CHRISTIAN LETTERS FULL OF Spiritual Instructions, TENDING To the Promoting of
the Power OF GODLINESS, BOTH IN PERSON and FAMILIES.

LONDON, Printed for and sold by Nevil Simmons, at the Princes-Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey. 1673.

CHRISTIAN LETTERS, Full of SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTIONS, Tending To the Promoting of
the Power of Godliness, both in Persons, and Families.
LETTER. I. To his Wife to Dispose her to his Ac^ptance of Taunton, on small
Maintenance.
My Dear Heart,
BY this time I hope thou have received mine by Martin, and also an Answer
touching their Resolution at Taunton. My thoughts have been much upon that
business of late, so small as the outward Encouragements in point of
Maintenance are, and methinks I find my heart much inclining that way. I will
tell thee the Principles upon which I go.

First, I lay this for a Fouudation, That a man's Life con^isteth not in the
Abundance of the things that he possesses. ^t was accounted a wise Prayer that
Agur put up of old, that ^e might only be Fed with Food convenient for him. And
^ertain it is that where m^n have least of the World; they ^steem it least, and
live more by Faith and in dependence upon God, casting their care and burden
upon him. O the sweet breathings of David's soul! the strong actings of his
Faith and Love, that we find come from him, when his condition was low and mean
in the World. How closely does he cling? How fully does he Rely upon God? The
Holy Ghost seems to make it a Privilege to be brought to a necess^ty of living
by Faith, as, I think, I have formerly hinted thee, out of Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11.
Where Canaan is preferred before Egypt, in regard of its dependence upon God
for the former and latter Rain, which in Egypt they could live without, and
have supplies from the River. And certainly could we that are unexperienced,
but feel the Thorns of those cares and troubles that there are in gathering and
keeping much, and the danger when Riches increase of setting our hearts upon
them, we should prize the happiness of a middle condition much before it.
Doubtless, Godliness with contentment, is great gain. Seek thou great things
for thy self (says the Prophet to Baruch) seek them not. Certainly a good
Conscience is a continual Feast, and enough for a happy Life: no man that
Wareth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him
who has chosen him to be a Soldier. We should be but little encumbered with
the things of this World, and withal free from a world of intanglements, which
in a great place committed wholly to our charge, would be upon our Consciences
as no small Burden.

Secondly, I take this for an undoubted truth, that a dram of Grace, is better
than a Talent of Wealth; and therefore such a place where our Consciences would
be free, and we had little to do in the World to take off our hearts and
thoughts from the things of Eternity, and had the advantage of abundance of
means, and the daily opportunities of warming our hearts with the blessed
Society and Conference of Heavenly Christians, and no temptations to carry us
away, nor discouragements in our walking with God, and the due performance of
our duty is (if we pass a true and Spiritual Judgment, as the Holy Ghost in
Scripture would) without comparison before another place, void of those
Spiritual helps and advantages. Let us think with our selves, what though our
Purses, our Estates, may thrive better in a place of a large maintenance? yet
where are our graces, our souls, like to thrive any way answerable to what they
are in this? We should have but little in the World, and we could live
hereafter; but alas, what is this if it be made up to us, as it will surely be
in Communion with God and his People? If we thrive in Faith, and Love,
Humility, and Heavenly mindedness, as above all places I know we are likely to
do there, what matter is it though we do not raise our selves in the World? the
thing it may well be accounted but mean; but alas, let us look upon it with a
spiritual Eye, and then we shall pass another Judgment of it. Oh! who would
leave so much Grace, and so much comfort in Communion with Christ and his
Saints, as we may gain there, for the probabilities of living with a little
more gentility and handsomness in the World? It Is a strange thing to see how
Christians generally do judge so carnally of things, looking to the things that
are seen and Temporal, and not the things that will stick by us to Eternity.
What is it worth a year? is the Maintenance certain and sure? What charges are
there like to be? these are the questions we commonly ask first, when we speak
of settling. But alas, though those things are duly to be considered too, yet
what good am I like to do? what good am I like to get? (Both which questions I
think might be as comfortably Answered concerning this, as any place in
England;) These should be the main interrogatories, and the chief things we
should judge of a place to settle in. What if we have but a little in the
World? Why then we must keep but a short Table, and shall make but a little
noise in the World, and must give the meaner entertainments to our Friends. O
but will not this be abund^ntly made up, if we have more outward and inward
Peace, as we may well count we shall have. One dram of saving Grace will weigh
down all this. Let others Hug themselves in their Corn, and Wine, and Oil, in
their fat Livings, and their large Tables, and their great resort, if we have
more of the Light of Gods Countenance, more grace, more comfort, who would
change with them? surely if Paul were to chose a Place, he would not look so
much what 'twas a year, but would wish us to take that where we might be most
likely to save our own and others Souls.

Thirdly, That the best and the surest way to have any outward Mercy, is to be
content to want it. When men's desires are over-eager after the World, they must
have thus much a Year, and a House well Furnished, and Wife, and Children, thus
and thus qualified, or else they will not be content; God does usually, if not
constantly, break their wills by denying them, as one would cross a froward.
Child of his stubborn humor: or else puts a sting into them, that a man had
been as good he had been without them, as a man would give a thing to a
froppish Child, but it may be with a knock on his Fingers, and a frown to boot.
The best way to get Riches, is out of doubt to set them lowest in ones desires.
Solomon found it so: Alas, he did not ask riches, but wisdom and ability, to
discharge his great Trust; but God was so pleased with his Prayer, that he
threw in them into the Bargain. If we seek the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness in the first place, and leave other things to him, God will not
stand with us for these outward, though we never ask them we shall have them
as over measure; God will throw them in as the Vantage. And to this suits the
experience of our dear Honorathius: and indeed (says he, speaking of God)
Honorathius finds that his only hiding place and refuge, and a place of
succor, from the storms that fall upon him, and has had such helps at dead
lift there, that he is engaged for ever to trust the^e. For when he has been
lowest, and in the greatest straights, he has gone and made his moan
Heavenward, with free submission to the rightful disposer of all things, and
he has been so liberally supplied, as makes him very confident the best way to
obtain any Mercy, or supply, is to be content to be without it: And he is
persuaded nothing set Gods Mercies farther off, than want of free suhmission to
want them. Certainly, God will never be behind hand with us. Let our care be to
build his House, and let him alone to build ours.

Fourthly, That none ever was, or ever shall be, a loser by Jesus Christ. Many
have lost much for him, but never did, never shall any lose by him. Take this
for a certainty, whatsoever probabilities of outward comforts we leave,
whatsoever outward advantages we balk, that we may glorify him in our
Services, and enjoy him in his Ordinances more than otherwhere we could, we
shall receive an hundred fold in this life. It Is a sad thing to see how little
Christ is trusted or believe in the World: Men will trust him no farther then
they can see him, and will leave no work for Faith. Alas, has he not a
thousand ways, both outward and inward, to make up a little outward
disadvantage to us? What does our Faith serve for? Have any ventured themselves
upon him in his way, but he made good every word of the Promise to them? let us
therefore exercise our Faith, and stay our selves upon the Promise, and see if
ever we are ashamed of our hope.

Fifthly, That what is wanting in the means, God will make up in the blessing.
This I take for a certain truth, while a man commits himself and his affairs to
God, and is in a way that God put him into: Now if a man have but a little
income, if he have a great Blessing, that is enough to make it up. Alas, we must
not account Mercies by the Bulk. What if another have a pound to my Ounce, if
mine be gold for his silver, I will never change with him. As it is not Bread
that keeps men alive, but the Word of Blessing that proceeds out of his mouth
of God; so it is not the largerness of the means, but the blessing of the Lord
that makes rich. Oh! if men did but believe this, they would not grasp so much
of the world as they do. Well, let others take their course, and we will take
ours, to wait upon God by Faith and Prayer, and rest in his Promise; and I am
confident that is the way to be provided for: Let others toil to enlarge their
income, (but alas, they will find they go not the right way to work) we will
bless God to enlarge our blessing, and I doubt not but we shall prove the
Gainers.

Sixthly, That every Condition has its Snares, Crosses, and Troubles, and
therefore we may not expect to be without them where ever we be, only that
condition is most eligible that has fewest and least. I cannot object any
thing against the proposal of Taunton, but the meaness of the maintenance; but
if our income be but short, we can I hope be content to live answerably, we
must fare the meaner, that will be all the inconvenience that I know, and truly
I hope we are not of the nature of that Animal, that has his Heart in his
Belly. I know how Daniel thrived by his Water and pulfe, and think a mean Diet
is as wholesome to the body, yea. and far less hurtful than a full and liberal
is; and persuade my self it would be no such hard matter for us contentedly to
deny our flesh in this respect. But let us consider how little and utterly
inconsiderable this inconvenience is, in comparison of those we must reckon
upon meeting with, if God cast us into another place, and whether this be not a
great deal less than the trouble we shall have for want of comsortable and
Christian Society, for want of the frequent and quickening means we shall here
have, in wrangling and contending with the Covetous, or else losing our dues,
in the Railings and scandalous, and malicious Reports, that are we see raised
upon the best by the wicked in most places, in their contentions about their
right to the Sacraments, in our intanglement in the cares and troubles of this
life, etc. all which we should be here exempted from. Upon these and the like
considerations, I find my heart very much inclined to accept of their offer at
Taunton. I beseech thee to weigh, and thoroughly consider the matter, and tell
me impartially thy thoughts, and which way thy Spirit inclines, ^or I have
always resolved the place I settled in should be thy choice, and to thy
content. The least intimation of thy will to the contrary, shall overballance
all my thoughts of settling there, for I should account it the greatest
unhappiness if I should thus settle, and thou should afterward be
discontented at the straightness of our condition. But I need not have Wrote
this, had not thou fully signified thy mind already to me, I had never gone
so far as I have. Well, the Lord whose we are, and whom we serve, do with us as
it shall seem good unto him. We are always as mindful as is possible of thee
here, both together and apart. Captain Luke desired me to entreat thee to meet
him one two hours in a day, for the Commemoration of Mercies upon the twenty
third day of every Month. Send word to me of their Resolution at Taunton, in
two Letters, least possibly one should miscarry, though never a one did yet. I
dare not think of settling under sixty Pound at Taunton, and surely it cannot
be less. I have Written as well as I could on a sudden my mind to thee, I have
been so large in delivering my Judgment, that I must thrust up my Af^ctions
into a Corner. Well, though they have but a corner in my Letter, I am sure they
have room enough in my heart: But I must conclude; The Lord keep thee my Dear,
and cherish thee for ever in his Bosom. Farewell mine own Soul,

I am as ever thine own Heart, JOS. ALLEINE
Oxon, May 27. 1659.
LETTER II. [Prepare for Suffering.] To my dearly belo^ed the Flock of Christ
in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most dear Christians,
MY extreme straights of time will now force me to bind my long loves in a few
short lines; yet I could not tell how to leave you unsaluted, nor choose but
write to you in a few words, that you should not be dismayed neither at our
present sufferings, or at the evil tidings that by this time I doubt not are
come unto you. Now, Brethren, is the time when the Lord is like to put you upon
the trial; now is the hour of temptation come. Oh! be faithful to Christ to the
death, and he shall give you a Crown of life. Faithful is he that has called
you, and he will not suffer you upon his faith^ulness to be tempted above what
you are able. Give up your selves and your All to the Lord, with resolution to
follow him fully, and two things be sure of, and lay up as sure grounds of
everlasting consolation.

1. If you seek by prayer and study to know the mind of God, and do resolve to
follow it in uprightness, you shall not fail either of direction or pardon;
either God will show you what his pleasure is, or will certainly forgive you if
you miss your way. Brethren, fix upon your souls the deep and lively affecting
apprehensions of the most gracious, loving, merciful, ^eet, compassionate,
tender nature of your Heavenly Father, which is so great that you may be sure
he will with all readiness and love accept of his poor Children when they
endeavors to approve themselves in sincerity to him, and would fain know his
mind and do it, if they could but clearly see it, though they should
unwillingly mistake.

2. That as sure as God is faithful, if he do see that such or such a
temptation (with the forethought of which you may be apt to disquiet your
selves, lest you should fall away when thus or thus tried) will be too hard for
your Graces, he will never suffer it to come upon you. Let not, my dear
Brethren, let not the present tribulations or those impending move you. This is
the way of the Kingdom: persecution is one of your Land marks: self-denial and
taking up the Cross is your A B C of ^eligion; you have learnt nothing, that
have not begun at Christs-Cross. Brethren, the Cross of Christ is your Crown,
the reproach of Christ is your riches; the shame of Christ is your glory; the
damage attending strict and holy diligence, your greatest advantage: sensible
you should be of what is coming, but not discouraged; humbled, but not
dismayed; having your hearts broken, and yet your spirits unbroken; humble your
selves mightily under the mighty hand of God; but fear no^ the face of man: may
you even be low in humility, but high in courage; little in your own
apprehensions of your selves, but great in holy ^ortitude, resolution and holy
magnanimity, lying in the dust before your God, yet triumphing in faith and
hope, and boldness and confidence over all the power of the enemies. Approve
your selves as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, with no Armor, but that of
righteousness; No weapons, but strong crying and tears; looking for no Victory
but that of Faith; nor hope to overcome, but by patience: now for the faith and
patience of the Saints, now for the harness of your suffering Grace: O gird up
the loins of your mind, and be sober, and hope to the end: Fight not but the
good fight of Faith: here you must contend and that earnestly: Strive not but
against sin, and here you may resist even unto blood: now see that you choose
life, and embrace affliction rather than sin. Strive together mightily and
frequently by prayer: I know you do, but I would you should abound more and
more: Share my loves among you, and continue your earnest prayers for me, and
be your assured that I am and shall be through Grace, a willing thankful
Servant of your Souls concernments.

From the common Goal May 2. 1663. Joseph Alleine.

LETTER III. [Warning to Professors.] To my most dearly beloved, my Christian
Friends in Taunton, Salvation.
Most loving Brethren,
I Shall never forget your old kindnesses, and the entire affections that you
have shed upon me, not by drops, but by floods, would I never so fain forget
them, yet I could not, they are so continually renowned; for there is never a
day but I hear of them; Nay, ^ore than hear of them, I feel and taste them. The
God that has promised to them that give to a Prophet though but a cup of cold
Water, shall receive a Prophets reward; he will recompense your labor of love,
your servent prayers, and constant cries, your care for my welfare, your
bountiful supplies who have given me, not a cup of cold water, but the Wine of
your loves, with the sense and tidings whereof I am continually refreshed. I
must, I do and will bless the Lord as long as I live, that he has cast my lot
in so fair a place, to dwell in your communion; and especially to go in and out
before you, and to be the Messenger of the Lord of Host to you, to proclaim his
Law, and to Preach his Excellencies, to be his Spokesman to you, and to woo^
for him, and to espouse you to one Husband, and to present you as a chaste
Virgin unto Christ. Lord! how unworthy am I, everlastingly unworthy of this
glorious Dignity, which I do verily believe the most brightest Angels in Heaven
would be glad of, if the Lord saw it fit to employ them in this work! Well, I
do not, I cannot repent, notwithstanding all the difficulties and
inconveniences that do attend his despised Servants, and hated ways, and that
are like to attend them; for we have but sipped yet of the Cup; but I have set
my hand to his plow; my Ministry I took up with you, and my Testimony I
finished with you, though I thought I had espoused you till death; and when I
was entered into that Sacred Office, which through rich Grace I was employed in,
I told you in the close of what I spoke before the laying of the holy Hands
upon me (most gladly do I take up this Office with all the persecution,
affliction, difficulties an tribulation and inconveniences that do and may
attend it) and blessed be God, I am through his goodness of the same mind
still, and my tribulations for Christ, do (to him be Glory, for to me belongs
nothing but shame and confusion of face) confirm my choice and my resolution to
serve him with much more than my labors. Verily, Brethren, it is a good choice
that I have commended to you: Oh! that there might not one be found among you
that has not made Mary's choice, I mean of that good part which shall never be
taken away from you. Brethren, let them take up with the world that have no
better portion: be content that they should carry the Bell, and bear away the
riches and perferments and glory, and splendour of the World. Alas! you have no
reason to envy them: verily, they have a lie in their right hand: Ah! how soon
will their hopes fail them: how soon will the crackling blast be out, and leave
them in eternal darkness: they shall go to the generation of their Fathers,
they shall never see light, like sheep they shall be laid in their Graves, and
the upright shall have Dominion over them in the morning. But for my Brethren,
I am jealous that none of you should come short of the Glory of God. I am
ambitious for you that you should be all the heirs of an endless life, the
living hopes of the Saints, the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away.

Ah my Brethren! why should not you be all happy? I am jealous for you with a
Godly jealousy, lest a promise being left you of entering into his rest, any
of you should come short of it. O look diligently, lest any man fail of the
Grace of God: Alas! how it pities me to see this Rest neglected: How it grieves
me that any of you should fall short of mercy at last! That any of that flock
over which the holy Ghost has made be in part overseer, should perish; when
Christ has done so much for you, and when his under Officers (through his
Grace, for we are not sufficient of our selves) have done somewhat to recover
and save them. Ah dear Brethren! I was in great earnest with you when I
besought you out of the Pulpit, many a time, to give a Bill of Divorce to your
sins, and to accept of the match and the mercy that in the name of God Almighty
I did there offer to you. Alas! how it pitied me to look over so great a
Congregation, and to think that I could not, for my life I could not, persuade
them, one quarter of them, in likelihood to be saved? how it moved me to see
your diligence in flocking, not only to the stated Exercises, but to the
Repetitions and to most hazardous opportunities, for which you are greatly to
be commended, since the Law forbad my public Preaching, and yet to think that
many of you that went so far, were like to perish for ever for want of going
further. I must praise your diligent attendance on all opportunities: Blessed
be God that made a willing ministry and a willing people: for I remember how I
have gone furnished with a Train! How I went with the multitude to the House of
God, with the voice of joy and praises, with the multitude that kept Holy Days.
The remembrance of which moves my soul, but, O my flock, my most dear flock,
how fain would I carry you farther then the external and outward profession; O!
how loath am I to leave you there! How troubled to think that any of you should
go far and hazard much for Religion, and yet miscarry for ever by the hand of
some unmortified lust! as secret pride or untamed passion, or an unbridled
tongue, or which I fear most of all, a predominate love of the World in your
hearts. Alas! must it be so, and is there no remedy but I must carry you to
Heavens-gate and leave you there! Oh, that I should leave the work of your
Souls but half done; and bring you no farther than the almost of Christianity,
Hear, O my people, hear, although I may command you, upon your utmost peril in
the Name of the Lord Jesus that shall shortly judge you, I beseech you, I warn
you as a Father does his Children, to look to the settling and securing of your
everlasting condition; and for life take heed of your resting in the
outter-part of Religion, but to be restless till you find the through-change of
Regeneration within, that you are quite new in the frame and bent of your
hearts: for here is the main of Religion in the hidden man of the heart: for
Christ's sake, for your Soul-sake look to it, that you build upon the Rock, that
you be sure in the Foundation work, that you do unfeignedly deliver over your
selves to the Lord to be under his command and at his dispose in all things:
see that you make no exceptions, no reserve, that you cast over board all your
worldly hopes, and count upon parting with all for Christ: that you take him
alone for your whole happiness. Wonder not that I often inculcate this: If it
be well here, it is well all; if unsound here, the error is in the foundation,
and you are undone. Brethren, I see great trials coming, when we shall see
Professors fall like leaves in the Autumn, unless they be well settled:
therefore is it that I would so fain have you look to your standing, and to
secure the main. And for you whose Souls are soundly wrought upon, O make sure
whatever you do: get and keep your evidences clear! How dreadful would your
temptations be, if you should be called to part with all for Christ, and not be
sure of him neither: get a right and clear understanding of the terms of life,
which I have set before you in that form of Covenanting with God in Christ,
that I commended to you. I would that none of you should be without a Copy of
it: be much in observing your own hearts, both in duties and out-crying
mightily to God for assurance: If you cannot discern your estate your selves,
go to some body that is albe and faithful, and fully open your Case, your
Evidences and doubts, and be extraordinary strict and watchful in your whole
course, and I doubt not but you will quickly grow up to assurance.

I cannot tell how to make an end, methinks I could write all the day to you,
but my straights of time are great, and my Letter already too long, yet I
cannot conclude till I have given you my unfeigned than^ for your most kind and
gracious Letter. Surely it shall be in store with me, and laid up among my
Treasures; that God is pleased so to unite your hearts to me, and to make use
of me for your edification, is matter of highest joy unto me; as also to see
your stedfas^ness in Christ, your unshaken resolutions, notwithstanding all the
Tempters wiles. Go on, my dearly Beloved, and the Lord strengthen your hands
and your hearts, and lift you up above the fears of men. My most dear Brother
Norman salutes you with manifold Loves and Respects, earnestly wishing that you
may wear the Crown of perseverance; as also Brother Turner. The Lord
strengthen, establish, settle you, and after you have suffered a while, make
you perfect: I leave my Brethren in the everlasting Arms, and rest,

From the common Goal at Juelchester, June 13th. 1663. Your Ambassador in
bonds, Joseph Alleine.

LETTER IV. [A Call to the Unconverted.] To the Beloved People the Inhabitants
of the Town of Taunton, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ.
Most endeared and beloved Friends:
I Do most readily acknowledge my self a Debtor to you all, and a Servant of
all, and therefore I have sent these few Lines to salute you all. My Lines did
fall in a fair place when the Lord did cast my lot among you; for which I
desire to be thankful. God has been pleased to work a mutual affection between
me and you. I remember the tears and Prayers that you have sent me hither with,
and how I saw your hearts in your eyes; How can I forget how you poured out
your Souls upon me. And truly you are a People much upon my heart, whose
welfare is the matter of my continual prayers, care, and study. And oh! that I
knew how to do you good: Ah? how certainly should never a son of you miscarry
if I knew how to save you. Ah! how it pities me to think how that so many of
you should remain in your sins after so many and so long endeavors to convert
and bring them in. Once more, Oh? my beloved, once more hear the call of the
most high God unto you. The Prison Preaches to you, the same Doctrine that the
Pulpit did Hear, O People, hear; he that has an ear let him hear. The Lord of
Life and of Glory offers you all Mercy, and Peace, and Blessedness: Oh, why
should you die! whosoever will, let him take of the Waters of Life sreely; what
miss of life when it is to be had for the taking? God forbid. O my Brethren, my
soul yerns for you, and my bowels toward you. Ah! that I did but know what
Arguments to use with you: who shall choose my words for me that I may prevail
with sinners not to reject their own Mercy: how snall I get within them? How
shall I reach them? Oh! that I did but know the words that would pierce them?
that I could but get between their sins and them. Beloved Brethren, the Lord
Jesus has made me, most unworthy, his Spokesman, to bespeak your hearts for
him: And oh, that I knew but how to woo for him, that I might prevail! these
eight years have I been calling, and yet how great a part do remain visibly in
their sins, and how few, alas! how few souls have I gained to Christ by sound
conversion. Once more I desire with all possible earnestness to apply my self
to you, I have thought it may be a Sermon out of a Prison might do that which I
could not do after my long striving with you, but have left undone: come then,
O Friends, and let us reason together.

Many among you remain under the power of Ignorance: Ah! how often have I told
you the dangerous, yea, damnable estate that such are in. Never make excuses,
nor flatter your selves that you shall be saved though you go on in this; I
have told you often, and now tell you again, God must be false of his Word, if
ever you be saved without being brought out of the state of ignorance: If ever
you enter in at the door of Heaven, it must be by the Key of Knowledge, you
cannot be saved, except you be brought to the knowledge of the Truth. A people
that remain in gross ignorance, that are without understanding, the Lord that
made them, will not have mercy on them. O why will you flatter your felves, and
wilfully deceive your own selves? when the God of Truth has said you shall
surely die if you go on in this estate: Oh, for the love of God and of your
souls, I beseech you awake and bestir your selves to get the saving knowledge
of God: you that are capable of learning a Trade to live by, are you not
capable of learning the way to be saved? yea, I doubt not but you are capable
if you would but beat your heads about it, and take pains to get it. And is it
not pity that you should perish for ever for want of a little pains, and study,
and car^ to get the knowledge of God: Study the Catechism, if possible get it
by heart, if not, read it often, or get it read to you, cry unto God for
knowledge; improve the little you have by living answerable. Search the
Scripture daily, get them read to you if you cannot read them. Improve your
Sabbaths diligently, and I doubt not but in the use of these means you will
sooner arrive to the knowledge of Christ than of a Trade. But for thee, O
hardened sinner, that wilt make thy excuses that thou have not time nor
abilities to get knowledge, and to sit still without it, I pronounce unto thee
that thou shall surely perish: And I challenge thee to tell me, if thou can,
how thou will answer it before the most High God when he shall sit in Judgment
upon thee, that thou would be contented to undergo a seven years
Apprentiship to learn how to get thy living, and that thou might have got
the knowledge of the principles of Religion in half the time, but thou would
not beat thy head about it.

Many are swallowed up in mere prosaneness: Alas! that there should be any such
in a place of such means and mercie^! but it cannot be concealed. Many of them
proclaim the^r sin like Sodom, and carry their deadly ^prosie in their
for^-heads. I am ashamed to think that in T^unton there should be so many
Ale-house-haun^ers and Tiplers, so many lewd Gamesters, and Rioters and
debauched livers; so many black mouthed Swearers, who have Oaths and Curses for
their common language, so many Raylers at Godliness, and Prcfane Scoffers, so
many liars and deceitful Dealers, and unclean and wanton Wretches. O what a
long list will these and such like make up, if put together: it saddens me to
mention such as these. O how crimsen is their guilt! how often have you been
warned, and yet are still unreformed, yea loose and profane. Yet one warning
more have I sent after you from the Lord to repent. Return, O sinners, what!
will you run into everlasting burnings with your eyes open?

Repent, O Drunkards, or else you shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. Repent, O swearers, else you shall fall into condemnation, James
5. 12. Repent, O liars, put away lying, and speak every one truth to his
neighbor; else you shall have your part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 20. 8. Repent, O companykeepers, forsake the foolish and live,
but a Companion of the wicked shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. Repent you
Deceivers of your unrighteous dealings, or else you shall have no Inheritance
in the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. The Lord that made us, knows my earnest
desire for your conversion and Salvation, and that I speak not this to you out
of any evil will toward you, for I will lie at your feet to do you good, but
out of a sense of your deplorable estate, while you remain in your sins. I know
there is mercy for you if you do soundly repent and reform, and bow to the
Righteousness and Government of the Lord Christ: but if you go on, and say, you
shall yet have peace, I pronounce unto you, that there is no escape, but the
Lord will make his wrath to smoke against you, he will wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his Trespasses.

Others have escaped the gross pollutions of the world, but stick in the form
of Godliness, and content themselves with a negative Righteousness, that they
are no Drunkards, nor Swearers, etc. or at best with an outward conformity to
the duties of Religion, or some common workings, instead of a saving. O I am
jealous for you that you should not lose the things that you have wrought, and
miss you reward for want of sincerity: for the Lords sake put on, and beware of
perishing in the Suburbs of the City of Refuge: beg of God to make through-work
with you, and be jealous for your selves; get a right understanding of the
difference between a Hypocrite and a sincere Christian, and try you estates
much, but only with those marks, that you are sure from the Scripture will
abide Gods trial.

But for you that fear the Lord in sincerity, I have nothing but good and
comfortable words: I have proclaimed your happiness in the last Token I sent to
the Town: I mean the abstract for the Covenant of Grace, upon the Privileges,
comforts, mercies there summed up, and set before you. May your souls ever
live; what condition can you devise wherein there will not be abundance of
comfort, and matter of joy unspeakable, to you. O Beloved, know your own
happiness, and live in that holy admiring, commending, adoring, praisings of
your gracious God, that becomes the people of his praise. I have been long, yet
methinks I have not emptied half my heart unto you: I trespass much, I fear,
upon the Bearer, therefore in haste I commend you to God. The good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush be with you all. The Lord Create a defense upon you, and
Deliverance for you: the Lord cover you all the day, and make you to dwell
between his shoulders; I desire your constant, instant, earnest Prayers for me,
and rest,

From the common Goal in Juelchester, July 4th. 1663. A willing Labourer, and
thankful Sufferer for you, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER. V. [Trust God, and be sincere.] To my most endeared Friends, the
Servants of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown:
MY hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that yo^ may be saved. I know
that you are the But of men's rage and malice: but you may satisfy your selves
as Dapid in his patient sustaining of Shemei's sury and curses: It may be the
Lord will look upon our affection, and require good for their cursing this day.
But however it be for that, be sure to hold on your way: your name indeed is
cast forth as evil, and you are hated of all men for Christs-sake, for your
profession of his Gospel, and cleaving to his ways and servants: but let not
this discourage you, for you are now more than ever blessed: only hold fast,
that no man take your Crown. Let not any that have begun in the Spirit, end in
the flesh. Do not forsake God, till he forsake you; he that endures to the end
shall be saved: The Promise is to him that overcomes; therefore think not of
looking back: Now you have set your hands to Christ's Pow, though you labor
hard, and suffer long, the Crop will pay for all: now the Lord is trying what
credit he has in the World, and who they be that will trust him. The
unbelieving World are all for present pay; they must have ready money,
something in hand, and will not follow the Lord when there is like to be any
great hazard and hardship in his service. But now is the time for you, my
Beloved, to prove your selves Believers, when there is nothing visible but
present hazard and expense, and difficulty in your Makers service. Now it will
be seen who can trust the Lord, and who trusts him not: Now, my Brethren, bear
you up, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong: now give glory
to God by believing. If you can trust in his Promises for your reward now, when
nothing appears but the displeasure of Rulers, and Bonds, and losses, and
tribulation on every side, this will be somewhat like Believers. Brethren, I
beseech you to reckon upon no other but crosses here. Let none of you dream of
an Earthly Paradise, or flatter your selves with dreams of sleeping in your
ease, and temporal Prosperity, and carrying Heaven too. Think not to keep your
Estates, and liberties and consciences too: Count not upon rest till you come
to the Land of Promise. Not that I would have any of you to run upon hazards
uncalled: No, we shall meet them soon enough in the way of our duty, without we
will balk it, and shamefully turn aside: but I would have you cast overboard
your Worldly hopes, and count not upon an earthly felicity, but be content to
wait till you come on the other side the Grave. Is it not enough to have a
whole eternity of happiness yet behind? If God do throw in the comforts of this
life too into the bargain; I would not have you throw them back again, or
despise the goodness of the Lord: but I would, my Brethren, that you should use
this World, as not abusing it, that you should be crucified to the world, and
the world to you; that you should declare plainly that you seek a Country, a
better Country, which is an Heavenly. Ah! my dear Brethren, I beseech you
carry it like Pilgrims an strangers, I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against your Souls; for what have we to do with the customs and
courses and fashions of this world, who are strangers in it! Be contented with
Travelers lots: know you not that you are in a strange Land? all is well as
long as it is well at home; I pray you, Brethren, daily and srequently to
consider your condition and station: do you not remember that you are in an
Inn; and what though your be but poorly attended, and meanly accommodated?
though you ^are hard, and lie hard? Is this a strange thing? what should
Travelers look sor else? will you set forth in a Journey, and promise your
selves nothing but sair way and fair weather? Shall a man put forth to Sea and
reckon upon nothing but the calm? If you were of the World, the World would
love his own. But now God has chosen you, and called you out of the world,
therefore the World hates you: But remember, my Brethren, it is your duty to
love them, even while they hate you; and to pray for mercy for them that will
show no mercy, nor do no Justice for us. This I desire you to observe as a
great duty of the present times: And let not any so far forget their duty and
pattern, as to wish evil to them that do evil to us, or to please themselves
with the thoughts of being even with them. Let us commit our selves to him that
judges righthously, and show our selves the children of the most High, who
does good to his Enemies, and is kind to the unkind and unthankful: And what
though they do hate us? Their love and good will were much more to be feared,
than their hatred, and a far worse sign. Brethren, keep your selves in the love
of God; here is Wisdom. O happy souls, that are his Favorites! For the Lords
sake look to this, make sure of something: look to your sincerity above all
things in the World: let not any of you conclude, that because you are of the
suffering party, therefore all is well: Look to the Foundation, that your
hearts be soundly taken off from every sin, and set upon God above as your
Blessedness: Beware that none of you have only a name to love, and be no more
than almost Christians. For the love of your Souls, make a diligent search, and
try upon what ground you stand, for it heartily pities me to think that any of
you should be in so deep, and hazard so much as these must do that will now
cleave to the hated ways of the people of God, and yet lose all at last for
want of being through and sound in the main work, I mean conversion and
Regeneration. None so miserable in all the world as an unsound Professor of
Religion now is, for he shall be hated and persecuted of the World, because he
takes up a Profession, and yet rejected of God too, because he sticks in a
Profession: but when once you bear the marks of Gods favor, you need not fear
the Worlds frowns: Cheer up therefore, Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and of
good courage under the Worlds usage: Fear not, in our Fathers House there is
bread enough, and room enough; this is sufficient to comfort us under all the
inconveniences of the way, that we have so happy a Home, so worthy a Portion,
so ready a Father, so goodly an Heritage, so sure a Tenure. Oh, comfort one
another with these words: let God see that you can trust in his Word: let the
world see that you can live upon a God. I shall share my Prayers and loves
among you all, and commit you to the Almighty God: the Keeper of Israel that
never flumbereth nor sleeps, be your Watchman and Keeper to the end, Farewell.
I am

From the common Goal at Juelchester, July 24. 1663. A fervent well-wisher of
your Temporal and Eternal Happiness, Joseph Alleine.

LETTER. VI. [Look out of your Graves upon the World.] To my most dearly
Beloved Friends, the chosen of God in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most endeared Christian,
MY heart is with you, though I am Absent, as to my Bodily presence from you,
and therefore as I have often already, so I have now written to you to stir up
your pure minds by way of Remembrance, and to call upon you for your steadfast
continuing, and vigorous proceeding in the ways of God. Dear Friends, and
fellow Soldiers under Christ the Captain of our Salvation, consider your
calling and Station, and approve your selves as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
as men of resolution and courage, be discouraged with no difficulties of your
present Warfare. As for humane affairs, it would have you to be as you are, Men
of Peace. I would have you Armed not for resisting, God forbid, but for
Suffering only, as the Apostle hints: You should resist, even to the
uttermost, striving against Sin. Here you must give no quarter, for if you
spare but one Agag, the life of your Souls must go for the life of your sins:
you must make no Peace; for God will not smile on that Soul that smiles on Sin,
nor have any Peace with him, that is at peace with his Enemy. Other Enemies you
must forgive, and love, and pray for (which I again desire you to mind as one
special duty of the times) but for these Spiritual Enemies, all your
affections, and all your Prayers must be engaged against them; yea, you must
admit no Parley: It Is dangerous to dispute with Temptations. Remember what Eve
lost by Parleying with Satan: you must fly from Temptations, and put them off
at first with a Peremptory denial. If you will but hear the Devils Arguments,
and the Fleshes Pleas, and fair Pretenses, it is an hundred to one but you are
ensnared by his Sophistry. And for this present evil World, the Lord deliver
you from its Snares. Surely you had need watch and be sober, and use your
spiritual Weapons dexterously and diligently, or else this World is like to
undo you, and destroy yo^. I have often warned you not to build upon an
External happiness. and that you should promise your selves nothing but
hardship here: Oh still remember your station; Soldiers must not count upon
Rest, and Fullness, but Hunger, and Hardness. Labor to get right appreh^sions
of the World. Do not think these things necessary; one thing is need^ul: You
may be happy in the want of all outward comf^s. Do not think your selves
undone, if brought to Want or Poverty: study Eternity, and you will see it to
be little material to you, whether you are Poor or Rich; and that you may have
never such an opportunity for your advantage in all your lives, as when you put
all to hazard, and seem to run the Vessel upon the Rocks. Set your enemies one
against the other: Death against the World; no such way to get above the World,
as to put your selves into the possession of Death.

Look often upon your Dust that you shall be reduced to, and imagine you saw
your bones tumbled out of your Graves, as they are like shortly to be, and men
handling your Skulls, and enquiring whose is this. Tell me of what account will
the World be then, what good will it do you: put your selves often into your
Graves, and look out from thence upon the World, and see what Judgment you
have of it then. Must not you shortly be forgot among the Dead? your places
will know you no more, and your Memory will be no more among men, and then what
will it profit you to have lived in fashion and repute, and to have been Men of
esteem? one serious walk over a Churchyard, as one speaks, might make a man
mor^ified to the World. Think upon how many you Tread, but you know them not:
no doubt they had their Estates, their Friends, their Trades, their businesses,
and kept as much stir in the World as others do now. But alas, what are they
the better for any, for all this? know you not that this must be your own case
very shortly: Oh the unhappiness of deceived man! how miserably is he
bewitched, and befooled, that he should expend himself for that which he knows
shall for ever leave him. Brethren, I beseech you lay no stress upon these
perishing things, but labor to be at a Holy indifferency about them: Is it for
one that is in his wits to sell his God, his conscience, his soul, for things
that he is not sure to keep a week, nor a day, and which he is sure after a ^ew
sleepings and wakings more, to leave behind him for ever? go and talk with
dying men, and see what apprehensions they have of the World? if any should
come ^o such as these, and tell them here is such and such pr^ferments for you,
you shall have such titles of honor and delights, if you will now disown
Religion, or subscribe to iniquity; do you think such a motion would be
embraced? Brethren, why should we not be wise in time! why should we not now be
of the mind of which we know we shall be all shortly! woe to them that will not
be wise till it be to no purpose! woe to them whose eyes nothing but Death and
Judgment, will open! woe to them that though they have been warned by others,
and have heard the Worlds greatest Darlings in Death to cry out of its vanity,
worthlessness and deceitfulness, and have been told where and how it would
leave them; yet would take no warning, but only must serve themselves to, for
warnings to others. Ah my Beloved, beware there be no worldly Professors among
you, that will part rather with their part in Paradise, than their part in
Paris; that will rather part with their Consciences, than with their Estates;
that have secret reserves in hearts to save themselves whole, when ^t comes to
the pinch; and not to be of the Religion that will undo them in the World.
Beware that none of you have your hearts where your Feet should be, and love
your Mammon before your Maker. It is time for you to learn with Paul, to be
Crucified to the World.

But it is time for me to remember that it is a Letter, and contain my self
within my limits. The God of all Grace, stablish, strengthen, and settle you in
these shaking times, and raise your hearts above the fears of the worlds
threats, and above the ambition of its favors. My dearest loves to you all,
with my servent desire of your Prayers May the Lord of Hosts be with you, and
the God of Jacob your refuge. Farewell my dear Brethren, Farewell, and be strong
in the Lord, I am

From the common Jail at Juelchester, June 31. 1663. Yours to serve you in the
Gospel, whether by Doing or Suffering. JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER VII. [First, Christian Marks: 2. Duties.] To the Beloved, my most
endearing, and endeared Friends, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.
Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown:
I Must say of you as David did of Jonathan, Very pleasant have you been unto
me, and your love to me is wonderful. And as I have formerly taken great
content in that my Lot was cast among you, so through grace I rejoice in my
present Lot, that I am called to approve my love to you by suffering for you;
for you, I say: for you know that I have not sought yours but you; and that for
doing my duty to your souls, I am here in these Bonds, which I do cheerfully
accept through the grace of God that strengthens me. Oh! that your Souls
might be quickened and enlarged by these my Bonds! that your hands might be
strengthened, and your hearts encouraged in the Lord your God by our
sufferings! See to it, my dearly Beloved, that you stand fast in the power of
the Holy Doctrine which we have Preached from the Pulpit; preached at the Bar;
preached from the Prison to you: It is a Gospel worth the suffering for: see
that you follow after holiness, without which no man shall see God: Oh! the
madness of the blind World, that they should put from them the only Plank upon
which they can escape to Heaven. Surely the Enemies of Holiness are their own
Enemies. Alas for them! they know not what they do. What would not these
foolish Virgins do at last, when it is too late for a little of the Oil of the
wise; Oh, for one dram of that Grace which they have scorned and despised. But
let not any of you, my dear People, be wise too late: Look diligently lest any
man fail of the Grace of God. Beware that none of you be cheated through the
subtlety of Satan and deceitfulness of your hearts with counterfeit gr^. There
is never a grace but has its counterfeit: and there is nothing in all the
World that is more common or more easy, than to mistake common and counterfeit
Grace for true and saving: and remember you are undone for evermore, if you
should die in such a mistake: Not that I would shake the confidence of any
sound Believer, who upon often and through searce into the Scripture and his
own heart, and putting himself upon Gods trial, has gotten good evidence that
his Graces are of the right kind: Build your confidenee sure: See that you get
the knowledge of the certain and infallible marks of Salvation, and make sure
by great observing your own hearts that these marks be in you, and then you
cannot be too confident. But as you love your souls take heed of a groundless
confidence. Take heed of ^ing confident before you have tried. Dear Brethren, I
would fain have you all secured against the day of Judgment; I would that the
state of your souls were all well settled: Oh how comfortably might you think of
any troubles, if you were but sure of your pardons! Were your Salvation out of
doubt, no matter though other things were in hazard. I beseech you, whatever
you neglect, look to this: I am afraid there are among you that have not made
your peace with God yet; that are not yet acquainted with that great work of
Conversion: such I would warn and charge before the living God to speed into
Christ, and without any more disputes or delays to put away their iniquities,
and to come in and deliver up themselves to Jesus Christ, that they may be
saved. It is not your Profession, nor performing external duties, nor partaking
of external Privileges that will save you: No, no, you must be converted or
condemned. It is not enough that you have some love and liking to Gods ways and
people, and are willing to venture something for them; all this will not prove
you sound Christians: have your hearts been changed? have you been soundly
convinced of your sins? of your damnable and undone condition in your selves?
and your utter ina^lity to lick your selves whole again by your own duties?
have you been brought at least to such a sight and sense of sin, as that there
is no sin, though agreeable to your constitution, though a support to your gain
but you do heartily abhor it, and utterly disallow of it? are you brought to
such a sense of the beauty of holiness, and of the Laws and ways of God, as
that you do desire to know the whole mind of God, and would not excuse your
selves by ignorance from any duty, and that you do not allow your selves in the
ordinary neglect of any thing that conscience charges upon you as a duty? are
your very hearts set upon the glorifying and enjoying of God, as your greatest
happiness, which you desire more than Corn and Wine, and Oil? had you rather be
the holiest than the richest and greatest in the world? and is your greatest
delight (ordinarily, and when you are your selves) in the thoughts of God, and
in your conversings with God in Holy Exercises? Is Christ more precious than
all the world to you? and are you willing upon the through consideration of the
strictness and holiness, and self-denyig nature of his Laws, yet to take them
all for the rule of your thoughts, words, and actions? and though Religion may
be dear, do you resolve if God will assist you by his Grace, to go through with
it, let the cost be what it will? happy the man that is in such a case. This is
a Christian indeed, and whatever you be and do short of this, all is unsound.
But you that bear in your souls the marks of the Lord Jesus above mentioned,
upon you I should lay no other burden, but to hold fast, and make good your
ground and to press forward toward the mark. Thankfully acknowledge the
distinguishing grace God to your souls: and live rejoycingly in the hopes of
the glory of God, the hopes that shall never make you ashamed: live daily in
the praises of your Redeemer: be much in admiring God, and study the
worthiness, excellency, and glory of his Attributes: let your souls be much
taken up in contemplating and commending his glorious perfection, and blessing
your selves, in the goodly portion you have in him: live like those that have a
God, and then be disconsolate if you can: If there be not more in an infinite
God to comfort you, than in a Prison, or poverty, or other affliction to deject
you, our Preaching is vain, and your Faith is vain. Let the thoughts of God be
your daily repast: and never be satisfied till your heart^ run out as freely,
naturally, constantly, unweariedly after God, as others do after the World: a
little force upon your hearts for a while to turn them into this holy Channel,
may quickly come so to habituate your minds to holiness, that they may
na^urally run that way. But it is time to shut up: Farewell; my dear Brethren,
the Lord God Almighty be a protection to you, and your exceeding great reward:
Farewell in the Lord I am

Yours in the Bowels of the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE
From the common Goal at Juelchester, Sept. 11. 1663.
Just now I received your melting Letter, to which I am not able now to return
an answer, but shall with speed: your very great affections for me cannot but
move me, and make me ready to repeat again the first words of my letter above.
The Lord enable me to return something to you for your great loves; I am
sensible I have come very short of my duty to you: but I must needs tell you,
my Bowels are moved with your loves, which I hope I shall greatly prize: once
more Farewell.

My dear Brother Norman remembers you with much love, desiring that you may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye should snine as lights in the World.

LETTER VIII. [How to show love to Ministers, and live joyfully.] To the most
Loving and dearly Beloved, my Christian Friends in Taunton, Grace, Mercy, and
Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Most endeared Brethren,
I Have received your moving melting letter, and could not look over such
tender expressions of your working affections, without some commotions in my
own: I may confidently say, I spent more Tears upon those lines, than ever you
did Ink: your deep sense of my labors in the Ministry, I cannot but thankfully
acknowledge, and take notice of: yet withal, heartily and unseingedly
consessing, that all was but the duty which I did owe to your precious and
immortal Souls: which God knows, are very much short of my duty. The omissions,
imperfections, defects, deadness, that accompanied my duties I do own, I must
and will own; and the Lord humble me for them. But all that was of God (and
that was all that was good) be sure that you give to God alone. To him I humbly
ascribe both the Will, and the Deed, to whom alone be Glory for ever.

My dear Brethren, my business as I have often told you, is not to gain your
hearts, or turn your eyes toward me, but to Jesus Christ: his Spokesman I am,
will you give your hearts to him? will you give your hands, your names to him?
will you subscribe to his Laws, and consent to his Offices, and be at through
defiance with all his Enemies? This do, and I have my Errant. Who will follow
Christ's Colors? who will come under his Banner? this shall be the man that
shall be my Friend; this is he that will oblige me for ever. Do these Letters
come to none that are yet unsanctified? to no loose sinner? to no ignorant
finner? to no unsound professor? Oh that there were none such indeed! oh that I
had left no such behind me! but would they do me a kindness as I believe they
would, oh then let them come away to Jesus Christ at this call! lie no longer O
sinner, in thy swill, be no more in love with darkness! stick no longer in the
skirts and outside of Religion, demure no longer, dispute not, and waver no
more, halt no further, but strike in thoroughly with Jesus Christ, except
nothing, reserve nothing, but come off thoroughly to the Lord, and follow him
fully. And then happy man that thou shall be, for thou will be made for ever;
and joyful man that I shall be, for I shall save a Soul from death. The earnest
and pitiful beggings of a poor Prisoner, do use to move some Bowels: hear O
Friends, will you do nothing for a Minister of Christ? Nothing for a Prisoner
of Jesus Christ? methinks I hear you answer, [yea, rather what will we not do,
he shall never want while we have it; he shall need no office of Love, but we
will run and ride to do it.] Yea, but this is not that I beg of you; will you
gratify me indeed? then come in, kiss the Son, bow to the Name of Jesus; not
in a Complement, with Cap and Knee, but let your Souls bow, let all your Powers
bend Sail, and do him homage. Let that Sacred Name be Graven into ^he substance
of your hearts, and lie as a bundle of Mirth between your Breasts. Let me
freely speak for him, for he is worthy for whom you shall do this thing; worthy
to be beloved of you; worthy to have your very hearts, worthy to be admired,
adored, praised, served, glorified to the uttermost by you, and every Creature;
worthy for whom you should lay down all, leave all: Can any thing be too much
for him? can any thing be too good for him? Or too great for him? come give up
all, Resign all, lay it at the Feet of Christ Jesus, offer all as a Sacrifice
to him, see that you be universally the Lords; keep nothing from him: I know
through the goodness of God, that with many of you this work is not yet to do:
but this set solemn resignation to the Lord is to be done more than once; and
to be followed with an answerable practice when it is done: See that you walk
worthy of the Lord? but how? in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the
Holy Ghost; let these two go together. So shall you adorn the Doctrine of God
our Savior: and experience, the Heavenly felicity of a Christians life: While
Holiness is made the But of others Persecution, do you make it the white, the
mark of your prosecution; that you live it up, as much as others cry it down. O
watch and keep your Garments about you; the plain, but comely clothing of
humility, the seamless Coat of Christian unity, the strait and close Garment of
strictness, mortification and self-denial, the warm Winter-garment of love and
charity, this Garment will keep you warm in the Winter: love will not be
quenched by the Waters, nor cooled by the nipping Frosts of persecution and
opposition. Cleave fast to Christ, never let go your hold; cling the faster,
because so many are laboring to knock off your fingers, and loosed your hold.
Hold fast your Profession, hold fast your Integrity, hold ^ast the beginning of
your confidence steadfast to the end: If you do but keep your hold, and make
goud your ground, and keep your way; all that the World can do, and all that
the powers of darkness can do, can never do you harm. Keep your own Vinyard
with constant care and watchfulness, and be sure that there be no Inroad made
upon your consciences, that the, Enemy do not get between you and home, between
your souls and God; and then let who or what will assail you without, you need
not fear: let this be your daily exercise, to keep your consciences void of
offense: keep fair weather at home, however it be abroad. But I would not only
that you should walk holily, but that you should walk comfortably: But I need
say the less to this, because the fear of the Lord, and the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, do lie together. On the provision God has made for your continual joy
and comfort: dear Brethren, do but understand your own blessedness, happy men
that you are, if you did but know and consider it; who would count himself poor
and miserable that has all the fullness of the Godhead for his: sound in this
deep: can you find any bottom? take the height of the Divine Perfections if
you can, till then you cannot tell your own felicity. Take a servey of
Immensity, tell me the longitude or latitude of infinite goodness and mercy, of
the Eternal Diety: if you can do this, you may guess at your own happiness. Oh
Christians! live like your selves, live worthy of your Portion, of your
Privilege, and your glorious prerogatives. I am in haste, and it is time for
me to end; however, that you may walk worthy of your glorious hopes, and may
live answerably to the mercies you have received from above, is the great
desire of

From the Prison at Juelchester, September 18. 1663. Your Souls fervent well
wisher in the bonds of affliction and tribulation. JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER. IX. [Easie Sufferings.] To the most Loving and Beloved, my Christian
Friends at ^aunton, Salvation.
DEarly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown, for whom I am an Ambassador
in Bonds: what thanks to render to God in your behalf, I know not, for your
fervent charity toward me, and all the servants of my Lord, for all your
labors of love, for all your diligence, and bold^ess, and resolution, in
owning the despised way, and hared ser^ants of the Lord Jesus, in an evil day.
The Lord is not unrighteous to forget this: Is not this upon record with him
and ^aled up among his Treasures? surely the Lord will have mercy upon Tauntou:
I have no doubt but that the God of ^our Mercies has yet a choice blessing in
store for you; be not weakened by my Bonds. Glory be to God in the Highest, that
he has accounted me worthy not only to Preach the Gospel to you, but also to
confirm it by the pa^ing with my much valued liberty, so dear a People, so
swee^ Relations, comforts, conveniences, which I enjoyed in all a^dance when I
was with you. When I look back upon all the circumstances of the late
Providence, I must say as they of Christ upon his Miracles, He has done all
things well; it is all as I would have it, I am fully satisfied in my Fathers
good pleasure. Verily there is no little honor and happiness, no little peace
and privilege in these Bonds. Verily all is true that I have told you of the
All Sufficiency of God, of the fullness of Christ, of the satisfactoriness of
the promises of the peace, tranquillity, content, and security, that is to be
had in a life of Faith. Surely methinks I should be content to seal to these
things at a much dearer rate than this; but my gracious Father will not put me
to the hardest Les^on at first: oh what reason have I to speak good of his
name! what else should I do all my days, but love, and fear, and preach, and
praise, so good a God? when I look back upon the gentle dealings of God with
me, I often think he has brought me up as indulgently as David did Adoni^ah,
of whom it is said, His Father had not displeased him. I have received nothing
but good at the hands of the Lord all my days; and now he does begin to
afflict, I see so much Mercy in this very Goal, that I must be more thankful
for this than for my prosperity. Surely the name of the place is, The Lord is
here: Surely it may be called Peniel. Be strong in the Lord, my Bre^hren, be
patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. In
nothing be terrified by your adversaries. Now let those that fear the Lord be
often speaking one to another. I hear that Satan is practicing to send more of
you after me: I desire and pray for your liberty: but if any of you be sorced
hither for the testimony of the Gospel, I shall embrace you with both arms Fare
you well, my most dearly Beloved: be perfect, and be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. My
Brethren in Bonds salute you with much affection, rejoicing to behold your
order and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ: share my heart among you,
and know that I am

The willing Servant of your Faith and Joy, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Jail at Juelchester, Sept. 28. 1663.
LETTER. X. [The Love of Christ.] To my Beloved in the Lord, the Flock of
Christ in] Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most Loving and best Beloved,
MY heart is with you, my affections are espoused to you. And methinks I could
even say with the Apostle, ( you are in my heart, to live and die with you:)
and who can but love where they have received so much love (and continually do)
as I have from you! the Lord requi^e your love which is great (and if compared
with his, but little) with his which is infinite; this is a love worthy of your
ambition, worthy of your adoration and admiration. This is the Womb that bore
you from eternity, and out of which have burst forth all the Mercies, Spiritual
and Temporal, that you enjoy. This was the love that chose you, when less
Offenders, and those that being converted, might have been a hundred sold more
serviceable to their Makers Glory, are l^ft to perish in their sins: May your
souls be filled with the sense of this love. But it may be you will say, how
shall I know if I am an object of Electing love? least an unbelieving thought
should damp your joy; know in snort, that if you have chosen God, he has
certainly chosen you. Have you taken him for your blessedness? and do you more
highly prize, and more diligently seek after conformity to him, and the
fru^tion of him than any, than all the goods of this World? If so, theu away
with doubts, for you could not have loved, and have chosen him, unless he had
loved you first. Now may my Beloved dwell continually in the thoughts, the
views, the tastes of the love. Get you: down under its shadows, and taste its
pleasant fruits. Oh the Provisions that love has made for you, before the
Foundation of the World! Ah silly dust, that ever thou should be thought
upon so long before thou wast: that the contrivances of the infinite Wisdom,
should be taken up about thee! that such a Crawling thing, such a Mite, a Flea,
should have the consultations of the Eternal Diety exercised about thee! verily
his love to thee is wonderful. Lord what is man! thou tellest us he is Dust and
Vanity, a Worm, nothing less than nothing; how then do thou love him! oh
wonderful! be astonished yea Heavens at this: be moved ye strong foundation of
the Earth. Fall down yea^ Elders, strike up ye Heavenly Quires, and sing yet
again, Glory to God in the highest: for all our strings would crack to reach
the Notes of love, praise, and admiration that this love does call for. Oh that
ever emptiness and vanity, should be thus prized! that Jehovah should make
account of so worthless, so useless a thing as man! that ever baseness should
be thu^ preferred! that ever nothing should be thus dignified! tha^ ever
rottenness should be thus advanced, a Clod, a shadow Potsheard, should be thus
glorified! Oh Brethren, study beseech you, not to require or retaliate (there is
impossibility, and blasphemy in such a thought) but to admire and im^tate his
love. Let love constrain you, let love put you upon doing, and prepare you for
suffering; forget not a love s^ memorable, undervalue not a love so unvaluable;
I would have you all the captives of love: may the cords of love dra^ you
toward, and knit you to your Redeemer? may the ^vided streams be united in
him. Alas, that our souls are s^ narrow, that the Waters are so shallow with
us! how little how very little would our love be, if he had it all, infinit^
less than the Glowworm to the Suu, or the Attome to the Universe? and have we
any of this little to spare for him oh that we might love him with our little
Ah! that all o^ little powers were engaged for him! Brethren, here is no
ex^cess: oh love the Lord ye his Saints! he is worthy for who^ you shall do
this. Do but think what love has done for yo^ and think if you can, what it
means to do for you. This is the love that yarned upon you, when in your Blood
no eye pitying you. This is the love that took you up when you were robbed and
wounded, and left for dead, and poured in Win^ and Oil into your wounds. This
is that love that reprieved and spared, and pardoned, when the Law had
condemne^ you, and Justice would have had you delivered up; an^ your
Self-condemning consciences gave up all for lost, co^cluding there was no hope.
This is the love, the expensiv^ love that bought you from the power of
darkness, from the eternal burnings, the devouring fire in which you must
otherwise have dwelt. Do you not remember how you were hungry, and it fed you,
naked and it clothed you, strangers and it took you in, sick and it visited
you, in Prison and it came unto you? you were dead and are alive, you were lost
and are found. And me thinks I see how love runs to meet you, and falls upon
your necks, and kisseth the Lips that deserve to be loathed, and rejoices over
you, and makes a Festival, and as it were a Holiday in Heaven to you, inviting
Angels to rejoice. And if the friends do rejoice, how much more does the
father? for says he, These my Sons were dead and are alive, were lost and are
sound. Oh melting love! ah Brethren, how strange is this, that our recovery
should be Heavens triumph, the joy of God and Angels. That this love should
feast us, and feast over us, and our Birthday should be kept in Heaven: that
this should be the round at Heavens Table, and the burden of the Song above: [
For this my Son was dead, and is alive,] and well, what remains but that you
should be another manner of People, than ever yet you have been, more holy,
more humble, more even, more resolved, more lively, more active? where is your
Zeal for the Lord of Hosts? will slender returns suffice you in answer to such
a love? God forbid. But necessity calls me off from going any further. May the
love that chose you, and redeemed you, for ever dwell in you, and overshaddow
you, and bear you safe to the Kingdom. In the Holy Arms of Divine Love I desire
to leave you. May you live under its daily Influences, and be melted and
overcome with its warming Beams, with its quickening, piercing, powerful Rays.
My most dear love, to you all. See that you live not in a dull, fruitless,
liveless course. Be patient, be watchful, instant in Prayer, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord: I am very healthful and cheerful through grace. See that none
of these things move you that befall us. Fare you well my dear Brethren, farewell
in the Lord, I am

From the Prison at Juelchester, October 25. 1663. Yours in the strongest Bonds
of Affection, and Affliction. Joseph Alleine.

LETTER XI. [Remember Christ Crucified, and crucify Sin.] To the Faithful and
Well-beloved People, the servants of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.
Most dear Christians,
I Am by Office a Remembrancer, the Lords Remembrancer for you and your
Remembrancer in the behalf of Christ. My business is, with the Apostle, to stir
up your pure minds by way of Remembrance. And what or whom should I remember
you of, but your mindful Friend, your Intercessour with the Father, who has
you always in remembrance, appearing in the presence of God for you? May his
memory ever live in our hearts, though mine should die: Oh remember his Love
more than Wine, remember in what a case he found you, and yet nothing could
anihilate his heart, nor divert the purpose of his Love from you: He loathed
not your Rags nor your Rottenness: he found you in a loathsome vomit and
filthiness, in a nasty and verminous tatters, (think not these expressions too
odious: no Pen can describe, no heart can imagine the odiousness of sin in his
sight, in which you lay and rolled your selves as the filthy Swine in the mire)
yet he pitied you, his Bowels were moved, and his Compassions were kindled,
when one would have thought his wrath should have boiled and his indignation
have burned down to Hell against you: he loathed not but loved you, and washed
you from your sins in his own Blood: Ah monstrous and polluted Captives? ah
vile and putrid Carkases? that ever the holy Jesus should take the hands of
you, and should his own self wash you, and wrinse you! merh^nks I see him
weeping over you; and yet it was a more costly Bath by which he cleansed you.
Ah Sinners! look upon the streaming Blood flowing out warm from his blessed
Body, to setch out the ingrained filthiness that you by sin had contracted.
Alas! what a horrid filthiness in sin, that nothing but the blood of the
Covenant could wash away! and what a love is Christ's, than when no Soap nor
Nitre could suffice to cleanse us, when a whole Ocean could not wash nor
purify us, would open every vein of his heart to do the work! look upon your
crucified Lord: do you not see a sacred stream flowing out of every Member? ah,
how those holy hands, those unerring Feet do run a stream to purge us! Alas,
how that innocent Back does bleed with cruel scourgings to save ours! how the
great drops of blood fall to the ground from his sacred Face in his miraculous
sweat, in his bitter and bloody Agony, to wash and beautify ours! how his
wounded hearts and side twice pierced, first with love and pity; and then with
Soldiers cruelty do pour out their healthful and saving Floods upon us? Lord,
how do we make a shift to forget such a love as this? ah mirrors or rather
monsters of ingratitude, that can be unmindful of such a Friend: do we thus
requite him: is this our kindness to such an obliging friend! Christians, where
are you affections? to what use do you put your faculties? what have you
memories for: but to remember him! what have you the power of loving for, but
that you should love him? wherefore serves joy or desire, but to long for him
and delightfully to embrace him? may your souls and all their Powers be taken
up with him: may all the little doors of your souls be set open to him. Here
^ix your thoughts, he^e terminate your desire; here you may light your Candle
and kindle your fire when almost out. Rub and chafe your hearts well with the
deep consideration of the love of Christ, and it is a wonder if they do not get
foam warmth. The Lord shed abroad his love in your hearts by the H. Ghost: Oh,
that this love might constrain you! Brethren what will you do now for Jesus
Christ. Have you never a Sacrifice to lay upon his Altar? come, and I will show
you what you shall do, let your hands be in the blood of your sins, fall foul
with them, search them out with diligence, search your hearts and your houses;
whatever iniquit^es you find there, out with them, put them far from your
Tabernacles; if you crucify them not, you are not Jesus his Friends. Godforbid
that there should be a lying Tongue, or any way of deceit in your Shops. That
his service should give place to the World in your Families. Far be it from any
of you, my Brethr^n, that you should be careful to teach your children and
servants the way of your Trades and Callings, and negl^t to instruct them in
the way of Life. Is weekly Ca^echising up in every one of your Families? The
Lord convince any of you that may be guilty of this neglect: Oh, set up God in
your Houses; and see that you be not slovenly in Closet performances: beware of
serving the Lord negligently; serve not the Lord with that which cost you
nothing: look to it that you content not your selves with a cheap and easy
Religion. Put your flesh to it: be well assured that the Religion that costs
you nothing will yield you nothing: keep up the life of Religion in your Family
and Closet duties. Fear nothing like a customary and careless performance of
Gods service. Judge your own selves whether lazy wishes, idie complaints, and
yawning Prayers are like to carry you through the mighty difficulties that you
must get through if ever you come to Heaven. When you find your selves going on
in a liftless, liveless, heartless course, and have no mind to your work, ask
your selves, is this to take the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, or can I hope
to win it without? see that you sacrifice your selves to the Lord, that you
deliver up your selves to him, that now you live to Christ himself As Christ
has made over his life and death to you, so let it be your care to live and
die to him: labor to forget your selves and look upon all your enjoyments as
Christ's goods; upon your time, parts, strength, as his Talents: look upon your
selves only in the quality of Servants and Stewards that are to husband all
these for your Lords advantage, and as those that must give an account. And
pray for me that I may take the Counsel that I give. I ^ss the Lord, I want
nothing but the opportunity of being ^ceable unto you, and to enjoy you: but I
hope the Lord will make my bonds for you to be useful to your edification; that
is the White I aim at, if I may glorify God, and serve your Souls best by
being here, I shall never wish to come out, though I confess liberty of its
self is very precious.

Finally, Brethren, Farewell: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you, I

The ready Servant of your Faith and Joy, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, October. 14. 1663.
My dear Brother Norman salutes you tenderly, desiring you to be patient, to
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

LETTER XII. [For daily Self-Examination.] To the most Beloved People, the
Flock of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.
Most dear Brethren:
I Would my time were as long as my heart, that I might open my self to you;
but I was not without some discontent diverted, when I was setting my self to
have Written at large to you. Now I am pinched, however I could not leave my
dear charge altogether unvisited, but must needs salute you in a few Lines.
Brethren, how stands it with you? does the main work go on? do your souls
prosper? This is my care, beware that you Flag not, that you faint not now in
the evil day. I understand that your dangers grow upon you, may your Faith and
courage and resolution grow accordingly, and much more abundantly to overtop
them. Some of your enemies I hear are in great hopes to satisfy their lusts
upon you: well, be not discouraged my dear Brethren, but bless the Lord who of
his abundant Mercy, has so remarkably preserved you so long beyond all
expectation. Let it not be a strange thing to you, if the Lord do now call you
to some difficulty: forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, as the
manner of some is. I plainly see the Coal of Religion will soon go out, unless
it have some better helps to cherish it, then a Carnal Ministry, and lifeless
Administration. Dear Brethren, now is the time for you that fear the Lord, to
speak often one to another: manage your duties with what prudence you ^an, but
away with that Carnal prudence, that will decline duty to avoid danger. Is the
Communion of Saints worth the venturing for? Shut not up your doors against
Godly Meetings. I am told that it is become a hard matter, when a Minister is
willing to take pains with you to get place: ^ar be this from you my Brethren.
What, shut out the Worcester d! suppose there be somewhat more danger to him that
gives the Minister entertainment? Is there not much more advantage accordingly?
did not O^ed Edom, and his House get the blessing by entertaining the Ark
there? or do you think God has never a blessing for those that shall with much
Self-denial entertain his Messengers, his Sain^s, his Worship? are you
believers, and yet are afraid you shall be loosers by Christ? do you indeed
not know that he that runs most hazard for Christ, does express most love to
Christ, and shall receive the greatest reward; away with that unbelief, that
prefers the present safety, before the future glory.

I left you some helps for daily Examination, I am jealous least you should
grow slack, and slight, and car^less in that duty. Let me ask you in the name
of the Lord, does never a day pass you, but you do solemnly and seriously call
your selves to an account, what your ^arriage has been to God and Men? speak
conscience, Is there never an one within the hearing of this Letter, that is a
neglecter of this duty? dot^ every one of your Consciences acquit you? Oh that
they did! oh that they could! tell me, would not some of you be put shrewdly to
it, if I should ask you when you read or thought over the questions that were
given you for your help? and would you not be put to a blush, to give me an
answer? and will you not be much more ashamed, that God and conscience should
find you tardy? not that I would necessarily bind you up to that very Method,
only till you have found a way more profitable: I would desire you, yea,
methinks I cannot but deeply charge you, to make daily use of that. Awake
conscience, and do thou fall upon that Soul that thou find careless in this
work, and never let him be at rest till thou can witness for him, that he is
a d^ily and strict observer of himself, and does live in the constant practice
of this duty. What shall neither Gods charge, nor your promise, nor profit hold
you to your work? yet I may not doubt, but some of you do daily perform this
duty. The Lord encourage you in it: yet give me leave to ask you what you have
gained? are you grown more universally consci^ncious, more strict, more humble,
and more sensible of your many and great defects, then you were before? If so,
blessed are you of the Lord; if otherwise, this duty has been performed but
slightly by you. What can you say to this question? does your care of your ways
abate, or does it incr^, by the constant use of this duty? If it abate,
remember from whence you are fallen, and repent; as good not do it at all, as
not to the purpose.

My Pen is apt to run, when I am writing unto you. I beseech you, that my
Letters may not be as so much waste Paper to you; may they be provocations to
your duty, and Medicines to any corruptions that they m^et with; Oh that they
might find out men's sins, and excite their graces! I have run much farther than
I thought I should have done, but now I am called upon, and must shur up. The
Lord God be a Sun and a Shield to you. My most dear Love to you all, fare you
well in the Lord, I am

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Goal at Juelchester, October. 20. 1668.
LETTER XIII. [Motives and Marks of Growth.] To the most Loving, and best
Beloved, the servants of Christ in ^aunton, Grace and Peace:
Most dear and tender Friends,
WHose I am, and whom under God I desire to serve; to build you up in Holiness,
and comforts has been through grace my great ambition. This is that which I
labored for; this is that which I suffer for: and in short the end of all my
applications to you, and to God for you. How do your souls prosper? are they in
a thriving case? what progress do you make in Sanctification? does the House of
Saul grew weaker and weaker, and the house of David stronger and stronger?
beloved, I desire to be jealous of you with a Godly jealousy, lest any of you
should lose your ground in these declining times: and therefore cannot but be
often calling upon you to look to your standing, and to watch and hold fast,
that no man take your Crown. Ah! how su^ely shall you reap in the end if you
faint not! take heed therefore that you lose not the things you have wrought,
but as you have begun well, so go on in the strength of Christ. and give
diligence to the full assurance of hope to the end, it is your thriving, I tell
you, I drive at.

Do you need Motives?] 1. How much are you behind-band? Oh, the fair advantages
that we have lost! what time, what Sabboths, Sermons, Sacraments, are upon the
matter lost? how much work have we yet to do? are you sure of Heaven yet? are
you fit to die yet? surely they that are in so much Poverty, under so many
great wants, had need to set upon some more thriving courses.

Secondly, Consider what others have gained, whilst we it may be sit down by
the loss: Have we not met many Vessels richly laden, while our Souls are empty?
Oh, the rich Booties, the golden Prizes that some have won? while we have
folded the hands to sleep! have not many of our own standing in Religion left
us far behind them?

Thirdly, Consider what a spending time there is coming: Affliction and
Tribulation seem to be not far from you: had you not need to be well stocked
against such a day? go to the Ant thou sluggard, she lays up her meat in the
Summer. Happy man that can say to his Soul on good grounds, what he vainly
spoke, Thou have much good laid up for many years: Who will not Victual the
Castle against the Siege? and the Ship against the Voyage?

Fourthly, Consider you will find all little enough when you come to die: the
Wise among the Virgins have no Oil to spare at the coming of the Bridegroom;
distress and temptations, and death will put all your Graces to it. How much
ado have many poor Saints had at last to put into this harbor? David cties for
respite till he had recovered a little more strength.

Fifthly, Consider how little it will avail you to thrive in your Estates, and
not thrive i^ your Souls: Poor Gehazi! what did he get by it when he gained
Naamans Talents, and came off with his Leprosy?

Sixthly, Consider how short your time for gathering in probability is: the
Israelites gathered twice so much Manna against the Sabbath as they did at
other times, because at that time there was no Manna fell. Brethren you know
not how long you have to lay in for.

Seventhly, Consider Gods expectations are great from you: he has been lopping
and pruning you, and now he looks for more fruit: he has had you for some time
under his more severer Discipline, and therefore expects you should be better
proficients: he has tried new means with you, and is come to you with a Rod;
and he will be angry with a witness if he do not find you now to mend. Times of
Afflictions use to be gaining times to Gods People; God forbid that you alone
should be losers.

Do you ask for marks how you may know your souls to be in a thriving case?

First, If your appetites be more strong. Do you thirst after God, and after
grace, more than heretofore? do your cares for and desire after the World
abate? and do you hunger and thirst after righteousness! whereas you were wont
to come with an ill will to holy duties, do you come to them as a hungry
stomach to its meats?

Secondly, If pour Pulses beat more even. Are you still off and on, hot and
cold. Or is the a more even spun thread of holiness through your whole course?
do you make good the ground from which you were formerly often beaten off?

Thirdly, If your natural heat do grow more vigorous, and your digestion more
quick. Do you take more notice of God in every thing, than heretofore? and let
none of his works, nor words pass without some careful attention, and
observation? do you ponder upon, and pray over his Word, and his Providence?

Fourthly, If you do look more to the Compass, and latitude of Religion, and
mind more than ever, the carrying on together the d^s of both Tables. Do you
not only look to the keeping if your own Vineyards, but do you begin to look
more abroad, and to lay out your selves for the good of others, and are filled
with zealous desires for their conversation, and salvation? do you manage your
talk and your Trade, by the rules of Religion?

Do you ear and sleep by rule? does Religion form, and mould, and direct your
carriage toward Husband, Wife, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants! do you
grow more universally conscientious? Is piety more diffusive than ever with
you, does it come more abroad with you, out of your Clossets into your Houses,
your Shops, your Fields? does it journey with you, and buy and sell for you?
has it the casting voice in all you do?

Fifthly, If the duties of Religion be more easy, sweet, and delightful to
you. Do you take more delinht in the Word than ever? are you more in love with
secret Prayer, and more abundant in it? cannot you be content with your
ordinary Seasons, but are ever and anon making extraordinary visits to Heaven?
and upon all occasions turning aside to talk with God in some short
Ejaculations? are you o^en darting up your souls Heaven-wards? Is it meat and
drink for you, to do the Will of God? do you come off more freely with God, and
answer his Calls, and open at his knocks, with more Alacrity and readiness of
mind?

Sixthly, If you are more abundant in those duties which are most displeasing
to the Flesh. Are you more earnest upon the duty of Mortification? are you more
strict and severe than ever in the duty of daily Self-examination, and holy
Meditation? do you hold the Reigns harder upon the Flesh than ever? do you keep
a stricter watch upon your Appetites? do you set a stro^r guard upon your
Tongues? have you a more jeal^s eye upon your hearts?

Seventhly, If you grow more vi^e in your own eyes. Pride is such a choking
Weed, that nothing will prosper near it. Do you grow more out of love with men's
esteem, and set less by it? are you not mavelous tender of being slighted?
can you rejoice to see others preferred before you? can you heartily value, and
love them that think meanly of you?

Eighthly, If you grow more quick of sense, more tender of sining, more sensi^
of Divine influences, or withdrawings. Are you more afraid of sin than ever?
are your sins a greater pain to you than heretofore? are your very infirmities,
your great afflictions? and the daily workings of corruption a continual grief
of mind to you?

Ninthly, If you are acted more by love to God and Faith in these Promises.
Fear is a slavish principle: do you find that you are acted less by fear, and
more by love? do you look more frequently to the things not seen than ever? and
does the World abate in your esteem? do you go more out of your selves? do you
live upon Christ as the Spring of your life, and make more use of him upon all
occasions than ever? do you prize the Promise more, and hug and embrace them
with grea^er dearness, and live more upon them.

Tenthly, If you grow of a more publisk Spirit. A selfish spirit is unworthy of
a Christian: are the common concernments of Gods Glory, and the prosperity of
the Church, much upon your hearts? will it no way content you to dwell in
plenty, peace, and safety your selves, except you may see peace upon Israel? do
the wounds in Gods Name and Glory go deep into you? are the sins of others your
sorrows?

Time, and room, and strength fails to add means too, as I inteuded. I have
trespassed in length already, may these be helps to you to put you forward, and
to help you in discerning your growth. I must conclude abruptly, and commend
you to God with my dear loves to you all, I take leave, and can only tell you
that I am,

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE
From the common Goal at Juelchester, Octo. 31. 1663.
LETTER XV. [Perswasion to Sinners, and comfort to Saints,] To my dearly
Beloved, the Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, Grace, Mercy, and Peace from
God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Most dearly Beloved,
I Have been through mercy many years with you, and should be willingly so many
years a Prisoner for you, so I might eminently and effectually further your
salvation. I must again, yea again, and again thank you for your abundant and
entire affections to me, which I value as a great mercy not in order to my
self, if I know my own heart, but in order to your benefit, and I may thereby
be a more likely Instrument to further your good. Surely, so much as I do value
your love, which is not a little, yet had I rather (if I am not unacquainted
with my self) be forgotten and forsaken of you all, and buried in oblivion, So
that your eyes and hearts might be hereby fixed on Christ, and sincerely
engaged to him. Brethren, I have not be spoken your affections for my self: O
that I might win your hearts universally to Jesus Christ, though I had lost
them for ever! O that I might be instrumental to convert you to him though you
were diverted from me. I am persuaded that I should much rather choose to be
hated of all, so this might be the means to have Christ honored, and set up
savingly in the hearts of you all. And indeed there is nothing great but in
order to God; nothing is much material or considerable as it is terminated in
us: It matters not whether we are in Riches or poverty, in sickness or health,
in honor or disgrace, so Christ may be by us, magnified in the condition we
are in. Welcome Prison and poverty, welcome scorn and envy, welcome pains or
contempt, if by these Gods glory may be most promoted. What are we for but for
God? what does the Creature signify separated from his God? why just so much
as the Cipher separated from the Figure, or the letter from the Syllable, we
are nothing or nothing worth, but in reference to God and his ends. Better were
it that we had never been, than that we should not be to him. Better that we
were dead than we should live, and not to him. Better that we had no
understandings than that we should not know him. Better that we were Blocks and
Bruis than that we should not use our reason for him. What are our Interests
unless as they may be subservient to his Interest? or our esteem or reputation,
unless we may hereby glorify him? do you love me? I know you do; but who is
there that will leave his sins for me? I mean at my requests: with whom shall I
prevail to give up himself in strictnese and self-denial to the Lord? who will
be entreated by me to set upon neglected duties, or reform accustomed sins? O
wherein may you rejoice me? in this, in this, my Brethren, in this you shall
befriend me, if you obey the voice of God by me, if you be prevailed with to
give your selves up thoroughly to the Lord? would you lighten my burden; would
you loosen my bonds? would you make glad my heart? let me hear of your owning
the ways and servants of the Lord in adversity, of your coming in, of your
abiding and patient continuing in the ways of holiness. O that I could but hear
that the prayerless Souls, the prayerless families among you, were now given to
prayer! that the profane sinner would be awakened, and be induced by the
Preaching of these Bonds, which heretofore would not be prevailed with, to
leave their drunkenness their loose company, their lying and deceit, and
Wantonness, by all the threatenings of God that could be pronounced against
them, nor all the beseechings, wooings, and entreaties that I was able to use
with them! will you not be made clean? when shall it once be? how long shall
the patience of God wait for you? how long shall the Lord Jesus stretch out his
hands toward you? O sinners, cast your selves into his Arm? Why should you die?
why will you forsake your own mercy? will you perish when mercy wooes you?
confess and forsake your sins, and you shall find mercy: will you part with
Christ, and sell your souls to perdition for a little ease and delight to your
flesh? or a little of the gain of unrighteousness? or a little Ale or vain
mirth, or loose company? why these are the things that part between sinners and
Christ.

I know many are spun with a finer thread, and are not so far from the Kingdom
of God, as the prayerless, ignorant, Sabbath-breaking, intemperate sort are.
But I must once again warn you of staying in the suburbs of the City of Refuge.
O what pity is it that any should perish at the Gates! that any should escape
the pollutions of the world and do many things yea, and suffer it may be too,
and yet should fall short of the glory of God, for want of a through work of
grace! Oh you halting Christians, that halt between Christ and the World, that
are as Ephraim like a Cake not turned, dow-baked, Professors, that have Lamps
without Oil, that cry, Lord, Lotd, but do not the will of our Father which is
in Heaven! how long will you stay in the place of the breaking forth of
Children? and stick between the womb and the World? your Religion will carry
you among the profane despisers of Godliness, but do own the people of the
Lord, and do love the Ministers and ordinances, therefore all is well. I tell
you, Godliness is a heart-work, it goes deep, and spreads far: unless the frame
of your hearts, and the drifts of your course be changed, unless you be
universally conscientious, and unreservedly delivered up to the Lord for all
times, and conditions whatever be the cost, you are none of Christ's, how far
soever you go in common workings and external performances. Hear then, O
people, and let not profaneness swallow you up: let not an almost Christianity
deceive you, or ignorance carry you blindfold to perdition. Oh the thousands,
and ten thousands that have been undone by one of these! Ah how often have you
been warned against them, least you should split against these dangerous Rocks.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, said Christ, and O Taunton, Taunton, may I say from
him, (...)? who can tell how often, would Gods (...) ^thered you, and you would
not? many, very many (...) would not. But will you now? will you yet come in? I
(...) forbear once more, even out of the Prison to (...) or sinners, and make
one tender of mercy more. O (...) to the waters of Life, wash you, make you
clean; read (...) diligent observation, the melting passages, Prove. 1. 22. to
the end, Isa. 1. 16, 21. Isa. 55. 6, 10. Oh obdurate sinners, if none of these
things move you!

But for you, whose very hearts are set against every sin, and are deliberately
resolved for God and Holiness ^re all the worlds delight; you that have
experience of a through change, and are brought to have respect to all Gods
Commandments, who will have none but God for your happiness, none but Christ
for your Treasure, that must and will have him, come what will come, blessed
are you of the Lord: O happy Souls rejoice in the Lord, and again. I say,
Rejoice: let your souls magnify the Lord, and your spirits rejoice in God your
Savior. Live you a life of praise, you are highly favored of the Lord, your
Lines are fallen in a pleasant place: only stick you fast to your choice:
Beware lest any man beguile you of your reward: watch and keep your garments
about you, lest you walk naked, and men see your shame. Many will be plucking
to pull you out of Christ's hands; but the harder they pluck, the harder do you
cling, and cleave to him, and the better hold fast do you take of him: blessed
is he that overcomes.

And now the God of Heaven fill you all with himself, and make all Grace to
abound in you, and toward you, and that he may be a Sun to comfort you, and a
Shild of protection to you, and shine with his happy Beams of Grace and Glory
on you all: Farewell in the Lord, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Gospel, JOS. ALLEINE
August, 28. 1663.
LETTER. XVI. [How to live to God.] To the Beloved People, the Inhabitants of
the Town of Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most endeared Christians,
TO tell you I love and long for you, seems somewhat needless. I cannot doubt
of your confidence that you have a deep share in my tenderest affections: for
this let my labors among you, and the hazards for you speak, rather that I my
self. Beloved, I am, without a Complement the devoted servant of your souls
prosperity, and the interest of Christ in you: way the Lord Jesus be set up
higher in your hearts; may his name ever live in you, and be magnified by you,
and I have what I ask. If this work be not promoted among you, I shall account
all my letters but waste Paper, and all my pains but lost labor. Brethren, I
beseech you, that none of you live to your selves, for this were directly to
cross the very end of Christ's death: for therefore he died that you should not
live to your selves, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Oh live to him that died for you! live to
him that is the God of your life! live to him that bought your lives with the
expense of his own! To him that bought you from destruction; and not only so,
but bought your names into the eternal Inheritance, reserved in the Heavens for
you. Will a man be easily persuaded to lose his life? how infinitely tender are
men here! And yet in the worst sense the most of men do lose their lives, yea,
lose them for nothing. Beloved, consider, I beseech you, that life is lost,
that is not lived unto God. If you would not loss your lives that you live, see
to him who is the end of your lives. Oh remember this, and reckon that day lost
which you have not lived unto God! Brethren how great a part of our lives have
we really, alas! to too really lost? I beseech you take heed: here you are
careful about many things, but beware that other things do not put out this
which should be the main of your cares, to wit, the spendin your days and
strength for him that made you. Would it not be dreadful for a man to find at
last when he comes to his account with God, that his whole life, or at least
the main of it had been but damnable self-seeking. That a man should have so
many years allowed him by God, and he should at last be found to have been but
a false and wicked servant that had set up for himself with his Masters stock,
and alienated his goods, and turned them to his own use? Well, that you may
thoroughly learn the grand lesson of living unto God, take these Counsels:

First, Settle it upon your heart that it is the sum of all your business and
blessedness to live unto God: It Is your business, for his pleasure you are and
were created: what have you else to do but to serve your Maker in your general
and particular Callings? what was the Candle made for (says one) but to be
burnt? beloved, what else have you strength for, but for God? does he maintain
servants, and shall not he look for their work; Would you endure it that the
servants that you find with meat and wages should set up for themselves, that
they should eat your bread and all the while do their own work? beloved, Gods
service is your business, and he made you and keeps you for no other end; and
it is your blessedness too. Labor to be under the rooted conviction of this
principle, that your very happiness lies in pleasing and honoring of God. Let
the sense of this live fresh upon your hearts, and it will regulate your whole
course.

Secondly, Remember what a dangerous, yea, damnable thing it is to live to your
selves: To make it our main care and business to please and gratify our
selves, or to have applause from and reputation with others, or to grow rich in
the world, and greaten our selves and posterity, is the certain evidence of a
graceless heart. And though the Godly do make God their principle end in
general, yet they must know, that for so much of their lives ar is spent
besides, this end (which is too too much) they shall suffer loss.

Thirdly, Labor to keep alive upon your selves a deep sense of your strong
obligations to God. Often think with your selves what a righteous, what a
reasonable thing it is, that you should with all that you have serve the Lord.
Beloved, sha I not the Vessel be for the use of the Potter that made it? Shall
not the servant Trade for his Master with whose goods he is entrusted? do yot
not fetch all your bread from Gods door? Is not he the Rock that begat you? the
Author of your being and well-being? is not this he that can crucify you or
release you? can save you or damn you at his pleasure? Is it not from him that
you fetch every breath? your interest obliges you to please him. Why should
Beltshazzars charge be against you? that the God in whose hand your breach is,
and whose are all your ways, you have not glorified, Dan. 5. 23.

Fourthly, Do not only intend God as the general end of your course, but in
every solemn action actually mind your end. Though a man need not, cannot think
of his Journeys-end at every step, yet with care he might come to this in every
solemn action, particularly and expressly to mind his end: a man cannot (nor
need he) think at every bit that he puts into his mouth, I will eat this for
God: yet he might every time he sits down to his Table, remember to eat and
drink, not to gratify his flesh, but to glorify God, by getting strength for
his work, you cannot think of it in every step in your Journey; but without
intending some glory to God by serving his will in your place and station? and
so in your visits and labors.

Fifthly, Every morning let this be your first and firm resolution, I will set
forth this day in the Name of God. Your first and last thoughts are of greatest
consequence; and therefore I advise you to begin and end with this: when ever
you lie down, say in your selves, I will make use of my Bed as an ordinance of
God, that a servant of his may be refreshed and fitted for his work: when ever
you rise up, think I will spend this day for God, and follow the business of my
calling, because I am so appointed by God, Zech. 10. 12. And they shall walk up
and down in his Name, says the Lord, etc.

Beloved, I design the sweetness and comforts, as well as strictness of your
lives. Live to God as you are directed, and you shall marvellously prosper in
both. I am not sure yet, whether or no I shall see you at the Assizes, which I
earnestly desire to do I leave all things to our Fathers wise disposal, and
commending you to God, I divide my loves among you, and so rest

From the Prison at Juelchester, Nov. 14. 1663. Yours in the bonds of the Lord
Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XVII. [Motives to set our selves to please God.] To the most Loving,
and best Beloved, the servants of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace:
Most dear Christians,
YOur Prisoner in the Lord saluteth you with all dearness: your are the care of
my heart, the desire of my Eyes, the joy of my Bonds, and the sweet of my
liberty. I am much satisfied in the wise disposal of our Heavenly Father,
whether he see it good for me to be a Bondman, or a Freeman, so I may but
serve your souls to the greatest advantage. Methinks I begin to feel in my
self, more than ever the benefit of your Prayers; the influences of Heaven,
through the riches of Free Grace (to which alone be the Praise) being more
fully sensible, and sweet upon me. I hope the Lord will restore us one to
another in his time, much better than we parted; in the mean time, see that you
stand fast in the hope of the Gospel. The Lord takes infinite care for you,
see that it be your care, the care of your very hearts, to please the Lord: Set
your hearts to it as the business of your lives, and the very end of your
beings, to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing. Set home on your
selyes such considerations as these.

First, It is the very business you were made for, and sent into the world for,
to please your Maker. For his pleasure you are, and were Created. Why should
the Lord repent that he had made you? Genesis 6. 6 What treacherous and damnable
falsehood is this, that when the Lord has given us Breath and Being, and sent
us into the World on purpose on his service, we should like false and wicked
servants, set up for our selves? why should your Creator say, he has made you
in vain?

Secondly, If you set your hearts to please the Lord, you are sure you shall
please him. It is not so with men, all the care in the World will not suffice
to please some men. How often do Princes forsake their greatest Favorites? so
that if you set to please men, you are not sure to attain your end at last;
yea, rather you are sure not to attain it. But if the Lord does see your very
hearts be set to please him, he will accept you, though you come short, 2 Cor.
8. 12. Read that sweet passage, 2 Chronicles. 6. 75.

Thirdly, It will be a certain sign of your sincerity, when the pleasing of the
Lord is your greatest business, Phil. 1. 20. To such the Promise runs, Isa. 56.
4. 5. It is a distinguishing evidence truly to seek and prize Gods favor, more
then Corn, Wine, Psalm. 4. 6. 7.

Fourthly, This will set all in order, and bring all your business to a Head,
when you have set down this as the one thing necessary, that you are resolved
to please the Lord, this will regulate your whole lives, and bring all your
business into a little compass. A Christian has but one thing to do in all
conditions, and that is to carry it so in his present state, as that he may
please God. A man-pleaser: O how many has he to please! what an endless work
has such an one to do?

Fifthly, Consider but how careful the Man-pleasing Parafite, and time serving
Hypocrite is to please m^: and shall not we take as much care to please our
God? oh how does the flattering Courtier study the humor of his Prince? be you
as careful to study, and to be acquainted with the mind of God. What will not
men do to screw themselves into the favor of the Mighty? oh that you were but
as diligent, and urwearied, and punctual in your endeavors, to get and to keep
the favor of the Almighty?

Sixthly, Consider whose favor or displeasure is of that consequence to you,
as the Lords is of. What if men should be angry with you, have they the Keys of
Hell, and of Death? no, no, fear them not. Can they undo your Souls? can they
send you to Hell? Alas they cannot. See that you dread his displeasure that
can. Alas what will their favor avail you? if they be pleased, can they stand
between the wrath of God and you? can they pardon your sins? save your souls?
secure your Eternal concernments? where is all their favor or good will, when
they or you come to die? It will not be worth a Rush when most needed.
Therefore beloved Brethren, whatever you do keep in with God. Resolve upon it,
He must be pleased, though all the World be displeased. Let it be enough to
you to have his good will: let this be the One thing that you bend your selves
to seek, and if you set to seek it, you may be sure to find it. The Messenger
stays for me, and so I must here shut up my Letter, as Jude does his. Ye
Beloved, building up your selves in your most holy Faith, Praying in the Holy
Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Eternal life. Unto his Grace I commend you all, and shall add
nothing but to share my loves among, and so rest,

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
Juelchester, November 22. 1663.
LETTER, XVIII. [The Worth of Holiness,] To the Beloved People the Flock of God
in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most dear Friends, and Brethren,
I Am now a Prisoner of the Lord for you Gentiles, and therefore have sent
these few Lines, to beseech you by these Bonds which I gladly endure for your
sakes, to hold forth, and hold fast the profession of your Faith without
wavering. The Lord make you steadfast in the Holy Doctrine wherein you have been
taught. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of God. O
remember that by the space of eight years, I ceased not to warn you every one,
and kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have taught you
publicly, and from House to House, warning every man, and teaching every man
that I might present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Oh that Impenitent
sinners would yet remember the Invitations, and the obsecrations, and the
obtestations, that they have had! have they not been sought unto? have they not
been entreated? have they not been followed from the Public, to their own
Houses? has not the Word been brought to their Doors? Has not Mercy wooed
them? have they uot been called under the VVings of Mercy? And yet they would
not. Oh that they would consider it now in the latter days? Jer. 23. 20. Oh
that they would remember, and repent, that there might be yet an after Harvest?
That they would yet come in and live! Are you yet willing to turn? hear how
Wisdom calls after you, Prove. 11. How long ye simple ones will you love
simplicity, and fools hate knowledge: turn you at my reproof. But if they will
not hear, good were it for them that they had never been born: It shall be
more, and better fot Sodom and Gomorrah, then for them.

But for you that have taken upon you the Profession of strict Godliness, I
shall only press you to follow on, and press toward the Mark. You have much
work yet to do, and God has given you no time to Loyter in. I beseech you to
put on. That Person that sits down when he has gotten to that pitch that he
thinks will bring him to Heaven, is never like to come thither; Grace is one of
those things that says, It never has enough. Let me urge upon you the
Apostles Counsel, Heb. 12. 14. Follow after Holiness.

First, Holiness is the choicest Ornament: it is an adorning in the sight of
God, of great prize. It is the Glory of God, and will you count it your shame?
Exodus 15. God is glorious in Holiness, and Grace is called Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
But we may now cry out as the Psalmist, in his complaint, O ye sons of men, how
long will ye turn my Glory into shame? Ps. 4. 2. But be of good comfort, the
shame of Holiness is real Glory: how confidently does Paul shake his Chain?
Acts 28. 20. We read of some that did glory in their shame in a sad sense, that
is in that which was real ground of shame, to wit, their sin, Phil. 3. 19. But
we meet with others that in a happy sense, did glory in their shame; that is in
the shame of Religion, which is indeed a Crown of Glory. So did Peter and John,
Acts 5. 41.

Secondly, Holiness is the safest Muniment: Grace is not only for Ornament,
but for Use. Righteousness is a Brestplate that keeps the Vitals, and is a sure
defense from any mortal wounds, Ephesians. 6. 14. When the Politicians have done
their best with all their politic fetches, it is he that walks uprightly,
that walks surely, Prove. 10. 19. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me,
says David, Psalm. 25. Last. I desire no other Protection than Innocence. I
desire to be no longer safe than these can preserve me; when I must let go my
Integrity or my safety, I will choose the danger rather than the sin:and yet
will never doubt but my Integrity will save me harmless, and prevent me for
ever coming off a Loser. Never persuade me that that man does choose wisely or
will consult in his own safety, that runs upon the displeasure of the infinite
God, who is a devouring fire, to fly the danger of man's displeasure. Did you
ever read or hear of a man so mad as to run upon the Swords point, to avoid the
scratch of a Pin? or to run upon a roaring Canon, rather than danger his being
wetshod? why this is the best wisdom of the distracted World, who will sin
rather than suffer, and to save themselves harmless in the World, will run upon
God, even upon his neck, and the thick Bosses of his Buckler, Job 15. 25. 26.

Thirdly, Holiness will be found to be your real happiness: Eat of this Tree,
and you shall be indeed as God. Godliness is Gods likeness. The beauty of
Holiness is this very Image; Sin is the disease of which Holiness is the Cure.
Pride is the Timpany, passion the Feavour of the mind, how restlesly raging is
the mind where they reign? holiness, humility, meekness, are a present ease, a
present Cure, if the Patient can take but enough. O what peace and tranquillity
does Holiness work in the Mind! Great peace have they that love thy
Commandments and nothing shall offend them, Psalm 19. 165. Read Isa 48. 18. 22.
and 26. 3. and 32. 17. holiness w^ll be a treasure of Riches, Jam. 2. 5. and a
Crown of honor. Acts 17. 11. A Paradise of pleasure to you, Prove. 3 (...) a
word, Holiness is the perfection of man's nature, (...) (...). The Communication
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4 The earnest of Glory, Mat. 5. 8. And the very
entrance of Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

Let me say now to every one of you, as our Savior to Martha, John 11. 26.
Believed thou this? If you do, live like Believers, and do you follow after
Holiness as others follow their Trades or Studies. Let Religion be your
business, and not a thing by the by with you: follow as hard upon the pursuit
of Grace, as if you did indeed believe riches and honor were in it. Count your
selves well, as long as you keep within the line of your duty. Let holiness sit
in your Lips, and season all your Speech with grace. Profess it, own it, plead
stoutly and resolve for it, be you Advocates for Holiness, in an Adulterous and
wicked Generation, wear it as a Robe of honor, when the spightful World cast
the dung of their Reproaches at you for it: let it dwell in your hearts: Let it
adorn your Houses: let it be your Companion in your Closets: Let it Travel with
you in your Journies: let it lie down and rise up with you: let it close your
eyes in the Evening, and call you out of your Beds in the Morning. Be you the
votaries of Holiness: keep her, and she shall keep you.

I shall close with my loves to you all, only because I know you love to hear
of my welfare: I must tell you that goodness and mercy do follow me
perpetually every day, and every night, Glory to God in the highest. Dear
Brethren, Fare you well in the Lord, I am

Your Devoted Servant in the Gospel, whether a Bondman, or a Free, JOS.
ALLEINE.
From the common Jail at Juelchester, December 3. 1663.
Most Dearly Beloved,
This was intended for you a Week sooner then it comes to be communicated. I
purposely write in the middle of the Week, that if any Opportunity be suddenly
offered, I may have somewhat ready for you: but last week I failed of a
Conveyance, I shall not add anything further now, but that I shall follow my
Counsels with my Prayers, and shall be an humble Intercessor night and day
before God for you: to him I commend you, and to the Word of his Grace,

Remaining Yours while I am, J. A.

LETTER XIX. [1. Try. 2. Rejoice.] To the most loving, and best beloved, the
Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most endeared Friends,
MY heart is solicitous for you: your Spiritual and Eternal welfare is the
matter of my desires and designs. Let not my Beloved think they were forgotten
by me, because you heard not from me the last Week: sleep departed from my eyes
to write to you at large; but in the morning I concluded it best, to defer the
imparting of it to you for a season, that you might have it a better way. Can a
woman forget her Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
Womb? yea, they may forget, but Christ will earnestly remember you still.
Natural Parents may be so far unnatural; spiritual Parents may be so far
carnal, as to forget their own Children: I would have you count nothing as
certain but Christ's love and care. This you may build upon: You need not fear
lest time and distance should wear out the remembrance of you with him: your
names are in^olled in the everlasting Decrees of Heaven, and a whole Eternity
has not been able to wear them out. Do any of you question whether you are so
happy as to have your names recorded above? I shall bring it to a speedy issue:
Do ^ou question whether Christ has taken your names? whether you are upon his
heart? Let me ask you, Is Heaven upon your Hearts? Is the Name of Jesus deeply
engraven upon your Souls? Is his Image and Superscription there? If you can
find that Heaven is the main of your cares, that your hearts are set upon it as
your home and your Country; and that it is your great business to seek it and
secure it, then never doubt, if your Hearts be chiefly upon Heaven, your Names
are unquestionable written in Heaven. Again, has Christ recorded his name in
your Hearts? Is the Name of Jesus the Beloved name with you? precious above
all; next to your hearts? Is there no other Name under heaven so dear and sweet
to you? What room ^ath Christ in you? If any thing be deeper in your hearts
than he is, you are unsound. As the Father has given him, so do your hearts
give him a Name above every Name: Is Christ uppermost with you in your
estimations and affection? Then rejoice and leap for joy, your Names are most
p^ecious with Christ, if his Name be above all dear to you. Once more, has
Christ drawn out his own similitude upon You! Is Christ within you? does he
dwell in your Hearts? Then be sure you have a room in his heart: The Image of
Christ is in holiness. Is this that which your very hearts are set upon? Do you
thirst for Holiness? Do you follow after Holiness? Do you prize it above all
prosperity and worldly greatness? Do you hate every sin and long to be rid of
it as your most irksome burden? and use all Gods means against it as far as you
know them? If it be thus with you, Christ has set his stamp upon your hearts,
and so you may be sure he has set you as a Seal upon his heart.

Rejoice then, O Christians, and bless your selves in the happy privilege that
you have, in being under Christ's care. Fear not little Flock; Stronger is he
that is with you, than he that is against you: What though Satan should raise
all his Militia against you, adhere to Christ in a patient doing and suffering
his pleasure and he shall secure you: The Lord will not forsake you, because it
has pleased the Lord to make you his people: God has entrusted you with his
Son: You are his Care and his Charge: Many will be lif^ing at you, many will be
plucking at you, but fear not, you shall not be moved, none shali pluck you out
of Christ's hand, he has all power, Mat. 28. 8. Can Omnipotence secure you? He
is all Treasures, Col. 2. 3. Can unsearchable Riches suffice you? In a word, he
is all fullness, Col. 1. 21. Can all content you? Can Fullness fill you? if so,
you are blessed and shall be blesied.

Beloved, We loose unutterably for want of considering, for want of viewing our
own Privileges, and Blessedness. O Man, is Christ thine, and yet do thou
live at a low rate and Comfort? Is thy Name written in heaven, and yet do
thou not rejoice? Shall the Children of the Kingdom, the Candidates of Glory,
the chosen Generation, the Royal Priesthood, be like other men? O Christians,
Remember who and whence you are, consider your Obligations, put on a better
pace; ^stir your selves, run and wrestle, and be strong for the Lord of Hosts
(and earnestly, yet peaceably) contend for the Faith once delivered to his
Saints; What shall we make nothing of all that God has said and done for us? O
Christians, shall he that has gotten an enriching Office boast of his Booty?
or he that has obtained the Kings Patent for an Earldome, glory in his Riches
and Honor? And shall the Grant of Heaven signify little with thee? Or Christ's
Patent for thy Sonship and Partnership with himself be like a Cipher? Shall
Hamon come home from the Banquet with a glad heart, and glorying in the
greatness of his Riches, the multitude of his Children, and all the things
wherein the King had promoted him above the Princes? And shall we turn over our
Bibles and read the Promises, and find it under Gods own hand, that he intends
the Kingdom for us, that he will be a Father to us, that he gives and grants
all his infinite perfections to us, and yet not be moved? Beloved Christians,
live like your selves, let the Word see that the Promises of God, and
Privileges of the Gospel are not empty sounds, or a mere Crack. Let the
Heavenly cheerfulness and the restless diligence, and the holy raisedness of
your Conversations prove the reality, excellency, and beauty of your Religion
to the World. Forget not your Prisoner. Labor earnestly for me in your
Prayers, who am night and day laboring and suffering for you. I can never
bless God enough for his most tender and indulgent care for you, which appears
so wonderfully in his Fatherly Protection, and his Fatherly Provision. See that
you receive not the Crace of God in vain. Remember with trembling, that of our
Lord, To whom much is given of him much shall be required. With my most dear
loves to you all, I commend you to your Father and my Father, your God and my
God, remaining

Yours in all manner of Obligations, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Goal at Juelchester, January 20. 1663.
LETTER XX. [The Felicity of Believers.] To the most beloved People, the
servants of God in Taunton, Salvation.
Most endeared Christians,
I Have longed and waited for a little breathing time, wherein I might write
unto you, but I have been oppressed hitherto with so many cares, and such a
throng of business, that till now (and scarcely now) I have had no time of
respiration, wherein I might sufficiently re^lect on you, or my self. But
although so great a part of Taunton be translated to Juelchester with me, yet I
may not, I cannot forget you that are behind.

Alas poor Taunton, how should I bewail thee! did I look upon thee only with
the Eye of sense, Alas! for thy wonted liberties, for thy former plenty, and
variety wherewith the Lord has blessed thee? he had spread a Table for thee in
the midst of thine Enemies; Bread has been given thee, and thy Waters have
been sure: B^t now a Famine seems to threaten thee, and the Comforters that
should relieve thy Soul are far from thee. Thy Shepherds are removed. Thou
see not thy Signs, nor thy Prophets, and thy wonte^ helpers are now disabled
from giving thee supplies, Alas, how do thine enemies triumph, and thy Teachers
and thine Inhabitants are become their Captives! and how great is the cry of
thy poor, and thine oppressed!

Such would be the language of sense, if that were suffered to be the Speaker.
But faith will speak in another Dialect. And therefore amongst my other
Counsels, that I shall send you, this shall be the first.

Judge not of the present Providence, by the conduct of sense, but by the eye
of Faith. Faith will see that we are then-most honored, when we are most
vilified, and reproached, and set at naught for the sake of Christ; and that we
are then most happy, when the World has done its worst to make us miserable.
Faith will tell you, that GOD is a very present help, when you seem quite to
fail of help; and will show you the Well of water, that is near, when the Water
in the Bottle is spent. What though you seem to have lost Ministers, Husbands,
Friends for a Season? Faith will tell you, that they are well bestowed, and
that it will be both your, and their advantage, in the Day of Retribution.

Brethren, what are you for? are you for the present world or for that that to
come? are you for your temporal enjoyments, or do you seek for Glory, Honor,
and Immortality? If you are for this World, you have made a very imprudent
choice, in taking up the Profession of Godliness and cleaving to and owning the
hated ways of the Lord; But if you are for Glory, and for Eternity, then be of
good cheer, all these things do make for us. You are witnesses how often I have
told you of these things, and I can say with the Apostle, I believe therefore
have I spoken, and therefore I am nothing moved with all these things, nor with
the things that do yet further betide me. I believe, and therefore. I told you,
that you should never be losers by Jesus Christ. Nay do I say I told it you,
you know the Lord Jesus Christ has showed you, that the persecuted are doubtly
blessed; that such should rejoice, and leap for joy, because great is their
reward in Heaven Has not God said, that if we suffer with him we shall also
Reign with him; and that these light afflictions work for us a weight of Glory?
And if this be true, I pray you, tell me whether GOD has not dealt well with
us in counting us worthy of this little Tribulation for his Name? Indeed the
Sufferings is but little; but verily the Reward will not be little. I know whom
I have trusted: I am well assured the Glass is turned up, and every hour
reckoned of our Imprisonment, and every Scorn and Reproach of our Enemies is
kept in Black and White. I believe, therefore do I speak; GOD is infinitely
tender of us, my Brethren, though a Poor and despicable Generation. I value not
the Pot gun threats of a frowning world; it is well with us, we are GODS
Favorites. Come my Beloved, let us sit down under his Shadow: Here is safety,
and rest, if God be for us, who can be against us? Verily he Bottles all our
Tears, and tells all our wanderings: He numbers all our hairs, whosoever
touches us shall not be Innocent. Know you not that we are the Apple of his
Eye? Has not he reproved the greatest for his Peoples sakes, saying reproach
not mine anointed? And so we forget how he loved us. Are not we his Jewels?
Does he not own us for his Members, for his Children?

Ah what a Block does Unbelief make of man? What, do you think that all this
does signify nothing? Can you forget your Children? Will you suffer your
Jewels to lie in the Dirt, or make no reckoning of them whether they are lost?

Verily I write not this without shaming reflections upon my own stupidity.
What, Beloved of God, adopted by God! What, a Member of Christ Jesus! A
Vessel of Mercy! An heir of Glory? What, and not yet swallowed up in the sense
of Gods infinite love! Blush, Oh my Soul, and be cofounded before the most
high, and cover thy face with shame.

I remember what the Heathen Seneca writes, observing the expressions of Gods
love to man in his common Providence; Verum est, usque in delicias Amamur, That
is, it is a very truth, we are Beloved of God even as his darlings.

My Brethren, Have Faith in God. Believe his Promises: Walk in the sense of
his love. Comfort your selves in Gods love toward you, under all the hatred
and envy of men, and the contradiction of sinners that you meet with. Be strong
and of a good Courage, God is for you. Be assured that he that walks
uprightly, walks surely: Forsake not the assembling of your selves together.
Now see that you speak often to one another, and build up each other in the
holy Faith. God knows I cannot do for you, as I would; I would have been larger
to you, but I cannot. My most dear loves I desire you to share among you. I am
greatly Yours. The Peace that passes all Understanding keep your hearts and
minds. I am

Yours to serve you and for you with all readiness of mind. JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, July 28th. 1665.
LETTER, XXI. [What do you more than others?] To the most dearly Beloved, the
Servants in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most loving and entirely Beloved,
YOu are a great Joy to me. I know not what thanks to render to the Lord for
you, when I hear of your Constancy, and Fidelity, and Zeal, in adhering to him,
and his ways, even in such a time as this, you are highly favored, Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, that he has regard ed the low Estates of his Servants:
That he should ever Indulge you as he has, and hover over you, even as the
Eagle stirteth up her Nest, and fluttereth over her Young, spreads abroad her
VVings, takes them, bears them on her Wings, for so has the Lord your God
dealt with you: He has kept you as the Apple of his Eye, and since the Streams
of Cherith were dried up, yet to this day he has not suffered the handful of
Meal to wast, nor the Oil in the Cruse to fail, but (though you have no
certainty to trust to) has continually provided for you to the full. How
should I love and bless the Lord for this his great Grace toward you, while I
live? Now I beseech you my Brethren, that you consider the Kindness of the
Lord; for the Lord your God is he that careh for you, and that you love the
Lord your God, and fear him for ever, for he is your Life, and the Length of
your Days. And as Job had a holy fear of his Children, least they should have
offended: So my most dearly Beloved, I am jealous of you with a Godly
jealousy, lest any of you should receive this Grace of God in vain. I must not
cease to put you in mind, that God does look from no small matter from you.
Remember my most endeared Charge, that the Lord does look for singular things
from you, that there be not a barren Tree nor a Dwarf Christian among you;
where the Lord does strew much, he looks to gather much; and where he sows
much, he expects to reap accordingly. Whose account my Beloved, is like to be
so great as yours? O look about you, and think of the Master coming to Reckon
with you for his Talents; when he will expect no small increase. Beloved, what
can you do? How much are you grown? What spoil have you made upon your
Corruptions? What progress in Grace?

Suppose Christ should put the awakening question to you, What do you more than
others? Beloved, God does expect more of his People, than of any others in the
world besides: And well he may. For

First, He has beftowed more on them than on others: Now where much is given,
much shall be required: Can you think of that without trembling? He has
bestowed on them singular Love more than on others; Thou only have I known of
all the Families on Earth. He has a distinguishing Love and favor for his
People, and he looks that his love should, be a constraining Argument to
Obedience. Again he has laid out a singular care on his People, more than on
others: He cares for no man, for nothing in all the World, in comparison of
them. He reproves Kings for their sakes. He will give Nations, and Kingdoms
for their Ransom. So precious are they in his sight, and so dearly Beloved,
that he will give men for them, and People for their Life. He withdraws not
his Eyes from the Righteous, he will not endure them out of his sight. The Eyes
of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and first the eye of his more accurate
Observation: God can winck at others as it were, and overlook what they do with
little notice, but he has a most eurious Eye upon his People, he marketh their
steps, and booketh their words, he weighs their Actions, and pondereth all
their goings. And should they not walk more cautiously, and charily, than any
alive, that are under so exact and curious an Eye? Secondly the Eye of special
Care, and Protection. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him. I
will guide thee with mine Eye: And should not they be infinitely tender and
careful how to please the Lord, who have his singular Care laid out on them? In
short, God has bestowed on them singular Privileges, more than others: These
are a peculiar Treasure to him above all People, a Kingdom of Priests, an holy
Nation, a singular separated People, they dwell alone, they are diverse from
all People: When the whole world lies in wickedness, these are Called and
Chosen, and Faithful, Washed, and Justified, and Sanctified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The rest are the Refuse: These the
Jewels: These are taken, and they are left. Shall not Gods Priests be Clothed
with Righteousness, and shall not Princes Live above the rate of Peasants?

Secondly, He has entrusted them with more then others; Not only with the
Talents of his Grace (for the increase whereof they must give a strict account)
but also with the Jewel of his Glory. How tenderly should they walk, that are
entrusted with such a Jewel? Remember, your makers Glory is bound up in your
fruitful walking.

Thirdly, He has qualified them more than others. He has put into them a
Principle of Life, having quickened them together with Christ. He has set up a
light in their Minds, when others lie in Darkness. He has given them other
Aids, than others have, even his Spirit to help their Infirmities, when others
lie like Vessels that are VVindbound, and cannot stir.

Fourthly, He has provided for them other manner of things than for others.
These are the little Flock to whom it is his good pleasure to give the Kingdom;
great are the preparations for them. The Father has prepared the Kingdom for
them from the foundations of the World: the Son is gone to Heaven on purpose to
prepare a place for them: The Spirit is preparing them, and making them meet to
be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: and should these be
like other People?

Brethren beloved, God and Men do expect you should do more then others, see
that that you be indeed singular. For

1. If you do no more for God than others, he will do more against you then
others: You only have I known, therefore will I punish you. The barren Tree in
the Vineyard must down, whereas had he been in the Common he might have stood
much longer. God looked for Grapes from his Vineyard, on which he had bestowed
such care and cost more than ordinary, but when they bring forth wild Grapes,
he will lay them waste in a worse manner than the Forest When Christ came to
the Fig Tree seeking fruit, and met with none, he cursed it from the root,
whereas had it been a Thorn or Bramble, it might have stood as before..

2. If you do no more than others, you must look for no more than others: If
you should put off God with a common obedience, you must expect to be put off
with common mercies.

3. Except you do more than others, God will be dishonored more by you than
others.

I have been too long with you, but I am earnestly desirous you should be
sensible of Gods extraordinary expectations from you. And truly, as God looks
for more from his own than others, so he looks for more from you than others,
even of his own, because that he has done more: See that you be shining
Christians, that you be strong in the grace of God, that you press toward the
mark. But I must conclude; I give my loves among you all, being able to add no
more, but that I am

Yours in fervent Loves and Longings, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, Jan. 2. 1663.
LETTER XXII. [Christian Care, Faith, Self-denial.] To the most Beloved People,
the Servants of God in Taunton, Salvation.
Most endeared Christians,
THe reason why my Letters have not of late come so thick as formerly to you,
is not because I forgot to love you, and to care for you; but because I have
been busily taken up in other labors of sundry kinds for you. I am yours, and
love to be so, being ambitious not to have dominion over your faith, but to be
a helper of your Joy. Christ's Officers are so your Rulers in the Lord, as yet
to Preach not themselves, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and themselves your
servants for Jesus sake. I have no greater felicity under God, than to serve
the good of souls. Brethren beloved, how fares it with your souls? are they in
health? do they prosper? I wish your temporal prosperity. It it a joy to me to
hear when your trade does flourish: but these are but very little things if we
look into Eternity. Brethren, my ambition for you is, that you should be Cedars
among the Shrubs, that from you should sound out the Word of the Lord, and that
in every place your Faith to Godward should be spread abroad. That Taunton
should be as a field that the Lord has blessed: that you should not only have
the Name, but the Spirit, Life, Power, Heat, Growth, Vigor of Christianity
among you. Let not Taunton only have the name to live, and be noted for the
profession of Religion, but see to it my Brethren, that the Kingdom of God be
with you: Oh that every one of your. souls might be a Temple of God! Oh that
every one of your Families might be a Church of God! Beloved, look to it, that
every one that names the name of Christ among you do depart from Iniquity,
secret as well as open, of the heart as as well as of the life. Let no man
think that to make an outcry upon the Wickedness of the times, and to be of
the Professing Party, will serve his turn; many go to Hell in the company of
the wise Virgins. That no man may be a Self-deceiver, let every man be a
Self-searcher. He that keeps no Day-book in his Shop, and no Account, no Record
in his Conscience, his Estate and his Soul will thrive both alike. Beloved, I
would that you should remember whither you are a going. If a man be after a few
Months to be Transported into another Country, never to return more, he will
send over whatever he can, and make the best Provision that he may against he
comes into another Country. Dear Brethren, you are Strangers and Pilgrims
here, and have but a few Months abode in this Country, see that you Traffic
much with Heaven. Christ is our Common Factor, O send over to him what possible
you can. Give Alms plentifully, pray continually, be much in Meditation and
Consideration; Reckon with your selves daily: Walk with God in your Callings:
do all the duties of your Relations as unto God: live not one day to your
selves, but unto Christ: Set forth continually in his Name, so shall you be
continually Transporting into another World, and laying up Treasure in Heaven:
And O the blessed store that you shall find there after a few Years diligence
in such a holy course! Beloved, while you are here in this World, You are but
like a Merchants Ship in a strange Port, the day for your return is set, and
you are to stay no longer then till your Freight is ready. Be wise, know your
season, improve you time, you are made or marred for ever, as you speed in this
one Voyage. There is no returning again to this Country to mend a bad Market,
God will call in all his Talents, time shall be no longer. Oh, come in, come
and buy now while the Market is open, that you that want may have grace and you
that have may have it more abundantly. Go and plead with the Lord Jesus, that
he has bid you come, buy and eat without Money, and without Price; that he
has counseled you to come buy of him Gold, Raiment, and Eyesalve; tell him
you are come according to his call, and wait upon him for Grace, for
Righteousness, for Light and Instruction: Lay hold on his Word, plead it, live
upon it; he is worthy to be believed, worthy to be trusted, go out of your
selves to him, unlearn your selves. There is a threefold Foot that ca^al-self
stands upon, our own Wisdom, our own Righteousness, our own Strength, these
three Feet must be cut off, and we must learn to have no subsistence in our
selves but only in Christ, and to stand only on his bottom. Study the
excellent Lesson of Self-denial, Self-annihilation, A true Christian is like a
Vine that cannot stand of it self, but is wholly supported by the Prop it leans
on. It is no small thing to know our selves to be nothing, of no might, of no
worth, of no understanding, nor reality; to look upon our selves as helpless,
worthless, foolish empty shadows. This holy littleness is a great matter; when
we find that all our Inventory amounts to nothing but folly, weakness, and
beggary; when we set down our selves for Ciphers, our gain for loss, our
excellencies for very vanities, then we shall learn to live like Believers. A
true Saint is like a Glass without a Foot, that set him where you will, is
ready to fall every way till you set him to a Prop: Let Christ be the only
support you lean unto. When you are thoroughly emptied and nullified, and see
all comeliness to be but as a withered Flower, dead, dried, and past recovery,
then you will be put upon the happy necessity of going out to Christ for all.

The Messengers haste forces me Abruptly to end here: I can add no more, but
my Prayers to my Counsels, and so commending you to God, and the Word of his
Grace, I rest

The fervent Well-willen of your Souls, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, Ap'il 16. 1663.
LETTER XXIII. [Right Reasons in Suffering.] To the most loving, and best
beloved, the Flock of Christ in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most loving and dearly Beloved,
I Know not what thanks to render to you, nor to God for you, for all the
unexpressable love which I have found in you toward me; and not terminatively
to me, but to Christ in me; for I believe it is for his sake, as I am a
Messenger and Ambassador of his to you, that you have loved me and done so much
every way for me; and I think I may say of Taunton as the Psalmist of
Jerusalem, If I forget thee, let my right hand forget her cunning, if I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. I would not, my
dear Brethren, that you snould be dejected or discouraged at the late
disappointments: for through the goodness of God I am not, but rather more
satisfied than before: and this I can truly say, nothing does sadden me more
than to see so much sadness in your faces. As on the contrary nothing does
comfort me so much as to see your cheer and courage. Therefore I beseech you,
Brethren, faint not because of my Tribulation, nor of Gods delays, but
strengthen the hands, and the feeble knees. And the Lord bolster up your hands,
as they did the hands of Moses, that they may not fall down till Israel do
prevail. Let us fear lest there be some evil among us, that God being angry
with us, does send this farther trial upon us. Pray earnestly for me lest the
eye of the most jealous God should discern that in me which should render me
unfit for the mercy you desire. And let every one of you search his heart, and
search his house to see if there be not cause there: Let not these
disappointments make you to be nevertheless in love with Prayers, but the more
out of love with sin. Let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God,
and he shall exalt us in due time. And for the enemies of God, you must know
also that their foot shall slide in due time. Let the Servants of God encourage
themselves in their God: for in the things wherein they deal proudly, he is
above them: therefore fret not your selves because of evil doers; commit your
cause to him that judges righteously. Remember that you are bid if you see
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment and Justice in a
Province, not to marvel at the matter: verily, there is a God that judges in
the Earth: and you have the liberty of appeals: rest in the Lord, and wait
patiently for him, and fret not your selves, because of the men that bring
wicked devises to pass: take heed that none of you do with Peter begin to sink,
now you see the waters rough, and the winds boisterous: these things must not
weaken your Faith, nor cool your Zeal: for they are great arguments for the
strengthening of it. What clearer evidence can there be for the future judgment
and perdition of the ungodly, and Coronation of the Just in another life, than
the most unjust proceedings that are here upon Earth: shall not the Judge of
all the Earth see right to be done? We lee here nothing but confusion and
disorder, the wicked receives according to the work of the righteous, and the
Innocent according to the work of the wicked. The Godly perish and the wicked
flourish; these do prosper, and they do suffer. What, can it be ever thus! no
doubtless, there must be a day when God will Judge the world in righteousness,
and rectify the present disorders, and reverse the unrighteous Sentences that
have been passed against his servants. And this evidence is so clear, that many
of the Heathen Philosephers have from this very Argument (I mean the
unrighteous usage of the good) concluded that there must certainly be rewards
and punishments adjudged by God in another World.

Nor yet lose your Zeal: now is the time that the love of many does wax cold:
but I bless God it is not so with you: I am sure your love to me is, as true
Friends should be, like the Chimneys, warmest in the Winter of Adversity: and I
hope your love to God is much more, and I would that You should abound yet more
and more. Where else should you bestow your Loves? Love ye the Lord, ye his
Saints, and cling about him the faster now ye see the world is striving to
separate you from him. How many are they that go to knock off your fingers! O
methinks, I see what tugging there is. The World is plucking, and the Devil is
plucking: Oh, hold fast, I beseech you; hold fast, that no man take your Crown.
Let the Water that is sprinkled, yea, rather poured upon your love, make it to
flame up the more. Are you not betrothed unto Christ? Oh rcmember, remember
your Marriage Covenant: did you not take him for Richer for Poorer, for better
for worse: now prove your love to Christ to have been a true conjugal love, in
that you can love him when most slighted, despised, undervalued, blasphemed
among men. Now acquit your selves, not to have followed Christ for the Loaves,
now confute the Accuser of the Brethren, who may be ready to suggest of the
best of you, as he did of Job, Does he serve the Lord for naught? And let it be
seen that you loved Christ and holiness purely for their own sakes, that you
can love a naked Christ when there is no hopes of worldly advantage, or
promoting of self-interest in following him.

Yet beware that none of you do stick to the ways of Christ and Religion upon
so carnal an account as this, because this is the way that you have already
taken up, and you count it a shame to recede from your Principles: I am very
jealous lest some Professors should miss of their reward for this: least they
should be accounted Turn-coats and Hypocrites; therefore they will show a
stoutness of spirit in going on, since they have once begun, and cannot with
honor retreat. Would you chose holiness and strictness, if it were to do
again? would you enter your selves among Gods poor people, if it were now first
to do. Would you have taken up the Profession of Christ, though you had
foreseen all this that is come and coming? This will do much to evidence your
sincerity. But I forget that I am writing a Letter, being prone to pass all
bounds when I have thus to do with you. The Lord God remember and reward you
and your labors of love. The Eternal God be your refuge, and put under you his
everlasting Arms. The Peace of God that passes all understanding keep your
hearts. Christ's Legacy of Peace I leave with you, and rest, with my dear
affections to you all,

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XXIV. [Councel for Salvation.] To the most beloved People, the servants
of God in Taunton, Salvation.
Most endeared Christians,
MY continual solicitude for your State, will not suffer me to pass in quiet
one week without Writing to you, unless I am extraordinarily hindered. Your
sincerity, stedfastness, and proficiency in the grace of God, is the matter of
my earnest desire, and that which I should account my self happy in. I have a
longing desire to see the Faces of you all, and (besides mine expectation)
shall (I trust) speedily have the opportunity to see you at the approaching
Assizes, which I shall greatly rejoice in, notwithstanding our coming may be
otherwise attended with many Inconveniences. In the mean time I send you a few
Prison Counsels. As,

1. To improve for Eternity, the Advantages of your present State. Though you
are at many disadvantages with respect to the public Ordinances, yet you have
many wondrous and most happy Privilege, which Spiritual Wisdom would make no
small improvement of. Oh what a mercy have you that you may serve God while you
will in your Families! That you may be as much as you will with God in secret
Prayer, and holy Meditation, and Self-examination! I beseech you consider what
a Blessing you have above others, that have your Health, and a Competency of
the Comforts of this life, and are free from those continual pains, or
Heart-eating Cares, that others are disabled by, from looking after God and
their Souls, as you may do. Oh consider what a blessed Seed-time you have for
Eternity! Now be wise and improve your happy Season, your day of Grace. Prepare
for Death, make all sure: Press on toward the Mark, lay up in store for your
selves a good Foundation against the time to come. In the morning sow your
Seed, and in the Evening withdraw not your Hand. Treasure up much in Heaven:
What profit is it that you have more than others? more Liberty, more Comfort,
more Health, more Wealth, than others? except you love God more, and serve him
better than others. Now ply your Work, and dispatch your Business, so as that
you may have nothing to trouble You upon your Deathbeds.

2. To Consider also the Temptations, and Disadvantages of your State. Study to
know your own weaknesses, and where your danger lies that you may obviate
Satan, and prevent your miscarrying: There is no Condition but has its Snares.
See that you acquaint your selves with his Devices, least you be beguiled by
him, and caught in his Trap through your own unwariness. You that are well
Provided for in the World, had need to watch your selves, least you fall in
love with present things, least you be lifted up, least you trust in those
Carnal props, and put confidence in the Creatures, least you warp, and decline,
and baulk your duties through Carnal fear, and the desire of preserving your
Estates. You that have little in the World, are not without your temptations
neither: Oh take heed of Envying others Prosperity, of murmuring and
discontent, of diffidence and distrustfullness, of using indirect means to help
your selves: Be sure You make not the Worlds pressures upon you, an excuse from
your daily serving of God in your Families, and in secret. Set this down as
your Rule, and unchangeable Resolution, that God and your Souls and your
Families shall be looked duly and continually after, go the world which way it
will. Consider what sins your Tempers, Relations, Callings, do most expose you
to. Be not strangers to your selves. Prove your selves upright in keeping from
your Iniquities.

3. To Converse often with your Dust. Brethren we are going, we are going, the
Grave waits for us: Oh forget not that Corruption is your Father, and the
Worm your Mother, and your Sister. These are your poor kindred that you must
shortly dwell with, when you come to your long home: Remember the days of
Darkness which shall be many. Take every day some serious turns with Death.
Think where you shall be a few days and nights hence, happy he that knew what
to morrow meant for twenty Years together. Believe it, you will find it no
little thing to die. Think often how you are provided, how you should receive
the Sentence of Death. Were you never within sight of Death? How did it look?
What did you wish for most at that time? What did then trouble you most? Oh
mark these things, and live according. Often ask your hearts, What if God
should this night require my Soul?

4. To serve your Generation with your might while you have time. You have but
a very little time to bring God any Glory here, or to do your Friends any good;
now up and be doing. Now or never live in the deep and constant sense of the
very little time that you have for this world, and the great work you have to
do. You are going whence You shall not return. There Is no After-Game to be
played. What! But one cast for Eternity, and will you not be careful to throw
that well?

Most dearly Beloved, I covet after your furtherance in Mortification, and
growth in Grace. And Oh that I could but represent Death to you, as shortly it
will show it self: Or could but open a VVindow into Eternity to You: How
effectually would this do the work. Then the Cripple would fling away his
Crutches, and betake himself to his Legs: Then the slothful would pluck his
Hand out of his Bosom, and shake off his Excuses, and be night and day at his
work. Then the Laodicean would be recovered from his benumed frame; then we
should have no Halving in Religion, no lazy wishing and complaining; but men
would ply the Oars to purpose, and sweat at their work.

But Oh unhappy man, how powerfully has the world bewitched thee! How
miserably has Sin unnmaned thee. that thou should look no far^her than thou
can see, and to be taken up with present things, and forget so momentous
concernments as are before thee?

But you my Brethren, lift up your selves above the objects of sense: may you
be men for eternity, and carry it like these that seek for glory, honor, and
immortality. I am apt to be too long with you: I commend you to Divine Grace:
my dearest loves among you, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the common Goal at Juelchester, March 5. 1665.
LETTER. XXV. To the loving and most beloved People, the Servants of God in
Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most dearly Beloved,
ALthough I am forced at the present, to be at a distance from you, yet I would
not have you ignorant, that the dear remembrance of you is always fresh with
me, and the care of your eternal welfare is always living upon my heart.
Therefore as my beloved Friends I warn you, and cease not to stir you up by way
of remembrance, being jealous for you with a Godly jealou^ie, that no man take
your Crown. My dearly Beloved, I know you have many enemies, and above all, I
fear your bosom Enemies: and as the Watchman of the Lord, I give you careful
warning, and exhort you all not to be high-minded, but fear. Blessed is the man
that fears always. Look diligently, lest any of you fail of the Grace of God.
You have made much and long Profession of the Name of Jesus Christ: Oh look to
your foundations, see upon what ground you stand. Look to your sincerity. You
must every one of you stand shortly before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and be
tried for your lives: Oh, try your selves thoroughly first. It Is easy to
mistake Education for Regeneration, and common Conviction and Illumination for
Conversion, and a partial Re^ormation and external Obedience, ^or true
Sanctification. Therefore I beseech you every one, to examine whether you are
in the Faith. Prove your own selves. Tell not me, you hope you are sincere, you
hope you shall go to Heaven: Never put it off with hopes, but pray, and try,
and search, till you are able to say, yea, and know you are passed from death
to life, and that you know you have a Building, not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens.

Suppose I should ask you one by one, where are your Evidences for Heaven?
Could you make out your claim? can you bring me Scripture Proof? can you show
me the marks of the Lord Jesus? what m^n you to live at uncertainties?
Brethren, it is an intolerable ignorance for any of you in these days of
glorious light, not to be able to tell the distinguishing marks of a sound
believer. And it is intolerable carelessness of your everlasting welfare, if
you do not bring your selves to the Trial by these marks. What are your hands
filled with Books, and your ears filled with Sermons, that tell you so plainly
from the Word of God, how you shall know whether you are in Christ, and are you
still to seek? Oh, stir up your own selves. Take heed, lest a Promise being
left of entering into his rest, any of you fall short of it at last by unbelief.
You are a professing People, you pray, and you hear, and you run upon some
Adventures for Jesus Christ: But, O look to your since^ity. Look to your
Principles, look to your ends, else you may lose all at last. Examine, not only
what is done, but whence it is done, look to the root as well as to the Fruit.
Eye not only your Actions, but your aims. Remember what a strict and severy eye
you are under. The Lord Jesus makes strict observation upon all your works and
ways. He observes who of you be fruitful, and who be barren and unprofitable.
He knows who of you be thriving and who be declining. He observes who be warm,
and who lukewarm: who be sound Christians, and who of you have only a name to
live.

Return, O backsliding Christians, you have lost your former convictions, and
lost your former Affections. You are grown remiss in your watch, and your Zeal
is turned into a kind of indifferency, and your diligence into negligence.
Your care is turned into security, and your tenderness into senselessness. Oh,
your case is dangerous. The Lord Jesus has a great controversy with you. Oh,
remember whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first works. Strengthen
the things that remain, and are ready to die. Oh, rub and chafe your swooning
souls, and ply them with warm applications, and rousing considerations, till
they recover their former heat. And know ye from the Lord, that the backsliders
in heart shall be filled with his own ways.

Oh ye barren and fruitless trees: behold the Axe is lifted up to fell you to
the ground, except you bring forth fruits, and those worthy of Repentance. May
not Christ say to some among you, Behold these three years have I come, seeking
fruit, and findig none? How is it then that you read not the Sentence passed on
the fruitless Tree? O sleepy Professors, how long will you drive on in this
heavy course? how long will you continue in an unprofitable and customary
profession? would you be the joy of our Lord, why know ye, that the thriving
Plant is the Masters praise, and his hearts delight. Christians, put on, press
toward the Mark, be adding to your Faith, Virtue; and to virtue, knowledge,
etc. See that you grow extensively, in being abundant in all sorts of good
works. Be pitiful, be courteous, gentle, easily to be entrea^ed. Be slow to
anger, soon reconciled. Be patient, be ye t^mperate, be ye cheerful. Study not
every one only his own things, but the good of his Neighbor. Think it not
enough to look to your own souls, but watch for other souls Pray for them, warn
them, be kind to them, study to oblige them, that by any means you may win
them, and gain their souls.

Labor to grow intensively, to do better the things that you did before, to be
more servent in Prayer, more free and willing in all the ways of the Lord, to
hear with more profit, to examine your selves more thoroughly, to mind Heaven
more frequently than heretofore.

And you, O carnal and unsound Professors, that reckon your ^elves to be in
Christ, but are not new Creatures; that because you have the good opinion of
the Godly, and are outwardly conformable to the ways of God, persuade your
selves you are in a good condition, although your hearts have not yet to this
day been renewed: O repent speedily. Repent, and be converted. What though we
cannot distinguish the Tares from the Wheat? yet the Lord of the Harvest can.
Christ will find you out, and condemn you for rotten and unsound, unless you be
soundly renewed by repentance, and effectually changed by converting Grace.

Brethren, I fervently wish your Salvation, and to this, while I am able, I
shall bend my ardent endeavors, I am now taking advice for my health, and hope
in some few Weeks to be restored to you. In the mean time I commend me to your
Prayers, and you to the grace of God, remaining.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
Dorchester, July 7th. 1666.
LETTER XXVI. [The Character and privileges of true Believers.] To the loving
and most beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Most Dearly Beloved,
I Longed to hear of your Welfare, but by reason of the Carryers intermitting
his journeys, could not till now obtain my desires, neither had I opportunity
till the last week of writing to you. I rejoice to hear by Mr. Ford, of Gods
continual goodness toward you; he is your Shepherd, and therefore it is that
you do not want. Me you have not always, but he is ever with you, his Rod and
his Staff shall comfort you; Nay, more then all this, you may hence conclude
comfortably for all times, yea, for the whole Eternity to come. Surely Goodness
and Mercy shall follow you all the days of your lives, and you shall dwell in
the House of the Lord for ever.

In this, my dear Brethren, in this rejoice, and again I say rejoice, that God
is engaged in so near and so sweet relation to you. Doubtless your Souls shall
lodge in goodness, and be provided for carefully, and lie down in everlasting
safety, that have the Almighty for our Shepherd. Blessed are the Flock of his
hands, and the Sheep of his Pasture, happy is the People that is in such a case.

But who are Christ's Sheep?

Not all Professors, I beseech you take heed how you rest in Profession. It is
not Profession, but Conversion that turns a man from a Swine to a Sheep. Let
none of you be deceived, nor flatter your selves, that because you bear the
name of Christians, and do many things, and have escaped the open gross
pollutions of the World, therefore you are surely among the number of Christ's
true Sheep. All this you may attain to, and yet be but washed Swine; here must
be an inward deep and through and universal Change upon your Natures,
Dispositions, Inclinations, or else you are not Christ's Sheep.

In a word, If you will be put out of doubt whether you are his sheep or not,
you must try it by this certain Mark that Christ sets upon all his Sheep, even
your Sanctification, you that will stand to the trial, answer me truly and
deliberately to these Questions. Do you hate every sin as the sheep does the
Mire? Do you regard no Iniquity in your hearts? Do you strive against, and
oppose all sin, though it may seem never so necessary, never so natural to you,
or have you not your secret haunts of evil? For every Swine will have his
swill. Do you abstain from sin out of fear, or out of dislike? Are you at peace
with no sin, or do you not hide some iniquity as a sweet morsel under your
Tongue? Is there not some practice that you are not willing to know is a sin
for fear you should be forced to leave it? Do you love the Commandment that
forbids your sin, or do you not wish it ou^ of the Bible, as that evil man
wished God had never made the Seventh Commandment? Again, how do you stand
affected toward Holiness? Do you love it? Do you choose it? Do you h^nger and
thirst after it, and desire it more than any Temporal good? Have you chosen the
way of Gods Precepts, and had rather live holily than be allowed to live in
your sins? Do You in your very hearts prefer a Godly strict Life in communion
with and conformity to God, before the greatest prosperity of the World? do you
chose Holiness, not out of bare necessity, because you cannot go to Heaven
without it, but out of love to it, and from a deep sense that you have of the
surpassing excellency, and loveliness, and beauty of it? If it be thus with
you, you are the persons that the Lord Jesus has marked for his Sheep.

And now, come ye blessed, all that have this mark upon you, come and
understand your happiness; you are marked out for preservation, and let it go
how it will with the rest; that I know, it shall go well with you that fear the
Lord, that fear before him. You are the separated ones, the sealed ones, upon
whom the Angel has set the Seal of the Living God; and so you are redeemed
unto God from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and unto the Lamb,
and have your Fathers Name written in your Foreheads.

Hear, O beloved Flock, I may give you the salutation of the Angels, Hail, you
are highly favored of the Lord, Blessed ^re you among men; though you are but
poor and despised, and like little Benjamin among the thousands of Judah; you
carry away the blessing and the privilege from all the rest. God has done
more for the least of you than for the whole World of Mankind besides, put all
their mercies together. Fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom. Blessed are you of the Lord, for yours is the Kingdom
of Heaven. All that the Scripture speaks of that Kingdom of Glory, that Kingdom
of Peace, of Righteousness, that Everlasting Kingdom, It speaks it all to you.
Behold your Inheritance, see that you believe. What know you not your own
selves? you are the Sons of God, Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, Joint
Heirs with Christ the Lord of Glory. Do you believe this? Take heed you make
not God a Liar: his Word is nigh you: have you no^ the Writings in your hands?
Do I speak any thing but what God has spoken? Shall I tell you of the thing
which shall be hereafter? Why thus it shall be. The Son of man shall come in
his Glory, and all his holy Angels with him: Then shall he sit upon the Throne
of his Glory, and he shall separate you as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from
the Goats, and he shall set you at his own right hand, Then shall the King say,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you.

Do you believe yet? Do you thoroughly believe? If so, then my work is done,
then I need not bid you Rejoice, no^bid you be Thankful, only believe. Do this
and do all. Belie^ and joy will rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glor^
Believe and you will be fruitful, and show your Faith by yo^ works. Believe and
you will Love, for Faith works by lov^ In a word, keep these things upon your
hearts by daily an^ lively consideration, and this will bring Heaven into yo^
souls, and engage you to all manner of holy conversation, an^ Godliness. This
will mor^ifie you to the World, the gra^ enemy which I advise, nay, I charge
you to beware of. When Saul had gotten his Kingdom, he left off taking care for
the Asses. O remember yours is the Kingdom: what are yo^ the better that you
have all this in your Bibles, if you do no^ weigh it by frequent and serious
consideration, and pond^ these sayings in your hearts. Beloved, I have written
the things to you that your joy may be full. And now Peace leave with you, I am
Christ's Ambassador to you, an Embas^dor of Peace; his Peace I pronounce unto
you; In hi^ Name I bless you. Farewell in the Lord, I am

The fervent Well-willer of your So^ JOS. ALLEINE
Devises, June 29. 1666.
LETTER XXVII. [O^ the Second coming of Christ.] To the Faithful, and Beloved,
the Servants of God i^ Taunton, Grace and Peace.
Loving and most dearly Beloved,
THough I trust my Bonds do preach to you, yet methink that does not suffice
me, but the conscience of my duty, and the workings of my heart toward you,
are still calling upon me to stir you up by way of remembrance, notwithstanding
you know and be established in the present Truth. And if Paul do call upon so
great an Evangelist as Timothy, to Remember that Jesus was raised from the dead
according to the Gospel, why should not I be often calling upon my self, and
upon you, my dearly Beloved, to remembe^ and meditate upon, and closely apply
the great and weighty Truths of the Gospel, which you have already received?
and in truth, I perceive in my self and you another manner of heat and warmth
in the insisting upon the plainest principles of Christianity, and the setting
them home upon mine own heart and yours, than in dwelling upon any more
abstruse Speculations, in the clearest handling of which, the Preacher may seem
to be too much like the winter nights, very brigh^, but very cold.

But now, my Brethren, I shall not with Paul call upon you so much to remember
the resurrection of Christ, as the Return of Christ: Behold, He comes in the
Clouds, and every E^e shall see him; Your eyes and mine eyes: and all the
Tribes of the Earth shall mourn because of him: But we shall lift up our heads,
because the Day of our Redemption draws nigh: this is the day I look for, and
wait for, and have laid up all my hopes in. If the Lord return not, I profess
my self undone, my Preaching is vain, and my suffering is vain, and the bottom
in which I have entrusted all my hope^ is for ever miscarried. But I know whom
I have trusted: We are built upon the foundation of that sure Word, we are not
built upon the sand of Mortality. Nor do we run so as uncertainly, but the Word
of the Lord abides for ever, upon which Word do we hope; How fully does this
Word assure us that this same Jesus that is gone up into Heaven shall so
return, and that he shall appear the second time unto Salvation, to them that
look for him. Oh, how sure is the thing! how near is the time! how glorious
will his appearing be!

The thing is sure, the Day is set, God has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the World by that man whom he has ordained; the manner of it is
revealed, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints: The
Attendants are appointed and nominated. The So^ of Man shall come in his Glory,
and all his holy Angels with him. The thing you see is established, and every
circumstance is determined. How sweet are the words that dropped from the
precious Lips of our departing Lord! What generous Cordials has he left us in
his parting Sermons, and his last Prayer! and yet of all the rest those are the
sweetest, I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am, there
you may be also. What need you any further witness: you have heard him your
selves, assuring you of his return. Doubtless he cannot deceive you, you have
not only known, but seen and felt the truth of his promises.

And will he come? tremble then ye sinners, triumph y^ Saints, clap your hands
all ye that look for the consolation of Israel. O sinners, where will you then
appear? how will you look upon him whom you have pierced; whom you have
persecuted? whose great Salvation you have neglected and despised? Woe unto you
that ever you were born, unless you should then be found to be Newborn.

But you, O Children of the most high, how will you forget your travel, and be
melted into joy. This is he in whom you have believed; whom having not seen ye
loved. But how will love and joy be working (if I may so speak) with pangs
unutterable, when you shall see him, and hear his sweet voice commending,
applauding, approving of you, and owning you by name before all the World.
Brethren, thus it must be, the Lord has spoken it. See that you stagger not at
the Promise, but give Glory to God by believing.

Again, the time is near, Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come.
Behold, I come quickly, says he: And again, The Lord is at hand: Sure you are,
that death cannot be far off. O Christian, thou do not know but the next
year, nay, possibly the next week, thou may be in Heaven. Christ will not
long endure thine absence, but will have thee up to him till the time of his
general appearing; when he will take us up altogether, and so we shall be ever
with the Lord.

Soul, believe thou this? If thou do indeed, what remains but that thou
should live a life of love and praise; studying to do all the good thou
can till thou come to Heaven; and waiting all the days of thine appointed
time till thy change shall come. O my Soul, look out and long. O my Brethren,
be you as the Mother of Sisera, looking out at the Windows, and watching at the
Latices, saying, why are his Chariot-wheels so long a coming. Though the time
till you shall see him be but very short, yet love and longing make it seem
tedious.

My Beloved, comfort your hearts with these Words: look upon these things as
the greatest reallities, and let your affections be answerable to your
expectations. I would not have told you these things, unless I had believed
them: for it is for this hope that I am bound with this Chain. The blessing of
the Holy Trinity be upon you, I am yours and will be. The God of Peace be with
you, I rest

Your Ambassador in Bonds, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, August 5. 1663.
LETTER XXVIII. [Of the Love of Christ.] To his most endeared Friends, the
servants of God in Taunton, Salvation.
Most dearly Beloved,
MEthinks my Breasts are not easy, unless I do let them forth unto you.
Methings there is something still to do, and my Weeks work is not ended, unless
I have given my Soul vent, and imparted something to the Beloved flock that I
have left behind And Oh, that my Letters in my absence might be useful to you!
Assuredly it is my joy to serve you, and my love to you is without
dissimulation: witness my twice lost liberties, and my impaired health, all
which I might have preserved, had it not been for my readiness to minister to
you.

But what do I speak of my love? it is the sense of the infinite love of God
your Father that I would have to dwell upon you. Forget me, so you remember
him. Let me be very little, so he be very lovely in your eyes. Let him be as
the Bucket that goes up, though I be as the Bucket that goes down. Bury me, so
that you do but set the Lord always before you. Let my name be written in the
dust, so his Name be written deep up all your Souls

O Lord, I am thy Servant, truly I am thy servant, Glorify thine own Name by
me, and thou shall have my hand to it, that I will be content to be hid in
obscurity, and to disappear through the overcoming luster and brightness of thy
Glory.

Brethren, understand mine Office, I Preach not my self, but the Lord Jesus
Christ, and my self your Servant for Jesus sake. Give him your hearts, and I
have my Errand I am but the Friend of the Bridegroom, and my business is, but
to give you to understand his love, and to gain your hearts unto him. He is an
Object worthy of my Commendations, and of your affections. His Love is worth
the writing of, and worth the thinking of, and worth the speaking of. O my
Brethren, never forge^, I beseech you, how he loves you. He is in Heaven, and
you are on Earth; he is in Glory and you in Rags; he is in the shining Throne,
and you in dirty flesh, and yet he loves you. His heart is infinitely tender
of you, even now while he is at the right hand of the Majesty on High. How
feelingly does he cry out at the hurt of his poor Members on Earth? Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me! Oh, of what quick sense is the sense of our dear Lord
unto us! when we are touched on Earth he feels it in Heaven.

Brethren, Christ is real in all that he speaks unto you: He is not like a
flourishing Lover, who fills up his Letters with Rhetoric, and has more care
of the dress of his Speech, than of the Truth. Who ever gave demonstration of
the reallity of his love at so dear a rate as Christ has done? Men do not use
to die in jest: Who will impoverish himself to enrich his Friend? and divest
himself of his honor to advance him? and debase himself to admiration below
his own degree to contract affinity with him? and all this but to make him
believe that he loves him.

Brethren, possess your very hearts with this, that Christ's love does go out
with infinite dearness toward you. Even now while he is in all his Glory, he
earnestly remembers you still. This is the High Priest that now is entered into
the Holy of Holies, does bear your names particularly, remembering every poor
believer by name. He bears your names, but where? upon his Breast Plate, upon
his heart, says the Text, Exodus 28. 29. Ah Christians, I may salute you as the
Angel did Mary, Hail you that are highly favored: Blessed are you among men.
Sure your Lot is fallen in an happy place; what in the bosom of Christ? yea,
and verily you may believe, and doubt not. I may apply that of Gabriel, O
Daniel, tho^ art greatly beloved, unto you; you are beloved indeed, to have
your Names written upon the very heart of Christ now he is in Glory.

Oh, let his Name be written then on your hearts. Do not write his Name in the
Sand, when he has written yours upon his own Breast! Do not forget him who has
taken such care, that while he is, he may never forget you, having recorded
your names not only on his Book, but on his Flesh, and set you as a Seal upon
his heart. He has you upon his heart, but why? For a memorial before the Lord
continually, so says the Text. Beloved, your Lord is so far from forgetting
you in all his Greatness and Glory, that he is gone into Heaven on purpose,
there to present you before the Lord, that you may be always in remembrance
before him O Beloved, Glory, yea, and Triumph in his love; Doubtless it must go
well with us. Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, and rose again, and is
now making Intercession. His interest is potent. He is always present. Our
Advocate is never out of Court. Never did cause miscarry in his hand. Trust you
safely in him. Happy is that man for whom he shall undertake to speak.

Oh, the Riches of Christ's love! he did not think it enough to die for you. His
love and care does not end with his natural life on Earth, but he ever lives
to make Intercession for us. His love is like his life, ever, ever: knowing no
remission in degree, nor intermission of time, no cessation of working, but is
ever, ever, in motion toward us.

But when shall I end, if I suffer my soul to run out its length, and my
running Pen te enlarge according to the demensions of this boundless Field of
Divine Love? If the Pens of all the World were employed to write Volumes of
love, if the tongues of all the living were exercised in nothing else but
talking of this love; If all the Hearts that be were made up of love; and all
the powers and affections of the mind were turned into one, to wit the power of
love, yet this were no less than infinitely too little, either to conceive, or
to express the greatness of Christ's love.

O my dearly beloved, may your souls be swallowed up in this love. Think, and
think while you will, you can never think how much you are beloved. See that ye
love again by way of Gratitude, though not of Requital: what though your souls
be but narrow, and your powers but little, yet love him with all you have. Love
him with all your hearts, and all your strength. To the Meditations, and to the
Embraces of Divine love I leave you, thinking it now not worth while to tell
you of my Love, Remaining

Yours in the bonds of your most dear Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
August 11. 1665.
LETTER. XXIX. [Warning t^ Professors of their Danger.] To the Beloved ^ople,
the Inhabitants of the Town of (...), Grace and Peace.
Most dear (...).
MY (...) my beloved is mine and I am his: but (...) ^ave no joy so great as
that you are mine and I (...) ^ou are Christ's. My Relation to Christ is abo^
(...) life and my peace, my riches, and my righteo^ (...) my hope and my
strength, and mine Inheritance, (...) ^ycing: In him will I please my self for
ever, and (...) will I glory. I esteem my self most happy and rich, and safe in
him, though of my self I am nothing. In him I may boast without Pride, and
glory without vanity. Here is no danger of being over much pleased; neither can
the Christian exceed his bounds in overvaluing his own riches, and happiness in
Christ. I am greatly pleased with the Lot that is fallen to me: the Lord has
dealt bountifully with me, and none shall stop this my confidence of boasting
in Christ. But as my lot in him is above all, so I will assure you, it is no
small content to me, that my lot is fallen with you. And though many
difficulties have fallen to my lot among you (for I have broken my health and
lost my liberty once and again, for your sakes) yet none of these things move
me. I wish nothing more then to spend and to be spent upon the service of your
Faith. I bless the Lord for it as an invalnable mercy, that ever he called me
to be an Ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ to you-wards. In this station I
desire to approve my self to him, and that I am withdrawn from my Work for a
season, it is but that I may return to you refreshed, and enabled for my work
among you. You may not think that I have forgotten you, and consulted my own
ease and pleasure: but if God prosper my intentions, I shall be found to have
been daily serving you in this retirement. I will assure you, I am very tender
of preserving all that little strength that God does add to me entirely for
your sakes: being resolved not so much as once to broach the Vessel till I draw
forth to you. I bless the Lord, I am in great tranquillity here in this Town,
and walk up and down the Corporation without any Questioning me. Only it has
pleased the Lord to add to my Affliction since my coming, by taking away my
dear Father, the day of whose glorious Translation was the day after my
arriving here. But I bless the Lord, I do believe and expect the return of the
Redeemer with all his Saints, and the most glorious Resurrection of my own dead
Body with all Believers: and this makes me to rest in Hope, and fills me with
unspeakle more Joy than the death of my self or any other Saint can with grief.
And now I make it my business to be rendered serviceable to you; and do by this,
return you my hearty thanks for your earnest Prayers and Intercessions to God
in my behalf, for it is he that must do the Cure: I seem to my self to be
retired to this place, as a Vessel rent and shattered and torn in the Service,
that it come to recruit in the Harbor: And here I am as it were rigging, and
repairing, and Victualling to put sorth again in the Service: which I shall do
with the first Wind, as soon as I am ready. What is my life u^less I am
serviceable? And though I must for the present forbear my wonted Labor, yet I
shall not cease to exhort you, and call upon you while I am absent from you, to
stand sast, and to grow up in your holy Faith.

Be warned, my dearly Beloved, that you fall not upon those dangerous Rocks
upon which so many Professors have been split.

There are three things which I beseech you carefully to beware of.

First, Lest while Christ is in your mouths, the world run away with your
hearts: There is many a seeming Professor that will be found a mere Idolater?
Many a Soul goes down to Hell in this sin, in the midst of his Profession, and
never discerns it till it be too late. Remember, I beseech You, that the Oxen,
the Farm, Wife, Merchandise, all of them lawful Comforts, did effectually keep
men from a sound and saving closing with Christ, as the vilest lusts of the
worst of men. Whatever you find your hearts very much pleased in, and in love
with, among these earthly Comfo^ts, set a mark upon that thing, and remember
that there lies your greatest dan^r. What you love most, you must fear most;
and think often wi^h your selves, This, if any thing is like to be my (...)
multitudes of Professors that perish for ever, by (...) ^and of this mortal
Enemy, I mean the overval^ing of Earthly things. The hearers compared to the
thorn^ Ground, did not openly fall away and cast off their Profession, as the
stony ground did; but while others withered away, the blade of Profession was
as green and fresh as ever; and yet their inordinate a^ection to the things of
this life, did secretly undo all at last. Little do most Professors think of
this, while they please themselves in their estates, while they delight
themselves so freely in their Children, in their Wives, in their habitations
and possessions; that these be the things that ^re like to undo them for ever.
How little is that Scripture thought of, which speaks so dreadfully to worldly
Professors; Love not the World, for if any man love the World, the Love of the
Father is not in him. Are there not many among us, who though they do keep up
Prayer, and other holy Duties; yet the strength and vigor of their hearts
goes out after earthly things? And these are their chief care and their chief
joy. Such must know, that they are none of Christ's, and they were better to
understand it now, and seek to be renewed by Repentance, then hereafter when
there shall be no place for Repentance.

2. Lest while Iniquity does abound, your love to Christ does wax cold.
Remember what an Abomination Laodicea was to Christ because she grew so
lukewarm; and what a controversy he had with Ephesus, a sound Church, because
she did but flacken and grow more remiss in her love. A friend is born for
adversity; and now is, the time, if you will prove the sincerity of your love
and friendship to Jesus Christ, by following him zealously, resolvedly, sully,
now he is more rejected and opposed.

Thirdly, Lest you keep up a barren and fruit^ss Profession, without
Progression: See to it my Brethren, that you be not only Professors, but
proficients: Many Professors think all is well because they keep on in the
exercises of Religion; but alas! You may keep on praying, and hearing all the
Week long, and yet be not one jot the further. Many there are that kee^ going,
but it is like the Horse in the Mill, that is going all day, but yet is no
further than when he first began. Nay, it often times happens in the Trade of
Religion, as it does in trading in the World, where many keep on in trading
still, till for want of care and caution, and examining their accounts whether
they go forward or backward, they trade themselves out of all. Oh, look to it
my Brethren, that none of you rest in the doing of duties, but examine what
comes of them. Otherwise as you may trade your selves into Poverty, so you may
hear and pray your selves into hardness of heart, and desperate security, and
formality. This was the very case of wretched Laodicia, who kept up the trade
of religious duties, and verily thought that all was well, because the trade
still went on, and that she was increased in spiritual goods, and in a gaining
way: but when her accounts were cast up at last, all comes to nothing, and ends
in wretchedness, poverty, and nakedness. Most dear Brethren, I wish and pray
for the prosperity of you all: but above all, I wish your Souls prosperity,
with which, after my most dear Loves to you all, having already exceeded the
bounds of an Epistle, I commend you to the living God, Remaining

Your fervent well wisher and Ambassador in Christ, JOS. ALLEINE
Devises, June 22. 1666.
LETTER. XXX. [An Admiration of the Love of God.] To the most Loving, and best
Beloved, the servants of God in Taunton, Salvation.
My most dear Friends,
I Love you, and long for you in the Lord, and I am weary with forbearing that
good and blessed work that the Lerd has committed to me, for the surtherance
of your Salvation. How long Lord, how long shall I dwell in silen^! How long
shall my Tongue cleave to the Roo^ of my Mouth! When will God open my Lips,
that I may stand up and praise him? But it is my Fathers good pleasure yet to
keep me in a total disability of publishing his Name among you; unto him my
Soul shall patiently subscribe. I may not, I cannot complain that he is hard to
me, or uses me with Rigor: I am full of the Mercies of the Lord, yea, Brimful
and running over, And shall I complain? Far be it from me.

But though I may not murmur, me^hinks I may mourn a little, and sit down and
wish, O if I may not have a Tongue to speak, would I had but Hands to Write,
that I might from my Pen drop some heavenly Councels to my Beloved People.
Methinks my feeble Fingers do even Itch to Write unto you, but it cannot be,
alas my right hand seems to have forgot her cunning, and has much ado with
trembling to lift the Bread unto my Mouth. Do you think you should have had so
little to show under my Hand, to bear Witness of my Care for You, and love to
you if God had not shock my Pen as it were out of my Hand? Bu^ all that he does
is done well, and wisely, and therefore I submit. I have purposed to borrow
Hands wherewith to write unto my Beloved, rather then to be silent any longer.

But where shall I begin, or when should I end? If I think to speak of the
Mercies of God toward me, or mine enlarged affections toward you, methinks I
feel already how strait this Paper is like to be, and how insignificant my
Expressions will be found, and how insufficient all that I can say will prove
at last to utter what I have to tell you; but shall I say nothing because I
cannot utter all, this must not be neither.

Come then all ye that fear the Lord, come and I well tell you what he has
done for my Soul. O help me to love that precious Name of his, which is above
all my Praises. O love the Lord all ye his Saints, and fear before him!
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together! he has
remembered my low estate, because his Mercy endures for ever. O blessed be you
of the Lord, my dearly Beloved, O thrice blessed may you be for all your
remembrances of me before the Lord, you have wrestled with the Lord for me, you
have wrestled me out of the very Jaws of Death it self: O the strength of
Prayer! Surely it is stronger than death. See that you even honor the power
and Prevalen^ of Prayer: Oh be in love with Prayer, and have high and venerable
thoughts of it. What distresses, diseases. Deathts can stand before it? Surely
I live by Prayer, Prayer has given a Resurrection ^o this Body of mine, when
Physicians, and friends had given up their hopes.

Ah my dearly Beloved, methinks it delights me to tell the story of your love,
how much more of the love of God toward me. I have not forgotten, O my dearly
Beloved, I have not forgotten your tender love in all my distresses. I remember
your kindness to me in my Bonds, when once and again I was delivered up to a
Prison for your sakes. I remember with much delight, how you refreshed and
comforted me in my Tribulations, how open your hearts were, and your hands were
not straightned neither, for I was in want of nothing I may not, I must not
forget what painful Journies you took to visit me, when in places remote the
hand of the Lord had touched me, and though my long sickness almost incredible
expensive to me, yet your Supplies did not a little lighten my Burden.

And though I put it last, yet I do not mind it least, that you have been so
ready in returning Praises to God in my behalf, your thanksgiving to God, my
dear Brethren, do administer abundant cause to me of my giving thanks unto you.

And now my heart methinks is big to tell you a little of my love to you surely
you are dear unto me; but though it be sweet to tell the story of love, yet in
this I will restrain my self For I fear least as the wise man says of the
beginning of strife, so I should find of the beginning of love, that it is like
the letting forth of the Water; and the rather I do ^orbear, because I hope you
have better Testimonies than Words, to bear witness here unto you.

But if I sing the song of love, O let Divine Love overcarry the praise; I
found my self in straights when I began to speak of the natural love between my
dear people, and an unworthy Minister of Christ to them; and it seemed that all
that I have said was much too little, but now I have to speak of the love God,
it seems to be by far too much.

O infinite love never to be Comprehended, but ever to be admired, magnified,
and adored by every Creature! O let my heart be filled, let my Mouth be filled,
let my papers be filled ever, ever filled with the thankful Commemoration of
this matchless love. O turn your eyes from other objects! O bury me in
forgetfulness, and let my love be no more mentioned nor had in remembrance
among you, so that you may be thoroughly possessed and inflamed with the love of
God. This, my Beloved, this is that love which is ever to be commended, and
extolled by you. See that you study this love, fill your souls with wonder,
and feast your souls with joy, and be ravished with rich contentment in this
Divine Love: Take your daily walk, and lose your selves in the Field of Love:
Drink, O Friends, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved, fear no excess. O that your
souls may be drencht and drowned in the love of Christ, till you can every one
say with the ravished Spouse, I am sick of love. Marvel not that I wander here,
and seem to forget the bounds of a Letter, this love obliges me, yea, rather
constrains me. Who in all the Earth should admire and commend this love if I
should not? I feel it, I taste it, the sweet savor thereof reviveth my soul,
it is light to mine eyes, and life to mine heart; the warm Beams of this
blessed Sun, O how have they comsorted me, ravished, and refreshed me both in
Body and Soul! my benumbed Limbs, my withered hands, my feeble knees, my bones
quite naked of flesh do yet again revive through the quickening, healing, and
raising influence of Divine Grace and Love. Now my own hands can feed me, and
my own seet can bear me, my appetite is quick, my sleep comfortable, and God is
pleased to give some increase continually though by insensible Degrees; and
shall not I praise that love and grace that has done all this for me? yea,
what is this to all I have to tell you? My heart is enlarged, but I told you
Paper could not hold what I have to speak of the goodness of the AllGracious
God, in which I live. I am forced to end, least you should not bear my length.
My dearly Beloved, I send my heart unto you, divide my love amongst you all,
and particularly tender it to your Reverend and Faithful Pastor, whose
presence with you, and painfulness, and watchfulness over you, and Zeal and
courage for you in so dangerous a time, is matter of my great Joy and
Thanksgivings unto God. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you all. Fare you
well in the Lord, I remain

Your unworthy Minister and servent Well-wisher in the Lord, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXI. To the most Beloved People, the Servants of God in Taunton,
Salvation.
Most dearly Beloved and longed for, my Joy and Crown,
MY hearts desire and Prayer for you is, that you may be saved. This is that
which I have been Praying and studying, and Preaching for these many Years: and
this is the end of my Venturing, and Suffering, and Writing at this present
time. God that knows all things, he knows that this is my wish; Oh that I
could but come at their Souls! And that this is the prize and the gain that I
run for, that I might win souls. I seek not other gifts, give me your hearts,
let me but part between your sins and you; suffer me but to save you; give me
leave to carry you over to Jesus Christ, and I will not ask you any more. I
will serve you gladly, I will suffer for you thankfully, so I may but save you.
Do not wonder why I follow you so pressingly, why I call upon you so
frequently; let not my importunity be grievous to you, all this is but to save
you. Christ did not bethink his Blood, and shall I think my Breath, or Ink, too
dear in order to your salvation? what pity is it, that any of you should
miscarry at last, under the power of Ignorance, or by a profane negligence, or
a formal and lifeless profession of strict Godliness.

Beloved, I am afraid of you lest (as to many of you) I have run in vain. I
cannot but most thankfully acknowledge, that (considering the paucity of those
that are saved) there are not a few of you who are the joy of your Ministers,
and the Glory of Christ. But it cannot be dissembled, that far the greater
number give little ground to hope, that they are in the state of Salvation. And
must not this be a pinching thought to a compassionate Teacher, to think, that
he cannot for his heart persuade men, but that the most of them will wilfully
throw away themselves? Is it not a wosul sight, to behold the Devils driving a
great part of our miserable Flocks (as they did once the Herd of Swine, the
Keepers themselves amazed looking on.) I say, driving them violently down the
hill, till they be choked in the Water, and drowned irrecoverably in the Gulf
of endless Perdition? Ah mserable spectacle! What through the wilful blindness
of some, what through the loseness and sensuality of others, what through the
halving, and Cold, and customary Religion of others, how great a number of our
poor Flocks, is Satan like to carry utterly away from us, after all that has
been done to save them?

Yet I cannot but call after them. Hearken unto me, O ye Children. How long
will ye love Vanity, and follow after leasing, and trust in lying Words? As the
Lord lives you are lost, except you turn: Wherefore turn your selves and live
ye. Ah how Mercy woeth you! How it waits to be gracious to you? Hear, O
sinners, hear. See you not how the merciful Savior of the World stretches
forth his hands all the day long, and spreads forth his Wings, and calls
you as a Hen does her Chickens! hear you not the soundings of his Bowels? He
had no need of you; Yet how do his compassions melt over perishing sinners? his
heart is turned within him, and shall not this turn your hearts? his repentings
are kindled together; and shall not this lead you to repentance? Behold, he
stands at the door and knocks. O man will thou keep jesus at the door, and
lodge Barrabas in thy bosom? and prefer thy cruel Lusts before thy
Compassionate Lord? Oh his melting love to sinners! He calls after them, Isa.
55. 1. He weepeth over them, Luke 19. 41, 42. He cries to them, Prove. 1. 21,
22, 23. How long ye simple ones, will you love simplicity? Will you not be made
clean? When shall it once be? Why will you die? Turn you at my Reproof: Behold,
I will pour out my Spirit upon you. Sinner, art thou not yet melted? Oh come in
at his loving Calls, Come out from thy sins: Touch the Scepter of Grace and
live: Why should thou be dashed in pieces by his Iron Rod? Kiss the Son: Why
should thou perish in the way? Set up Jesus as thy King, lest he count thee
sor ^is Enemy, because thou would not that he should Reign over thee, and so
thou be called forth and slain before him. Oh how dreadful will this Case be,
to perish under the pitiful Eyes of his Mercy, and to die by the hand of a
Savior! Oh double hell, to have thy Redeemer become thine Executioner! And the
hand that was so long stretched forth to save thee, to be now stretched forth
to slay thee! And the merciful heart of Christ himself hardened against thee, so
as that he should call thee forth, and with his own hand hew thee in pieces,
(as Samuel did Agag before the Lord.)

But I have been too too long in prefacing to what I intended forthwith to have
fallen upon: Indeed I am apt to run out in matters that do so nearly touch upon
your greatest Concernments.

Beloved, I despair of ever bringing you to Salvation, without Sanctification:
Or possessing You with Happiness, without persuading you to Holiness. God knows
I have not the least hope ever to see one of your Faces in Heaven, except You
be Converted and Sanctified, and exercise your selves unto Godliness. This is
that I drive at. I beseech you study to further Personal Godliness, and Family
Godliness.

1. Personal Godliness. Let it be your first care to set up Christ in your
Hearts. See that you make all your worldly Interests to stoop to him, that You
be entirely and unreservedly devoted unto him. If You wilfully, and
deliberately, and ordinarily harbor any sin, You are undone. See that You
unfeignedly take the Laws of Christ, as the rule of your words, thoughts, and
actions; and subject ^our whole man, members and mind faithfully to him. If You
have a true respect to all Gods Commandments, you are sound at heart. Oh study
to get the Image and impress of Christ upon you within. Begin with your hearts,
else you build without a foundation. Labor to get a saving change within, or
else all external performances will be to no purpose. And then study to show
forth the power of Godliness in the life. Let Piety be your first and great
business. It Is the highest point of Justice, to give God his due. Beware that
none of you be a Prayerless person: sor that is a most certain discovery of a
Christless, and a graceless person, of one that is a very stranger to the fear
of God. Suffer not your Bibles to gather dust. See that you converse daily with
the Word. That man can never lay claim to Blessedness, whose delight is not in
the Law of the Lord. Let ^editation and self-examination be your daily
exercise, else the Papists, yea the Pagans, will condemn us. That the short
questions, which I have given you as a help to self-examination, may be daily
perused by you, is the matter of my passionate request unto you. If ever you
come to any growth in Holiness, without the constant use of ^his practice, I am
grossly deceived. And therefore I would beseech, yea, even charge you, by the
Lord, that you would daily examine your selves by these questions, till you
have found a better help to this duty.

But Piety, without Charity, is but the half of Christia^y, or rather impious
Hypocrisy, We may not divide the Tables. See therefore that you do justly, and
love mercy, and let Equity, and Charity run like an even Thread, throughout all
your dealings. Be you temperate in all things, and let Chastity, and and
Sobriety, be your undivided Companions. Let truth and Purity, Seriousness and
modesty, Heavenliness and gravity be the constant ornaments of your speech. Let
patience and humility, simplicity and sincerity shine out in all the parts of
your conversations. See that you sorget and sorgive wrongs, and requi^e them
with kindness as you would be found children of the most high. Be merciful in
your Censures, and put the most favorable construction upon our Brethrens
carriage that their actions will reasonably bear. ^e slow in promising.
punctual in fulfilling. Let meekness and in^ocency, Affableness, Yieldingness,
and Curt^sie, com^end your conversations to all men. Let none of your Relations
want that love and loyalty, that reverence and duty, that tenderness, care, and
vigilance, which their several places and capacities call for. This is
throughout Godliness. I charge you before the most high God, that none of you
be found a swearer, or a Liar, a lover of evil company, or a scoffer, or
malicious, or covetous, or a drunkard, or a glutton, unrighteous in his
dealing, unclean in his living, ^r a quarreller, or a thief, or backbiter, or a
railer: for I denounce unto you from the living God, that destruction and
damnation is the end of all such, Prove. 13. 20. Jam. 5. 12. Rev. 21. 8. 1 Cor.
6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.

2. Family Godliness. He that has set up Christ in his heart, will be sure to
study to set him up in his house. Let every family with you be a Christian
Church; every house, a house of Prayer; every household a household of says. Let
every householder say, with Joshua, I, with my House will serve the Lord, and
resolve with David, Psalm 121. 2. I will walk within my house, with a perfect
heart. Let me press upon you a few duties, which I have been long harping upon,
but Alas ( I speak it to your shame) with many (too too many) of you, to little
purpose in general.

First, Let Religion be in your Families, not as a matter by the by, (to be
minded at leisure, when the world will give you leave) but the standing
business of the house. Let them have your prayers as duly as their meals, is
there any of your familie^, but have time for their taking food? wretched man!
can thou find time to eat in, and not time to Pray in?

Secondly, Settle it upon your Hearts, that your Souls are bound up in the
Souls of your Family. They are committed unto you, and (if they be lost through
your neglect) will be required at your hands; Sirs, if you do not, you shall
know that the charge of Souls is a heavy charge, and that the Blood of Souls is
a heavy guilt. O man, have thou a charge of Souls to answer for, and do thou
not yet bestir thy self for them, that their Blood be not found in thy Skirts?
Will thou do no more for immortal Souls, than thou will do for thy Beasts that
perish? What do thou do for thy Children, and Servants? Thou providest Meat
and Drink for them, agreeable to their Natures, and do thou not the same for
thy Beasts? Thou give them Medicines, and cherishest them when they be sick,
and do thou not so much for thy Swine? More particularly.

1. Let the solemn Reading of the Word, Isa. 34. 16. John 5. 31. and singing of
Psalms, be your Family Exercises, Psalm 118. 15. See Christ singing with his
Family, viz. his Disciples, Mat. 26. 30. Luke 9. 18.

2. Let every person in your Families be duly called to an account of their
profiting by the word h^rd or read, as they be about doing your own (...). This
is a duty of consequence unspeakable, and would be a means to bring those under
your Charge, to remember and prosit by what they receive. See Chirsts Example
in calling ^is Family to an account. Mat. 16. 11. 13. 15.

33. Often take an account of the Souls under your care concerning their
Spiritual estates Herein you must be Followers of Christ, Mat. 13. 10, 36, 51.
Mar^ 4. 10, 11. Make enquiry into their conditions, insist much upon the
sinfulness and misery of their natural estate, and upon the necessity of
Regeneration and Conversion in order to their Salvation. Admonish them gravely
of their sins, encourage beginnings. Follow them earnestly, and let them have
no quiet for you, till you see them in a saving change. This is a duty of high
consequence, but ( I am afraid) fearfully neglected by some that are Godly.
Does not Conscience say, Thou art the man?

4. Look to the strict sanct^fying of the Sa^bath, by all of your H^holds,
Exodus 20. 10. Lev. 23. 3. Many poor Families have little time else. O improve
but your Sabbath Days as diligently in laboring for knowledge, and doing your
Makers work, as You do the other days in doing your own work, and I doubt not,
but you may come to some proficiencie.

5. Let the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of s^lemn Prayer, be daily offered
up. in all your Families. Psalm. 92. 1, 2. Exodus 30. 7, 8. ^L^ke 1. 9, 10.
Beware they be not found among the Families that call not upon Gods Name; sor
why should there be wrath from the Lord upon your Families? Jer. 10. 25. O
miserable Families without God in the World, that are without Family Prayer!
What have you so many Family fins, Family wants, Family Mercies, what and yet
no Family Prayers? How do you pray with all Prayer and Supplication, if You do
not with Family Prayer? Say not, I have no time. What have thou all thy time on
purpose to serve God, and save thy Soul, and is this that for which thou can
find no time. Find but a heart, and I will find time. Pinch out of your meals
and sleep, rather then want for Prayer. Say not my business will not give
leave. This is thy grea^est business, to save thy self, and the Souls committed
to thee. Besides a whet will be no let. In a word, the blessing of all is to be
got by Prayer, Jer. 29. 11, 12. 2 Samuel 7. 29. And what is thy business without
Gods Blessing? Say not, I am not able. Use thy one Talent, and God will
increase it, Mat. 25. 24. etc. Helps are to be had till thou art better able.
But if there be no other remedy, thou mai'st join with thine abler Neighbor.
God has special regard to joint Praye^, Jam. 5. 14. to 19. Acts 12. 5. to 12.
2 Cor. 1. 11. and therefore you must improve Family advantages for the
performing of it

6. Put every one in your Families upon private Prayer. Observe whether they do
perform it. Get them the help of a form, if they need it, till they are able to
go without. Direct them how to Pray, by minding them of their sins, w^nts, and
mercies, the materials of Prayer. This was the practice of John, and of Jesus,
Luke 11. 1, 2.

7. Set up Cathechizing in your Families, at the least once every Week. It was
my parting, dying request, that you would set up and maintain this duty in your
Families. Have You done it all accordingly? Cannot your consciences witness,
cannot your families witness you have not? Well, I thought my parting words
would have done something with you: I hoped the fervent request of a dying
Minister, would have prevailed for such a small matter with You. What, to this
day without solemn C^techising in your houses? Ah, what a discouragement to
your Teacher is this? Brethren, shall I yet prevail with you? Will you reject
me now also? O let me persuade you, before you take off your eyes from these
Lines, to resolve to set upon the constant exercise of this Duty. Surely I have
done and suffered more for you then this comes to: will you deny me? I beseech
you, let me find, if ever God do bring me again to visit your houses, that the
^ords of a suffering Minister have some power with you. I have sent you an help
on purpose: what shall all my persuasions be but speaking in the wind? and all
my pains but laboring in the fire? Beloved you have no dread of the Almighties
Charge, That you should teach these things diligently to your Children, and
talk of them as you sit in your hou^, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 4. 9, 10
and 11. 18, 19, 20. and train them up in the way they should go, Prove. 22. 6.
the Margin. Has God so commended Abraham, that he would teach his children and
his household, Genesis 18. 19. and that he had so many (...) servants, Genesis 14. 14.
the Margin has given such a promise to him thereupon, and wlll not you put in
for a share, neither in the praise, nor the Promise? Has Christ honored
Cathechising with his presence, Luke 2. 46. and will not you own it with your
practice? Say not, they are careless, and will not learn. What have you your
Authority for, if not to use it for God, and the good of their Souls? You will
call them up, and force them to do your work; and should you not, at least be
as zealous in put^ing them upon Gods work? Say not, they are dull and are not
capable If they be dull, God requires of you the more pains and patience, but
so dull as they are, you will make them learn how to work; and can they not
learn as well how to live! Are they capable of the mysteries of your trade, and
are they not capable of the plain principles of Religion? well as ever you
would see the growth of Religion, the cure of ignorance, the remedy of
profaneness, the downfall of error, fulfill you my joy in going through with this
duty.

I have been too long already, and yet I am afraid my Letter will be ended
before my work be done, how l^th am I to leave you, before I have prevailed
with you to set to the work, to which you are here directed, will you pass your
promise, will you give me your hands? Oh that you would! you cannot do me a
greater pleasure. Ask what you will of me; See if I will not do as much for
you. Oh that your Families might be a joy to me, as that twice noble Ladies to
John; who professes he had no greater joy, then to find her Children walking in
the truth! Beloved why should you not give the hand one to another, and
mutually engage each to other, for more vigorous and diligent endeavors, in
promoting Family Godliness. I must tell you, God looks ^or more than ordinary
from you, in such a day as this. He expects that you should do, both in your
hearts, and in your houses, somewhat more that ever, under these his
extraordinary dispensations. My most dearly beloved minc own bowels in the
Lord, will you satisfy the longings of a traveling Minister? will you answer
the calls of Divine Providence? would you remove the Incumbent, or prevent the
impending Calamities? would you plant Nurseries for the Church of God? would
you that God should build your Houses, and bless your substance? would you that
your children should bless you? that your Father should bless you? Oh, then set
up piety in your Families as ever you would be blessed, or be a blessing, let
your hearts and your Houses be the Temples of the living God, in which ^is
worship (according to all the forementioned directions) may be, with constancy
reverently performed. Pardon my pro^xity and importunity in so earnest pursuing
of you; I am yet afraid I have done too soon, and shall end without my Errand.
The Lord God persuade you To him I turn me, for I am well assured, he can
prevail with you:

O Father of Spirit, that has set me over thy Flock to match for their Souls,
as one that must give an account. I have long studied thy Will, and taught in
thy Name, and do unfeignedly bless thee; that any have believed my Report. I
have given unto them the Words which thou gave me, and they have received
them. I have manifested thy Name unto them, and they have kept thy Word. And
now I am no more with them, but I come unto thee: Holy Father keep them through
thine own Name; for they are thine. As they have kept the Word of thy Patience,
so keep thou them in the hour of Temptation. They are but a flock a little and
a helpless flock: but thou art their Shepherd, suffer them not to want. Do
thou feed them, and fold them. Let thy Rod and thy Staff comfort them, and let
not the Beasts of prey fall upon them, to the spoiling of their Souls.

But what shall I do for them that will not be gathered. I have called after
them, but they would not answer; I have charged them in thy Name, but they
would not hear; I have studied to speak perswasively to them, but I cannot
prevail. Then I said, I have labored in vain; I have spent my strength for
naught, and in vain, yet I cannot give them over, much less may I give thee
over Lord persuade Japhet, to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Lord compel them to
come in, and lay the hanas of mercy upon them, as thou did on lingering Lot,
and bring them forth, that they may escape for their lives and not be consumed.
Lord, I pray thee open their eyes that they may see, and lay hold upon their
hearts by thy Omnipotent Grace. Do thou turn them, and they shall be turned: O
bring back the miserable Captives, and suffer not the enemy of mankind to drive
away the most of the flock before mine eyes, and to deride the fruitless
endeavors of thy Laborers, and boast over them, that he can do^e with them,
though he seek to ruin them, than all the beseechings, counsels, and charges
of thy Servants that seek to save them. Lord, if I could find out any thing
that would pierce them, that would make its way into their hearts, thou know
I would use it. But I have been many years pleading thy cause in vain. O let
not these endeavors also be lost. O God, find out every ignorant, every
profane sinner, every prayerless Soul, and every prayerless family, and
convince them of their miserable condition, while without thee in the World.
Set thy Image upon their Souls, set up thy Worship in their Families. Let not
pride, ignorance, or slothfulness, keep them in neglect of the means of
knowledge. Let thine eyes be over the place of my desires for good, from one
end of the year to the other end thereof. Let every House therein be a Seminary
of Religion, and let those that cast their eyes upon these lines, find thee
sliding in by the secr^t influence of thy Grace into their hearts, and
irresistably engaging them to do thy pleasure. Amen, Amen.

LETTER. XXXII. [He that endures to the end shall be saved.] To the most
loving, and best beloved, the Serv^ts of Christ in Huntington, Grace and Peace.
Most dear Christians,
I Do thankfully acknowledge, both to God and you, that I am many ways obliged
to love, and serve you; and surely, when the Lord shall turn our Captivi^y, I
will (through his Grace) endeavor to show my self thankful, wherein I may unto
you. I am the more sensible of your great love, because I cannot be insensible,
how little I have deserved such a Mercy, and how little I have been able to do,
to oblige you. Able, I say, for I am sure. I have been willing to be much more
serviceable to you: But now, Letters and Prayers are all that I have for you;
of these I shall be ready to be prodigal. Your love to me has been very
bountiful: I may not forget the liberal Supplies that you have sent, many of
you, even out of your poverty to me; and not to me only, but to the whole
Family of my Brethren, and FellowPrisoners, who do all bless you, and send by
these with me, their thankful respects unto you. I fervently pray, and do not
doubt to speed, that you may reap in Grace and Glory, what you have sown to us
in bounty. Verily, there is a reward for the Righteous. Ah, how sure is it! And
how great and how near is it? Come on, my dear Brethren, and Fellow-Travellers
Stir up your selves, and set to your race. See that you loiter not, but speed
apace in your holy course. What ^ire by the way, or think of looking back, when
Heaven is the prize? God forbid. To him that sows righteousness ^here shall
be a sure reward. What though it should seem sl^w? As long as it is so sure,
and so great, never be discoura^ed: In the end you shall reap, if you faint
not. Wait b^ a while, and you shall have a blessed harvest. The Lord speaks
(...) the Christian, as he to his Creditor in another case. Have pa^ence with
me, and I will pay thee all. Oh now ^or Faith and Patience! How safely, how
sweetly would these ^arry us to our home and harbor, through all difficul^s.
Brethren beloved, be ye followers of them, who through ^th and Patience inherit
the Promises. It is want of patience that undoes the world. Patience, I mean,
not so much (...) the bearing the inflicted evil, as in waiting for the
de^erred good. If the reward of Religion would be presently in hand, who would
not be Religious? Who but the deceitsul world count it doubtful and distant;
and they are all for something in hand, and so take up with a present felicity.
The L^ord deals all upon trust, and upon that account is but little dea^t with.
You must have patient, and be content to plow and sow, and wait for the return
of all at the harvest, when this life is ended They that like not Religion upon
these terms, may see where they can mend their Markets. But you, my Brethren,
be steadfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you
know your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Wait a little, there is but
a short life between you, and the blessed inheritance of the endless Glory. Ah
wretched unbelievers! how worthy are you to be shut for ever out of the
Kingdom, that did so undervalue all the Glory, that God had promised, as not to
count to sufficient to pay them for a little waiting? Beloved, lift. up your
eyes and behold your Inheritance, the good Land that is beyond the Jordan, and
that goodly Mountain. The Promises are a Map of Heaven. Do but view it
believingly and considerately, as it is darkly drawn there, and tell me, what
think you of that worthy portion, that goodly Heritage? will not all this make
you amends for your stay? Why then act like Believers. Never bethink the pains,
nor expenses of Religion. Let no man fear he shall come off a loser. What
though you are much upon the spending hand? I might tell you, God is beforehand
with you however: but I would have you principally to look forward. It is much
that God has [laid out] upon you; but who can tell what he has [laid up] for
them that fear him? And will you miss of all, for want of patience? God sorbid.
Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the Earth, and has
long patience, till he receive the early and later rain. Be ye also patient,
stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. What shall the
Husbandman have more patience for the fruits of the Earth, than you for the
precious fruits of your Faith? The Husbandman has no such certainty as you: he
has but a probability of an harvest, and yet he has p^ience; he is content to
venture. He is at great pains, and much cost, he is still laying out, and has
nothing coming in, and yet he is content to wait for his rei^bursement, till
the Corn be grown. But your harvest is most sure, as sure as the irrevocable
Decree, the infallible promise, the immuta^le Oath of a God, a God that cannot
lie, that knows no place for Repentance, can make it. Again, the Husbandman
has no such increase to look for as you. Oh, if he were but sure, that every
Corn would bear a Crown with what exaltation and joy, rather than patience,
would he go through all his cost and labor. Why, Brethren, such is a Believers
increase. Every Grain shall produce a Crown; and every Tear shall bring forth a
Pearl; and every minute in pains or Prayers, an age of Joy and Glory. Besides,
the Husbandman has long patience, and will not you have a little patience? It
is not long patience that God does expect of you: for behold, the coming of the
Lord draws nigh. Will the Garrison yield when relief is at hand? Or the
Merchant sit down and give up his hopes, when within sight of the Harbor? Or
will the Husband man despond, and give up all for lost, when he sees the Fields
even white for the Harvest? Or shall he do more for a crop of Corn, than you
will do for a crop of Glory? far be it. Behold the Judge is even at Door. The
Lord is at hand. He comes quickly, and his reward is with him. He comes with
the Crown in his hand, to set upon the head of patience. Therefore cast not
away your confidence, which has great recompense of reward. The Prisoners of
the Lord, your Brethren in the patience of Jesus, can tell you, it is good
suffering for such a Master. We must tell you, as they said to our Lord in
another case, He is worthy for whom you should do this. God is beyond measure
gracious to us h^re. He shines bright into our prison, blessed be his Name. He
waters us from Heaven, and Earth. As we trust, you forgot not the poor
Prisoners, when you pray, so we would that many thanksgivings should abound in
our behalf. And Prayer being the only Key that can open our Prisons, we trust
that you will not slack, nor let your hands be heavy, but pray and not faint:
and doubtless Prayer will do it. But I am apt to pass the bounds of a Letter,
yet I promise my self now an easy pardon for so loving a trespass. With my
dear Loves to you all, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace. Though
I have done writing, yet not praying. I will promise, where my Letter ends, my
Prayers shall begin. Farewell dear Brethren: Fare you well in the Lord, I am

An unworthy Ambassador of Jesus in Bond, JOS. ALLEINE.
From the Prison at Juelchester, October. 29. 1663.
LETTER XXXIII. [For Perseverance.] To my dear Friends the Servants of Christ
in Luppit, Salvation.
Beloved Christians,
HAving taken up a Resolution to Write to, and to endeavor to confirm all the
Places, where I have gone up and down Preaching the Kingdom of God, You were by
no means to be omitted. You were the People that were last upon-my heart,
before my taking up, and had I not been made a Prisoner, I think I had in a few
hours after the time of my Apprehension been with you. Now I can no way but by
Prayers, Letters, and Councels visit you; and so have sent these, to let you
know, that you are upon my Heart, and that your Welfare is dear unto me. I
bless the Lord to hear that his Work does not cease among you. It is the Joy of
our Bonds, Beloved, to hear that the Word is not bound, and that Satan has not
his design upon the People of God, who doubtless intended by these Sufferings
to have struck Terror into them, and to have made their Hands weak. Know, dear
Christians, that the Bonds of the Gospel are not tedious through Grace unto us,
that Christ is a Master worth a suffering for, that there is really enough in
Religion to defray all our Charges, to quit all the Cost and Expense you can be
at in or upon it; That you may Build upon it that you can never be losers by
Jesus Christ, that Christ's Prison is better than the Worlds Paradise, that the
Divine Attributes are alone an All-sufficient Livelihood, that the Influences
of Heaven, and shines of Gods Countenance are sufficient to lighten the
darksomest Dungeon, and to perfume and sweeten the noisomest Prison to a poor
Believer; that if you can bring Faith and Patience, and the Assurance of the
Divine Favor with you to a Prison, you will live comfortably in spite of
Earth and Hell. These are Truths that the Prisoners of Christ can in a measure
Seal unto; and I would have you to be more soundly assured of, and established
in. Brethren we are of the same mind in a Prison, that we were os in the
Pulpit; that there is no life to a life of Holiness; that Christ, and his Yoke,
and his Cross, are worthy of all acceptance; that it is the best, and wisest,
and safest and gainfulllest course in the World to stick close to Christ and
his Ways, and to adhere to them in all hazards. Come on, Beloved Christians,
come on, stack not your pace, but give diligence to the full assurance of Hope
unto the end, and be ye followers of them who through Faith and Patience
inherit the Promises. Strengthen the hands that hang down, and the feeble
knees. If you faint in the day of Adversity, your strength is small. Cheer up,
my Brethren, look what a Crown, what a Kingdom here is; What say you? Is not
here a worthy Portion, a goodly Heritage? Were it not pity to lose all this for
want of Diligence and Patience? Come, dear Christians, and fellow Travelers, I
pray you, let us put on: Pluck up the weary Limbs, our Home is within sight.
Lift up your Eyes from the Pisga of the Promises: You may see the Land of Rest.
Will any of you think of returning into Egypt? God forbid: A little patience,
and Christ will come. Behold, the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of
the Earth, and has long patience till he receive the early and later Rain: Be
ye also patient, stablish your Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.
He is not a Christian indeed, that cannot be content to tarry for his
Preferment in another World. Cast upon it, my Brethren, that your Kingdom is
not of this World; that here you must have Tribulations, and that all is well
as long as we are secured for Eternity. Exhort one another daily: strive
together in Prayer, unite your strength therein, and pull a main: Mercy will
come sooner or later, however we will be content to wait till the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Ah how surely will he come! He will render Tribulation to
them that trouble us, and to us that are troubled, rest with him. Only believe
and wait: What not watch with him one hour? Why the Judge is even at the door!
And how blessed will you be if you do but continue and hold fast till he come!
Watch therefore, and stand fast, quit you like men, be Zealous, and let your
hearts be strong: God is your Friend, and you may trust him. He is able to bear
you out, and bear you up: faint not therefore, but be steadfast, unmovable,
abounding in the works of the Lord. Speak often one to another, provoke to
love, and to good Works. Let the Bay of opposition against Godliness, make the
Torrent of your Zeal break over with the more violence. But it is time to end, I
have been bold to call upon you, you see; and to stir you up by way of
remembrance. May the Spirit of the most high God excite you, encourage you,
inflame you: may these poor lines be some quickening to you: may the good will
of him that dwelt in the Bush dwell with you. My dear loves to you all, pray
sor the Prisoners. Farewell dear Brethren, farewell in the Lord, I am

Yours in the Bonds of the Lord Jesus, JOS. ALLEINE.
October. 11. 1665.
LETTER XXXIV. [To a Backsliding Fellow Student.]
Sir,
WHom this will find you, or when, or where, I know not; but I have shot this
arrow at a venture. Once you were an Associate with me in Corpus Christi, where
I remember your blameless Conversation, and your zealous affection for, and
adhesion to the ways and people of God. May you be still found in the same
paths of holiness, without which no man shall see God. The vows of God are upon
me (which, I confess, I have been to slack to pay) that I would put you in
remembrance, and in all Brotherly tenderness advise you, to remember from
whence you are sallen. I was informed, before your leaving of England, of many
unhappy miscarriages, which the great reproach of your holy profession, you had
been too manifestly guilty of, I am not without some hope, that the Lord may
have since recalled you, and brought you back to himself: and yet not without
more fear, lest, if the power of corruption were so strong, as to precipitate
you with such violence, at such a time as that was, and in such a place as
England, as Oxon where you had so many encouragements, and inducements,
examples, and faithful friendly, watchful observers, you may now much more be
carried away, in such a place, and among such company, as now you may be likely
to be in. Sir, I beseech you to be assured, that nothing but the conscience of
my duty has engaged me, now you have been so many years a stranger to me, and
are at so many thousand miles distance from me, to write notwithstanding to
you. And I beseech you, bear a little with me. Is it wisdom after you have
begun in the Spirit, to end in the flesh? you did run well, who has hindered
you? I remember your strict walkings, your holy converse, your many tears: will
you-lose the things that you have wrought? have you found out another, a nearer
way to Heaven? do you hope to get in at the wide Gate, in the broad way? need I
to mind you, that it had been better for you never to have known the way of
Life, then after you have known it, to turn aside from the Holy Commandment?
can you ever enter into Gods Hill, without you be of clean hands, and a pure
heart? I know, you are not ignorant, That strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it: and will you yet do
as the most, and decline the way of strictness, and whole self-denial, and give
the flesh the reins? what, when God, that cannot lie, has said, If you live
after the flesh, you shall die? Do you not know that you do in vain name the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, except you depart from iniquity? I am sure you
know it: Oh Sir, consider it, improve it. Oh, have you so learnt Christ, as to
think, ^at the way of carnal liberty and looseness, the way of evil company and
fleshliness, is the way to eternal life? I am not for tying up Salvation to
this, or that Opinion: but certainly, let men be of what opinion they will,
without str^ess, self-denial, and holy diligence, they cannot be saved, Mat.
16. 42. Mat. 11. 12. 1 Pet. 15, 16. Once you could say with (...), I am
companion to all them that (...) is it so now? O Sir, let not the wicked entice
you. Has not God said, A Companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20.
That you must forfake the foolish, if you desire to live, Prove. 9. 6. Sir, I
have no more hopes ever to meet you more on Earth: O that I might meet you in
Heaven! let us tread the same path of Holiness, and then we shall doubtless
meet there. But surely you must deeply, and timely repent of, and return from
your grievous backslidings, or else I desire never to meet in your Heaven. But
why should not we, that have so often met in serious and holy Prayer together,
we that have so often met at the Lords Table together, we that have so often
eat together, and fasted together, meet in glory together? I beseech your dear
Sir, if the Lord has not already smitten you to the dust, and broken you, and
reduced to the ways of holiness, now consider your ways, and turn your ^eet to
his Testimonies Oh remember that, The back-slider in heart shall be filled with
his own ways. God has said it, and who shall reverse it? If any man draw back
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And once again, when the righteous
turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, shall he live? In
his Trespass that he has trespassed, shall he not di^? I know Prayers can
reach you, though at so vast a distance; I shall add to them these Counsels,
and commit you to God, remaining

Yours real Friend in Christ, JOS. ALLEINE.
Juelchester, May 18th. 1664.
LETTER XXXV. [Good Counsel to his Wise.]
My most dear Theodosia,
THou seem to have been long from me: let nothing any longer detain thee,
but my Sisters necessity, or Fathers Authority. I am very sorry that thou
should lose two Sacraments. I am in a comfortable state of health, through
Divine goodness, to which be glory for ever. See that thou love and admire that
Fountain of our life, and peace; and be ever mindful that it is all thy business
to love, and serve, and praise thy Creator and Redeemer. I have no other
business but this to write to thee about: but this is all our business What be
use to call business is but vanity and pastime and some by matter in comparison
of this. Remember and forget not that it is thy chief end to glorify God, and
enjoy him for ever. Learn well that Lesson, and know that it is the only thing
necessary. Every morning remember that thy serving and pleasing of God, is the
whole business of that day, and therefore set out accordingly with an express
design and intention to please God in thy eating, drinking, visiting,
conversing, calling, and duties of thy Relations throughout the day. My most
dear heart, I have nothing in the world that does concern thee, or me so much
to write of to thee, as this is. Oh that thou may still be laying up in
Heaven! still furthering thy account; still adding to the heap, and increasing
thy glorious reward! nothing is done for God, but thou shall hear of it again.
Whatever is not done for God, is but so much lost. Those things which others do
being led by their natural affections and desires, those things do thou do with
holy aims, for spiritual ends, and then God will put it on the account, as so
much done for him. So it is my dearest, God keeps a true account. See that thou
believe it, and so plow in hope, and sow in hope, pray and hear with an eye to
the sure reward. Let thy hopes be strong and lively, and then thy hands will be
strong, and thy resolutions and affections will be strong. My time is very
precious, and I would not lose any inch of it. See thou to it, that my time in
writing this letter be not lost time. Love God the more, and set thine heart
the straighter toward him, and do but practice this one thing, in every solemn
action to look to thy ends, and then I have got well, and thou better by these
Counsels. My dearest, I love thee in truth and tenderness, but my love
signifies little, unless it serve thine eternal good,

I rest thine own, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER. XXXVI. [To his Wife, Desires after Heaven.]
My dear Heart,
MY heart is now a little at rest to write to thee. I have been these three
days much disturbed, and set out of frame. Strong solicitations I have had from
several hands, to accept very honorable preferment in several kinds, some
friends making a Journey on purpose to propound it, but I have not found the
invitations (though I confess very honorable, and such as are or will be
suddenly embraced by men of far greater worth and eminency) to suit with the
inclinations of my own heart, as I was confident they would not with thine. I
have sent away my friends satisfied with the reasons of my refusal, and am now
ready with joy to say with David. Soul return unto thy rest. But alas, that
such things should disturb me, I would live above this lower region, that no
passages or providence whatsoever might put me out of frame, nor disquiet my
soul, and unsettle me from my desire rest. I would have my heart fixed upon
God, so as no occurrences might disturb my tranquillity, but I might be still in
the same quiet and even frame. Well, though I am apt to be unsettled, and
quickly set off the hinges, yet methinks I am like a Bird out of the nest, I am
never quiet till I am in my old way of Communion with God, like the needle in
the Compass that is restless, till it be turned toward the Pole. I can say
through grace with the Church, with my soul have I desired thee in the night,
and with my Spirit within me have I sought thee early, my heart is early and
late with God, and it is the business and delight of my life to seek him. But
alas, how long shall I be a seeking? how long shall I spend my days in wishing
and desiring, when my glorified Brethren spend theirs in rejoicing and
enjoying? look as the poor imprisoned captive sighs under the burdensome clog
of his Irons and can only pear through the Grace, and think of, and long for
the sweetness of that liberty which he sees others enjoy: such methinks is my
condition: I can only look through the Grate of this Prison my flesh, I see
Abraham, and Isaac, and J^ob, sitting down in the Kingdom of God, but alas, I
my self must stand without longing, striving, fighting, running, praying,
waiting, for what they are enjoying. Oh happy, thrice happy pouls! when shall
these Fetters of mine be knocked off? when shall I be set at liberty from this
Prison of my body? you are clothed with glory, when I am clothed with dust. I
dwell in flesh, in a House of Clay, when you dwell with God in a House not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. I must be continually clogged with the
cumbersome burden of this Dunghill Body, that had it not a soul dwelling in it
like Salt as it were to preserve, it would soon turn to pu^faction and
corruption, and be as odious and loathsome as the filthiest Carrion, when you
have put on incorruption and immortality. What continual molestation am I
subject to by reason of this flesh? What pains does it cost me to keep this
earthen vessel from breaking, it must be fed, it must be clothed, it must be
exercised, recreated, and which is worst of all cherished with time-devouring
^ep, so that I live but little of the short time I have allotted me here: but
oh blessed souls, you are swallowed up of immortality and life, your race is
run, and you have received your Crown How ^^^rious must I be^to keep me from
dangers, how apt am I to be troubled with the cares and fears of this life,
molesting my self with the thoughts of what I shall eat, and what I shall put
on, and wherewithal I shall provide for my self and mine, when your souls are
taken with nothing but God and Christ, and it is your work to be still
contemplating, and admiring that love that redeemed you from all this. Alas,
how am I encompast with infirmities, and still carry about me Death in my
bosom, what pains and cost must I be at to repair the rotten and ruinous
building of this earthly Tabernacle, which when I have done I am sure will
shortly fall about my ears; when you are got far above mortality, and are made
equal with the Angels. Oh I groan earnestly to be clothed upon with my house
which is from Heaven, being willing rather to be absent from the body, and
present with the Lord: Oh, when shall I come and appear before him. When shall
I receive the purchase of my Savior, the fruit of my prayers, the harvest of
my labors, the end of my Faith, the Salvation of my soul? Alas, what do I
here? this is not my resting place. My treasure is in Heaven, and my heart is
in Heaven, Oh when shall I be where my heart is? woe is me that I sojour in
Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of K^dar. Oh that I had wings like a Dove, that
I might fly away and be at rest. Then would I hasten my escape from the windy
storm and tempest, and be out of the reach of fears, disturbances, and
distractions. How long shall I live at such a distance from my God, at such a
distance from my Country? Alas, how can I be merry, how can I sing the Lord
Song in a strange Land; no, I will hang my Harp upon the Willows, and sit down
and weep when I remember Sion. But yet my flesh shall rest in hope, and I will
daily bath my soul in the sweet thoughts of my blessed home. I will rejoice in
hopes of what I do not yet enjoy, and content my self with the taste of what I
shall shortly have my fill of. But stay this Pen runs not beyoud thy
Commission. Alas, now I ^ceive what I have gotten, I perceive I have set down
what I would be rather than what I am, and wrote more of my dears heart than my
own penning, rather a Copy for my self, than a Copy of my self. Well, I thank
God I have got some heat by it for all, the Lord grant thou may get a
thousand times more. The Lord grant the request I daily pour out before him,
and make us helps and furtherances to each others soul, that we may quicken and
promote and forward one another in his ways. Help me by thy Prayers as thou
do always. The God of all peace and comfort be with thee my sweet love,
Farewell,

Thine beyond Expression, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER XXXVII. [God is a satisfying Portion.]
My most dear Pylades,
HAd not my right hand long since forgot her cunning, and the Almighty shook
the Pen out of my hand. I should long ere this have been writing to thee: but
it is a wonder of Divine Power and goodness that my soul had not before this
time dwelt in silence, and that death had not put the long period to all my
writing and converse.

O my Pylades, what shall I say unto thee now I begin to write, where shall I
begin, when shall I end? methinks I am as a full Bottle quite inverted, where
the forward pressing of the overhasty liquor makes the evacuatin more flow, and
my thoughts are like a thronging crowd sticking in the door.

Long is the song of love that I have to tell thee, I rejoice in the constancy
of thy love, that the waters of so long a silence, and so great a distance have
not yet quenched it, but thy desires are toward me, and thy heart is with me,
though providence has hindered me from thy much desired company. I will assure
thee it has been a pleasure to my heart a good part of this summer to hope
that I should come one half of the way to give thee a meeting; but such is my
weakness hitherto, that I am forced to put off those hopes till the Spring,
when, if God give me strength to ride, I intend to see thee before mine own
Home. I thank thee for all the dear expressions of thy fervent love: Methinks I
see it, and feel how it runs through all the veins of every ^etter, nay, every
Line? I needed not so chargeable a Testomony as thy golden Token, with which I
was something displeased, because I thought thou need more than my self: but
the love thereby expressed is most dearly welcome to me. What thou talkest of
Retribution, and of Justice, does not so well relish with me, because the
Phrases seem improper to the love professed between us, I never looked for any
return from thee but love, which is the paying of all thy Debts: my expenses
have indeed been vast and almost incredible; but surely goodness, and mercy
has followed me, and do follow me in every place, and in every change of my
condition; so that as to temporals I have lack of nothing, and as for
spirituals I abound and superabound, and the streams of my comforts have been
full and running over; the joy of the Lord has been my strength at weakest,
and in the multitude of my thoughts within me, his comforts have refreshed my
Soul, I have found God a satisfying portion to me, and have sat down under his
shadow with full delights, and his fruit is most sweet to my taste: he is my
strength and my Song, for I will talk of him, and write of him with perpetual
pleasure. Through grace, I can say, methinks I am now in my Element, since I
have begun to make mention of him, I am rich in him, and happy in him, and my
soul says unto him with Divid, Thou have made me most Blessed for evermore,
and happy is the hour that ever I was born to be made partaker of so blisful a
Treasure, so endless a felicity, so Angelical Prerogatives, as I have in him; O
sweet are his converses, how delightful it is to Triumph in his Love!

Suffer me to be free with thee, where should I pour out my Soul, if not into
thy bosom? did the poor woman call upon her friends and neighbors to rejoice
together with her at the finding of a lost Groat? and shall not I tell to thee
the keeper of the Secrets of my Soul, and the friend of my inmost Bosom, what a
friend is the Lord to me, though an unworthy sinner, shall not I run and tell
thee what a treasure I have found. And here methinks the story of the Lepers
comes not unaptly to thy mind, who said one to another when they had eat and
drunk, and carried away silver and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it, We
do not well, this day is a day of good tidings and we hold our peace. It is sit
that I should be clothed with shame; I acknowledge before God, who tries the
hearts, I am unworthy, everlastingly unworthy, but it is not fit that he should
lose his praise, nay rather, let him be the more adored, and magnified, and
admired for ever and ever, and let my Secrets say, Amen. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul bless the Lord, O my Friend, let us exhalt his Name together, he is my
solace in my solitude, he is my standing comforter, my tried friend, my sure
refuge, my safe retreat, he is my Paradise, he is my Heaven; and my heart is at
rest in him: and I will sit and sing under his shadow, as a Bird among the
Branches; and whither should I go but unto him? Shall I leave the fa^ness of
the Olive, and sweetness of the Fig Tree, and of the Vine, and go and put my
trust under the shadow of the Bramble? No, I have made my everlasting choice:
this is my rest for ever, he is my well Beloved in whom I am well pleased.
Suffer me to boast a little here, I may Glory without Vanity, and I can praise
him without end or measure, but I have nothing to say of my self: I find thou
do overvalue me, and magnify me above my measure; set the Crown upon the
head of Christ, let nothing be great with thee but him, give him the glory: but
thy love pleases me, only I have this exception, that thou art in love with
thine own Idol, as Austin somewhere speaks to a friend of his that did too much
magnify him, and magnifiest a Creature of thine own fancy, and not thy poor
Orestes: God that knows all things, knows my poverty, how little, how low,
and how mean I am, and how short I come of the seize of the Saints, who
yet do themselves come so exceedingly short of the Rule that God has set
before us: I often think of the Complaint of the devout Monsier [ I feel my
self very poor this week, and very defective in the love of God; if you would
know wherein you may pleasure me, love God more; that what is wanting in me,
may be made up in the abundance of your love:] in this, my Pylades, in this
thou may most highly pleasure me; love God a little the better, praise him a
little the more for my sake; let me have this to please my self in, that God is
alittle the better loved sor me, and that I have blowed up, if it be but one
flash, nay, but one spark of Divine Love in the bosom of my dearest friend
toward him.

But why, my Pylades, why is thy style toward me changed? why have thou lost
the old and wonted strain of our former pleasing familiarity? this I could not
but observe with some disgust, is it because thy heart is changed; but this is
a question in which I cannot ask any resolution; I am satisfied and at rest in
thy love, but what this alterations means, I know not; art thou willing by
degrees to grow strange; it cannot be, thou see however that I cannot change
my voice.

Besides, I find some jealous passages in thy last lines unto us; but can
thou think that T. B. can be put into the balance against my old friend, my
own, my Covenant Pylades, or can a friend of words come into any competition or
comparison with thine experienced love? I cannot entertain the thoughts of this
without some disdain.

But thy needful cautions are acceptable to me, I desire to foresee and provide
for manifold changes and storms; I know I am not yet in the harbor; O pray with
me that I enter not into Temptation, for I am very weak in Spirit, as well as
in body, God knows. But there is no end with me, somewhere or other I must
break off, and thou will say it is time to shut up; for once only know, that I
am thy daily Orator, and will be whilst I am: and yet once more I must have
room to add my thankful acknowledgement of thine and thy costly kindness; and
so with our most dear affections to you both, I commend you to the God of love,
still abiding

Thy fast and sure ORESTES.
Bath, October. 12. 1668.
LETTER XXXVII. [To a person of Quality to be constant.]
Most Honored Sir,
MAny charges have passed over both you and my self, since my last Writing to
you, but I am glad to hear that in that great change of your condition, you
have made so wise and happy a choice. Mine unfeigned desire to God is for your
Temporal and Spiritual prosperity; and that the blessings of both Worlds may be
heaped up upon you. Yet I should desire you not to expect too much here, nor to
count it a strange thing, if you meet with disappointments. Is it enough if you
have the Lord for your portion, and Heaven for your Inheritance; though the
World should not answer your expectations. I doubt not but you will be likely,
as well as we, to meet with manifold temptations: the Lord make you, when you
have done all to stand. Hold out a while in faith, patience, and self-denial,
and you shall be as sure as God can make you of the Crown. Now arise and shine,
and hold forth the power of holiness in all your converse. We have lived in
times when Religion was the way to credit and esteem, and then it was more
difficult to discern sincerity of ones profession, because men might be drawn
to it upon worldly ends. But now is the time when God will prove us, if we will
appear for him, and own his ways, when they are the common scorn of the World.
Oh Sir, think it not hard if God do call you forth to own him in such a time as
this, when few of your rank and quality will bear you company: but look upon it
as a special advantage to prove your sincerity, and your fidelity to the Lord
your Maker. The holy and blessed life of that noble Marquess Galeacius, I
should much commend to your reading and imitation. Court not the World nor its
preserments, Moses his self-denying choice. which the World would have branded
for unparalled folly, when he voluntarily left all the Court-preferments and
pleasures, the wisest Judge commends for the great^ wisdom. If Religion will
make you vile, resolve with tha^ ^yal Worthy, that you will be yet more vile.
Remember who accounted the reproaches of Christ greater riches, than the
Treasures of Egypt. Verily it is a greater honor to you to be vilified for
Christ, than to be ^ignified with the highest Titles that the greatest on Earth
can conser: and to be called Puritan or Phanatique, for the bold and constant
owning of the power of Christianity, than to have whole Pages filled up with
the honorable offices and marks of Dignity, that Earthly Princes can bestow.
Now then is your time to get the true honor. Few of your places and dignity,
will take this way to get it: But he that can but use the prospective os Faith,
and look as far as the approaching Judgment, will easily see the vanity of the
worlds riches and flattering preferments, and the everlasting glory and honor
wherewith the despised Saints shall surely be Crowned. Fix your eyes and
Meditations here, and that will set you above the worlds temptations, when by
its offers or threatenings it would make you to warp, and to let go your
hold-fast of Eternal life. Now is the time for you to make Heaven sure, and
when that is done, you are prepared for the worst that can come. I desire you
to accept of my service and respects, and my Wives, which I do hereby present
unto you, and to your most deserving yoak-fellow, whom I unfeignedly honor
though I never saw her, not so much for her noble blood, which yet calls sor
great respects, as for her far more noble qualifications, and privileges of
her second birth. Pardon my boldness with you, in troubling you so long, I am
Sir,

Your most Oblidged Friend, and Servant, JOS. ALLEINE.
Feb. 26. 1661.
LETTER XXXVII.
Dear Cousin,
THough I have been in the valley of the shadow of death, though I have had
more than one foot in the Grave, and have been in deaths often, yet the love
and remembrance of you, ever lives on my heart: I have long had neither feet
to walk nor hands to write, yet I have borrowed hands as you see, rather than I
would stay any longer from warning and admonishing of you. Dear Couzin, that
soul of yours, that precious-immortal soul is of no light value with me! I pray
hard for its Salvation: I have a Godly fear for you, lest your soul should
miscarry in a crowd of worldly business, and of earthly cares Ah, my dear
Niece, it comforts me that you are so settled for this world, and are in want of
nothing, I bless the Lord for this, but me thinks this does not satisfy me.
Oh, that I could be sure that you were once safe settled in Christ; though you
are, I trust comfortably furnished with earthly things, yet in this you are but
half provided for: have you a Treasure in Heaven? have you laid hold on eternal
life? have you made sure work for everlasting? have you past the straits of the
New Birth? do you bear upon you the marks of the Lord Jesus?

If you shall pass by a sumptuous Fabric, and a great Lordship, and should lay
claim to all as your inheritance, and please your self with the hopes of
enjoying all this, when you had nothing to show, no Writing, no Evidence to
produce, as a ground for any such hop^, would not every one say, this were a
piece of strange vanity and imprudence; much greater folly is it to promise our
selves a part in Paradise, and rest satisfied in a mere persuasion that we are
the Heirs of Heaven, when we cannot prove our Title from the Book of God, nor
produce from within our selves, the sure and certain marks of the children of
God.

Ah, dear Couzin, rouse up your self make conscience, to deal plainly and
freely with your soul, say within your self, I have hopes for Heaven? but where
are my grounds and my Evidences? do I not build without a foundation? do I
venture my Salvation upon mere uncertainties? What have I, what do I more than
others? I pray, I hear, I read, but may not a mere Hypocrite do all this? I run
not with others into the wretched practice of Lying, and Couzening, Whoredom,
and the like; but what is this more than a Pharisee may have to say for
himself? can I prove by Scripture my claim to Heaven? can I produce Chapter and
Verse to justify my self?

Oh Couzin, fear, least a Promise being left of entering into rest, you should
by any mistakes, or self-deceits fall short through unbelief; fear lest you
should take Count^ ^old, or some common workings for saving Grace. Oh, there is
a world of counterfeit Coin going, multitudes perish by mistake, and wake in
Hell, whilst they dreamt they were in Heaven: the temp^er is very subtle, and
will sure deceive if he can: your heart is deceitful above all things, and is
willing to cheat you if it can. Therefore am I engaged so earnestly to call
upon you, as one that watches for your soul, to arise speedily and to set
roundly to your work. Oh, consider your danger, and work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling: away with these lazy Prayers, away with these cold
and heartless Professions, away with this drowsy, liveless, ^less Religion;
bestir your self to purpose for your soul before it be too late, search your
conscience as with Candles, be jealous of your self; consider, now is your
time, what you do you must do quickly, the patience of God is waiting, Christ
is knocking, the Spirit of God is striving, and death is at the door: Oh now
take your opportunity, and take heed lest a ^thful heart, and the cares of this
World, or a presumptuous confidence that all is well and safe already, should
at last shut you out of the Kingdom of God.

I cannot write distinctly to your Husband, but I beseech you to call upon him
to set his heart to these Counsels which I havee written to you; I earnestly
entreat him to make Religion his business, and to look heedfully to it, that
the gain of the World prove not the loss of his soul. I desire him that Closer
and Family Prayers, and weekly Catechizing of his Household, and strict
sanctifying of the Sabbath, and reading of the Scriptures singing of Psalms,
repeating of Sermons, and diligent attendance upon powerful Preaching may be
his continual exercises; that so his house may be a little Church, and God may
delight to dwell in his Family: pray give me to understand what is done of
these things, for I have a zeal for your welfare, and that you and your
household should serve the Lord, that you may enter into his rest, and carry
children, and servants, and friends, and all to Heaven with you- As to my own
estate, I have lost all my limbs, and about this twelve Months useless, and
been aga^ and again under the sentence of death; but was brought in (...)
^-litter to Bath, where God has wonderfully restored me, so that I can feed my
self, and go alone, and speak with a little more freedom. Oh, love the Lord,
praise the Lord for me; notwithstanding I continue weak, and have not strength
to write, yet I could not tell how to die in silence from you; but have made
use of a friendly hand to send these counsels and calls after you, which I
beseech you to accept in the fear of God, for it is not unlike that they may be
my last to you that ever you may receive: I now commend you to the Lord, and
with mide own and my dear Wivet love to you both, Rest,

Your loving and careful Uncle, JOS. ALLEINE.
October. 21. 1668.
LETTER. XXXV. [The Concernments of our Souls especially to be regarded.]
Dear Cousin,
YOu may think you are forgotten with me, because you have not heard so long a
time from me; but this may let you know, That though God has taken away your
Father; and suffered your Mother to be helpless to you; Yet you have one friend
on earth that cares for you. The welfare of your immortal soul is dear to me,
and is the matter of my sollicitons care and prayer. Dear Cousin, methinks I
feel a Godly jealousy of you within my heart, lest you should lose your soul
amongst a crowd of worldly cares and business. O remember the story of him in
the Book of the Kings, who relates that he had a Soldier committed to his
keeping, upon condition that he should lose his life if he did let him go: But
while thy servant went hither and thither, the man escaped. But the King
replies presently, Even so shall thy judgment be; thy life shall go for his
life. Ah Cousin, take earnest heed, lest while you are going hither and
thither, minding many things, (...) in a hurry of worldly affairs, the enemy
run not away with your soul. Oh beware that the World does not secretly steal
away your heart. Consider, that whatever your business be, you must and will
have an eating time, and a sleeping time. Oh be as sollicitous every day to
keep your praying times, which are a thousand times more necessary than a time
to eat in, or sleep. Be sure that there does not a morning or evening pass over
your head, in which you have not perfumed your Closer with solemn and fervent
prayer. And take heed, it you love your salvation, lest Saran beguile you with
the bare outward performance of duties and ou^ward acts of Religion. See to it,
that you do not rest in a Worldly Religion; to give God your knee, while the
World carries away your heart. You may pra^, hear, and read, and all to no
purpose, except your very Soul be employed and engaged in these duties; and the
^ife, vigor, and strength of your affections be found to go after God in them.
If therefore you will have Christ and Heaven, see that you renounce the world.
You must cast overboard your worldly hopes, and take up with God, with a naked
Christ, as your wh^ happiness, both for this life, and that which is to come.
There is no hopes of your Salvation, without a sound mortification to the
world; you must be mortified to your worldly expectations: look not for much
from tbe world; promise not your self much from the world; seek not great
things for your self: say unto God, So I may have thee for my portion, and thy
Kingdom for my inheritance, give or deny me what thou will, poverty or riches,
any thing or nothing, I will be contented with my Lot. Say unto your soul, So I
may but have Christ, so I may but carry it for the other world, let this world
go which way it will: I must be converted or condemned; I must be born again,
or else would I had never been born: but of this present world there is no such
necessity; I may be poor, and yet happy: but woe unto me if I remain
unsanctified: I must have grace, or perish for ever. Dear Cousin, if I live,
you shall find me a friend to your worldly prosperity; but whether I live or
die, I charge you by the Lord, that you be infinitely tender of your immortal
souls everlasting concernments. Will you not spin a fair thread of it, if while
you are pursuing after earthly things, you lose your soul in the throng? While
I live, I shall pray and care for you. Farewell in the Lord. I am

Your truly loving and careful uncle, JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER. XXXVI. [Godly Counsels.]
Dear Cousin,
THE welcome tidings of your safe arrival at Barbados, is come to my ears; as
also the News of your escape from a perilous sickness, for which I bless the
Lord, and desire to be thankful with you: for I am not without a care for your
well being, but do look upon my self as really concerned in you. I have
considered, that God has be^est you of a careful Father, and that your Mother
takes but little care for you; so that you have none nearer than my self to
watch for your Soul, and to charge and admonish you in the Lord, and to take
care of you. But yet, Dear Cousin, be not discouraged by these things, but look
to Heaven, fly unto Jesus, put away every known sin, set upon the
conscientious performance of every known duty; make Christ your choice, embrace
him upon his own terms; deliver up your self, body and soul to him; see that
you have no reserves nor limitations in your choice of him; give him your very
heart; cast away your worldly hopes and expectations, make Religon your very
business. O Cousin, these things do, and you shall be sure of a friend in
Heaven to take the care of you; and, if I may be any comfort to you, you shall
not fail, while I live, to have one friend on earth to take care for you. You
are gone far from me, even to the uttermost parts of the Earth; but I have sent
these Lettters to call even thither after you; yea, not only to call, but to
cry-in your Ears, O what is like to become of your Soul! Where is that immortal
Soul of yours like to be lodged for ever? Amongst Devils, or Angels? Upon a Bed
of Flames, or in the joys of Paradise? Dear Cousin, go aside by your self in
secret, retire from the noise of the World, and say to your self, Oh my Soul!
whither art thou going? do not I know in my very heart that I must be converted
or condemned? That I must be Sanctified, or I can never be Saved? Oh my Soul!
what seek thou! what designs do I drive at? what is my chief care? which way
do I bend my course? Is it for this World, or the World to-come? Do I first
seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof? Do I think Heaven
will drop into my mouth? that Glory and immortality will be got with a wet
finger, with cold Prayers, and heartless wishes, while the World carries the
main of my heart? Do I think to be Crowned, and yet never fight? to get the
race, and never run? to enter at the strait gate, and never strive? to overcome
Principalities and Powers, and never wrestle? No, no; say within your self, Oh
my Soul, either lay by the hopes of Heaven for ever, or else rouse up thy self,
put forth thy strength in seeking after God and Glory; either lay by thy
Worldly hopes, or thy hopes of immortality; away with thy sins, or thou must
let Christ go for ever; think not to have Christ and the World too, to serve
God and Mammon, it cannot be: If thou follow the World as thy chief desire and
delight; if thou live after the flesh, thou must die, count upon it, the Lord
has spoken it, and all the World can never reverse it. Thus reason the case
with your own Soul, and give not rest to your self night nor day, till you are
gotten off from the World, broken off from the wil^ull practice of every known
sin, and gotten safe into Christ. Dear Cousin, I charge you by the Lord, to
observe these things; pray over them, weep over them, read them again and
again; do not pass them over as slight and ordinary things: your Soul is at
stake, it is your Salvation is concerned in them; think not I am in jest with
you. Ah Cousin, I travel in birth with you, till Christ be formed in you. Why
should you die? Oh repent and live, lay hold on eternal life, win Christ, and
you win all. O be thankful to the Lord, that now you are fatherless and
friendless, yet you have one Remembrancer to warn you to fly from the wrath to
come. God forbid that I should find you at last in the place of Torments, for
your not embracing the Godly Counsels. To conclude, in short, I charge you as a
Minister, as a Father to you, Take heed of these three things:

1. Lest the gain of the World prove the loss of your Soul: 2. Lest the snare
of evil company withdraw you from God, and so prove your final ruin. 3. Let a
lofty and a worldly heart should thrust you out of the Kingdom of Heaven.
God abhors that the proud should come near him: Oh labor, whatever you do,
for an humble heart; be little, be vile in your own eyes; seek not after great
things; be poor in Spirit; without this, Heaven will be no place for you, God
will be no friend to you. Dear Cousin, your lot is fallen, as I fear, in a
place of great wickedness, where your Soul is in much danger, where your
temptations are many, and your helps for Heaveu but few; where Godly examples
are rare, and many will entice you to sin and vanity. O! if you love me, or
love your Soul, look about you, consider your danger, fear lest you should
miscarry for ever by worldly loss and vain company, which proves to so many the
fearful cause of their eternal perdition. I can but warn you, and pray for you:
but though you have none to oversee you, remember the strict and severe eye of
God is upon you, to observe all your actions, and that he will surely bring all
your practices into his Judgment. Your Aunt, with my self, commend our dear
love to you; and I commend you to the Lord, and remain,

Your loving and careful Uncle, JOS. ALLEINE,
August, 19. 1668.
LETTER XXXVII.
Dear Cousins,
THough you are removed far from me, out of my sight, and the Seas as a great
Gulf are fixed betwixt you and me; yet my Prayers follow you, and my good
wishes for your present and everlasting welfare, like the wings of a Dove, take
speedy flight. I look upon my self, now God has removed my Brother, to be as
in the room of a Father to you, yea and of a Mother too; for I know you have
but little help from her.

My Dear Niece, my heart is careful for you; and therefore I cannot cease,
while I am in being in this World, to warn and admonish you, as my Children,
and to call upon you in the Name of the Eternal God, to awaken your selves with
all Godly fear and holy diligence, lest by any means you should come short of
the glory of God.

Let me mind you, dear Cousins, of the dangerous place your stand in, and look
about you with trembling. Methinks I see Satan watching for your Souls, as the
Dragon did for the Seed of the Woman, waiting to devour it as soon as she
should be delivered. Know you not, that you must wrestle with Principalities
and Powers? Methinks I see Temptations surrounding you, and belaguering you, as
the enemy about the Walls of the Treacherous party within you, I mean carnal
affections and corruptions, complo^tinge how to deliver up the Castle. Know you
not, that your fleshly Lusts do war against your Souls? and that your own
hearts are not true to you, but deceitful above all things? Lord, what need
have you to bestir your selves, and to fly unto Jesus! to distrust your
selves, and to trust only in him and his Righteousness! Oh work your Salvation
with ^ear and trembling: Do you ever think to escape these mighty enemies, to
conquer the power, and avoid the plots and snares of those potent adversaries,
without most painful diligence? O cry to Heaven for help; watch and pray; fear,
lest a promise being left of entering into rest, either of you should come short
of it.

My dear Neeces, you have many do watch for your souls, to devoor them; but I
doubt too few, except my self, do watch for your Souls, to save them: therefore
I look upon my self, who am now upon the matter your only Monitor, to be the
more concerned to awaken my self to your help, and to look after you, and to
watch for you, left by any means you should miscarry by the deceits and
temptations wherewith you are encompassed. I would not have you over-careful
for the things of this lise, though I commend your laudable care and diligence,
that you may not be burdensome to any man; but I commend to you a better and
more necessary care, and that is that which the Apos^le speaks of, the Virgins
care; The unmarried (says he) cares for the things of the Lord. Ah, let this
be your ear; seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and
then all these things shall be added; you have Gods sure promise for it: If the
Lord give me to live and prosper, you shall see and know, that I am not a
friend only in words to you; but however that shall be, see that you embrace
the Counsels of God from me. Oh make sure of Heaven betimes, walk humbly with
God, beware of a proud heart and a lofty spirit; abhor your selves, else God
will not be pleased with you; condemn your selves, that God may acquit you. The
leven of pride will sour the whole lump, and mar all your Profession and
Religion, and render your Persons, and Prayers, and all, an abomination to the
Lord, if it prevail in you. Oh therefore be not high minded, but fear; and by
prayer and watchfulness restrain and root up this wretched corruption of pride,
which is a sin so natural to you, that you had need to use an infinite care and
caution to keep it under.

As to my self, these may acquaint you, That I have been often at the very
gates of death: I have lost all my limbs; but prayer has redeemed me from my
extremities, and God has blessed the use of the Bath to me. Oh praise the
Lord, praise him for my sake, and give glory to the God of my Life. Love him,
honor and glorify him, whose favor and friendship has filled my Soul with
comfort, and given a resurection to my body. I can now walk alone, and feed my
self, but am altogether unable to write, which is the reason why these come to
you in another hand. Dear Cousin, you may think me too tedious; but you must
pardon me, if I err in my love and zeal for your welfare: And now I shall
trespass no more, but with my own and dear Wives love to you, I commend you to
God, and rest,

Your loving and careful uncle, JOS. ALLEINE

LETTER XXXVIII. [Do all in reference to God and his Glory.]
Dear Friend,
I Have received yours of the 19th. of September, but it came to me in the time
of my sickness, in which I was much a stranger to writing; it con^nued upon me
five months, and to this day so much weakness remains in my arms, that I am not
able to put off or on my own clothes. Your Letter was exceeding welcome to me,
not only as reviving the remembrance of our old friendship, but also, as
bringing me news of some spiritual good that you received by me, which is the
best tidings that I can receive: for what do I live for, but to be useful to
souls in my generation? I desire to know no other business than to please and
honor my God, and serve my generation in that short allowance of time that I
have here, before I go hence, and shall be seen no more. Shall I commend to you
the Lesson that I am about to learn? But why should I doubt of your acceptance,
who have so readily embraced me in all our converses?

The Lesson is, To be entirely devoted unto the Lord, that I may be able to say
after the Apostle, To me to live is Christ. I would not be serving God only for
a day in the week, or an hour or two in the day; but every day, and all the
day. I am ambitious to come up toward that of our Lord and Master, To do
always those things that please God. I plainly see, that self-seeking is
self-undoing; and that then we do promote our selves best, when we please God
most. I find, that when I have done all, if God be not pleased, I have done
nothing; and if I can but approve my self to God, my work is done: I reckon I
do not live that time I do not live unto God.

I am ^ain to cut off so many hours from my days, and so many years from my
life (so short as it is) as I have lived unto my self. I find no enemy so
dangerous as my self, and O that others might take warning by my hurt! O that I
had lived wholly unto God! then had every day and every hour that I have spent,
been found upon my account at that great day of our appearing before God: then
I had been rich indeed, in treasure laid up there, whither I am apace removing;
then I had been every day and hour adding to the heap, and increasing the
reward which God of his mere grace has promised, even to the meanest work that
is done to him, Col. 3. 24. I verily perceive I am an external loser by acting
no more as for God; for what is done to my self, is lost; but what is done for
God, is done for ever, and shall receive an everlasting reward. Verily, if
there be another world to come, and an eternal state after this short life, it
is our only wisdom to be removing, and, as it were, transplanting and
transporting what we can, from hence, into that Country to which we are
shortly to be removed, that what we are now doing, we may be reaping the fruit
of for ever more. The world think themselves wise; but I will pawn my soul upon
it, that this is the true wisdom.

Well, let us be wholly swallowed up in the concerns of Religion, and know no
other interest but Jesus Christ's. I cannot say, I have already attained; but
this is that my heart is set to learn, That in all that I do, whether sacred or
civil actions, still I may be doing but one work, and driving on one design,
That God may be pleased by me, and he glorified in me; that not only my
Praying, Preaching, Alms, etc. may be found upon my account; but even my
eating, drinking, sleeping, visits, discourses, because they are all done as
unto God. Too often do I take a wrong aim, and miss my mark; but I will tell
you what be the rules I set my self, and do strictly impose upon my self from
day to day: Never to lie down, but in the Name of God; not barely for natural
refreshment, but that a wearied servant of Christ may be recruited and fitted
to serve him better the next day. Never to rise up but with this r^solution,
Well, I will go forth this day in the Name of God, and will make Religion my
business, and spend the d^y for Eternity. Never to enter upon my calling, but
first thinking, I will do these things as unto God, because he requires these
things at my hands in the place and station he has put me into. Never to sit
down to the Table, but resolving, I will not eat merely to please my appetite,
but to strengthen my self for my Masters work. Never to make a visit, but upon
some holy design, resolving to leave something of God where I go; and in every
company to leave some good savor behind. This is that which I have been for
some time a learning, and am pressing hard after; and if I strive not to walk
by these Rules, let this Paper be a witness against me.

I am not now in my former public capacity, such things being required of me
to say and subscribe, as I could by no means yield to, without open lying and
dissembling with God and Men: yet, that I am unuseful, I cannot say; but rather
think, that possibly I may be of more use than heretofore. I thank the Lord, I
have not known what it is to want a tongue to speak, but in my sickness; nor a
people to hear; but so, as that we both, follow the things that make for peace.

I perceive you are otherwise persuaded in some things, than I am: but however,
I trust we meet in our end. Since you are in, may it be your whole study to
gain souls, and to build them up in holiness, which is with too many the least
of their cares. One duty (miserably neglected) I shall be bold to commend to
you from my own experience, and that is, the visiting your whole Flock from
house to house, and enquiring into their spiritual estates particularly, and
dealing plainly and truly with them about their conversion to God: to the
usefulness of this great work, I can set my Probatum est.

I hear you have two Parsonages: O tremble to think how many precious souls you
have to look to! and let it be seen, however others aim at the Fleece, you aim
at the Flock; and that you have indeed Curam animarum.

You see how free I am with you; but I know your candor.

I rejoice in your happy Yoke Fellow: salute her from your old Friend, and
accept the unfeigned respects of him who is, Sir,

Your real and faithful Friend; JOS. ALLEINE.

LETTER. XXXIX. PRISON COMFORTS. [To a Minister in Prison.]
worthy Sir,
I Owe you a Letter, and more than a Letter, for your particular respects to
me, your brotherly sympathy, your multiplied and earnest prayers, your
tenderness of my health, your welcome Jewel in M. Ruths Letters, from which I
trust my soul and others may reap no small benefit. Much more do I owe you for
your common respects to the people of my desires; and not only to them, but to
the whole Church of God; and in all whose concernments, I see, you are
concerned. Your indefatigable labors with us, we do with all thankfulness
accept, as the undoubted evidence of your great love: For all which may he
requi^e you, who will shortly say, Inasmuch as thou did it unto the least of
these my Brethren, thou did it unto me.

It was but a little after my release from my own confinement, but I heard of
yours; and now write to you, as one that has taken a higher degree than ever,
and more truly honorable, being commenced Prisoner of Christ. I was once
affected with the Picture of a devout man, to whom a voice came down from
Heaven, saying, Quid vis fieri pro te, To which he answered, Nihil domine nisi
pati ac contemni pro^e. Undoubtedly, Sir, it is our real glory to be throughout
conformed to Jesus Christ, not only in his sanctity, but in his sufferings.
Paul counted all things but dung for this, that he might win Christ, etc. and
know the fellowship of his sufferings, and be made conformable to his death. I
doubt not but your consolations in Christ do much more then superabound in all
your tribulations for him: Yet let me add this one Cordial, That now you have a
whole shoal of Promises come in to you, which you had not before; I mean, all
the Promises to suffering Saints, in which they have not so immediate, but only
a remoter right, unless in a suffering state: And doubtless he has gotten
well, that has gotten such a number of exceeding great and precious Promises.
If the men of the world do so rejoice when such or such an Estate is fallen to
them? should not you much more, that have such a Treasure of Promises fallen to
you?

I can tell you little good of my self; but this I can tell you, That the
Primises of God were never so sweet in this world to me, as in and since my
imprisoned state. Oh the bottomless riches of the Covenant of Grace! It shames
me that I have let such a Treasure lie by so long, and have made so little use
of it. Never did my soul know the Heaven of a Believers life, till I learnt to
live a life of praise; and by more frequent consideration to set home the
unspeakable riches of the Divine Promises, to which, I trust, through grace I
am made an heir. I verily perceive, that all our work were done at once, if we
could but prevail with our selves and others to live like Believers; to tell
all the world by our selves and others to live like Believers; to tell all the
world by our course and carriage, that there is such pleasantness in Christ's
wars, such beauty in holiness, such reward to obedience, as we profess to
believe. May ours and our peoples conversations but preach this aloud to the
world, that there is a reality in what God has promised; that Heaven is worth
the venturing for; that the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us!

Verily, Sir, it is but a very little while that Prisons shall hold us, or that
we shall dwell in dirty flesh. Porphyry tells us of Photinus, that he was
ashamed to see himself in the body; to see a Divine and immortal soul in a
Prison of flesh, (for so they held the body to be;) but the worst shackles are
those of sin. Well, they must shortly off all together; our Lord does not long
intend us for this lower Region: Surely he is gone to prepare a place for us:
Doubtless it is so; yea, and he will come again, and receive us to himself,
that where he is, we may be also. And what have we to do, but to believe, and
wait, and love, and long, and look out for his coming, in which is all our
hope? 'Twill be time enough for us to be preferred then. We know before hand
who shall then be uppermost. Our Lord has showed us where our place shall be,
even at his own right hand; and what he will say to us, Come ye Blessed, etc.
Surely we shall stand in his Judgment: He has promised to stand our Friend:
Let us look for the joyful day: As sure as there is a God, this day will come,
and then it shall go well with us. What if Bonds and Banishments abide us for a
season? This is nothing but what our Lord has told us, The ^ld shall rejoice,
but ye shall weep and lament: You shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be
tu^ned into joy. Oh how reviving are his words! I will see you again, and your
heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes away from you.

If that miserable wretch leapt cheerfully off the Ladder, saying, I shall be a
Queen in Hell: With that joy should we do and suffer for God, who have his
Truth in pawn, that we shall be Crowned in Heaven? Verily, they are wonderful
Preparations that are making for us: The Lord prepare us ap^e, and make us meet
to be Partakers. It was the highest Commendation that ever that worthy R.
Baxter received, which fell from the Pen of his scoffing Adversary Tilenus, who
says of him, T^tum Puritanismum totus spirat. Oh that this may be true of us
and ours.

Let your true Yoke Fellow, and my Christian Friends with you in the Bonds of
the Gospel, have my hearty Commendations: And these Counsels, I pray You, give
them from me, for the improving of their present state.

1. To habituate themselves, both as to their thoughts and discourses, more
thoroughly than ever unto Holiness. Brethren, I would teach you the Lesson that
I resolve to learn with you, That your minds and tongues may as naturally run
on the things of Heaven, as others on the things of this World. Why should it
not be thus? I am sure God and heaven do as well deserve to be thought on, and
talked of by us, as fro^h and vanity can deserve of the World. There are many
that have in a great measure learnt this Lesson, and why should not we be some
of them? What if it be hard at first? Every thing is so to a beginner. Besides,
is not ours a Religion of self denial? Further, if we do but force our selves a
while to holy Thoughts, and Heavenly Discourse, it will ^row habitual to us,
and then it will be most natural, familiar, and Heavenly sweet. Oh what gainers
will you be, if you do but learn this Lesson?

Verily, it is the shame of Religion, that Christians are so unlike themselves,
unless upon their knees. Sirs, our lives and language should tell the world
what we are, and whether we are going. Christians, let little things content
you in the world, but aspire after great things in the grace of God. Many real
Christians do little think what high frames of holiness they might grow up to,
even in this life, with pains and diligence. Sirs, be you men of great designs:
think it not enough if you have wherewith to bear your charges to Heaven; but
aspire with an holy ambition to be great in the Court of Heaven, favorites of
the most High, of tall growth, great experience, singular communion, that you
may burn and shine in your place, and convince the world; that you may savor
of Heaven where ever you come, and that there may be an even-spun thread of
Holiness running through your whole course. It Is the disgrace of Profession,
that there is so little difference to be seen in the ordinary conversation of
Believers from other men: It is not a shame, that when we are in company with
others, this should be all the difference that is to be seen, only that we will
not curse and swear, as do the worst of men? Christians, if you will honor the
Gospel, bring forth your Religion out of your Closets (the world cannot see what
you do there) into your Shops, Trades, Visits, etc and exemplify the rules of
Religion in the management of all your Relations, and in your ordinary
converse. Let there be no place or company that you come into, in which you do
not drop something of God: this will be the glory of Religion, and we shall
never convince the world till we come to this. May you come my Brethren, out of
your Prisons with your faces shining, having your minds seasoned, and your
tongues tipped with holiness: may your mouths be as a Well of Life, from whence
may flow the holy Streams of edifying discourse: may you ever remember, as you
are sitting in your houses, going by the way, lying down, rising up, what the
Lord does then require of you, Deuteronomy. 6. 7.

2. To improve their present retirements from the World, for the settling of
their spiritual Estates. It Is a common complaint amongst Christians, that they
want assurance. Oh, if any of you that wanted assurance when you came to
Prison, may carry that blessing our, what hap^y gainers would you be! Now you
are called more than ever to self-searching. Now bring your Graces to the
Touchstone. Be much in self observation. See what your hearts do with most love
and delight, go out unto: what are your greatest hopes, and your chief designs.
See whether God's Intrest be uppermost in you: prove this, and prove all. Rest
not in probable hopes. Think not that is enough that you can say, you hope it is
well. God looks for extraordinary dispensation. Be restless till you can say,
that you know it is well? that you know you are passed from death to life.

Think not that this is a privilege that only a few may expect. Observe but
these three things: 1. To acquaint your selves thoroughly with the condition of
Life, and take heed of laying the marks of Salvation either too high or too
low. 2. To be much in observing the frame, and bent, and workings of your own
hearts. 3. To universally conscientious, and to be constant in even and close
walkings,
and then I doubt not but you will grow up speedily to a settled assurance, and
know and feel that peace of God that passes all understanding: and this will
be somewhat worth your carrying out of Prison.

But I return to your self. But what shall I say? I have more need to receive
from you, than ability to give; only I will tell you my wishes for you: I wish
that your body may prosper, as your soul also prospers. I wish, that you may
see the travel of your Soul; that you may find your people thriving under your
hands iu all manner of holy conversation and godliness, that whosoever
converses with them, may see and hear by them, that God is in them of a Truth.
I wish your enlargement from your bonds, and your enlargement in them: that
your Prison may be but the Lanthorn through which your Graces, Experiences,
Communion, and Prisonartainments, may shine most brightly to all beholders. I
wish your Prison may be a Paradise of Peace, and a Patmos of Divine
discoveries. Lord Jesus set to thy Amen. I am, Sir,

Your unworthy Brother and Companion in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus, JO^.
ALLEINE.
Jan. 10. 1664.
LETTER. XL. [Directions to the Ministers of Somersetshire and Wiltshire, for
the instructing of Families by way of Catechizing.]
Sir,
THis Letter comes to you, like the men of Macedonia to Paul, crying to you,
Come and help us. O how insufficient do we find our selves for the praises of
God! what reason have we to call upon our selves, and to call upon all our
Friends! and yet we foresee that all will be too little a Sacrifice at last,
and to slender a return to the most High God, God, who has made us such
wonders of Mercy, and such signal instances of his Divine Power and rich Grace.
You are not ignorant of our Estate, how the Sentence of death had passed upon
us; how our flesh and our hearts failed, and friends an Physicians gave up
their hopes: but God, that raised the Dead, was pleased to make us the
Monuments of his wondrous mercy. O that the same God would make us the special
instruments of his praise and glory. Of a Truth Sir, we perceive our hearts are
too little, our Tongues are too short, our expressions are too low, either to
conceive or utter what we owe to the great God. O help! help! bless the Lord, O
our souls: bless the Lord, O our friends: O that all that have wrestled with
God for us, might join hand in hand to make some suitable returns to the God of
our lives, and may bring in every one his Sacrifice, and all contribute to make
one common stock of Praises, that many thanksgivings may abound to God on our
behalfs. O what has Prayer done for us! while we live we must honor Prayer,
and admire the power of Prayer, we owe our limbs and our lives to prayer. O
that a goodly crop of praise may grow up unto God as a return for his Mercies:
that the seed of prayers, and showers of tears, may procure sheaves of joy, and
songs of deliverance.

But O what shall we render? wherewithal shall we come before the Lord, or bow
our selves to the most high God? O where shall we find a fitting sacrifice?
Verily we will give our selves and our all to him. But alas, what are we, and
what is this little that we call our All? Therefore have we found in our hearts
to write to you and others, that we might excite you to the Divine praises with
us. And O that the Lord might be loved the better, and glorified the more for
our sakes: Will you tell us wherein we may show our love to him? wherein we may
best please and serve him? O that you would! herein assuredly you would most
highly gratify us. O that we might do some singular thing for God; for
certainly they are not common things that he has done for us. We pray you call
upon those that fear the Lord, to help us in celebrating his loving kindness. O
how it pleases our very hearts to think that God should be loved and honored
the better for us: that we may be instruments, if it be but for the blowing up
of one flash, nay, the kindling of one spark of Divine love in the heart of his
Children toward him! Sir, you cannot pleasure us in any thing so much as in
th^s, to love and admire God, and spread his praise more and more; that what is
wanting through our weakness, may be made up in your abundance. But we have
need to crave your pardon for our length; but the love of Christ constrains
us, and we hope you will pass by an error of love.

While we have been devising what to do for our God, we thought we could no way
better him, than by providing such as you are to set up his great Name with us.
We love and honor you, not only as you are a Member, but a Minister of Christ
Jesus our Lord, and therefore deserve to be doubly dear unto us: And because we
could think of no more pleasing a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, we have stirred up
our selves and friends with us, to send to you a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, this poor token of love, which though but small, yet we trust will be
a sweet savor unto God, and will be accepted with you, being our two Mites
cast into God's Treasury. But look not upon your self as obliged to us hereby:
but put it upon the account of Christ, to whose precious Name we dedicate, and
from whom (although he be so much already before hand with us, yet) we expect a
recompense at the Resurrection of the Just.

And being further desirous to promote the work of God in our low and slender
capacities, we have been bold to provoke your self, with other our Fathers and
Brethren in the Ministry, to set about that necessary and much neglected work
of Catechizing; not a little pleasing our selves in the sweet hope, that by
your means we may be instrumental to spread the sweet savor of the knowledge
of our God, in every place: and being well persuaded of your readiness to
forward so blessed a work, we have stirred up our selves and our friends to
expend a considerable sum of money to furnish Ministers with Catechisms, a
hundred whereof we have sent unto you, beseeching you to use your best prudence
and utmost diligence for the spreading of them, and for others improvement by
them, that our labor and charge in so good a work, prove not at last of no
effect.

Sir, we shall humbly propose unto you, but not impose upon you. But let us be
bold with you in Christ, to lay our requests before you as touching this
concernment, they being indeed what judicious friends and brethren have thought
fit to propound.

1. That that people be publicly and privately instructed about the high
necessity and great usefulness of this duty.

2. That the Catechisms be freely given to all that will promise to use them.

3. That you would be pleased to acquaint your self with all the Schools that
are within your Verge; and that you would do your utmost to engage the Teachers
thereof to teach their Scholars this Catechism; and that you would furnish all
their Scholars that are capable and willing to learn.

4. That you will endeavor from house to house to engage the Master or
Mistress of every Family, for the forwardsng of this work.

5. That you will appoint set-times wherein to take an account of the
proficiency of all such as have promised to learn; and that, if it may be, they
may be engaged to learn weekly a proportion, according to their Capacities.

6. That you would favor us so far, as to let us know as speedily as you may,
of the receipt of these lines; and, if we may presume so far upon you, we pray
you to indulge us some assurance under your hand, that you will to your power
promote this happy design, and that by our Lady Day next you will acquaint Mr.
Bernard what progress is made.

Sir, our souls will even travel in Birth for the success of this undertaking;
and therefore we request you for the love of God, and by the respect which we
are persuaded you bare to us, that you will labor to comfort and encourage us
in our endeavors for God, which you can no way in the World do so well, as by
letting us see, that there is some blessed fruit of our cost and pains; and
that we have not run in vain, nor labored in vain. If there be any of these
Catechisms remaining in your hands that you cannot dispose of by our Lady Day,
be pleased to send them to Mr. Bernard, or to Mr. Rositer in Taunton. If you
should need any more, give us speedy notice, and you shall not fail to be
furnished with what number you desire.

Thus upon the bended knees of our thankful souls, we commend our poor
sacrifices, together with your self, to the eternal God, and remain,

Christ's devoted Servants, and your Friends, JOS. BERNARD. and JOS. ALLEINE.

FINIS.

