ALLEGIANCE AND PREROGATIVE Considered in a Letter from a GENTLEMAN In the
Country to his FRIEND Upon his being Chosen a MEMBER of the Meeting of STATES
IN SCOTLAND.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.

ALLEGIANCE AND PREROGATIVE Considered in a Letter from a GENTLEMAN In the
Country to his FRIEND Upon his being Chosen a MEMBER of the Meeting of STATES
IN SCOTLAND.
SIR,
I Received Yours, wherein you tell me you are chosen a Member of the Ensueing
Meeting of the States of this Kingdom* You desire my Opinion, What should be
their behavior toward K. James the 7th. how far we are now tied by our
Allegiance, what Limits ought to beset to the Prerogative, etc. Which you say
are at present, the great Subjects of Discourse.

I doubt not, since these things are so much talked of by every Body, and the
Itch of Writing is so Universal, but you will see several things on these Heads
from much Abler Pens: And from such who not only are better qualified for the
undertaking, but also by hearing and perhaps, (being personally present,) by
seeing the practices and methods of England in the same case, are better
furnished with helps for the performance; So that any thing I can say to you
will be superfluous.

Yet in obedience to your desire, and to testify my sincere and unbiassed
Affection to the good of my Country, and withal to convince you, that it is
not from any fond Principle of Bigoted Loyalty, nor from a stupid
unconcern'dness in the great Concerns of the Nation, that I decline coming to
Town at this time, when as you say, it is expected that the greatest part of
the Gentry will be present during this Assembly of the States: I shall freely
give you my rude thoughts of what appears to me, to be the proper Work and
necessary duty of this Meeting, in the present extraordinary Conjuncture, and
leave it to you to make what use thereof you shall think fit.

As to the first point you mention, tho you know I am neither Divine nor
Casuist, yet I must say that I think it is very evident to any thinking man,
That Heaven it self has very fully loosed the Nation from their Allegiance, and
by remarkable providence granted a clear Dispensation from their Oaths to K.
James the 7th. We need not dispute what was the genuine sense of these Oaths,
whether they allowed this implicit Reservation, That if the King should
subvert the Foundations of our Government, Our Laws, Religion, Liberties and
Properties; The People should in that case be free, to assert and assume their
Native Rights: Neither need we enter upon the Invidious task of Examining how
far the King advanced in these unjust Practices and Designs. Heaven it self, I
say, seems most convincingly to have superseeded all such Debates and
Enquiries, and to have laid it upon this Meeting of the States to settle and
establish just and solid Foundations for the Government of the Nation in all
time coming.

It Is acknowledged by all Christians, that no Oath can bind, when either their
Superveens a Physical Impossibility of performing it; Or when the performance
becomes morally unlawful. And every considering Man must acknowledge that
Providence has cast both these Impediments in the way of this Assembly, to
divert them from their Allegiance to K. James. For now England has Dethroned
him, and their Action is applauded, (as proceeding upon just and valid grounds,
most of which are common to us with them) by the greatest part of this Nation;
So that it is obvious to every one, that it would be Impossible for this
Assembly of our States to maintain and support him, in the exercise of his
Royal Dignity here, against the unquestionable Attempts, that we must expect
Englands Jealousies of such an irritated Neighbor, would provoke them to set
about for his overthrow. And these Attempts could not miss of Success, having,
as unquestionably, a great, If not the far greatest part of this Nation for
their Abettors. Thus what a Scene of Blood, War and Confusion should these
Nations become? And what a feeble distracted Government might we expect in such
Circumstances?

But if any shall plead that there is no Physical Impossibility in the case, and
that the Histories of past Ages teach us, that this Nation, when unanimous in
their Allegiance may maintain their King against all the Efforts of England;
Especially since we may now expect more Assistance then ever from our old
Allies the French. Yet this at least, I am sure, every Protestant must consess
is moral^y unlawful for him to concur in; Since such a Conjunction were
utterly inconsistent with his indispensible Moral Duty of preserving, or at
least doing nothing that evidently tends to the ruin of the true Reformed
Religion. Now any man that is capable of the least serious Reflection upon the
present state of Affairs, must plainly see that the Interest of His present
Majesty of England and his party, are so intervoven with that of the Reformed
Religion, that the one cannot suffer loss or overthrow without the notable
damage or apparent ruin of the other, not only in this Island, but all
Christendom over. He must also see no less clearly, that it were a mere dream
to imagine it possible to support and preserve K. James in his power here,
without wronging the K. of England and his Interest. For to be sure, either of
them would employ his whole Art and might for the others ruin; Such different
Interests (beside the particular quarrels of the late Revolution) being now
altogether incompatible in this Island. Neither is it to be thought that K.
James would value this Crown further then that he might thereby be enabled to
recover that of England

Thus it is plain that we can never fancy to preferve K. James's power here,
without resolving to assist and second him in his attempts; to the great
prejudice, if not the Total Ruin (so far as men are able) of the Reformed
Religion over all Europe. But I am persuaded no Protestant of Common Sense, can
ever think his Allegiance will warrant or in the least Justify him in any such
practice. For whatever has been said to Evince that Allegiance did bind
Subjects to Passive Obedience, tho secrued to the highest pitch: Yet none was
ever so impudent as to assert that it obliged them to an Active concurrence
with their King, in methods directly tending to the Suppression or Extirpation
of the true Religion. Here Christians of all Persuasions will own. That it is
better to obey God then Man.

Wherefore it being thus Irrefragably evident that God in his wise Over Ruling
Providence, has ordered things so, that it is both Impossible for this Meeting
of the States to preserve the Crown to K. James, or at least not to be
undertaken without exposing this Nation to all the lamentable evils, that a
weak, unlettled Government, constant Wars and confusions can bring upon it;
And that it is also unlawful for us Protestants, to aim at it; since he cannot
now be Re established but upon the Ruins of the whole Reformed Interest in
Christendom; Let all therefore awfully observe the hand of GOD; and cheerfully
submit to his will, and without attempting to strugle against Heaven, leave K.
James to the disposal of Providence. Let every Man in his Station contribute,
what in him lies, to re^reive our Religion and Laws from the grievous abuses
they have suffered, and to secure them to us and our Posterity; from the like
hereafter, and from falling under the fatal Dangers from which GOD has been
pleased so signally to rescue them: Neither let this Assembly of Estates look
back, as if they were under any tie to withhold them from advancing vigorously,
in settling the Government of this Nation, now under Anarchy, a State in which
it cannot subsist. Nor let any thoughts of the Right of Succession stop their
procedure, For besides that there can be no Heir to a living Man; the former
Arguments are as part against the Prince of Wales, true or Supposititious as
against King James the 7. But now when God has so wonderfully put this
opportunity in their hands, let them be as honest and upright hearted Patriots,
set themselves seriously to consider, what is fit to be done, for settling a
Government in this Nation upon just and solid Foundations; whereby the true
Religion and public Peace may be established and secured, the just property
and Liberties of the Subject clearly asserted, and the high-stretched
Prerogative of the Crown brought to an equal frame.

I am persuaded, that as it is the Genius, so it is the Interest of this Nation
to have a Monarchy still established, for any other Form must unavoidably evert
the whole bulk of our Laws and Customs, which might be of fatal Consequence:
Nor could any other Model be long lived here considering the natural bent of
Scotsmen to this. Besides since experience has discovered to us the worst
diseases, that can attend Monarchy, I think if we be wise, we may now apply
such Remedies, as may secure us, for the future, against them; And so we may be
safer under it, then any other kind of Government, the inconvenieneies whereof
(in this Nation at least) we can only discover by a tract of time.

As to the choice of a Monarch, I think the best method is, to follow the
example England has set us. For besides the just and solid Reasons that
determined their choice, which are all as pregnant and applicable to us; We
have further this cogent Reason, that England having already declared the
Prince of Orange their King, out of a due sense of the Great Deliverance he has
been Instrumental in working for them; We must do the same, unless we will
declare our selves the most ingrate of Mankind, since we are delivered from a
far greater Bondage then ever England felt: And unless we will resolve to break
with England and their King, which how fatal it might soon prove, every Body
can see, more then is fit for the Honor of this Nation to express. This I
shall only say, that it were certainly very unkind to the Reformed Religion, to
divert, and weaken by such a breach, the K. of Englands hands, who is now,
under GOD, the chief support of it.

But seeing the Fondness of this Nation, for the Restoration of K. Charles the
Second, did hurry them from one extreme to another; from having abandoned the
King and Royal Family, to give too much; and lay the Foundations of an
unbounded Prerogative; upon which an Aspiring Court (designing to Copy after
the Perfidous Cruel H^ctor of Europe) finding still unhappily amongst this
poor, Proud; Self seeking People, fit Tools for their service; have reared up
an Uncontrolable, Despotick, Absolute Power in the King; and that by repeated
Laws, but more by a constant Series of Arbitrary practices; Whereby they have
brought us into Absolute Bondage, and laid a Yoke upon us that neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear.

It therefore nearly concerns and highly becomes the Wisdom of the States of
the Kingdom; Yea it is their Duty to the Nation, whom they Represent, and what
they owe to their posterity in After-Ages; before they give the Crown out of
their hands, to smooth and purge it of every thing that may be hard and
grievous to the People; And to leave it only Adorned, with such Jewels, as can
only be firm and shining, when by Justice and Mercy they attract the Peoples
hearts; but will prove brittle and dim when put to gall their Necks.

I would therefore humbly offer to the Consideration of this Ensueing Meeting,
some things, that to me seem necessary and incumbent for them to do, for
retrieving this Nation from the intolerable Thraldom we have been brought
under; And for vindicating and asserting the Peoples Just Right and Freedom,
without robbing the Crown of any Jewel, that is fit for the Hononr of a King,
who is to Rule by Law; Or without diminishing any part of the Kingly Power,
that is necessary for enabling out Kings, to perform the great duties of their
High Charge.

Let our Kings be Vested with Power to be Nursing Fathers to the Church, to be
Patres Patriae, vigorous Asterters and Defenders of the Honor and Well of the
Nation, against Attempts from Abroad, or Seditions at Home; Let them have Power
to be Terrors to Evil doers, and Encouragers of these that do Well; Let them
have Power to preserve to all their Subjects, their Respective Properties and
Liberties from all Insolence and Injustice; to see all our Laws vigorously,
Executed and all Transgressors impartially punished. These are the only true
Jewels of the Crown, and every beyond this, that is fixed to it ought to be
cleansed and wiped off, as noisome dust and rust, that will thoroughly corrupt
it. It is then the unquestiouable Duty of this Meeting of the States, to cut
off from the Crown, all such Excressences as are useless to a Just King, and to
our sad experience, are Pernicious and of most dangerous consequence to the
People.

First, Then, it has been often Asserted and maintained, That the King derives
his Crown and Dignity immediately from GOD, that the People do not, nor cannot
give any Right or Title to it; That all power and Authority is Originally and
Eminently Inherent in the Crown, and that therefore the Parliament can give no
Prerogative to the King. This has been long Current Coin at Court, and amongst
Court parasites, and of late has had the boldness to appear Barefaced in our
Parliaments, where it seems to have given rise to yea dictated some of our Acts
about the prerogative. But it is obvious, that this is a Mother Evil, and may
be broody of all the mischiefs that can be dreaded from Arbitrary Power or
Tyranny; For if this Maxim hold good, what security for our Religion, Laws,
Property, or any thing that is dear to Free men or Christians? Sure none, but
the Princes pleasure. Why then should we complain of the late Court style,
which makes the Prerogative Royal, and a Supreme Absolute Power to be obeyed
without Reserve, to signify the same thing! Me thinks the Style is very Just
and Congtuous and goes very well on the Foot of this Maxim. Wherefore, as we
would deliver our selves and our Posterity from the evident hazard of Absolute
Slavery, this Pernicious Principle must be Absolutely Eradicated. It will be
fit the States seriously revise all our Acts about the Prerogative, and
wherever any thing is found to look this way, it must either be explained to a
harmless meaning, or if it will not bear a Tolerable sense, it must be
cancelled; For a little Leven may sour the whole Lump.

It will also be necessary, that the Asserting of this Principle by Word or
Writ, be declared an High-Crime, against the very nature and Constitution of
our Government, punishable as Treason and unpardonable* It has taken deep root,
and will need a severe steady hand over it, to keep it from springing up again
in its season, from which God deliver us.

2. The late assumed Prerngative of disabling, Suspending or Dispensing with
standing Laws, must be declared Illegal, and against the Constitution of a free
Nation. I need not insist to lay open the mischief of such a power; all the
World sees it, and even some of those who asserted it, now cry shame on it, it is
so palpably a Gangrene that might overspread, eat out or enervate all the
strength and Life of our whole Laws. I shall only say, it will be fit to
declare that all Judges or others, to whom the Execution of the Law is
committed, shall upon their highest Peril be obliged, to put the Laws of the
Nation to due Execution, notwithstanding of any Command, Mandate, or
Dispensation they may get to the contrary, from any person or persons
whatsoever.

3. I humbly conceive it will be much the Nations advantage, if the Power of
Pardoning be restrained, as to Assertors or Propagators of any Principles
against the Freedom of the Nation and Parliaments, in favor of any pretended
Prerogative. As also, as to all Judges, Officers or Ministers of State and
others having the King's Commission, for Malversing in their respective
Offices. Because if ever it be the ill-fate of this Nation, to come under a
Designing and Aspiring Prince, so long as he has the Power of Pardoning such,
he will never want Instruments to set up and establish his Prerogative as high
as ever: Neither will he want Judges and others, who will palpably pervert
Justice, wrest and trample on our Laws and Freedom, and with all their Might
Sacrifice them and us to his Ambition, or other ill Designs. And I appeal to
every Man, that will make but any Reflection on our late Government, if he is
not convinced, that many who served it, durst never have made such steps as
they did, if they had not rested secure on that Pillow; That however Criminal
they became, by such measures, They being for the Kings service, could get his
Remission on demand; Since there is, and will ever be a perverse Crew of ill
men, whom neither Honor nor Conscience can bind, to be Faithful and Just to
their Country; but who still upon any hopes of Impunity, will be. Animated to
say and do all the mischief they can, when it is accep^able to the Princc. Let
the Terror of severe Laws be set before them, to Overawe them and strip them
of all hopes of Impunity by a Princes Favor. Such a Limitation will not be
uneasy, to a just and good Prince, and is Absolutely necessary for our safety
under an ill one.

4. It must be declared illegal, and not in the Kings power, to constitute any
Judge or Judicature, Ecclesiastic, Civil or Criminal, except such as are
Authorized by the Laws of the Nation. As also that it is Illegal for the King
to give wa^rand to any Judge to proceed otherwise in Judgment, then by the
Forms and Rules; the Law and Practice of the Kingdom has set, for the several
Judicatures and Cases therein cognoscible, and that all who accept and proceed,
conform to any such commissions or Warrands shall be severely punished.

The experience of the Grievous oppressions the Western, Southern, and some
other shires of this Kingdom, have suffered, and the much Blood that has been
shed in them very summarly (to say no worse) by virtue of such Commissions and
Proceedings, will I am confident Evince the necessity of this. For certainly so
long as such a power is left to the Crown no Man or Party can reckon
themselves secure of their Liberties or Estates, no not of their very Lives
longer, then they escape being Obnoxious to the Court, for then packt Judges
and Arbitrary Forms and Rules of proceeding, may make sharp Work, and havoc
enough, I confess I have often been surprised to see several Sober and Rational
men satisfied with, and Applaud such methods when used against these, they
wished to see undone. For being blinded with a Passion to have such a party
Ruined, they did not consider that if the Cannon were turned against
themselves, they might soon find the fatal Effects of such methods, and be
thereby summarly exposed to some severe punishment in their Bodies or Goods, or
perhaps both without hopes of Reddress. So it is every Man's Interest that
every Subject have a Fair and Legal Trial, and that all his concerns be Judged
by the ordinary Judges; and conform to the known Laws and Practice of the
Realm. And that any such power be quite exploded, for which there can be no
pretense, unless you will grant the King a Prerogative above all Laws.

Perhaps it will be alleged that such Commissions have been very useful in our
High-Lands and Borders, and that it is impossible to bring the Thieves there to
condign punishment, or prevent their ruining these Countries, unless it be
allowed that they be Judged without the Ordinary Rules and Forms of Law. I
humbly think it may be worth the serious consideration of our first Parliament
to give their special Orders and Instructions for this case. But by no means,
on this account, ought the least twigg of any such Transcendant Power above the
Laws be left to the King. For if it should be allowed, That the King by an
Inherent power in the Crown may by his Commission warrant the Judging of
Thieves, without observing the Ordinary Law in the Nation: Why may he not, by
the same Inberent power? give such Commissions for trying all alleged Guilty
of every kind of Treason, or other Crimes and Transgressions of any Penal Laws?
Then, pray, what security has any Subject of a Legal Trial for any guilt he man
be charged with? Or what avails the Laws and Judicatures established for the
safety of the Innocent, as well as the Punishment of the Guilty.

5. It will be fit it be declared; That all the Ministers of State, Lords of
Session and Justiciary, and other Inferior Judges, who receive their
Commissions from the King, shall always get them, ad Vitam aut Culpam: and not
Durante Beneplacito. For when Men hold these places at pleasure, it is
certainly a great temptation to them who are not of a very firm Honesty, to
comply with any Designs of the Court, and humors of the present chief
Favorites. And when an honest Man stands his ground, and refuses such a
Servile Compliance against his Honor and Conscience, Then (as we have seen) he
is presently to be turned out and some pliable Tool (that will receive any
Impressions from these hands) put in his place; and so our Judicatures, filled
with Men who will give themselves up to a blind Obedience to the Dictates from
Court. And what Justice can the Nation expect from such Judges? I do not say,
the abolishing Commissions Durante Beneplacito will ascertain us of Just
Judges: But, to be sure, it will free them, whom we shall have, from many
Temptations to be unjust, and secure to us more firmly these that are just and
honest: So it is well worth the while. There is one thing I cannot pass about
our Judges, tho it be not hujus loci. I think it would be much our interest to
have Crimen Ambitus in force amongst us; as to Session and Justiciarie
especially. Many wise People have thought that a Man's sueing and Soliciting
for such Offices, was a just Ground to make him Suspected, as unworthy of the
Trust. This is certain, if such Methods were strictly discharged and every one,
at his admission to these Offices, oblidged to purge himself of them; we might
justly expect, they should go more by Merit, then they can do while men are
allowed to Brigue and Intrigue for them. For commonly Cunning and False Men are
most Assiduous, and Dexterous at Insinuating into a Court.

6. I think the Kings Ecclesiastic Supremacy, as it stands now Asserted by
Acts of Parliament ought to be Abrogated. I will not enter on the debate, what
power is allowable to a Christian Magistrate in or about Eccl^siastical
Matters: but leaving this as unnecessary to be discussed here; I shall prove
the Assertion from these two considerations, first if there is any such
Supremacy allowable in a Christian Nation to any Civil persons or Judicature,
it cannot with safety be trusted but where the Legislative power is Lodged.
2dly. It appears uncharitable and unchristian to enact, or leave in Force any
Laws Declaratorie of such a Supremacy.

First, Then consider that by this Supremacy, the King has Power to turn off
any Churchman Summary, without any Process, (of this we have seen several
instances) he has also Power thereby at pleasure, to Crush any set of Clergy
or Church Government he thinks uneasy to him, and advance any Party or Model,
he hopes to be better served by. He has by this Supremacy likewise Power (if
not in express terms, yet by very natural Consequence,) to Suppress all
Assemblies, Convocations of the Clergy, Synods, Presbyteries, Sessions, or any
other meetings of Churchmen necessary or convenient, for preserving Order in
the Church. From consideration of these things, it is evident and clear as Sun
shine; That if such a Supremacy be allowed to our Kings, then they shall have
Power to introduce Corruptions in our Religion by a Corrupt Clergy, to raise
constant Schisms in our Church, to nourish and Foment a Spirit of Animositie
and Persecution by one party of Clergy against another, to the great reproach
of our Religion, and danger of our State (as past experience may teach us)
finally they shall have power to dissolve and unhing our Church, by depriving
Her of all means necessary, for establishing and preserving of Order and
Discipline without which no Society can subsist. And surely, these things
cannot happen in a Christian Nation without bringing deadly Convulsions upon
the Civil State. Now I am confident that after very little reflection on the
whole, you and every Rational Man will Anticipate me in the Inference, and
conclude that such a Supremacy is of the last Importance, both to the Religion
and Civil Interest of the whole Nation, and not to be trusted to any, but
reserved to King and Parliament; if it is allowable to any Civil Power.

Secondly, That it is Uncharitable, to enact any Laws Declaratorie of such a
Supremacy, will evidently appear from this, that it gives great scandal to
good Protestants, and p^aceable Subjects, and is no ways necessary. Surely,
then it is very unbecoming Christian Charity and Moderation to give great
Offense, and lay a stumbling block before such, Officiously and Needlessly. Now
all the World knows this Supremacy has been a st^ne of stumbling both to Jew
and Gentile, (if I may so speak) for not only the Presbyterians have still
declaimed against it, as an Antichristian inchroachment upon Christ's
prerogative; but many Episcopal have judged it an Invasion and Diminution of
the intrinsic power, consigned by CHRIST to his Church; whereupon several
minent amongst that Clergy resused our Test. Thus as the Offensive Nature of
such Laws is evident; So every considering Man must acknowledge, That they are
useless, because all Laws about Church Government should only be founded on
these Grounds; That, What is thereby enjoined is agreeable to the Word of GOD,
most consonant to the practice of the purest Churches, and most proper and
conducing for the Advancement of Truth, Piety and good Order in this Church.
Now on these Reasons, only let every thing in Relation to the P^licy of the
Church be Enacted in Parliament, without pretending or Declaring by any Act,
what power they have in such Matters. Thus I am suit, King and Parliament may
do their Duty in this Matter, from time to time, and a great Deal, if not All
the Offense would be removed. For it cannot be denied, That, the Legislative
power being in them, what Form of Government they apply their civil Sanction
to, it becomes the Legal Government of the Nation; Which is all needs be
claimed, and their meddling in such Matters cannot be quarrelled, since all
Protestants, do not only approve, the Parliaments Ratifying of our very
Confession of Faith, but ordinarily plead that thereby we have greater
privileges and right for defense of it, than any principle of Religion it self
gives us. The only hazard is, that they may Err in their choice, but I know no
Remedy for this, (unless we go to Rome for Infallibility, and I fear we should
loose our Labor) except, That no such Laws be imposed Rigorously, to be owned
by all, but a reasonable Toleration allowed to peaceable Dissenters: Seeing
then there is no use for such Declaratory Laws of an Ecelesiastick Supremacy;
Were it not very uncharitable to keep them on foot, for a snare and for ginn to
so many of our Christian Brethren of the same Religion. I may add further, it
were very Dangerous to the public peace, for certainly from this Fountain many
of Our intestine commotions have sprung, and these streams are not yet dried up.

7. And Lastly, Having already far exceeded the due bounds of a Letter, and the
brevitie I designed; I shall Crowd all that occures to me further about the
Prerogative into one Article. I think it necessary the Convention take to their
serious consideration, The Kings sole power of Disposal of Trade, his power of
setting Valuation on current Money, his power of the Militia, of Peace and
War, and raising the Nation in Arms; as they are declared in the respective
Acts thereanent: As also the Practice of the Kings establishing Instructions of
War, and thereby exempting Soldiers from the ordinary Laws and Judicatures.
We have seen and felt grievous abuses in the Nation from all these, as I could
Instance, but that I haste to a close; and it is enough to my purpose, that
every thinking Man upon a very little reflection will see such powers may be
the Foundation of Arbitrary proceedings in many cases of high Importance to the
whole Nation. I confess I do not think it advisable or safe; to divest the
King wholly of these Powers, and reserve them to a Parliament: For the exercise
of all or most of them may be very necessary, much oftener then we can expect or
desire parliaments, and may trust with the reasonable intervals of parliaments;
neither do I think it possible to lay down fixed Rules, that can continue
useful for any time, for the Kings managment of these Powers, such is the
inconstancy and vicissitude of humane Affairs. The only Medium I can think on
is, that the King shall be restricted, in the exercise of these Powers, to the
Advice and Concurrence of a Council, or Councils to be named by the Parliament
out of the whole States: This Council may have their settled Annual Meetings,
or more frequent if needful, and withal be obliged to Conveen when upon any
Emergent the King shall call them But as for the Militia, since it is palpablie
useless to the Crown and Government and very heavy to the People, I hope all
will be Unanimous to have it totally discharged. As for exempting Soldiers
from the ordinary Laws and Judges, in Causes Civil or Criminal betwixt them and
other Sub^ects, least at it is of dangerous Consequence, and there is no shadow
of Law or Justice for it in this Nation, wherefore it ought to be discharged
and declared Illegal in all time coming. I doubt not e're you come this length,
you will be as weary in reading this tedious and indigested Letter, as I am of
writing it. So I shall delay at this time, the troubling you with what is fit
to be done, for securing our Crown from falling again into Popish hands, what
convenient amendm^nts may be made, as to the Constitution of, and Forms of
Procedure in our Parliaments, and what is expedient for the Redress of our past
Grievanc^s and necessary for the providing wholesome Remedies for preventing
the like hereafter. The slightest review of all these (tho desired in Powers)
would swell this Letter into the Volume of a Treatise, which I have no thoughts
of writing: I hope you do not expect it, and though the stuff is course, you
have large enough measure already, for an Letter. Besides what is here omitted,
seems to be the prop^r work of a Parliament when the Crown is settled, but what
is spoke of, seems necessary to be dispatched by the Meeting of States before
they declare the Crown. For though I am fully persuaded, that if we give the
Crown to the King of England with as Absolute, unlimited a Prerogative, as ever
any Tyrant or Sultan Usurped: Yet our Religion and Laws, and every Man's
Liberty and Property, would be as secure to Us, under so Brave, Generous, Pious
and Just a Prince, as they can be by all the Provisions we can devise for their
security: But it is uncertain how long God may bless us with him, and who may
come after him. And this is certain that if once the Crown be settled, and a
set of Officers of State, and Counselors established, (our Nobility and great
Ministers have unhappily been so accustomed, to carry things here with so high
a hand,) They will be sure to use all their Interest to frustrate all Projects
for such Limitations of the Prerogative, foreseeing easily that thereby their
hands will be more bound up, then was usual, and I doubt not, if you will be at
the pains to observe it, you will easily perceive that such as have but any faint
hopes and a remote prospect of getting any share of the Government into their
hands, will already be shy on these Points. Wherefore it nearly concerns every
honest Sincere Scotsman, to strike thee Iron while it is hot, for it is much
better holding then drawing: If this is acceptable and gives you any
satisfaction, you shall by the next have more of the matters now omitted.

March 6. 1689. I am Yours, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
Sir,
I Have said nothing of the Kings Negative Vote in Parliament, and his Power of
Adjourning and Dissolving them. Tho it is of the greatest Importance, for if it
stands, as it is now Asserted, all hopes of Redress of Griveances by a
Parliament are cut off under an ill Government, when there is greatest need of
it. Wherefore it much concerns this Meeting to adjust in to an harmless Temper.
Yet I must confess. I can hit upon no overture for this that pleases me. But I
doubt not, The things is so Obvious and of such vast Consequence, you will hear
of it from better hands.



FINIS.

