PROTESTANCY To be Embraced: OR, A New and Infallible Method To Reduce
ROMANISTS FROM POPERY TO Protestancy.

A Treatise of great Use to all His Majesty's Subjects, and necessary to
prevent Error and Popery.

By David Abercromby D. Lately Converted, after he had Professed near Nineteen
Years Jesuitism and Popery.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, by Thomas Hodgkin. 1682.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, LORD BISHOP of London, Dean of His
Majesty's Chapel, and one of His most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Was once fully resolved to side first openly with the Protestant Church, and
then to inform the Public of the true motives of my Conversion from Popery to
Protestancy; but upon second thoughts, ad obstruendum os loquentium iniqua, to
stop the mouths of such as could misconstrue my intentions, I judged it
necessary to prevent the reflections of some, and surprisal of others.

I acknowledge my self in this Conjuncture Accountable by duty to two sorts of
persons: 1. To the Jesuits my former Brethren. 2. To the Roman Catholics of
my familiar acquaintance: I was looked upon by those as being able to serve
them at home, as I had not been useless to them abroad, and by these as a
zealous Defender of Popery. If I can but allay the first heats of both, and
hinder a sudden rise of anger and passion, I may hope by this peaceable method
to conquer irresistibly their understandings, yea, if pre-occupation stand not
betwixt them and the truth, strike at their hearts, and change their wills.

My Thoughts, my Lord, were not long at a stand, under whose Patronage this
short Treatise should face the Public, it being chiefly intended for the
Conservation of the Protestant Religion, and Conversion of His Majesty's
Subjects from Superstition and Popery, I was of opinion you could claim a
peculiar right to it, not only on the account of your Character and Dignity,
but particularly because of that Apostolic zeal you are inflamed withal for
your Flocks spiritual Concerns and Proficiency; whereby you are powerfully
moved to accept of, and defend whatever may prove instrumental to the increase
of true Virtue and Christian Piety.

I confess ingenuously, your Deep Knowledge makes me somewhat apprehensive of
your Censure, but your eminent Virtue puts me in hopes again you will easily
pardon whatever you shall find defective in this method; or not answerable to
your own Accuracy. Yet I have called it, and hope it shall prove such,
infallible for two Reasons. 1. Because taken wholly, it amounts to a clear and
forcible Demonstration, though perhaps each Argument it contains will not prove
a full Conviction to every obstinate Romanist. 2. Because it relies on
Self-evident Principles, and overthrows the most material Obstacles to the
Conversion of Romanists, I mean their preoccupated Opinions, and groundless
Fancies, That Protestants are all Reprobates, Schismatics, Heretics, and such
as retreat from Popery to Protestancy, Apostates; but however this method prove
otherwise infallible, which the event must determine; one thing I may
confidently ascertain, it will show infallibly to Posterity, with what respect
I am,

MY LORD, Your most Humble And Obedient Servant, David Abercromby.

The most material Contents of this Book.
I. THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. II. The Authors former Life, and the occasion of
his Conversion. Page 1 III. That Protestants may be saved. Page 19 Grounded, 1.
On their Allegiance to all their respective Superiors. Page 21 2. On Gods
general providence and care to illuminate all men for attaining the end he
created them for. Page 25 3. On their high sentiments of Gods mercies, and
Christ's merits. Page 27 4. On their living and lively faith. Page 28 5. On
their belief of all Fundamentals, and Acts of true divine Love. Page 30 6. On
the Nature and Doctrine of a probable Opinion received by Romanists. Page 33 7.
On this undeniable Truth, That they are neither Schismatics, nor Heretics,
but true Members of the Universal Church. Page 44

IV. That Protestants may be saved more easily and with greater security than
Romanists, grounded on their not admittance of these obstacles that are
infallibly to be met with in the Profession of Romanism. Page 62 Such be, 1.
Their rash and implicit Faith. Page 64 2. Their endless Scruples, caused by
their doctrine relating to Baptism. Page 65 3. Their less apprehension of Hell
by their relying on Purgatory, and of mortal sin, by that dangerous Opinion of
theirs, That all sins deserve not eternal punishment. Page 70 4. Their neglect
and not reading of Divine Scriptures. Page 71 5. Their Prayers in an unknown
Tongue. Page 75 6. Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Page 76 7. Their
Invocation of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints. Page 95 8. Their
Image Worship, Wafer-worship, Relick-worship, etc. Page 97 9. Their renouncing
Sense and Reason, in favor of their Romish decisions. Page 106 10. Their
multiplied Fasts and Abstinency, under pain of mortal sin. Page 107 11. Their
forbidding Ecclesiastics to marry. Page 110 12. Their insnaring Vows of
Chastity, Poverty, Obedience, and of more than God has commanded them to do.
Page 112

IV. Conclusions flowing from the Principles established in the first two
Articles. Page 129 V. Charitable Advice to all His Majesty's Subjects of ihe
Romish Persuasion. Page 145
Protestancy To be embraced: OR An Infallible Method to reduce Romanists From
Popery to Protestancy.
1. THis little Treatise will be a Subject of great amazement to all such as
have known my former Life and Conversation, whereof courteous and curious
Reader, take this accurate, short, and true account.

2. I was bred up in my greener years at Doway, and in a short time became so
good a Proficient in the mysteries of Popery, that I entered the Order of
Jesuits in France at my first instance: I lived amongst them full eighteen
years and more, and I may say, without vanity, in some esteem and repute of a
Scholar being judged after a solemn examen, capable to teach Divinity and
Philosophy in the most renowned Universities of Europe, which is the Jesuits
way of G^aduating their own men in Divinity. I taught in France Grammar, in
Lorrain Mathematics and Philosophy; and being graduate in Physic, I practiced
it not unhappily, and intend to practice it hereafter, with certain hopes, God
willing of the same good success.

3. All this while I studied more to the endowment of the intellective faculty
by humane Sciences, than to perfect my will by solid Virtues and Piety: To
which I thought the School Divinity, as taught by Romanists, was not a small
hinderance: The speculative part thereof, being apter to beget doubts of the
truth of Christianism, than to clear those that men may, and do sometimes frame
to themselves.

4. Take for instance, they call in question and dispute, if the Incarnation of
God was possible or not; if God can lie or speak a falsehood; if it be within
the reach of his Omnipotency to condemn an Innocent soul to the pains of
everlasting flames; if his actual existency can be clearly proved, or pointed
out by the light of a true demonstration, and the like: Such disputes I ever
thought, Otiosorum hominum negotia, the affairs of those that have no affair to
busy themselves withal; I judged them fitter to destroy than edify, to
nourish and spread Errors, than to increase Piety and dispell Ignorance.

5. I studied several years the Jesuit School Divinity, and I may say in all
truth, I reaped no other benefit thereby, save only that in my own conceit, and
perhaps in the opinion of some others, I became an able Disputant, about what?
About Chymera's, beings of reason, as they speak, Impossibilities, and such
like whimsical notions.

6. Yet in the midst of these hot disputes we had often for mere Punctilo's of
honor, and a vain repute of some sharpness, I felt often the Spirit of God
working interiourly my Conversion, by the secret voice of his Holy Inspiration,
which caused me often to break out in these or the like words: Quid haec ad
aeternitatem? What avails all this for my last end and eternal felicity.

7. As to the practical part of the Romish School Divinity, relating to Cases
of Conscience, the World knows how far from a true and sincere Conscience are
those men commonly called Casuists: I read several of them most exactly, but
was still displeased at their far fetched subtilties, invented for the avoiding
of sin, but in reality are the true sources of all looseness and iniquity:
Whatever crime your Conscience accuses you of, consult but a Romish Casuist,
and he will instantly endeavor your repose by some bias or another tending to
his own interest; and the settling of your inward peace on some frivolous
distinction, or groundless precision.

8. Such sort of men are great Patrons of self-love, and always prone to
pronounce in favor of our corrupted nature against the light of their own
Conscience and Reason, and under pretense of shunning severity, they fall into
the other extreme, more dangerous, by yielding through an interess'd
complacency to the perverse Inclinations of such as require their advice.

9. I had great intimacy with several Romanists persuaded of the lawfulness of
such immoral Practices; their common byword was, Les gens d'esprit ne pechent
point, that is witty men hardly ever sin: Their reason was, because sin, for
instance Adultery, may be looked on as a double faced medal; the one side
whereof represents to us a natural act, the other side an injust act; their
meaning is, if you consent to an Adultery as it is a natural act precisely, you
shun by this precision the guilt of sin, since an act as natural is not sinful,
but if you consent to it as it is an injust act, you commit then a sin, which
witty and sharp men, especially Casuists, I fancy will never do, knowing how to
distinguish in the same individual act, rationem actus, and rationem peccati,
the formality of an act, from that of a sinful act.

10. So the dultish sort only, either incapable of, or not reflecting on such
precisions, shall commit Adulteries, or any other sins for want of this
prescinding faculty: Than which no greater illusion could I ever conceive, as
to commit a sin were not more than enough to desire an ill thing, or what is
necessarily tied to an ill and unlawful object known to be such.

11. These and the like dangerous opinions which we shall discuss in another
place, put often my thoughts to a stand, in order to examine what truth could
be in these ordinary reproaches made by Protestants against Romanists, accused
commonly by them of disconformity with the Primitive Church of Novelties,
Errors, and Superstitions.

12. Being thus perplexed in mind and as Hercules in Bivio, uncertain what way
to make choice of, I came to Scotland, where because of some repute I had got
abroad of a Scholar, I was put instantly to work by the Jesuits; against M.
Menzeis, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in Aberdeen. I wrote then in a short
time a Treatise of some bulk against his way of defending the Protestant
Religion, but neither to my own satisfaction, though several others seeing
things but under one light, seemed to be persuaded by my arguments, nor to the
satisfaction of most Romanists, who thought and said my Doctrine in some
material points was not unlike, or the same with that of Protestants.

13. After a stay of about two years in Scotland, after an accurate parallel of
Protestancy and Popery, and a scrupulous scrutiny of the most material grounds
they both stand on, I came to London as to a safe Sanctuary, where I might
serve God in all freedom and security.

14. The extreme kindness of the Londoners to all distressed Persons, and their
late unparallelable Charity to the Persecuted Brethren of the French Nation,
could not but inspire me with high sentiments of their Piety and Religion.

15. I must confess here ingenuously, that the English Nation, exceeded not
only formerly their Neighbors in Warlike Exploits, and would yet, if times and
occasion put them to it, but were ever, and are still far beyond them all in
beneficency and works of Charity, the genuine Characters of Divine Faith and
true Christianism influenced no doubt by the example of our most wise and most
Gracious Sovereign, who as he defends and conserves by all imaginable means the
Protestant Religion, so favors all such with his Royal Protection and
Friendship, that conform to it, by renouncing their Errors and Popery.

16. I foresee this change of mine, how well grounded soever, will stir up
against me. 1. My former Brethren, the Jesuits. 2. My nearest Relations, who
are for the most part, and ever were Zealous Romanists: I doubt not
nevertheless but they shall put a favorable construction on what I have done;
provided 1. They condemn me not, incognita causa, unheard, and 2. Suspend their
censure till after an impartial, and entire perusal of this present Treatise,
all preoccupation Mother of error laid aside.

17. They cannot say that any other motive but that of saving my Soul in the
securest way, caused me to withdraw from them, and side with Protestants: They
know I was in a Condition amongst them to want for nothing, being supplied with
necessaries sufficiently; but now I must rely on Gods Providence and my own
Industry. Yet this I am not troubled at, since Christ has said, Search first
after the Kingdom of Heaven, and then all other things ye stand in need of,
shall be added unto you: Since he can neither deceive nor be deceived, may we
either think or say without Blasphemy, he will disappoint such as have settled
all their hopes in his infallible promises; but to shun Prolixity, I come to
the main point I aim at, which is to give to the public an infallible method,
not written of for ought I know by any other, to reduce Romanists to Conformity
with the Reformed Churches: By the same means I shall lay open to the World on
what grounds I have forsaken Popery and embraced Protestancy.

18. This method to be such as it is designed, shall be 1. Plain, that every one
may understand it. 2. Peaceable, that the will may be gained, and by it the
understanding sweetly conquered. 3. Short, that it may be proportionable to the
leisure of the most busied, and none through Prolixity loath to read it: All
this I hope I shall perform to the satisfaction of Protestants and Conviction
of Romanists, if I make out with the clearness of a Noon Sunshine:

1. That Protestants may be saved.

2. That they may be saved more easily, and with greater security than those of
the Romish persuasion.

19. The first of these Principles proved, will cause Romanists to look upon
Protestants with a brotherly Love and Charity; the second once established,
will force them sweetly but irresistably to side with them, as to matters of
Religion and Divine Worship; since they are persuaded in a business of such a
weighty moment, as is that of our Everlasting Happiness: Tutius semper est
eligendum, the safest must still be preferred before what is less secure.

20. This Treatise shall contain three short Articles; in the two first, I
shall prove evidently to all Impartial Readers, the forementioned truths; in
the last we shall raise such inferences as flow naturally from these two
foregoing Principles.

ARTICLE I. PRINCIPLE I. That Protestants may be saved.
SECT. I.
1. NOthing makes Romanists more averse from Protestants, than this groundless
persuasion of theirs, that Protestants cannot be saved, this is the sole cause
of their obstinacy in Popery; the true source of their immortal hatred against
us, and the very root of these extreme Rigors they have practiced against
Protestants, wherever they happened to be absolute Masters: This pitiful
mistake wherein I lived several years, was as a veil before my eyes, hindering
me to see the truth, which now by the Grace of God I see clearly.

2. Because this Principle is of great moment for the Conversion of Romanists,
I shall prove it to persuasion in two different ways.

1. Positively, by positive and evincing Reasons.

2. Negatively, by showing there can be no let or hinderance of Salvation, to
such as profess Protestancy.

3. I can imagine but two things necessary to Salvation, or the attaining of
Eternal Felicity.

The First is to live conformably to the Law of God, because he is what he is,
our Sovereign Lord and Master.

The Second is, to live conformably to the lawful Commands of such men as have
their Authority derived from him, as the first Lawgiver; such are Kings,
Magistrates, Princes, and all Superiors whatsoever, in their respective degrees
of Superiority, and Authority.

4. As to the first point, what people in the World professes a more sincere
allegiance to God, or a more scrupulous observance of his Holy Law, than the
Reformed Churches do? So as of old it was said, Not us in judaea Deus, that God
was known particularly to the Jews, we may say in all truth of them; there is
no where such a general knowledge, whether practical, or speculative of his
Holy Law, as amongst Protestants; they read it in their Churches, they
interpret it in their Pulpits, they peruse it in their Families, they make it
the Subject of their private Meditations, of their more serious Conversations:
The Star they guide themselves by through the stormy Sea of this World is no
other but Gods Infallible written Word, whereunto they conform; or which is all
one for my intent, they ought by their Principles, to conform their Thoughts,
Words, and all their Actions: Is it than consistent with reason, to exclude
from a capacity of Eternal Felicity, such as not relying upon uncertain
Traditions, regulate all their steps by the rule of God's Infallible Word? Let
us lay aside our own particular fancys, and renounce our too partial and
preoccupated Judgments, and we shall instantly pronounce in their favor not a
little discontent, and amazed at our former uncharity and gross mistakes.

5. Their Doctrine relating to our allegiance due to all Superiors, is so
wholesome and peaceable, that I can imagine none more subservient to the
interest of Princes; they are infinitely averse, and with all reason from that
irrational opinion of most Romanist Divines; who teach the Pope of Rome has
power to Depose Princes, when it pleases him to fancy they are Heretics:
Whether they give a direct authority to the Pope over Kings, which is no less
than to enslave all Crowned Heads to the Bishop of Rome, or an indirect one,
only to depose Princes in certain Junctures, it is clear they take from Caesar
what is Caesar's, that independency on all earthly power, God has allowed him
here on Earth. Princes are accountable to the King of Kings for all their
actions, and we to them, if we forget so far our duty, as to refuse them due
allegiance. This Doctrine being confessed and professed by all true
Protestants, can we either think or say they are Reprobates, or not in the way
to Heaven?

6. To banish such an unchristian fancy far from your thoughts, remember what
is said in Scripture, God illuminates all men, illuminat omnem hominem, for
what end? For no other but that by this light they may discover the way to
their last end; if all men be thus illuminated, are Protestants excepted? Are
they not men, and most of them great examples of virtue and piety?

7. I wondered often to hear Romanists grant such as shall never hear of Christ
and his Gospel, were nevertheless in a capacity to save their Souls, provided
they lived conformably to the dictates of right reason: I was amazed I say, to
hear them confess this, and so inconsequentially deny the same to Protestants;
but what can we expect from preoccupated judgments, but in just Censures,
uncharitable Reflections, and illegal Conclusions?

8. I desire them here to consider that no people in the World has higher
sentiments of God, and lower of themselves, than those of the Reformed
Churches: Which are confessedly the best Dispositions can be imagined, to
render us capable of that end we were created for. They neither rely on the
Mediation and Merits of Saints, nor on their own good works, they ground all
their hopes of Salvation on the precious blood of Christ, shed for us upon the
Altar of the Cross, they exalt highly by all their principles, Gods infinite
goodness and mercy ever acknowledging when they have done all they can, they
are but useless Servants, and that all their sufficiency flows from that
overflowing Fountain of all power, goodness, and mercy.

9. And if without faith it is impossible to please God, we have all reason to
say they are most acceptable to his eyes, since they show by their works their
Faith is a saving and living Faith. Who ever has conversed with them more
intimately, and will speak impartially what he thinks of their Life and
Conversation, shall easily assent to this, and confess ingenuously they are the
best representatives of the Primitive Christians, so real you shall find them
in their intentions, so sincere in their words, and upright in all their
procedures.

10. How than can Romanists without the guilt of an extreme uncharity, impose
so pitifully upon the ignorant sort, causing them to believe on their bare word
and authority, without the least rational inducement imaginable, that no
Protestants are Elects, that to be a Reprobate and a Protestant, is one and the
same thing? Are they God's Counselors? Advises he with them who is to be
saved, and who not? If a rash judgment be a sin, as undoubtedly it is, they are
not innocent, when rashly and upon groundless grounds, they condemn so
unmercifully their Neighbors, who are as good, if not better than themselves.

11. Believe they not all the Fundamental points, whatever is contained in the
Creeds and Scripture? And if acts of Divine Love have been ever thought
necessary, and sufficient means to the attaining of our last end; where shall
we find a greater aptitude, and better dispositions to such acts, than amongst
Protestants?

12. As Ignoti nulla cupido, There is no Love without Knowledge: The more
knowledge we have of, and the greater perfections we discover in the object we
tie our hearts to, our love is ordinarily so much the more ardent. The Reformed
Churches have this advantage above all others: They read the Scriptures, and
command them to be read by all their Subjects; whereby they attain to a high
knowledge of Gods infinite Power, Clemency, Wisdom, Mercy, and his other
attributes: Their understanding thus enlightened, their will takes easily fire,
and burns with a flame of true Divine Love: The Origin whereof, is no other
but that not ordinary knowledge of God they attain to by reading often and
meditating frequently his infallible Word: Which I know certainly to be wanting
amongst Romanists, because of their slight performance, or rather entire
neglect of such a Christian duty.

13. Out of these foregoing reflections the Charitable and Impartial Reader may
easily gather, they go straight on their Journey, and not one step out of the
way, who forsaking Popery embrace Protestancy; and if any Romanist doubt yet of
this self-evident truth, I shall be at the pains to convince him once more, by
an argument beyond the reach either of a rational answer or flat denial, it
runs hus, ad hominem.

14. The learnedest sort o Romanists teach it lawful and secure in Conscience
to square our actions by the rule of a probable opinion, yea the Jesuits hold
it safe, to stand to that opinion which is less sure, and participates less of
probability than the opposite, though in reality surer and more probable; their
reason is, because a man so doing, acts prudently, and consequently sins not.

15. But the main and material point, is to know what is understood by a
probable opinion: The Romanists generally, and I think none can deny it, mean
by a probable opinion, that which learned and pious men hold and follow: For if
they be pious, godliness and piety will be their sole aim in all their
practices; if learned, they will believe nothing without sufficient grounds and
good reason; this definition of a probable opinion laid as a confessed
Principle and immovable ground-stone, I build thereon this ensuing, clear, and
short Discourse.

16. Who-ever follows a probable opinion, sins not, does neither rashly, nor
imprudently, but who holds that Protestants may be saved, follows a probable
opinion, ergo, he sins not, he neither does rashly nor imprudently in so doing.
The second proposition I prove, argumento ad hominem, invincibly thus, that
opinion is probable which is believed, and defended by learned and pious men,
that Protestants may be saved, it is believed and defended by learned and pious
men, ergo it is a probable opinion, and by a necessary inference may be followed
and believed without the least appearance either of sin, rashness, or
imprudence.

17. The middle proposition is not unlike to a self-evident principle, and on
this account can be denied by none as have their Wits about them, or so much of
common sense and understanding as to see through the terms it is enounc'd in:
Dare they say Protestants are neither pious, nor learned? Auditum admissi risum
teneatis amici. I am persuaded they will be ashamed of such a childish and
groundless answer: For if they be neither pious nor learned, they must then
both be wicked and ignorant, I know no middle, this must be their inference,
which is so pitiful that the mere recital of such an extravagancy is a full and
entire refutation thereof, enarrasse, refutasse est.

18. But sure I am, they will grant willingly their own Divines to be both
pious and learned men, yet they teach, and I was taught by them, that all
Protestants are not Reprobates: To understand this it is observable they
distinguish two sorts of Protestants, the one they call material, and the other
we may call for distinction's sake, formal. The Material Protestants are bred
up in an invincible ignorance of what the Romanists think necessary to
Salvation, as the belief of Transubstantiation, of Purgatory, and the like: In
an Ignorance, I say, invincible, because living in the midst of Protestants,
they are supposed to want all opportunity of instruction, and so must rely on
their Pastors authority: To these they extend their charity, and grant they may
be saved; they are not so merciful to the others, who live they say in a
vincible ignorance of Catholic truths, which they may easily dispel and
overcome, but will not through wilfulness and obstinacy.

19. But to such also I shall cause them to be favorable, and by a parity of
reason, paritate rationis, force them to impart, will they, nill, they a part
of their Charity: Because generals produce not such a clear knowledge as
particulars do, I shall take this particular, the Transubstantiation, for
instance: The belief of this mystery, says the Romanist, is necessary to
Salvation, yet confesses a Material Protestant may be saved without it,
because he lives in an invincible ignorance, occasioned by his want of
opportunity to be instructed: But the Formal Protestant upon another account
lives likewise in an invincible ignorance of this necessity, because the
Reasons he is convinced by are stronger in his opinion than yours, and so you
shall never influence him by your arguments to believe, acknowledge, or
understand the contrary; what then the want of instruction or understanding
works in the Material Protestants, this wit effectuates in those whom for
method's sake we have called formal: If those, I mean the former, be guiltless,
because hearing nothing of Transubstantiation, they cannot assent to the
existency thereof, these are not to be blamed, for though they hear of such a
mystery, yet their understanding is conquered by lights destructive to it,
which discovering to them clearly the truth of this Negative, there is no
Transubstantiation, remove far from their intellective faculty, the knowledge
of this Positive, there is a Transubstantiation.

20. I say then they are not to be blamed, because it is not in the power of the
will to force upon our understanding the belief of a known falsehood, or of what
appears to us evidently false; to conclude as I have begun, paritate rationis,
by a parity of reason, since the Romanists, because of the foresaid invincible
ignorance, grant to some Protestants a capacity of being saved, unless they
belie themselves, they will not refuse the same to those in whom we meet with a
like invincible ignorance, yea more and harder to be overcome, as may appear by
what I have said.

21. I foresee the Romanist may reply, that those Protestants he has no
charity for, are such as resist the known truth, for instance, they are
persuaded the arguments in favor of Transubstantiation are better grounded
than these, they oppose against it: So they shall not be saved through their
own misbelief, wilfulness, and obstinacy in error: To which I make this short
and satisfactory answer, that such men are not true Protestants of whom only we
speak, but rather abominable Hypocrites professing outwardly a Doctrine they
judge in their hearts false and erroneous. This Objection than vanishes, as
being de subjecto non supponente, grounded on a false supposition.

SECT. II.
1. I Have proved positively, and I think to persuasion, if preoccupation be
laid aside, the undeniable truth of my first Principle, that Protestants may be
saved: For the Readers entire satisfaction, I shall make out the same in a
Negative way, by showing to all not wilfully blind, there can be no let or
hinderance to their Salvation; whatever Romanists can instance as inconsistent
with their attaining to eternal happiness, may be reduced either to Schism or
Heresy, and that either jointly or severally: After an impartial scrutiny of
their best grounds of such foul aspersions, I found them all to be groundless,
unwarrantable, and insufficient.

2. Schism is a separation from the true Church of God, Protestants are not
separated from the true Church of God, ergo, they are not guilty of Schism,
they are not Schismatics: All generally confess the Christians of the three
first Centuries, to have been the constituent Members of Christ's true Church;
from these the Protestants are not separated either in belief, manners, or
Ecclesiastical Discipline, this I could prove to the conviction of the most
obstinate, had it not been performed abundantly, and more than once by others:
The same cannot be said of the Romanists, since they have admitted of many
novelties never heard of in these Primitive times, such are in invocation of
Saints, adoration of the consecrated Wafer, Image Worship, Popes Supremacy,
etc. So if they stand to the same Fundamentals with the Church in her purest
age, it is certain they have added thereunto, and are guilty of diverse
Superstructures which the Protestants were never, and cannot be accused of: But
it is not so much my design in this place to charge Romanists, as to justify
Protestants, and those who embrace Protestancy.

3. They will perhaps say we are Schismatics, because separated from the
Church of Rome: But

1. The Church of Rome is a particular one, and a member only of the Universal
Church.

2. As it now stands, it is not our rule, but that undoubted of Christian Church
in the Primitive times without spot or blemish.

3. This aspersion of Schism smites rather themselves; For those only we call
Schismatics who are guilty of division and breach of unity, by doing that
which is the true cause thereof: That the meanest capacities may understand
this, let them take notice of what follows: If my body were united or closely
joining to yours, would ye not be judged the true cause of our separation, if
ye put any thing between you and me hindering this union? so you are the true
Separatist, not I, because you have thrust me from you by that middle Obstacle
you have placed betwixt us both, which unless first removed, I cannot unite my
body to yours again.

4. This is downright our present case if well understood: The Protestants and
Romanists were once two united bodies in the pure age of the Church, in these
happy times when Superstition had not as yet gained a foot of ground amongst
Christians, they were one People, anima una corunum, one Soul, and one Heart:
But at length the Romanists set up betwixt us and them, murum aheneum, an
invincible obstacle, a heap of errors destructive both to union and unity, so
if we be separated now, who were formerly united, it is evidently by their fault
we could not persevere in union with them because of this middle wall that did
separate us, let them throw it down as they are obliged in conscience to do,
and we shall draw up together and join them close again: Since then they gave a
just occasion, yea, and are the true causes of this separation, they are the
Separatists and true Schismatics, not we.

5. As for Heresy let Romanists say what they please, it cannot with the least
appearance of truth be laid to our charge: He is not guilty of that crime, who
defends obstinately any opinion whatsomever, else all Schoolmen and Divines
standing stiffly to their own fancys in Doctrinal points, would be reckoned
Heretics: Such be those only who deny flatly and with obstinacy Divine Truths
or Articles of Faith, which cannot be imposed upon Protestants without
injustice, ignorance, and calumny.

6. They deny indeed General Councils to be infallible in their decisions, but
their infallibility is no Article of Faith, else Austin was a Heretic;
asserting, General Councils gathered out of all the Christian World, are often
corrected, the former by the latter; Tom. 6. l. 2. con. Donat.
correction of a Council undoubtedly supposes a precedent error and a Council
to be errable, as every one understands that knows any thing: On the same
account he speaks after this manner to Maximian, an Arian Bishop.

Neither ought I to instance the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of
Arimene, to take advantage thereby, for neither I am bound by the authority of
this nor thou of that; set matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with
reason, try the matter by the authority of Divine Scriptures. Anst. con. Maxim.
l. 3. c. 4.


7. An Article of Faith must either be clearly contained in Scripture, or
according to the Romanists, declared expressly by some of their General
Councils: But that General Councils are infallible in their Decisions, is
neither contained clearly in Scriptures, let them tell us in what Part, Book,
Chapter, Verse, nor is it determined in any of the eighteen General Councils,
they acknowledge as the rules of their Faith; none can be instanced, where this
has been decided: Upon what grounds then hold they this as a Divine Truth,
which is nothing else but a fanciful opinion hindering them to follow Austin's
advice, to set matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, to try
the matter by the authority of Divine Scriptures.

8. The general Councils are so far from pretending to be infallible Judges of
controversial Debates, De ordin. Cele. con.
that in a set form of Prayer appointed to be said after every Council, they
pray that God would spare their ignorance, and pardon their errors: and if they
curse and anathematize such as reject their decisions, this argues not they
arrogate to themselves any infallibility in deciding, for the same is the
practice of Provincial and Particular Councils, who neither pretend to be, nor
are looked upon by the Romanists as infallible Judges.

9. This undeniable truth is of greater moment than perhaps it appears to be of
at first: For if the General Councils be not infallible when they decide in
matters of Faith, none of their decisions can be holden by Romanists as divine
and revealed truths, unless they be evidently conformable to God's written
Word: Wherefore receive they not the definitions of a private man as revealed
Oracles? the reason is, because they know he is fallible and liable to error:
Now the same being the condition and fate of General Councils, they must of
necessity confess, they impose no obligation upon us to believe their decisions
as Articles of Divine Faith: Who then rejects as Protestants do
Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Image Worship, Power of Popes to
depose Princes, Prayer for the dead, and all other points we yield not to the
Romanists, deny's only what is asserted by errable Councils, and consequently
no Articles of Divine Faith, we are therefore notoriously calumniated, when on
this account we are called by Papists obstinate in error and Heretics.

10. But how says the Romanist? shall we resolve our doubts in matters of
Faith, if we acknowledge not the definitions of General Councils as divine and
infallible Oracles? You was told before by S. Austin how to behave in this
case: I repeat his words, set matter with matter, says he, cause with cause,
reason with reason, try the matter by the authority of Divine Scriptures, never
yet corrupted in material points, nor ever shall by Gods especial and necessary
Providence over his Church; if then you read his Infallible Word with true
humility and a sincere desire of your own spiritual profit, he will open your
understanding, resolve your scruples, give repose to your conscience, and as
great insight in his Word as he knows to be convenient for your spiritual
interest.

11. This method is better and securer than that of the Romanists; whatever is
decided by a lawful general Council, is to them an Article of Faith, a revealed
truth, a divine Oracle, but such Councils they hold none to be, unless the
Members thereof have been really baptized, which they can never be certain of,
because this depends on the uncertain intentions of those who Baptized them:
For they generally teach besides the pronunciation of the words, I Baptize thee
in the Name of the Father, etc. The Ministers intention to confer the
Sacrament, is absolutely necessary, so if it be wanting, as easily it may, the
Child is not Baptized. On the same account they are not certain if their Popes
be Priests, because perhaps the Bishop who ordained them, had no such intention
when he pronounced the set form of ordination: Of this I shall say a word again
in another place.

12. But if the general Councils be not infallible, what mean the Scriptures,
by asserting, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, the
Church is the pillar and ground of truth? To this I answer, There is nothing
here as is evident relating to that ptetended infallible decisive faculty of
General Councils: The first Proposition signifies only the true Church shall
have an existency and being to the end of the World, maugre the opposition of
Tyrants, Persecutors, and all her Enemies, though it may fall out she be not
always visible in any Assembly or Congregation: As it happened to the Primitive
Church at Jerusalem, when all her Members were scattered abroad throughout the
Regions of Judaea and Samaria; Acts 8.1.
as it happened when Christ was smitten, and all the rest were hid, as it
happened in Elias his time, who thought he was left alone, not knowing where
the other seven thousand true Worshippers of God were; as it happened during
the Persecution of the Roman Emperors, and lately before the General
Reformation of the Christian World, yet the Gates of Hell prevailed not against
the Church because she was ever existent, though not visible as now to the
World: Her Meetings and Assemblys being of necessity in that juncture of
affairs very secret and unknown to her Enemies. She is said to be the pillar
and ground of truth, by reason of Gods especial Providence over her Children,
never suffering them all to fail and err, but still stirring up some or several
in opposition to Superstition, Idolatry and Errors.

ARTICLE II. PRINCIPLE II. That Protestants may be saved more easily, and with
greater security, than Romanists.
I Hope the foregoing Discourse will be an occasion of moderation to the most
severe Romanists, who reflecting impartially on their former mistakes, rash
Judgments, and preoccupated opinions, will convert their former zeal, or rather
fury against Protestants, into Brotherly Love and Charity. I say more, if they
will be at the pains to consider a moment or two, and seriously, the Contents
of this second Article; they shall, I doubt not, let go the uncertain, take
what is surest, and embrace Protestancy, as the easiest and safest way to our
Eternal Happiness, since by the grace of God it wants these lets and
impediments to be met with in the Profession of Popery: To run over some of
them, with order and method, we shall take notice.

1. Of their Faith and Doctrine.

2. Of their Divine Worship and Ecclesiastical Discipline.

SECT. I. Their Faith and Doctrine.
1. THeir Faith is so blind, that I have heard many of them say, if a General
Council had defined white to be black, they would believe it, whereby you see
they are disposed to admit of any error, if it be authorized by a General
Council, though the infallibility thereof be no point of their Faith, as I have
proved evidently in the foregoing Article.

2. They believe Baptism absolutely necessary to Salvation, and none a true and
real one, if the Minister when he pronounces the words intends not to Baptize,
which no doubt happens frequently, since his intention may be easily diverted
to his other designs and affairs: Let all the World judge if people thus
principled can enjoy a true repose of mind or peace of Conscience, the only
foretast we have in this life, of that to come: For how can they know
assuredly, whether the Minister or Priest really intended to Baptize them or
not, and so they may doubt if they be Christians? for such they grant none is
to be accounted without true Baptism; and of this they can have no certainty,
because they are still uncertain of the Ministers intention, judged by them so
necessary to the validity of this Sacrament, that if he intended only the mere
pronounciation of the words, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc. The
Baptism could be no more a true one than a bare, frivolous, and insignificant
Ceremony; what trouble then and turmoil of Spirit they must needs perpetually
wrestle with, while Protestants as to this point enjoy a perfect Tranquillity,
holding Baptism independent on the Ministers good or ill will, malice or
intention, provided he pronounce seriously the words, and set form of Baptism,
which we cannot be but sure of.

3. I was once eyewitness to the cruel torture of Conscience, a Romanist
suffered upon a doubt of his Baptism, occasioned by this Romish Doctrine: We
were in the same Ship together upon Sea, pressed by a furious Storm to think on
what was our only concern in that conjuncture: In the mean time this Gentleman
showing by his melancholy looks the inward distemper of his Soul; cries aloud,
as if he had been beside himself, he feared to be damned: I questioned him on
what grounds he spoke so rashly; because, said he, I know not whether I be
Baptized or not; I doubt if the Priest had any such intention when he
pronounced the words commonly used in Baptism; I told him whatever I thought
fittest to convince his understanding and quiet his Conscience, but could not
prevail, because he knew the Council of Trent teaches the Ministers intention
to be absolutely necessary to the existency of Baptism.

4. On the same grounds they may doubt if their Priests can absolve, and be
truly Priests, because in their persuasion they are no Priests without the
intention of the Bishop that ordained them, which perhaps he had not when he
uttered the set form of Ordination. This minds me of a Bishop lately deceased
in France, who confessed at his last hour he had ordained many, but ever
without intention to ordain any: I was intimately acquainted with one ordained
by the same Prelate, and I am fully persuaded if he were advertised of this
last confession of his, he would scruple to continue a moment in the function
of Priesthood.

5. Who can relish, if he has any sentiment of true Piety, what they teach of
their Purgatory and purging fires. This Doctrine flatters sinners in their
imperfections, causes them to live more loosely than otherwise they would do,
to make little scruple of these sins they call venial, and never eternally
punished: On this account they are not so apprehensive of these Everlasting*
Torments we should ever remember of, when we are solicited to sin, if no
higher motive can withdraw us from it: Hell I say enters not so deeply into
their thoughts because they rely on this third place: And the worst of them all
after an absolution got from a Priest, hopes to go to Heaven, if not straight,
at least a little about by Purgatory: The Protestants who believe no middle
place after death, out of Heaven or Hell, walk more cautiously, fear more God's
dreadful but just Judgments, certain if they dye in the Lord, they shall rest
from their labors, if in sin they shall be liable to his wrath for ever.

6. The Scripture is the true Spiritual book we should still have in our hands.
Nocturna versare manu versare diurna. Here we are to gather that Spiritual
Manna to nourish not our Bodies but our Souls, while we travel through the
Wilderness of this wild World. These sacred Writings are capable to make us
wise unto Salvation; search the Scriptures says S. John, for in them ye think
ye have Eternal Life: Yet the Romanists deprive the people of this Spiritual
Food, forbiding them severely to read the Holy Scriptures, as if they were more
hurtful than profitable; hence it is they live in a deep ignorance of all true
Christian Duty, in indifferency, and lukewarmness, without relish of heavenly
things, without true devotion, which is never more stirred up, than when we
hear God speaking in the secret of our hearts by the Divine Oracles of his Holy
Word.

7. They cause the People to contemn or at least to have less veneration for
Divine Scriptures, by teaching they contain not all things necessary to
Salvation, they are obscure, they are imperfect. They seem sometimes to
question their Divine Original, when they ask how we are sure they are inspired
by the Holy Ghost; as if that were not known to say no more by the Air,
Majesty, and Simplicity of expression, proper to God only, as we know the Kings
Letters and Commands to his Subjects by his Seal and proper expressions, none
but the King uttering himself after that manner: So the Holy Scriptures being
as God's Patents and Letters to us, we need not enquire from whom they are, let
us only disclose them, and we shall instantly know their Divine Original, quasi
dei sigillo, as by God's own Seal and Characters proper to him only, without
having recourse to the pretended infallible decisions of General Councils, as
Romanists do, who must run back to the Scriptures again to prove these
decisions infallible, and so, in circuitu ambulant, they turn round in a circle
without advancing one step. But it is not so much my design to dispute and
quarrel with the Romanists, as to go on peaceably and in the Spirit of
Christian Charity, pointing out as with the finger, the great Obstacles to
perfection they meet with, by following blindly the Maxims of Popery: I add
only here their Prayers in an unknown Tongue unfruitful as S. Paul says, to
the understanding, is not a small let to Piety and Devotion; what Spiritual
Consolation can the ignorant sort reap at Mass, or as they call it, Divine
Service, by hearing the Priest praying they know not what? unless they hold
against common sense and reason, that ignorance is the Mother of Piety and
Devotion.

8. Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, is on several accounts dangerous and
ensnaring.

First, It destroys all evidence grounded on the experimental knowledge of our
senses, and makes void the proof Christ made use of to his Apostles, Luke 24.32.
in aim to convince them he was not a Spirit; Handle me, says he, and see, for
a spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye see me have, which can be no conviction
to Romanists, who both taste, handle, and see bread in the Eucharist; if they
will trust their own senses as our Savior in a not unlike case desired his
Disciples to trust to theirs, yet deny flatly what they see, taste, and handle,
to be Bread, against their own and the experience of all men not blind of both
eyes: Our Savior's Proof, I say, that he was not a Spirit, shall never
influence a Papist to Conviction, for though the Apostles could both see and
handle our Savior's Body, nevertheless it is no necessary inference by their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that Christ's Body was there; may they not say
the Apostles could touch, handle, and see the appearance only thereof, as they
handle, and see the accidents of Bread, and not really Bread in the Eucharist
in their opinion of this Sacrament, which takes quite away the force of
Christ's argument grounded on the mere Testimony of our senses and favors, the
Marcionists denying he had ever a true and real body?

I shall say yet something more surprising, but no less true than what I have
said before. This Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 1. Establishes that old and
odd fancy of some doting Philosophers, who doubted of all things how evident
soever. 2. It Is evidently destructive to the whole body of Christian Religion:
In order to prove apodictically these two Propositions, I must suppose a Third
one, as a self-evident Principle, and whence they both flow as from their only
source, That our Senses in the Eucharist, are deceived in and about their
proper object; which I think can be denied by no Romanists, since they confess,
though they see all the appearances of true Bread, that nevertheless there is
no such substance in the Eucharist, but the Body and Blood of Christ, under the
veils of Bread and Wine: I see nothing, I taste nothing, I touch nothing in a
Consecrated Wafer, but what my senses are sensible of in an unconsecrated one,
but says the Romanist, I must not stand in this case to the judgment of my
senses, what I see, touch, and taste, after the Consecration, is no more in
reality Bread, whatever the constant and experimental knowledge of our Senses
teach us to the contrary; they will grant then I hope they are deceived, and
mistake their own proper object; but perhaps because they foresee the dangerous
consequence of such a Concession, some will be apt to run to a
School-distinction, in aim to defend with a show of reason this self-evident
falsehood, that our Senses in the case here handled are not deceived as to their
proper Object: They may distinguish, I fancy, two sort of Objects, a Mediate
one, and another Immediate, the Immediate one is, the color, shape, quantity,
and other accidents or appearances of Bread, the Mediate one is the substance
it self; our Senses, say they, mistake not the former, because the accidents
are the same both before and after the Consecration, but sure I am, they
mistake the latter, it being now by their Principles invisibly changed into the
Body of Christ: This distinction then cannot serve their turn. Let them torture
their discursive faculty never so much, they shall never be able to prove that
our Senses are not truly deceived, representing to us as Bread, what really, if
we believe the Romanists, is not Bread. I come now to the Conclusions springing
naturally from this granted Principle: If I mind to play the Pyrrhonian, and
doubt of every thing I have from the Romish Transubstantiation, a ground
whereon to build this extravagancy; whither-soever I direct my sight, I can
ascertain you of nothing that my eye sees: I enter into a Garden, and there I
behold here Lillies, and there Roses, I smell them, I touch them, and yet I may
question the truth of this, and doubt if I see any such thing, what if the red
of the Roses and the white of the Lillies be now by an Eucharistick-like
Miracle the covertures of some other substances that are neither Roses nor
Lillies; so perhaps it is not a Rose that I smell, a Lilly that I see, Fire that
I feel, an Apple that I taste, a Trumpet that I hear, but some other substances
in their shape, and clothed with their Garments: As it is not Bread that I see
in the Eucharist, but another substance, to wit Christ's Body and Blood under
the accidental parts of Bread and Wine; what do we know but the whole visible
Mass of this World, and all the Objects of our Senses are nothing else but mere
accidents and Superficial Representations of things that perhaps were and now
have no foundation in being, or never were, but have ever been supplied by
God's infinite power? Thus the Pyrrhonian Triumphs upon the same ground whereon
the Romanist settles that strange Doctrine of Transubstantiation, while the
whole Body of Christian Religion is as it were a flote and carried too and fro
by the wind of this uncertain Doctrine. For if our Senses may mistake their own
proper object, as confessedly the Romanist says they do in the Eucharist, our
Faith is nothing else but fancy and uncertainty: Comes it not by hearing? Fides
exauditu? if than one sense may be deceived, why may not likewise the other?
What I see in the Eucharist is not Bread; though it appears to be such, perhaps
what I hear is not the true Word of God, though it shine with all the
Characters thereof: In fine, since our Senses are capable of an error relating
to their proper object, an eyewitness now can be no witness at all, or at
least no Conviction: To what purpose then did our Savior show himself after
his Resurrection so often, and to so many in the day of his glorious Ascension?
In promptu causa est, the Answer is at hand, to no purpose, if our Senses could
mistake their proper object, and what so many eyewitnesses saw and judged to
be Christ, could have been his mere shape and figure, as the Marcionist
pretends, with a clear advantage over and from the Romanists whose Doctrine he
may easily make use of in defense of his error and Heresy. To conclude, if
what appears to the eyes of all men to be Bread, is no such thing, what has
been sounded in the ears of all the World, from Father to Son as a truth may
prove a falsehood? Our ears being no less apt to be imposed upon than our eyes.
Which looks like a mortal blow to all tradition of equal authority with Divine
Scriptures, and I discover not yet how the Romanist can shun it: For since he
grants we may all, and have been from the Cradle of the Church, mistaken in
what we see, may not we likewise be deceived in what we have heard from our
Fathers, and they in what they have heard from their Forerunners, etc. And the
rather that an ear-witness is not so much to be credited as he that has seen:
You judge by this discourse, what extremes these are forced into, who deny on
so slight grounds the greatest and most sensible evidence, which is that of our
senses: But Christ's Word, says the Romanist, is my security; he assures us
the Bread is changed into his body, I enquire no more: Who speaks so forgets,
or knows not what is said elsewhere, litera occidit, the letter kills, and
the literal Sense is an occasion to several of gross errors and pitiful
mistakes: Christ is called a Door, a Rock, a Wine Tree, a Lion, etc. We would
be looked upon as besides our selves if we assented to all this, as interpreted
in the literal sense, and according to the bare sound of the words: For as the
literal sense of such and the like expressions, involves not only obvious
implicancys and manifest absurdities, but moreover was constantly contradicted
by the experimental knowledge of such as were so happy as to see Christ, even
so in our case, these words, this is my Body, if understood conformably to the
mute Letter, both represent to our mind a World of illegal, absurd, and
irrational inferences, and are besides contradicted through all Ages by the
constant experience of all seeing and feeling men: Let no Man nevertheless
imagine we ground our mysteries on the Testimony of our Senses; we only say
nothing can be supposed as a mystery that is point blank against the evidence
of sense and infallible experience, which cannot be retorted against the
mystery of the Trinity, for though we neither see it nor feel it, yet our
Senses show nothing to us evidently destructive to it, and on this account this
mystery is not against but above the reach both of Sense and Reason.

Secondly, This Doctrine inclines the meaner capacities to idolatry, and the
sharper wits to Hypocrisy and Dissimulation: The common People, because
incapable to distinguish the appearance of Bread they see, from the Body of
Christ they see not, and being taught to adore him hidden thus under the veils
of Bread and Wine, are apt to, and no doubt do frequently adore the accidents
they see, which they call sometimes blasphemously, God, yea say commonly, when
the Wafer is lifted up by the Priest in the midst of the Mass, on leve Dieu,
God is lifted, their understanding finding no passage through the Consecrated
Wafer to Christ's Body.

9. As for the sharper sort of Romanists when they reflect;

1. On what is said in Scripture, Act. 3.22.
that the Heavens must receive Christ until the times of restitution of all
things.

2. That a Body can no more be without its due extension, for example, of five
or six foot, than water without humidity, fire without heat, a stone without
hardness.

3. That the Bread cannot be miraculously changed into Christ's Body, because
all miracles are of necessity visible, as is clear by all those we ever heard
or read of: But here the substance into which the Bread is converted, is not
visible: This visibility nevertheless is necessary in a change really
miraculous, as it appears by that of water into wine, of Moses Rod into a
Serpent, etc.

4. That it is inconsistent with reason to say Christ's Body is at the same time
in Heaven and Earth, yea, and in as many places as there be all the World over
Consecrated Wafers: Who-ever understands these absurdities, will never, I am
confident, believe a true Transubstantiation, though he profess otherwise
outwardly through Hypocrisy and Dissimulation: The Trinity, I confess, and
Hypostatical Union, or the Incarnation, are far beyond the reach of our reason,
yet because they are not the Objects of our Senses, we believe them with less
reluctance, and more easily upon authority; but that which has ever been, and
still is evidently repugnant to the experimental knowledge of all our Senses,
as the Transubstantiation confessedly is, can scarce ever be looked upon as a
truth, by such as make use of their discerning faculty. The Romanists instance
commonly these Words of Christ, This is my Body, as the ground of this
Doctrine, which they say, must not be taken in a figurative sense, because they
are Christ's last Will and Testament; and no man, neither ignorant nor
malicious expresses his last Will by Figures and Metaphors: But here lies
their mistake, that these words, This is my Body, are a true and real
Testament, or Christ's Legacy to his Apostles: For he says not, I leave you my
Body, which is the usual manner of uttering our selves in Testaments, but, This
is my Body. It Is no Testament, than as they imagine, or at least not a proper
one.

10. Their Doctrine relating to the mediation of the Virgin Mary and other
Saints, withdraws them from rendering to Christ our only Redeemer due Honor
and Glory: For though there is no other Name under Heaven whereby we must be
saved but that of Christ, yet many of them pretend to Eternal Happiness by the
merits of the Saints and the Virgin Mary, whom they join still with Jesus in
their Visits to the Sick, either crying aloud to them, or exhorting the sick to
pronounce Jesus Maria, as if they judged Christ's merits insufficient, or that
some other Name, than that of Christ our Advocate, with the Father, could be a
propitiation for our Sins; hence it is they extol so much their meritorious
works, that we have reason to say, they ground thereon their best hopes of the
other Life; at least it is certain, the simple undiscerning sort relys more on
what they do than on what Christ did for them, I mean more upon their good
works than on his infinite merits and mercys.

SECT. II. Their Divine Worship and Ecclesiastical Discipline.
1. THeir manner of Divine Worship is not unlike that of the ancient Heathens,
and on this account is far from the purity of the Primitive Church: They adore
God in Pictures and Images, as he was adored by the Heathens in the Sun, Moon,
and other less noble Creatures, or rather to speak in their own terms, they
worship those Images as representations of that invisible and Sovereign Being,
we call God: Though this was severely punished in the Israelites worshipping
the Golden Calf as a representation of God, for I cannot imagine they adored it
as a true God, unless you suppose they were as void of reason as it was; if
then this Worship of theirs be looked upon by all as Idolatry, what may we
judge of that Romish Image Worship the very same, or at least in nothing
material differing from it?

2. Images are commonly called the Books of Ignorants, but in my judgment they
deserve rather to be denominated the Books of Ignorance, because they occasion
often mistakes and errors: As for instance, an Old Man representing God the
Father, a Dove the Holy Ghost, are apt to make the ignorant sort believe they
have indeed some such shape. I shall not contest here about this point, because
it has been discussed so often by others: One thing only I shall say, which I
think is undeniable, that Protestants serve God more in spirit and truth than
Romanists do: Because they make their Addresses to him immediately, without
having recourse to Images, or imploring the help of Saints as Mediators: I know
they answer this by distinguishing a relative and Sovereign Worship. The former
they allow to Images, the latter to God only: But

First, This relative Worship was condemned and punished in the Israelites, as
I have insinuated above.

And Secondly, They adore confessedly the Cross, cultu latriae, with that
Sovereign cult belonging to God only: What then can they instance in defense of
their innocence? I must as yet tell them in this place;

3. They fall short of the end they aim at, in covering the inside of their
Churches with rare Pictures, and Images of exquisite Artifice; their aim is, as
I charitably suppose, to stir up the people thereby to greater devotion. But we
find by experience a quite contrary effect; they are diverted from Prayer, by
that great variety of alluring objects they have before their eyes, you may see
them in their Churches more gazing, for the most part, than praying: At least,
certain it is, the common sort is withdrawn by such outward shows, from uniting
their hearts to God by fervent Prayer: The use of Images then, is not so great
a help to Devotion, as the Romanists do falsely imagine.

4. Nevertheless their Image Worship, though to be rejected, is not so
intolerable as their adoration of the Consecrated Wafer; because besides what
I have said before, it may happen, and I am of opinion very frequently, that
their Priests either want the necessary intention, or entirely forget, or
designedly will not Consecrate the Wafer: In this case mere unconsecrated Bread
is adored, and exposed on their Altars to the public Cult: Will they say this
is no inconveniency, though the People may be guiltless because of their
invincible ignorance, and strong imagination of Christ's Body really there
existent. The thought of this accident, which no doubt happens frequently,
with-draweth several Romanists from yielding to the Wafer, that Sovereign Cult,
due to God only.

5. There is another inconveniency, not unlike the precedent, in a sort of
Worship ordinary amongst Romanists: They honor the Relics of Saints, as their
Bones, Garments, and Parcels of their Bodies, they expose them to the public
Cult on their Altars, they carry them with a ceremonious pomp in their solemn
Processions: But what if these Relics be of Men that are not in Heaven? For I
suppose it is no Article of their Faith, that whom the Pope Canonizeth, as they
speak, is not a Reprobate; since his infallibility was never yet declared by
any of their eighteen General Councils, he is not infallible, when he declares
this man to be in Heaven, or that Woman to be a Saint: Perhaps then you
invocate a damned Soul, you kneel before the Bones of a Reprobate, you ask help
from those whom God has rejected; than which I can imagine nothing more
absurd: If this were well reflected on by the Romanists, they would not be so
forward in worshipping the remainder of the dead.

6. It Is now full time, lest I exceed the bonds I have set to my self, to speak
one word of their Ecclesiastical Discipline: When I consider besides, the
Written Law of God, how many and how heavy Obligations the Romish Church
imposes upon her Subjects, I am fully convinced that Popery is justly called,
and without exaggeration, a mere slavery; the Crowned heads are liable to it,
no less, yea rather more than others: Most of Romanist Divines teach without
any warrant, either from Scripture or reason; the Popes of Rome have power to
depose Princes, untye their Subjects from their sworn allegiance, to give their
Dominions, primo occupanti, to such as can conquer them if they refuse to purge
their Kingdoms of opinions judg^d by Romanists Heretical. This you may see at
large in the Council of Lateran, held under Innocent the third, third Chapter.

7. The Romish Church enslaves so far the understanding of her Followers, as to
forbid them the use of that rational faculty God has bestowed upon us, chiefly
to find out by its light the true Church, and having found it to govern our
selves therein by the same, to search the Scriptures, to try the Spirits if
they be of God or not, lest we be carried away by the wind of all sort of
Doctrine. But this is not permitted to the Romanists, they must pull out their
eyes and say, white is black, if a General Council, though never as yet proved
by them infallible, affirm it: This occasioned an ancient Philosopher to call
the Christian Religion, the Religion of Fools, not because they believe things
above the reach of Humane Reason; for that is no folly, but on this account,
that some of them, to wit the Romanists, believe as 'twas instanced in the
Eucharist, or Lord's Supper, that which is contradicted by the experimental
knowledge of all our Senses.

8. 'Twas a Liberty and Privilege of the Primitive Church, 1 Cor. 10.24, 25,
27.
as S. Paul witnesses to the Corinthians, that whatsoever is sold in the
Shambles, whatever is set before us we may eat, asking no question for
Conscience Sake, that every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
if it be received with Thanksgiving; the Roman Church has taken away this
Privilege, and commands abstinence from Meats, ordains Fasts observed most
punctually by some of them, falsely persuaded the best part of Christian
perfection consists in such indiscreet Rigors, not knowing that true virtue
consists mainly in an entire Victory, we should endeavor to get over our own
Passions, our most dangerous, because Domestic Enemies: So many commanded Fasts
as we see in the Romish Church, under the pain of Mortal Sin, are no doubt, an
occasion of sin and disobedience to many, who think themselves obliged in
Conscience to observe them as injunctions of their Church: Cardinal Bellarmine
that Renowned Romanist, was of this opinion: It Is reported, he was wont to say,
that if 'ere he happened to be Pope, he would abolish the Obligation of the
Lent Fast. No doubt because he judged it a too heavy Yoke, and on this account
more hurtful than profitable.

9. Marriage in the purest age of the Church, was not forbidden to
Ecclesiastics; says not S. Paul, 1 Timot. 3.
that a Bishop may be the Husband of one Wife. Hebr. 13.4.
That Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: And writing to
Timothy, 1 Timot. 4.3.6.
that forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, is the
Doctrine of the Devils: Was not the Forerunner of Christ, the Son of the
High Priest Zacharias, an evident mark, that our Savior approved of, and
honored such sort of Marriages? yet the Romish Church adding still great and
heavy weights to the yoke of Christ, forbids expressly Ecclesiastics to Marry,
though S. Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 7.2.
let every man, that is, whether Clergy or Layman, unless he has the Gift of
Continency, have his own Wife; which Gift is always supposed when a Man or a
Woman vows Chastity: So if you find by experience, you have it not, you are
obliged not to vow, or if you have vowed rashly, flattering your self, you had
this Gift, you are no more engaged by your former vow, because none is obliged
to perform beyond what lies in his power, and it is in no man's power to live
continently, without a Gift of Continency, which God bestows on whom he
pleases, and refuses it to others as he thinks fit; who may, and perhaps are
obliged in this case, to secure themselves from Sin and Temptation, by a lawful
Marriage: For in this conjuncture, Melius est nubere quam uri, it is better to
Marry than burn.

10. It Is observable, the most of those that enter these Orders, they call
commonly Religious, make their vows so young and so inconsiderately, that they
hardly ever reflect on what they undertake, several of them protest they are
forced thereunto by their Parents, or upon the account of some other humane
respects and interest, and if afterward they renew twice a year, as it is
customary amongst the Jesuits, their first vows, it is but with their Lips and
not from their Heart: They may sin, I confess, by this dissimulation, though I
am persuaded, their Crime is none of the greatest, because of the juncture and
necessity of their affairs; but however this Sin communicates no validity to
their vow, which subsists not in reality, without an entire liberty, freedom,
and inward consent, because of the heavy and insupportable Yoke it lays on
their Necks; which in this case they may shake off at the first opportunity,
and follow that sort of Life they shall find most convenient for their
Spiritual concerns and good of their Souls.

11. I wondered often upon what grounds the Romanists call these three vows of
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience to their Superiors, Evangelical Counsels,
because I had never read in the Gospel, that Christ exhorted ever any to tie
themselves to his service by solemn vows. He counseled, I confess, a young man
to sell all he had, and give it to the Poor, but not to make a vow to do so:
Neither could I ever be persuaded, nor any rational man ever will, that it is a
higher degree of perfection to vow, for instance, Chastity, than to live in
Continency, without such a tie and obligation.

12. This is nevertheless the Doctrine of the most learned Romanists. And if I
remember well of their chief Divine Thomas Aquinas, but as they commonly say in
Sorbon, Amicus Aristoteles, amicus Divus Thomas, sed magis amica veritas, no
man's authority is to be admitted of against the truth, which undoubtedly sides
not with them in this conjuncture; because their assertion is entirely grounded
on this weak and illusory reason, that he who vows Continency, sacrifices to
God the thing men make most account of, that precious liberty, they think
preferable to all the Riches of the World, which he that lives chaste without
such a tie does not.

13. This I say is a mere falsehood and a flat illusion, for though I vow, I
keep entirely my former liberty. True it is I cannot break this promise and vow
made to God if it be a real one, without committing a sin, but this puts me in
a worse condition than I was in before: For now if I fall, I commit two Sins,
one against my Vow, and another against the virtue of Continency, whereas
before I vowed I could be guilty but of one. I think then the state of highest
perfection is that which removes us farthest from sin and the occasions
thereof, which certainly vows do not, but ensnaring men rather because of their
great weakness and frailty, expose them to both by that perverse, though inbred
inclination of theirs, to whatever is forbidden them; for nothing more true
than nitimur in vetitum semper, etc.

14. This engages me here to the defense of an Assertion, which will be looked
upon as a Paradox by the Romanists, yet if reflected on without preoccupation,
is a clear, simple, and undeniable truth: They dry up all the veins of their
Eloquence in extolling a Religious Life, as they call it: they say it is most
perfect, happy, blessed, and what not: read Jerome Platus on this Subject, and
you shall find him as whimsical in his notions of this imaginary happiness, as
Plato was in his abstract Idea's.

15. I can prove to persuasion there is no way of serving God more dangerous,
and wherein you shall meet with greater obstacles to your spiritual progress
and eternal happiness, than in these pretended Religious Orders, as they now
stand of the Romish Church; my reason is clear, and runs thus, because their
yoke is incomparably greater and heavier than that of other Christians, since
besides the Commands of God and their Church, they tie themselves to a
numberless number of petty observances and rules, which though they confess
bind not their conscience, yet they teach none of them can scarce ever be
transgressed without sin, either ratione scandali, by reason of the scandal, or
ratione contemptus, because of the contempt of Authority, or on some other
account; they say as yet something more strange, that non progredi, regredi
est, it is not enough for them to observe the Commands of God and the Church,
they call that non progredi, no progress, unless they do more than he has
commanded, by standing with as great preciseness to their Customs and Rules, as
if they were an essential part of Gods written Law.

15. In what fears then, if they have a timorous conscience; in what troubles
and turmoils, and what vexation of spirit they live in: for if so few keep Gods
Commands, as it is said the Just falls seven times a day, what judgment may we
frame of them who pretend to do more than he has ordained, by observing a
number innumerable of petty Rules, Statutes, and frivolous Customs. On this
account I have heard several amongst them say what I believe to be most true,
that their yoke was not like to the yoke of Christ, sweet and light, Jugum
suave and onus leve, but rather exceedingly bitter, and most heavy, Jugum
amarum and onus grave.

16. In fine, I may affirm, without deviating from the Truth, That these Romish
Vows are rather Snares to entrap Souls, than true means to their attaining to a
higher degree of Glory in Heaven. The Devil overcomes some by manifest
Temptations, and a flat Proposition of Sin, but because some others, desirous
to live after a more perfect manner, admit not so easily of his Suggestions, he
catches them by their own inclinations, by vowed engagements, to the pursuance
of a Perfection, which, through Humane Frailty, they shall never reach to; so
weary to swim always against the water, they are forced, at length, to yield to
the stream, and go downwards, which was the Enemies sole aim and main design.

17. Out of this foregoing Discourse, we may conclude, Protestants to be most
happy, as meeting with none of these forementioned Obstacles, to their eternal
happiness, so long as they follow the Maxims of true Protestancy. For,

First, Their Faith is not so blind, though submissive enough to Church
Authority, as to hold for Divine Truths, the fanciful Opinions of fallible Men,
or Decisions of errable Councils: The Word of God only is their Rule, to this
they are taught to conform their Faith and their Actions.

Secondly, They are not tortured and turmoil'd with Doubts, if they be Baptized
or not, because they know the Existency of Baptism to be independent on the
Ministers uncertain intentions.

Thirdly, They have no Incitement to Sin, by relying on a middle place between
Heaven and Hell; they hold no Purgatory, and so are powerfully deterred from
offending God, through fear of his terrible Justice exercised in Hell, upon
such as die without Repentance.

Fourthly, They reject the dangerous distinction of Venial, and Mortal Sin, as
opening a door to Looseness; for though some Sins be more heinous than others,
yet in this we must confess a perfect equality, that they are all offenses of
an infinite Majesty, and consequently deserve his eternal Wrath, as being of an
unlimited malice.

Fifthly, They allow every one to read the Scripture as the Fountain of all
wholesome Doctrine, and capable to make us wise unto Salvation, as being a Light
to our Understanding, lest we err; and a Fire to our Will, lest we wax Cold in
Charity and Love toward God and our Neighbors.

Sixthly, Their Doctrine concerning the Lord's Supper is spirit and life, it
gives no occasion either of Idolatry or Hypocrisy, by teaching that strange
Novelty of Transubstantiation: They captivate indeed their understanding in
obsequium Fidei, in obedience to Divine Faith, but pull not out their Eyes to
believe there is no Bread in the Eucharist, where they see all the inseparable
Properties thereof, as Color, Shape, Quantity, etc.

Seventhly, They rely solely on the Merits of Christ; neither on the mediation
of Saints, nor on their own good works, fully persuaded of this Christian
Truth, when they have done all they can, they are but useless Servants, and
that all their sufficiency is from Above.

Eighthly, Their Divine Worship is pure, and without mixture of Superstition or
Idolatry; neither entirely without Ceremonies, nor overburden'd with 'em
superstitiously.

Ninthly, They adore God in Spirit and Truth, not under corporal Shapes, and
false Representations; they adore him as Spirit and Truth, as he is in reality,
knowing perfectly all their spiritual needs, and bodily necessities, without
the help of Saints as Speakers and Informers.

Tenthly, Their Ecclesiastical Discipline is most conformable in all its parts
to that of the Primitive Church, as also their Faith, their Manners, and way of
living, as may be gathered out of this and the foregoing Article; and every one
knows that is not altogether a Stranger to Antiquity.

Eleventhly, They serve God in all freedom of spirit, without endangering their
Souls by vows of Continency, true Snares rather to Innocence, than fit means
for attaining to Perfection and eternal Felicity.

ARTICLE III.
SECT. 1. Conclusions flowing from the first Principle of this Method.
I. MY first Principle was, That those who profess Protestancy, may be saved. I
proved it to Conviction, without invectives or bitterness, in the spirit of
Christian Charity, Meekness and Lenity, persuaded of this clear Truth, that
Conviction of the intellective Faculty works never a true Conversion, unless
the Will be conquered by a civil and charitable way of debating.

II. It Is Proverbial amongst the Romanists, That out of the Church there is no
hopes of salvation. In what sense this is true, it is not my design here to
inquire; but I affirm they are pitifully mistaken, understanding by the Church,
that handful of Christians united together in communion with the Sea of Rome,
which is as unreasonable, as if one would say, a Particular is an Universal, a
Part is the Whole, or at least of as great and vast a bulk. They will grant
then, I suppose, Protestants to be Members of the Universal Church, but dead
ones, destitute of life, spirit and vigor. The contradictory of this
Proposition stands demonstrated in the first Article; for since they may be
saved by the merits and influence of their invisible Head Christ, they are both
wholesome, living, and vigorous Members of his Church.

III. They cannot be accused of Schism, nor without a groundless Calumny called
Schismatics, since they are still contained in the Catholic or Universal
Church, their Reform being in the Church, not from it; hold they not all Points
necessary to salvation, and whatever was of Divine Faith in the primitive
Times. They separated, I confess, from the particular Church of Rome, but
Romanists were the true causes of this Separation, by introducing Errors and
Novelties, so they are properly the Separatists, not Protestants: Let them be
ashamed then to sound perpetually as they do in the Peoples ears, such a
notorious Calumny, which with greater truth may be Retorted against themselves.

IV. I hope hereafter they shall prove more moderate, and call them Brethren,
whom they have thought hitherto Heretics; for I am persuaded they are
convinced this foul aspersion of Heresy is groundless, as being a mere
illusion, and the product of a preoccupated judgment. The Protestants, say
they, are Heretics, because they reject obstinately the Decisions of General
Councils; but will they never reflect that these Decisions can neither be
looked upon by us, nor by them as revealed Truths, unless their Infallibility
be either grounded on clear Scripture, or in their sentiment on the Authority
of some General Council. In what Scripture is it said, General Councils are
infallible Judges of Controversial Debates? In what Council was it decided,
that General Councils were unerrable? Here they are amazed, and their thoughts
at a stand; they are forced to yield, and confess ingenuously, that this
pretended Infallibility has no other foundation in being, but that of their
own Opinion and Fancy: For though 'twere grounded on the Decision of some
General Council, this must be first proved Infallible by an Evidence distinct
from its own Testimony.

V. But because my only design in this place is to raise Inferences, and not
to frame new Arguments, I entreat the Romanist Reader, after a serious perusal
of my first Article, to reflect a moment upon his own Uncharity against so many
Thousands of His Majesty's Subjects, and other Nations, so commendable for
their unstained Life and Conversation; so acceptable to God, because of their
Virtue and Innocence. Let them, I say, upon second thoughts, repent of their
former Uncharity, in condemning their Neighbors so inconsiderately, as
Schismatics, Heretics, Reprobates. Let them detest from the bottom of their
hearts this Unchristian Rigor and Severity; if perhaps upon such groundless
pretenses they were persuaded 'twas lawful to persecute them by Treason, Fire
and Sword, the deep ignorance they lived in could be as a Veil to the Enomity
of their Crime: But after the perusal of this Treatise they can no more pretend
ignorance, they are told of their Error, and sufficiently informed of their
former mistakes.

VI. Neither can they with the least appearance of Truth call Apostates such as
embrace Protestancy, since they retain still the Faith of that Church which
flourished the first three Centuries after our Savior's Birth, and is
confessed by all Parties to have been the true Church of Christ. They admit not
indeed the additional Articles of Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Imageworship,
Invocation of Saints, etc. for the grounds above laid. But on this account they
are in no true sense Apostates, because Apostasy is a defection from the true
Faith, and these Points are either gross Errors, or, as a learned Divine of the
English Church calls them, inferior Truths, not destructive to Divine Faith,
whether believed or denied; though they be, as I have insinuated elsewhere, not
a little prejudicial to true Virtue, and Christian Piety.

VII. Rashness or Imprudence can with as little justice be objected to such as
retreat from Popery. It has been demonstrated by the consent of Romanists, and
self-evident Principles they follow, by professing Protestancy a probable and
well-grounded opinion, That worshipping God after the Protestant manner, they
may attain to the end they were created for, which is eternal happiness.

SECT. 2. Conclusions flowing naturally from the second Principle of this
method.
THE second Principle was, That Protestants may be saved more easily, and with
greater security, than those of the Romish Persuasion. I shall not repeat here
what I said before, to explain, rather than to prove this self-evident Truth,
hence only I infer what is evident enough of it self without any formal
inference.

I. That Romish Priests are obliged not to endeavor, as they do, the
Conversion, or rather Perversion of Protestants, because it is a sin to withdraw
any man from the safest way to Heaven.

II. The Romanists once convinced, as I hope they are, of this second
Principle, must of necessity renounce Popery, and profess Protestancy, there
being an obligation incumbent to all men in matters of such a high Concern, to
choose that which is securest.

III. Protestants must stand stoutly to their own Religion, and way of Divine
Worship, and cannot, if they regard a good Conscience, after this instruction
turn Romanists, because in so doing they would endanger their own Souls, by
reason of the forementioned obstacles to salvation in the profession of Popery.

IV. All true Protestants, and more particularly Those who by their Dignity,
Office, and Employment, are to watch over the Flock, must needs, if they will
perform their duty, endeavor with all Charitable and Christian means the
Confirmation of Protestants in Protestancy, and the Conversion of their Popish
Subjects from Popery, else they forfeit their Character and Ministry, as
neglecting the spiritual concerns of Souls redeemed by the precious blood of
Christ, and committed to their trust and vigilance: If I have been my self
instrumental to the perversion of several, while misled by a blind Zeal, I saw
things but under one light, I shall, at Convenience, repair this Damage done to
the Church, by writing in my spare-hours such instructions as may be
subservient to their returning homewards, or useful to the conversion of
others, and particularly my nearest and dearest Relations.

V. I shall put here a stop to my Pen, and an end to this Treatise, with a
short and charitable Advice to all His Majesty's Subjects of the Romish
Persuasion.

Charitable Advice to all His Majesty's Subjects of the Romish Persuasion.
YOu have believed till now, as an Article of your Faith, That Protestants were
all Reprobates, Heretics, Schismatics, and many of them Apostates. Your Faith
being ever an implicit one, and pinned on other men's sleeves. You are more to
be pitied for this gross mistake, than blamed. You are not unlike, pardon me
the freedom of this Parallel, to those that are blind from their birth. You may
induce such men to believe any Falsehood you please, as for instance, that White
is Black, or Black is White, because they want the use of their visive Faculty,
and solely rely on your Authority. You renounce not only to your reason, in
favor of the pretended Council-Oracles. You hold not only your understanding
captive when Rome speaks, but you extinguish the clearest light thereof, in
submission to her Decisions, as if you were quite blind, and understood
nothing, or as if Nature had not bestowed upon you an intellective Faculty, in
order to discern good from evil, falsehood from truth, to try the spirits whence
they are, whether of God or not. The Romanists, your Masters, imitate those
ancient Heathens, who, to gain the Peoples esteem and greater veneration for
their Laws, said confidently, They had received them immediately from the gods:
So they, to hold you in awe, and tyrannize over your understandings, as by a
principle of Conscience, call boldly whatever is decided in General Councils,
Divine Oracles, Revealed Truths, Faith-Articles, which is the greatest Artifice
the Prince of Darkness could invent, to spread all the World over Error,
Ignorance, and Superstition. To avoid then your being seduced hereafter, make
use of your Reason, since it is chiefly allowed you for your attaining to the
knowledge of saving Truths, peruse often, and meditate frequently this
Treatise, wherein you shall discover clearly,

I. That Protestants, you have been so averse from hitherto, through
preoccupation and ignorance, may be saved, as being true Members of the
Universal Church, and neither Heretics nor Schismatics.

II. That they attain to Eternal Happiness more easily, and with greater safety
than Romanists, standing to the Principles of Popery.

III. That the boasted of Infallibility of General Councils is no Article of
Faith amongst Roman Catholics, but a mere politic design to domineer by this
persuasion over all Nations, for the increase of temporal Concerns; and that as
Rome of old subdued the World by force of Arms, she may still enslave it by
Religious Scruples, and strong Fancies of the Divine Original of her Oracles,
which was meant by the Poet that sung thus: Roma caput mundi, quic quid non
possidet armis Religione tenet.

You have pretended formerly your Conscience suffered you not to conform to
that Divine Worship now established by Law in these three Kingdoms, you thought
it not lawful to forsake Popery, and profess Protestancy, as being in your
opinion nothing else but Heresy, Schism, Apostasy. This can be no more an
Obstacle to your Conversion, you are now informed to Conviction of the
contrary, and of your incumbent Obligation to retreat from Romanism; of two
Evils, the least is to be chosen; and of two ways to Heaven, that which is
securest, in matters of this Concern all deliberation laid aside, your
Conscience will press you to the surest. So long as you endeavor your being
insensible to her Checks, you pretend in vain to any true happiness in this
life, she will sound perpetually in your ears the extreme danger you are in
through your own fault, and as an inseparable, terrifying, and threatening
Ghost, disturb your Repose by day and by night, in all times, and in all places.

Omnibus umbra locis aderit. FINIS.

