A DECLARATION OF General MONCK Touching the King of SCOTS; AND His
Proclamation, published by sound of Trumpet, at the Head of each Regiment; upon
his marching with Nine Thousand Horse and Foot for BERWICK.

With the Engagement taken, and subscribed by the Scottish Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen; And the Warrants and Commissions, sent from Sir Arthur Haslerigg,
and the rest of the Parliamen^s Commissioners at Portsmouth, to the
High-Sheriffs of the Western Counties.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Bradley, 1659.

A PROCLAMATION FROM General MONCK; Published at the Head of each respective
Regiment, both of Horse and Foot, upon their advance toward England.
Upon the advance of General Monck with his Army toward Berwick Proclamation
was made at the Head of each respective Regiment, both of Horse and Foot, For
all persons whatsoever, either Officers and Soldiers, that could not freely,
willingly, or consciously, engage with Him, in this present Expedition, to lay
down their Arms, and depart the Army; and that for his own part, he had a deep
sense of this great and National Affair, having just grounds of
dissatisfaction, and that he could not comply with any, who should refuse, or
seem dubious, to stand or adhere to a warrantable concurrence: His Undertakings
being such, that the candor of his Heart bore him Testimony and Evidence of
the justness of his Cause; and that he ought not to violate the Authority of
Parliaments, whose Legislative Power and Freedom* every individual Member were
bound to assert and maintain, after such solemn assurances of faithfulness and
obedience; and to assert the honor and integrity of such Noble Patriots, who
for many years had undergone a Labyrinth of Troubles, and stood even in the
very Gap and Gulf of the Ruins, Desolations, and Miseries, that for many
yeaars threatened these distracted, divided, and bleeding Nations.

Proclamation being thus made by sound of Trumpet, the Army drew off in a
Regimental way from Hadington toward Berwick, where General Monck caused a
Declaration to be published, intimating* The integrity of his Heart, and the
sincerity of his Cau e; That he held a detestation of that horrid impiety, to
raise himself by the ruin of others, That he was none of tho e that sought
great things to himself: That he was forced with the Parliaments Army under his
command, to bear Testimony against the violence of those, who shall endeavor
an absolute extirpation of the Peoples Rights and Privileges, and that he is
resolved to use the utmost of his Endeavors, to remove the late force put upon
the Parliament Members: That no means shall be left by him unassayed, for
preservation of the peace of the Commonwealth, in obedience to the Parliament;
taking God to witness, the integrity of his present Design and Intentions, and
that he abhors the very thoughts of introducing any arbitrary power, being
resolved to spend his blood in opposition to any single person whatsoever: That
he doubts not but the justness of his Cause will crown his Endeavors, being
resolved to leave the success to the Most High, and to hazard ALL for the
Glory of God, and the good of his people.

Upon his departure from Edenbrough, an Engagement was tendered to the Assembly
of Lords and Gentlemen, which they subscribed; assuring him, in the Name of
themselves, and the whole Nation, that they will not own the interest of
Charles Stuart, but endeavor the preservation of the peace of their Country,
against all attempts whatsoever.

Having thus settled the Country in a posture of defense, Orders were issued
forth for the Army to march toward the Borders; Which the Lord Lambert
understanding, immediately gave Order for the advance of his Forces; so that
both Armies being upon motion, several Regiments of Horse and Foot are matched
into Northumberland; and it is reported, that General Monck is advanced over
Berwick Bridge, and that some Engagement has happened, and a small party of
horse routed: But this being various, we shall not blot paper with any such
circumstances: considering, that the Interests of several persons do balance
the Scales according to their affections: However, thus much is ascertained,
that the Army under the conduct of General Monck consists of about Nine
Thousand Horse and Foot, and that the Lord Lambert is near upon Eleven Thousand.

By the last Express from Portsmouth, on Saturday last, it is certified, that a
party of horse came as far as Gosper, and faced the Town, but afterward
wheeled off at a further distance. Seven Troops are also marched from
Petersfield toward Chichester, and some Commotions are feared about Exceter.
The Foot that marched from London was met on Saturday last between Lookhup and
Petersfield, and intended to arrive before Portsmouth the 12th instant. Which
place is said to be supplied with great store of provision and ammunition,
having above threescore pieces of Ordnance.

Col. Morley, and the rest of the Members of the Old Parliament, having
consulted the public affairs in general, and settled that Garrison, dispatched
(as we hear) sundry Letters to the Governors of several Castles and Garrisons,
inciting them to a return of their former Duty, and to alienate their
affections from the Army. But how it is rescented, the Relations are various,
and the several Reports as dubious: for some report the Isle and Castle of
Portland to be in safe hands, and that Cowes and Hurst Castle in the Isle of
Wight have undergone some Tamperings: as also Carisbrook Castle: What further
shall accrue, upon these National Transactions, we shall endeavor to make
obvious, by our next: Humbly imploring, that the signal manifestations of Gods
most gracious presence, may enlighten the Sons of men in these dark and gloomy
Times, and to work our deliverance from the inevitable ruin and mischiefs,
which are now aggravated by our manifold Divisions.

Upon the arrive of this sudden change and alteration, in so considerable a
Garrison as Portsmouth, It was ordered, That a considerable Body of Horse and
Foot should be forthwith sent down into the Western parts, to reduce that
Garrison, or block it up: and accordingly the Lord Disbrow was made choice of,
as Commander in chief for that Expedition, who advanced with several Troops of
Horse from Westminster, and on Tuesday Night last Colonel Hewsons Regiment of
Foot began their march from the City of London, and five Companies of Colonel
Gibbons Regiment from the Borough of Southwark who were met on Friday last
above twenty miles on their way toward Portsmouth, the Horse being in the Van,
who are somewhat impeded in their march, by the present season, and inclemency
of the weather. Notwithstanning, willing they are, to embrace all timely
Opportunities, for the obviating all dangerous and pernicious Designs and
Enterprises, that may any ways prove obnoxious and destructive to the public
peace and welfare of these Nations: In order whereunto, all possible care is
taken, for the way-laying, stopping, and guarding the several Avenues and
Passes, porting and leading to the Town, that so the reducing of it may prove
the more facile, and the Work expedited, which otherwi^e may introduce various
Contingencies and Mutations, the Spirits of the people being exceeding
inclinable thereunto: occ sioned by the deplorable Revolutions, and a general
decay of Trade, as does exceed the greatest of presidents in former times.

Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, Colonel Morley, and Colonel Walton, have issued forth
Warrants, for the raising of Forces in the Western Counties, according to the
power given them by Act of Parliament for the commanding of the Army.

The Forces sent from London are arrived in those parts, and have faced the
Town; but there is little hopes (as yet) of attiquing the place.

The Garrison is reinforced with additional supplies, and many of the Gentry
are joined with them; but Colonel Norton (we hear) declines engaging. There is
free access into the Town by Sea, and the Frigates which lay in the Harbor have
been coasting up and down, and have brought in some supplies. They were lately
at Faymouth, and from thence went toward Plymouth, but are since returned. The
Commissions issued forth for raising of the Countries, have been sent to
diverse Gentlemen in those parts; but we do not hear of the embodying of any
Forces, since the dispiersing of those in Sussex.

FINIS.

