His Royal Highness JAMES DUKE of Alban^, and York, only Brother to his sacred
Mayesty, Lord High Com^issioner of Scotlan^


Medulla Historiae Scoticae: Being a Comprehensive HISTORY OF THE Lives and
Reigns OF THE KINGS OF SCOTLAND, FROM FERGVS the First, to our Gracious
Sovereign CHARLES the Second.

CONTAINING The most Remarkable Transactions, and Observable Passages,
Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military, with other Observations proper for a
Chronicle; faithfully Collected out of Authors Ancient and Modern.

To which is added, A brief Account of the Present State of Scotland, the Names
of the Nobility, and Principal Ministers of Church and State, the Laws
Criminal: A Description of that Engine with which Malefactors are Tortured,
called the BOOT.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall, 1685.

To the Most Noble JAMES Earl of Perth, Lord Drummond, and Stobhall, etc.
Lord Justice General of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, One of the Extraordinary
Lords of the SESSION, and one of the Lords of His MAJESTY'S Most Honorable
PRIVY COUNCIL in that KINGDOM.
THIS Compendious History of the KINGS of Scotland, is Most Humbly Dedicated by

Your Lordships Most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant, W. A.

TO THE READER.
I Shall not detain the Generous Reader with Flourishes upon the Grandeur, and
Glory of the Scottish Crown, nor tell you that it may Vie Antiquity with the
Ancientist Monarchy of the Universe, that I leave to your Vmpirage, when you
have compared the following sheets with the Histories of other Nations. Only
thus far I will assure you that Scotland will be found to be a Country Pregnant
of Wonderful Changes, and Revolutions, a Theater whereon Divine Providence has
I Exhibited diverse remarkable Instances, of it is Peculiar Care over Crowned
Heads, and where all Treason and Disloyalty has been persued with utter ruin
and Destruction. It can show a Race of Kings Unparalleled for their Bravery,
and Gallantry in the Defense of their Country, and Protection of their Allies,
and for their Heroicism in Assisting and redresing the Miserable and Oppressed.
But I leave their own Acts, as represented in the following Mirror to make
good my assertion, and shall proceed to offer something in my own Vindication,
for I am liable to some Reprehension for Cramming so Large, so Bulky a History
into so small a Volum, but if it be considered that all the Curious have
neither the leisure to peruse nor the means to provide a larger, I hope I shall
need no farther Apology upon that point, nor need I advocate much for differing
much from many Authors, as to the Origin of our Nation, since I have followed
the most Authentic, and have only varied from those whose writings are
vanished with Monckery, and savor more of the Legend than true History.
Besides the plain bomespun manner wherein all these matters are delivered, will
disgust several who only delight in what is Flaunting and Tricked up with all
the Ornaments and Gawdiness of Rhetoric and Elocution; but be it known I
fitted my style for the Capacities of Vulgar Readers, such as becomes a
History, not a Panegyric, and what squars best with the Tongue of both
Kingdoms, wherein there was never yet any Chronicle published of the Realm of
Scotland; so as that those who were unacquainted with the Latin, were excluded
from the knowledge of the Primitive state of so Illustrious a Kingdom. After
having fitted this account for the Common use by divesting it of a Pompous
Dress and a too Stately Dignity of style, my Chief Care was to avoid
Partiality, by a stedy and Cauterous stearing between Buchanan and Bishop
Lesley, Seylla and Charybdis, where vast Funds of Wit and Learning might easily
have wrought the shipwreck of an unwary Pilot; so that though a great part hereof
is a translation of Eminent Authors, yet I left my Originalls when I found 'em
bias'd, and avoiding their Extremes boul'd directly to the Block.

THE Introduction,
HIstory has been reckoned, one of the most Generous amusements of the greatest
Personages, and the loftier the Subject, the more agreeable the Entertainment.
Now for the Advantages, and Dignity of a Scottish Chronicle; I will not so much
insist upon it is Novelty, and the wonderful Vicissitudes it contains, as the
Preheminency of that Crown, over all Commonwealths, Empires and Monarchies,
which, by stating their several Claims and Pretenses, will sufficiently be made
appear. The Emperor Challenges the first Rank, as succeeding to the Roman
Emperors, who are supposed to have been universal Monarchs; the French King
pretends also to it, upon the Account of his being Styled the most Christian
King, with other such Pretenses. The King of Spain also pleads it, as his
Right; being the most Catholic King, and King of manyest Kingdoms.

In this Debate of theirs, we are not a little concerned; our business
therefore shall be to prove: First, that the King of Great Britain has an
unquestionable Right of Precedence to all the above named Princes: Secondly,
that he has it it as King of Scotland.

First, he founds his Precedence to them all, 1. Upon his being a absolute
Monarch of the Isle of Great Britain, which was first Christian, 2. Upon his
being one of the Quatuor nucti, which were before all other Kings, 3. That
having Conquered France, he has Right to all it is Titles, by which he carries
it clear from the Spaniard, or any other Competitor, and Lastly, that it was
granted him, even as King of England by the Popes themselves, in the General
Councils; so that had they not relinquished his Papacy, it is like his
Holiness, had not as yet questioned their Title to it.

II. His Majesty as King of Scotland, may justly claim the Precedence from all
those Princes; it being by Lawyers declared the uncontroverted use of
Precedence, That amongst those of equal Dignity, he who first attained to that
Dignity, is to be preferred, This being a Rule among others Dignities, we see
no reason, but that it should hold here.

This being granted, I subsume that the King of Scotland, being equal in
Dignity with the Kings of England, France and Spain, attained to that Dignity,
before either of them, for the first King of Scotland Reigned about three
hundred and thirty years before the birth of Christ: Whereas the English
Historians Confess, that they cannot reckon higher than eight hundred years
after Christ: Nor can either the French, or Spaniard come up to the English,
for the French take the Origin from Hugh Capi, who Usurped that Crown, Anno.
987. And the Spaniards from Rudolphus King of the Romans, Elected 1273.

But here it is objected by some, that the Kings of Scotland, were Vassals to
the Kings of England, and did them Homage for the Crown of Scotland, and so can
Claim no Precedence amongst any free Princes, far less amongst such as are of
the first magnitude. This some English Historians do with great Confidence
aver; but that their Ignorance, or Malice, or both may appear, we are Content
to refer the matter, not only to the Respect the General Councils gave to the
Representatives of the Kings of Scotland, which was only due to free Princes,
together with the Judgment of Foreign Princes, Lawyers, and Historians about
it; but also to the acknowledgment of the Kings of England themselves, (1.)
King Henry of England, having entreated the Assistance of Alexander King of
Scotland, against Simeon Earl of Leicester, did by Letters under his hand,
publicly declare, that he did not crave this Assistance, as Superior, to which
Superiority, he had no pretense, but to which is very Considerable, the King
and Parliament of England, have treated with the Ambassadors of Scotland;
whereas no Superior can Treat with his own Vassal, as a Forreigner.

We freely Grant that the Kings of Scotland did hold the Lands of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, in Capite of the Crown of England,
which yet was no Disparagment to them; that being most ordinary amongst
Sovereign Princes, for thus Henry King of England, and several others of their
Kings, did Homage to the Kings of France, for the Provinces possessed by them in
France; as the King of Spain also does, this day to the Pope, for Naples and
Sicily. And yet the Homage done for those Countries have been the occasion of
an Ignorant mistake in some, and a malicious Pretense for others, to
Mis-represent it, as done for the Kingdom of Scotland.

Advertisement.
By reason of the Authors absence from the Press; several Faults have escaped,
which the Reader is desired to amend.

A List of the KINGS of SCOTLAND.
1 FErgus. 2 Ferithar. 3 Main. 4 Dornadill. 5 Hothat. 6 R^ther. 7 Rutha. 8
Thereus. 9 Josine. 10 Finnane. 11 Durst. 12 Even. 1 13 Gill 14 Even. 2. 15
Eder. 16 Even. 3. 17 Metelan. 18 Caratack. 19 Corbred. 1. 20 Dardan. 21
Corbred. 2. 22 Luctack. 23 Mogald. 24 Conar. 25 Ethod. 1. 26 Satrael. 27
Donald. 1. 28 Ethod. 2. 29 Athirck. 30 Nathalock. 31 Findoch. 32 Donald. 2. 33
Donald. 3. 34. Crathilinth. 35 Fincormach. 36 Romach. 37 Angusian. 38
Fethelmach. 39 Ewen. 1. 40 Fergus. 2. 41 Ewen. 2. 42 Dongard. 43 Constantine.
1. 44 Congall. 1. 45 Goran. 46 Ewen. 3. 47 Congall. 2. 48 Kinnatell. 49 Aidan.
50 Kenneth. 51 Ewen. 4. 52 Ferchard. 1. 53 Donald. 3. 54 Ferchard. 2. 55
Maldwine. 56 Ewen. 5. 57 Ewen. 6. 58 Amberkelleth. 59 Ewen. 8. 60 Mordach. 61
Etfin. 62 Ewen. 7. 63 Fergus. 3. 64 Solvat. 65 Achaius. 66 Congall. 3. 67
Dongall. 68 Alpine. 69 Kenneth. 2. 70 Donald. 5. 71 Constantine. 2. 72 Eth. 73
Gregory. 74 Donald. 6. 75 Constantine. 3. 76 Malcolm. 1. 77 Indulf. 78 Duff. 72
Culen. 80 Kenneth. 3. 81 Constantine. 4. 82 Grim. 83 Malcolm. 2. 84 Donald. 7.
85 Macbeth. 86 Malcolm. 3. 87 Donald Bane. 88 Duncan. 89 Edgar. 90 Alexander.
1. 91 David. 1. 92 Malcolm. 4. 93 William. 94 Alexander. 2. 95 Alexander. 3. 96
John Balliol. 97 Robert Bruce. 98 David. 2. 99 Edward Balliol. 100 Robert. 2.
101 Robert. 3. 102 James. 1. 103 James. 2. 104 James. 3. 105 James. 4. 106
James. 5. 107 Henry Stewart, and Mary Stewart. 108 James. 6. 109 Charles. 1.
110 Charles. 2.
AN EPITOME OF THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND.
THe Scots by the most judicious Writers, and by those who have most carefully
studied, not only their own Antiquities, but those of other Nations are
acknowleged (although they be not of the greatest) to be undoubtedly among the
most ancient People in Europe. But to speak more particularly of their ancient
Nation, we must know that the whole Island (...), it is a part, was at first
called Albion, or Albium: As Theophrastus, Ptolomy, Tacitus and Seneca tells
us, which Name the true race of the ancient Scots retain to this day, calling
the ancient Country Albin, and themselves Albinich, always keeping their
primitive Name notwithstanding of the many different People, that have since
inhabited it.

The Etymology of this Name is disputed by many, but it seems to be really
derived from Alb, or Alp, signifying a Hill or high place. The ancient
Inhabitants of the Northern parts of this Island were called Scots, who were
divided into two sorts, the one who were the first Possessors, and this
Posterity does inhabit it to this day, were called the Scoto-Brigantes. Some
have taken upon them to be very accurat, in giving an Account of their descent,
and the manner of their coming hither, even from the far ends of the Earth; but
with so little appearance of Truth, that I will not put my Reader nor my self
to the trouble to refute it. The most probable Conjecture, and that which
carries most Evidence with it is, that these first Inhabitants came in
Colonies from Spain to Ireland (nor is it improbable, that these Colonies were
Originally from France) who either for want of Accommodation to live at home,
or being thrust out by stronger hands came over to Ireland, where they
continued long, for either themselves or their Children desirous of new
Habitations, transported themselves to the north Islands, where they continued
in an unsettled Course of Life for a long time; the time of their entering
Albion, is said to have been from the Creation, about 3530 years. Pect. Boet.
Ralph l. 306.
The first place they took Possession of was Argyle, they being divided into
sundry Tribes, elected every Tribe their own Captain, to govern them in Peace
and War, this very name they had in great Veneration.

Then after, about 150 (as some write) a German, or as Beda says, a Scythian
Navy arrived upon the coast of Ireland; being as is probable, beat thither by a
Tempest, having neither Wives or Children with them; the men were in want of
every thing, having by tedious Sailing consumed all their Provision. They sent
to the Inhabitants, desiring they might have a residence among which they told
them, they could not afford in regard of the Barrenness of the place, and the
multitude of Inhabitants that possess it already; but that there was a
habitable Land called Albion, not far from them, whether they might go; it
being for the most part, as yet un-inhabited, and such as did inhabit it, like
to ruin one another by civil Discords

Those men (afterward called Picts following their Advice, set Sail and came to
that part of Albion that lies toward Germany; and having Landed, soon beat out
the Inhabitants, and made them draw themselves within less bounds. Possessing
themselves of Caithness, Ross, Murray, Merus, Angus, Fiffe and Lothian,
together with Orkney, which some say was their first Habitation. They were a
civil People, Ingenious and Crafty, both in Peace and War.

Having fixed their residence, they sent Messingers to the Scots, desiring
their Daughters in Marriage, alleging that if they condescended, it would
highly conduce to the Welfare of both of them; being thereby made strong, for
either an offensive or defensive War, with any of their Neigbours. This message
the Scots at first rejected, but upon mature Deliberation they condescended: So
having agreed upon the Terms, which were that they should concur with all their
Forces, when they were invaded, and as often as the Crown of Picts came to want
an Heir, the next of the Woman's blood should succeed; the Scots gave their
Daughters in Marriage to them: But the Brittons who inhabited the South parts
of the Island, suspecting that this affinity between the Scots and the Picts,
might tend to their prejudice, sent Ambassadors to the Picts, persuading them
to break with the Scots; by this means the Scots suffered extremely, many of
their People who dwelt among the Picts, being surprised and cut off, in
Compensation of which they cut off, as many of the Picts as they could catch;
thus they for a long time wasted one another Country with continual
Incursions, at last they resolved to put it to the hazard of a General Battle.
The Scots assembling in Argyle, consulted what was fit to be done, and
considering that they had not only to do with the Picts, but with the Brittons
also; therefore it was agreed to send Ambassadors to Ireland, to have the
Advice and Assistance of their old Friends, and Progenitors in this Affair, and
finding that by having many supreme Captains, Sedition and Division increased
amongst them, they resolve to elect one to have the supreem Government over the
rest.

Their Ambassadors arriving in Ireland, and representing their condition to
Ferchard King of Scots, he was much concerned at the wrongs done them,
therefore he sent his Son Fergus a wise and valiant Prince, accompanied with
many gallant Soldiers; sending with him also the fatal Marble Chair for his
encouragement: Upon his arrival he called a Council in Argyle, where having
made an elegant Oration, he was by Unanimous Consent elected King of the Scots.

1. Thus Fergus the first King of Scots, was Crowned in the fatal Marble Chair,
which he brought with him from Ireland, in the year from the Creation 3641.
before the coming of Christ 330. about the beginning of the fourth Monarchy,
when Alexander the Great vanquished Darius the last Persian Monarch. Soon after
the Picts assisted by the Brittons, invaded the Country against them, the King
most valiantly took the Field with his fierce Scots; when the two Armies
approached one another, the Brittons stood off in Battle Array, resolving that
when the Scots and Picts had sufficiently weakened one another in Battle, to
break in upon them, and destroy them both; this by a Fugitive Britton was
discovered to Fergus, whereupon he desired an interview with the King of Picts;
wherein, representing the eminent hazard that both of them were in, by the
Treachery of the Brittons, after mature Deliberation; it was determined that
they both should convert their Arms against the Brittons, this resolution was
most pleasing no doubt to the Picts Wives, to see their Husbands and their
Fathers agreed. The Brittons seeing this disappointment of their hopes break
upon the Picts, pillaging and spoiling at their Pleasure, which when Fergus
heard of, he went against them, and with the Assistance of the Picts, he
totally routed them killing their King, his Name was Coil with many of his
Nobles: Upon this Victory the Nobles and Subjects agreed, that Fergus and his
Posterity, should inherit the Crown of Scotland for ever, whereupon Charters
and Evidences were granted to them, ratifying the same.

The Kingdom of Scotland being thus confirmed to Fergus and his Successors, he
with Advice and Consent of his Council divided the whole Land, then inhabited
by the Scots among his Nobles and Captains, making many Laws to repress Vice
and Disorders: Not long after he was chosen Arbitrator, to determine some high
Controversies amongst his Friends in Ireland; whereupon he went thither,
accompanied with many of his Nobles, and settled all their Debates. But
returning home, he was by a tempestuous Storm driven upon a Rock in the Sea,
where he and all the Nobles in his Company perished, this Rock is called after
his Name Carrib-Fergus: Thus dyed this brave and valiant Prince, in the five
and twentieth Year of his Reign, to the unspeakable Grief and loss of his
Subjects.

2. Fergus being dead, left two Sons behind, him Ferlegus and Atainus, neither
of which were capable presently to manage the Government, because of their
tender years: Whereupon a Convention was holden by the Nobles, for electing of
a King, wherein some were for choosing one of the late Kings Children;
alleging, that they were bound by Oath to continue the Crown in Fergus his
Succession; others aggravated the Danger both at home and abroad, under the
Government of a Child. At length, after a long Debate it was enacted, that when
it happened their King should dye, (the Heirs begotten of his Body, being
Children) the nearest of the Royal Blood, being the best qualified for doing of
Justice should succeed, and possess the Crown for his time; and after his
Death, the former Kings Son to succeed without any impediment, if he is found
fit for Government. This Law was in Force till the Reign of King Malcom the
third. Thus by this Law Feritharis Brother to Fergus the late King was chosen,
who begun his Reign in the Year of the World 3666. before the coming of Christ
305 Years, from the beginning of the Reign of Scotland 26.

Feritharis Reigned fifteen years with such Equity and Modesty, that his
Subjects found him an excellent King, and his Nephews an excellent Tutor; but
at length Ferlegus having an itching after the Government, and having got some
loose young Men upon his side, went to his Uncle and boldly demanded the
Kingdom from him, alleging that he enjoyed it, only by way of trust, during
his Minority. Feritharis upon this called a Convention of the Nobles, where he
willingly offered to resign the Kingdom, in Favors of his Nephew; but they
being sensible how happy they had hitherto lived, under his Government, and
knowing that the other was of a rude untractable disposition, by no means would
hear of it; soon after there was a Conspiracy discovered against the Kings
Person, managed by Ferlegus and some others: Whereupon he was presently
arraigned and found Guilty, but his Fathers memory, his Uncles desire to the
Parliament, prevailed to have him pardoned, and committed only to the keeping
of some, who were commanded to take special notice of all his Actions, but he
found a way to deceive his Keepers, and make his escape; he first fled to the
Picts, then to the Brittons, where he spent the rest of his days in great
Misery, within a Month after, Feritharis dyed, not without Suspicion of being
poisoned by some of his Nephews Accomplices, which so enraged the Nation
against him, that his very Memory was hateful.

3. Mainus Fergus his second Son, succeeded, in the Year of the World 3680.
before Christ 291. After the beginning of the Reign forty one. He was a noble
Prince, and a severe Justitiary, he renewed the old League, with Crinus King of
Picts, he dyed peaceably the 29th. Year of his Reign.

4. His Son Dornadill succeeded him in the Government in the Year of the World
3079. before Christ 262. after the beginning of the Reign seventy, he followed
his Fathers Footsteps in Equity and Justice, but was more given to Pastimes;
especially Hunting; he is said to have made several Laws about Hunting, which
the Ancient Scots observe to this day, he dyed peaceably the 28. year of his
Reign.

5. Dornadilles eldest Son, being yet a Child and not fit to Govern, the People
set Hothat his Brother upon the Throne in the year of the World 3738. before
Christ 233 after the beginning of the Reign 98. He proved a monstrous Tyrant,
taking Pleasure in nothing more than in murdering his Nobility, and destroying
his People by all the means that he could devise, till at last one Dowall a
Gallaway man, having gathered together a Company of disaffected Persons came
boldly to the King, telling him how grievous his Government was to the People,
because of his Oppression, and therefore desired him to resign the Crown (which
he was unfit to wear) to such as had a better Title to it; the King though
surprised by his Enemy, yet no ways daunted, told him, that whatever was done
by him during his Government, was done by Royal Authority, and if it was
grievous to the Subjects, they had their own obstinacy to blame for it,
hereupon Dowall presently fell upon, and killed him after he had Reigned twenty
years.

6. Rewther the Son of Dornadilles, was by Dowals Faction made King without the
Peoples Consent, in the year of the World 3758. before Christ 213. after the
Reign 118. the Nobles took this very ill. And as for Hothat, though they knew
that he deserved the worst kind of Death, yet they did not approve of this
Fact, as being of bad Example; they knew also, that what Dowal did, was for his
own ends, as afterward appeared. Hothat's Relations taking the advantage of the
Peoples dissatisfaction stirred them up by all means, to make War upon Dowall;
at length, they draw to Arms under the Command of Ferguhort, Hothat's
Son-in-Law, and Captain of Kintire and Lorn. Dowall came against them with
great Power, accompanied with the young King, the King of Picts, and many
others of his Friends. There followed a most cruel Battle, where after two
several Engagements in one day, Dowall was utterly defeated, himself, the King
of Picts, together with all the chief of the Claws were killed upon the place.
Reuther the young King was pursued, and taken at the Castle of Callender, but
very civilly used.

The consequences of this unhappy day, were most fatal both to Scots and Picts;
not having Men enough left alive to inhabit the Realm, or to withstand their
Enemies, upon which the Brittons took occasion to invade them, but they no wise
being in Case to resist them, after several bloody Skirmishes, were forced to
betake them to the Mountains; the King of Scots went into Ireland, and the King
of Picts to Orkney, whereafter twelve years Misery, they resolved once more to
try their Fortune, and returning home, the one from Ireland, the other from
Orkney; they joined Battle with their old Enemies, the conflict was so
terrible, that none of the parties could boast much of the Victory. However,
the up-shot of the matter was, a Peace was concluded, and the Scots, and Picts
re-installed in their old Possessions. This King dyed in the twenty six year of
his Reign, having left one Son begotten by Gethus the King of Picts his
Daughter.

7. But he being young and not fit to Reign, being scarcely ten years of age,
Reutha his Fathers Brother succeeded in the year of the World 3784. before
Christ 187. after the beginning of the Reign 144. he instituted diverse Laws,
which are in Force among the old Inhabitants to this day; and having Reigned
seventeen years with great applause, either for his want of Health, or Love of
Solitariness, or for fear of Thereus, Reuthers Son, whom he knew to have an
itching after the Crown he resigned.

8. Thereus succeeded in the year of the World 3799. before Christ 171. after
the Reign 158. The first six months he Governed pretty moderately, but he
suddenly brake loose, giving reins to all kinds of of wickedness, causing
Slanders and Calumnies to be raised against his Nobles, and under this pretense
cruelly Murdering them; but at last the people not able to endure his Tyranny,
degraded him of all his Honors. Covan Captain of the Brigants, was made
Governor, who Governed very wisely, about the space of eleven years, at which
time being informed, that Thereus had dyed at York, he resigned the Government.

9. Josina the Kings Brother succeeded to the Crown, the year of the World
3818. before Christ 161. after the Reign 170. He was a peacable and good King,
it is observed of him, that he highly esteemed Physicians, being himself very
expert in that Science, whence it came to pass that for many Ages after, the
Heads of Families and Men of worth, were for the most part excellent
Physicians: He dyed in a good Age, after he had Reigned twenty four years.

10. To him succeeded his Son Finnan, in the year of the World 3834. before
Christ 137. after the Reign 194. This Prince followed his Fathers Footsteps,
he studied nothing more than to gain the Hearts of his Subjects, and to
maintain his Royal Dignity, more with Clemency than Force: That he might prove
an effectual Enemy to Tyranny, he made a Law that Kings should command nothing
of great weight, in the state without Advice of their Parliament, he dyed the
thirtieth year of his Reign.

11. Durstius his Son succeeded Finnan, A. M. 3864. before Christ 107. after
the Reign 224. A Flagitious and wicked Tyrant, he banished his Fathers Friends
from the presence, because they advised him to leave off his lewd Courses.
Having prostituted his Wife, who was Daughter to the King of the Brittons to
his Companions, he repudeated her. But soon after, it was discovered, that he
was carrying on a Conspiracy against his Nobles, and knowing that he could have
no shelter, either at home or abroad; having been so cruel, he feigned a
sincere Repentance of his former wickedness, calling home his Queen, promising
by Oath to his Nobles, that he would no longer follow his Irregular Courses;
which they readily believing, forgot all former Injuries, but not long after
having invited them, to make them merry with him, when he got them all
together, he caused a Company of Ruffians to fall upon them and Murder them.
The noise of this heinous Act going all abroad, stirred all the People to
revenge, who killed him in Battle, after that he had Reigned nine years.

12. It was hotly debated among the Nobles, whether the next in Blood to
Durstius should succeed, some were against it, fearing lest the Successor, if
he were in kin to him, might be tempted to revenge the Death: Others were for
keeping up his ancient Custom according to the Oath sworn to Fergus, at length
they Condesended upon Ewen, Brother to Durstius, him they Crowned, A. M. 3873.
before Christ 98. He is thought to have been the first, who caused his Subjects
to give him their Oath of fidelity. He went with the Picts against the
Brittons, where there was so cruel a Battle fought, that Night drawing on both
Parties retired, but the Scots and Picts understanding that the Brittons had
left the Field, they returned to their Camp, where they found great spoil,
which they divided by Law of Arms, and returned home Victors, where Ewenus
spent the rest of his days in Peace, he dyed the nineteenth of his Reign, and
was buried in Dunstaffage.

13. Durstius his two Sons, who were the nearest of the Royal Line, after
Evenus his Death began to contend for the Crown, in the mean time Gillus, base
Son to Evenus, having got together some Villains for his purpose, suppresseth
them both, and Murders them, then sets himself upon the Throne, A. M. 3802.
before Christ 79. after the Reign 252. But not thinking himself secure, so long
as any of Durstius his Posterity, were extant resolved, to take off his three
Nephews, who were in the Isle of Man; the eldest two he caught in his Snare,
and killed, but the third was conveyed away by his Nurse, in the Night time and
carried to Argyle, where she kept him for some years in a Cave for fear of the
Tyrant, who was at last killed in Battle in Ireland, whether he had fled, by
Caldebus the Captain of the Brigrands the second year of his Reign.

14. Evenus the second King Finnans Nephew succeeded in the Government, A. M.
3894. before Christ 77. years; a good Institutor, he confirmed the Peace with
the Picts, having married Gethus the third King of Picts his Daughter, he
afterward overcame Belus King of Orkney in Battle, who finding no way to escape
killed himself: He also built Innerlosher, and Innerness, he dyed in the
seventeenth year of his Reign.

15. Ederus Durstius his Brothers Son succeeded in the Year of the World 3911.
before Christ 60. after the Reign 271. Bredus of the Isles, Cousin to Gillus
the Tyrant, brake in upon the Country; the King went presently against him, and
overthrew him and his followers, and burnt their Ships; he afterward assisted
the Brittons against Julius Caesar in England, where by his means a Glorious
Victory was obtained, he dyed in Peace the forty eight year of his Reign, and
was buried in Dunstaffage.

16. To him succeeded Evenus the third his Son, A. M. 3959. before Christ 12.
This man came to such a height of Luxury, that not being content, that he took
an hundred noble Women to be his Concubines; he made an Act, that every Man
should keep as many Wives as he pleased, so that he had an Estate to maintain
them, and another, that the King should have the first Nights enjoyment of a
Noble man's Lady, allowing the Noble men the same privilege from their
Inferiors: He was afterward taken in Battle and imprisoned, where he was killed
by a young Child the seventh year of his Reign.

17. Mettallan's Nephew to Ederus succeedeed, A. M. 3966. before Christ 4.
after the Reign 326. A King universally beloved, because that in his time there
was universal Peace abroad, and Tranquillity at Home; but yet he could not
reduce his Nobles from the Riotous habit, that they acquired in his
Predecessors time, he dyed Peaceably the thirty ninth year of his Reign.

18. To him succeeded, Garratacus his Sisters Son, A. M. 4005. A. D. 35. He
first composed some Tumults, that were in the Isles upon the late Kings Death,
then assisted his Neighbors against the Romans. Some report that in his time,
Orkney was conquered by Claudius the Emperor, and the King and Queen of it sent
in Triumph to Rome. After many bloody Battles fought with the Romans, he at
last was desired by Vespasian to submit to them, and he should be reputed a
Friend to the Senate, and enjoy great Honors, to which he answered, that the
Kingdom of Scotland was as free to him, as the Kingdom of the Romans was to
Caesar, he dyed Peaceably the twentieth year of his Reign.

19. To him succeeded his Brother Corbred, A. M. 4025. after Christ 55. after
the Reign 385. The Islanders, who almost in every Interregnum stirred up
Sedition, hoping for a Change therein, diverse expeditions quite subdued by him:
He suppressed Thieves, going frequently from place to place, doing Justice, he
dyed in the tenth year of his Reign, and was buried in Dunstaffage.

20. Corbred's Son being a Child, the Parliament chused Dardan Nephew Metellan,
A. M. 4042. after Christ 72. there were great hopes had of him at first, but
within three years he degenerated, and became an odious Tyrant, murdering and
destroying all the wisest, and best of his Counselors, and to complete his
Villainies, hired a Ruffian to murder Corbred's two Sons, who were in the Isle
of Man; but the Traitor being taken just ready to perpetrate the Villainy, was
forced to discover the whole Plot: Whereupon the Nobles Unanimously resolved,
to revenge the Treason, but the King absconding himself, and his Forces being
defeated by the Nobles, was at last taken, and his Head struck off the fourth
year of his Reign.

21. Corbred the second, Surnamed Galdus comes next to the Throne, after
Christ 76. A Courageous and warlike Prince, in his days the Romans had greatly
enlarged their Borders, for having quite routed the Brittons, they went as far
North, as the River Tay, and had probably gone further, had not that Valiant
warrier Agricola been called home by Domitian, who envied his Success, he was
no sooner gone, but Corbred came with an Army, and made a great slaughter among
the Romans, pursuing them from one place to another; till at length they were
glad to beg their Peace, which was granted upon very Honorable terms. Corbred
having spent the rest of his days in Peace, dyed the thirty fifth year of his
Reign, and was buried in Dunstaffage.

22. Luctacus succeeded his Father Corbred, Anno Dom. 110. A most Flagitious
man, given to all kinds of Lewdness and Cruelty; which his Nobles perceiving,
at a Convention of the States, began to reprove him for his Wickness and
Tyranny: He being enraged at this, commanded some of them to be put to Death;
but instead of being obeyed, they fell upon him and his Accomplices, and killed
them the third year of his Reign, he was buried in Dunstaffage.

23. To him succeeded Mogald, Corbred the second Sisters Son, A. D. 113. the
beginning of his Reign was fortunate, for he Governed most Prudently and
Successfully. He discharged the Romans from approaching the Confines of his
Kingdom, and defended the Picts from them, he defeated Lucus with his Romans in
Westmorland, and obtained a great Victory: In his time Adrian the Emperor came
into Britain, where he built Adrians Wall, from the mouth of Tyne, to the
Flood of Esk fourscore miles in length, he was killed in the thirty third year
of his Reign.

24. Conar succeeded his Father Mogald, A. D. 149. Who became a cruei Tyrant,
and was suspected to have had a hand in Conspiring his Fathers Death, he did
greatly dilapidate the Rents of the Crown by his Extravagancies, being forced
to call a Parliament; he pressed mightily for Money, alleging that his
Revenues was not answerable to his Charges, but his Nobles answered his demands
in another manner, then he expected, for they presently degraded and imprisoned
him. Ardgad Captain of Argyle made Governor: He dyed in Prison the fourteenth
year of his Reign, and was buried in Dunstaffage.

25. After, him Ethod the first Sisters Son to Mogad began to Reign, A. D. 163.
He highly applauded Ardgad his Government, keeping him still in great Trust
with himself. He sent him to the Isles, to allay some Tumults that were
beginning to stir, which he did (as he thought) effectually, but he was not
long gone, then they became worse than before; wherefore the King sent him
thither again, where he was unfortunately killed, this so enraged the King that
he went thither himself in Person, and made them soundly smoke for their
Insolency. Having composed his Affairs at home and abroad, he began to give
himself to ease, but soon after he was killed in his Chamber by an Irish
Harper, whom he kept to make Music to him, the thirty third year of his Reign.

26. Ethod having no Sons ripe for the Government, his Brother Satrael
succeeded him, A. D. 199. He was so cruel, that he made it his Work to cut off
all the ancient Nobility, but was at length stabbed by one of his Courtiers the
fourth year of his Reign, and was buried in Dunstaffage.

27. His Brother Donald the first succeeded him, A. D. 199. A Prince famous for
Princely Endowments, but especially, in that he was the first King, that
embraced Christianity in Scotland, and gave it his Royal Sanction, though for
several years before his time, the Gospel had it is Professors, though not
publicly owned; he with the Concurrence of his Nobles made what Reformation,
he could, yet could he not during his Life, get the People weaned from their
old Heathenish Superstitions: In his time Sevesus the Emperor came into
Britain with a Prodigious Army, intending no less than to Conquer the whole
Island. The Scots and Picts at his coming, betake them to the Hills, and draws
him after them, but his Army suffered grievously, having as one Writes, Dion.
lost 50000. Men in that expedition, at length they came to a Peace with him,
after which he built a great Wall, reaching from Forth to Clyde: Peace being
concluded abroad, Donald returned home, and passed the rest of his days in
Peace, he dyed the eighteenth year of his Reign and was buried in Dunstaffage.

28. Ethodius the second Son to Ethodius the first, succeeded Donald, A. D.
216. A man of a foolish and cross Temper, unfit to Govern that fierce People;
but his Nobles managed the Government prudently, he at last was killed in a
Tumult, made by his Domestics the sixteenth year of his Reign and was buried
in Dunstaffage.

29. His Son Athircus is made King, A. D. 231. At first he gave great grounds
of hope, that he should prove an accomplished Prince, but it proved quite
contrary, he turned extremely profligate, prostituting Noble men's Daughters to
his Companions: Upon which account one Hotholocus a Noble man conspired against
him, which he perceiving, that there was no way to escape, killed himself the
twelfth year of his Reign.

30. Athircus being Dead, Hatholocus procured himself to be chosen King, A. D.
242. A cruel and lascivious Tyrant, being acquainted that Ethircus his Children
were with the Picts, he called the chief of the Nobility, whom he knew to have
been Athircus his Friends, pretending he wanted their Advice, in some matters
of State; whent he had got them convened in one place, he caused them to be
thrown in Prison, and soon after executed: Whereupon their Friends rebelled,
and the King going about to gather an Army to subdue them, was killed by one of
his Courtiers the eleventh year of his Reign.

31. Hathalocus being thus dead, Athircus his children are called home and
Findochus, the eldest of them set upon the Throne, A. D. 253. a wise and
valiant Prince; his first Expedition was against Donald, of the Isles who under
pretense of revenging the late Kings death, had raised an Army, him he subdued
forcing him to flee to his Ships, where being hotly pursued, he got into a
small Boat which being over laden immediately sunk, and he perished, yet his
Son whose name was Donald, keept up the quarrel against him. Hindoch, went with
an Army entering the Islands wasted them so that they were left almost quite
desolate. Donald finding his weakness betakes him to treacherous courses, and
striking in with Carance the Kings brother, they instigated two Ruffians to
Murder him, both which were tormented to death. The 11 th. year of his Reign
he was buried in Dunstaffage.

32. To him succeeded his youngest Brother Donald the 2 d A. D. 264. An
excellent Prince, while he was preparing to reveng his Brothers death he heard
that Donald of the Isles had made an inroad upon Murray, not in the quality of
a Robber, but of a King. Where upon commanding the strength of the Kingdom to
follow him, he went against him with those forces he had in readiness, which
Donald hearing of, took such tedious marches that he was close upon the Kings
Camp before any was a ware, which obliged the King to fight, but the inequality
of their number was such, that the King was defeated, most of his men killed,
himself being wounded, with several of his Nobles were taken. He dyed the third
day after, partly of his wounds and partly of Melancholy, the first year of his
Reign, he was buried in Dunstaffage.

33 Donald, Lord of the Isles usurped the Crown A. D. 265. excercising much
cruelty, none dared to oppose him having so many of the Nobility his prisoners
whom he threatened upon every provocation to kill. At length Crathelinth Son to
King Findochus, who having lurked long with his Nurse, and was believed to be
dead, having gathered a few subtle men together went directly to Donalds Court,
who dissembling both his name and quality became in a short time very intimate
with him, but when he found his opportunity he put an end to the Tyrants days,
the 12 th year of his Reign, conveying himself and his followers away
undiscovered. There was all this time a sore Persecution of the Christians,
under the Emperor Decius.

34. Crathelinth was set upon his Fathers Throne A. D. 277. A Valiant and
religious King. He first caused all the late Tyrants Race to be Razed to the
foundation for preventing the mischief might follow, he also purged the Land of
Superstitions, planting the true Christian Religion. This King having peace on
all sides, he addicted himself much to hunting, one day as he was at his sport,
one of the Picts stole away a Dog in which he greatly delighted; but the keeper
of the Kings dogs being informed where he was kept, went to take him and
striving to take him by force was killed in the place, which was the beginning
of a sad war, that lasted a long time; but at last by means of one Caransius a
Roman, (who was afterward King of Britain.) they made peace. King Crathelinth
passed the rest of his days in peace, and dyed the 24 year of his Reign, he was
buried in Dunstaffage.

35. To him succeeded his Cousin German Fincormach, A. D. 301. A Prince both
Pious and Valiant, he Joined with the Britains against the Romans, and after a
most Bloody battle routed them, pursuing them as far as York. Having procured
Peace abroad he wholly applied himself to the utter extirpating of Idolatry. In
his days fell out the ninth Persecution under Aurelius, and the tenth under
Dioclesian, which gave occasion to many Christians from diverse parts of the
Empire, now a second time to flee to Scotland, for refuge as they had done once
before under Domitian. Among those Fugitives who fled thither for shelter, from
the general Massacre were many excellent men in Piety and Learning, whom the
King not only did kindly receive but also employed to assist him and his
council in the further settling of Christianity in his Dominion, and in the
total Extirpation of Idolatry out of it, which was so much the harder work
because of the Druides, the principal false Prophets and Idolatrous Priests of
those days who not only by their subtle Hypocrisy and sense pleasing Divine
service but also by a cunning forcast having drawn into their hands the hearing
and determining of Civel affairs, had so gained upon the spirits of the Poor
and Simple people, that they could not imagine how to be without them and live.
The resolute care and labor of this gracious King and his Council, together
with the help of these Pious and Learned men, prevailed at last utterly to
overthrow, and abolish the Groves with the Alters under the Oaks, and all Idol
service; and to Establish the pure worship of God in all places of his
Dominions, filling the Rooms of these false Prophets with Godly and Learned
teachers among the people, which was done in all places throughout the Kingdom,
but especially in the Islands which those Pious men took for their particular
abode, as being most fit for a retired life and namely in the Isle of Man, the
King caused a Church to be built to the honor of our Savior, these Holy men
were for their laboring so much in Gods worship called Colidei or Culdees.
This good King dyed in peace the 47 year of his Reign and was buried in
Dunstaffage.

36. Romach brothers Son to Crathelinth, after a hot debate, by the assistance
of the Picts, possessed himself of the Throne, A. D. 348. But proving a cruel
Tyrant he was killed by his Nobles the 3 d year of his Reign; in his time
Christianity began in Ireland.

37. Augustian Another of Crathelinth's Brothers sons succeeded, A.D. 351. a
Valiant and peaceable King. The late Kings associates, not thinking themselves
secure fled to the Picts, whom they instigated to make War upon the Scots, in
revenge of Romacks death: Augustian hearing of their purpose sent to Hertanus
the King of the Picts, acquainting him how dangerous, a War betwixt them at
that time might prove; The Romans and Britains being so apt to take advantage
of them, when they are low; but all would not do, whereupon he went against
them with his Forces and quite Defeated them, killing many of their Nobles.
Afterward they renewed their strength, and came to the Wood of Camelon where
the King of Scots with his Army lay, where they fought a most bloody battle on
both sides, both the Kings were killed with many of their Nobles in the third
year of his Reign. He was buried in Dunstaffage without Succession.

38. Fethelmack The youngest of Crathelinths Brothers Sons Succeeded, A. D.
354. A Valiant Prince; he scarcely Reigned two years when having raised an Army
he went against the Picts, and gave them a most fatal overthrow, killing their
King in Battle, he was afterward Traitorously murdered in his bed, by two
perfidious Picts, who insinuated themselves into his favor with the assistance
of an Harper, the groans of the dying King being over heard by his Servants,
they came rushing into the Room where they took the Villains in the very Act of
their cruelty, who were afterward tormented to death. At this time St Andrews
Church was built by the King of the Picts, at the request of St Rewell, he dyed
the third year of his Reign, and was buried in Dunstaffage.

39. To him Succeeded Ewin the first Son to Fincormach. A. D. 357. A Valiant,
Just, and good King. In his time the Romans resolving to be Masters of the
whole Island, and to destroy both Scots and Picts, first Communicate to the
Picts, their purpose to Eradicat the Scots, and that if they would be assistant
therein they should enjoy all their Lands, holding it of the Romans. They as a
base ungrateful people accepted the proffer. So that the Scots had now to do
with Romans, Britains and Picts. In the first Battle the Romans and the others
were worsted, but soon after the Romans renewing their strength, with all their
Adherents Eugen, (or Ewen) upon the other hand convened all that could bear
arms in his Dominions knowing they were to fight for no less then their
Country, and Liberty. They engaged at the River Dun, the Battle was most
bloody, with doubtful success for a while, but at last the Scots being over
powered with fresh supplies from the Romans, were forced to fly, leaving the
King and his Brother with fifty thousand of their men dead in the Field. They
fled some to the Isles, some to Ireland and Scandia, they attempted several
times to recover their Country but in Vain, till at length the King of Picts
dying, the Roman Legate charged them that they should choose no other King but
live under the Roman Government and by Roman laws, when they saw this they
became some what sensible of their folly, and treachery to their best
neighbors; resolving at length to call them home and Join forces them, that
the one might recover their Country, the other their Liberty.

40. Echadius the Kings Brother (upon the late fatal defeat,) finding there was
no shelter for him in his Country departed with his Son Hutha, and his Grandson
Fergus to Scandia, there they were kindly entertained. In process of time
Echadius and Hutha dying, Fergus became a most Valiant man, gained great fame
in France, and Pannonia. To him the Picts sent Ambassadors inviting him home,
promised there assistance toward the recovering of his Country, which he
readily accepted of, and having arrived with a few Danes and Goths in his
company (the Scots, likewise gathering to him,) he soon regained his Kingdom,
being Victorious against the Romans in many Battles, at last he was killed in
Battle by the Romans, the sixteenth year of his Reign, and was buried in
Icolmkill, which was the burial place for the Kings till King Malhiscom Kanmors
days; having left the Kingdom almost in as bad case as he found it.

41. To him Succeeded his son Eugenius the second, A. D. 420. A Valiant and
Victorious Prince; he managed the Government by the help of the Valiant Grame,
(whose father was banished out of Scotland, with Ethod Brother to King Eugenius
the first) who married a Virgin of the Blood Royal of Denmark, She brought
forth a daughter to him which was married to Fergus the second, Eugenius his
Father. this Grame being the Kings Grandfather was mighty helpful to him
against the Romans: for he pulled down the wall of Abercorn built by the Romans
called afterward Grames Dick, as also Adrians Wall, over against the Irish
Seas* By his help the Kings of Scots and Picts past with Fire and Sword through
all the bounds between Tyne and Humber, here they fought a most bloody Battle
in which there were 15000. Britains killed, together with most of their Princes
and Nobles, but few of the Scots: by which means they totally expelled the
Romans out of Britain, and brought the Britains under Contribution, reserving
also to themselves the whole Land lying between Tyne and Humber. This Prince
dyed the one and thirtyth year of his Reign, having the seventh year delivered
his Country from the Romish Yoke, 496 years after that Julius Caesar brought
them first under Tribute.

42. To him his Brother Dongard Succeeded. A. D. 451- A Prince fitted both for
war and peace, in his time the Pelagian Heresy infested the Church, for curing
of which Celestine Bishop of Rome sent one Paladius into Scotland; he is said
to have been the first who Instituted Bishops there, for until that time the
Church was governed by Monks* this King dyed the fifth year of his Reign.

43. Constantine the first Succeeded to Dongard. A. D. 457. A man full of bad
qualities, cruel to his Subjects, but fearful of his Enemies, given up also to
all kind of Lasciviousness: the Picts seeing his unworthiness broke with him,
his Subjects also were at the very nick of Rebellion. He was slain in the two
and twentyth year of his Reign by a Noble man of the Isles, whose Daughter he
had defloured.

44. To him Succeeded Congall the first, A. D. 479. His first work was to
reduce his Subjects from the sottish and base customs to which his Father had
inured them. The Britains seeing him inclined to peace, persuaded Aurelius
Ambrosius, to demand restitution of Westmorland from him, which he denying to
do, they draw to Arms on both sides, but being better advised, they again
agreed that things should stand as Constantine left them. During the Reign of
Congall he had Wars with the Saxons, but no great action, In his time lived
those two famous Prophets, Merlin and Gildas. He dyed the two and twentyth year
of his Reign.

45. His Brother Govan Succeeded him, A. D. 501. who governed the Kingdom with
great discretion. In his time arrived in Britain Occa and Passentius the Sons
of Hengist, with an Army of German Soldiers against whom came King Ambrose and
fought and routed them, but with small reason to boast of his Victory, for he
lost the prime of his Nobility in that engagement, he thereupon sent for the
King of Scots and Picts to come to his assistance finding himself so much
weakened Occa being advertised thereof, sent his Brother Passentius to Germany
for assistance, who by contrary winds being driven upon the coast of Ireland,
gathered a considerable number of Soldiers of fortune and returned home. In
the mean time Ambrosius was Poisoned by Occaes means to him Succeeded the
Valiant King Arthur, who by assistance of the Scots and Picts, obtained several
great Victories against the Saxons. Govan having made peace with all his
Neighbors returned home, He dyed the thirty fourth year of his Reign, not
without suspicion of Treachery in which Donald Captain of Athlo had no small
hand.

46. Eugenius, (or Ewen) the third, Congallus the firsts Son Succeeded, A. D.
535. a wise and prudent Prince, he consulted with some of his Nobles about
revenging the late Kings death, but found by their Coldness and Unconcernedness
in the matter ground of suspicion, that they themselves were not Inocent of it,
which made him dread their designs against Himself. Yet he managed the
Government so wisely, that he dyed in Peace the twenty third year of his Reign.

47. To him Succeeded Congal the second his Brother, A.D. 558. A Prince of a
very strict Life, contending even with the Monks themselves for Piety, he made
many excellent Laws relating to Churches, and Churchmen. In his time lived
these two Famous Men S. Colm and S. Mungo. He dyed in peace the eleventh year
of his Reign.

48. Kinnatill Succeeded his Brother Congall, A. D. 569. At which time Aidan
Govans Son come to Scotland, who being ntroduced to the King by S. Colm, was
Graciously received with assurance that he should be the man who should Succeed
to the Crown. He dyed in peace the first year of his Reign.

49. Aidan Accordingly Succeeds, A. D. 570. Soon after a Conspiracy being
discovered, which some of his servants intended against his Person, the
Conspirators fled to the Picts, who refusing to deliver them up to Justice when
demanded, he quite broke with them, and Confederated with the Britains against
them, and the Saxons, routing them in several Battles. about this time his good
Friend S. Colm dyed to his great grief. Soon after Augustine the Monk came into
Britain, being sent by Pope Gregory, who created much trouble by his
innovations, in matters of Religion. This Prince dyed in peace the thirty fifth
year of his Reign.

50. Kenneth the first, Congalls second Son Succeeded, A. D. 605. We have
nothing Recorded of him worth noting, He dyed in peace the first year of his
Reign.

51. Ewen The fourth, Aidans second Son Succeeded, A. D 606. He was Educated by
S. Colm, but slighted his Injunctions in one thing, for that he preferred War
to peace, his hand was heavy upon the Rebellious and Stubborn, but yet a modest
Conqueror, he dyed in peace the fifteenth year of his Reign.

52. To him Succeeded his Son Ferchard the first, A. D. 621. A Vicious Tyrant,
which his Nobility not being able to endure, called him to an account, but he
refusing to submit was compelled; having laid before him how injurious he had
been to his Country, and what an Enemy to Religion, abetting the Pelagian
Heresy, with many such things, they degraded him, and put him in Prison, where
soon after he killed himself.

53. To him Succeeded his Son Donald the fourth, A. D. 632. He studied nothing
more then to preserve and advance the Christian Faith, at home, and among his
Neighbors, he sent some Learned Divines to Northumberland, to restore the
Christian Faith, which was much decayed. He perished (as some write) in
Lochtay, being there at fishing the fourteenth year of his Reign, but others
affirm he dyed in his Bed.

54. His Brother Ferchard the second Succeeded, A. D. 646. A wicked Tyrant
Impious toward God, and cruel toward Man, having strangled his Wife, and
Deflowred his Daughters, his Nobles resolved to call him to account, but were
dissuaded by one Colmar a Religious Monk who told them that Gods hand would
soon be upon him which accordingly fell out, For being at Hunting he was Bitten
by a Wolf, which caused a dangerous Feavour of which he dyed, declaring his
sorrow for his former Life, the eighteenth year of his Reign.

55. To him Succeeded Malduin. Donald the fourths Son, A. D. 664. A wise and
Religious Prince. the Argyle and Lenox men much infested the Country by their
Animosities between themselves; the Leaders of the Sedition he put to death; at
this time the Plague had over spread all Europe, whereof infinite multitudes
dyed every where, but the Scots and Picts were preserved from it. This good
King was strangled by his Queen, upon suspicion of Adultery the twentyth year
of his Reign. She and her Servants were the next day burnt alive.

56. Ewin The first Malduins Brothers Son Succeeded, A. D. 684. Edfried, King
of Northumberland Invaded Scotland, having the assistance of the Picts, but
they deserting him he was routed and ten Thousand of his men killed. The next
year Edfried Invaded the Picts, they pretending to fly drew him upon an Ambush
where he and all his Army were cut off. The Scots and Britains also entering
Northumberland, so afflicted that King that he was never able to recover his
losses. Ewin dyed the fourth year of his Reign.

57. Ewin the sixth, Ferchard the seconds Son Succeeded, A. D. 688. A Religious
and Learned King, he had neither certain Peace nor certain War with his
Neighbors. He dyed the ninth year of his Reign, It is said that in his time it
rained Blood for seven days over all Britan, that also the Milk Butter, and
Cheese was turned into Blood.

58. Amberkelleth Succeeded, A. D. 697. At first he appeared a Sober Prince,
but he soon put of the Mask, turning to all kinds of wickedness, he was killed
by the Shot of an Arrow in the night time, the second year of his Reign.

59 To him Succeeded Ewin the seventh, his Brother, A. D. 699. He made peace
with the King of Picts, and Married his Daughter, who within a year after
(being with Child) was Murdered in her Bed instead of the King, by two
Brothers of Athols, who had Conspired the Kings death. He was a good and
Religious King, he dyed the sixteenth year of his Reign.

60. Ewin A little before his death recommended to the Nobles, Mordach
Amberkeleths Son, who was chosen A. D. 715. An Excellent Prince, he procured
Peace over all Britain, he repaired many decayed Churches, and built the
Monastery of Whitehorne. He dyed the sixteenth year of his Reign.

61. To him Succeeded Etfin, Ewin the sevenths Son, A. D. 730. A Religious King
and severe Justitiar, being aged, after that he had Reigned 30 years, he
elected four Regents, viz. the Thanes of Argyle Athole Gallaway and Murray to
govern his Subjects, but their Government was grievous. He dyed the thirty
first year of his Reign.

62. Ewin the Eighth Mordachs Son Succeeded A. D. 761. His first work was to
put to death Donald, Lord of the Isles, and the Earl of Galloway, for their
cruelty in the Late Kings latter days. But he himself afterward degenerating
into all Vices, was killed by his Nobles the third year of his Reign.

63. Fergus the third Etfins Son Succeeded, A. D. 764. He Married Ethiolia,
Daughter to the King of Picts, who having several times admonished him of his
adulteries at last with the help of some of his familiar Servants strangled
him, and being accused thereupon confessed the fact, and presently stabbed her
self to the Heart with a Dagger. The King was buried in Icolmkill the third
year of his Reign.

64. Solwath Ewin, the Eighths Son Succeeded A. D. 767, A Valiant Prince, He
was much troubled with the Gout, of which Donald a Bane, Captain of the Isles.
taking advantage proclaimed himself King of the Isles, breaking also in upon
the Continent made great Havoc, but at length was by Duchal Captain of Argyle
and Duchal Captain of Athol beset in a Wood, where their was no way to Escape,
their he and all his followers were cut to pieces. This good King dyed of the
Gout, the twentieth year of his Reign.

65. Acaius Etfins Son Succeeded A.D. 787. He made a new peace with the English
and Picts, finding that the Irish intended to make war against him, because of
a slaughter that was committed in Kintire, upon some Irish Robbers, yet he sent
Ambassadors to Ireland, showing how little ground they had to denounce war, and
how little it would tend to their Honor to revenge the quarrel of a pack of
Thieves, but they not giving ear to his peaceable message, presently Rigged out
a Fleet, which was not two Nights at Sea, when it was utterly ruined by a
storm, which made the Irish now supplicate for a peace upon any terms, which
the King readily granted. He soon after made a League with Charles the great
King of France, and Emperor of Germany, which continues inviolated to this day.
For the corroboration of which, Achaius sent his Brother William with Forty
thousand Valiant warriors to assist the aforesaid Charles in his Wars, against
the Infidels where he purchased great Fame, being commonly called by the
Princes of France: The Knight without Reproach. Before this time also some
Learned Men, passed from Scotland unto France, among which Johannes Scotus who
was Charles's Tutor was singular for his Learning who together with Clemens
another of his Country men, Founded the University of Paris. Achaius Married
Fergusian Sister to Hungus, King of the Picts, who bore to him one Son called
Alpine who afterward Succeeded; to be King of Scotland, and Heir to the King of
Picts; King Achaius dyed the thirty second year of his Reign.

66. To him Succeeded Congal, his Cousin German, A. D. 819. He Governed
peaceably for five years.

67. Dongal Salvatius's Son Succeeded, A. D. 824. who having settled the peace
at home, sent his Ambassadors to the Picts, demanding the right of Succession
in the name of Alpin, Son to King Achaius, being there own King dyed without
Succession, which they refusing to do; Dongal denounced war against them but he
Unfortunatly Perished in a Boat as he was passing over the river of Spey, in
the seventh year of his Reign.

68. Alpin Acaius's Son succeeded, A-D. 831. A Valiant Prince, he led the Army,
which was raised by Dongall, against the Picts, to assert his Title to their
Crown, wherein a most bloody Battle, he with his own hand slew Feredech their
King; then they Elected Brudus his Son, who was killed the first year of his
Reign, in a Tumult raised by his Subjects: His Brother Kenneth succeeded to
him, who coming with an Army against the Scots, rent off his Coat of Armor and
fled to the Mountains, where he was shamefully killed by a Country man (not
knowing who he was) whereupon the Picts Elected Brudus, a fierce and valiant
Prince to be their King, who sent his Ambassadors to Alpine desiring Peace;
Alpine answered that he would make no Peace, until the Crown of the Picts were
set upon his Head, as the Right inheritour of it. Brudus upon this raised a
great Army, and came over the Bridge of Dunkell, marching to Augus, where Alpin
with his Army did lie. The night before the Battle, he devised a cunning
Stratagem; for having a great many Women in his Army, he caused them to stand
in Battle Array, with linen Shirts above their clothes, ordaining some
Horsemen to Command them; he drew them into a Wood, Commanding none of them to
appear, till the Armies had joined Battle. King Alpin upon the Picts approach,
presently led out his Men, and joined Battle with them, then the aforesaid
reserve began to move from their Ambush: The Scots seeing them, apprehended
them to be a fresh Army of Picts, whereupon they immediately fled. In this
Battle King Alpine himself was taken, and beheaded the third year of his Reign.

69. To him his Son Keneth the second succeeded, A. D. 834. Now the Picts fully
resolve, to banish the Scots quite out of their Country, for which purpose they
procure help from England. But when they were at their full strength, they
divided amongst themselves to such a height, that Brudus was forced to disband
his Army; he soon after dyed for Grief, Donsken his Brother succeeded, who made
it his work to keep Peace on all hands. But Keneth after three years uncertain
Peace, being desirous at any rate to revenge his Fathers Death, and to recover
the Crown, which by right did belong to him; Convened his Nobles, and consulted
with them concerning the matter, but finding them not inclined to it, he
invites them all to a great Feast, which he had prepared of purpose, where they
were Royally entertained within his Palace until dark Night; after they had
Liberally feasted, they were conveyed to several apartments within the Palace,
and when deep sleep had seized upon them; the King caused some Men that he had
ready for that end, to pass to their several Beds clad with Fish-skins, which
did cast a dazzling light in the dark; each man having a Hunting Horn in his
hand, through which he spoke. The Nobles being amazed at this sight, were
desired by them, not to be terrified for that they were Angels sent from God,
to the Princes and Nobles of Scotland, to cause them to obey the Kings Order;
it being very Just and Right, and that they needed not to fear the Success, for
they should be Victorious. Their Speeches being ended, they in an instant
vanished: This mightily astonished the Nobles, not knowing what to make on it.
It was no sooner Day light, than they got up and enquired one for another; and
having convened all together, every Man began to declare what appeared to him,
which made them all presently conclude, that it was no Fancy, but a real
Vision: The King also assured them, that the same Vision appeared to him at the
same hour. Hereupon they Unanimously consented, that all who were able for
Fighting, should meet the King upon a day appointed, which they did as the
Picts did also upon the other hand; they fought most Valiantly on both sides,
but the Picts were routed in one, and quite ruined in another Battle; their
King and all his Nobles being killed. And their City Camelon after a long siege
utterly destroyed, and razed; and the Picts Men, Women, and Children put to the
Sword; after they had Reigned in Albion 1181 years. King Keneth brought the
fatal Chair from Argyle to Scone, adding the Picts Dominions to his own, he
dyed the twentieth year of his Reign.

70. Donald the fifth, Keneth the seconds Brother succeeded, having his
Territories enlarged from the Orcades to Adrians Wall: He was a vicious and
luxurious Prince, which gave the Fugitive Picts some ground to Hope, that they
might recover their Lands, whereupon they requested Osbred and Ella two great
Princes in England, to restore them, promising to pay Homage to them, they
accepted the offer invading Scotland, with great Forces where they were
miserably routed in a pitched Battle. King Donald proud of this Victory,
pursued them to the Water of Tweed with his Army; there he found two Ships
laden with Wine, which he parted among his Soldiers, they not being much used
to such Liquor drank of it, till they were not able to stir: Of which, when
King Osbred was advertised, he came suddenly upon them, and killed 2000 of
them, took the King himself, and carried him about in Derision. Osbred pursuing
this Victory conquered great Lands in Scotland: So that Sterling-bridge was
made the march between the Scots and the English. This Osbred Coined money in
Sterling Castle, which was (as some think) the first beginning of Sterling
money. King Donald being ransomed, was soon after taken by his Nobles, and put
in Prison, where he desperately killed himself, the fifth year of his Reign.

71. To him succeeded Constantine the second, who was Crowned in Scone. A. D.
859. Soon after Hunger and Hubba with a great Fleet of Danes Landed in Fife, to
shun whose Cruelty, many religious Persons, with Adrian their Bishop fled into
the Isle of May, where they were all Cruelly put to Death by the unmerciful
Danes. Constantine with his Army met them at the River of Levin, where he
overthrew them, pursuing them toward Caryl, where their Ships lay; but the
Scots being proud of this Victory, became too secure: Whereupon the Danes
rallied upon them, where followed a terrible Battle, at last the Scots were
defeated; the King being taken, and dragged to a Cave was basely murdered, the
fifteenth year of his Reign.

72. To him succeeded Ethus his Son, Surnamed the Swift, A.D. 874. His
wickedness and Cruelty, came to so great a height, that his Nobles were forced
to imprison him, where within three days he dyed of Melancholy, the second
year of his Reign.

73. Gregory the Great Dungalls Son succeeded, A. D. 876. A Prince of a Kingly
Spirit; he made a Law, that all ^ings hereafter, should at their Coronation,
swear to defend the Christian Faith. His first expedition was into Fife,
against the Picts and Danes which were left there, when Hungar went into
En^land; them he expelled, not only out of Fife, but also out of Lothian, and
the Mers. Coming to Berwick; the Danes durst not venture to Fight him; but
leaving a Garrison in the Town, retired to Northumberland, to gather more
Forces. But Gregory in the Night time, being Guided by some Englishmen entered
the City, and put all the Danes to the Sword; thence he went to Northumberland,
there he utterly routed the rest of them, which gave him occasion to enlarge
his Dominions with Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmorland; after which he
entered in a League with the King of England, wherein his right to the foresaid
Lands was ratified. His next expedition was against the Irish, who had Landed
in Galloway, and committed great Insolences, but at his coming they retired
back to their own Country. He with a great Army followed them, where at his
Landing, he overthrew Brennius and Cornellius, who were Guardians to the young
King of Ireland, with their Nobles taking several Forts and Castles, at last he
laid Seige to Dublin, where their young King was; which after some resistance
yielded. The King returning Conqueror from Ireland, dyed the eighteenth year of
his Reign; by him the City of Aberdeen was built.

74. Donald the sixth, Constantine the seconds Son succeeded, A. D. 894. He was
a Religious and good King, fit for either War or Peace; he had some Ingagments
with the Danes, and sent Assistance to the King of England against them, toward
the latter part of his days, he was troubled with Intestine broils, for the
Murrays, and Rosses invading one another, committed great Insolences; to
quench this Fire the King came upon them with a great Army, and taking the
Leaders of the Faction, put them to Death for an Example to others. He dyed the
eleventh year of his Reign.

75. To him succeeded Constantine the third, Ethus's Son, A. D. 905. A Valiant,
but unfortunate Prince; the perfidious Danes, having broken their League with
him joined with the English, but within four years they met with such measures,
as made them glad to return to the Scots: Whereupon followed a hot and cruel
War, wherein Constantine found himself so unsuccessful, that he resigned his
Crown, and betook himself to a Monastery, where he dyed the fortieth year of
his Reign.

76. Malcolm the first, Donald the sixths Son succeeded, A. D. 943. A valiant
Prince, and severe Justitiar. A Peace being made with England, wherein
Cumberland and Westmorland were annexed to the Crown of Scotland, to be holden
in Fee of the Kings of England; this Prince passed the rest of his days, in
executing of Justice, which he did with such strictness, that some Villains in
Murray-Land conspired against him, where he was Traitorously killed, the ninth
year of his Reign.

77. Indulf Constantine the thirds Son succeeded, A. D. 952. A brave Warrior,
the Danes Landing in the North with a huge Army, he went against them, there in
a pitched Battle, he routed them, but dyed himself in the Battle, the ninth
year of his Reign.

78. To him succeeded Duff. Malcolm the first's Son, A. D. 961. A Prince who
much studied the Peace of his Country; he went about his Northern Circuits,
where he kept his Courts, severely punishing Malefactors; coming at last to the
Castle of Forress, suspecting no harm was Traitorously murdered by the Captain,
and his Wife, who were afterward apprehended and put to a cruel Death.

79. To him succeeded Culen, Indulfs Son, A. D. 966. Who having revenged the
late Kings Death, soon after became a most Flagitious and wicked Prince,
deflowring his own Daughters and Sisters: He was killed by Rodard a Noble man
at Meffen, this Daughter he had deflowred the fourth year of his Reign.

80. Keneth the third, Duffs Brother succeeded, A. D. 970. The beginning of his
Reign, was good, executing of Justice severely, finding his Nobles averse, to
deliver up there Friends and Vassals, who troubled the Peace, to Justice; he
called a Convention of the States at Scone, where having Clandestinely
conveyed, some Men in Arms, where the Nobles were convened, made them all
Prisoners, telling them, that so it would be until they did give up those
Rebels to Justice; they finding themselves thus hooked, sent to their Friends,
to perform the Terms of their Liberation; thus in a short time he had five
hundred notable Thieves, delivered up, them he caused to be every one hanged
upon Gibbets, close by the Castle of Berth. The Danes with a great Fleet of
Ships Landing in Angus, destroyed all before them, till they came to Berth,
where the King and his Army ran-countered with them; there followed a most
bloody Battle, the Scots beginning to give Ground, were made to Rally by the
means of one Hay and his two Sons, who hearing as they were at Plowing, not far
from the Field, that the Scots fled, came each of them with a Club in his hand,
and renewed the Battle, putting the Danes to flight, there they were all cut
off, the King amply rewarded him, giving him so much of the best Land in
Scotland as a Faulcon off a Man's hand, flew over, which was six miles in
length, and four in breadth, this was the Original of the Noble and Ancient
Surname of Hay. But that which darkened all this Noble Kings Acts, was his
causing Malcolm Prince of Scotland to be Poisoned; making a Law, that the
Eldest Son, or Nephew of the deceased Prince of what age soever he be, shall
succeed to the Crown, with diverse others Laws of the like Nature: At last
coming to the Castle of Felercarne, the Lady Grof had the Kings Image in Brass,
in the midst of the House with a Golden Apple in his hand; the King upon the
Ladies desire, pulling the Apple out of the Images hand, was shot through the
Body with an Engine, that was made in it for the purpose: He dyed the twenty
fourth year of his Reign.

81. To him succeeded Constantine the fourth, Surnamed the Balde, A. D. 994. He
came to the Crown by Usurpation, he was killed in Battle at Cramond in
Lonthian, the second year of his Reign.

82. Grimus, Duffs Son Usurped the Crown, A.D. 996. Malcolm whose Right it was,
sent to the Nobles, acquainting them how far he was wronged; which Grimus
hearing of, caused the Messengers to be cast into Prison, which was like to
have been, the beginning of a War; yet they were seemingly agreed for that time
by one Horthadus a Bishop, but not long after his Vices being intolerable,
Malcolm was brought home from England, who killed him in Battle, the eighteenth
year of his Reign.

83. Malcolm succeeded to the Crown, A. D. 1004. A Noble and Valiant Prince, in
his time Sweno King of the Danes being banished his Country, and coming to
Scotland, was converted to Christianity, and supplied with Men for reducing his
Kingdom; yet to his great loss he soon after made War against Malcolm, who
utterly routed his Army several times: This Prince was killed by a Conspiracy,
of some of his Nobles in the Castle of Glames, the thirtieth year of his Reign,
the Conspirators flying in the Night, chanced to pass over the Pool of Forfar
upon the Ice, where the Ice breaking, they all miserably perished.

84. Duncan the first, Malcolm the seconds Grandson, by his Daughter Beatrix
succeeded, A. D. 1034. He was thought to be of too indulgent a Spirit, for
Governing that fierce and untractable People: Bancho of whom are descended the
Ancient and Royal name of Stewarts, was in his time Thane, or Earl of Lochaber:
He was Traitorously murdered by his Cousin Makbeth, the sixth year of his Reign.

85. To him succeeded Mackbeth, Malcolm the seconds Daughters Son, A. D. 1040.
Although he came to the Crown by Treachery and Bloodshed, yet he Governed for a
time pretty moderately, but at last brake out into all kind of Tyranny, and
Cruelty, forcing his Nobles to the servilest of his Work; which they being not
able to endure, Macduff Earl of Fife, Posts to England, where he found Malcolm
the late Kings Son, at King Edwards Court, whom he invited home to revenge his
Fathers Death, and possess the Crown which was his own by right: Malcolm
suspecting Treachery, pretended several excuses to try Macduffs sincerity, but
when he found him Cordial, he declared his Willingness: Whereupon getting
assistance of Men from King Edward, he entered Scotland; Macbeth hearing of his
arrival, went about to oppose him, but Macduff surprising him in his Castle of
Dunfinnan, killed him with his own hand, the seventeenth year of his Reign.

86. Malcolm Surnamed Kanmor, Son to Duncan the first succeeded, A. D. 1057. He
was a worthy Prince, and in Compensation of their Service and Loyalty, in his
Restoration created many Earls, Lords, Barons and Baronets, commanding that
their Lands should be called after their Names: He made also his Thanes Earls;
many new Surnames began at this time, as Calder Lochbart, Gordoun, Seytown,
Lander Kennethe, Meldrome, Schau, Liberton, Livermond, Cargill, Strachan,
Ratray, Dundass, Meazeis, Mertine, Cockbourn, Lesly, Abercromby: At this time
also William Duke of Normandy conquered England, which was the occasion that
these Surnames (being expelled their Country) came to Scotland. viz. Ramsay,
Vans, Lindsay, Lownal, Towers, Preston, Bissat, Fowls, Wandlaw, Maxwell, from
France came the Names of Frazer, Sintcare, Boswel, Montray, Montgomry, Boys,
Campbel, Beaton. At this time Walter Son to Fleance came to Scotland, who
shortly after was created high Steward of the Kingdom. King Malcolm was killed
at the siege of Anwick, by one Robert Moubray, who came from the Castle upon a
light horse holding in his hand a Lance, with the Keys of the Castle upon the
point of it. King Malcolm looking steadfastly to the Lance, the other run him
through the Eye with it, escaping to the next Wood: Whereupon King William
changed this Moubrey's Name to Percy: King Malcolm dyed the thirty sixth year
of his Reign, and was buried in Dunfermling.

87. Donald the seventh, Surnamed Bane, being Malcolm Kanmores Brother usurped
the Crown, A. D. 1093. But within a year he was expelled by Duncan, base Son to
the foresaid Malcolm.

88. Duncan the second usurped the Crown, but did not enjoy it long, being
killed by Macpendar Earl of Mearnes at Taich, by procurement of Donald the
seventh, who after was Crowned King. He gave the North and West Isles, to the
King of Norway for his assistance, to recover the Crown. He was taken Captive
by Edgar his Successor, and put in Prison, where after some years he dyed
miserably.

89. Edgar, Malcolm, Kanmores Son succeeded, A. D. 1098. He was the first
anointed King, Governing with great Wisdom and Sobriety: He dyed the nineteenth
year of his Reign, and was buried in Dumfermling.

90. To him succeeded Alexander the first, Surnamed Fierce, A. D. 1107. Soon
after his coming to the Throne, certain Traitors were by his Chamberlains means
let in to his Chamber, intending to have killed him in Bed, but he being
surprised at their noise, got out of Bed and caught a Sword in his hand,
wherewith he killed the Chamberlain, and six of the other Traitors; the rest
hasted away, but being pursued, and some of them overtaken Confessed, that
diverse of the Nobles were in the Conspiracy, them the King pursued, killing
some and taking others: He dyed in Peace the seventeenth year of his Reign, and
was buried in Dumfermling.

91. To him succeeded his Brother David the first, A. D. 1124. He possessed
Northumberland, and Cumberland, Huntington, and Westmorland. He married Maud
Daughter to the Earl of Northumberland, who dyed in the flower of her Age, for
which the King took such Grief, that he resolved never to Marry again; but gave
himself wholly to works of Charity. He purged his Court from all Vices, so that
his whole Family were given to Virtuous Exercises, no Rioting nor Drunkeness,
nor Lascivious, or wanton Songs were suffered: This Victorious and Religious
King dyed in Carlyle, the twenty ninth year of his Reign, and was buried at
Dumfermling; where King James the first visiting his Tomb, called him, a Sore
Saint to the Crown.

92. Malcolm the fourth (Surnamed the Maiden) next Heir after King David began
his Reign, A. D. 1153. A just and mild Prince; in the beginning of his Reign,
there was a great Famine in Scotland, whereof many dyed. Sumerled, Thane of
Argyle, taking advantage of the present Calamity raised a Rebellion, purposing
to make himself King; but he was soon crush't, his Friends killed, and himself
forced to fly to Ireland; soon after, being invited to London, by King Henry of
England, under pretense of confirming him in his Title, to Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmorland; he carried him with him into France, where he had
Wars for that time; he no sooner was returned home, then he made War with
England, to the great loss of both Kingdoms: He dyed at Jedburgh, the twelfth
year of his Reign.

93. To him succeeded William his Brother, Surnamed the Lion, A. D. 1165. He
demanded Northumberland, which by Right belonged to his Crown, to be
re-delivered to him, which the King of England (being taken up with Wars in
France) durst not altogether refuse; but condescended to let him have such
parts of it, as his Grandfather possessed; but soon after he was by a Stratagem
taken Prisoner at Alunick, and sent to France where the King of England was,
whence not long after he was Ransomed with a sum of Money; being returned home,
he expelled all the Murrays out of Murray-Land, for that they were Seditious
and Tumultuous in his absence: About this time the Pope sent to King William a
Sword, with the Sheath and Hilts all of Gold, set about with precious Stones
with a Hat, or Diadem, giving him the Title of the Defender of the Church.
After this, he retired to Bertha, where he stayed not long, when by a sudden
Inundation of two Rivers, Tay and Almond; the Towns Walls were beat down, the
Castle demolished, the young Prince and his Nurse with several others drowned
(the King himself narrowly escaping: He founded and built the City of Perth,
granting to it several great and ample Privileges. He dyed the forty ninth
year of his Reign, and was buried in Aberbrothick.

94. His Son Alexander the second succeeded to him, A. D. 1214. Having pacified
all Rebellions at home, he led his Army into England, where having made Peace
with King John, he married his Sister: Afterward he went into France and
renewed the old League with this Addition, that neither of them should receive,
or protect the Enemies of the others Kingdom, nor Marry with any Stranger,
without making one another privy thereto. In the mean time his Queen dyed
without any Succession; within a year after he married Mary Daughter to
Ingelram Earl of Coucy in France, who bare to him Alexander the third; in his
time came Cardinal Egadius into Britain, to beg Money for the Holy War, of
which he got a great deal, but going through France he spent it all, and told
his Holiness, when he came to Rome, that he had been robbed by the way:
Whereupon presently another Legate was sent to Britain. But the People hearing,
how they were cheated of their Money by the last procured an Order, discharging
this not to enter the Kingdom. King Alexander dyed in Peace, the thirty fifth
year of his Reign, and was buried at Melross.

95. Alexander the third succeeded his Father, A. D. 249. Being nine years of
Age at his Coronation. Ambassadors were sent to England, demanding Margaret
King Henry the third's Daughter in Marriage for King Alexander, which was
granted; the next year, the two Kings had a meeting at York, where the Marriage
was Solemnized. During his Minority the Realm was well Governed by his Nobles;
taking the Government upon himself, his first work was to summon the Earls of
Monterth, Athole and Buchan, and the Lord Strabogy, who were all of the Name of
Cumings; they not daring to appear, were denounced Rebels: They being now
afraid, thought nothing so much for their safety, as the having the King in
their Power, which they got, and confined him in the Castle of Sterling; but
the Earl of Athel, who was the head of the Party, dying, their Hearts failed
them, and (every one of them getting his Remission) they set the King at
Liberty; soon after the Danes with a great Army invaded the Country, the King
with his Forces went against them, and routed them, killing twenty four
Thousand of them; the King returned to Norway with only four Ships, which was
all that was left of his whole Fleet. At this time Alexander Earl of Carrick,
passed to the Holy Land, having a Daughter who succeeded to his Estate; she
Married Robert Rance, Lord of Annaudale, and bare to him, that noble and
invincible Champion Robert Bruce King of Scotland: King Alexander had two Sons
by his Queen, viz. Prince Alexander and David, and one Daughter Margaret, who
was married to the King of Norway; she bare to him Margaret called the Maiden
of Norway. The King and Queen going to London, to the Coronation of King Edward
the first: David the second Son dyed in their absence; within a few years after
the Prince dyed at Lundores, to the great Grief of the Nation, and not long
after the King dyed by a fall from over a Rock at Kinghorn, the thirty seventh
year of his Reign: Leaving none of his own direct Line to succeed him.

The Nobility having met upon this so important occasion, they put the Kingdom
into the hands of six Regents; for the South side Robert Archbishop of
Glasgow: John Cumine, and John the great Steward of Scotland. For the North,
the Archbishop of S. Andrews, Macdiff Earl of Fife, and Cumine Earl of Buchan.
Edward of England, sends to demand the Daughter Grandchild in marriage, as
next Heir to the Crown, which was agreed too, but the Death of the Lady
frustrated all that Negotiation, by which means great contention arose between
Bourn, and John Baliol. Baliol managing the English, and Bruce the French
interest, Baliol being in the second degree of relation and Bruce in the third;
the one being David Earl of Huntingtons Grand Child, the other his great Grand
Child: matters standing thus, the whole was referred to King Edward, who coming
to Berwick and calling Lawyers to his assistance, pretends all equity, but
raised up eight other Competitors, the better to weaken the claim of the other
two, and so handled the business that ( Bruce having refused the Crown in
Homage to England,) upon his aceptance of these conditions.

96. John Balliol was declared King, A. D. 1293. In the fourth year of his
Reign, an Appeal being made against him to King Edward, by Mac-Duff and he
refusing to rise from his Seat to answer it. King Edward enters Scotland
masters the Country, takes Baliol and sends him Prisoner to London, and
afterward to France, where he dyed long after in Exile. About this time Sir
William Walace arose, who to his Honor did so Heroically defend his Country,
in its low condition, as made it easily appear that if he had had as happy a
fortune to advance, as he had to relieve, he might have been Commemorated for
as great a man as ever was in any age; for having upon a quarrel Slain a Young
English Gentleman, and enforced to lurk in the Hills for safety of his life, he
became inured to such hardness, that awaking his natural Courage, he be came
the Head of all the Malcontents, and filled both the Kingdoms with his terror
so that having gleaned up to a tumultuary Army, he became Baliols Viceroy; thus
after some little skirmishes he reduced all beyond the Forts: after which he
went to England, and Ranged up and down for some time, and returned without
opposition; after which the English enters Scotland with a great Army, and
finding the Scots disposed under three Leaders, (who disputed among themselves
for Priority) quite routed them, but soon after they made a general
insurrection, to oppose which, King Edward sent Ralph Conniers with a great
army, who a by tripple Victory were defeated at Kolkin.

All this while Robert Bruce continued with King Edward, who weary of the Kings
delays and offputs, at last strikes in with John Cumin, Baliols Cousin german,
they agreed that Bruce should have the Kingdom, and Cumine all Bruces Lands.
Cumine notwithstanding communicates this agreement to King Edward, Bruce has
notice, and by shooing his Horse backward escapes to Lockambban, there he finds
Cumines Letters advising to cut him off, upon which he hastens to Dumforess,
where he heard that Cumin was, and after his exprobrating his infidelity, Stabs
him dead in the Franciscan Monastery. About the same time Walace was
traitorously Betrayed by Sir John Monteits at Glasgow, and delivered to the
English: and being brought to London was Cruelly executed in Smithfield, and
his Limbs hung up in the most Eminent places.

97. Robert Bruce was (after he had stayed for the Popes absolution for
defiling the Monastery, with the murder of Cumine) Crowned at Scone 1306. a
Valiant and Heroic Prince, he had many Enemies both at home and abroad, which
Edward taking advantage off, with the assistance of the Cumines, quite Routed
him, forcing him to the Hills where he endured great Misery, to the great ruin
and Slaughter both of his Family and Friends, but making to gether some little
force, he took Carrick and Innerness, by surprisal, and by this means augmented
his Train, so that he was in case to withstand Edward, having obtained a
considerable Victory (though sick and forced to be held on horse back) this
gave him time to take in the remaining strength, but they were within a year
retaken from him, which encouraged Edward the second to enter with a great Army
to Scotland, but had a great defeat at Bannokburn, which occasioned the loss of
Berwick, and Bruces confirmation in Parliament; some few years after were spent
in light Skirmishes, and Incursions. Robert having some rest convened his
Nobles intending to determine the right of Inheritances, which some had
unlawfully kept in these unsettled times; this begat a Conspiracy, which being
detected, a meeting was held at Perth, there by their own Papers many were
Convicted, and Executed but some Pardoned.

In the mean time a Legate came from Rome, armed with all the Thunderbolts of
that See, to threaten the Scots into a Peace with England; but missing of his
Errand, the Scots followed him with an Army, and marched as far as Stainmore;
Edward in revenge raises a most powerful Army, Robert therefore considering
that his force would not be in case to resist so great a Power, caused all the
cattle to be carried unto the Avious retreats of the Hills, that they might not
be serviceable to the Enemy, whereupon the English for want of Victuals were
forced to retire, Bruce pursues them as far as York, there he obtained a great
Victory. About this time the family of the Hamiltons took their rise, one of
them killing an English Gentleman, fled to Robert for Protection, who gave him
lands which retain the name to this day. Bruce now having subdued his enemies,
begins to compose himself to the cares of Peace, and by Act of Parliament
settles the Crown upon his Son, (though a Child) and in case of his decease, to
Robert Stewart his Grandchild by his Daughter, soon after Thomas Randolph, and
James Douglas were sent with a flying party of horse into England, from whence
they returned without any considerable action, saving only that Douglas with
two hundred horse beat up the English quarters, cutting two ropes of the Kings
Tent with his Sword, and made a good retreat, Bruce finding himself wasted with
Age, retired to the Abbey of Kilross, leaving these three Counsels behind him.
First not to let one man Solely command the Ebudae. Secondly never to put all
their strength at one Hazard with the English. Thirdly never to make long
Truces with them. Thus he dyed leaving Charge with the Valiant Douglas, to go
to Jerusalem (whither himself designed an Expedition) which the Douglas
performing, he afterward Joined with the Christian Princes against the Turks
and Saracens, where he obtained several great Victories. He purposing to return
home was driven by a Tempest upon the Coast of Spain, where he joined with the
King of Aragon against the Saracens, and obtained great Victories, at last he
was killed by an Ambushment that was laid for him of purpose, thus ended the
Noble and Valiant Douglas, one of the most renowned warriors that lived in his
days; It is said that he was thirteen times Victorious against the Turks and
Sarazens, and fifty seven times against the English. In the preceding age
there was a Gate in Dansick called the Douglas port, in memory of this Douglas.
King Robert dyed at Cardross the twenty fourth year of his Reign, and was
buried in Dumfermling.

98 To him Succeeded his Son David Bruce A. D. 1330. Being seven years of age,
Thomas Randal who was continued Governor, kept the country in entire peace and
prosperity, which King Edward hearing of, hired a Monk to kill Randal by
poison, the Monk giving out that he had great skill in curing the Stone (where
with the Government was sore troubled) came to be in favor with him, which
gave him opportunity to perpetrate his Villainy, how ever the Poison did not
take effect at first, but the Monk returned home and told King Edward that he
had done his business, who immediately raising a great Army came to the border,
of which the Governor being advertised presently marched against him, (himself
not being able to ride nor go, was carried in a litter; when King Edward heard
that the Governor was there, in person, he sent an Herald under pretense of
seeking peace, whom the Governor received with a very austere countenance,
when Edward was by the Herald certified of the truth of his being alive, he
returned home and burnt the Monk alive. The Governor returning home dyed at
Musselbrough, after his death the Earl of March and the Earl of Mar were
chosen Governors, in which they were scarce warm when news was brought that
Edward Balliol was seen in the Fryth with a formidable Fleet, his Army
consisted of both English and Scotch, the Earl of Stafford with diverse other
English men of note were with him, the Governors raised two great Armies to
oppose the Balliol, he came near the water of Hone, where he pitched his Tents,
the Earl of Mar also encamped within view of him, but he slighting the
smallness of their number took little care of himself, the Balliol in the night
time passed the water of Erne, having intelligence of the Ford by a stake set
up for that purpose, and entering the Earl of Marrs Camp, killed him in his
Bed, with many other Noble men and Gentlemen; namely the Earl of Carrick, Sir
William Hay Constable of Scotland, Alexander Frazier, also Robert Keith, Lord
Marshal, Balliol past immediately and beseiged Perth and soon overcame it. The
Earl of March being encamped at Ochterarder, and hearing of the Earl of Marrs
death, and the taking the Town of Perth marched thither and beseiged it, but
after he had filled the Ditches, and put himself in a case to make an assault,
he most shamefully left it thereupon.

99. Balliol usurped the Crown at Scone, A. D. 1332. coming from thence to
Perth, they that adhered to David, Bruce beseiged him and his party, upon the
other hand his adherents wasted and destroyed the beseigers country, Perth
being well fortified, was by the King committed to the Earl of Fiffe as
Governor of it, but the Sons of them who were killed with the Earl of Mar at
Duplin, beseiged and took it committing the Governor to the Castle of
Killdrummie. Andrew Murry of Tullibardin, was Executed for fastening the stake
in the Ford of the River Erne, whereby Balliol and the Englishmen were directed
the Night wherein they Surprised the Earl of Mar. Therefore John Kandal
Earl of Murry, and the Earl of Galloway gathered a great Army and came
against Balliol and quite routed him, killing many of his Nobles and taking
many Prisoners, the Kingdom being thus divided the one part for Balliol, the
other for Bruce, the King of England thinking it a fit time for him to make a
full Conquest of Scotland, raised a great Army and beseiged Berwick, mean while
Archibald Dowglass raised an Army and entering the Borders, Burnt all before him
to divert the King of England from the Seige, King Edward advertised of this,
sent a Messenger to Sir Alexander Setonn, who was Governor, telling him that
if he did not presently render he would hang his two Sons, whom he had in his
hands, which he refusing to do the two Young Gentlemen were presently hanged
then the Governor came with an Army to Northumberland where a most Bloody
battle was fought on Halidown-hill, and the Governor himself with many Nobles
killed, thereupon Berwick was rendered, and Edward Balliol Established King,
who sought by all means to have gotten Robert Stewart in his hands, for he knew
that (next to King David) his Title was best to the Crown. Soon after King
Edward prepared an Army both by Sea and Land, to enter into Scotland, but the
most part of his Ships Perished in Forth. The King returning with Balliol into
England, left Cumin Earl of Athol Governor who seized upon all the Lands
pertaining to Robert Stewart and his Friends, but Robert Stewart took the
Castle of Dunne, and killed all the Englishmen therein* at this time the Earl
of Murray came from France, who together with Robert reduced much of the
Country to the obedience of King David chasing the Governor and his Followers
to the Mountains, but the English entered with a great Army and (though a great
part of their Army was routed) took Perth, but their Fleet being harrast at
Sea, were forced to retreat, and the rather in design of a French War, but some
of the Nobles still standing out, the English landed in Murray, and reduced
all, and leaving Balliol returned home, the next year the English beseiged
Dunbar, and sent in two Parties under Talbot and Monford who were both routed,
yet the seige continued, at last they were forced to raise the seige, also
having received great loss by the Valor of Robert Stewart.

Murray in the mean time dying, Stewart was created Viceroy till David's
return, who having the first year gained some Victories, did the next year
take Perth, Sterling and the Castle of Edinburgh, the Scots gaining all their
ground except Berwick. In the year 1336. David resolves upon an expedition into
England, though much dissuaded by his council, Making John Randolph General,
himself going disguised, Soon after a peace for two years was treated of, which
David would not accept without the consent of France, whereupon marching as far
as the County of Durham, had his Army quite routed and himself taken Prisoner,
his Kingdom also in a manner Depopulated with the Plague: by this time John of
France was also made Prisoner in England; the Scots after eleven years
Captivity, ransomed their King, who at his return punished some of those who
had deserted him at Durham, and endeavored to remove the Succession of the
Crown from Robert Stewart, to whom he was some years after reconciled; he spent
the last five years of his Reign in composing Domestic feuds, Queen Jane
daughter to Edward the second of England dying, he Married Margaret Logy,
Daughter to Sir John Logy, then he purposed to have past to Jerusalem, having
provided all necessarys for his Voyage, but he fell sick of a Feavour in the
Castle of Edinburgh, whereof he dyed in the fortyth year of his Reign, without
Succession, and was buried in Holyrood-house.

100. Robert Stewart the first King of that Name, succeeded his mothers
Brother, A. D. 1378. A Valiant and worthy Prince, he Married Eupham Daughter to
the Earl of Ross, who bare to him David, Earl of Strathern, Walter Earl of
Athol, Alexander Earl of Mar, with several Daughters. After her Death, he
marries Elizabeth Moor his own Concubine, the better to Legitimate Children he
had by her, he honored them with Titles, and declared them his Successors, two
years after an Attempt is made upon Berwick* and Sir John Lilbourn, and (...)
grave Captains of it taken (...) After this, the Earl of Douglass came with
twenty thousand Men, to the Fair of Pennire within England, spoiling all the
Goods there; but carried away the Pestilence with him, whereof many dyed. To
revenge this, the English came with a great Army over Solway, destroying all
before them, mean while the Scots gathered together about five hundred Men. and
lay in Ambush, till the English returned back; then with a sudden noise and
Clamor, as they passed by they set upon them, forcing them back, till many
were drowned in Solway. Not long after, Edward King of England dyed; whereupon
the Duke of Lancaster came into Scotland, entreating to have a Peace for three
years, which Peace being expired: My Lord of Galloway, laid siege to the Castle
of Lochmaban, and made himself Master of it; defeating a strong party of
English, who were coming from Carlyle to it is relief: King Richard fearing of
it, sent the Baron of Gray-stock with a Body of Men, to fortify Roxburgh, who
being within a mile of it, he was taken by the Earl of March, and carried to
Dunbar; the same year, the strengths of Teviotdale were by the Earl of Douglas
recovered out of the English hands, soon after which he dyed. His Son James
succeeding to him, went by the Kings Order with an Army into England, whence he
was presently after Counter-manded home, where he found the Admiral of France
with two hundred and forty Ships well Manned, come to their Assistance, with
them they passed into England and took the Castles of Warkford, and Corwal. And
laying siege to Roxburgh, and Carlyle; the Scots and French could not agree, in
whose Names the strengths should be kept if they were won, which brought the
business to nothing: Whereupon King Richard in revenge enters Scotland with a
great Army, and marching through the Mers and Louthian, did much hurt. But the
Earls of Fife, Douglas and Galloway followed him into England, and secretly
passing the Water of Solway, came to Cokermouth; where in three days time they
spoiled the whole Country about, and returned safely with great Booty. In the
year 1388. The King past again into England with an Army, at which time the
Irish taking their advantage, entered Galloway, destroying all before them:
Whereupon William the Lord of Galloways Son pursued them to Ireland, and burnt
the Town of Carlingfoord, and finding sixty Ships in several Harbors, loaded
fifteen of them with the spoil of the Town, and burnt the rest: Returning home,
he spoiled the Isles of Man. The next year, the King of England sent an Army
into Scotland, which did much hurt in the Mers, revenging this affront: King
Robert sent two Armies into England, the one under the Command of the Earl of
Fife, entered Cumberland; the other led by the Earls of Douglass, and March
entered Northumberland; the two Armies met within two miles of Newcastle. The
Earl of Douglass chose out ten thousand Men to besiege Newcastle, wherein was
the Earl of Northumberland with his two Sons, Henry Hotspur, and Ralph. Henry
Challenged the Earl of Douglass to fight with him, which Douglass accepted off,
so being mounted upon two starely Horses, they assaulted one another
desperately, at last Douglass beat Peircy out of his Saddle, but he was
presently rescued and brought into the Town. Immediately Douglass assaulted the
Town, but it was so well defended by the English, that he was forced to retire
and encamp at Otterburn, whither Henry Peircy immediately followed, there they
fought a bloody Battle, until the darkness of the Night parted them, but when
the Moon began to appear, they joined again with more Fierceness than before,
Victory inclining sometime to one side, and sometimes to another; till at last
Patrick Hepburn came with fresh Men to the Scots: Whereupon the English
retreated, leaving eighteen hundred of their Men dead in the place, and a
hundred and forty taken Prisoners; among which were the two Peircies above
mentioned. But the Valiant Earl of Douglass dyed in this Battle, being thrice
run through the Body, and Mortally wounded in his Head, which was a greater
loss and Grief to his Nation, then the gain of this Victory could balance. The
next year a Parliament was called at Perth, wherein Robert Earl of Fife, the
Kings second Son was elected Governor, the King himself by reason of his great
Age, not being able to Govern. He was a Valiant, Victorious and fortunate
Prince in all his Wars, for his Governors and Captains returned always with
Victory. He was very constant, and a great Iustitiar, hearing patiently the
Complaints of the Poor; causing all wrongs to be redressed. He dyed peaceably
in the Castle of Dun-Donald, the seventy fifth year of his Age, and the
nineteenth year of his Reign.

The same year John his eldest Son was called to succeed, who thinking that
Name ominous to Kings (and there wanted not Examples) as of him of England, and
him of France, and thinking something of the Felicity, of the two former
Roberts, was Crowned by the Name of,

101. Robert the third, A. D. 1390. He was more remarkable, for his
Peaceableness and Modesty, then for any other Virtue; the first seven years of
his Reign were past in Peace, by reason of his Truce with England, but not
without some fierce Fiends among his Subjects; especially, the Clankays, and
Clanchattes, the King seeing the Difficulty of reducing them, made this
Proposition to them, that three hundred of each side should try it by Dint of
Sword before the King; the Conquered to be pardoned, and the Conqueror
advanced, this being agreed to, a place was appointed upon the North-side of
Perth; but when the Clans presented themselves, there was one of one side
missing, whom then his party could not supply: A Tradesman steps out, and for
half a French Crown, and promise of Maintenance during his Life, filled up the
Company. The first was furious, but none behaved himself more furiously, then
the other Mercenary Champion, who was the greatest cause of the Victory, for of
his side their remained ten grievously wounded, the other party had but one
left; who not being wounded, yet being unable to sustain the stroke of the
other, threw himself in the Tay, and escaped with his Life: By this means the
fiercest of the two Clans, being cut off, the remainder being Headless were
quiet: Two years after, the King in Parliament made his two Sons Dukes, which
was the first time that Title, was known in Scotland. Next year Richard the
second of England, being forced to resign, Henry the fourth succeeded, in the
beginning of his Reign, though the Truce was not expired; yet the Seeds of War
began to bud, upon this occasion, George Earl of March betrothed his eldest
Daughter to David the Kings eldest Son, Archibald Earl of Douglass incensed at
this, got a Vote of Parliament to revoke this Marriage, and giving a greater
sum of Money, got a Marriage confirmed in Parliament, betwixt David and Mary
his Daughter. The Earl of March nettled at this, demands Redress, but not being
heard, he leaves the Court; and with his Family and Friends goes into England,
to the Lord Percy, who with his Assistance did much hurt to the Lands of the
Douglasses; the Scots declare the Earl of March an Enemy, and sends to demand
him of the English, which they refusing, several Incursions happened upon both
sides, till at length Piercy was defeated by the Douglass's at Lynton-bridge.
At this time, David Earl of Cravford, and the Lord Wells in England, engaged
to run certain Courses on Horseback, with sharp Spears for Life and Death upon
London Bridge, which they performed most gallantly. The People Perceiving the
Earl of Cravford to sit so stiffly, cried, the Scotch man was locked in his
Saddle; he hearing this, leapt out of the Saddle upon the Ground, and presently
mounted again, to the great wonder of the Beholders: The second time they run
without any hurt, but the third time the Lord Wells was beat out of his
Saddle, and sorely hurt with the fall. By this time the Queen dying, her Son
David, who for his Extravagancies was by her means kept under restraint, broke
out into his former disorders, and committed all kind of Rapine, and
wickedness; complaint being brought to his Father, he committed him to his
brother Robert (this Design was to root out all that Offspring) the business
was so ordered, as that the young man was shut up in Faulkland Castle to be
starved; which yet was for a while delayed, one Woman thrusting in some Oaten
Cakes at a Chink, and another giving him Milk out of her Breasts, through a
Trunk; but both these being discovered, the Youth being forced to tear his own
Flesh dyed of a multiplied Death, which Murder being whispered to the King, he
was so abused by the false Representations of his Brother; that Grief and
Imprecations was all the relief that he had left him, and being now retired
sickly, to Boot Castle, and unable to punish him. The King therefore Solicitous
to preserve James his youngest Son, is resolved to send him to Charles the
sixth of France: And having taking shipping at the Bassas, he passed by the
Promontory of Flambrough; and whether he was forced by a Tempest, or that he
was Sea-sick, he was forced to Land there, he was taken by the English, and
detained Prisoner, notwithstanding the eight years Truce; and though it came to
be debated at the Council Table, yet his Detention was carried in the
Affirmative: But the News so struck his aged Father, that he had almost
presently dyed; but being carried to his Chamber with voluntary abstinence and
Sorrow: He dyed within three days, the sixteenth year of his Reign, and was
buried in Pasley.

Upon this, the Parliament confirm Robert for Governor; about four years
after, Donald of the Isles enters Ross as his pretended Inheritance, with ten
thousand Men, which he easily subdued; thence he went to Murray and Mastered it
also, and so went on to Aberdeen; to stop this Torrent, Alexander Earl of Mar,
followed by most of the Nobility, met him at Harlaw, where they joined in so
bloody a Battle, and lost so many noble and considerable Persons, that though
Night parted them, neither could pretend to the Victory, to this year, the
University of S. Andrews owes it is Rise: The English being taken up with a War
with France, nothing considerable was acted between them and the Scots, for ten
years after, at which time Robert the Governor dies, and Murdoch his Son (a
very unfit Person,) was put in his place; who suffered his Sons to come to that
petulancy, that they were not only offensive to the People, but with all
disobedient to their Father; who having a brave Faulcon, which his Son Walter
had often begged, but in vain, he snatched it out of his Fathers hand, and
wrung off her Neck, for which his Father being angry Well says he, Since I
cannot Govern thee: I will bring one shall Govern us both: And from that day,
he ceased not to further the Redemption of the King, he Governed four years.

102. But the Nobles weary under this form of Government, the Governor being
also irritated by the Misdemeanor of his Children, all Unanimously determine
without longer delays, to work the deliverance of their Native Prince James,
fourth of England, which at length was effected, Anno. Dom. 1424. Having
Ransomed him for the sum of forty hundred thousand Marks. He married Jane
Daughter to the Duke of Somerset, Son to John of Gaunt, who bare to him two
Sons, Alexander who dyed shortly after, and James the second who succeeded to
him.

The King having passed the Solemnities of Hasterat Edinburgh: He with his
Queen came to Perth, and from thence to Scone; where he was Crowned in the
twenty seventh year of his Age, after he held a Parliament at Perth, where the
Tax was laid on to pay the sum promised to England for his Ransom, from thence
he went back to Edinburgh, where he called such as were Concerned with the
Crown Rents together; he understood by their Accounts, that the most and best
part of the Crown Lands were alienated, and wasted by the late Governor, and
his Sons, whereat he was exceedingly incensed; yet that time he smothered, and
put a fair Countenance upon his Passion. But soon after, pregnant Accusations
were brought in against some of the Nobility; especially, the Governors
Friends, upon which some of them were made Prisoners, which occasioned much
discontent and Jealousy on both sides, yet the King securing the Body of this
Estate on his side, resolved to go on; and having Arrested the Governor, with
two of his Sons, and several others his Friends, they were all committed to
several Prisons: Whereupon James the Governors youngest Son, in a desperate
rage accompanied with a number of Outlaws, came to Dumbarton, and set on Fire,
and killed John Stewart the Kings Uncle, with thirty others. This Insolency of
the Son, quite diverted the Kings Clemency from his Father and Brethren:
Whereupon he calls a Parliament at Sterling, where the Governor with his two
Sons, and his Father-in-Law the Duke of Lenox, were Arraigned and Condemned,
and soon after Executed; this highly perplexed some other Lords and Gentlemen,
who were Prisoners at the same time, fearing that they should also meet with
the same measures; yet the King like a wise Physician, being not willing to
take away more Blood, than he thought would take away the Disease of the Body,
in a short time set them all at Liberty. The Wars continuing between France and
England, the French sent an Ambassador to renew the ancient League with
Scotland: But his main business was, to carry on a match between Lewis the
Daulphine, though then very young; and Margaret Daughter to King James, this
match the English neglected, but afterward most earnestly sued for it.

The South parts of the Kingdom, being brought under Obedience, the King
resolved to have the North follow their Example, for which end he went thither
himself in Person, to keep his Courts: When he came there, he found things in a
strange Condition, all going by strength of hand; the stronger overthrowing the
weaker. The King not knowing well how to go about the taming of these rude
Villains, seemed to give small Faith to what he heard of them, allowing such of
them, as seemed to come and see him a great deal of seeming Favor, till at
length he got forty of their Chiefs all at once, within the Castle of
Innerness, whom he presently surprised, making them close Prisoners: Within a
few days after, the King was convinced of this wickedness; Alexander Macrory,
and John Macherter were hanged; John Campbel for murdering John of the Isles,
was beheaded: The Earl of Ross being taken in this Trap, was brought by the
King to Perth, where he was accused of Oppression and other things; yet the
King pardoned him, and freely dismissed him, taking his Oath of Fidelity. But as
soon as he went home, he gathered together a Rabble of Outlaws, who came
toward Innerness, burnt both Town and Castle to the Ground: Whereupon the King
himself went with his Forces against him, at whose approach all the Rebels
fled: Alexander thus abandoned of his Forces, fled to the Isles; but finding
that he was waylaid on all hands, and had no way left him to escape, he came
disguised to Edinburgh: Whereupon Yesterday the King being at Church, he came
wrapped in a mourning Garment and fell down at his Feet, beging his Life, which
at the Queens request was granted; but to keep him from any more mischief, the
Earl of August was appointed to take him into Custody, within Tanutallon Castle.

Donald Balloth Cousin-german to the Earl of Ross raised a great number of
outlaws and invaded Lochaber, and in a Bloody Battle overthrew the Earls of
Mar and Caithness at Innerlochy, the news coming to the King he came with a
great Army to Dunstaffage, which when the Clans heard of, they tendered their
Submission to the King, promising to break Balloth and his party, which the
King accepted of, Balloth fled to Ireland where he was taken and his head chopped
off and sent to King James.

Notwithstanding of the many Acts of Justice that were done upon these
disorderly outlaws, yet nothing frighted one Macdonald, who was Famous for all
sorts of Villainies; among other Cruelties he is said to have nailed Horseshoes
to the Soles of a Widow, because that she swore to delate him to the King
being taken with twelve of his associates, and brought to Perth, the King
caused them to be shooed in the same manner as he had served the woman, draging
him about for a Spectacle to the people for three days, then all of them were
put to death. In this year A. D. 1430. the first of June was a terrible Eclipse
of the Sun, at three of the clock in the afternoon, the day turning black for
the space of half an hour, as though it had been night, which was afterward
called by the common people The black Hour. The King having settled the Country,
begins to look to his own affairs, and having advisedly perused all evidences
and Charters belonging to the Crown, he recalls all such Lands as had been
either alienated from it, or wrongfully usurped, about this time there came
Ambassadors from the King of Denmark requiring of King James a Yearly Tribute,
due to him as King of Norway for the western Isles, the Ambassador was
honorably entertained, and the old League renewed with Denmark; soon after the
French Kings Ambassadors came to have Margaret already betrothed to Lewis the
Dauphin, delivered to them and conveyed to France, where they found the Lord
Scroop earnestly dealing with the King, that he must bestow his daughter upon
King Henry the sixth of England, promising that if he would agree thereto, that
the Town and Castle of Berwick should be delivered into the hands of the Scots,
with all the Lands lying between Tweed and the Redcross in in Richmondshire,
the French Ambassadors also proffered great and tempting things, withal putting
the King in mind how true they have been to him for so many years, since the
first making of the League.

The King and his Council after mature deliberation, declare they will not
break the Ancient League with France, whereupon the English Ambassadors turned
from Prayers to Threatenings, and being denied friendship denounced War. But the
King no wise moved hereat presently prepared his Ships, and with a company of
able and skilful Mariners set his Daughter to Sea, and having escaped the
English Fleet that waited for her, safely arrived at the Rochel, A. D. 1430.

The English to revenge this supposed afront invades Scotland both by Sea and
Land; against their forces commanded by Henry Piercy of Northumberland, went
James Dowglass Earl of Angus, with several Gentlemen, their numbers were much
about one, the lists of their meeting was Popperden, Adam Hepburn of Hales, and
Alexander Elphinston led the Vanguard of the Scots, Sir Richard Piercy and Sir
John Ogle of the English, Sir Alexander Ramsey of Dalehouse, and Henry
Clidsdale kept the Rears, no sooner came they within distance of Joining but
the sounds of Drums and Trumpets, was out noised by the shouts of the
Assailants; Guns being about this time invented were here first practiced
between the Scots and English in an open field, then the fight with equal order
had been long maintained on both sides, now the Scots then the English yielding
ground, many of the Commanders at length began to fall, most of the English,
then was the Piercy at once constrained to be both Commander and Soldier, but
all would not do, at last Victory declared her self altogether for the Scots,
two hundred Gentlemen and Common Soldiers of the Scots were slain here. Of the
English dyed Sir Henry Cliddsdale, Sir John Ogle, Sir Richard Piercy with
fifteen hundred Gentlemen and Common Soldiers, and four hundred taken
prisoners, of which forty were Knights; King James resolving to prosecute this
War raised an army, and comes to Roxburgh, beseigeth the Castle defended by
Sir Ralph Gray; But when he came so near his design that they within were
driven to terms to Surrender: The Queen in great have comes to the Camp
representing to her Husband a Conspiracy, which if not suddenly prevented would
endanger his person and Crown, this put the King in great astonishment, not
knowing what to do, at last after many doubtful resolutions and conflicts in
his thoughts, raises the seige, disbandeth the Army, and accompanied with some
chosen bands of his most assured friends, Perplexed Pensive and Sad returned to
Perth, stayed in the Convent of the Dominicans, endeavoring so secretly as was
possible to find out the Conspiracy, but his close practicing was not unknown
to the Conspirators, which made them hasten the mischief before trial, or
remedy could be thought upon.

The Conspirators were Robert Graham, Robert Stewart Nephew to Waller Earl of
Athole, and one of the Kings sworn Domestics, but he who gave motion to all
was the Earl of Athole, he himself the Kings Fatthers Brother; this quarrel
was no less then a pretended Title to the Crown, and being animated by the
Oracle of a Southsayer, who assured him that he would be Crowned in a solemn
Assembly before his death, never doubted of success. These having associated
unto them the most audacious, whom hope of preferment might entice.

Thus Graham and Stewart which were accomplices guided with resolution, and
guarded with the darkness of the Night, came to the Blackfriars of Perth, and
having the way made open to them, entered the Gallery before the Kings chamber
door, where they attended some of their Confederates, who should have stole
away the bar by which means they might enter the chamber, but before their
coming the occasion was put in their hands, for Walter Streater one of the
Kings Cup bearers came forth of the Chamber and finding armed men, rushing
rudely to force their entry, with a loud voice gave the alarm of Treason,
while they were working his death a Maid of Honor got to the Door, and essayed
to shut it, but the bar which should have made it fast was gone, she thrust in
her Arm in the place of it but that easily broken, the conspirators rush into
the Chamber, and slaying all such of the waiters as made defense, they at last
stroke down the King, (whom while the Queen by interposing her body sought to
save, she received two wounds) and he with twenty eight most toward the heart
was left dead. The report of this Murder being spread abroad, wrought
incredible Sorrow and Grief in the Hearts of his Subjects of all sorts, the
Nobles of their own accord and motion Assembled to Edinburgh, and directed
Troops of Armed men through all the quarters of the Kingdom, to aprehend the
Murderers; such diligence was used that within forty days all were taken and
put to Ignominious Deaths: the common sort of the Conspirators were hanged upon
Gibbits, the punishment of Athol was continued for three days, the first day he
was Stripped naked to his shirt, and by a Crane fixed in a Cart often hoisted
aloft and thus dragged along the great street of the Town, on the second day he
was mounted upon a Pillar in the Marketplace, and crowned with a Diadem of
burning Iron with this Inscription, the King of all Traitors, thus was his
Oracle accomplished, the third day he was laid naked upon a Scaffold, his belly
ripped, his Heart and Bowels taken out and thrown in a Fire before his eyes,
lastly his Head was cut of and fixed in the most Eminent place of the Town, his
Body sent in quarters, to the most populous Cities of the Kingdom, to remain a
Trophy of Justice. His Nephew was not altogether so vigorously handled, being
only hanged and quartered.

But it being notorious, that Graham had imbrewed his hands in the Kings Blood,
a Gallows being raised in a Cave, he had his Right hand nailed to it, and as he
was dragged along the Streets, Executioners with burning Pincers, tearing the
most Fleshy part of his Carcass; being thus torn and flayed, his Heart and
Intrals were thrown into a Fire, his Head set up, and his Quarters sent among
the Towns, to satisfy the wrath and sorrow of the injured People: Being asked
during his Torture, how he durst embrew his hand in his Princes blood, he made
answer, that having Heaven and Hell before him, he dared leap from Heaven into
Hell; an answer worthy for such a Villain.

Dueas Sylvius then Legate in Scoltand, from the Pope; having seen this sudden
and Terrible revenge, being a Witness of the Execution: Said he could not tell,
whether he should give them greater Commendations, that revenged the Kings
Death, or brand them with a sharper Condemnation, that distained themselves
with so Heinous a parricide. Thus dyed this Noble and Wise Prince, in the
thirteenth year of his Reign: He was buried in the Charter House of Perth,
which he himself had founded.

103. The three Estates of the Kingdom, set the Crown upon the Head of James
the second at Holy-rood-house; while yet a Child in the sixth year of his Age,
A. D. 1437. The Government is entrusted to Alexander Levingston of Calander,
and the Custody of the Kings Person, to Sir William Crichtoun: Whereupon
Archibald Earl of Douglass, grudging that these Honors had been conferred upon
Men far below himself, retired home and gave Orders, that none of his Vassals
should acknowledge the present Government; also he used all means to weaken the
hands of the Chancellor, and Governor, sowing (by his Instruments) the Seeds
of Division between them, which accordingly answered Expectation, they begin to
cross and Counter-act one another, which made them at length that neither of
them was obeyed, the Country, having usurped a Licencious Liberty, doing what
he thought best.

The Queen seeing things thus mismanaged betwixt them, and finding that the
Chancellor was mostly to blame, she at last resolves to change the Game of
State. To effect her design, she came to Edinburgh; and with fair Speeches
prevailed with the Chancellor, to let her enter the Castle* and delight her
self some days in the Company of her Son; after some days staying, where having
fixed every thing for her purpose, she puts the King into a Trunck, as if he
had been some Fardel of her Apparel, and conveys him by water to Sterling,
presently after Proclamations are made against the Chancellor, and he Commanded
to render the Castle, which he refusing to do, he is presently besieged. But
the two Rulers being better advised, considering that Douglass waited to see
them undo one another, come to an agreement.

Much about this time, the Queen Dowager married James Stewart's Son, to the
Lord of Lorn, the Governor fearing what might follow upon the Novation,
committed them both to the Castle of Sterling, then the Queen began to repent
her, of her former Courtesies to the Governor, resolving once more to Face
about; which the Chancellor observing, lays hold upon the Opportunity, and
strikes in with her presently, they contrived how to take the Prince out of the
Governors hands, which they after effected thus, the King being one Morning
hunting in the Park (the Governor being at Perth) the Chancellor coming to him
by the Queens assistance, prevails with him to go to Edinburgh, and take the
Government upon himself; which when the Governor hears of, he very calmly came
to Edinburgh, where the Chancellor and he becomes Friends.

The great Confusions that were in the Country, did necessitate the the calling
of a Parliament, where many grievous Complaints were brought against several
Oppressors; and among the rest William Earl of Douglass, Son to Archibald; was
represented as the Source, whence the Miseries of the Country sprang: The
Parliament resolve to proceed against him, by way of Rigor, but the Governor
and the Chancellor advise them rather to write a fair Letter to him, and invite
him by fair means to come in and submit, which was accordingly done, and
wrought so effectually upon him, that he resolves presently to obey; hoping
thereby to get himself set up: He upon his arrival, was together with his
Brother David, and Sir Malcolm Flyming of Cummerald, with great Ceremony
conducted by the Governor to the Castle of Edinburgh, where the King was; at
this Table he was set to Dine, this so elevated his Heart, that he Blessed
himself with the Expectation of other Favors.

But amidst these Entertainments (behold the Instability of Fortune) near the
end of the Banquet, the Head of a Bull (which was the sign of present Death in
those days) is set down before him: At which sudden Spectacle, he leapt from
the Table all aghast, but he is presently seized upon by armed Men, who led him
to the outer Court of the Castle, and notwithstanding the Tears and Cries of the
young King, that they might spare his Life, he together with his Brother and
Flyming, had their Heads cut off: This Act left Grief and Terror in the Hearts
of the People, who ever after hated the Actors of the Tragedy.

The Kings Nonage being now near expired, he takes the Government upon himself,
and finding the two Rulers being so long settled in the Government; not to be
Ambitious and Headstrong, he resolves to entertain another Faction more
powerful than they: So setting his thoughts upon William Earl of Douglass Son
to the Baron of Abercon, him he received into Favor. This sudden change of
Court, moved the two Rulers to withdraw, after which they were both removed
from their Offices; and at last summoned before the King, to answer such things
as they should be Legally accused of. They finding that there was a design upon
them, did not appear: Whereupon they were both forfeited.

This produced great Confusion in the State, all being divided into Factions,
and Parties: Whereupon followed much Effusion of Blood; especially, between the
Layndsays, and the Ogletives. Douglass to keep himself high, did much abett
these Broils, making his own use of them; yet not long after, the Chancellor
notwithstanding Douglass's power, and Policy, is restored to his Fortune and
Dignity.

The King being settled upon the Throne, married Mary Daughter to the Duke of
Gnilders, soon after, the Peace with England expired, and the Borders of both
Kingdoms, break and mutually invade each other, which issued in a Truce for
seven years. But this Truce stood not long, both Nations being equally inclined
to break it: Whereupon after several Incursions on both sides, at last they
came to a Battle. The Scots were Commanded by the Earl of Ormond, the English,
by the Earl of Northumberland, Magnus Red-beard; a man trained from his Youth
in the Wars of France, who is said to have required no more for his Service to
the Crown of England, then that by his own Valor, he must Conquer of Scotland.
Here it is valiantly fought for a long time, with doubtful Victory, till at
length Magnus being killed, it inclined to the Scots, the loss of the English
was great, many brave Men being killed and taken Prisoners, upon their side,
but the Scots lost few of any Note, except Cragy Wallace: This Battle brought
on a Truce for three years.

This Victory no sooner was obtained, and thereby Peace abroad, but presently
they fall out at home; this Douglass being always the first mover of strife:
But now finding himself overpowered by Adversaries, both at Court and in the
Country; he leaves the Kingdom and goes to Rome, he was not long gone, but by
the means of his Enemies, he is cited to appear before the Council upon several
days together, with his Brother and Vassals, to answer such things as should be
objected against them; and upon not appearing, are all denounced Rebels: the
Earl of Douglass hearing of this unexpected News at Rome, takes a Journey, and
comes to the Borders of Scotland; whence he sent his Brother to Court to know
the Kings mind toward him. The King promised upon his Submission, to accept of
him, which he performed, making him for his further Encouragement Lieutenant
General of his Forces: But he stood not long privately in his Prosperity, for
going to the Court of England upon some design, the King was highly
dissatisfied with him, yet upon his humble Submission he is pardoned, but
divested of all public employment within the Kingdom.

Thus being degraded from his Honnours, he gives himself wholly to study
revenge, and that he might the more successfully effect his Design; he gets the
Earls of Cranford, Ross-Murray, the Lord Balveny, with many other Barons and
Gentlemen, to enter in a Confederacy, both offensive and defensive with him,
after they broke out in unsufferable Insolences; spoiling and plundering the
Lands of such as were not of their Faction, and killing, and destroying such as
offered to oppose them.

The King begins to be apprehensive of their Design; therefore thinks it high
time to look to himself and his Country: Whereupon he sent for Douglass, to
come and speak with him at Sterling, which he at first feared to do, but upon
second Thoughts, he accompanied with many of the Confederates went to Court,
where the King very Graciously received him; the day being far spent, the Gates
of the Castle shut, all removed except some of the Council, and the Guards, the
King takes the Earls apart very friendly, and remembered him of Favors
received, and wrongs forgotten: Taxing him with the exorbitant abuses of his
followers, then he told him of a Covenant, which he heard was made betwixt him
and some of the other Nobility, and desired to know what he had to say.
Douglass answered in plain terms, it was so, but that the Covenant was made for
his own safety, the King further expostulated with him to break it, which he
refusing to do, the King with his Dagger ended the Quarrel, killing him in the
place.

About the end of this Tragedy, a pair of Spurs between two Platters, is
directed to Sir James Hamilton, as a part of the Kings Banquet: Whereupon he
and the rest takes the Allarum, and setting Fire to diverse places of the Town,
they make their escape; the King to vindicate himself, emits Declarations,
showing all his good Subjects the Reasons that moved him to take Douglass's
Life, that it was not a fit of Passion, nor an Act of private revenge, but
merely to save the State from utter Ruin: Yet the Mobile were diversely affected
some justifying the Fact, as Noble and Just, but others (as the greater number)
as boldly Condemned it, as Inhumane and Cruel; these of the League missing no
Opportunity that was for their Interest, made it their work to sow Sedition and
Discord, and to encourage all Breaches and Contempt of the Laws, which
increased their number, so that the King was reduced to a very low condition,
till at last Cranford one of the Confederates being routed, by the Earl of
Huntly, he recovered some strength, and having called a Parliament at
Edinburgh, summoned the Confederate Lords to appear before, which they
scornfully refused to do: Whereupon the King levying an Army, forced them to
retire; yet the Country suffered sadly, by their unbridled Fury. At length
after much loss on both sides (the King daily prevailing, the Earl of Cranford
submitted himself to his mercy, as several others did afterward. Whereupon the
Earl of Douglass fled to England, there having gathered together several
desperate Men, he made several inroads upon the Border.

The King having with much difficulty recovered the Royal Authority of his
Ancestors, ( England in the mean time being at the point of utter ruin by the
contest of Henry the sixth, and the Duke of York,) was much solicited by both
of them, but he told the Ambassadors that he had more reason to look to his own
concerns, then to assist either of them which he intended to do, thereupon
raising a Powerful Army he passed the Tweed, and besieged Roxburgh, where
having applied his battery to the Castle, he began to storm it, but by the
space of an overcharged Piece the King's thigh bone being broken was struck
immediately Dead, the twenty Fourth year of his Reign, having left three sons
James who succeeded Alexander Duke of Albany, and John Earl of Mar, and was
buried at Holy-Rood house. After his death the Queen with her Son came to the
siege and encouraged the Nobles, who took and demolished the Castle, and also
the Castle of Warke.

104. To him Succeeded his Son James the third, A. D. 1460. A good Prince
corrupted by wicked Courtiers, who with advantage of his years being but seven
years of age when he began to Reign, his education is entrusted to his Mother,
the Government of the Kingdom to the Earls of Anaudale Castle, Orkney and the
Lords, Boyd and Graham, the Bishops of St. Andrews, Glasgow and Dnubek.

In this Princes Nonage great confusions increased both at home and abroad, at
home by the Islanders who extremely infested the country, and came as far as
the Blairth of Athole and burnt S. Brides Church, where the Earl and his Lady
took Sanctuary, carrying them to the Island Ila, from whence as these Savages
were going further, they were all miserably destroyed by a tempest. Nor was it
better abroad, England being in a flame by the Civil Wars, Henry being taken
and released again by his Queen, flees to Scotland desiring their assistance
against his Enemies, and that he might be the better heard caused the Town of
Berwick to be delivered to the Scots; thereupon the Queen who managed the War
geting some supply, marched (taking the King with her) into England, but was
soon overthrown at Durham.

A. D. 1466. the Queen of Scots dyed having left many sound and profitable
instructions to the King her Son, who now coming to fifteen years of age, is by
his Regents committed to the Lord Boyds Brother to be Educated in the Exercise
of Chivalry, by which means the Boyds became to darken all others in the State,
nothing being done without them, the Kenedies who had been the Kings best
Friends, seeing things go thus left the Court, after which the Glory of the
Court and Country suffered a great Eclipse. The Lord Boyde to be yet higher
gets the sole Government settled upon himself, which laid the Foundation of his
ruin, and not satisfied with this, he obtains his Son to be Married to the
Kings eldest Sister, this highly displeased the rest of the Nobility that his
ambition should be so boundless, which gave matter to his former Enemies to
work upon, all oppression and violence is winked at on purpose at last they
procure Complaints from all parts of the Kingdom against the Boyds, which made
the Kings affection begin to turn away from them.

A. D. 1468. A match being proposed and agreed upon between the King and
Margaret Daughter to the King, of Denmark, the Boyds Enemies procures the Earl
of Arran who had Married the Kings Sister to be sent to bring home the Queen;
he was no sooner gone then his Interest at Court began to fall, for a
Parliament being called; the Lord Boyd and his Brother Sir Alexander are
summoned to appear thereupon he distrusting this Case fled to England, but his
Brother was taken and Arraigned, the Earl of Arran also though absent is
declared a Rebel. The Queen arriving with her fleet arriving in the Ferth, My
Lady Arran went aboard in disguise and informed her Husband of the calamity of
his House, persuaded him to do for himself, whereupon he hoisted Sails and
returned with his Lady to Denmark. The King sends Letters full of promises
and threatenings to move his sister to return to Scotland, which when she did
she was constrained to be divorced from her Husband, and to Marry James Lord
Hamilton; not long after the Earl of Arran dyed in great misery at Antwerp.

Queen Margaret the third year after her Marriage brought forth a Son who was
named James, the King of Denmark to Congratulate the happy delivery of his
Daughter, released all his claims to the Isles of Orkney and Sherland, but in
the midst of this calm a cloud begins to overcast the Kings Splendour, for his
Brothers being Princes of unquiet and restless spirits they set themselves
altogether to study Novelties, and to bring him into contempt with his
Subjects, to this end they had drawn away many of the young Nobility and Gentry
to follow them. The King was Naturally Superstitious, giving much head to
divinations which gave also his Brothers occasion to vilify him, and incense
his people against him, yea the Earl of Mar became so Insolent that in the
Kings own presence, he began to rail against the Government of the state and
Court, which the King highly resenting, caused to Imprison him where he fell in
a high Fever whereof he dyed. The Duke of Albany imputed the death of his
Brother to the Court party, but while he was keeping his Cabals in order to an
Insurrection, he was surprised and Imprisoned in the Castle of Edinburgh out of
which he soon after made his escape to France, thence he came to England, and
began to tamper with King Edward, revealing to him the weakness of the Kingdom
of Scotland, and how easily it might be subdued, the Nobility not respecting
the King but much affecting a change in the Government, which by his assistance
might easily be effected, he promised also to settle a corespondence with the
Nobles of Scotland which he did, then that they might get their design wrought,
gives way for the breaking loose of the Borders, fierce incursions are made by
the English upon Scotland and by the Scots upon the English, and the
discontented Nobility blame the King for all, thereupon pretending the
necessity of the times and the danger the Kingdom was in, they entered into a
Bond of association after which they enter the Kings bed chamber, where they
seized some of his Servants in his presence and put them to death, as
incendiaries in the state.

About this time the Duke of Gloucester set forward toward Scotland with two
and twenty thousand men, finding Berwick two strong for him he marches directly
to Edinburgh, there by public writings at the Market places he gave out high
demands, all which King James being shut up in Edinburgh Castle answered with
silence, the disatisfied Lords having obtained what they chiefly aimed at,
wished the English at home again therefore they desire a peace with them, which
the Duke of Gloucester granted upon condition that all his demands were
satisfied (one of which was to reinstall the Duke of Albany) which after much
debate was granted and he with his Army returned home.

The Duke of Albany having recovered his Estate and Honors, his first work was
to restore the King to his Prerogatives, reconciling him to his discontented
Lords; but he himself stood not long in his favor, for by the advice of some
of his Enemies about the King a Plot is resolved upon to bring the Duke within
compass of Law, which he being aware of fled to England to present to King
Edward and the Duke of Gloucester his grievancies, in his absence he is
convinced of many points of Treason whereupon he and the Lord Crightton his
Associate are both forfeited, which when he heard he presently caused to give
up the Castle of Dunbar, whereof he was Lieutenant, to King Edward, who
immediately put a Garrison in it. Not long after the said King Edward dyed, and
his Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester Succeeded.

The Duke of Albany obtains five hundred Horse from King Richard with which he
came with the old Earl of Douglass to Lochmabban to surprise a Fair which was
held there, whereupon the Lord of Johnston who was warden dispatched Posts
about for supply of men with which he Encountered the Duke, here it is most
Couragously fought on both sides but at last the English are quite routed, the
Duke hardly by swiftness of his Horse escaped, but the Earl of Dowglass is
taken and brought in Triumph to Edinburgh where the King adjudged him to
perpetual confinement, soon after followed a Truce with England for three
years, but before the time was expired Henry Earl of Richmond came with some
Companies out of France, (of which that Famous warrior, Bernard Stewart, Lord
Albany Brother to the Lord Darnly had the leading,) which by the resort of his
Country men turned into an Army and Rencountred Richard at Bosworth where he
was killed, and Henry Proclaimed King of England.

King James taking advantage of this change besieged Dunbar, which was soon
surrendered upon Articles. After this King Henry sent Ambassadors to King James,
to agree if possible upon a lasting, and firm Peace between the two Crowns, at
length after some difficulty they agree upon a Truce for seven years.

The King having settled a Peace with England, betakes himself to the Exercise
of Religion, having founded a College for divine Service in the Castle of
Sterling* he endeavored to annex the Priory of Goldingham to it. The Priors of
this Convent, having for many years been of the Name of Humealedged, that they
were wronged of their Right: First they began to Petition, but finding this
uneffectual, they began to associate with their Neighbors, giving it out that
the King was a mere Tyrant, not to be trusted, by which means many of the
Hearts of the Subjects were alienated from the King. The King understanding how
things stood he made choice of a Guard to defend his Person, resolving to live
beyond the River Ferth; of which, when the Lords of the Insurrection were
certified, they surprise the Castle Dunbar, and tumultuously overrun the
Countries, besouth the Ferth: Thus coming to Lithgow, they resolved to make the
Duke of Rothesay the Kings own Son their Head, whom having corrupted his
Keepers with Bribes, they constrained to go with them.

But the King loosing neither Courage, nor Council passes the Ferth, near
Blackness with his Forces, before his arrival at this place, the Earls of
Montross, Gleancan, Lords, Maxwel, Ruthwen with others, being advertised by
Letters came to him, they of the Association, having the Prince with them, to
add Authority to their Quarrel. Gathered from all Quarters, the two Armies
being in readiness to decide their Quarrel by Battle; the Earl of Athole the
Kings Uncle, so traveled between the Lords of either Party, that the King had
a Suspension of Arms agreed on. The Earl rendering himself a pledge for the
Accomplishment of the Kings part, of the Reconcilement to Lord Hails. Thus the
King lost a good opportunity, the like of which was never again in his offer,
for the Lords notwithstanding that was agreed upon, continued very troublesome
to the Country, the Town of Edinburgh, is pestered with Troops of armed Men.
The King warned of his danger, fortifies the Castle of Edinburgh for his
defense; then he sent to the Lords, to understand their Intentions, and what
they meant, they finding their offenses flew higher than hope of pardon could
reach, answered that nothing could secure them, nor the Kingdom until he had
divested himself of all the Government of the Kingdom, and resigned the Crown
in Favor of his Son. But he resolving to hazard all rather, then condescend to
this, was advised by some of his Friends, to retire to the Castle of Sterling,
where his Forces might have more easy Access to him, but this proved a a fatal
advice for coming thither, the Treacherous Constable denied him entrance, in
the mean time News came to him, that the Confederates were within six miles of
him at Falkirk. The King to make a Virtue of necessity, resoves to put all upon
the hazard of a Battle; the Confederates were encamped near the Torwood. The
King set forward with his Army upon the other side of the Torwood. Both drew up
in a plain field near Bannock-burn, and engaged most desperately: The first
Charge is valiantly given, and Lance meeting with Lance, the Vant-Guard of the
Lords began to yield ground. But the next Charge being given by Anandale Men,
the middle of the Kings Army is beat back to the main Battle, notwithstanding
of which it is fought a while with great obstinacy on both sides, until the
Standard Royal was beaten down; then began the Kings Army to bow the Horsemen,
obeying no Orders, begun to turn their backs. In this rout and Confusion of
Horse and Foot, the King seeking to retire toward the River Ferth, by the fall
of his Horse in leaping a Ditch, being sore bruised, was carried by such, who
knew him not, to a Well at Bannock-burn; where he was killed in cold Blood, by
Borthwick a Priest with some others, the twenty ninth year of his Reign, and
was buried at Kambush-Kenneth.

105. To him succeeded his Son James the fourth, who was Crowned at Edinburgh,
A. D. 1489. Being about sixteen years of age, a noble and Courageous Prince,
and Godly; the beginning of his Government was most uneasy, the Death of the
late King, being yet recent, his followers resolve to have it revenged. In the
North, Alexander Lord Forbs displayed the Bloody shirt of the murdered King
upon a Lance in Aberdeen, and other places of the North, inviting the Country
as by an Herald to the revenge of his Murder. In the West, the Earl of Lennox
has the same resolution; also the Earl of Marshad, Lords, Goodore and Lyle,
with the Confederates in other parts of the Kingdom. But the Lord Drumond
routed the Earl of Lennox at Telliemoss, and also Sir Andrew Wood, obtained a
considerable Victory over the English (who pretended to revenge the late Kings
death) at the mouth of Ferth. The Rumor of these Victories, so amazed Forbs and
his Confederates, that they laid down their Arms, and put themselves into the
Kings mercy, and were all received into Favor.

The Lords rejoiced greatly, that they had brought things to this pass, but the
King gave no sign of Joy; yea upon the contrary, to give a Testimony to the
World, of the Agony of his mind, for the Death of his Father; and that Remorse
and Anguish he suffered for the Faults of those, who brought him to the Field
against him, he girded himself with an Iron Chain, to which every third year
thereafter, he added some Rings and weight, so long as he lived, and though
this might threaten no good to some, yet they pass it by, not daring to Attempt
ought against the common Peace.

Amidst this Grief and Sorrow of the Kings, Andrew Forman Secretary to
Alexander the sixth Bishop of Rome, arrived in Scotland, with Instructions to
the Clergy, in a Letter, from his Master, to the King and Nobles, exhorting
them to the mutual Duties of their Stations, after this some Headstrong
Nobility dying, the Country enjoyed a great calm of Peace, the Seeds of
Dissension, seeming to be quite taken away. But the Borders keeping up their
old fewds by new Accessions, make daily Incursions one upon another, which came
at last to open Hostility: Whereupon King James enters England, and spoils all
the North parts, and returns home without any considerable Action, not long
after Ambassadors came from England, desiring a Peace; which is granted, and
the Commissioners for both sides met at Edinburgh, where many Articles and
conditions of the peace were hotly disputed, one of the Englishe's demands was
an Interview between the two Kings at Newcastle, which being referred to King
James his own arbitrament, he answered, that he meant to treat of a Peace, but
not to go a Begging for it.

Much being said at last they conclude upon a Peace for some Months following;
after which followed a match between King James of Scotland with Lady Margaret
the King of Englands Eldest Daughter, which was consummated at Edinburgh. King
Henry brings his Daughter as far as Cokebiston in the way, and then resigning
her to the Earl of Northumberland, who with a great train of Lords and Ladys
brought her to Edinburgh to the King her Husband, where they for some days,
were taken up with nothing but Banqueting, masks, and Tilting, with such other
exercises; by this means the King wasted his Treasures greatly; then some of
them set their wits awork, to squeeze the Subjects for Money, which occasioned
great murmurings among the Poor.

A. D. 1507. James Prince of Scotland and the Isles, was born at
Holy-Rood-house the one and twentyth of January but he soon after dyed at
Sterling, the year following, the Queen brought forth another Son named Arthur,
but he dyed also in the Castle of Edinburgh. Then she brought forth her third
Son at Linlithgow, who Succeeded to the Crown and was named James.

About the same time Bernard Stewart came to Scotland, entreating that King
James would make War with King Henry of England, to keep him from molesting
France, which at last he obtained: then began they to go to their old work of
making incursions one upon another, till at last it breaks out to an open War.
Whilst King James stayed at Linlithgow attending the gathering of an Army, now
ready to set forward, as he was at his Devotion an Ancient man came in, in a
very strange and Majestic manner, and of a comely and reverent aspect, who
having enquired for the King, he intruded himself Prease, passing through till
he eame to him with a Clounish Simplicity, leaning over the Canons Seat where
the King Sat: Sir (said he) I am sent hither to entreat you for this time to
delay your expedition, and to proceed no farther in your intended Journey. For
if you do, you shall not prosper in your Enterprise, nor any of your Followers.
I am further Charged to warn you, if you be so Refractory as to go forward, not
to use the Acquaintance, Company, or Council of Women, as you tender your
Honor, Life and Estate. Having delivered his Commission, he withdrew himself
among the crowd, but could never be seen again; the Queen also did greatly
shake his resolutions with her Tears and Prayers, acquainting him with the
Visions and affrightments of her sleep, but he laughed at all these fancies,
thinking them to be only the contrivance of such as hated the French and loved
the English faction, so he gave present Orders to his Army to March over the
Tweed, not staying till his whole Forces came to him, though they were upon
their March, yet for all his have when once he had passed the River, he trifled
away his time so idly, that many of his Soldiers wanting necessary provision
returned home, which the Nobility seeing, advised the King to return also:
having spoiled that Country sufficiently already, but he would hear no such
advice, though at last his Army was brought so low that he had none almost left
but the Nobility and their Attendants. The English Army Commanded by the Earl
of Surrey consisting of twenty eight thousand men, were come by this time
within three miles of the place, where the Scottish army was encamped, which
made them draw to their arms. The Earl of Surreys Vanguard, passed the water of
Till at Twysel Bridge, King James seeing them pass the water imagines that
they intended to gain a hill between his Camp and them. To prevent which, he
removed to another Hill; whilst the Scottish Army was removing, the English
advance to the foot of Flondon Hill.

The fatal hour of the two armies approaching one another, the English draw up
in good order in two Battles, one of which was equal in number to the whole
Scottish army, the Scots by their fewness of number, not being able to Order
many Battalions, Marshal themselves in four, three of which to enter the Fight,
and the fourth to attend for supply: the King commanded the middle, or main
Battle; the Earl of Huntly, the Right wing, and the Earls of Cranford, and
Montross the left; the third Battalion was commanded by the Earl of Lennox, and
the Earl of Argyle, and the reserved, by the Earl of Bothwel.

The Earl of Huntly making down the Hill, where they encamped, encountered a
wing of the English Van, led by Sir Edmund Howard; which after a furious and
long Fight, he put to flight, the Battalion led by the Earls of Lennox and
Argyle (being High-Land Men) encouraged with this glance of Victory loosing
their Ranks, brake furiously upon the Enemy, invading them in the Face of them;
they were not only valiantly received, but Hedged in on all hands, and
miserably destroyed. The main Battle which the King led, being joined by the
Earl of Bothwel, fought it out courageously Body against Body, and Sword to
Sword; great numbers falling upon both sides, till the darkness of the Night,
as it were by mutual Consent, forced a Retreat; neither of them knowing unto
whom Victory pertained.

Many brave Scots did here fall, esteemed to be above five thousand of the
Noblest and worthiest Families of the Kingdom; neither was the loss of the
English less in number, but most part of them being common Soldiers, was
thought little of: About the dawning of the next Morning, the Lord Dacres with
his Troops, taking a view of the Field, and seeing the Brazen Ordnance of the
Scots, not carried off, sends speedy Advertisement to the pensive Army,
inviting all to the setting up of Trophies.

What the Kings fate was, is uncertain, the English hold, that he was killed in
this Battle; the Scots, that many in like Arms, with the like Guards, were
killed, every one of which was taken for the King: Among others, Alexander Lord
Elphingston, one of his Favorites, being not unlike the King in Face and
Stature, and representing him in his Armor in the Field, with the Valiantest,
and most Courageous of the Army fought it out, and Acting heroically his part
as a King, was killed, heaps of dead Bodies invironing his. In the search,
where the fight was, the number, Tallness, and the Furniture of the dead Bodies
being observed, their Faces, and Wounds viewed, His Body as if it yet breathed
Majesty, was amidst the others selected, thought to be his Master, brought to
Berwick and imbalmed. That it was not the Kings Body, his Iron Chain which he
always wore, and was not there found about him, gave Testimony.

Others have recorded, that the Fortune of the day inclining to the English;
four Tall men mounted upon lusty Horses, wearing upon the tops of their Lances
for Cognizance, Streamers of Straw, mounting the King upon a Sorrel Hackney,
conveyed him far from the place of fight, and after that he was seen beyond the
Tweed, between Kelso and Dunce, after which, what became of him was uncertain.
Many think, that he was killed in the Castle of Hume, either by Intelligence,
between the English and the Humes, or in hopes of great Fortunes, which would
follow Innovations, and Confusions in the State. To this is added, that one
Carbreth in the time of John Duke of Albanies Government, vaunted, that however
the Governor wronged the Humes, yet he was one of those who had abated the
Insolency of King James, and made him know that he was a Mortal, all which,
increased the Suspicion of many. The Governor not long after, cut off the
Heads of the Earl of Hume and his Brother, without any known cause. This noble
Prince was lost the twenty fifth year of his Reign.

106. The fatal overthrow of the King and Nobility, filled the remnant of the
State with great sorrow and perplexity; the Heads and fairest parts, which
Majesty, Authority and Wisdom had made eminent, were cut off, and nothing but
some turbulent Churchmen, Orphan-Noblemen, and timorous Citizens, left to fill
their Room. In this maze of perplexity, James the Prince is set upon the
Throne, A. D. 1514. And is committed to the Tutelage of his Mother, together
with the Government of the Realm.

But the Government of a Woman and a Child, over a Headstrong People, could not
stand long firm: A hot Contest arose among the Clergy for the Archbishop-Prick
of S. Andrews; three being put in at one time, one by the Pope, another by the
Queen, and a third by the Chapter; the State was in as bad Case; Alexander*
Lord Gordon usurping almost a Royal Authority, over the Countries benorth the
Ferth, as the Lord Hume also did, upon the South Side. The Queen seeing her
Authority contemned, privately, Marries the Earl of Angus; looking upon him, as
one who could Protect her, and hers in Extremity; but this Match instead of
heightning, weakened her Interest; the Nobility dividing in two Factions, the
one pleading for the Earl of Douglass, and the other opposing him (thinking him
too high already) made choice of the Earl of Arran, but a third party steps in,
of whom the Lord Chamberlain was Chief, who carried the choice from both;
pitching upon John Duke of Albany: When King Henry heard, that this Gentleman
was like to carry the Day, he writes to Scotland, remonstrating to them, how
dangerous this choice might prove to their State: Yet notwithstanding of all
that could be said, they adhered to their choice, and sent to France to call
home the Duke of Albany, who furnished with all necessaries by the French King,
with eight well Rigged Ships, takes the Seas, and in the Month of May, arrived
upon the West-coasts of Scotland, from whence with a great retinue of the
Nobles and Barons of the Country, by easy Journies, the Queen meeting him, he
came to the Town of Edinburgh, where he is restored in Parliament, to his
Fathers inheritance.

At the Presence of this new Governor, the Face of the State turned more
beautiful; Oppression is restrained, Justice sincerely executed; the Governor
not willing to listen to every man's Advice, gave himself to follow the Council
of John Hepburn Prior of S. Andrews; this man being of a subtle mind, Malicious
and Crafty, represented to him things as he pleased, representing the
Factiousness of the Nobility, naming several, whom he said the Kingdom could
not bear. Among others, he gave out, the Lord Chamberlain to be a man
unpolished, Stubbornly Stout, mighty in Riches, and Power, of a working Mind,
and vehement Spirit* that he spoke against the Chamberlain, etc. The Governor
did presently lay hold on this, and changed in his affection toward him, which
the Chamberlain perceiving, could not but reflect upon the Governors
ingratitude; wherefore he resolved to Face about, and striking in with the
Queen and her Husband, became very intimate with them, he represented to them
what hazard the Prince was in, the Governor being a man of such an unsatiable
Spirit, that nothing but the Crown could set bounds to his Ambition: Advising
the Queen to think of a way to prevent it; they concluded at last, that their
only safety would be, that the Queen would transport her Son to England.

But as privately as the business was managed, it came to the Governors ears,
who presently sent a Troop of Horse, who surprised the Castle of Sterling, and
in it the Queen with her two Sons. The Prince and his Brother are sequestered
from their Mother, and committed to the keeping of four Noblemen: Whereupon the
Queen, her Husband, and the Chamberlain, with many others mis-trusting the
Governor, fly to England; their sudden departure perplexed the Court
exceedingly, which moved the Governor to write to King Henry, representing to
him, how little reason they had from him to depart the Kingdom; earnestly
declaring his respects to the Queen; and that if she, and all that were with
her should please to return, she should be very welcome; they hoping that they
were sincere, at last were moved to yield to his desires, but when once he had
got them within the Country, he resolved to be revenged upon them; this bred
new Confusions, for some of the Lords being imprisoned, their Friends break
very loose, the Country is daily pestered and impoverished, by Incursions and
Inroads, till at last after great loss on both sides, they come to an
Agreement, which was followed with the renewing of the Truce with England for
some Months.

All things being thus seemingly calmed, both at home and abroad, the
forementioned Prior of S. Andrews, begins to persuade the Governor, that all
his endeavors to settle the Realm, would prove vain, so long as the Earl of
Hume was alive, whom neither rewards could soften, nor Honors and preferments
make constant, upon this the Governor begins to contrive how to get the Earl
secured; wherefore he came to Edinburgh, and called a Convention of the states,
having entreated the Earl of Humes Friends, that he would not fail to be there,
the matters to be determined, concerned him dearly.

The Earl of Hume with his brother David came to Edinburgh, the Night, before
the Day appointed, who were received by the Governor with great Ceremonies,
and with more than ordinary Favors entertained, and shortly after, both
imprisoned, and a day appointed for their Trial: The first thing laid to their
Charge, was the death of the late King, whom several Witnesses proved to have
been seen coming to the Castle of Hume, from Flondon; this not being proved by
pregnant Evidences, he was accused of several other points of Treason, of which
he not being able to clear himself to their satisfaction; the Judges prepared
and directed by the Governor; pronounce him and his Brother guilty, and
Condemn them to have their Heads chopped off; which Sentence was the next day put
in Execution, and their Heads fixed upon the most Conspicuous places of the
City. This Calamity of the Family of the Humes, bred Terror and Astonishment
in many of the Noblemen of the Kingdom, and greatly estranged their Hearts from
the Governor.

Ambassadors being sent from France, to renew the Ancient League between the
two Countries: The Governor was chosen by the Nobility of Scotland, to pass
into France for accomplishing this solemn Action. He was no sooner gone, but
the Queen after she had stayed a year in England, Honorably dismissed by her
Brother came to Scotland: Sir Anthony Darcy, being by the Governor made Warden
of the Mers, and Lothian, was slain by Sir David Hume of Wedderburn, coming to
Dunce, to hold a Justice Court: Whereupon the Earl of Arran was declared
Supreme Warden, of the Marches, who soundly revenged Darcies Death upon the
Humes.

The Kingdom now began to be sensible of the offense of the Governor; Factions
increasing daily, the Nobility and Gentry deciding their Rights by their
Swords; insomuch, that the Earl of Arran, who was Provost of Edinburgh, having
been with the Prince at Dalkeith upon his return had the Gates shut upon him;
the Citizens pretending that, he intended to invade their Privileges:
Whereupon followed a Tumult in the City, which continued all Night, where a
Deacon of the Crafts was killed by one of the Hamiltons, which did quite
alienate the Citizens affection, from the Earl of Arran; and made them incline
to the Earl of Angus; this made the Earls of Arran, and Angus begin to cross
each other: Whereupon followed much Confusion in the Country, and much
Bloodshed between the Douglasses and the Hamiltons; at last having encountered
one another with their followers, at Edinburgh they fight most desperately in
the Street, till at length the Hamiltons were forced to retire, having left
above fourscore of their number dead upon the Street. These broils coming to
the Governors ears in France, he made all the haste he could home; coming to
Edinburgh, he set himself to amend the Enormities, committed in his absence: a
Parliament is called, to which many Noblemen and Gentlemen are cited to appear
and answer, but some fearing the Event appeared not: Whereupon their Estates
are forfeited; several fled into England, among which were the Humes, and the
Cockburns, who were the Authors of Darcies death, others submitted and were
pardoned.

The King of England being informed of the Condition of Scotland, sent thither
an Ambassador requiring the Duke to avoid the Country, according to the
Articles agreed upon, between him, and the King of France in their last Truce.
To which he answered, that what the Kings of France and England agreed upon in
their Treaties of Peace, was to him uncertain, but of this he was most certain
that neither the King of England nor France, had Power to Banish him (a
Foraigner over them where Authority did not reach,) his Native Country, like
over like having no Jurisdiction.

Whereupon King Henry gathered a great Army to Invade Scotland. Now they draw
to Arms on both sides, the Governor marches with his Army to Carlisle, where he
pitched his Camp upon the River Esk, this struck great Terror to the Citizens
of Carlisle, who offered him diverse presents for their safety of the Town, which
were rejected, but the Nobility refusing to go upon English ground (suspecting
that the Governor only played the Game of the French) he was forced to come to
a Truce. However the Governor resolving to be revenged upon England, went to
France where he obtained from the King, Three Thousand Pikes, and One Thousand
Lances, with which he returned home, and having raised an Army with them he
Marches to England, and Besieges Wark, but is Repulsed; whereupon much against
his will, a Truce for some Months is concluded on.

Soon after, the Administration of the Government was put upon the Prince
himself, the Thirteenth Year of his age; the Governor returning to France,
after which he never returned to Scotland. A Parliament is called, wherein a
Peace is concluded with England, and eight Lords appointed to have the Custody
of the Kings Person quarterly. Ambassadors were sent to England, to treat for a
Marriage between the King, and the King of Englands Daughter, which came to
nothing. The State began of New to be tossed with the troublesome factions of
the Queen, and the Earl of Angus; the Queens Faction accused Angus of High
Treason, for detaining the King against his will: to which the Earl moved the
King to give an answer, showing that he was not kept against his will. But with
all sent another Letter secretly, desiring by any means he might be removed
from the Earl; upon this advertisment, the Queen, and they of her Faction
Assemble what Forces they could raise, and with great expedition marched from
Sterling to Edinburgh. The Earl of Angus, with the Citizens of Edinburgh, and
the King (though against his will) Marched out against them, when the Leaders
of the Queens Forces understood, that the King himself was in Person in the
advers Army they would advance no farther, but retired back again to Sterling,
where they Disbanded, and returned every man to his own dwelling place;
presently after the Queen sues for a Divorce from the Earl of Angus, which the
Archbishop of S. Andrews granted with the Earls own consent.

The King wearied of his confinement in the Earl of Angus his custody, consults
with the Lord of Buccleugh, and some Borderers, how he might be set at Liberty;
they Essayed it by Arms at Melross, but were put to the worst, then the Earl of
Lenox undertook it, and raised some Forces for that end, but the Earl of Angus
having gotten the assistance of the Earl of Arran, with several others, quite
routed him near Costerphin where he was killed in cold Blood.

Now, the Earl of Angus thinks himself secure enough, having put all things in
(as he thought) to rights, he takes a progress to Lothian, leaving the King at
Faulkland. Now the King amidst his Solitary walks in his Park, bethinks himself
what a fair opportunity he had, resolved to essay by stratagem what the Factions
of his Nobles could not perform by Force, thereupon he directs the Forester
of the Park to advertise such Gentlemen about as kept Hounds, to attend him
next Morning, for he would have his Sport early; he Suppeth sooner then he
used, Commanding all to their rest; the waiters all shifted, and the Court
hushed, shutting his Camber door, in the Apparel of one of his Grooms,
unperceived, he passed the Guards to the stable, where with two who attended
him with ready Horses, he posted to Sterline, where many of the Nobility and
Gentry flocking to him, he discharged the Earl of Angus from all Public
Offices, whereat he was so exasperated, that he and his Friends, followed very
extravagant Courses, but the King pursued them so, that after much misery at
home, they were constrained to fly into England, where they were Charitably
received, and Honorably entertained by King Henry.

The next year the King visited the Borders, holding Justice Courts, and
executing Justice upon all Oppressors, Thieves, and Outlaws there in Ewsdale;
He caused eight and twenty famous Robbers to be Hanged, others he brought with
him to Edinburgh, for more public Execution and Example; yet the Borders were
nothing the more Peaceable, for by the means of the Earl of Angus, the English
make daily Incursions, and Spoils the Country; the Scots likewise serving the
English with the same Sauce, till at last, by the Mediation of the French King,
a Peace is concluded on, during the Princes Lives, and one Year after the
Decease of him who should Dye first.

About this time the Pope's Power began to Totter in England, King Henry having
renounced all Subjection to him, because he would not Grant him a Divorce from
his Queen Katharine, who had been before Married to his Brother, Prince Arthur,
and then (by a Dispensation from the Pope) to him. The Pope finding King Henry
peremptory in his purpose, did, together with the Emperor, deal with King James
to make War with England, and to this end sent an Ambassador privately to
Scotland: King Henry went on with his Affairs in England, and Executed John
Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, for asserting the Pope's Supremacy in England:
Upon this, the whole Conclave stirred up the Pope against King Henry, wherefore
he sent another Ambassador to Scotland, most invectively Exclaiming against the
King of England's Cruelty, and humbly desiring King James's assistance against
him.

King James (to try his Uncle's Mind) send an Ambassador to England, to
acquaint him with the Emperors and Popes Embassage. King Henry presently
dispatched William Lord Howard to Scotland, who made such hasty Journeys, that
he prevented the News of his coming; he found the King at Sterline, a part of
his Embassage was, That the two Kings must have an interview at York; this so
startled the Churchmen, fearing, that his Uncle might infect the King with the
Opinions of the new Reformers, that they opposed it with all their might: Yet
the King and his Council proposed, that the Meeting might be at New Castle,
which the Lord Howard would, in no wise, hear of, but departed in a chafe.

King James having so many great Matches in his offer, now resolves to accept
of some one or other; wherefore Sailing from Kirkaldie in ten days, he arrived
at Diep in Normandy, and from thence to Vandosme, where the Lady Mary of Burbon
was; but upon some considerations he settled not his Affections upon her, though
a great Beauty, but went to Paris, where he fell in Love with Magdalen,
Daughter to King Francis, with her he was Married in the Church of Nostradam,
with great Solemnity; and soon after Returned with her to Scotland, but to his
great Grief; she Dyed within a few Months after, and was Buried at
Holyrood-House.

Not long after, the King (desirous of Succession) sends David Beaton, and
the Lord Maxwel to France, to propose Marriage in his Name, to Mary of Lorrain.
In the mean time, two Plots against his Life are discovered at Court, one by
John, Eldest Son to the Lord Forbes, who thereupon was put to Death; yet the
King was much Grieved afterward, finding great probability, that he was accused
through Malice: The other was Jane Doughlass, with her Husband Archbald Campbel
of Keepneeth, who, in the thoughts of many, were as groundlesly Accused as the
first, yet both were found Guilty, and Dyed for it.

The King's Marriage with the foresaid Lady, being Concluded, they are Married
by Proxy, and she Arrived in Scotland, A. D. 1538. Soon after the Queen
Dowager Dyed at Methwen, and was Buried in the Charter House of Perth.

Now began the Kingdom to be divided in Matters of Religion, the Reformation
breaking in upon them, which perplexed the King exceedingly, not knowing what
course to take: His Council was against violent Courses to be followed, but the
Prelates, who had most his Ear, gave him a quite contrary Advice; after which,
most vigorous Inquisitions are established, and Punishments denounced against
all such as departed from Popery; whereupon some are Burnt alive, others
Banished, and many Imprisoned; amongst which, was that famous Poet and
Historian, Master George Buchanan, who whilst his Keepers Slept, escaped by a
Window of the Prison, the Muses holding the Rope.

The King of England, having by this time, so Irritated the Pope, that he was
Excommunicated, sends again to his Nephew King James, desiring an Interview
at York; the Nobility were clearly for it, but the Churchmen fearing their
Bacon, was as much against it, pretending, the hazard that his Person and
Kingdom would be liable to. After long reasoning upon both sides, it was
agreed, That the King should not altogether refuse to meet his Uncle, but
adhere to the first offer proposed to his Ambassador, concerning this
Interview; which the King of England, rather than his Suit should take no
effect, accepts: But an Incursion, which hapened upon the Borders, made him
that he lost all heart to the Interview; hereupon he sends many Letters,
excusing his stay, also representing his many Grievances and Wrongs; thus were
the Seeds of Discord again sown amongst them.

The reformed Religion, by this time, begins to be professed by many; for the
curbing of which, the Prelates presents Sir James Hamilton, natural Son to the
Earl of Arran, to be Supreme Judge of the Inquisition, which turned to his own
Ruin; for while he is vigorously Persecuting all such as were suspected of the
reformed Religion, having many in Jayles, and multitudes in Scrolls, to bring
within the Labyrinth of a Process, the Supreme Providence Arresteth himself:
For having a Process against James Hamilton, Sheriff of Lithgow, his own
Cousen; the said James Accuses him of High Treason, for which (notwithstanding
all that the Prelates could do in his Favor) he was Tried, Condemned, and put
to Death.

Not long after, diverse of the Nobility became to Favor the Protestant
Religion, which so perplexed the King, that he knew not what to do; he became
very sullen and retired, that he would scarce suffer his own Domestics to come
near, to add to his perplexity, (as he lay in the Palace of Lithgow) in the
midst of the Night he leaped out of his Bed, and called for Lights, commands
his Servants to search for Thomas Scot, his Justice Clerk, who (he said) stood
by his Bedside laden with great Weights, cursing the time that ever he Served
him; for by too much Obedience to him, he was by the Justice of God condemned
to everlasting Torments. Soon after, News came, That the said Thomas Scot Dyed
at Edinburgh, much about the same Hour of the Night. Another Instance of the
same nature was, Sir James Hamilton, a little after his Death, seemed to the
King, to have appeared to him in a ghastly manner, with a Sword in his hand,
with which he thought he cut off both his Arms, advertising him, he would come
again shortly, and be more fully revenged. The next day after the Vision, word
came, that both his Sons were departed this Life almost in one hour.

King Henry finding himself disappointed, by his Nephew, of their Meeting, and
understanding the Churchmen to have been the occasion of it, makes Prizes of
all the Scottish Ships that his Fleet could meet with by Sea, and Incursions
with his garrisoned Soldiers by Land. King James directs James Lermonth of
Darsie to his Uncle, to give sufficient Reasons for his not meeting him at
New Castle, and to demand Restitution of his Ships. King Henry not only
refuses to restore the Ships, but also delaying the Answer of the Scottish
Ambassador to gain time, sends Sir Robert B^wes, seconded with the Earl of
Angus, and Sir George Douglass, in hasty manner, to invade Scotland: These to
the number of Three Thousand, Burn and Destroy all before them, till at last
the Earl of Huntly, with some Borderers, meeting them at a Place called
Valldanrigg, quite routed them, Killed many, and took some Prisoners.

The next Summer King Henry sent the Earl of Norfolk toward Scotland with an
Army of Forty Thousand Men, accompanied with a great many of the English
Nobility. King James advertised of their coming, Mustered an Army of Thirty
Thousand Men on Falla-moor, to Oppose them. When the Duke of Norfolk understood
that he was resolved to give him Battle, choosing rather to make an honorable
Retreat, than give a doubtful Charge, he retireth off the Scottish ground:
Whereupon King James encouraged his Nobility and Army to follow them, and
revenge old Quarrels: The Nobles answered, That to defend their Prince and
Country, they would hazard their Lives, or whatever was dear to them. If the
Enemy had stayed upon Scottish Ground, they would either make them retire, or
Dung the Field with their Carcasses. But to Invade England, they did not think
their Quarrel just enough, neither had they Ammunition enough to Engage with so
strong an Enemy in his own Country; that they thought it enough, that upon
their approaching, they made the English retire, if not fly; for whether they
did fly or retire, they had suffered as much Wrong as they had done. The King
finding them thus obstinate, returns with his Army to Edinburgh, where he
immediately Disbanded them; he begins most bitterly to reflect upon the Noble
men's refusing to Invade England, which was aggravated and abetted by Cardinal
Beat^n, Oliver Sinclave, and others. The Lord Maxnel seeing the King so highly
Offended, desired His Majesty to give him Ten Thousand men, and he would engage
his Honor, to effect something to the King's Satisfaction; the King thanketh
him for his Offer, appoints a Rendezvous upon the West Marches: No
Proclamations are divulged for the levies of Men, but close Letters sent. The
Cardinal, and the Earl of Arran, March toward Haddingtoun, and the East
Borders; and several Earls, Lords, and Barons, accompanied with the King's
Domestic Servants, ride to the West Borders: The Night before they rode, the
King himself came to Lochmabban to attend the Event.

Sir Thomas Wharton, Warden of the Marches, much troubled at such a frequent
Assembly of the Scottish Riders; raising the Power of the Country, places them
by a Hill, where he might take a view of the Forces. The Scottish Lords
beholding the English putting themselves in a Fighting posture, desire to know
the King's Lieutenant General; whereupon Oliver Sinclave is mounted upon
crossed Pikes, and the Commission read, wherein he is designed to be
Lieutenant, and all Commanded, in the King's Name, to follow him. No sooner
began the Commission to be read, but such a Tumult, and confused Clamor arose
in the Army, that there was no Order kept; every thing running in Confusion.
The English taking advantage of the Disorder, brake in among them; while they
stand in Amaze, doubting whether to Fly or Stand. Here is a general Surprise,
most part willingly rendering themselves to the English, without any show of
Defense; many of the Nobility and Gentry were taken and carried Prisoners to
London, where they remained till after the King's Death.

The certainty of this voluntary Defeat coming to the King at Lockmabban, so
Stupefied and Astonished him, that he had neither Council nor Resolution what
to follow; apprehending by this and their former Actions, that the Nobility had
Conspired his overthrow. After which he came to Faulkland, where he gave
himself over to Sorrow: Now are his Thoughts busied with Revenge, as also with
rage against his Nobility. Long Watchings, continual Cares and Passions,
abstinence from Food and Recreation, had so extenuated his Body, that pierced
with Grief, Anguish, Impatience, Despair, he remained affixed to his Bed. To
Comfort him, Letters came from Lithgow to him, That his Queen was delivered of
a Daughter; when he heard it was a Daughter, he turned his Face from them that
read the Letter, and Sighing a Farewell to the World: It will end as it began
(says he) the Crown came by a Woman, and it will go with one. The Cardinal put
some blank Papers in his hand, of which they Composed a Letter-Will, which,
whether he Subscribed or not, is uncertain: After which he spoke not many Words
that could be understood; he Dyed the Thirteenth of December, Anno Dom. 1542.
in the Thirty-Third Year of his Age, and Thirty-Second of his Reign; not
without Suspicion of having got an Italian Posset by the Cardinal's means.

The King was no sooner Dead (leaving his young Daughter, who was afterward
called Mary, to Succeed) then the Cardinal proclaimed his Last Will, wherein
were expressed four Protectors or Regents, of whom himself was the First and
Principal, and with him were joined the Earls of Huntly, Argyle, and Murry. But
within a Week after, the Chase was turned: For the Earl of Arran being advised
by the Lord of Grange, who was Treasurer, and Master Henry Balneaves, with some
others, caused to Assemble the Peers of the Realm, representing to them his
undoubted Title to the Government of the Kingdom, during the Minority of her,
to whom, by Line, he should Succeed, if she want Succession of her own body.
The Cardinal opposed himself, and all his Interest against Arran, but it was
carried by many Voices; whereupon Arran was declared Governor, and with public
Proclamation invested in his Office.

A Parliament soon followed, wherein the Clergy most violently pressed, That
severe Edicts might be Published against those they called Heretics: But
others Propounding in Parliament, whether such, of the People, as could not
speak Latin, might not have the Word of their Salvation in the Language they
understood, as Lawfully as they that understood Latin, must have it in that
Language; it was Voted Affirmative, and at last, after much debating, it passed
into an Act, That it was free for all Men and Women to Read the Scripture in
their own vulgar Tongue; and all Acts made to the contrary were rescinded.

King Henry (before the Parliament was ended) sent an Ambassador to Scotland,
whose Embassage was to Contract a perpetual League and Amity between the Two
Kingdoms; and that all Occasions of Wars might be taken away, a Match was
proposed, by the Ambassador, between young Prince Edward, and the Queen of
Scotland; which was by the Governor and Parliament Accepted; whereupon they
sent their Ambassadors to England, where things came so far, that both Parties
declared their Agreement in all Particulars, except the time when the young
Queen should be delivered to the English.

The Papists foreseeing what would probably follow, if the Queen should be put
in their Enemy, the King of England's hand; begin, with all their might, to
Oppose it: about this time the Governors base Brother, John Hamilton, came from
France, who was very helpful to his brethren the Papists, in carrying on all
their Affairs. At last, partly by few promises of great Things, and partly by
Threatening to declare him an Enemy to Holy-Church, if he complied not, they
make him Condescend to break with England; whereupon ensued great and bloody
Wars between the Two Kingdoms; for King Henry immediately sent a strong Army to
Scotland, who came as far as Edinburgh, committing great Hostilities. In
compensation of which, the Scots enter England: Burning and Destroying all
before them, returning again with great Spoil.

Mr. George Wishart, being by Cardinal Beaton, burnt Alive for the Protestant
Religion; the said Cardinal was surprised by Norman Loslie Master of Rothes,
William Kirkaldie of Grange, and John Loslie of Park-Hill, in his Castle of St.
Andrews, and put to Death; Possessing themselves of the Castle for their
Security, knowing that now they were to have many and powerful Enemies, which
accordingly fell out; for the Papists procure an Army from France, under the
conduct of Monsieur Deosel, who besieged the Castle, and soon after took it.

King Henry being now Dead, his Son King Edward sent an Army of Ten Thousand
Men to Scotland: The Popish Party there procures the like number from France;
these two Armies grievously infested the Country. The next Year the Queen was
at Six years of Age Transported by the West Seas into France (escaping the
English Fleet, that watched for her about Calice) and soon after Married to the
Daulphine.

However, the Reformation goes on, notwithstanding the Queen Mother, who is now
styled Queen-Regent her opposition. She was Assisted in her Designs by the
French (as the Reformers were also by the English) but her Death put a stop to
the Persecution; which gave the Protestants opportunity of putting things in
order, relating to the Worship of God. Great Preparations were making in
France, for invading of Scotland, and root out the Reformed Religion: This
terrified the Reformers mightily; but while they were in a Consternation, not
knowing what to do, the King of France Dyed, and their Queen remained a Widow;
this was a great Deliverance to them, for by his Death the intended Invasion
came to nothing.

Soon after, the Queen comes Home, and sets up Mass in her Chapel, which the
Reformers opposed. This bred much confusion in the State; but the Queen finding
that the Body of the People, with most part of the Nobility were against her
Way, she became a little more calm, condescending that some Maintenance might
be settled upon the Ministers.

About this time, the Earl of Huntly breaks out in a Rebellion in the North; to
oppose which, the Queen went her self in Person, and Routed him, near Aberdeen,
his Sons, and many of his Friends being Slain, himself also Dying in the place
without any Wound.

The Easter following, Mass began to be very public at Edinburgh, which so
incensed the Lords and others, That they Imprisoned several Priests: The Queen
began to Storm at this, but they told her, That what they did was according to
Law, and they would Justify it in Parliament.

In July 1564. The Earl of Lenox, with his Son Henry Stewart, Lord Darly,
return from England, and were very graciously received by the Queen, who took
such Affection to Darly, that she Posts away Lethington to Queen Elizabeth,
showing her, That she meant to Marry him: Queen Elizabeth (pretending her
disliking of such Contracts of Princes with Subjects) labors to diswade her
from it; but underhand promotes it for her own ends. The Queen (with some
difficulty) gets her intended Marriage ratified in Parliament, which was
afterward Proclaimed by name, Henry and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland, and
Solemnized the Twenty-Seventh of July, 1565.

This procures great Alterations in the State; for several Lords and Gentlemen
of the Reformation, being Summoned to Appear before the King and Queen; and
upon Nonappearance, were declared Rebels: Whereupon, the King and Queen
presently take Arms; the Lords, with their Intention, fled into England, where
they stayed a while under Queen Elizabeth's Protection, who afterward dismissed
them, writing to the King and Queen in their Favors; at length they came to an
Agreement, which yet continued not long.

For the King beginning to be jealous of the daily resort of Frenchmen to
Court, and of their great Favor with the Queen, caused one of them, called
Rizio, who from a Musician, was advanced to be the Queen's Secretary for
French, to be seized in her Chamber, and presently put to Death; and finding
that this Action brought him under the odium of the Papists, he made a show of
turning Protestant, calling home several of the Banished Lords and others: But
however, from that day he began to be despised by the Queen, and Bothwel is
advanced.

The Nineteenth of June, 1566. The Queen, at Edinburg, was Delivered of a Son,
to the great Joy of all the Kingdom; he was Baptized at Sterlin, December the
Seventeenth, and called James; the Witnesses were the Earl of Bedford for Queen
Elizabeth, who in her Name presented a Font of pure Gold, valued at Three
Thousand Crowns; the Count de Briance for the French King, and an Ambassador
for the Duke of Savoy.

The King finding himself daily slighted by the Queen, repaired to his Father
at Glasgow, where, by the way, he was taken very Ill with a Pain in his
Stomach; when he came to Glasgow his Body breaks out in bluish Blisters, which
when the Physicians saw, they knew him to have been Poisoned; but with their
Antidotes, and his own vigorous Youth, he Recovered. Not long after, the Queen
Visited him at Glasgow, and prevailed with him to come to Edinburg; he Lodged
in the Kirk-Field for his Health (as was pretended): But many suspected that
the Earl of Bothwel had a Design upon him, but few durst adventure to tell him
of it: Yet the Earl of Orkney told him, That if he retired not hastily out of
that Place, it would cost him his Life; this Advertisement moved the Earl of
Bothwel to hasten forward his Enterprise, laying a Train of Powder under the
House where the King lay, which in the Night time did Blow it up; but it was
said, That the King was taken forth, and brought* Alive to a Stable, where a
Napkin was stopped in his Mouth, and he therewith Suffocated.

Presently after, Bothwel obtains a Divorce from the Pope, to free him of his
Wife, and was Married to the Queen, May the Fifteenth, 1567. Whereupon the
Lords take Arms (the Queen and Bothwel being at Dumbar) resolving to call him
to an Account for what was past: the Queen also, and he, sent to their Friends
to come to their Defense; the two Armies Faces each other at Seaton: Then
Bothwel steps out upon Horseback, between the Armies, offering to Fight with
any that durst Charge him with that foul Aspersion of Murdering the King: James
Murray offers the Combat, but he is refused, as not equal in Honor; then his
Brother, the Lord of Tully-Bardine, Accepts the Challenge; him he refuses,
because he was not a Nobleman; then the Lord Lyndsay presents himself, telling
him, That he was his Equal every way: but the Queen recalled Bothwel, and would
not suffer them to Fight. In fine, the Queen finding the Confederates resolute,
and their Number exceeding her own, she desires Bothwel to shift for himself,
for that she would put her self in their Hands; which accordingly she did, and
was by them conveyed to Edinburgh, and after to the Castle of Lochlevine. The
Queen of England sends her Ambassador to the Lords, desiring, That the Queen
might have her full Liberty; and that the Prince might be sent to England to be
Educated: At length Matters were wrought to that point, that she must of
necessity resign the Crown to her Son

108. This young Prince was Crowned at Sterline, the Twenty-fourth of July,
Anno Dom. 1567. at thirteen Months and eight days old. The Earls of Morteun and
Hume, taking the Coronation Oath for him: Master Knox also Preached the
Coronation Sermon. The Earl of Murray is, within a Month after, created Regent;
he presently Summons a Parliament, wherein diverse are Executed, as having
Accession to the late Kings Murder; which occasioned many Factions in the
State, and much hatred to the Regent.

In the mean time the Queen was conveyed out of Lochlavin, by George Douglass
the Governors Brother, my Lord Seaton, and diverse of the House of Hamiltone,
with their dependers waited to receive her, and conveyed her to Hamiltoun: The
Regent being at Glasgow, draws together what men he could so suddenly command,
and with them Marches to Langsidemoor, where it was Fought most Briskly; but
the Queen, though being more in number, was worsted; after which she lost all
courage, never resting till she was in England: The Regent returned Victor, and
distributed the Spoil among his Friends and Dependants.

The Queen of England sends Ambassadors to the Regent, desiring him to send
Commissioners to her, to give her a reason of their thus proceeding against
their Queen, upon which he himself went to Berwick for that purpose: After long
reasoning, they parted without concluding any thing. The Regent returning home,
did not sit long Idle; for the Earl of Hamilton pretending a right to the
Regency, conveins his friends at Glasgow, the Regent presently went against
him. He finding himself disappointed of many that he expected to come to his
Assistance, submitted himself, and is made prisoner, Queen Mary, being by the
Queen of Englands order conveyed to Carlisle. The Duke of Norfolk in hopes to
get her in Marriage, became mighty forward to procure her liberation; which
made Queen Elizabeth begin to grow jealous of him; whereupon he is committed to
the Tower, a Conspiracy being discovered, which he managed for relievving the
Queen of Scots.

The Regent having brought things to some order at home, the Hamiltons seeing
it impossible for them now to contend with him, Killed him most Treacherously
and Basely, as he was passing through Lithgow, having shot him with a Hakbut,
out at a Window, January the 22 d. 1569. About three Months after Lennox, the
Kings Grandfather is chosen Regent. Hamilton being by all refused, he marches
with 5000 to Lithgow, to suppress the Queens Faction, they intended to call a
Parliament; there great Confusion follows over all the Kingdom.

A Parliament being summoned by the Regent at Sterling, they began to reform
abuses, which are very many; but they thinking themselves secure, took no care
to keep Guards: Whereupon one George Bell marches from Edinburgh, in the Night
time as guide to the Earl of Huntly; he commanded five hundred men, they
surprised them all in their Beds, some escaped, and others were taken
Prisoners; but the Regent himself was killed in the Tumult.

Those who were for the King, chose the Earl of Mar Regent; about this time the
Duke of Norfolk was arraigned, and found guilty of Complotting with Queen Mary
against Queen Elizabeth, and within four Months after had his Head chopped off
upon Tower Hill, where he confessed all the indictment: Mar about a year after
being chosen Regent, dies at Sterline; to succeed whom, Mortoon was without
controversy Elected.

The King was committed to the keeping of Alexander Arskine, and Mr. George
Buchanan made his Tutor, none of the Queens Party being permitted to come near
him. The Factious had by this time become very unnatural; the Mother against
the Son, and the Son against the Mother. Edenburg Castle, which Kirkaldie of
Grange kept for the Queen, is besieged and taken by the Regent, and the
Governor, with his Brother Hanged. The Regent proud of his Success, began to
be somewhat extravagant, which was a forerunner of his downfall, which his
Enemies improved to his disadvantage: Whereupon he is deposed.

The King seeing that things were turning from bad to worse, took the Scepter
in his own Hand, having the Assistance of twelve Noblemen, whereof M^rtoun was
one: A Parliament soon after is called at Edingburgh, where the King appeared
to his People, being yet but twelve years Old. In this Parliament was ratified
that Confession of Faith inserted in the late Test in Scotland.

Anno Dom. 1582. Fell out the Road of Ruthwen, where the King was Seized by
some of his Nobles, and carried to Edinburg, upon pretense, That he was Misled
by bad Councils: They kept him under a sort of Restraint for above a Year; but
at last, being at St. Andrews, he was Relieved by Colonel Stewart Captain of
the Castle; for as the King had entered the Gate, the Colonel presently shuts
it, and by this means shuts out the company that attended the King: Soon after,
many of them are Imprisoned, but all obtain a Pardon, except the Earl of Goury,
who was Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed, Anno Dom. 1584.

About which time there is a Plot discovered in England, to set the Queen of
Scots at Liberty; in which the Lord Pag^t Throgmorton and others were
concerned, who accordingly suffered for it. But the Suspicion of all reflected
upon Queen Mary, which hastened her ruin: Whereupon she was removed from her
Fifteen Years Imprisonment under the Earl of Shrewsberry, to Sir Amias Pawlet,
and Sir Drew Drury in Fothrengam Castle, on purpose to put her upon extremities
of Redress against their extreme Imprisoning: Whereupon she deals with the Pope
and Spain to hasten the means of her Relief, but it proved the hastening of her
destruction.

The Council of England after long deliberation what to do with Queen Mary, at
last resolved to proceed against her upon Act 27. Eliz. Against Plotters or
Contrivers of the Queens Death. To which purpose a Commission under the Great
Seal issued out, Impowering twenty-four Noblemen and others therein, who came
to the Castle the 11th. of October. 1536. to Try her. The manner of her Trial was
thus. A Chair of State was set, as for the Queen of England, at the upper end
of the Presence Chamber. Beneath against it was placed a Chair for the Queen of
Scots; close to the Walls on both sides of the Cloth of Estate, seats were
made for the Lords; next to these were the Knights, Privy Counselors. Forward
before the Earls, sat the two Chief Justices, and on the other side, other two
Justices. At a Table in the midst sat the Attorney General, the Solicitor, a
Sergeant at Law, the Clerk of the Crown, and two Notaries.

The Indictment being read, she declined their Jurisdiction, being a free
Princess, and not a Subject to the Crown of England; to which it was Answered,
That her declinator was in vain, for whosoever offends the Laws of England in
England must be subject to the same, and accordingly examined and Judged. So
they proceeded to examine the Evidence, and after a long Trial, and much spoken
on both sides, she is found guilty. Not many days after a Parliament was
called, wherein Queen Elizabeth was besought, that the Sentence against the
Queen of Scots, might be put in Execution. The Queen desired that some other
methods might be consulted for safely, and that poor distressed Queen spared;
but they answer, What no other satisfaction* Whereupon the Sentence was
Proclaimed throughout London and all the Kingdom* King James hearing of his
Mothers condition, writ several Letters to Queen Elizabeth, passionately
desiring, that the Sentence might be reversed; but all to no purpose: for soon
after she signed a Warrant for a Mandate fitted for the Great Seal for her
Execution, which was performed upon Wednesday, the 8th. of February, 1586.

Queen Elizabeth immediately after Writes a Letter full of Apologies, and fair
promises to King James; yet notwithstanding in great discontent, he calls home
his Ambassadors from the Court of England. The States of Scotland urge him to
a revenge: The King of Spain also, and the Pope promise him great assistance,
if he would undertake it; but he thought fit to delay for a time, which made
England the more suspicious of his Designs. Wherefore an Ambassador was sent
to him, earnestly desiring him to take off his adherence from Foreign
Friendship, assuring him that his Mothers fate would be no prejudice to his
right of Succession, which was a powerful Argument with him.

The next Year, the Kings Marriage with the King of Denmarks Daughter was
agreed upon. In the mean time, the Popish Lords, such as Huntly, Cranford and
A^rol, make a Rebellion in the North; to suppress which, the King himself went
in Person; at his coming, the Rebels disperse; the Headers of them submitted to
the Kings Mercy, and are committed close Prisoners, and not long after Tried and
found Guilty; but the Sentence was delayed to an indefinite time, which at last
turned to a Pardon.

The King hearing that his Marriage was consumated at Denmark by Proxy, and
the Queen at Sea, was soon after surprised with the News, that her Navy was
beat into Norway by a Storm: He presently resolves to go thither, and meet Her,
which he does very privately; leaving the Government of the Kingdom to his
Council. Within five days he arrives at Norway, where he was solemnly Married
the next Sunday. From thence he went with his Queen to Visit the Queen Mother
of Denmark; where they staid till April following: Then having sent for
Shipping to return, they Landed at Leith the 20 th. day of May, Anno Dom. 1590.
and a little after the Queen was solemnly Crowned at Holy-Rood-House.

Though the King made severe Laws against Feuds, yet were they not quite
suppressed, for by reason of a quarrel between the Earls of Huntly, and Murray
the North broke very loose, as did the Kers also in the South; but they were
soon suppressed, till Bothwel afterward (being Imprisoned, for consulting with
Witches to take away the Kings Life, and having escaped, made an attempt upon
the Kings Lodgings, and was repulsed;) being suspected to have been with
Murray, the Earl of Huntly procures a Warrant to take him; and coming to
Dunnibirsle, where Murray was, firing the House, Murray attempting to make his
Escape was Barbarously Murdered.

Bothwel having so often been disappointed of his designs, at last having got
some of the Lords on his side, he came in by the Postern-gate, under disguise
of attending my Lady Athole, with another of his Companions armed, to the very
Bedchamber; where he forced the King to grant him a Pardon, which was the next
day repealed in Council, and Bothwel and his Associates forced to fly.

Anno Dom. 1593. The Queen was delivered of her first Born in Sterli^g, where
he was Christened in the Chapel Roval, by the Name of Henry Frederick. Two
Years after, Princess Elizabeth was born at Edinburgh.

The King resolving to bring the Church of Scotland to a Conformity in
Government, and Ceremonies, did occasion much confusion; for the Ministers
strong opposed; having also a great part of the Nobility on their side. The
Popish Lords and others unable to stand out any longer, submitted to the
Censure of the Church. The next Year a Parliament is called, wherein the King
will have some of the Ministers sit as representing the Church; being Church
Affairs, as well as Affairs of State are handled there.

Anno Dom. 1599. John Earl of Goury, and his Brother Alexander, attempt to kill
the King at Perth; but both of them dyed in the attempt, and had all their
Lands seized for the Kings use. In commemoration of which, the 5th. of August
is annually celebrated.

The 26 th of February, 1600. Prince Charles was born at Domfermling, which
afterward was King of Great Britain, etc. The Jesuits having no hope of
Toleration in Scotland, all their Politics having failed them, they went the
old way to work. One Moubray at the Court of Spai^, undertook to kill King
James, but as he was upon his way to London, he was discovered by an Italian,
who accused him of his intended Murder; whereupon they were both taken, and
sent to Scotland. Moubray was committed to the Castle; where having found a way
to break the Iron Grates of the Prison window, thought to have let himself down
by a Rope; which proving too short, he fell from the precipice, and dashed out
his brains upon a Rock.

Queen Elizabeth's health beginning to decay, by reason of her age, and the
great troubles she had undergone, removes from London to Richmond, where she
daily became weaker and weaker. The Lord Admiral, Lord Keeper, and Secretary
Cecil came from the Council to know her pleasure concerning her Successor. She
answered, My Throne is for a King, none oth^^ shall Succeed me. Cecil asked
her, What King? She said, What other King, than my Kinsman the King of Scots:
Then after some time not stirring, she leasurely turned her head about and
dyed, the Seventyeth year of her Age, the 24th. of March. 1602.

Her eyes being shut, the same day the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being
Assembled, proclaimed her death, and declared King James her Successor:
Presently Posting Letters to him, acquainting him with the Queens Death, and
(being a Body without a Head) humbly desiring his Majesty to hasten to them,
how soon, and in what manner he pleases. The King having communicated these
Letters to his Privy Council; returns them his acknowledgment of their dutiful
Affection.

The King sets out for England, ordering the Queen to follow Twenty days after,
the Princes Henry, Charles, and Princess Elizabeth at further Pleasure. He was
most magnificently Entertained all the way, having a Gallant train of Scottish
Noblemen and other Gentlemen, to convey him to Berwick, where he was most
magnificently received by the English, and accompanied with Shouts and
Acclamations of Joy by all ranks, in his Journey through England, till he came
to London. His first Reception was in the Charter House, where he stayed four
days, having confered the Honor of Knighthood upon 80 Gentlemen. On St.
Jameses's day the King and Queen were Crowned at Westminster in the Fatal
Marble Chair.

Secretary Elphingston was within a few years after accused by the King, for
Writing Letters to the Pope in his Name; which he confessed, and was thereupon
committed, but soon after pardoned.

The King was not allowed to enjoy the pleasure of his new Title with Peace,
for soon after followed the Treason of the Lord Cobham and Gray, with Sir
Walter Rawley, and others; for which, some of the number being condemned to
dye, and brought to the very Block, obtained a Pardon.

His Majesty took upon him the Title of Great Britain, to take away every thing
that might be occasion of discord amongst the Subjects of the two Kingdoms, and
to that effect were sundry of his Majesty's Chief Officers of Estate, sent for
to England by Commission; viz. The Earl of Mo^^rose Great Chancellor of
Scotland. Francis Earl of Errol, Lord great Constable, Alexander Lord Urquhart
and Fyve President. Sir Thomas Hamilton Advocate, the Lords, Lithgow and
Roxburgh; with sundry others of the Nobility, with Sir John Sharp, and Sir
Thomas Craig, Learned Lawyers. These meeting with the Chancellor, Treasurer,
Secretary, had many Learned Orations, Conferences, and Speeches, wherein the
King assisted himself sometime in person. This great meeting was dissolved
without any great business done.

At this time came to England Don John de Velasco great Constable of Castile,
and Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Spain, to take Oath of the King
for observation of the Articles of Peace concluded between these two Kings.
Like as Baron Howard of Essingham, and Earl of Nottingham, and High Admiral of
England, was sent into Spain, to take the King of Spain's Oath for observation
of Peace. Like as Edward Baron of Beauchamp and Earl of Hartford, were sent
into the low Countries for the same purpose. The Earl of Rutland was sent into
Denmark, and sundry Noblemen and Gentlemen, to sundry Kings and Princes, and
Commonwealths, his Confederates and Allyances. Thomas Percie, Robert Catesbee,
Thomas Winter, by the instigation of some Jesuits, having intended to Overthrow
the King, His Queen, and Posterity, at one blow, intended that most inhumane
and barbarous Treason, called, The Powder Plot; and to that effect, associating
themselves with Sir Edward Dick^ee, Ambrose Rockwood, John Grant, the two
Wrights, with sundry others fell to digging of the Vault, where after long
travail, hearing that the Cellers were to Let, Hyring the Cellers which were
under the Parliament House, to the use of Mr. Thomas Piercie one of the Kings
Gentlemen Pensioners, and one of the chief Plotters; where conveying in the
said Cellers under the Parliament House, a great quantity of Gunpowder, with
Billets and Faggots, with sundry other combustible stuff, the principle
Plotters removed themselves to Warwickshire, under pretense of a Match Hunting,
and at that time to surprise Lady Elizabeth, then in the custody of the Lord
Hadington, whom they meant to proclaim Queen, and in her Name to enter into
Arms. But there is an eye in Heaven, that sees men's actions, and lays them
open to the view of the World, by weak means, and weak instruments: All things
succeeding thus happily, as they thought; and leaving Faukes, alias Johnstoun
to give Fire to the Train in the Night time by Torch: The Lord Monteagle going
along in his Coach, an unknown Fellow presents him with a Letter: The tenor
whereof was to withdraw his Lordship from that session of parliament, wherein
there was something to be done against the Catholics, but there was a terrible
blow to be given, and no man should know who should be the giver of it, and
when the Letter was burnt, the Peril was ended. My Lord Monteagle, in Religion
Popish, notwithstanding delivers the Letter to Salisbury, who acquainting my
Lord Chamberlain, and after my Lord Admiral, and the Earls of Worster, and
Northampton, who not finding out the meaning of the Letter, and knowing that
the KING was well seen in such hid mysteries, present it to his MAJESTY in the
privy Gallery: The King Reading it over, and over again, Salisbury told him
that he thought some Mad Fellow had written it: his Majesty asking the reason
of Salisbury: He replied, because he writ there was a terrible blow to be
given, and no man should know who should be the giver: His Majesty answered,
that the last sentence made the other more clear: That the Letter being burnt,
the Peril was ended, which the burning of the Letter could make to no purpose
to hinder the Peril. The King assured him that is was some blowing up of
powder, and therefore desired that his houses might be surveyed. After
examination, Wh^ngard, keeper of the Parliament House, told that he had let the
House to Mr. Thomas Perci^; and after some pains taken that same night, by the
Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Knevet, Mr. Doublede, found the foresaid Faukes with
a Dark Lanthorn, ready to enter the House, but he being apprehended, the Blow
was prevented; where swift fame carrying it down to the Country, the principal
Plotters knew not where to flee to hide their heads. They surprise Warwick
Castle, where being affrighted with drying of Gunpowder, and other strange
Dreams, seeing Castles and Towers blown up in the Air, they were at last
besieged in the Castle of Warwick where Percie and Catesbee were both Shot with
one Musket, shot back to back, the rest were apprehended and brought to
London, where after the Confession of all for the most part, and penitence and
contrition in some, craving pardon of his Majesty and Country, for such an
horrible and inhumane Fact, Catesbee, Grant, Winter, and Bates were Executed at
the West of Paul's; as also, Winter, the two Wrights, and Faukes, and Ambrose
Rockwood at Westminster. So here we see the God of light brought the deed of
Darkness to light, and as they said by their Confession, to cast the aspersion
and Guilt of the Action upon the Puritanes, so the God of Heaven would have it
to fall upon the Plotters themselves.

After this followed the Nuptial of that Noble Lady, Lady Elizabeth, matched
with the Prince Palatine of the Rhyne. At which time that Noble Prince, Prince
Henry* a prince so complete of all Virtues, that Europe could not show his
second, a Prince so Mars-like, and so beloved of all military men, and so
beloved of them; that true Moecenas of Virtue, and Learning; as appeared by his
Valiant, his Active, and his Princely prise, wherein he entitled himself by
the Name, Moeliades, Lord of the Isles; challenging the Gentry of Great
Britain; which was performed in the Hall of Whitehall by Torch Light; the
challengers were with him, the Duke of Lennox, the Earls of Arundal,
Southampton, Pembr^ke, Sir Thomas Somerset, and Sir Richard Preston; where
before the King, the Queen, the Peers of the whole Island, with the concurrence
of all Foreign Ambassadors, where he gave testimony of his Activeness, Agility
and Quickness, which cannot be expressed to the Life, how every thing was done
in the Action, and performed, and the prises given to the defendants, where the
challengers and defendants were most Royally Feasted the next day, as the prise
and reward of their Virtue and Valor, given by the Noblest Lady of Britain,
according to the Tennor of the challenge; and was given by Lady Elizabeth his
sister, viz. 1. Philip Earl of Montgomerie. 2. Thomas Dearsie, son to the Lord
Dearsie. 3. Sir Robert Gordon of Lochinvar. This Triumph being ended to his no
small Honor. Much more might be said of this great Prince, who was taken away
in the prime of his Years, (to the great grief of all his Majesty's most loving
subjects) to eternal happiness: for our sunset, ensued no night, by arising of
the day star of our Britain, CHARLES our hope, who long may reign over us.

His Majesty being possessed with a longing desire to see his Ancient native
Kingdom; made Progress in Anno 1617. and did so much by easy journey, till he
came to Berwick upon Tweed; where he reposed himself two or three days. From
thence he came to the Bound-Rod: The Earl Hume hereditary Sheriff of the Mers,
welcomed his Majesty with a gallant train of Gentlemen, being three thousand
well mounted. His Majesty alighted at the Rod, and received the Dukes of Lennox
and Buckingham, the Earls of Arundale, Rutland, Pembroke, Southampton,
Montgomery, and Carlisle, with many others of his Court, very Royally, making
them welcome; and mounted his Horse again: He rode to Dunglasse the Earl of
Hume his residence, where he was bountifully entertained. The next day he
removed to Seaton, the residence of the Earl Winton, where he was most Royally
entertained. The next day he rode forward toward Edinburgh, where compassing
the Town, riding the way of the Long-gate, he entered the West Port, where the
Provost, Bailiffs and Counsel attended him in their bounds; where Mr. John Hay,
in name of the town, made an eloquent Oration, welcoming His Majesty, and was
delivered to him a fair Basin with a thousand Pieces of Gold. Riding along to
the high Church, being conducted by the Trained Bands of the Town, being clad
in Velvet and Satin with Partizados in their hands; and entering there he heard
a Learned Sermon, by the Right Reverend Father in God the Archbishop of St.
Andrews; where after Sermon, he mounted his Horse and going toward the Abbey,
where at St. John's Cross, the Provost taking leave of him, his Majesty Knighted
him. And within few days his Majesty rode to his Parliament, with his Peers,
Prelates, Barons, and Burgesses, and thereafter was most sumptuously feasted by
the Town of Edinburgh. It is needless to set down in particulars what was done,
because I intend Brevity. His Majesty removed to Linlithgow, and so to
Striviling; where he was feasted by the Earl of Mar: Thereafter he went to
Dunfermling, Faulkland, Scone, etc. Where by the way he was feasted at Dearcie
the Archbishops residence. It were tedious to rehearse the Learned Orations,
Poetical Poems, which were presented to His Majesty and are extant in a Book,
called, The Muses Welcome. His Majesty crossing Tay to Angus, had every where
most Royal Entertainment; and returning the same way to Sterling, and so to
Glasgow, where he was received by the Town: Thereafter he went to Lochlowmount,
where he hunted, and slew many Deer; and crossing the River of Clyde to Pasiey,
where he was Entertained three days together by the Earl of Abercorne: From
thence to Hamilton Palace, where he was Honorably Entertained by the
Marquess: From thence to Sanquihair, and so to Dumfries: Thereafter crossing
the River of Eske, he went to Carlisle, where he kept his fifth Day of August.
And so taking along the West Sea Bank, through the Countries of Cumber,
Westmerland, Lancashire, and Cheshire, and so crossing through the middle of
England, he returned to London in health, with great joy and content of His
Majesty's loving Subjects; where he lived a long time after in great
Tranquillity and Peace with the Christian Princes his Neighbors, ballancing
the affairs of Europe, and laboring the peace and quiet of all Christendom.
His Piety, Religion, Learning, Bounty and Mercy, would of it self take a
Volume, but every one of these lives after him, and speaks for him, as may
appear by many excellent Poems he writ, as some part of David's Psalms, some
part of Du Bartus Divine weeks, Lepanto, his Basilicon doron, his Book of
Demonology, his premonition to Christian Princes, his Book against Conradus
Vorstius, etc. are all sufficient of themselves to testify of him, and need no
other blazing. He went to England the 36. of his Age, and brought with him his
Queen, with a Goodly and Royal Progeny, bringing with him Kingdoms, Unity,
Peace and Plenty, and ending his Pilgrimage (being full of days) at his House
in Theobalds the 59th. Year of his Reign, upon the Sabbath, to the everlasting
Sabbath, where he rests. He was buried at Westminster.

This Illustrious Monarch having dyed in a good old Age, left the Diadem of
Three Kingdoms, in Succession, to his Son Charles, the first of that Name, who
was immediately Proclaimed, being on a Sunday morning, when Doctor Laud then
Bishop of St. David's, was in the Pulpit at White Hall, and broke off his Sermon
upon the first Notion of the Fathers Death. He was set upon the Throne, A. M.
5682. Anno Dom. 1624. He Married Henrietta-Maria, Daughter to the French King,
Henry the Fourth; and Sister to Jews the Thirteenth, of the Family of the
B^urbones, whom he had formerly seen, as he passed through France into Spain:
Having gone to meet her at Dover, his first Complement to her, was, That he
desired to be no longer Master of himself, than he was Servant to her, which he
made good to the full.

He called his first Parliament at Westminster, which Assembled the Fifteenth
of June following, Anno Dom. 1624, wherein the King declared his want of Money,
and the great Charge he was like to be put to, upon several Accounts, both at
Home and Abroad; especially to maintain the Army which was listed for
recovering the Palatinate.

The Parliament having several Petitions, which were presented to King James a
little before his Death, un-answered; Petitioned his Majesty to Redress those
Grievances which concerned Religion and Privilege, without which they could
come to no Conclusions for raising of Money; whereupon the King gave them full
Assurance of all their Demands; so they immediately Granted two Subsidies from
Protestants, four from Papists, and three from the Clergy.

After this the Parliament did not Sit long; for the last Subsidies not being
enough to defray the King's necessary Charges, he urges the Parliament for
more; but they, instead of answering his Just Demands, fall foul upon his
Servants, who managed his Revenues, especially the great Duke of Buckingham:
This came to such a Height in the Houses, that they came to the Canvasing his
Commings in, his great Revenues of Crown Demeans, which they would Revoke, and
Resume to supply the King's Wants; which made the King, in great Regret,
resolve to give an end to their Sitting; and accordingly the next day Dissolved
them. The City of London was at this time much wasted with a long Plague, which
was the occasion of removing Michaelmas Term to Redding. There was another
Parliament called soon after, but they began where the former left; present
Grievances, and impeach: Buckingham.

Upon May the Nineteenth, 1630. The Queen was Delivered of a Son at Saint
James's, who was Christened Charles, and Preserved by Providence, to Succeed
his Father, to the Royal Scepters of Three Kingdoms; the King of France, and
the Prince Elector Palatine, represented by the Duke of Lennox, and the
Marquess of Hamilton were his Godfathers; and the Queen Mother of France,
represented by the Duchess of Richmond his God-Mother.

The King in the Year 1633. made a Journey to Scotland, attended with a
splend^d Train of the Nobility of both Kingdoms; and upon June the Eighteenth,
was solemnly Crowned King at Edinburgh; which Solemnity being over, his Majesty
called a Parliament, and in which he passed an Act, for Ratification of the old
Acts; some suspecting, that the Confirmation of Episcopacy was by it intended,
with all their Strength opposed it, but in vain.

Not long before his Majesty went to Scotland, being desirous (if possible) to
have it prevented, he Writ to a Lord, who had the Trust of the Crown, to bring
it to England, that he might be Crowned there: But the Lord answered, That he
durst not for his Life do it; but if his Majesty would be pleased to accept of
it in its proper place, he should find his People there ready to yield him the
highest Honor; but if he should put it off much longer, it might tend to his
Majesty's and their great Loss; neither could they be long without some to
Govern them.

In the Year 1633. October the Thirteenth, the Queen brought forth her second
Son, who was Baptized James, and entitled, Duke of York: Much about this time
the Discontents in Scotland began to increase; some of the Nobility siding with
the Malcontents; of which the Lord Balmirreno, the chief Secretary of State
was one, who was thereupon Arraigned by his Peers, and found Guilty; but
obtained the King's Pardon.

December the Twenty-Eighth, 1635. the Lady Elizabeth was Born; and now great
Differences arose about Church Matters, chiefly occasioned by Archbishop
Laud's zealous injoyning of Ceremonies, as placing the Communion Table at the
East end of the Church upon an Ascent, with Rails Altar-wayes, with many other
things not formerly insisted on by the Church, but now obstinately opposed by
many, which brought things into great confusion.

His Majesty earnestly desiring an Uniformity in Religion in Scotland (a thing
attempted before by King James) enjoined the Scots the use of the Liturgy and
Surplice, with all the English Ceremonies, and began first in his own Chapel;
Proclamation being made, That the same Order should be kept in all Churches:
The Bishops were satisfied with it, but the Ministers and People was so
discontented, that when the Dean of Edinburgh began to read the Common Prayer,
the Women began to grumble; upon which, the Bishop of Edinburgh steps up into
the Pulpit to command Silence; but this did but augment their Fury to such a
height, that they Assaulted him; some with Cudgels, others with Stones, and
others (for want of better Weapons) were forced to pelt him with the Stools
upon which they sat, to the great hazard of his Life: The Archbishop of of St.
Andrews (being then Lord Chancellor) interposing, was like to have been served
with the same sauce: The like Disturbance happened in several other places;
whereupon the Council emitted Proclamations to prevent Tumults; which was so
little regarded by the multitude, that the Bishop of Galloway, going the next
day to the Council, was by them pursued to the Council Chamber. They Seized
also the City Magistrates, that they might not join with the Council to curb
them. The Lords of the Council having at length, with fair words, in some
measure, pacified them, they presently emit Proclamations to keep the Peace,
but produced no such Effect; for they stiffly petitioned against the
service book; which incensed the King extremely: Thus matters went in the Year
1637.

The next Year the Scots hearing, That the King was making preparations in
England, to reduce them by force, they entered into a Covenant, to defend the
Religion they professed; whereupon, they sent for General Lesly, and other
Officers from beyond Sea, putting themselves in a posture of Defense: But the
Duke of Hamilton obtained a Declaration from the King, discharging the use of
the service book, and the five Articles of Perth for a time; consenting also,
that Church Matters may be ordered by general Assemblies. This Declaration*
being published, and a general Assembly convened at Glasgow; the Bishops are
summoned to appear there as Guilty persons; but in answer to the Summons, the
Bishops sent in a Protestation against their Assembly; which the Covenanters,
for a while, would not vouchsafe to Read, until they had dispatched what
business they pleased: The King, having notice of their Proceedings against the
Bishops, ordered their Assembly to be dissolved, which accordingly was done;
but the Covenanters presently emit a Protestation against it. In this Assembly
they quite abolished Episcopacy: Whereupon, the King raises an Army in England,
with which he marched in Person against the Scots; but while his Majesty stayed
at York, by the mediation of some persons, a Treaty of Peace was agreed upon;
wherein it was agreed, That the King should publish a Declaration, ratifying,
what his Commissioners had promised in his name: That a general Assembly, and a
Parliament be held at Edinburgh within a short time: And lastly, That upon
disbanding their Forces, and restoring the King to his Forts and Castles; the
King was to recall his Fleet and Forces, and make Restitution of their Goods
since the Breach.

The King not finding the Scots punctual to their Articles, returned to
England, and Nullified the agreement resolving now to try other courses:
Whereupon, the Scots apprehending their danger, prepared for their own defense.
The King resolves upon a War; and with some difficulty compleateth his Army,
whereof himself was Generalissimo. He began his march to the North, July the
Twentieth, 1640. by which time the Scottish Army was upon the Border: Wherefore
the King sent the Lord Conway with Twelve Hundred Horse, and Three Thousand
Foot, to secure the Passes upon the River Tyne. General Lesly being advanced
thither, desired Leave to pass to the King with their Grievances, which was
denied; whereupon he commands his Horse to take the Water (the Foot to their no
small hazard following) and force their Passage; which they did, and put the
Lord Conway to a disorderly Retreat. Soon after, they took New Castle, and then
Durham.

At last, His Majesty condescends to Treat with them, and to that end, receives
a Petition from them, containing their Grievances; for redressing of which, it
was agreed, That sixteen English Lords should meet with as many Scots. Rippon
was a place appointed for the Treaty; here they appointed another Treaty to be
held at London for composing all differences.

Much about this time Montross fell off from the Covenanters, having by several
private Letters tendered his service to the King, which came all to be
discovered by the means of some that were about His Majesty. However, the
Treaty went on at London, and at last was concluded: Whereupon the Scots, after
five months abode in England, returned home.

By this time a Parliament was called at Westminster; wherein the breach was so
far from being healed, that it was made wider. Diverse of the Kings Favorites
were impeached; amongst which, Archbishop Laud was one, and soon after him the
Earl of Strafford.

This Year 1641. His Majesty went toward Scotland, where he was entertained
with great Demonstrations of Affection; and confirmed the Treaty between the
two Nations, by an Act of Parliament, which he summoned himself during his
abode there. In the mean time, the horrid Rebellion in Ireland broke out;
wherein those cruel Butchers, did most barbarously murder about 200000.
Protestants, Men, Women and Children. The King being then in Scotland, moved
the Parliament to send thither Sir George Monroe with 2500. men to reduce the
Rebels.

The King being returned from Scotland, (the Parliament then sitting at
Westminster) the breach daily grew wider; wherefore the Scottish Commissioners
interposed between the King and Parliament, for composing their differences,
which were now grown to such a height, that the King not long after left
London, and returned to York.

Now began the Calamity of a sad War; for which they began Vigorously to make
preparations on both sides. The Scots finding (as they pretended) that the King
was refractory to an Agreement with his Parliament; and giving ear to those
vile Libels that were spread abroad, which accused His Majesty of conniving at
the Papists both in England and Ireland (being called by the Parliament to
their assistance) entered England, Jan. 16. 1643. their Army being in number
18000. Foot, and 2000. Horse.

In the mean time matters are fitting in Scotland, by James Earl (afterward
Marquess) of Montross; who having received the Kings Commission by Sir Robert
Spotswood, to be General Governor of Scotland, passed into the heart of the
Kingdom; where he raised what men he could for the Kings Service, resolving
with them to divert the Covenanters. They upon the other side raised an Army to
oppose him. Their first Rencounter was near Perth; where the Covenanters under
the Command of the Lords Elcho, Tullibardine, and Drumond were quite routed;
here the Atholmen and Irishmen, of which he had 1500. did him good service.
From thence he marched Northward, to Aberdeen; where at the Bridge of Dee, he
defeated another Body of the Covenanters, under the Lord Burleighs command.

After this Victory, he went about most of the Northern Countries, and brought
a great many of them under Subjection, though himself and his Army were reduced
to great straits by reason of the coldness of the weather, and scarceness of
Victuals, yet he would not give over his enterprise. From thence he marched
into Argileshire, where he burnt and destroyed all before him, and returned
back again to Lochabor. He stayed not long there; when hearing that Argile was
coming against him, and was already the length of Innerlochy, He resolves
(finding his men bent for it) to fight him, which accordingly he did, and quite
worsted him. Not long after, he had an absolute Victory over General Major
Hurry at a place in the Highlands, called Aldearn, which did very much weaken
the Covenanters. And Baily resolving revenge, at Alford was served with the
same sauce himself.

The next Victory that this Valiant Champion obtained, was at Kilsyth; a fatal
day it was to the Covenanters: for here they lost a great many Gentlemen of
Quality, besides a vast number of common Soldiers: yea, such of their Leaders
as escaped this bout, finding (as they thought) their strength quite gone, fled
some to England, others to Ireland, and some also came in, and Submitted to
Montross upon Mercy. Thus things being, in humane probability, brought to great
order, Montross receives Orders from the King at Oxford, to march Southward
with his Army: Where His Majesty promised to send him some recruit of Horse to
fight Sir David Lesly, who was coming from England against Montross: But L^sly
preventing the Kings recruits, surprises Montross at Philiphaugh, where he
quite routed him. Thus the wheel of Fortune turns now upon this gallant
Nobleman, who was Conqueror hitherto, and forces him with a very few followers
to shift for himself, leaving many of his Friends dead in this fatal place.
Montross by this loss, being brought very low, he marched toward the North with
the few men he had; and after many endeavors to make up his Army again, he is
surprised by a Message from His Majesty, Commanding him to lay down his Arms,
and go into France, where he should stay till further Orders; which accordingly
he did, though with great reluctance, in the Year 1646.

But to return to the Scots Army in England: They after they had served the
Parliament upon several occasions, and particularly at Marston-Moor, where they
helped them to obtain a Victory against Prince Rupert, retired to New Castle.
The King being brought so low, that he was hardly able to keep any thing of an
Army in the Field, came thither in disguise, acquainting the Scotish-General,
That he would now commit himself to him; looking upon him as a man of Honor,
that would do nothing but what is Just and Loyal, in a matter of such weight;
The General answered His Majesty, He would with all his heart serve him, and
that the most effectual service that he thought he could do him, was to mediate
a Peace between His Majesty and His Parliament.

The Parliament being Advertised, that the King was in the Scottish Army; sent
their Messengers thither, to know upon what account they detained the King of
England in their Camp; who were only called in to assist the Parliament, but
not to Act by themselves: Telling them further; That if the King were in
Scotland, as he was then in England; they would not presume to keep him up from
his Subjects there, as the Scots did in England; the Committee of the Army
answered, That they knew very well the People of Englands Right to the King to
be as good as theirs; neither did they detain His Majesty from them, but that
he was with them as their King; in no wise under restraint, but at full Liberty
as became his Majesty to be. And further, that it was their earnest desires to
see a well-setled Peace between His Majesty and his two Houses. Presently
after, they had another message, desiring them to return home; for that the
Parliament had no further service for them; thanking them withal for the
Service they had done. The Committee replied, that they came not to England
without the Parliaments call, and that the Terms upon which they were invited
thither, were not fulfilled by the Parliament, their Army wanting almost 500000
l. of their Arrears: That upon payment of it, they would go home. At last it
was agreed, that the Scots should have 200000 pound of their Arrears in hand,
and the rest should afterward be sent after them. So that within -- weeks
after, they would draw the Army out of England. As for the Kings Person, it was
agreed, That he should be kept by the English in Honor and Splendour suitable
to his Royal Dignity, and that nothing should be transacted in England
concerning His Majesty, without the Advice and Consent of the Scots. Thus were
they befooled by perfidious men, which brought a great reproach upon Them and
their Posterity. Though it be false that they Sold him, yet it is a sad truth,
that His Majesty told them, that the English would no longer stand to their
Agreement, than they thought it for their Interest.

His Majesty being now in the English's hands, they at first carried themselves
somewhat respectfully to him; but they began soon after to appear like
themselves; having purged the House of Commons of all such as they thought
would oppose them, they began to keep His Majesty almost a close prisoner in
the Isle of Wight.

The Scots hearing how the King was thus (contrary to the promise and
engagement) abused by the English, sent their Commissioners to London, to put
the Parliament in mind of the agreement at New Castle; but before they came,
the Game was altered (the Parliament being purged by the Army) the barbarous
Juncto prove unexorable; wherefore the Commissioners return home, and
acquainted the Nobility how matters stood: Whereupon an Army is presently
listed under the Duke of Hamilton, with which he marches to England, but is
unfortunately overthrown at Preston; most of the Soldiers being killed, and
himself taken prisoner, and brought up to London; where, not long after, he,
together with the Earl of Holland, and Lord Capel, were Executed on Tower Hill.

Within a few days, his Majesty is brought from the Isle of Wight to Windsor;
during his abode there, the Officers of the Army, and the Members they left in
the House, proceeded to that height of Insolence, as to bring the King to a
Trial. Which, when it was Voted, and passed in the pretended House of Commons,
they proceeded to make an Act for the Trial of his Sacred Majesty; which they
entitled, An Act of the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament, for
Erecting of an High Court of Justice, for Trying and Judging Charles Stewart
King of England.

This Terrible form of proceeding against his Majesty, struck great terror to
the hearts of all sober and good men; yea, the Presbyterian Ministers, who
before were against him, now declare themselves both in their Pulpits, and by
earnest Petitions to the Parliament, to be zealous abhorrers of the Kings
Death, and every where make public Protestations against the Trial; yet
nevertheless the Juncto goes on: And upon Friday January the 19 th. 1648. his
Majesty was brought by a strong Guard of Horse from Windsor to St. James's, and
from thence to Westminster, where he was Tried, and found Guilty, contrary to
the Laws of God and Man: And upon January the 30 th. about two a Clock in the
Afternoon, he submitted his Royal Neck to the Fatal stroke, upon a Scaffold
Erected between White Hall Gate, and the Gate leading to the Gallery to St.
Jameses: The 24 th year of his Reign he was Interred, in St. Georges Chapel at
Windsor.

His sacred Majesty that now Reigns, being at this time in France, with the
Queen Mother, is by Unanimous consent of all his Subjects in Scotland,
proclaimed at Edenburg, Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of
Scotland, England, France, and Ireland, etc. and presently after, they sent
their Commissioners to treat with His Majesty, who was then in the Isle of
Jerzey: After much debating on both sides, at last, Breda in Holland is agreed
upon, as a fit place for a solemn Treaty. Here the Commissioners from the
Church and State, met the King, and delivered the Propositions. During the
Treaty, the abovementioned Marquess of Montross was seized in Scotland, and
Executed, which troubled his Majesty so much, that it went nigh to break the
Treaty; but at length, through the urgency of Affairs, it was concluded. And
being brought to Edinburgh, it was agreed, that another Message should be sent
to invite the King over, to take Possession of the Crown, which was his own by
an unquestionable Title; but the English Parliament replied, If they could
hinder it, it should not be so. Wherefore they prepare an Army to invade
Scotland, under the command of their General Oliver Cromwell. However, the
Scots no wise daunted at the Storms threatened from England, resolved to adhere
to his Majesty, (though upon their own terms).

The King arriving at the mouth of Spey, in the North, several Lords were sent
to accompany him to Edinburgh; but in the mean time, Cromwell was advanced as
far as Haddington against him. Sir David L^sly, sent Sir John Brown with a
Party of Horse, which continued skirmishing for some while, but produced no
great Effect: The next Rencounter was at Dumbar, where the Scots had a Bloody
Overthrow from Cromwell; which did exceedingly strengthen his Interest in
Scotland.

The first work that the Scots went about after this disaster, was the
Coronation of the King, which was done at Scone; with as great Solemnity, as
the state of Affairs could allow: The Ceremony being over, His Majesty removed
to Sterling, resolving to debate his right to Cromwell, where people of all
ranks flocked to him; insomuch, as in a short time, he had an Army of 22000
Men; but they dividing amongst themselves, gave Cromwell opportunity to pass
over; and forthwith defeating a part of the Kings Army at Innerkething, possessed
himself of the whole Country: His Majesty seeing (after the defeat) that
Cromwell was like to Conquer all Scotland, makes choice of his most faithful
Friends, to venture with him into England; where he might with more safety and
advantage hazard three Kingdoms, than in a Field; wherefore with 16000 men he
privately marched to England, by the way of Carlyle; and without any
considerable opposition, came to Lancashire; where at Warrington Bridge, some
considerable Forces of the Parliament were ready to cut down the Bridge, but the
Scots were with them so suddenly, that they prevented the breaking down of the
Bridge, and forced their way over the Planks. Hence his Majesty marched to
Worcester in very good order. Cromwell hearing of his motions, sends Lamb^rt
with a select Party of Horse; after him the Parliament also raised numerous
Forces in most Countries in England; all which marched to Worcester against the
King. In the mean time Lambert gained a most Advantageous Pass at Hop^on, by a
desperate attempt, having caused some of his Troopers to swim the River on
Horseback, carrying their Houlsters and Pistols in their hands, to save them
from wet; whereby they put Major General Massey, and his men, to the retreat:
So that the Parliamentarians had a fair opportunity to make a Bridge over the
River, over which Cromwell passed, and joined the rest of the Army; which put
the King upon a necessity of Fighting, (the City being attacked on all sides):
Whereupon his Majesty marched out of the City with horse and foot against them.
Where followed a most desperate engagement; insomuch that his Majesty's Horse
was twice shot under him; every man resolving to dye in the Bed of Honor,
rather than to have their Prince and Country thus trod upon by the base
Usurpers: But the Enemy still advancing with fresh supplies where there was
need of them, so over powered the Kings Forces, that they were forced at last
to give ground, after twice Rallying, to retreat to the City.

His Majesty seeing that all was lost, was forced to Retreat to the City by the
same Gate he came out at, having left the Duke of Hamilton, Sir John Douglass,
Sir Alexander Forbes, with many other Valiant Gentlemen behind him. His Majesty
was exceedingly troubled for the loss of Duke Hamilton; for that he did see him
behave himself so Valiantly, and Fighting so desperately, even when he was
encompassed with the Enemies Horse and Foot. It being impossible for His
Majesty to keep the City long, the whole Nation almost being in Arms against
him, he resolves to retire: Accordingly, with some few Attendants, he marched
out at twelve a Clock at Night; and thinking their Number might discover them,
ordered every Man to shift for himself: Only with three or four in his Company,
he came to a place called Boscobel, where he disrobed himself; and for want of
Scissers, had his Hair cut off with a Knife; and so with the company of one
Careless (who brought him Provision) he betook himself to a Wood, where he
lodged in that Famous Royal-Oak: The Soldiers hunting about for him, and a
Thousand Pounds promised to any that would take Him, either Dead or Alive.

Soon after, His Majesty rode from Bently to Bristol before Mistress Lane (she
having a Pass for her self and her Servants) whence He returned, and absconded
a while in Sommersetshire, Wiltshire, and Hampshire; and at last came to
Briggemstone in Sussex, where He took Shipping, about the end of October, 1651.
and was Safely wafted over to a Creek in Normandy, whence he went to Diep, and
there provided himself of such Necessaries as served him until He came to his
Mother, who was at the French Court.

Cromwell hearing of Iretons Success in Ireland, and of Lieutenant General Monks
Success in Scotland, makes a Motion, That for the Security of the Commonwealth
(as it was then called) the Parliament should be turned out, as a parcel of
Drunkards, Whore-Masters, and Oppressors; which was accordingly done, and then
a new Convention is called, July, 1653. where the Government is put upon
Oliver's Shoulders, by an Instrument delivered to him, by their Speaker Mr.
Rouse.

In this Year and the next, were Five Bloody Engagements at Sea, between the
English and the Dutch; the English for the most part having the Victory. In the
Year 1656. Cromwell calls another Parliament, which he had so far secured for
his Interest, that they invite him to take the Imperial Crown of this Realm;
which he, as a cunning Fox (knowing that this step of his Advancement would
hasten his Ruin) with pretented modesty declined, contenting himself with
being Lord-Protector, which he was made three Years before. Then they
Petitioned him to accept of Three-Hundred Thousand Pounds a Year for his
Support; to have a New House of Lords; to name his own Successor: All which
(with much ado) he accepted of.

But when Fortune had set him so High, that all the World that heard of it were
Astonished: Behold, in the midst of his Triumph he is snatched away by Death,
upon September the Third, 1658. He lay in State, at White Hall, about six
Weeks, and then was, in great Splendour, Interred in Westminster Abbey, among the
Princes of the Royal Blood: His Son Richard was presently Installed in his
Place, wherein he had hardly time to look about, when Fleetwood and Lambert,
with the rest of the Army thrust him out, calling the Long-Parliament again;
this Revolution was followed by another; for soon after, several Gentlemen in
Cheshire, under the conduct of Sir George Booth, rose for the Defense of their
Privileges, but were defeated by Lambert; he immediately after turned out the
Long-Parliament, and erected a Committee of Safety.

His Majesty's Friends looked on with some Hope all this while, seeing all
these Metamorphosing of Government, might tend to the opening a Door for His
Majesty's entering General Monk hearing in Scotland, how matters went in
England, drew his Army toward the Borders: Against him Lambert marched as far
as New Castle, resolving to Fight him; but his men had no heart to the Work,
which forced him to give way. In the mean time the remainder of the
Long-Parliament, had again Convened with some difficulty, and Dissolved the
Committee of Safety; inviting General Monk to march with his Army to London,
which he accordingly did; and to requite their kindness, gets them Dissolved.

In the Year 1660. Another Parliament was called at Westminster, where, by
unanimous Consent, His Majesty was invited Home; and accordingly, the
Twenty-ninth of May following, His Majesty accompanied with the Dukes of York
and Gloucester, and attended with a Gallant Train of Lords and Gentlemen,
Arrived at Dover, whence He was conducted through London, in great State to
White Hall; where, by a Lineal Legal Succession, He possesses the Imperial
Crown of Scotland, for almost Two Thousand Years: So that, for Royal
Extraction, and Long Line of Just Descent, His Majesty may Reckon with any
Monarch in the Christian World.

AN APPENDIX To the Present STATE of SCOTLAND,
SECT. I. Of its Climate, Dimension, Division, Air, Soil, Commodities.
SCotland is one of the Two Kingdoms that divides the great Island of
Britain, being bounded on the East by the German Ocean, on the North, by the
Dewcalledon Sea; on the West, by the Irish Sea: And divides it self from
England, by the Rivers Tweed and Solway, and the Cheviot Hills.

Clim. Edinburgh is Situated between the Degrees of Latitude 56 d. 2 minutes,
of Longitude 3 d. 0 min. from London West. Longest Day, 17 hours 27 min.
Aberdeen 57 d. 10. min. of Latitude; 2. d. 20. min. Longitude; the most
Northernly parts of Scotland, is Dunsby-head, whose Latitude is 58 d. 5 min.

Dimensions. Its Length is about 480. Miles; its breadth is very
disproportionable, there being no place in it that is above 70. Miles distant
from the Sea.

Division. The Country is divided according to its Inhabitants; into Highland
and Low-land. The Highlanders live in the North and West Parts, or in some out
Islands; being a bold and hardy People, much given to Warlike Exercises; being
always in readiness, when ever Commanded by their Chief: Their Weapons were
commonly Bows and Arrows, but not so much used now as formerly; they are a
People that can endure as much hardships of War, as any People in the World.
The Lowlanders bordering upon the East and South, are as civil, as any other
People; their Language much like the English, differing only in the Accent.

Air. The Air is very wholesome; the cold in Winter toward the North is very
sharp; but there being great plenty of Firing, the Inhabitants do not suffer by
it. The heat is less scorching in Summer, than in some other parts of the
Continent.

The Soil is pleasant and healthful, abounding with Springs and Rivers; toward
the North it is Mountainous, yet not wanting fruitful Valleys apt to bear any
Grain.

Commodities. The Country every where affords plenty of Sheep, Oxen, Coneys
and fallow Deer; as also abundance of Geese, Ducks, Hens, Turkies, Pigeons,
Partridges, Sea-Plover, Herons, Quails and Larks, etc. with great plenty of
Fish, such as Salmonds, Pikes, Carps and Trouts; also Herrings, Oysters,
Cockles, Mussels, Turpots and Lobsters. Fruits. As Apples, Pears, Plums,
Cherries, Peaches and Apricocks. Corn, Barley, Rye, Beans, Pease and Oats. Also
it produces a great quantity of Tin, Lead, Copper, Allom, Salt, Hops; with
several Silver-Mines. It is accounted Richer under ground, than above, by
reason of their Mines, which when tried, yield much in their quantities of Ore.

SECT. II. Of the Laws of Scotland.
THey are made of the Municipal and Civil Laws; the Municipal consists either
of Acts of Parliament, or of the Customs and Practices of the College of
Justice; and when neither of these contradict, the Civil Law is of force.

All the Rights and Evidences of the Subject, are committed to Registers; by
which means men are sure not to be cheated in buying, or conveying Estates. For
first, no man can have a right to an Estate but by his being seized of it,
which is done by delivering Earth and Stone; upon which an Instrument is made,
called a Seizing, and this within sixty days after must be Registered, else it
is of no force; by which means all secret Conveyances are cut off. Next, all
Bonds have a Clause in them for inserting them in the public Registers; and
they being Registered without any further Action upon a charge of six days, the
Debtor must make payment. A Third Instance is, that any Creditor may serve a
Writ on his Debtor, called Letters of Inhibitione, by which he can make no
disposition of his Goods or Estate, till the Party be satisfied; if these
Letters be returned Registered, within twenty-one days after they are served,
otherwise they have no force. Many such Instances may be produced, by which it
appears how securely the Subject may enjoy that he has, or may purchase.

SECT. III. Of the Chief Officers of State, of the Parliament, of the Privy
Council, of the College of Justice, of the Justice Court, and of the Exchequer.
THe King administers the Government of the Kingdom by his Officers of State,
who are Eight in number: The first is the Lord Chancellor, who is Keeper of
the Great Seal, and President of all Courts, except the Exchequer. This Office
is in the Person of John Earl of Perth. The second is the Lord Treasurer, who
manages the Revenue, and presides in the Exchequer, who is at present the
Marquess of Queensbury. The third is the Lord Privy Seal; which Office the
Marquess of Athole enjoyes. The fourth is the Lord Secretary, who is at present
Alexander Earl of Murray. The fifth Officer is the Lord Clerk of the Registers,
who has the charge of all the public Records; this Office is executed by Sir
George Mikenzie, of Tarbet. The sixth is the Kings Advocate; he is commonly a
Judge, except in cases where the King is concerned; and then he pleads for the
King: The present Lord Advocate is, Sir George Mikenzie of Rosehaugh: The
seventh Office is, the Lord Treasurer Deputy; which Office was Executed by Sir
Charles Maitland, of Hattoun, now Earl of Lauderdale. The eighth is the Lord
Justice Clerk, who assists the Lord Justice General in criminal Causes. The
present Justice Clerk is, Richard Maitland, Esquire.

Par. The Parliament is made up of three Estates: The first is Ecclesiastical,
consisting of Archbishops, and Bishops: The second Estate is, The Nobility and
Barons: The third is, The Buroughs.

Upon the first day of each Parliament, there are such solemnities, and
magnificent Shows, as is not observed in any Kingdom upon such occasions. For
all the members of Parliament according to their degree, Riding (as it were) in
Procession from the Kings Palace to the Parliament House. The Commissioner
Riding last: The Crown, the Sword, and the Scepter, with the rest of the
Honors being carried before him; they return in the same order back again to
the Palace. Sometimes the King makes use of a Convention of Estates, which can
make no Laws; only by this meeting impositions are laid upon the Subjects.

The Parliament being the supreme Court, it is not impertinent to give a List
of the Nobility with their Precedence and Surnames, which is as follows.

Dukes.

His Royal Highness the Duke of Albany.

Surnames. The Dukes of Hamilton Hamilton. Buccleauch Scot. Lenox Lenox.

Marquesses Surnames. The Marquess of Huntley Gordone. Douglas Douglas.
Montross Graham. Athol Murray. Queensbury Douglass.

Earls Surnames The Earls of Crawford Lindsey. Errol Hay. Marishall Keith.
Southerland Southerland Mar Ereskine Airth Grahame. Morton Douglass. Buchan
Ereskine. Glencairn Cunninghame. Eglinton Montgomery. Casstles Kennedy. Murray
Stewart. Caithness Sinclare. Nithifdale Maxwell. Wintoune Seatoune. Linlithgow
Livingstone. Hume Hume. Pearth Drummond. Dumfermling Seatoune. Wigtoun Fleming.
Strathmore Lion. Abercorn Hamilton. Roxborough Ker. Kelly Ereiskine.
Haddingtoun Hamilton. Galloway Stewart. Seaforth Mac. Kenzy. Lowthian Ker.
Kinnoule Hay. Loudon Campbell. Dumfriess Creighton. Sterling Alexander. Elgine
Bruce. Southesk Carnaigy. Traquair Stewart. Ancram Ker. Weimes Weimes. Dalhousy
Ramsey. Airly Ogilvy. Callender Levingstone. Carnwath Dalziel. Finlator Ogilvy.
Levin Lesley. Annandale Johnstone. Dysert Murray. Panmuire Mauld. Tweddale Hay.
Northesk Carnaigy. Kinkardin Bruce. Forfar Douglass. Balcarres Lindsay.
Middleton Middleton. Aboyne Gordone. Tarras Scot. Newburgh Levingstone.
Kilmarnock Boyd. Dundonald Cochraine. Dumbarton Douglass. Kintore Keith. Broad
Albyne Campbell. Aberdeen Gordone.

Viscounts Surnames. The Viscounts of Faulkland Carey. Dumbarr Constable.
Stormont Murray. Kenmure Gordone. Arbuthnet Arbuthnet. Frendaret Creightone.
Kingstone Seatoune. Oxenford Macgill. Kilsyth Levingstone. Irwing Campbell.
Dumbiane Osborne. Preston Grahame. Newhaven Sheene.

Lords Surnames The Lords of Forbes Forbes Saltone Frazier Gray Gray. Ochiltry
Stewart Cathcart Cathcart. Sinclare Sinclare. Mordington Douglass. Semple
Semple. Elphingstone Elphingstone. Oliphant Oliphant. Lovat Frazier. Borthwick
Borthwick. Rosse Rosse. Torphighen Sandilands. Spyne Lindsey. Lindoris Lesley.
Balmerinoch Elphingstone. Blantyre Stewart. Cardrosse Ereskine. Burghly
Balfour. Maderty Drummond. Cranstone Cranstone. Melvil Melvil. Neaper Neaper.
Cameron Fairfax. Cramond Richardson. Rae Macky. Forrester Bailzy. Petsl^go --
Kirkudbright Mac-cleland. Frazier Frazier. Bargany Hamilton. Bamf Ogilvy.
Elibank Murray. Dunkeld Galloway. Halcarton Falconer. Belhaven Hamilton.
Abercromby Sandilands. Carmichael Carmichael Rollo Rollo. Colvil Colvil. Duffus
Southerland. Ruthven Ruthven. Mack-Donald Mack-donald. Rutherford Rutherford.
Balanden Balanden. Newark Lesly. Burntisland Weimes. Strathard Nairne.

His Majesty's Privy Council is chiefly employed about Public Affairs; the
Power of it has been mostly raised since King James came to the Crown of
England; by reason of which, being necessitated to be absent from Scotland
himself, he lodged much of his power in the Lords of His Privy Council; we
cannot (by reason of the late alterations) give an exact List of the present
Lords of the Council: Wherefore we shall forbear.

The Supreme Court of Judicature, about the property of the Subject, is called
the College of Justice. It consists of fourteen Judges, who are called
Senators of the College of Justice, and a President. This Court sits from the
first of November, till the last of March.

The Justice Court being the next Supreme Court, where Criminals are tried,
consists of a Lord Justice General, and a Lord Justice Clerk who is his
Assistant. All Trials for Life, are in this Court; where every Subject, as well
Peers as Commoners are tried; Peers by a Jury or Assize of Peers; and
Commoners, by a Jury of Commoners.

The next Supreme Court is the Exchequer, which consists of, the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Treasurers Deputy, and some Assistants called the Lords of
the Exchequer: Here all the Kings Grants, Pensions, Gifts of Wards, and such
like are passed.

SECT. IV. Of Sheriff-Courts; also an account of the Shires of Scotland, with
their Sheriffs who are (most of them so) by Inheritance.
THere are beside the Supreme Courts of the Nation, other inferior Courts; the
most considerable of which, is the Sheriffs Courts, where Thefts, and all
lesser Crimes are Judged; as also Murders, if the Murderer be taken in hot
blood. The Sheriffs in this Nation are (most of them) so by Inheritance;
wherefore it may not be impertinent here to give a List of the Shires of
Scotland, with their Sheriffs.

Shires of Scotland, with their bounds and Sheriffs.
Shires Sheriffs The Shire of Edinburgh contains Middle Lothian. The Earl of
Lau^erdale. The shire of Berwick contains Mers. Earl of Home. The shire of
Peeblis contains Tweddail. Earl of Tweddail. The shire of Shelkirk contains
the Forest of Etterick. -- Murray. The shire of Roxburgh contains
Tiviotdale, Lidisdale, Eshdail, Eusdail. Duke of Buckleugh. The shire of
Dumfreis contains Nithisdail, and Anandail. Marquess of Queensbury. The shire
of Wigton contains the West parts of Galloway. Sir Patrick Agnew of Lochnaw.
The shire of Air contains Kyle, Carrict, and Cunninghame. Earl of Dumfreis.
The shire of Renfrew contains the Barony of Renfrew. Earl of Eglington. The
shire of Lanerick contains Clidsdail. Duke Hamilton. The shire of Dumbritton
contains Lenox. Duke of Lenox. The shire of Bute contains the Isles of Bute
and Arran. Sir James Stewart of Bute. The shire of Innerara contains Argile,
Lorn, Kintyre, with the most part of the West Isles. -- The shire of Pearth
contains Athol, Goury, Glenshee, Strath-Ardell, Broad-Albine, Ramach,
Balhider, Glenurqhuay, Stormont, Menteith, and Strath-Yern. Marquess of Atholl.
The shire of Striveling lies on both sides the River Forth. Earl of Mar. The
shire of Linlighgow, West Lothian. -- Hope of Hoptoun. The shire of Clackmanan
contains a part of Fife, lying upon the River Forth, toward Striveling.
Bruce of Clackmanan. The shire of Kinross contains so much of Fife, as lies
between Lochleiven, and the Ochell Hills. Earl of Morton. The shire of Couper
contains the rest of Fife. Earl of Rothes. The shire of Forfar contains
Angus, with its pertinents. Earl of Southesk. The shire of Kinkardin contains
Mernis. Earl of Kincardin. The shire of Aberdeen contains Mar, with its
pertinents, also the most part of Buchan, Forumarten, and Strathbogie. Sir --
Campbel of Caddel. The shire of Bamf contains a small part of Buchan,
Strath-Dovern, Boyn, Enzy, Strath-Awin and Balveny. Sir James Baird of
Auchmedden. The shire of Elgine contains the Eastern part of Murray. Robert
Dumbar of -- The shire of Nairn contains the West part of Murray. -- The
shire of Innerness contains Badenoch, Lochabyr, and the South part of Ross.
Earl of Murray The shire of Cromarty contains a small part of Ross, lying on
the South side of Cromarty Firth. -- The shire of Tayne contains the rest of
Ross, with the Isles of Sky, Lemes, and Harrigh. Earl of Seaforth The shire of
Dornoch contains Southerland. and Strath-Naver. Earl of Southerland. The
shire of Weik contains Cathness. Earl of Cathness. The shire of Orkney
contains all the Isles of Orkney and Schetland. -- The Constabulary of
Haddington contains East Lothian and Lauderdale. Earl of Lauderdale.
Stewartries. Stewards. The Stewartry of Strathern. Earl of Pearth. The
Stewartry of Monteith. Earl of Monteith. The Stewartry of Annandate. Earl of
Annandale. The Stewartry of Kirkudbright contains the East parts of Galloway.
Earl of Nithisdale. Baileries Bailiffs. Kyle. -- Carrict. E. of Cassiles.
Cunninghame. E. Eglington.

We should in the next place have spoken somewhat of the Ecclesiastical
Government of the Kingdom; but it being done already by so many Learned Pens,
especially Archbishop Spotswood, to which we refer the Reader: We shall now
pass to

SECT. V. Of the Universities of Scotland.
In Scotland there are four Universities.

St. Andrews. Glasgow Aberdeen. Edinburgh.
Of the University of St. Andrews.
This University was founded by Bishop Heawardlaw A. D. 1412 the Archbishops
of St. Andrews are perpetually Chancellors thereof; the Rector is chosen
yearly, and has the same Power with the Vice Chancellor of Oxford and
Cambridge.

There are in this University three Colleges, viz. St. Salvator, St. Leonards,
and St. Maryes, St. Salvators College was founded by Bishop Kennedy who endued
it with very sumptuous and costly Ornaments; and provided sufficient
maintenance for the masters and professors. St. Leonards College was founded by
Prior, John Hepburn, A. D. 1525. Persons endowed are Principal, four Professors
of Philosophy, Eight Poor Scholars.

St. Mary's College was founded by Archbishop Beaton, no Science is here
taught but Theology, which is done gratis, the Schools being open to receive
any to be instructed.

Of the University of Glasgow.
This University was founded by King James the second, and augmented with ample
Privileges by King James the Sixth. King Charles the First did ratify all the
old Privileges, and bestowed money for repairing the Fabric, also King Charles
the second by consent of Parliament bestowed a considerable sum of money upon
it.

Of the University of Aberdeen.
There were in this place an associated company of Students of Divinity, and
the Canon and City Laws in the times of King Alexander the second, but it was
by King James the Fourth made an University in A. D. 1494, it was founded with
as ample Privileges as any University in Christendom. In it both Philosophy,
Divinity, Physic, and Law, are very accurately taught.

The University of Edinburgh.
King James the Sixth, Anno. Dom. 1580. founded this University upon the
supplication of the Magistrates of the City; granting them under the great Seal
an University with all the privileges and immunities that any University
within the Kingdom could pretend to.

Persons endowed, were, a Principal, a Professor of Divinity; a Professor of
Philosophy, a Professor of Humanity; to which is since added a Professor of
Hebrew.

A Postscript. Of the Laws of Scotland for Torturing Criminals; and of that
Torture in particular called the Boot.
THe Laws of Scotland, according to a late Learned Writer, Sir G. Mace^zy in
his Criminals, allow not Tortures but in case of Obstinacy in the criminal,
where there is great presumption of guilt, and therefore it is not allowed to
any, but to the Council or Justices to use torture in any case.

It is a ruled case in Law, that Torture being adduced, purges all former
presumptions, which preceded the Torture, if the person Tortured be constant in
his denial; and therefore Torture is called, Probatio Vltima. Neither can a
Person sentenced to dye, be Tortured, when Sentence is passed against him, for
Post condemnationem judices functi sunt Officio. Minors also have this as one
of their Privileges, by the Scottish Laws, that they cannot be Tortured lest
the tenderness both of their Age and Judgment make them fail.

The most ordinary way of Torture in Scotland is, by an Iron Engine called the
Boot, the manner thus. The Criminal is called to be examined before the
Council, and upon Obstinacy is threatened with the Boot, and then dismissed for
that time; with certification, that if within so many days he do not confess,
he shall be Tortured: When this day comes, if he continue obstinate, he is
called before the Council, or a Quorum of them, where the Executioner attends
with the Boot; there he is again examined by the Judges; if he do not confess,
then they order the Executioner to put his Leg in the Boot with some Iron
Wedges; then they examine him again; if he continue refractory, then the
Executioner is commanded to drive one of the Wedges, and then another, till the
Criminal either confess, or the Judges are satisfied he has nothing to confess.

FINIS.
Books Lately Printed and Sold by William Benbridge.
THE second part of the Weeks Preparation for the Sacrament. Consisting of
Soliloquies, Prayers, Hymns, Ejaculations, Thanksgiving and Examination, for
Sunday Evening, (after the Celebration of the Holy Communion.) As also for
Morning and Evening on every day of the Week following. Together with
Directions to lead an Holy Life.

The Style of Exchanges, containing both their Law and Custom, as practiced now
in the most considerable place of Exchange in Europe. Unfoulding diverse
Mysteries, and directing every Person, howsoever concerned in a Bill of
Exchange, to what he ought to do and observe, in any case, in order to his own
security. Translated out of Low and High-Duch, French and Italian-Latine
Authors. The whole Methodically digested into Chapters and Sections, that by
the help of an Index any particular Case many readily be found. By John
Scarlett, Merchant of the Eastland Company, The second Edition.

Lucian's Works, Translated from the Greek. By Ferrand Spence. 1. Volume. 2.
Volume. 3. Volume.

The History of the Bucan^ers: being an Impartial Relation of all the Battles,
Sieges, and other most Eminent Assaults committed for several years upon the
Coasts of the Westindies by the Pirates of Jamaica and Tortuga, both English,
and other Nations. More especially the Unparalled Atchievments of Sir H. M.
Made English from the Dutch Copy: Written by J. Esquemeling, one of the
Bucaniers, very much Corrected from the Errors of the Original, by the
Relations of some English Gentlemen, that then resides in those Parts.

Scanderbeg Redivivus. An Historical Account of the Life and Actions of the
most Victorious Prince John the III. King of Poland: Containing an Exact and
Succinct Series of Affairs from his Cradle, to this present day; With a
particular Account of the many Great and Signal Victories obtained by Him
against the Turks, from the time he was first made Crown-General, and
afterward Elected King of Poland.

The Exact Englishman: Or, the complete London Scholar, A new Spelling Book.
Beginning with a Choice and Methodical Collection of all Monosyllable, or Words
of one Syllable, (turned into English Meter;) And Proceeding to those of two,
three or more Syllables, digested into an Order and Method never before extant.
With Graces and Prayers. Useful not only for English-Schoolmasters in teaching
Children to Spell and Read, but may be servicable to the Elder Learners, and to
Strangers, as a Repertory or Treasury of English Words to be used on occasion.
By S. N. Schoolmaster in London.

The Parliament of Women: Or, A Complete History of the Proceedings and
Debates, of a particular Junto, of Ladies and Gentlewomen, With a design to
alter the Government of the World. By way of Satyr.

Pandaemonium: Or, The Devil's Cloister. Being a further blow to Modern
Sadduceism, proving the Existence of Witches and Spirits. In a discourse
deduced from the fall of the Angels, the Propogation of Satan's Kingdom before
the Flood: The Idolatry of the Ages after, greatly advancing Diabolical
Confederacies, With an Account of the Lives and Transactions of several
Notorious Witches, some whereof have been Popes: Also a Collection of several
Authentic Relations of Strange Apparitions of Demons and Specters, and
Fascinations of Witches, never before Printed. By Richard Bovet Gent.

FINIS.

