A Sure Guide TO HEAVEN: OR An Earnest Invitation to Sinners to turn to God, in
order to their Eternal Salvation.

Showing the thoughtful Sinner what he must do to be saved.

By Joseph Alleine late Minister of the Gospel at Taunton in Somersetshire.

John 3. 3. Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1688.

TO THE READER That would be safe and happy.
IF it were only possible thou may live hereafter, and be called to account
in another world for what thou do in this, it would be thy wisdom to take the
safest course, and not to run the constant hazard of being dragged by death to
Judgment, before thou were prepared to meet thy Judge. But another Life, and a
Judgment to come, are more than possible; there is an high probability, yea as
great a certainty as can with reason he expected, that death will not put an
end to thy being, that thou shall live after the return of thy body to the
Earth, and that then thou shall be tried, and sentenced to such an happiness or
misery, as will be incomparably greater than any thing, nay than all thou did
ever feel or see, hear of or imagine. These weighty Truths are taught and
established in some measure by the Light of Nature, but much more clearly and
firmly by the Oracles of God in the Holy Scriptures. Besides what they say of
the different states of separated Souls, they plainly teach, and strongly
assert, That God has appointed a time in which he will judge the whole world
by the Mediator Jesus Christ; that that great Mediator who is God as well as
Man, will descend from Heaven, attended by its glorious Inhabitants, with
triumphant Acclamations to his Royal Throne; that a mighty Voice will cite all
that ever dwelt on Earth to make their personal appearance; that that awakening
and commanding Summons shall be presently heard and obeyed by the dead, and
they with the quick then remaining alive, shall all stand before the Judgment
Seat; that after a thoroughly searching and impartial trial, which will reach
men's several talents, trusts and opportunities of getting and doing good, and
their most secret actions, words and thoughts, every one shall receive an
unalterable Sentence of Absolution or Condemnation; and that then such as are
approved and absolved, shall inherit an heavenly Kingdom prepared for them from
the foundation of the world, be like the Angels their delightful Companions,
converse with their most amiable and loving Savior, beholding and partaking of
his glory, yea resemble, see and enjoy God himself in completed Holiness, and
everlasting Bliss: And those on the other hand, that are reprobated and damned
shall never be admitted into the Regions of Light, nor yet be favored with a
glimpse thereof; but suffer with Devils in the blackness of darkness for ever,
the perpetual gnawings of the Worm that dies not, and the extreme torments of
unquenchable fire. Seeing then these things cannot be denied, thou must be
guilty of such woeful abuses of reason as far exceed all the extravagancies of
them that want it; thou must be most grossly foolish, most unnaturally cruel to
thine own Soul, to thy whole self, if thou do not earnestly desire to be one
of those unto whom the Lord shall say, Come ye blessed, and not, Depart ye
cursed; if thou do not readily welcome, and diligently use any proper helps
for the avoiding of the heaviest endless misery, and for the attaining of the
purest, vastest, everlasting happiness. And such helps are now offered thee in
this little Book, which has a taking tincture of the excellent Author's
flaming love to God, and useful Charity to the Souls of men; and now it is in
thine hand, let me tell thee, it cannot be refused the reading, or rea^ without
doing what it so plainly teaches and affectionately urges, but at thy
greatest peril. If thou will not be at a small expense of time and pains to
read it over, if after the neglect of so many means of instruction this also be
rejected, how justly may thou be destroyed for lack of knowledge? How soon
may the things which belong unto thy peace be hid from thine eyes? A continued
wilful want of understanding is large ground for fear, lest he that made thee
should not have mercy on thee, and he that formed and redeemed thee should show
thee no favor: If thou read, but do not practice what Scripture and
Reason so pathetically plead for, the increase of thy knowledge will increase
thy sorrow, because it will aggravate thy sin; for to him that knows his Lords
will, how and why to do good, and does it not but the forbidden evil, to him
it is heinous, inexcusable sin, for which he is liable to be beaten with many
stripes, in constant dreadful danger of severer punishment. I hope therefore
thou will peruse so short a discourse, and art not unwilling to do it in such a
manner as to grow acquainted with, and be persuaded to thy great duty, and
which is inseparable from it, thy greatest advantage; and that thou may not
fail thereof, is the design of the following Directions.

1. Pray in the name of Christ as thou art and shall be enabled, for the more
effectual assistances of the Holy Spirit. Such is the corruption of our nature,
that it utterly disables to make a saving use of outward means without inward
aids. Unless the Spirit by his powerful operations work thee into a serious
teachable temper, set home the attempts of Gods Messengers, and give them an
efficacy far beyond their own, the most concerning truths and weightiest
arguments can never be so represented and enforced, as to overcome thy sensual,
worldly inclinations, rescue thee from the dominion of sin and Satan, and bring
thee back to God. Thou must therefore pray, and that with becoming
apprehensions of the great God, due regard to the gracious Mediator, deep shame
and sorrow for the ^ins thou confessest, ardent desires of all the grace thou
beggest, and faithful improvements of such measures as thou have already
received. And if thou thus ask, with fervent importunity and persevering
constancy, thou will undoubtedly find that God bade thee not to seek his face
in vain. As our Lord warrants us to argue, Luke II. If a man will not deny a
Friend what he is importunate for, and if a Father will grant his Son what he
asks and wants, much more will thy Heavenly Father give thee the Holy Spirit
for all needful purposes, to produce all those effects in thee, that are truly
necessary for thine Eternal Salvation.

2. Consider seriously what thou read, and work it on thy Soul as far as
thou art concerned therein. Medicines for the Body will operate though they are
not thought of; but Spiritual Remedies for the mind require its cooperation
with them; the clearest explications, fullest proofs and strongest motives
about matters of nearest and greatest concernment will not do the Soul any
good, unless by thinking it apply them, and extract their virtue; nor will the
Spirit heal its lamentable Diseases, if his influences be not answered with
suitable endeavors. Work then as he works in and with thee; take into most
serious consideration whatever is apt to promote thy recovery; lay those things
closest to heart which are likeliest to cure the hardness thereof; inculcate
and urge them, and withal cry mightily unto him, who is able, and no less
willing to help thee, till thou feel his gentle force, and come to a
conquering resolution, that thou must and wilt do as thou art advised, till
thou do not only assent to the course proposed as fit to be taken, but art
steadily determined, that it is best for thee, that it is absolutely necessary,
and must effectually be prosecuted; that by the grace of God thou will
thoroughly change thy heart and life, and so escape from the greatest evil, and
make sure of the chiefest good.

3. When thou have seriously considered and resolved, proceed presently to
practice, with all thy might, and without the least delay. It Is commonly a work
of some time to alter the temper of the Soul, and change the course of the
life; and according to God's usual methods, the longer thou have been
accustomed to do evil, the more time and pains will be requisite, to break the
force of stubborn lusts, to weaken and subdue vicious habits, and to gain those
of grace and goodness, to travel back the way thou have gone wrong, and to get
out of it into the path of life. It Is well then if there be days enough before
thee to do the one thing needful, to be sure thou art not certain of an hour to
spare, the loss of so small a part may prove the loss of all. Besides, if thou
putt'st off thy reformation though but for a little while, it is a sign thou
do not really intend it at all, for thou purposest against conviction to add
sin to sin at present, and how can that consist with an hearty design of
growing good afterward? Delude not therefore thy self with such a desperate
cheat, but imitate the Royal Ps^lmist, When thou have thought on thy ways turn
thy feet unto Gods testimonies; Make haste and delay not to keep his
Commandments.

4. Remember that conversion unto God is but the beginning of thy duty, that
thou must afterward obey him all the days of thy life, and that there is no
other way to preserve an interest in his favor, and a right to the great
expressions thereof. They are the largest and the last discoveries of Divine
Grace, that teach thee to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, and so doing to look for the
blessed Object of thy hope; they plainly enough warn thee against drawing back
unto perdition; they threaten a final rejection if thou deniest thy Savior in
words or works, and they often direct and command thee to seek for glory and
honor, and immortality, by patient continuance in well-doing; to be faith full
unto death whatever it cost thee, that thy Lord may give thee a crown of life:
These may seem hard sayings, but they contain nothing like a reasonable
discouragement. There Is misery more than enough in Hell to necessitate a
prevention by any temporary labors, wants and suff^rings, and an abundantly
sufficient happiness in Heaven to encourage a steadfast perseverance in the work
of the Lord, though it were more harsh and grievous than sinners imagine. And
even at present, Religion is not without a reward, yea thou will find it, if
thou triest as thou should, a reward to it self, when the main difficulties
at first are over, thy duty will grow daily easier, it will have many pleasures
mixed with it, and become at length it self the greatest. It will not abridge
thy appetites of any desirable gratifications, but give them a new delicious
relish of the Fountain from which they flow. Instead of the girds and twinges
of a bad Conscience, and dread of an after-reckoning, 'twill settle peace
within, and fill thee with comfortable reflections and joyful hopes; and a
loving, thankful, praising obedience will by degrees become thy sweetest
employment. Therein thou may draw still nearer to God, delight thy self in,
and receive from him the desires of thine heart, thou may walk always in the
light of his countenance, and feed on his loving kindness, which is better than
life.

In short, before thou ascendest to Heaven thou may be in an Heaven on
Earth, and find by happy experience, that the way to have all thou can wish
hereafter, is to be and do what is best for thy self here.

Useful Questions, whereby a Christian may every day examine himself.
Psalm. 4. 4. Commune with your heart upon your beds.
EVery Evening before you sleep (unless you find some other time of the day
more for your advantage in this work) sequester your self from the World, and
having set your heart in the presence of the Lord, charge it before God to
answer to these Interrogatories.

For your Duties.
Q. 1. Did not God find me on my Bed, when he looked for me on my knees? Job 1.
5. Psalm. 5. 3.

Q. 2. Have not I prayed to no purpose, or suffered wandering thoughts to eat
out my duties? Mat. 15. 8, 9. Jer. 12. 2.

Q. 3. Have not I neglected or been very overly in the reading Gods holy word?
Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Josh. 1. 7, 8.

Q. 4. Have I digested the Sermon I heard last? Have I repeated it over, and
prayed it over? Luke 2. 19, 51. Psalm. 1. 2. and 119. 5, 11, 97.

Q. 5. Was there not more of custom and fashion in my family duties than of
Conscience? Psalm. 101. 2. Jer 30. 21.

Q. 6. Where in have I denied my self this day for God? Luke 9. 23.

Q. 7. Have I redeemed my time from too long or needless visits; idle
imaginations, fruitless discourse, unnecessary sleep, more than needs of the
World? Ephesians. 5. 16. Col. 4. 5.

Q. 8. Have I done any thing more than ordinary for the Church of God, in this
time extraordinary? 2 Cor. 11. 28. Isa. 62. 6.

Q. 9. Have I look care of my company? Prove. 13. 20. Psalm. 119. 63.

Q. 10. Have not Ineglected or done something against the duties of my
Relations, as a Master, Servant, Husband, Wife, Parent, Child, etc. Ephesians. 5. 22.
to chap. 6. V. 10. Col. 3. 18. to the 4. V. 2.

For your Sins.
Q. 1. Does not sin sit light? Psalm. 38. 4. Romans 7. 24.

Q. 2. Am I a mourner for the sins of the Land? Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 9. 1, 2, 3.

Q. 3. Do I live in nothing that I know or fear to be a sin? Psalm. 119. 101,
104.

For your Heart.
Q. 1. Have I been much in holy Ejaculations? Neh. 2. 4, 5.

Q. 2. Has not God been out of mind: Heaven out of sight? Psalm. 16. 8 Jer. 2.
32. Col. 3. 1, 2.

Q. 3. Have I been often looking into mine own heart, and made conscience even
of vain thoughts? Prove. 3. 23. Psalm. 119. 113.

Q. 4. Have not I^ given way to the workings of pride, or passion? 2 Chronicles. 32.
26. James 4. 5, 6, 7.

For your Tongue.
Q. 1. Have I bridled my Tongue, and forced it in? Jam. 1. 26. Jam. 3. 2, 3, 4,
Psalm. 39. 1.

Q. 2. Have I spoken evil of no man? Tit. 3. 2. Jam. 4. 11.

Q. 3. Has the Law of the Lord been in my mouth as I sat in my house, went by
the way, was lying down, and rising up? Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.

Q. 4. Is there no company I come into, but I have dropped something of God,
and left some good savor behind? Col. 4. 6. Ephesians. 4. 29.

For your Table.
Q. 1. Did not I sit down with no higher end than a beast, merely to please my
Appetite? did I eat and drink to the glory of God? 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Q. 2. Was not my Appetite too hard for me? Jude 12. 2 Pet. 1. 6.

Q. 3. Did not I arise from the Table without dropping any thing of God there?
Luke 7. 36, etc. Luke 14. 1, etc. John 6.

Q. 4. Did not I mock God, when I pretended to crave a blessing, and return
thanks? Acts 27. 35, 36. Mat. 15. 36. Col. 3. 17, 23.

For your Calling.
Q. 1. Have I been diligent in the duties of my Calling? Eccles. 9. 1 Cor. 7.
17, 20, 24.

Q. 2. Have I defrauded no man? 1 These. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 8.

Q. 3. Have I dropped never a lie in my shop, or trade? Prove. 28. 6. Ephesians. 4. 25.

Q. 4. Did not I ra^hly make, nor falsely break some promise? Psalm. 106. 33.
Josh. 9. V. 14, etc. Psalm. 15. 4.

An Addition of some brief Directions for the Morning.
D. 1. If through necessity or carelessness you have omitted the reading and
weighing of these questions in the Evening, be sure to do it now.

D. 2. Ask your self, what sin have I committed? what duty have I omitted?
against which of these Rules have I offended in the day foregoing? and renew
your repentance, and double your watch.

D. 3. Examine whether God were last in your thoughts when you went to sleep;
and first, when you awoke.

D. 4. Enquire whether your care of your heart and ways does increase upon your
constant using of this course for self-examination; or whether it does abate,
and you grow more remiss.

D. 5. Impose a task of some good meditation upon your selves while you are
making ready, either to go over these Rules in your thoughts, or the heads of
the Sermon you heard last, or the holy meditations for the purpose in the
practice of Piety, or Scudder's daily walk.

D. 6. Set your ends right for all that day.

D. 7. Set your watch, especially against those sins and temptations that you
are like to be most incident to that day.

THE CONTENTS.
I. What Conversion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. II. What
Conversion is, and wherein it consists. III. The Necessity of Conversion. IV.
The Marks of the Unconverted. V. The Miseries of the Unconverted. VI.
Directions for Conversion. VII. Motives to Conversion. VIII. Conclusion. IX.
Counsel for Personal and Family-Godliness.
This same Book is Printed in large Octavo of a bigger Print for ease of
Ancient Persons.

Whereunto are annexed diverse Practical Cases of Conscience Judiciously
Resolved.

Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, etc.

An Earnest Invitation to Sinners to Turn to God in order to their Eternal
Salvation.
DEarly Beloved, and longed for, I gladly acknowledge my self a debtor to you
all, and am concerned, as I would be found a good Steward to the Household of
God, to give to every one his Portion. But the Physician is most solicitous for
those Patients, whose case is most doubtful and hazardous, and the Father's
bowels are especially turned toward his dying Child. The numbers of the
unconverted souls among you, call for my most earnest compassions and hasty
diligence to pluck them out of the burning, Jude 23. and therefore to these
first I shall apply my self in these lines.

But whence shall I fetch my arguments, or how shall I choose my words? Lord,
wherewith shall I woo them? wherewith shall I win them? Oh that I could but
tell! I would write unto them in tears, would weep out every argument, I would
empty my veins for Ink, I would petition them on my knees, verily (were I able)
I would. O how thankful I would be, if they would be prevailed with to repent
and turn.

How long have I traveled in birth with you? how frequently have I made suit
to you? how often would I have gathered you? how instant have I been with you?
this is that I have prayed for, and studied for, for many years, that I might
bring you to God: Oh that I might but do it! Will you yet be entreated? Oh what
a happy man might you make me, if you would but hearken to me, and suffer me to
carry you over to Jesus Christ!

But, Lord, how insufficient am I for this work! I have been many a year wooing
for thee, but the Damsel would not go with me. Lord, what a task have thou set
me to do! Alas, wherewith shall I pierce the scales of Leviathan, or make the
heart to feel that is hard as a stone; hard as a piece of the nether Millstone!
Shall I go and lay my mouth to the grave, and look when the dead will obey me
and come forth? Shall I make an Oration to the Rocks? or declaim to the
Mountains, and think to move them with arguments? Shall I give the blind to
see? From the beginning of the world was it not heard that a man opened the
eyes of the blind; But thou, O Lord, can pierce the scales and prick the
heart of the Sinner. I can but shoot at rovers, and draw the bow at a venture,
and do thou direct the arrow between the joints of the harness, and kill the
sin, and save the Soul of a sinner, that casts his eyes into these labors.

But I must apply my self to you, to whom I am sent: yet I am at a great loss.
Would to God I knew how to go to work with you! would I stick at the pains? God
knows you your selves are my witnesses, how I have followed you in private,
as well as in public, and have brought the Gospel to your doors, testifying to
you the necessity of the new birth, and persuading you to look in time after a
sound and thorough change. Beloved, I have not acted a part among you, to serve
my own advantage: your Gospel is not yea^ and nay. Have you not heard the same
truths, from the Pulpit, by public labors, and by private letters, by
personal instructions? Brethren, I am of the same mind as ever, that holiness
is the best choice, that there is no entering into Heaven, but by the straight
passages of the second birth, that without holiness you shall never see God,
Heb. 12. 14. Ah my beloved! refresh my bowels in the Lord. If there be any
consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any fellowship of the Spirit, any
bowels and mercies, fulfill you my joy. Now give your selves unto the Lord, 2
Cor. 8. 5. Now set your selves to seek him. Now set up the Lord Jesus in your
hears, and set him up in your houses: Now come in and kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
12. and embrace the tenders of mercy. Touch his Scepter and live; why will you
die? I beg not for my self; but fain I would have you happy: This is the prize
I run for, and the white I aim at. My soul's desire and prayer for you is, that
you may be saved, Romans 10. 1.

The famous Lycurgus, having instituted most strict and wholesome Laws for his
people, told them he was necessitated to go a Journey from them and got them
to bind themselves in an Oath, that his Laws should be observed till his
return. This done, he went into a voluntary banishment, and never returned
more, that they might, by virtue of their Oath, be engaged to the perpetual
observing of his Laws. Methinks I should be glad of the hard conditions which
he endured (though I love you tenderly) so I might but hereby engage you
thoroughly to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Dearly beloved, would you rejoice the heart of your Minister? Why then,
embrace the Counsels of the Lord by me: forgo your sins: set to prayer: up with
the Worship of God in your families: keep at a distance from the corruptions of
the times. What greater joy to a Minister, than to hear of souls born unto
Christ by him, and that his Children walk in the truth? 2 John 4.

Brethren, I beseech you suffer friendly plainness and freedom with you in your
deepest concernments. I am not playing the Orator, to make a learned speech to
you, nor dressing my dish with eloquence, wherewith to please you. These lines
are upon a weighty errand indeed, viz. to convince, and convert, and to save
you. I am not baiting my hook with Rhetoric, nor fishing for your applause,
but for your souls. My work is not to please you, but to save you; nor is my
business with your fancies, but your hearts. If I have not your hearts, I have
nothing. If I were to please your ears, I could sing another song. If I were to
preach my self, I would steer another course; I could then tell you a smoother
tale: I would make you pillows, and speak you peace; for how can Ahab love this
Micaiah that always prophesies evil concerning him? 1 Kings 22. 8. But how much
better are the wounds of a Friend, than the fair speeches of the Harlot, who
flattereth with her lips, till the Dart strike through the liver, and hunteth
for the precious life? Prove. 7. 21, 22, 23. and Prove. 6. 26. If I were to quiet
a crying infant, I might sing him to a pleasant mood, and rock him asleep. But
when the Child is fallen into the Fire, the parent takes another course; he
will not go to still him with a song or trifle. I know if we speed not with
you, you are lost. If we cannot get your consent to arise, and come away, you
perish for ever. No Conversion, and no Salvation: I must get your good will, or
leave you miserable.

But here the difficulty of my work again recurs upon me. Lord choose my stones
out of the Rocks, 1 Samuel 17. 40, 45. I come in the name of the Lord of Hosts,
the God of the Armies of Israel. I come forth like the stripling Goliath, to
wrestle, not with flesh and blood, but with Principalities and Powers, and the
Rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. This day let the Lord smite
the Philistine, and spoil the strong man of his Armor and give me to fetch off
the captives out of his hand. Lord choose my words, choose my weapons for me,
and when I put my hand into the bag, and take thence a stone, and sling it, do
thou carry it to the mark and make it sink, not into the forehead, 1 Samuel 17.
49. but the heart of the unconverted sinner, and smite him to the ground, with
Saul in his so happy fall, Acts 9. 4. Thou have sent me, as Abraham did
Eliezer, to take a wife unto my master thy Son, Genesis 24. 4. But my discouraged
soul is ready to fear the woman will not be willing to follow me. O Lord God of
my Master, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and show kindness to my
Master, and send thine Angel before me, and prosper my way, that I may take a
wife unto thy son, Genesis 24. 12. That as the servant rested not till he had
brought Isaac and Rebekah together, so I may be successful to bring Christ and
the souls of my people together, before we part.

But I turn me unto you. Some of you do not know what I mean by conversion, and
in vain shall I persuade you to that which you do not understand, and therefore
for your sakes, I shall show what this Conversion is. Others do cherish secret
hopes of mercy, though they continue as they be; and for them I must show the
necessity of Conversion. Others are like to harden themselves with a vain
conceit, that they are converted already, unto them I must show the marks of
the unconverted. Others because they feel no harm, fear none, and so sleep upon
the top of the mast; to them I shall show the misery of the unconverted. Others
sit still, because they see not their way out; to them I shall show the means
of conversion. And finally for the quickening of all, I shall close with the
motives of Conversion.

Chap I. Showing the Negative, what Conversion is not, and correcting some
mistakes about it.
LET the blind Samaritans worship they know not what, Ioh. 4. 22. Let the
Heathen Athenians superscribe their Altar unto the unknown God, Acts 17. 23.
Let the guileful Papists commend the mother of destruction, Hos. 4. 6. for the
mother of devotion: they that know man's constitution, and the nature of the
reasonable souls^ operation, cannot but know, that the understanding having the
Empire in the soul, he that will go rationally to work, must labor to let in
the light here. Ignoranti^ non est consensus. And therefore that you may not
mistake me, I shall show you what I mean by the conversion I pers^^de you to
endeavor after.

It is storied, that when Jupiter let down the golden Chaplets from Heaven, all
of them but one were stolen: Whereupon (lest they should lose a relic of so
great esteem) they made five others so like it that if any were so wickedly
minded, as to steal that also, they should not be able to discern which was it.
And truly my bel^ved the Devil has made many counterfeits of this Conversion;
and cheats one with this, and another with that; and such a craft and artifice
he has, in this mystery of deceits; (that if it were possible) he would
deceive the very Elect. Now that I may cure the damnable mistakes of some, who
think they are converted when they are not, as well as remove the troubles, and
fears of others, that think they are not converted when they are; I shall show
you the nature of conversion, both negatively, or what it is not; and
positively what it is.

We will begin with the Negative.

1. It is not the ta^ing on us the Profession of Christianity. Doubtless
Christianity is more than a name. If we will hear Paul, it lies not in word,
but in power^ 1 Cor. 4. 20. if to cease to be Jews and Pagans, and to p^t on
the Christian Profession had been true Conversion^ (as this is all, that some
would have to be understood by it) who better Christians than they of Sardis
and Laodicea? These were all Christians by profession, and had a name to live,
but because they had but a name, are condemned by Christ, and threatened to be
spewed out, Rev. 3. 1. 16. Are there not many that name the name of the Lord
Jesus, that yet depart not from iniquity? 2 Timothy 2. 19. and profess they know
God, but in works deny him? Tit. 1. 16. And will God receive these for true
converts, because turned to the Christian Religion? What, converts from sin,
when yet they do live in sin? It Is a visible contradiction. Surely if the lamp
of profession would have served the turn, the foolish Virgins had never been
shut out, Mat. 25. 3, 12. We find not only professors but Preachers of Christ,
and Wonder-workers turned off, because evil workers, Mat. 7. 22, 23.

2. It is not the being washed in the laver of Regeneration, or putting on the
badge of Christ in baptism. Many take the press-money, and wear the Livery of
Christ, that yet never stand to their colors, nor follow their leader. Ananias
and Saphira, and Magus were baptized as well as the rest. How fondly do many
mistake here, deceiving, and being deceived! dreaming that effectual grace is
necessarily tied to the external administration of Baptism (which what is it,
but to revive the Popish Tenent, of the Sacraments working grace, ex opere
operato?) and so every Infant should be regenerated not only ( Sacramento
tenus) sacramentally, but really and properly. Hence men do fancy, that being
regenerated already, when baptized, they need no further work.

But if this were so, then all that were baptized (in their infancy) must
necessarily be saved: because the promise of pardon and salvation is made to
conversion and regeneration.

Acts 3. 19. 1 Pet. 3. 4. Mat. 19. 28. Our Calling, Sanctification, (as to the
beginnings of it) on Conversion (which are but the same thing, under different
conceptions and expressions) is but a middle link in the golden chain, fastened
to election at the one end, and glorification at the other, Romans 8. 30. 2 These.
2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. The silver cord may not be broken, nor the connection
between Sanctification and Salvation, between grace and glory, impiously
violated, Mat. 5. 8. if we were indeed begotten again, it is to an inheritance
incorruptible reserved in heaven for us, and the divine power is engaged to
keep us for it, 1 Pet. 1. 5. And if the very regenerate may perish at last in
their sins, we will no more say, that he that is born of God, his seed
remains in him, and that he cannot sin, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. i. e. unto death, nor
that it is impossible to deceive the very elect, Mat. 24. 24.

And indeed were this true, then we need look no farther to see our names
written in Heaven, than only to search the Register, and see whether we were
baptized: then I would keep the certificate of my baptism, as my fairest
evidence for Heaven, and should come by assurance of my gracious state, with a
wet finger; then men should do well to carry but a certificate of their baptism
under the Registers hand, when they died (as the Philosopher would be buried
with the Bishops Bond in his hand which he had given him for receiving his alms
in another world,) and upon sight of this, there were no doubt of their
admission into Heaven.

In short, if there be no more necessary to conversion or regeneration, than to
be turned to the Christian Religion, or to be baptized in infancy, this will
fly directly in the face of that Scripture, Mat. 7. 14. as well as multitudes
of others. For first we will then no more say, strait is the gate and narrow is
the way; for if all that are baptized, and of true Religion are saved, the door
is become heavenly wide, and we will henceforth say, wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads unto life; for if this be true, whole Parishes,
yea whole Countries, and whole Kingdoms may go in a breast, and we will no more
teach, that the righteous is scarcely saved, or that there is need of such a
stir in taking the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, and striving to enter in.
Surely if the way be so easy as many make it, that there is little more
necessary, than to be regenerated in our baptism, and cry God mercy, and be
absolved by the Minister at our end; it is more ado than needs to put our selves
to such running, and seeking, and knocking, and fighting, and wrestling, as the
word requires as necessary to Salvation. Secondly, if this be true, we will no
more say, Few there be that find it; yea we will rather say, Few there be that
miss it: we will no more say, that of the many that are called, but few are
chosen, Mat. 22. 14. and that even of the professing Israel, but a remnant
shall be saved, Romans 11. 5. If this Doctrine be true, we will not say any more
with the Disciples, Who then shall be saved? but rather who then shall not be
saved? Then if a man be called a brother, (that is a Christian) and be
baptized, though he be a fornicator, or a ^ailer, or covetous, or a drunkard,
yet he shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

But the Arminian will reply; such as these though they did receive
regenerating grace in Baptism, are since fallen away, and must be renewed
again, or else they cannot be saved.

I answer, 1. That there is an infallible connection between regeneration and
salvation, as we have already showed, and I itch to be farther evidencing but
that it is against designed brevity. 2. Then men must be born again, which
carrys a great deal of absurdity in its very face. And why may not men be twice
born in nature, as well as in grace? Why not as great an absurdity to be twice
regenerated as to be twice generated? But 3. and above all, This grants however
the thing I contend for, that what ever men do, or pretend to receive in
baptism, if they be sound afterward to be grossly ignorant, or profane, or
formal, without the power of godliness, they must be born again, or else be
shut out of the Ki^gdom of God. So then they must have more to plead for
themselves, than their baptismal regeneration.

Well, in this you see all are agreed, that be it more or less that is received
in baptism, if (when men come to years) they are evidently unsanctified, they
must be renewed again by a through and powerful change, or else they cannot
escape the damnation of Hell. Friends and Brethren be not deceived God is not
mocked; Gal. 6. 7. Whether it be your baptism, or what ever else that you
pretend, I tell you from the living God, that if any of you be a prayerless
person, Ioh. 15. 14. or unclean, or malicious, or covetous, or riotous, or a
scoffer, or a lover of evil company, Prove. 13. 20. in a word, if you are not
holy, strict and self-denying Christians, Heb. 12. 14. Mat. 16. 24. you cannot
be saved, except you be transformed by a further work upon you, and renewed
again by repentance.

Thus I have showed, that it is not enough to evidence a man to be regenerate,
that he has been baptized, effectual grace not necessarily accompanying
baptism, as some have vainly asserted. But I must answer one Objection before I
pass.

Object. The Sacraments do certainly attain their ends, where man does not
ponere obi^em, or lay some obstruction, which infants do not.

Sol. I answer, it is not the end of Baptism to regenerate, 1. Because then
there would be no reason, why it should be confined only to the seed of
Believers, for both the Law of God and the nature of Charity, requires us to
use the means of conversion for all, as far as we can have opportunity. Were
this true, no such Charity as to catch the children of Turks and Heathens, and
baptize them, and dispatch them to Heaven out of hand; like the bloody
Wretches, that made the poor Protestants (to save their lives) to swear they
would come to Mass, and that they would never depart from it, and then put them
forthwith to death, saying, They would hang them while in a good mind. 2.
Because it presupposes regeneration, and therefore cannot be intended to
confer it. In all the express instances in Scripture, we find that baptism does
suppose their repenting, believing, receiving the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 37. Acts.
2. 38. Acts. 10. 47. Mark 16. 16. And to imagine, that baptism was instituted
for an end of which not one of the first subjects was capable (for they were
all adult persons and supposed to have faith and repentance according as they
professed, and their Children were not baptized till after them, in their
right,) were no little absurdity. Were this Doctrine true, baptism would make
Disciples, but we find it does bespeak them such beforehand, Mat. 28. 19. 3.
Because Baptism, being but a Seal of the Covenant cannot convey the benefits,
but according to the tenor of the Covenant, to which it is set.

Now the Covenant is conditional, therefore the Seal conveys conditionally. The
Covenant requires faith and repentance, as the condition of the grand benefits,
pardon, and life, Acts 16. 31. Acts 3. 19. And what the Covenant does not
convey but upon these conditions, the Seal cannot. So that Baptism does
presuppose faith and repentance in the subject, without which it neither does,
nor can convey the saving benefits; otherwise the Seal should convey contrary
to the tenor of the Covenant to which it is affixed.

3. It lies not in a moral righteousness. This exceeds not the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and therefore cannot bring us to the Kingdom of God,
Mat. 5. 20. Paul, while unconverted touching the righteousness which is in the
Law blameless, Phil. 3. 6. None could say black is thine eye. The
self-justiciary could say, I am no Extortioner, Adulterer, Unjust, etc. Luke
18. 11. Thou must have something more than all this to show, or else (however
thou may justify thy self) God will condemn thee. I condemn not morality,
but warn you not to rest here. Piety includes morality, as Christianity does
humanity, and Grace reason. But we must not divide the tables.

4. It consists not in an external conformity to the Rules of Piety It Is too
manifest, men may have a form of godliness, without the power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Men
may pray long, Mat. 23. 14. and fast often, Luke 18. 12. and heav gladly, Mark
6. 20. and be very forward in the service of God, though costly and expensive,
Isa. 1. 11. and yet be strangers to Conversion. They must have more to plead
for themselves, than that they keep their Church, and give alms, and make use
of prayer to prove themselves sound Converts. No outward service but an
hypocrite may do it; even to the giving all his goods to the poor, and his
members to the fire, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

5. It lies not in the chaining up of corruption, by education, humane laws, or
the force of incumbent affliction. It Is too common and easy, to mistake
education for grace; but if this were enough, who a better man than Iehoash:
While Iehojadah his uncle lived he was very forward in Gods service, and calls
upon him to repair the house of the Lord, 2 Kings 12. 2, 7. But here was
nothing more than good education all this while: for when his good Tutor was
taken out of the way, he appears to have been but a wolf chained up; and falls
on to Idolatry.

6. In short, it consists only in illumination, or conviction, in a superficial
change, or partial reformation. An Apostate may be a man enlightened, Heb. 6. 4.
and a Felix tremble under convictions, Acts 24. 25. and a Herod amend many
things, Mar. 6. 20. It Is one thing to have sin alarmed only by convictions, and
another to have it captivated and crucified by converting grace. Many because
they have been troubled in conscience for their sins, think well of their case;
miserably mistaking conviction for Conversion. With these Cain might have
passed for a Convert, who ran up and down the world, like a man distracted
under the rage of a guilty conscience, till with building and business he had
worn it away, Genesis 4. 13, 14. Others think, that because they have given, off
their riotous courses, and are broken off from evil company, or some particular
lust, and reduced to sobriety and civility, they are now no other than real
Converts, forgetting that there is a vast difference between being sanctified,
and civilized: and that many seek to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 13.
24. and are not far from it, Mark. 12. 34. and arrive to the almost of
Christianity, Acts 26. 28. and yet fall short at last. While conscience holds
the whip over them, many will pray, hear, read, and forbear their delightful
sins: but no sooner is this Lion asleep, but they are at their Vomit again. Who
more religious than the Jews, when Gods hand was upon them? Psalm. 78. 34, 35.
but no sooner was the affiction over, but they forgot God, and showed their
Religion to be a fit, ver. 36, 37. Thou may have disgorged a troublesome fin,
that will not sit in thy stomach, and have escaped those gross pollutions of
the world, and yet not have changed thy swinish nature all the while, 2 Pet. 2,
20. 22.

You may cast the lead out of the rude mass, into the more comely proportion of
a plant, and then into the shape of a beast, and thence into the form and
features of a man; but all the while it is but lead still. So a man may pass
through diverse transmutations, from ignorance to knowledge, from profaneness to
civility, thence to a form of Religion; and all this while he is but carnal and
unregenerate, while his nature remains unchanged.

Application. Hear then O sinners, hear as you would live; so come and ^ear;
Isa. 55. 3. Why would you so wilfully deceive your selves, or build your hopes
upon the sand? I know he shall find hard work of it that goes to pluck away
your hopes. It cannot but be ungrateful to you, and truly it is not pleasing to
me. I set about it as a Surgeon, when to cut off a putrified Member from his
well Beloved friend; which of force he must do, but with an aching heart, a
pitiful eye, a trembling hand. But understand me, Brethren, I am only taking
down the ruinous house, (which will otherwise speedily fall of it self, and
bury you in the rubbish) that I may build fair, and strong, and firm for ever.
The hope of the wicked shall perish, if God be true of his word Prove. 11. 7.
And were not thou better, O sinner, to let the word convince thee now in time,
and let go thy false and self-deluding hopes, than to have death too late to
open thine eyes, and find thy self in hell, before thou art aware? I should be
a false and faithless Shepherd, if I should not tell you, that you who have
built your hopes upon no better grounds, than these forementioned, are yet in
your sins. Let your conscience speak? what is it, that you have to plead for
your selves? Is it that you wear Christ's livery? that you bear his name? that
you are of the visible Church? that you have knowledge in the Points of
Religion? are civilized, perform religious duties, are just in your dealings;
have been troubled in conscience for your sins? I tell you from the Lord, these
pleas will never be accepted at God's Bar. All this, though good in it self,
will not prove you converted, and so will not suffice to your salvation. Oh
look about you, and bethink your selves of turning speedily and soundly. Set to
praying, and to reading, and studying your own hearts; rest not, till God has
made thorough work with you; for you must be other men, or else you are lost
men.

But if these be short of Conversion, what shall I say of the profane sinner?
It may be, he will scarce cast his Eyes, or lend his Fars to this discourse.
But if there be any such reading, or within hearing, he must know from the Lord
that made him, that he is far from the Kingdom of God. May a man be civilized
and not converted; where then shall the Drunkard, and Glutton appear? May a man
keep company with the wise Virgins, and yet be shut out? Shall not a companion
of fools much more be destroyed? Prove. 13. 20. May a man be true and just in
his dealing, and yet not be justified of God? What then will become of thee, O
wretched man, whose conscience tells thee thou art false in thy trade, and
false of thy word, and make thy advantage by a lying tongue? If men may be
enlightened, and brought to the performance of holy duties, and yet go down to
perdition, for resting in them, and sitting down on this side of conversion;
what will become of you, O miserable families, that live as without God in the
world? and of you, O wretched sinners, with whom God is scarce in all your
thoughts: that are so ignorant, that you cannot, or so careless, that you will
not pray? O repent and be converted? break off your sins by righteousness; away
to Christ for pardoning and renewing grace: give up your selves to him, to walk
with him in holiness, or else you shall never see God. Oh that you would take
the warnings of God! In his name I once more admonish you. Turn you at my
reproof, Prove. 1. 23. Forsake the foolish, and live, Prove. 9. 6. Be sober,
righteous, godly, Tit. 2. 12. Wash your hands you sinners, purify your hearts
ye double minded, James 4. 8. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1. 16,
17. But if you will on, you must die, Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Chap. II. Showing positively what Conversion is.
I May not leave you with your eyes half open, as he that saw men as trees
walking, Mark 8. 24. The word is profitable for Doctrine, as well as reproof; 2 Timothy 3. 16. And therefore having thus far conducted you by the shelves and
rocks of so many dangerous mistakes, I would guide you at length into the
Harbor of truth.

Conversion then (in short) lies, in the through change both of the heart, and
life. I shall briefly describe it in its nature and causes.

1. The Author, it is the spirit of God; and therefore it is called the
sanctification of the spirit; 2. These. 2. 13. and the renewing of the holy
Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Yet not excluding the other Persons in the Trinity: For the
Apostle ^eacheth us, to bless the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that he
has begotten us again; 1 Pet. 1. 3. and Christ is said to give repentance to
Israel; Acts 5. 31. and is called the everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. and we his
seed, and the Children which God has given him, Heb, 2. 13. Isa. 53. 10. O
blessed Birth! Seven Cities contended for the Birth of Homer: but the whole
Trinity fathers the new creature. Yet is this work principally ascribed to the
Holy Ghost, and so we are said to be born of the Spirit, Job. 3. 8.

So then it is a work above man's power. We are born, not of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man; but of God, John. 1. 13. Never think thou can
convert thy self. If ever thou would be saveingly converted, thou must
despair of doing it in thine own strength, Ier. 13. 18. It is a Resurrection
from the dead, Rev. 20. 5. Ephesians. 2. 1. a new creation, Gal. 6. 15. Ephesians. 2. 10. a
work of absolute omnipotency, Ephesians. 1. 19. Are these out of the reach of humane
power? If thou have no more than thou had by thy first birth, a good nature,
a meek and chaste temper, etc. thou art a very stranger to true Conversion. This
is a supernatural work.

2. The moving Cause is Internal, or External.

The Internal mover is only free grace. Not by works of righteousness which we
have done: But of his own mercy he saved us -- by the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Of his own will begat he us, Iam. 1. We are chosen and called
unto Sanctification, not for it, Ephesians. 1. 4.

God finds nothing in a man to turn his heart, but to turn his stomach: enough
to provoke his loathing, nothing to provoke his love. Look back upon thy self,
O Christian: Take up thy verminous rags: Look upon thy self in thy blood, Ez.
16. 6. O reflect upon thy swinish Nature, thy filthy swill, thy once beloved
mire, 2 Pet. 2. Can thou think without loathing of thy trough and draugh?
Open thy Sepulcher, Mat. 23. 27. Art thou struck almost dead with the hellish
damp? behold thy putrid soul, thy loathsome members. O stench unsufferable, if
thou do but sense thy own putrefaction! Psalm. 14. 3. Behold thy ghastly
visage, they crawling Iusts, thy slime and corruption. Do not thine own Clothes
abhor thee? Job 9. 31. How then should holiness and purity love thee? Be
astonished O Heavens at this, be moved O Earth, Ier. 2. 12. Who but must needs
cry, Grace! Grace! Zech. 4. 7. Hear and blush you Children of the most high; O
you unthankful generation! that free grace is no more in your mouths, in your
thoughts; no more adored, admired, commended by such as you. One would think
you should be nothing but praising and admiring God, whatever you are. How can
you make a shift to forget such grace, or to pass it over with a slight and
seldom mention; What but free grace should move God to love you, unless enmity
could do it, or deformity could do it, unless vomit or rottenness could do it?
How affectionately does Peter lift up his hands? Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy has begotten us again. 1
Pet. 1. 3. How feelingly does Paul magnify the free mercy of God in it? God
who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us; has quickened
us together with Christ; by grace ye are sa^ed, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

The External mover is the merit and intercession of the blessed Jesus. He has
obtained gifts for the rebellious, Psalm. 68. 18. and through him it is, that
God works in us, what is well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13. 21. Through him
are all spiritual blessings, bestowed upon us in Heavenly things, Ephesians. 1. 3. He
interceedeth for the Elect, that believe not, John 17. 20. Every Convert is the
fruit of his travel, Isa. 53. 11. O never was Infant born into the world with
that difficulty, that Christ endured for us. How emphatically he groaneth in
his travel; All the pains that he suffered on his Cross they were our birth
pains, Acts 2. 24. (...), the pulls and throws that Christ endured for us. He
is made sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1 30. He sanctified himself (that is, set
apart himself as a sacrifice) that we may be sanctified, John 17. 19. We are
sanctified through the offering of his Body once for all, Heb. 10. 10.

It Is nothing then without his own bowels, but the merit and intercession of
Christ, that prevails with God to bestow on us converting grace. If thou art a
new creature, thou know to whom thou owe it, to Christ's pangs and
prayers. Hence the natural affection of a believer to Christ. The Foal does not
more naturally run after the Dam, nor the Suckling to the Dugs, than a Believer
to Jesus Christ. And whither else should thou go? If any in the World can
show that for thy heart that Christ can, let them carry it. Does Satan put in,
does the World court thee? Does sin sue for thy heart? Why, were these
crucified for thee? 1 Cor. 1. 13. O Christian, love and serve the Lord whilst
thou have a Being. Do not even the Publicans love those that love them? And
show kindness to them that are kind to them? Mat. 5. 46, 47.

3. The Instrument is either Personal, or Real.

The personal is the Ministry. I have begotten you to Christ through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Christ's Ministers are they that are sent to open men's
eyes, and to turn them to God, Acts 26. 18.

O unthankful World, little do you know what you are doing, while you are
persecuting the Messengers of the Lord. These are they whose business is (under
Christ) to save you. Whom have you reproached and blasphemed? Against whom you
have exalted your voice, and lifted your eyes on high? Isa. 37. 23. These are
the servants of the most high God that show unto you the way of salvation^ Acts
16. 17. and do you thus requite them, O foolish and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. O Sons
of ingratitude, against whom do you sport your selves? against whom make you a
wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Isa. 57. 34. These are the Instruments
that God uses to convert and save you, and do you spit in the face of your
Physicians, and throw your Pilots overboard? Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do.

The Instrument Real is the word: We were begotten by the word of truth: This
is it that enlightens the eyes, that converteth the soul, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. that
makes wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. This is the incorruptible seed, by
which we are born again, 1 Pet. 1. 23. If we are washed, it is by the word, Ephesians.
5. 26. if we are sanctified, it is through the truth, John 17. 17. This
generates faith, and regenerates us, Romans 10. 17. Iam. 1. 18.

O ye Saints, how should you love the word? for by this you have been
converted: O ye sinners, how should you ply the Word? For by this you must be
converted: No other ordinary means but this. You that have felt its renewing
power, make much of it while you live, be for ever thankful for it. Tie it
about your Necks, write it upon your hands, lay it in your bosoms, Prove. 6. 21,
22. When you go let it lead you, when you sleep let it keep you; when you wake
let it talk with you: Say with holy David, I will never forget thy precepts,
for by them have thou quickened me, Psalm. 119. 93. You that are unconverted,
read the word with diligence, flock to it, where powerfully preached, fill the
porches, as the multitude of the impotent, blind, halt, withered, waiting for
the moving of the water, John 5. 3. Pray for the coming of the spirit in the
word. Come off thy knees to the sermon; and come to thy knees from the Sermon.
The seed does not prosper because not watered by prayers and tears, nor covered
by meditation.

4. The final cause is man's salvation, and Gods glory, We are chosen through
sanctification to salvation^ 2 These. 2. 13. Called that we might be glorified,
Romans 8. 30. but especially, that God might be glorified. Isa. 60. 21. that we
should show forth his praises, 1^ Pet. 2. 9, and be fruitful in good works,
Col. 1. 10.

O Christian, do not forget the end of thy Calling, let thy light shine, Mat.
5. 16. Let thy Lamp burn, let thy Fruits be good, and many, and in season,
Psalm. 1. 3. Let all thy designs fall in with Gods, that he may be magnified in
thee, Phil. 1. 20. Why should God repent that he has made thee a Christian, as
in the time of the old world, that he made them men? Genesis 6. 6. Why should
thou be an eyesore in his Orchard, Luke 7. by thy unfruitfulness? or a son that
causes shame, as it were a grief to thy father, and a bitterness to her that
bare thee, Prove. 17, 25. Prove. 10. 5. O let the Womb bless thee that bare thee,
Prove. 17. 21. He that begets a fool does it to his sorrow; and the father of a
fool has no joy.

5. The subject is the elect sinner, and that in all his parts and powers,
members, and mind. Whom God predestinates, them only he calls, Romans 8. 30. None
are drawn to Christ by their calling, nor come to him by believing, but his
Sheep, those whom the father has given him, John 6. 37, 44. Effectual calling
runs parallel with eternal election, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Thou beginnest at the wrong end, if thou disputest first about thine election.
Prove thy Conversion, and then never doubt of thine election. Or can thou not
yet prove it? Set upon a present and thorough turning. Whatever God's purposes
be, (which are secret) I am sure his promises are plain. How desperately do
rebels argue? If I am elected I shall be saved, do what I will; if not, I shall
be damned, do what I can. Perverse sinner, will thou begin where thou should
end? Is not the word before thee? What says it? Repent and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted su^, Acts 3. 19. If you mortify the deeds of the
body, you shall live, Romans 8. 13. Believe and be saved, Acts 16. 31. What can
be plainer? Do not stand still, disputing about thine election, but set to
repenting and believing. Cry to God for converting grace. Revealed things
belong to thee, in these busy thy self. It Is just (as one well said) that they
that will not feed on the plain food of the word, should be choked with the
bones. Whatever Gods purposes be, I am sure his promises be true. Whatever the
decrees of Heaven be, I am sure, that if I repent and believe I shall be saved;
and that if I repent not, I shall be damned. Is not here plain ground for thee,
and will thou yet run upon the rocks?

More particularly, this change of conversion passes throughout in the whole
subject. A carnal person may have some Shreds of good morality, a little near
the list, but he is never good throughout the whole cloth, the whole body of
Holiness and Christianity; Feel him a little further near the ridge, and you
shall see him to be but a deceitful piece. Conversion is not repairing of the
old building, but it takes all down and erects a new structure: it is not the
putting in a patch, or sowing on a list of holiness; but with the true convert,
holiness is woven into all his powers, principles, and practice. The sincere
Christian is quite a new fabric, from the foundation to the Top-stone, all
fire-new. He is a new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. a new creature. All things are become
new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Conversion is a deep work; a heart work, Acts 2. 37. and 6.
14. it turns all upside down, and makes a man be in a new world. It goes
throughout with Men, throughout the Mind, throughout the Members, throughout
the Motions of the whole Life.

1. Throughout the Mind. It makes an universal change within. First, it turns
the balance of the judgment, so that God and his Glory do weigh down all
carnal and worldly interest, Acts 20. 24. Phil. 1. 20. Psalm. 73. 25. It opens
the eye of the mind, and makes the Scales of its Native Ignorance to fall off,
and turns men from darkness to light, Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9. The
man that before saw no danger in his condition, now concludes himself lost and
for ever undone, Acts 2. 37. except renewed by the power of Grace. He that
formerly thought there was little hurt in sin, now comes to see it to be the
chief of evils; he sees the unreasonableness, unrighteousness, the deformity
and filthiness that is in sin, so that he is affrighted with it, loathes it,
dreads it, flies it, and even abhors himself for it, Romans 7. 15. Job 42. 6.
Ezekiel. 36. 31. He that could see little sin in himself, and could find no matter
for confession (as it was said of that learned Ignoramus Bellarmine, who it
seems while he knew so much abroad, was a miserable stranger to himself) that
when he was to be confessed by the Priest, could not remember any thing to
confess; but was fain to run back to the sins of his youth: I say he that could
not find matter for confession, unless it were some few gross and staring
evils, now sin reviveth with him, Romans 7. 9. he sees the rottenness of his
heart, and desperate and deep pollution of his whole nature: he cries, unclean,
unclean, Lev. 13. 45. Lord purge me with Hyssop, wash me thoroughly, create in
me a new heart, Psalm. 51. 2, 7, 10. He sees himself altogether become filthy,
Psalm. 14. 3. corrupt, both root and tree, Mat. 7. 17, 18. he writes unclean
upon all his parts and powers, and performances, Isa. 64. 6. Romans 7. 18. He
discovers the nasty corners that he was never aware of, and sees the blasphemy,
and theft, and murder, and adultery that is in his heart, which before he was
ignorant of. Heretofore he saw no form, nor comeliness in Christ, no beauty that
he should desire him; but now he finds the hid treasure, and will sell all to
buy this field. Christ is the pearl he seeks, sin the puddle he loathes.

Now according to this new light, the man is of another mind, another judgment,
than before he was: Now God is all with him, he has none in Heaven nor in
Earth like him, Psalm. 73. 25. He prefers him truly before all the World; his
favor is his life; the light of his Countenance is more than Corn, or Wine,
and Oil, (the good that he formerly enquired after, and set his heart upon,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7.) Now let all the world be set on one side, and God alone on the
other; Let the Harlot put on her paint, and gallantry, and present her self to
the soul (as when Satan would have tempted our Savior with her) in all the
glory of her Kingdoms, yet the soul will not fall down and worship her; but
will prefer a naked, yea a crucified, persecuted Christ before her, Phil. 3. 8.
1 Cor. 2. 2. Not but that a Hypocrite may come to yield a general assent to
this, that God is the chief good: yea the wiser Heathens (some few of them)
have at last stumbled upon this, but there is a difference between the absolute
and comparative judgment of the understanding. No hypocrite comes so far as to
look upon God, as the most desirable and suitable good to him, and thereupon to
acquiesce in him. This was the Converts voice, The Lord is my portion, says my
soul: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I
desire besides thee. God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever,
Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Lam. 3. 24.

Secondly, it turns the bias of the Will, both as to means and end. (1.) The
intention of the Will is altered, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ier. 31. 33. Esaias 26. 8, 9. Now
the man has new ends and designs. Now he intends God above all, and desires
and designs nothing in all the world so much, as that Christ may be magnified
in him, Phil. 1. 20. He accounts himself more happy in this, than in all that
the earth could yield, that he may be serviceable to Christ, and bring him
glory in his generation. This is the mark he aims a^ that the name of Jesus may
be great in the world, and that all the Sheaves of his Brethren may bow to this
Sheaf.

Reader, do thou view this, and never ask thy self, whether it be thus with
thee? Pause a while, and breath on this great concernment.

2. The Election also is changed, so that he chooses another way, Psalm. 119.
30. He pitches upon God, as his blessedness, and upon Christ as the principal,
and holiness as the subordinate means to bring him to God, John 14. 6. Romans 2.
7. He chooses Jesus for his Lord, Col. 2. 6. He is not merely forced into
Christ by the storm, nor does he take Christ for bare necessity, as the man
begged from the gallows, when he takes the wife rather than the halter: but he
comes off freely in the choice. This match is not made in a fright as with the
terrified conscience or dying sinner; that will seemingly do any thing for
Christ, but does only take Christ, rather than Hell: but he deliberately
resolves, that Christ is his best choice, Phil. 1. 23. and would rather have
him to choose, than all the good of this world, might he enjoy it while he
would. Again, he takes holiness for his path: He does not out of mere necessity
submit to it: but he likes and loves it. I have chosen the way of thy Precepts,
Ps. 119. 173. He takes God's testimonies not as his bondage, but as his
heritage, yea his heritage for ever, v. 111. He counts them not his burden, but
his Bliss, not his cords, but his cordials, 1 John 5. 3. Psalm. 119. 14, 16, 17.
He does not only bear, but take up Christ's yoke: He takes not holiness as the
stomach does the loathed potion, (which it will down with rather than dye) but
as the hungry does his beloved food: Now time passes so sweetly with him (when
he is himself) as that he spends in the exercises of holiness; these are both
his a^^^ent, and element, the desire of his eyes, and the joy of his heart, Job
23. 12. Psalm. 119. 82, 131, 162, 174. Psalm. 63. 5.

Put thy conscience to it as thou go, whether thou art the man; O happy man,
if this be thy case; But see thou be through and impartial in the search.

Thirdly, It turns the bent of the affection, 2 Cor. 7. 11. These run all in a
new channel. The Jordan is now driven back, and the water runs upward against
its natural course.

Christ is his Hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. this is his prize, Phil. 3. 8. here his eye
is, here his heart is. He is contented to cast all over board (as the merchant
in the Storm, ready to perish) so he may but keep this Jewel.

The first of his Desires is, not after gold, but grace, Phil. 3. 13. He
hungers after it, he seeks it as silver, he digs for it as for hid treasure; He
had rather be gracious, than be great; he had rather be the holiest man on
earth, than the most learned, the most famous, most prosperous. While carnal,
he said: Oh if I were but in great esteem, and rolled in wealth, and swim'd in
pleasure, if my debts were paid, and I and mine provided for, then I were a
happy man; but now the tune is changed. Oh, says the convert, if I had but my
corruptions subdued, if I had such measures of grace, such fellowship with God,
though I were poor and despised, I should not care, I should account my self a
blessed man. Reader, is this the language of thy soul?

His Ioys are changed. He rejoices in the ways of God's Testimonies, as much
as in all Riches, Psalm. 119. 14. He delights in the Law of the Lord, wherein
once he had little favor. He has no such Joy, as in the thoughts of Christ,
the fruition of his company, the prosperity of his people.

His Cares are quite altered. He was once set for the World, and any scraps of
by time, nothing (too often) was enough for his soul. Now he gives over caring
for the Asses, and sets his heart on the Kingdom. Now all the cry is, What
shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. 30. His great solicitude is, how to secure his
soul. Oh! how he would bless you, if you could but put him out of doubt of this!

His Fears are not so much of suffering, but of sinning, Heb. 11. 25, 27. Once
he was afraid of nothing so much as the loss of his estate, or esteem, the
pleasure of friends, the frowns of the great: Nothing sounded so terrible to
him as pain, or poverty, or disgrace. Now these are little to him, in
comparison of God's dishonor or displeasure. How warily does he walk, lest he
should tread on a sn^^e? He fears always, he looks before and behind; he has
his eye upon his heart, and is often casting over his shoulder; lest he should
be overtaken with sin, Psalm. 39. 1. Prove. 28. 14. Eccles. 2. 14. It kills his
heart to think of losing Gods favor; this he dreads as his only undoing, Psalm.
51. 11, 12. Psalm. 119. 8. No thought in the world does pinch him, and pain him
so much, as to think of parting with Christ.

His Love runs a new course. My love was crucified (said holy Ignatius) that
is, my Christ. This is my Beloved, says the Spouse, Cant. 5. 18. How does
Augustine often pour his loves upon Christ. O Eternal Blessedness, etc.

He can find no words sweet enough. Let me see thee, O light of mine eyes.
Come, O thou joy of my spirit; Let me behold thee, O the gladness of my heart.
Let me love thee, O life of my soul. Appear unto me, O my great delight, my
sweet comfort, O my God, my life, and the whole glory of my soul. Let me find
thee, O desire of my heart. Let me hold thee, O love of my soul. Let me embrace
thee, O heavenly Bridegroom. Let me possess thee.

His Sorrows have now a new vent, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10. The view of his sins, the
sight of a Christ crucified, that would scarce stir him before, now how much do
they affect his heart?

His Hatred boils, his Anger burns against sin, Psalm. 119. 104. He has no
patience with himself; he calls himself fool, and beast, and thinks any Name
too good for himself, when his indignation is stirred up against sin, Psalm. 73.
22. Prove. 30. 2. He could once swill in it, with too much pleasure, now he
loathes the thought of returning to it, as much as of licking up the filthiest
vomit.

Commune then with thine own heart, and attend the common and general current
of thine affections, whether it be toward God in Christ above all other
concernments. Indeed sudden and strong commotions of the affections and
sensitive part, are oft-times found in Hypocrites, especially where the natural
constitution leads thereunto, and contrariwise, the sanctified themselves are
many times without sensible stirrings of the affections, where the temper is
more ^low, dry and dull. The great inquiry is, whether the judgment and will be
standingly determined for God, above all other good, real or apparent: and if
the affections do sincerely follow their choice, and conduct: though it be not
so strongly and sensibly, as is to be desired, there is no doubt, but the
change is saving.

2. Thorowout the Members. Those that were before the instruments of sin, are
now become the holy utensils of Christ's living Temple, Romans 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3.
16. He that before made, as it were, a baud or a barrel of his body, now
possesses his vessel in sanctification, and honor, in temperance, chastity,
and sobriety, and dedicated to the Lord, 1 These. 4. 4. Gal. 5. 22, 23. 1 Cor.
6. 19, 20.

The Eye that was once a wandering Eye, a wanton Eye, a haughty, a covetous Eye,
is now employed, as Mary, in weeping over her sins, Luke 7. 38. in beholding
God in his works, Psalm. 8. ^. in reading his word, Acts 8. 30. in looking up
and down for objects of Mercy, and opportunities for his service.

The Ear that was once open to Satan's call, and that (like a vitiated Palate)
did relish nothing so much as filthy, as at least frothy talk, and the Fools
laughter, is now bored to the Door of Christ's House and open to his discipline.
It says, Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears. It cries with him, Veniat
verbum Domini, and waits for his word ^s the Rain, and relishes them more than
the appointed food, Job 23. 12. than the Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19.
10.

The Head, that was the Shop of worldly designs, is now filled with other
matters, and set on the study of God's will, Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 119. 97. and
tho Man beats his head, not so much about his gain, but about his duty. The
Thoughts and Cares that now fill his head are principally, how he may please
God, and fly Sin.

His Heart, that was a Sty of filthy lusts, is now become an Altar of incense,
where the fire of divine Love is ever kept in, and whence the daily Sacrifice
of Prayer and Praises, and sweet Incense of holy desires, Ejaculations, and
Anhelations are continually ascending, Psalm. 108. 1. Psalm. 119. 20. Psalm. 139.
17, 18.

The mouth is become a Well of Life, his Tongue as choice Silver, and his Lips
feed many; Now the Salt of Grace has seasoned his Speech and eat out the
Corruption, Col. 4. 6. and cleansed the mouth from his filthy Communication,
Flattery, Boasting, Railing, Lying, Swearing, Backbiting, that once came like
the flashes proceeding from the Hell that was in the Heart, James 3. 6, 7. The
Throat, that was once an open Sepulcher, Romans 3. 13. now sends forth the sweet
Breath of Prayer, and holy Discourse, and the man speaks in another Tongue, in
the Language of Canaan, and is never so well, as when talking of God, and
Christ, and the matters of another World. His Mouth brings forth Wisdom, his
Tongue is become the silver Trumpet of his Makers Praise, his glory, and the
best member that he has.

Now here you shall have the Hypocrite halting. He speaks it may be like an
Angel, but he has a covetous eye, or the gain of unrighteousness in his hand.
Or the hand is white, but his heart is full of rottenness, Mat. 23. 27. full of
unmortified cares, a very Oven of Lust, a Shop of Pride, the Seat of Malice. It
may be with Nebuchadnezzar's Image, he has a Golden Head, a great deal of
Knowledge: but he has Feet of Clay, his Affections are Worldly, he minds
earthly things, and his way and walk are sensual, and carnal, you may trace him
in his secret haunts, and his footsteps will be found in some bypaths of sin.
The work is not thorowout with him.

3. Thorowout the Motions, or the Life, and Practice. The new Man takes a new
course, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. His Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. No sooner
does Christ call by effectual grace, but he straightway becomes a follower of
him, Mat. 4. 20. When God has given the new heart and writ his Law in his
mind, he forthwith walks in his Statutes, and keeps his Judgments, Ezekiel. 36.
26, 27.

Though sin may dwell (God knows a wearisome and unwelcome guest) in him, yet
it has no more Dominion over him, Romans 6. 7, 14. He has his fruit unto
holiness, Romans 6. 22. and though he makes many a blot, yet the Law and Life of
Jesus is that he eyes, as his copy, Psalm. 119. 30. Heb. 12. 2. and hath^^n
unfeigned respect to all God's Commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. He makes Conscience
even of little sins and little duties, Psalm. 119. 113. His very infirmities
which he cannot help, though he would, are his souls burden, and are like the
dust in a man's eye, which though but little, yet are not a little troublesome.
[O man do thou read this, and never turn in upon thy soul by
self-examination?] The sincere Convert is not one man at Church, and another at
home, he is not a Saint on his Knees, and a Cheat in his Shop: he will not
Tithe Mint and Cummin, and neglect Mercy and Judgment, and the weighty matters
of the Law; he does not pretend Piety, and neglect Morality, Mat 23. 14. but he
turns from all his sins, and keeps all Gods Statutes, Ezekiel. 18. 21. though not
perfectly. (except in desire and endeavor) yet sincerely, not allowing himself
in the breach of any, Romans 7. 15. Now he delights in the word, and sets himself
to Prayer, and opens his Hand, (if able) and draws out his Soul to the hungry,
Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 109. 4. Isa. 58. 10. He breaks off his Sins by
Righteousness, and his Iniquities by showing Mercy, to the poor, Dan. 4. 27.
and has a good Conscience, willing in all things to live honestly, Heb. 13.
18. and to keep without offense toward God and Men.

Here again you shall find the unsoundness of many Professors, that take
themselves for good Christians. They are partial in the Law, Mal. 2. 9. and
take up with the cheap and easy duties of Religion, but they go not through with
the work. They are as a Cake not turned, half toasted, and half raw; It may be
you shall have them exact in their words; punctual in their dealings; but then
they do not exercise themselves unto Godliness; and for examining themselves,
and governing their hearts, to this they are strangers. You may have them duly
at the Church; but follow them to their Families, and there you shall see
little but the World minded; or if they have a Road of Family Duties; follow
them to their Closets, and there you shall find their Souls are little looked
after; It may be they seem otherwise religious, but bridle not their Tongues,
and so all their Religion is in vain, Iam. 1. 26. It may be they come up to
Closet and Family Prayer; but follow them to their Shops, and there you shall
find them in a Trade of Lying, or some covert and cleanly way of deceit. Thus
the Hypocrite goes not thorowout in the course of his Obedience.

And thus much for the subject of Conversion. 6. The Terms are either from
which, or to which.

1. The Terms from which we turn in this motion of Conversion, are Sin, Satan,
the World and our own Righteousness.

First, Sin. When a Man is converted, he is for ever out with Sin, yea with all
sin, Psalm. 119. 128. but most of all with his own Sins, and especially with his
Bosom Sin, Psalm. 18. 23. Sin is now the Butt of his indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
he thirsts to bathe his hands in the blood of his Sins. His Sins set a broach
in sorrows. It is Sin that pierces him and wounds him, he feels it like a Thorn
in his side, like a prick in his Eyes, he groans and struggles under it, and
not formally, but feelingly cries out, O wretched Man! he is not impatient of
any burden so much as of his sin, Psalm. 40. 12. If God should give him his
choice, he would choose any affliction, so he might be rid of Sin. He feels it
like the cutting gravel in his Shoes, pricking and paining him as he goes.

Before Conversion he had light thoughts of Sin: he cherished it in his Bosom,
as Uriah his Lamb; he nourished it up, and it grew up together with him; it did
eat as it were of his own Meat, and drank of his own Cup, and lay in his Bosom,
and was to him as a Daughter: but when God opens his Eyes by Conversion, he
throws it away with abhorence, Isa. 30. 22. as a man would a loathsome Toad,
Which in the dark he had hugged fast in his Bosom, and thought it had been some
pretty and harmless bird. When a man is savingly changed, he is not only deeply
convinced of the danger, but defilement of sin: and O how earnest is he with
God to be purified: He loathes himself for his sins, Ezekiel. 36. 31. He runs to
Christ, and casts himself into the Fountain for sin and for uncleanness, Zech.
13. 1. If he fall what a s^ir is there to get all clean again? He flies to the
Word and washes, and rubs, and rinches; laboring to cleanse himself from all
filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit: He abhors his once beloved sin, Psalm. 18.
23. as a cleanly nature does the Trough and Mire, wherein he sees the Swine
delight.

The sound Convert is heartily engaged against sin^ He wrestles with it, he
wars against it. He is too often foiled, but he never yields the Cause, nor
lays down the Weapons; but he will up and to it again, while he has breath in
his body. He will never give quiet possession, he will make no peace; he will
give no quarter, he falls upon it, and fires upon it, and is still disquieting
of it with continual alarms. He can forgive his other Enemies, he can pity
them, and pray for them, Acts 7. 60. but here he is implacable, here is he set
upon revenge: he hunteth, as it were for the precious life; his Eye shall not
pity, his Hand shall not spare, though it be a right Hand or a right Eye. Be
it a gainful Sin most delightful to his Nature, or support to his Esteem with
carnal Friends, yet he will rather throw his gain down the Ke^nel, see hi^
credit fall, or the Flower of pleasure wither in his hand, than he will allow
himself in any known way of sin, Luke 19. 8. He will grant no indulgence, he
will give not toleration, but he draws upon sin wherever he meets it, and
frowns upon it with this unwelcome salute, Have I found thee, O mine Enemy!

Reader, has Conscience been at work, while thou have been looking over these
Lines? Have thou pondered these things in thine heart? Have thou searched the
Book within, to see if these things be so? If not, read it again, and make thy
Conscience speak whether or no it be thus with thee.

Have thou crucified thy Flesh with its affections and lusts; and not only
confessed, but forsaken thy sins; all sin in thy fervent desires, and the
ordinary practice of every deliberate and wilful sin in thy life? If not, thou
art yet unconverted. Does not Conscience fly in thy Face, as thou read, and
tell thee that thou live in a way of lying for thy advantage, that thou usest
deceit in thy Calling, that there is some way of secret wantonness that thou
live in? why then, do not deceive thy self, thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Does not thy unbridled Tongue, thy brutish Intemperance, thy wicked Company,
thy neglect of Prayer, of hearing and reading the Word, now witness against
thee, and say, We are thy works, and we will follow thee? Or if I have not hit
thee right, does not the Bird within tell them, there is such or such a way,
that thou know to be evil, that yet for some carnal respect thou do
tolerate thy self in, and art willing to spare? If this be thy Case, thou art
to this day unregenerate, and must be changed or condemned.

Secondly, Satan. Conversion binds the strong man, spoils his Armor, casts out
his Goods, turns men from the power of Satan unto God, Acts. 26. 18. Before,
the Devil could no sooner hold up his Finger to the Sinner, to call him to his
wicked Company, sinful Games, filthy Delights, but presently he followed, like
an Ox to the Slaughter, and a Fool to the correction of the Stocks, as the Bird
that hastes to the prey, and knows not that it is for his life. No sooner
could Satan bid him lie, but presently he had it upon the top of his Tongue,
Acts 5. 3. no sooner could Satan offer a wanton Object, but he was stung with
lust. The Devil could do more with him than God could. If the Devil say, Away
with these Family Duties, be sure they shall be rarely enough performed in his
house. If the Devil say, Away with this strictness, this preciseness, he will
keep far enough from it: If he tells him there is no need of these Closet
Duties, he shall go from day to day, and scarce perform them. But now he is
converted, he serves another Master, and takes quite another Course, 1 Pet. 4.
4. he goes and comes at Christ's beck, Col. 3. 24. Satan may sometimes catch
his foot in a Trap; but he will no longer be a willing Captive. He watches
against the Snares and Baits of Satan, and studies to be acquainted with his
devices. He is very suspicious of his Plots, and is very jealous, in what comes
athwart him, lest Satan should have some design upon him. He wrestles against
Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6. He entertains the Messenger of Satan as men
do the Messenger of Death. He keeps his Eye upon his Enemy, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and
watches in his duties, lest Satan should put in his Foot.

Thirdly, The World. Before a sound faith, a man is overcome of the World.
Either he bows down to Mammon, or idolizes his reputation, or is a lover of
pleasure more than a lover of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Here Is the root of Man's misery
by the fall; he is turned aside to the Creature instead of God, and gives that
esteem, confidence and affection to the Creature, that is due to him alone,
Romans 1. 25. Mat. 10. 37. Prav. 18. 11. Ier. 17. 5.

O miserable Man! What a deformed Monster has sin made thee? God made thee
little lower than the Angels, Sin little better than the Devils, John 6. 70.
and 8. 44. a Monster that has his Head and Heart, where his Feet should be;
and his Feet kicking against Heaven, and every thing out of place; the World,
that was formed to serve thee, is come to rule thee; and the deceitful Harlot
has bewitched thee with her enchantments, and made thee bow down and serve her.

But converting Grace sets all in order again, and puts God in the Throne, and
the world at his Footstool, Psalm. 73. 25. Christ in the heart, and the World
under Feet, Ephesians. 3. 17. Rev. 12. 1. So Paul, I am crucified to the World, and
the World to me, Gal. 6. 14. Before this change all the cry was, Who will show
us any (worldly) good? but now he sings another tune, Lord list thou up the
light of thy Countenance upon me, and take the Corn and Wine whosoever will, Psalm.
4. 6, 7. Before, his hearts delight and content was in the World; then the Song
was, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have much Goods laid
up for many Years; but now all this is withered, and there is no comeliness that
he should desire it, and he tunes up with the sweet Psalmist of Israel, The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance; the Lines are fallen to me in a fair
place, and I have a goodly heritage. He blesses himself, and boasts himself in
God, Psalm. 34. 2. Lam. 3. 24. nothing else can give him con^ent. He has
written Vanity and Vexation upon all his Worldly Enjoyments, Eccles. 1. 2. and
loss and dung upon all humane Excellencies, Phil. 3. 7, 8. He has life and
immortality now in chase, Romans 2. 7. he trades for grace and glory, and has a
Crown incorruptible in pursuit, 1 Cor. 9. 25. His Heart is set in him to seek
the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. and 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. He first seeks the Kingdom of
Hearen and the Righteousness thereof, and Religion is no longer a matter by the
by with him, but the main of his care, Mat. 6. 33. Psalm 27. 4. Now the gaudy
Idol is become Nehushtan, 2 Kin. 18. 4. and he gets up and treads upon it, as
Diogenes trampling on Plato's hangings, saying Calco, Platonis fastum. Before
the World had the swaying interest with him ^ he would do more for gain than
godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 6. more to pleasure his friend; or his flesh, than to
please the God that made him, and God must stand by till the world were first
served; but now all must stand by; he hates father, and mother, and life, and
all in comparison of Christ, Luke 1. 26.

Well then, pause a little, and look within: Does not this nearly concern thee?
Thou pretendest for Christ; but does not the world sway thee? Do thou not
take more real delight and content in the world, than in him? Do not thou
find thy self better at ease when the World goes to thy mind and thou art
encompassed with carnal delights, than when retired to prayer and meditat on in
thy closet, or attending upon God's Word and Worship? No surer Evidence of an
unconverted State, than to have the things of the World uppermost in our aims,
love, and estimation, John 2. 15. James 4. 4.

With the sound convert Christ has the supremacy. How dear is this name to
him? How precious is its savor, Cant. 1. 3. Psalm. 54. 8. The name of Jesus is
engraven upon his heart, Gal. 4. 19. and lies as a bundle of Myrrh between his
Breasts, Cant. 1. 13, 14. Honor is but air, and laughter is but madness, and
Mammon is fallen like Dagon before the Ark, with hands and head broken off on
the threshold, when once Christ is savingly revealed. Here is the pearl of
great price to the true Convert; here is his treasure, here is his hope, Mat.
13. 44, 45. This is his glory, my beloved is mine, and I am his, Gal. 6. 14.
Cant. 2. 16. O it is sweeter to him to be able to say, Christ is mine, than if
he could say the kingdom is mine, the Indians are mine.

Fourthly, Your own Righteousness: Before Conversion, Man seeks to cover
himself with his own Figleaves, Phil. 3. 6, 7. and to lick himself whole with
his own Duties, Mic. 6. 6, 7. He is apt to trust in himself, Luke 16. 15. and
18. 9. and set up his own Righteousness, and to reckon his Counters for Gold,
and not submit to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. But Conversion changes
his mind; now he casts away his filthy Rags, and counts his own Righteousness,
but a menstruous Cloth: he casts it off, as a Man would the verminous Ta^ters
of a nasty Beggar, Esaias 64. 7. Now he is brought to poverty of Spirit, Mat. 5.
3. complains of and condemns himself, Romans 7. and all his inventory is, Poor,
and miserable, and wretched, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. he sees a world
of iniquity in his holy things, and calls his once idolized Righteousness, but
flesh, I and loss, and dogs-meat, and would not for a thousand Worlds be found
in himself, Phil. 3. 4, 7, 8, 9. His finger is ever upon his sores, Psalm. 51.
3. his sins, his wants. Now he begins to set a high price upon Christ's
Righteousness; he sees the need of a Christ in every duty, to justify his
person, and justify his performances, he cannot live without him; he cannot
pray without him; Christ must go with him, or else he cannot come into the
presence of God; he leans upon the hand of Christ and so he bows himself in the
house of his God. He sets himself down for a lost, undone man without him. His
life is hid in Christ, as the life of man in the heart. He is fixed in Christ,
as the roots of the tree spread in the earth for stability and nutriment.
Before the news of a Christ was a stale and sapless thing; but now how sweet is
a Christ? Augustine could not relish his before so much admired Cicero, because
he could not find the name of Christ; how pathetically cries he, Dulcissime,
amantis. benignis. caris. etc. quando te videbo? quando satiabor de
pulchritudine tua? Medit. c. 37. O most sweet, most loving, most kind, most
dear, most precious, most desired, most lovely, most fair, etc. all in a
breath, when he speaks of and to his Christ; in a word, the voice of the
Convert, is with the Martyr, None but Christ.

2. The terms which, are either ultimate, or Subordinate and Mediate.

The ultimate is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whom the true Convert
takes, as his Allsufficient and eternal blessedness. A Man is never truly
sanctified, till his very heart be in truth set upon God above all things, as
his portion and chief good. These are the natural breathings of a believers
heart: Thou art my portion, Psalm. 119. 57. My soul shall make her boast in the
Lord, Psalm. 34. 2. My expectation is from him, he only is my rock, and my
salvation, he is my defense: in God is my salvation and my glory, the Rock of
my strength, and my Refuge is in God, Psalm 62. 1. 2, 5, 6, 7. Psalm 18. 1, 2.

Would you put it to an issue whether you be converted or not? Now then let thy
soul and all that is within thee attend.

Have thou taken God for thy happiness? Where does the content of thy heart
lie? Whence does thy choicest comfort come in? Come then and with Abraham lift
up thine eyes Eastward, and Westward, and Northward, and Southward, and cast
about thee, what it is, that thou would have in Heaven or Earth to make thee
happy. If God should give thee thy choice as he did to Solomon, or should say
to thee, as Ahashuerus to Esther, What is thy petition, and what is thy
request? and it shall be granted thee, Esther 5. 3. What would thou ask? go
into the gardens of pleasure, and gather all the fragrant flowers from thence;
would these content thee? Go to the treasures of Mammon; suppose thou might
lade thy self while thou would from hence: go to the towers, to the trophies
of honor: what think thou of being a man of renown, and having a name like
the name of the great men of the earth? Would any of this, all this suffice
thee, and make thee count thy self a happy man? If so, then certainly thou art
carnal and unconverted. If not, go farther; w^de into the divine excellencies,
the store of his mercies, the hiding of his power, the deeps unfathomable of
his All Sufficiency: Does this s^it thee best, and please thee most? Do thou
say, It Is good to be here? Mat. 17. 4. Here I will pitch, here I will live and
dye? Will thou let all the world go, rather than this? Then it is well between
God and thee: Happy art thou, O man, happy art thou that ever thou wast born.
If a God can make thee happy, thou must needs be happy; for thou have avouched
the Lord to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Do thou say to Christ, as he to us, Thy
Father shall be my Father, and thy God my God? John 20. 17. Here is the turning
Point. An unsound professor never takes up his rest in God; but converting
grace does the work and so cures the fatal misery of the fall, by turning the
heart from its idols, to the living God, 1 These. 1. 9. Now says the soul, Lord,
whither should I go? Thou have the words of eternal life, John 6. 68. Here he
centers, here he settles. O it is as the entrance of Heaven to him, to see his
interest in God When he discovers this, he says Return unto thy rest, O my
soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm 116. 7. and it is
even ready to breath out Simons Song, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart
in peace, Luke 2. 29. and says with Jacob, when his old heart revived at the
welcome tidings, It is enough, Genesis 45. 28. When he sees he has a God in
Covenant to go to, this is all his salvation and all his desire, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

Man, is this thy case? Have thou experienced this? Why, then blessed art thou
of the Lord. God has been at work with thee, he has laid hold on thy heart by
the power of converting grace, or else thou could never have done this.

The Mediate term of Conversion is either Principal, or less Principal.

The Principal, is Christ, the only Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
His work is to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. he is the way to the Father, John
14. 6. the only plank on which we may escape; the only door by which we may
enter, John 10. 9. Conversion brings over the soul to Christ, to accept of him,
Col. 2. 6. as the only means to life, as the only way, the only name given
under Heaven, Acts 4. 12. He looks not for salvation in any other but him; nor
in any other with him, but throws himself on Christ alone; as one that should
cast himself with spread arms upon the Sea.

Here (says the convinced sinner) here I will venture, and if I perish, I
perish: If I d^^, I will die here. But Lord suffer me not to perish under the
pitiful eyes of thy mercy. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to turn away from
following after thee, Ruth 1. 16. Here I will throw my self, If thou kick me,
if thou kill me, Job 13. 15. I will not go from thy door.

Thus the poor soul does venture on Christ, and resolvedly adhere to him.
Before Conversion the man made light of Christ, minded the Farm, Friends,
Merchandise, more than Christ, M^t. 22. 5. Now Christ is to him as his
necessary food, his daily bread, the life of his heart, the staff of his life,
Phil. 3. 9. His great design is, that Christ may be magnified in him, Phil. 1.
20. His heart once said, as they to the Spouse, What is thy Beloved more than
another? Cant. 5. 9. He found more sweetness in his merry company, wicked
games, earthly delights, than in Christ. He took Religion of a fancy, and the
talk of great enjoyments for an idle dream. But now to him to live, is Christ.
He sets light by all that he accounted precious, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8.

All of Christ is accepted by the sincere Convert. He loves not only the Wages,
but work of Christ. To. 7. 12. not only the benefits, but the burden of Christ:
He is willing not only to tread out the corn, but to draw under the yoke: he
takes up the commands of Christ, yea and Cross of Christ, Mat. 11. Mat. 16. 24.

The unsound closes by the halves with Christ; He is all for the Salvation of
Christ; but he is not for sanctification: he is for the privileges, but
appretiates not the person of Christ. He divides the offices and benefits of
Christ. This is an error in the foundation. Whosoever loves life, let him beware
here. It Is an undoing mistake, of which you have been often warned, and yet
none more common. Jesus is a sweet name, but men love not the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. They will not have him as God offers, To be a Prince and
a Savior, Acts 5. 31. They divide what God has joined, the King and the
Priest. Yea, they will not accept the Salvation of Christ, as he intends it;
they divide it here. Every man's vote is for Salvation from suffering, but they
desire not to be saved from sinning. They would have their lives saved, but
withal they would have their lusts. Yea, many divide here again, they would be
content to have some of their sins destroyed; but they cannot leave the lap of
Dalilah, or divorce the beloved Herodias. They cannot be cruel to the right
eye, or right hand; the Lord must pardon them in this thing, 2 Kings 5. 18. Oh
be infinitely tender here; your souls lie upon it. The sound Convert takes a
whole Christ, and takes him for all intents and purposes, without exceptions,
without limitations, without reserves. He is willing to have Christ, upon his
terms, upon any terms. He is willing of the dominion of Christ, as well as
deliverance by Christ; he says with Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
Acts 9. 6. Any thing Lord. He sends the blank to Christ to set down his own
Conditions, Acts 2. 37. Acts 16. 30.

The less Principal is the Laws, Ordinances, and ways of Christ. The heart that
was once set against these, and could not endure the strictness of these bonds,
the severity of these ways, now falls in love with them, and chooses them as its
rule and guide for ever, Psalm 119. 111, 12.

Four things (I observe) God does work in every sound Convert, with reference
to the Laws and Ways of Christ, by which you may come to know your estates, if
you will be faithful to you own souls; and therefore keep your eyes upon your
hearts, as you go along.

1. The Judgment is brought to approve of them, and subscribe to them, as most
righteous and most reasonable, Psalm 119. 112, 128, 137, 138. The mind is
brought to like the ways of God, and the corrupt prejudices that were once
against them, as unreasonable, and intolerable, are now removed. The
understanding assents to them all, as holy, just, and good, Romans 7. 12. How is
David taken up with these excellencies of Gods Laws? How does he expatiate in
their praises both from their inherent qualities, and admirable effects, Psalm
19. 8, 9, 10, etc.

There is a twofold judgment of the understanding; Iudicium absolutum, and
comparatum. The absolute judgment is, when a man thinks such a course best in
the general, but not for him, or not under the present Circumstances he is in,
pro hic and nunc. Now a godly man's judgment is for the ways of God, and that
not only the absolute, but comparative judgment; he thinks them not only best
in general, but best for him. He looks upon the rules of Religion, not only as
tolerable, but desirable, yea more desirable than gold, fine gold, yea much
fine gold, Psalm 19. 10.

His judgments are setledly determined, that it is best to be holy, that it is
best to be strict, that it is in it self the most eligible course; and that
it is for him the wisest and most rational, and desirable choice. Hear the
godly man's judgment, I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right. I love thy
Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold; I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way, Psalm 119. 127,
128. Mark he did approve of all that God required, and disallowed of all that
he forbad, Righteous O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. Thy testimonies
that thou have commanded are righteous, and very faithful. Thy word is true
from the beginning, and every one of thy righteous judgments endures for ever,
Psalm 119. 86, 160. 162, 163. See how readily and fully he subscribes, he
declares his assent, and consent to it, and all and every thing therein
contained.

2. The desire of the heart is to know the whole mind of Christ, Psalm 119.
124, 125, 169. Psalm 25. 4, 5. He would not have one sin undiscovered, nor be
ignorant of one duty required. It Is the natural and earnest breathing of a
sanctified heart, Lord if there be any way of wickedness in me, do thou
discover it. What I know not teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I will
do it no more. The unsound is willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. loves not to
come to the light, John 3. 20. He is willing to keep such or such a sin; and
therefore is loath to know it to be a sin, and will not let in the light at that
Window. Now the gracious heart is willing to know the whole latitude and
compass of his makers Law, Psalm 119. 18, 19, 27, 33, 64, 66, 68, 78, 108, 124.
He receives with all acceptance the word that convinces him of any duty that
he knew not, or minded not before, or discovered any sin that lay hid before,
Psalm 119. 11.

3. The free and resolved choice of the will is determined for the ways of
Christ, before all the pleasures of sin and prosperitys of the World, Psalm
119. 103, 127, 162. His consent is not extorted by some extremity of anguish,
nor is it only a sudden and hasty resolve, but he is deliberately purposed, and
comes off freely in the choice, Psalm 17. 3. Psalm. 119. 30. True, the Flesh
will rebel, yet the prevailing part of his Will is for Christ's Laws and
Government; so that he takes them not up as his toil or burden, but his bliss.
1 John 5. 3. Psalm 119. 60, 72. When the unsanctified goes in Christ's ways, as
in Chains and Fetters, he does them naturally, Psalm 40. 8. Ier. 31. 33. and
counts Christ's Law his Liberty, Psalm. 119. 32, 45. James 1. 25. He is willing
in the beauties of holiness, Psalm. 110. 3. and has this inseparable Mark.
That he had rather (if he might have his choice) live a strict and holy life
than the most prosperous and flourishing life in the world, 1 Samuel 10. 26.
There went with Saul a band of men whose hearts God had touched. When God
touches the heart of his chosen, they presently follow Christ, Mat. 4. 22. and
(tho drawn) do freely run after him^ Cant. 1. 4. and willingly offer themselves
to the service of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7. 16. seeking him with their whole
desire. 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. Fear has its use; but this is not the main Spring of
Motion with a sanctified heart. Christ keeps not his Subjects in by force, but
is King of a willing people. They are (through his grace) freely resolved for
his service, and do it out of choice, not as slaves, but as the Sun or Spouse,
from a Spring of Love, and a Loyal Mind. In a Word, the Laws of Christ are the
Converts Love, Psalm 119. 159, 163, 167. desire, ver. 5, 20, 40. delight, ver.
77, 92, 103, 111, 143. and continual study, ver. 99, 79. Psalm 1. 2.

4. The bent of his course is directed to keep Gods Statutes, Psalm 119. 4, 8,
167, 168. It Is the daily care of his life to walk with God. He seeks great
things: he has noble designs, though he fall too short. He aims at nothing
less than perfection: he desires it, he reaches after it, he would not rest in
any pitch of grace, till he were quite rid of sin and had perfected holiness,
Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Here the Hypocrites rottenness may be discovered. He desires holiness (as one
well) only as a Bridge to Heaven, and enquires earnestly, what is the least
that will serve his turn; and if he can get but so much as may just bring him
to Heaven, this is all he cares for. But the sound Convert desires holiness for
holiness sake, Psalm 119. 97. Mat. 5. 6. and not only for Heaven's sake. He
would not be satisfied with so much as might save him from Hell; but desires
the highest pitch. Yet desires are not enough. What is thy way and thy course?
Is the drift and scope of thy life altered? Is holiness thy trade, and religion
thy business? Romans 8. 1. Mat. 25. 16. Phil. 1. 20. If not, thou art short of
sound Conversion.

Application. And is this, that we have described, the Conversion that is of
absolute necessity to salvation? Then be informed. 1. That strait is the gate
and narrow the way that leads unto life. 2. That there be but few that find
it. 3. That there is need of a Divine power, savingly to convert a sinner to
Jesus Christ.

Again, then be exhorted, O man that read, to turn in upon thine own self.
What says Conscience? Does it not begin to bite? Does it not twitch thee as
thou go? Is this thy Judgment, and this thy Choice, and this thy way, that
we have described? If so, then it is well. But does not thy heart condemn thee,
and tell thee, there is such a sin thou live in against thy Conscience? Does
it not tell thee, there is such and such a secret way of wickedness, that thou
make no bones of? Such or such a Duty, that thou make no Conscience of?

Does not Conscience carry thee to thy Closet, and tell thee how seldom prayer,
and reading is performed there? Does it not carry thee to thy family, and show
thee the charge of God, and the souls of thy children and servants, that be
neglected there? does not Conscience lead thee to thy Shop, thy Trade, and tell
thee of some mystery of iniquity there? Does it not carry thee to the Ale-Shop,
or to the Sack-Shop, and round thee in thine ear for the loose Company thou
keep there, the precious time thou mis-spendest there, for the talents of
God which thou throwest down this Sink, for thy gaming, and thy swilling, etc.
Does it not carry thee into thy secret Chamber, and read thee a Curtain Lecture?

O Conscience do thy duty. In the name of the living God I command thee
discharge thine office. Lay hold upon this sinner, fall upon him, arrest him
apprehend him, undeceive him. What, will thou flatter and sooth him, while he
lives in his sins? Awake, O Conscience. What meanest thou, O sleeper? What,
have thou never a reproof in thy mouth? What, shall this soul die in his
careless neglect of God and Eternity, and thou altogether hold thy peace? What,
shall he go on still in his trespasses, and yet have peace? O rouse up thy
self, and do thy work. Now let the Preacher in the bosom speak. Cry aloud and
spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet; let not the blood of this Soul be
required at thy hands.

Chap. III. Of the Necessity of Conversion.
IT may be you are ready to say, what means this stir? And are apt to wonder,
why I follow you with such earnestness, still ringing one lesson in your ^ars,
That you should repent and be converted, Acts 3. 19. But I must say unto you,
as Ruth to Naomi, Entreat me not to leave you, nor to turn aside from following
after you, Ruth 1. 16. Were it a matter of indifferency, I would never keep so
much ado. Might you be saved as you be, I would gladly let you alone. But would
you not have me solicitous for you, when I see you ready to perish? As the Lord
lives, before whom I am, I have not the least hopes to see one of your faces
in Heaven, except you be converted. I utterly despair of your salvation, except
you will be prevailed with to turn thoroughly, and give up your selves to God in
holiness and newness of life. Has God said, Except you be born again, you
cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. and yet do you wonder, why your
Ministers do so plainly travel in birth with you? Think it not strange, that I
am earnest with you to follow after holiness, and long to see the Image of God
upon you. Never did any, nor shall any enter into Heaven by any other way but
this. The Conversion described is not an high pitch of some taller Christians,
but every soul, that is saved, passes this universal change.

It was a passage of the Noble Roman, when he was hasting with Corn to the City
in the famine, and the Mariners were loath to set sail in foul weather,
Necessarium est navigar^, non est necessarium vivere. Our voyage is of more
necessity than our lives. What is it that thou do account necessary? Is thy
Bread necessary? Is thy Breath necessary? then thy Conversion is much more
necessary. Indeed this is the ^^num necessarium, the one thing necessary. Thine
Estate is not necessary; thou may sell all for the Pearl of great price, and
yet be a gainer by the purchase, Mat. 13. 46. Thy life is not necessary; thou
may part with it for Christ to infinite advantage. Thine esteem is no^
necessary; thou may be reproached for the name of Christ, and yet happy, yea
much more happy in reproach than in repute, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Mat. 5. 10, 11. But
thy Conversion is necessary, thy damnation lies upon it, and is it not needful
in so important a case to look about thee? Upon this one point depends thy
making, or marring to all eternity.

But I shall more particularly show the necessity of Conversion in five things;
for without this,

1. (...) being is in vai^. Is it not pity thou should be good for nothing,
an unprofitable burden of the earth, a wart, or wen in the Body of the
universe? Thus thou art, whilst unconverted, for thou can not answer the end
of thy Being. Is it not for the divine pleasure thou art and were created? Rev.
4. 11. Did not he make thee for himself? Prove. 16. 4. Art thou a man, and have
thou reason? Why then bethink thy self, why and whence thy Being is. Behold
God's workmanship in thy body, and ask thy self, to what end did God rear this
fabric? Consider the noble faculties or my Heaven-born soul: to what end did
God bestow these excellencies? To no other, than that (...) should please thy
self, and gratify thy senses? Did God send men, like the Swallows, into the
World, only to gather a few sticks and dirt, and build their Nests, and breed
up their young, and then away? The very Heathens could see farther than this.
Art thou so fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. 14. and do thou not
yet think with thy self, surely it was for some noble and raised end?

O man, set thy reason a little in the Chair. Is it not pity such a goodly
fabric should be raised in vain? Verily thou art in vain, except thou art for
God. Better thou had no Being, than not to be for him. Would thou serve thy
end? Thou must repent, and be converted. Without this thou art to no purpose,
yea, to bad purpose.

First, To No purpose. Man unconverted, is like a choice instrument, that has
every string broke, or out of tune. The Spirit of the living God must repair,
and tune it, by the grace of regeneration, and sweetly move it by the power of
actuating grace, or else thy prayers will be but howlings, and all thy services
will make no Music in the Ears of the most Holy, Ephesians. 2. 10. Phil. 2. 13. Hos.
7. 14. Isa. 1. 15. All thy powers and faculties are so corrupt in thy natural
State, that except thou be purged from dead works, thou can not serve the
living God, Heb. 9. 14. Tit. 1. 15.

An unsanctified man cannot work the work of God. 1. He has no skill in it. He
is altogether as unskilful in the work, as in the word of righteousness, Heb.
5. 13. There are great mysteries as well in the practices, as principles of
godliness: now the unregenerate knows not the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 13. 11. 1 Timothy 3. 16. You may as well expect him that never
learned the Alphabet to read, or look for goodly Music on the Lute, from one
that never set his hand to an instrument, as that a natural man should do the
Lord any pleasing service. He must first be taught of God, John 6. 45. taught
to pray, Luke 11. 1. taught to profit, Esaias 48. 17. taught to go, Hos. 11. 3.
or else he will be utterly at a loss.] 2. He has no strength for it. How weak
is his heart? Ezekiel. 16. 30. He is presently tired. The Sabbath what a weariness
is it? Man. 1. 13. He is without strength, Romans 5. 6. yea stark dead in sin,
Ephesians. 2. 5.] 3. He has no mind to it; he desires not the knowledge of God's
ways, Job 21. 14. He does not know them, and he does not care to know them,
Psalm 82. 5. He knows not, neither will he understand.] 4. He has neither due
instruments, nor materials for it. A man may as well hew the Marble without
Tools; or Limn without Colors, or Instruments, or build without Materials, as
perform any acceptable service without the graces of the Spirit, which are both
the Materials, and Instruments in the work. Alms giving is not a service of
God, but of vain glory, unless dealt forth by the hand of divine love. What is
the prayer of the lips without grace in the heart, but the carcass without the
life? What are all our confessions, unless they be the exercises of godly
sorrow and unfeigned repentance? What our petitions, unless animated all along
with holy desires, and faith in divine attributes and promises? What our
praises and thanksgivings, unless from the Love of God, and a holy grattiude,
and sense of God's mercies in the heart? So that a man may as well expect the
trees should speak, or look for Logic from the brutes, or motion from the
dead, as for any service holy and acceptable to God, from the unconverted. When
the tree is evil, how can the fruit be good? Mat. 7. 18.

Secondly, To Bad purpose: The unconverted soul is a very cage of unclean
birds, Rev. 18. 2. a Sepulcher full of Corruption and Rottenness, Mat. 23. 27.
a loathsome carcass full of crawling Worms, and sending forth a hellish and
most noisome favor in the nostrils of God. Psalm 14. 3. O dreadful case! Do
thou not yet see a change to be needful? would it not have grieved one, to have
seen the golden consecrated Vessels of God's Temple turned into quaffing bowls
for drunkenness, and polluted with the Idols service? Dan. 5. 2, 3. Was it such
an abomination to the Jews, when Antiechus set up the picture of a Swine at the
entrance of the temple? How much more abominable then would it have been to
have had the very Temple it self turned into a Stable, or a Stye, and to have
the holy of holies served like the house of Baul; to have the Image of God
taken down, and be turned into a draughthouse? 2 Kings 10. 27. This is the very
case of the unregenerate; all thy Members a^e turned into instruments of
unrighteousness, Romans 6. 19. Servants of Satan; and thy in most powers into
receptacles of uncleanness, Ephesians. 2. 2. Tit. 1. 15. You may see the goodly
guests within, by what comes out. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Theits, False witness, Blasphemies, etc.
This black guard discovers what a Hell there is within.

Oh abuse unsufferable! to see a Heaven-born soul abased to the filthiest
drudgery, to see the glory of Gods creation, the chief of the ways of God, the
Lord of the Universe, a lapping with the prodigal at the trough, or licking up
with greediness the most loathsome vomit. Was it such a lamentation, to see
those that did feed delicately, to sit desolate in the streets? and the
precious Sons of Sion, comparable to fine gold, to be esteemed as earthen
Pitchers; and those that were clothed in Scarlet, to embrace dunghils? Lam. 4.
2, 5. And is it not much more fearful, to see the only thing that has
immortality in this lower world, and carries the stamp of God, to become as a
vessel wherein there is no pleasure, Ier. 22. 28. (which is but the modest
expression of the vessel, men put to the most sordid use.) Oh indignity
intolerable! Better thou were dashed in a thousand pieces, than continue to be
abused to so filthy a service.

II. Not only man, but the whole visible creation is in vain without this.
Beloved, God has made all the visible creatures in heaven and earth for the
service of man, and man only is the spokesman for all the rest. Man is in the
universe, like the tongue in the body, which speaks for all the Members. The
other creatures cannot praise their Maker, but by dumb signs and hints to man,
that he should speak for them. Man is, as it were, the high Priest of Gods
creation, to offer the Sacrifice of praise for all his fellow creatures, Psalm.
147. and 148. and 150. The Lord God expects a tribute of praise from all his
works, Psalm 103. 2. now all the rest do bring in their tribute to man, and pay
it in by his hand. So then, if man be false, and faithless, and selfish, God is
wronged of all, and shall have no active glory from his works.

O dreadful thought to think of! That God should build such a world as this,
and lay out such infinite power, and wisdom, and goodness, thereupon, and all
in vain, and man should be guilty at last, of robbing, and Spoiling him of the
glory of all. O think of this, while thou art unconverted, all the Offices of
the creatures to thee are in vain; thy meat nourishes thee in vain, the Sun
holds forth his light to thee in vain, the Stars, that serve thee in their
courses by their most powerful, though hidden influence, Judges 5. 20. Hos. 2.
21, 22. do it in vain; thy Clothes warm thee in vain; thy Beast carries thee in
vain: in a word, the unwearied labor, and continual travel of the whole
Creation (as to thee) is in vain. The service of all the creatures, that drudge
for thee, and yield forth their strength unto thee (that therewith thou
should serve their Maker) is all but lost labor. Hence the whole Creation
groaneth under the abuse of this unsanctified world. Romans 8. 22. that pervert
them to the service of their lusts, quite contrary to the very end of their
Being.

III. Without this, thy Religion is in vain. Jam. 1. 26. All thy religious
performances will be but lost; for they can neither please God, Romans 8. 8. nor
save thy soul^ 1. Cor. 13. 2, 3. Which are the very ends of Religion. Be thy
services never so specious, yet (...) has no pleasure in them, Isai. 1. 14.
Mal. 1. 10. Is not that man's case dreadful, whose sacrifices are as Murder,
and whose prayers are a breath of abomination? Isa. 66. 3. Prove. 28. 9. Many
under convictions think they will set upon mending, and that a few prayers and
alms will salve all again; but alas, sirs, while your hearts remain
unsanctified, your duties will not pass. How punctual was Iebu? and yet all was
rejected, because his heart was not upright, 2 Kings 10. with Hos. 1. 4. How
blameless was Paul? and yet being unconverted all was but loss. Phil. 3. 6, 7.
Men think they do much in attending God's Service, and are ready to twit him
with it, Isa. 58. 3. Mat. 7. 22. and set him down so much their debtor, when as
(their persons being unsanctified) their duties cannot be accepted.

O soul, do not think, when thy sins pursue thee, a little praying and
reforming thy course will pacify God: thou must begin with thine heart. If that
be not renewed, thou can no more please God, than one that having unspeakably
offended thee, should bring thee his vomit in a dish to pacify thee, or having
fallen into the mire, should think with his loathed embraces to reconcile thee.

It is a great misery to labor in the fire. The Poets could not invent a
worser Hell for Sisyphus than to be getting the Barrel still up the Hill, and
then that it should presently fall down again and renew his labor. God
threatens it, as the greatest of temporal judgments, that they should build and
not inhabit, plant and not gather, and their labors should be eat up by
strangers, Deuteronomy. 28. 30, 38, 39, 41. Is it so great a misery to lose our common
labors, to sow in vain and build in vain? how much more to lose our pains in
Religion to pray and hear, and fast in vain? This is an undoing and eternal
loss. Be not deceived. If thou go on in thy sinful state, though thou
sho^ldst spread forth thine hands, God will hide his eyes; though thou make
many prayers, he will not hear, (...). 1. 15. If a man without skill set about
our work, and mar it in the doing, though he take much pains, we give him but
small thanks. God will be worshipped after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. If a
servant do our work, but quite contrary to our order, he shall have rather
stripes than praise. Gods work must be done according to Gods mind, or he will
not be pleased; and this cannot be, except it be done with a holy heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.

IV. Without this, thy hopes are in vain, Job 8. 12, 13. The Lord has rejected
thy Confidence, Ier. 2. 37.

First, Thy hopes of Comfort here are in vain. It Is not only necessary to the
safety, but comfort of your condition, that you be converted. Without this you
shall not know peace. Isai. 59. 8. Without the fear of God, you cannot have the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31. God speaks peace only to his people,
and to his Saints, Pal. 85. 8. If you have a false peace, continuing in your
sins, it is not of Gods speaking; and then you may guess the Author. Sin is a
real Sickness, Isai. 1. 5. Yea the worst of sickness, it is a Leprosy in the
head, Lev. 13. 44. the plague in the heart, 1 Kings 8. 38. it is brokenness in
the bones, Psalm. 51. 8. it pierc^^h, it (...) i^ racketh, it tormenteth, 1
(...) ^. 10. A man may as well expect ease, when his ^^scases are in their
strength, or his bones out of joint, as true comfort, while in his sins.

O wretched man, that can have no ease in this case, but what comes from the
deadliness of the disease^ You shall have the poor-sick man, saying in his
lightness, he is well; when you see death in his face. He will needs up and
about his business, when the very next step is like to be into the grave. The
unsanctified often see nothing amiss, they think themselves whole, and cry not
out for the Physician, but this shows the danger of the^r Case.

Sin does naturally breed distempers and disturbances in the soul^ ^ What a
continual tempest and commotion is there in a disconte^ted mind? What an eating
evil is inordinate care? What is passion but a very fever in the mind? What is
lust but a fire in the^ bones? What is pride but a deadly tympany; or
covetousness but an un^atiable and unsufferable thirst? Or malice and envy but
venom in the very heart? Spiritual sloth is but a scurvy in the mind, and
carnal security a mortal lethargy; and how can that soul have true comfort that
is under so many diseases? But converting grace cures, and so eases the mind,
and prepares the soul for a settled, standing, immortal peace. Great peace have
they that love thy Commands, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm 119. 165. They
are the ways of wisdom that afford pleasure and peace, Prove. 3. 17. David had
infinitely more pleasure in the word, than in all the delights of his Court,
Psalm. 119. 103, 127. The Conscience cannot be truly pacified, till soundly
purified, Heb. 10. 22. Cursed is that peace, that is maintained in a way of
sin, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. Two sorts of peace are more to be dreaded than all the
troubles in the world; peace with sin, and peace in sin.

Secondly, Thy hopes of Salvation hereafter are in vain: yea, worse than in
vain, they are most injurious to God, most pernicions to thy self; there is
death, desperation, blasphemy in the bowels of this hope. 1. There is death in
it. Thy Confidence shall be rooted out of thy Tabernacles (God will up with it
root and branch) it shall bring thee to the King of Terrors, Job 18. 14. tho
thou may lean upon this house it will not stand. Job 8. 1^. but will prove
like a ruinous building, which when a man trusts to; it falls down about his
ears. 2. There is desperation in it. Where is the Hope of the Hypocrite, when
God takes away his soul? Job 27. 8. Then there is an end for ever of his hope.
Indeed, the hope of the righteous has an end, but then it is not a destructive,
but a perfective end; his hope ends in fruition, others in frustration, Prove.
10. 28. The godly must say at death, It is finished, but the wicked, It is
perished; and in too sad earnest bemoan himself, (as Job in a mistake) Where
now is my hope? He has destroyed me, I am gone, and my hope is removed like a
tree, Job 19. 10. The righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32. When
nature is dying, his hopes are living, when his body is languishing, his hopes
are flourishing; his hope is a living hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. (...) but others a
dying, yea a damning, soul-undoing hope. When a wicked man dies, his
expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes, Prove. 11. 7. It
shall be cut off, and prove like the Spiders Web, Job 8. 14. which he spins out
of his own bowels, but then comes death with the broom, and takes down all, and
so there is an eternal end of his confidence, wherein he trusted. For the eyes
of the wicked shall fail, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the
Ghost, Job 11. 20. Wicked men are settled in their carnal hope, and will not be
beaten out of it. They hold it fast, they will not let it go. Yea but death
will knock off their fingers. Though we cannot undeceive them, death and
judgment will. When death strikes his dart through thy liver, it will let out
thy soul and thy hopes together. The unsanctified have hope only in this life,
1 Cor. 15. 19. and therefore are of all men most miserable. When death comes,
it lets them out into the amazing gulf of endless desperation. 3. There is
blasphemy in it. To hope we shall be saved, though continuing unconverted, is
to hope we shall prove God a liar. He has told you, that so merciful and
pitiful as he is, he will never save you notwithstanding, if you go on in
ignorance, or a course of unrighteousnes, Isa. 27. 11. 1. Cor. 6. 9. In a word,
he he has told you, that whatever you be or do, nothing shall avail you to
Salvation without you be new creatures, Gal. 6. 15. Now to say God is merciful,
and we hope he will save us nevertheless, is to say in effect, we hope God will
not do as he says. We may not set God's Attributes at variance. God is
resolved to glorify mercy, but not with the prejudice of truth, as the
presumptuous sinner will find to his everlasting sorrow.

Object. Why but we hope in Jesus Christ, we put our whole trust in God, and
therefore doubt not but we shall be saved.

Ans. 1. This is not to hope in Christ, but against Christ. To hope to see the
Kingdom of God, without being born again, to hope to find eternal life in the
broad way, is to hope Christ will prove a false Prophet. It Is David's plea, I
hope in thy word, Psalm 119. 81. but this hope is against the word. Show me a
word of Christ for thy hope, that he will save thee in thine ignorance, or
profane neglects of his service, and I will never go to shake thy confidence.

2. God does with abhorrence reject this hope: Those condemned in the Prophet,
went on in their sins, yet (faith the Text) they will lean upon the Lord, Mic.
3. 11. God will not endure to be made a prop to men in their sins: The Lord
rejected those presumptuous sinners, that went on still in their trespasses,
and yet would stay themselves upon the God of Israel, Isa^ 48. 1, 2. as a man
would shake off the briars (as one said well) that cleaves to his garment.

3. If thy hope be any thing worth, it will purify thee from thy sins, 1 John
3. 3. but cursed is that hope, which does cherish men in their sins.

Object. Would you have us to despair?

Answ. You must despair of ever coming to Heaven as you are, Acts 2. 37. that
is, while you remain unconverted. You must despair ever to see the face of God
without holiness, but you must by no means despair of finding mercy, upon your
thorough repentance and conversion; neither may you despair of attaining to
repentance and conversion, in the use of Gods means.

V. Without this, all that Christ has done and suffered will be (as to you) in
vain, John 13. 8. Tit. 2. 14. that is, it will no way avail to your salvation.
Many urge this as a sufficient ground for their hopes, that Christ died for
sinners: but I must tell you, Christ never died to save impenitent and
unconverted sinners (so continuing) 2 Timothy 2. 19. A great Divine was wont, in
his private dealings with souls, to ask two questions, 1. What has Christ done
for you? 2. What has Christ wrought in you? Without the application of the
Spirit in Regeneration, we can have no saving (...) ^^rest in the benefits of
Redempt^on. I tel^ you from the Lord, Christ himself cannot save you, if you go
on in this estate.

I. It were against his trust. The Mediator is the Servant of the Father, Isa.
42. 1. shows his commission from him, acts in his name, and pleads his command
for his justification, John 10. 18, 36. John 6. 38, 40. And God has committed
all things to him, entrusted his own glory, and the salvation of his elect with
him, Mat. 11. 27. John 17. 2. Accordingly, Christ gives his Father an account
of both parts of his trust, before he leaves the world, John 17. 4, 6, 12. Now
Christ should quite cross his Fathers glory, his greatest trust, if he should
save men in their sins; for this were to overturn all his counsels, and to
offer violence to all his attributes.

First, To overturn all his Councels; of which this is the order, that men
should be brought through sanctification, to salvation, 2 These. 2. 13. He has
chosen them, that they should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. They are elected to pardon
and life through sanctification, 1 Pet. 1. 2. If thou can repeal the Law of
Gods immutable counsel, or corrupt him, whom the Father has sealed, to go
directly against his Commission, then and not otherwise, may thou get to
Heaven in this condition. To hope that Christ will save thee while unconverted,
is to hope that Christ will falsify his trust. He never did, nor will save one
soul, but whom the Father has given him in election, and drawn to him in
effectual calling, John 6. 34, 37. Be assured, Christ will save none, in a way
contrary to his Fathers will, John 6. 38.

Secondly, To offer violence to all his attributes. 1. To his Justice. For the
righteousness of Gods judgment lies, in rendering to all according to their
works, Romans 2. 5, 6. Now, should men sow to the flesh, and yet of the Spirit
reap everlasting life, Gal. 6. 7, 8. where were the glory of divine Justice,
since it should be given to the wicked according to the work of the righteous?
2. To his holiness. If God should not only save sinners, but save them in their
sins, his most pure and strict holiness would be exceedingly defaced. The
unsanctified is in the eyes of Gods holiness, worse than a Swine or Viper, Mat.
23. 33. 2 Pet. 2. 23. Now what cleanly nature could endure to have the filthy
Swine Bed and Board with him in his Parlour, or Bedchamber? It would offer the
extremest violence to the infinite purity of the divine nature, to have such
to dwell with him. They cannot stand in his judgment, they cannot abide in his
presence, Psalm 1. 5. Psalm 5. 4, 5. If holy David would not endure such in his
house, no nor in his sight, Psalm 101. 3, 7. shall we think God will? Should he
take men as they be from the Trough to the Table, from the Harlots lips, from
the Stye and Draff, to the glory of Heaven, the world would think God were at
no such a distance from sin, nor had such dislike of it, as we are told he
hath^ they would conclude, God were altogether such a one as themselves (as
they wickedly did, but from the very forbearance of God, Psalm. 50. 21.) 3. To
his Veracity. For God has declared from Heaven. That if any shall say he shall
have peace, though he should go on in the imagination of his heart: his wrath
shall smoke against that man, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. That they (only) that confess,
and forsake their sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. That they that shall
enter into his Hill, must be of clean hands and a pure heart, Psalm. 24. 3, 4.
Where were Gods truth, if notwithstanding all this, he should bring men to
Salvation without Conversion? O desperate sinner, that dare to hope, that
Christ will put the lie upon his Father, and nullify his word to save thee! 4.
To his Wisdom. For this were to throw away the choicest mercies, on them that
would not value them, nor were any way suited to them. First, they would not
value them. The unsanctified sinner puts but little price upon God's great
Salvation, Mat. 22. 5. He sets no more by Christ than the whole by the
Physician, Matthew 9. 12. he prizes not his balm, values not his cure, tramples
upon his blood, Heb. 10. 29. Now would it stand with wisdom, to force pardon
and life, upon them that would give him no thanks for them? Will the all-wise
God (when he has forbidden us to do it) throw his holy things to Dogs, and his
pearls to Swine, that would (as it were) but turn again, and rend him? Mat. 7.
6. This would make mercy to be despised indeed. Wisdom requires that life be
given, in a way suitable to God's honor, and that God provide for the securing
his own glory, as well as Man's felicity. It would be dishonorable to God, to
set his Jewels on the snouts of Swine (continuing such) and to bestow his
choicest riches on them, that have more pleasure in their swill, than the
heavenly delights that he does offer. God should lose the praise and glory of
his grace, if he should cast it away on them, that were not only unworthy, but
unwilling. Secondly, They are no way suited to them. The Divine Wisdom is seen
in suiting things each to other, the means to the end, the object to the
faculty, the quality of the gift to the capacity of the receiver. Now, if
Christ should bring the unregenerate sinner to Heaven, he could take no more
felicity there, than a Beast if you should bring him into a beautiful room, to
the Society of learned men, and a well-furnished Table: when as the poor thing
had much rather be grazing with his fellow-brutes. Alas, what should an
unsanctified creature do in Heaven! He could take no content there, because
nothing suits him. The place does not suit him, he would be but piscis in
arido, quite out of his element, as a Swine in the parlour, or a Fish out of
water. The Company does not suit him. What communion has darkness with light,
corruption with perfection? Filth and rottenness, with glory and immortality?
The employment does not suit him: The Anthems of Heaven fit not his mouth, suit
not his ear. Can thou charm thy Beast with Music? Or will thou bring him to
thy Organ, and expect that he should make thee melody, or keep time with the
skilful Quire? Or had he skill, he would have no will, and so could find no
pleasure, no more than the nauseous stomach in the meat, on which it has newly
surfeited. Spread thy Table with delicates before a languishing Patient, and it
will be but a very offense. Alas, if the poor man think a Sermon long, and say
of a Sabbath, What a weariness is it? Mal. 1. 13. how miserable would he think
it, to be held to it to all eternity? 5. To his immutability, or else to his
Omnisciency, Omnipotency. For this is enacted in the Conclave of Heaven, and
enrolled in the decrees of the Court above, that none but the pure in heart
shall ever see God, Mat. 5. 8. This is laid up with him, and sealed among his
Treasures. Now if Christ, yet, bring any to Heaven unconverted, either he must
get them in without his Fathers knowledge, and then where is his Omnisciency?
Or against his will, and then where were his Omnipotency? Or he must change his
will, and then where were his Immutability?

Sinner, will thou not yet give up thy vain hope of being saved in this
condition? Says Bildad, Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? Or the rocks
moved out of their place? Job 18. 4. May not I, much more reason so with thee?
Shall the Laws of Heaven be reversed for thee? Shall the everlasting
foundations be overturned for thee? Shall Christ put out the eye of his Fathers
Omnisciency, or shorten the arm of his eternal power for thee? Shall divine
Justice be violated for thee? or the brightness of the glory of his holiness be
blemished for thee? Oh the impossibility, absurdity, blasphemy, that is in such
a confidence! To think Christ will ever save thee in this condition, is to make
thy Savior to become a Sinner, and to do more wrong to the infinite Majesty,
than all the wicked on Earth, or Devils in Hell ever did, or could. And yet
will thou not give up such a blasphemous hope?

II. Against his word. We need not say, Who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring
down Christ from above? Or who shall descend into the deep, to bring up Christ
from beneath? The word is nigh us, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Are you agreed that Christ
shall end the controversy? Hear then his own words; Except you be converted
you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 3. You must be
born again, John 3. 7. If I wash thee not, thou have no part in me, John 13. 8.
Repent or perish, Luke 13. 3. One word, one would think, were enough from
Christ; but how often and earnestly does he reiterate it, verily, verily,
verily, verily, except a man, be born again, he shall not see the Kingdom of
God, John 3. 3, 5. Yea, he does not only assert, but prove the necessity of the
new birth, viz. from the fleshliness and filthiness of man's first birth, John
3. 6. by reason of which, man is no more fit for Heaven than the Beast is for
the Chamber of the Kings presence. And will thou yet believe thine own
presumptuous confidence, directly against Christ's words? He must go quite
against the Law of his Kingdom, and Rule of his Judgment, to save thee in this
estate.

III. Against his Oath. He has lifted up his hand to heaven, he has sworn,
that those that remain in unbelief, and know not his ways (that is, are
ignorant of them, or disobedient to them) shall not enter into his rest, Psalm
95. 11. Heb. 3. 18. and will thou not yet believe, O sinner, that he is in
earnest? Can thou hope he will be forsworn for thee? The Covenant of Grace is
confirmed by an Oath, and sealed by blood, Heb. 6. 17. Heb. 9. 16, 18, 19. Mat.
26. 28. But all must be made void, and another way to heaven found out, if thou
be saved, living and dying unsanctified. God is come to his lowest and last
terms with man, and has condescended as far as with honor he could, has set
up his Pillars with a Ne plus ultra. Men cannot be saved, while unconverted,
except they could get another Covenant made, and the whole frame of the Gospel,
(which was established for ever, with such dreadful solemnities) quite altered;
and would not this be a distracted hope?

IV. Against his honor. God will so show his love to the sinner as withal to
show his hatred to sin. Therefore he that names the name of Jesus must depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and deny all ungodliness; and he that has hope of
life by Christ must purify himself as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Tit. 2. 12.
otherwise Christ would be thought a favourer of sin. The Lord Jesus would have
all the world to know, though he pardon sin, he will not protect it. If holy
David shall say, Depart from me all you workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6. 8. and
shall shut the doors against them, Psalm. 101. 7. shall not such much more
expect it from Christ's holiness? Would it be for his honor, to have the dogs
to the table? or to lodge the swine with his children? or to have Abraham's
bosom to be a nest of Vipers.

V. Against his Offices. God has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior,
Acts 5. 31. he should act against both, should he save men in their sins. It is
the Office of a King.

Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos. To be a terrer to evil doers and a
praise to them that do well, Romans 13. 3, 4. He is a Minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath on him that does evil. Now should Christ favor the ungodly
(so continuing) and take those to reign with him that would not that he should
reign over them, Luke 19. 27. this were quite against his Office: He therefore
reigns, that he may put his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. now should
he lay them in his bosom he should cross the end of his regal power. It belongs
to Christ, as a King to subdue the hearts, and slay the lusts of his chosen,
Psalm 45. 5. Psalm. 110. 3. What King would take the rebels, in open hostility,
into his Court? What were this but to betra^ Life, Kingdom, Government and all
together? If Christ be a King, he must have homage, honor, sub^ection, etc.
Man. 1. 6. Now to save men while in their natural enmity, were to obscure his
Dignity, lose his Authority, bring contempt on his Government, and sell his
dear-bought rights for naught.

Again, as Christ should not be a Prince, so neither a Savior, if he should do
this. For his Salvation is spiritual, he is called Jesus, because he saves his
people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. So that should he save them in their sins,
he should be neither Lord nor Jesus. To save men from the punishment, and not
from the power of sin, were to do his work by halves, and be an imperfect
Savior. His Office, as the Deliverer, is to turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
Romans 11. 26. He is sent to bless men in turning them from their iniquities,
Acts 3. 26. to make an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24. so that he should destroy his
own designs, and nullify his offices, to save men abiding in their unconverted
estate.

Application, Arise then, what meanest thou O sleeper? Awake, O secure sinner,
left thou be consumed in thine iniquities, Say as the Lepers, If we sit here we
shall die, 2 Kings 7. 3, 4. Verily, it is not more certain that thou art now
out of hell, than that thou shall speedily be in it, except thou repent and be
converted, there is but this one door for thee to escape by. Arise then, O
sluggard, and shake off thine excuses. How long will thou slumber, and fold
thine hands to sleep? Prove. 6. 10, 11. Will thou lie down in the midst of the
Sea, or sleep on the top of the mast? Prove. 23. 34. There is no remedy; but
thou must either turn or burn. There is an unchangeable necessity of the change
of thy condition, except thou art resolved to abide the worst of it, and try it
out with the Almighty. If thou love thy life, O man, arise and come away.
Methinks I see the Lord Jesus laying the merciful hands of an holy violence
upon thee; methinks he carries it like the Angels to Let, Genesis 19. 15, etc.
Then the Angels ^^^st^ned Lot, saying, Arise, lest thou be consumed, And while
^he ling^ed, the men laid hold upon his hand, the Lord being merciful unto
him, and they brought him without the City and said, Escape for thy life. stay
not in all the plain, escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

Oh how willful will thy destruction be, if thou should yet harden thy self
in thy sinful states But none of you can say, but you have had fair warning.
Yet methinks I cannot tell how to leave you so: It is not enough to me to have
delivered my own soul. What, shall I go away without my errand? Will none of
you arise, and follow me? Have I been all this while speaking to the wind? Have
I been charming the deaf Adder, or allaying the tumbling Ocean with arguments?
Do I speak to the trees or rocks, or to men? to the tombs and monuments of the
dead, or to a living auditory? If you be men, and not senseless stocks, stand
still, and consider whither you are going: if you have the reason and
understanding of men, dare not to run into the flames, and fall into hell with
your eyes open: but bethink your selves, and set to the work of repentance.
What! men, and yet ^un into the pit, when the very beasts will not be forced
in! What, endowed with reason, and yet dally with death and hell, and the
vengeance of the Almighty! Are men herein distinguished from the very brutes,
that they have no foresight of, and care to provide for the things to come; and
will you not hasten your escape from eternal torments? O show your selves men,
and let reason prevail with you; Is it a reasonable thing for you to contend
against the Lord your Maker? Isa. 45. 9. or to harden your selves against his
word? Job 9. 4. as though the strength of Israel would lie? 1. Sam. 15. 29. Is
it reasonable that an understanding creature should lose, yea live quite
against the very end of his Being, and be as a broken pitcher, only fit for the
dunghill? Is it tolerable, that the only thing in this world that God has made
capable of knowing his will, and bringing him glor^, should yet live in
ignorance of his Maker, and be unserviceable to his use; yea should be engaged
against him, and spit his venom in the face of his Creator? Hear, O Heavens,
and give Ear, O earth, and let the Creatures without sense be judge, if this be
reason, that man, when God has nourished and brought him up, should rebel
against him, Isa. 1. 2. Judge in ^our own selves: Is it a reasonable
undertaking, for briars and thorns, to set themselves in Battle against the
devouring sire? Isa. 27. 4. or for the Potsherd of the earth to strive with his
Maker? If you will say, this is not reason, surely the eye of reason, is quite
put out. And if this be reason, then there is no reason that you should
continue as you be, but it is all the reason in the world, you should forthwith
repent and turn.

What shall I say? I could spend my self in this argument. Oh that you would
but hearken to me! that you would pre^ently set upon a new course! will you not
be made clean? When shall it once be? What! will no body be persuaded? Reader,
shall I prevail with thee for one? Will thou sit down and con^ider the
forementioned arguments, and debate it, whether it be not best to turn? Come
and let us reason together. Is it good for thee to be here? Will thou fit
still, till the tide come in upon thee? Is it good for thee to try whether God
will be so good as his word? and to harden thy self in a conceit, that all is
well with thee, while thou remainest unsanctified.

But I know you will not be persuaded, but the greatest part will be as they
have been, and do as they have done. I know the drunkard will to his vomit
again, and the deceiver will to his deceit again, and the lustful wanton to his
dalliance again. Alas, that I must leave you where you were; in your ignorance
or looseness, or in your lifeless formality and customary devotions! however, I
will sit down and bemoan my fruitless labors, and spend some sighs over m^
perishing hearers.

O distracted sinners! What will their end be? What will they do in the day of
visitation? Whither will they flee for help? Where will they leave their glory?
Isa. 10. 3. how powerfully has sin bewitched them? How effectually has the
God of this world blinded them? How strong is their delusion? How uncircumcised
their ears? How obdurate their hearts? Satan has them at his beck. But how
long may I call, and can get no answer? I may dispute with them year after
year, and they will give me the hearing, and that is all. They must and will
have their sins, say what I will. Though I tell them there is death in the Cup,
yet they will take it up. Though I tell them it is the broad way, and ends in
destruction, yet they will go on in it. I warn them, yet cannot win them.
Sometimes I think, the mercies of God will melt them, and his winning
invitations will overcome them: but I find them as they were^: Sometimes, that
the terror of the Lord will persuade them; yet neither will this do it. They
will approve the word, like the Sermon, commend the Preacher; but they will yet
live as they did. They will not deny me, yet they will not obey me. They will
flock to the word of God, and sit before me as his people, and hear my words;
but they will not do them. They value and will plead for Ministers; and I am to
them as the lovely Song of one that has a pleasant voice; yet I cannot get
them to come under Christ's Yoke. They love me, and will be ready to say they
will do any thing for me; but for my life, I cannot persuade them to leave
their sins to forgo their Evil Company, their intemperance, their unjust gains,
etc. I cannot prevail with them, to set up prayer in their Families and
Closets, yet they will promise me, like the forward Son, that said, I go Sir,
but went not. Mat. 21. 30. I cannot persuade them to learn the principles of
Religion, though else they will die without knowledge, Job 36. 12. I tell them
their misery; but they will not believe but ^tis well enough; If I tell them
particularly I fear for such reasons their State is bad, they will judge me
censorious; or if they be at present a little awakened, are quickly lulled
asleep by Satan again, and have lost the sense of all.

Alas for my poor hearers! Must they perish at last by hundreds, when Ministers
would so fain save them? What course shall I use with them that I have not
tried? What shall I do for the daughter of my people? Jer. 9. 7. O Lord God
help. Alas shall I leave them thus? If they will not hear me; yet do thou hear
me. Oh that they might yet live in thy sight! Lord save them, or else they
perish. My heart would melt to see their houses on fire about their ears, when
they were fast asleep in their Beds: and shall not my soul be moved within me,
to see them falling into endless perdition? Lord have compassion, and save them
out of the burning. Put forth thy divine power, and the work will be done: but
as for me I cannot prevail.

Chap. IV. Showing the Marks of the Unconverted.
While we keep aloof in generals there is little fruit to be expected. It is
the hand-fight that does execution. David is not awakened by the Prophet's
hovering at a distance, in parabolical insinuations: he is forced to close with
him, and tell him home, Thou art the man. Few will, in words, deny the
necessity of the new Birth; But they have a self deluding confidence, that the
work is not now to do. And because they know themselves free from that gross
hypocrisy, that does take up Religion merely for a color to deceive others,
and for the covering of wicked designs: they are confident of their sincerity,
and suspect not that more close hypocrisy (where the greatest danger lies) by
which a man deceives his own soul, Iam. 1. 26. But man's deceitful heart is
such a matchless cheat, and self delusion, so reigning and so fatal a disease
that I know not whether be the greater, the difficulty, or the displicency, or
the necessity of the undeceiving work that I am now upon. Alas for my
unconverted hearers! They must be undeceived, or undone; but how shall this be
effected? hic labor, hoc opus est.

Help, O all-searching light, and let thy discerning eye discover the rotten
foundation of the self-deceiver; and lead me, O Lord God, as thou did thy
Prophet, into the Chambers of Imagery, and dig brough the wall of Sinners
hearts, and discover the hidden abominations that are l^king out of (...) the
dark. O^ send thine Angel before me, to (...) ^undry Wards of their hearts, as
thou did before Peter, ^^d make ever the Iron G^^es to fly open of their own
accord. And as Jonathan no sooner tasted the Hon^y, but his eyes were
^^lightned; so grant O Lord, that when the poor decei^ed ^^^ls with whom I have
to do, shall cast their eyes upon the^e lin^s, their minds may be illuminated,
and their consciences convinced and awakened, that they may see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and be converted, and thou ^ayst heal them.

This must be premised, before we proceed to the discovery, that it is most
certain men may have a confident persuasion, that their hearts and states be
good, and yet be unsound. Hear the Truth himself, who shows in Laodicea's case,
that men may be wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and
yet not know it, yea they may be confident they are rich and increased in
grace, Rev. 3. 17. There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, and
yet is not washed from their filthiness, Prove. 30. 12. who better persuaded of
his Case, than Paul, while yet he remained unconverted? Romans 7. 9. So that they
are miserably deceived, that take a strong confidence, for a sufficient
evidence. They that have no better proof, than barely a strong persuasion, that
they are converted, are certainly as yet ^^rangers to Conversion.

But to come more close; as it was said of the adherents of Antichrist, so
here; some of the unconverted carry their Marks in their foreheads, more
openly; and some in their hands, more covertly. The Apostle reckons up some,
upon whom he writes the sentence of Death, as in these dreadful Catalogues,
which I beseech you to attend with all diligence, Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. For this you
know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an
Idolater, has an inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man
deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of
God upon the Children of disobedience. Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and ^ll liars, shall have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters and adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, or extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God? See
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Woe to them that have their names written in these
bed-rolls: such may know, as certainly as if God had told it them from Heaven,
that they are unsanctified, and under an impossibility of being saved in this
condition.

There are then these several sorts, that, past all dispute, are unconverted,
they carry their marks in their foreheads.

1. The unclean. These are ever reckoned among the Goats, and have their Names,
whoever be left out, in all the forementioned Catalogues, Ephesians. 5. 5. Rev. 21.
8. 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10.

2. The Covetous. These are ever branded for Idolaters, and the Doors of the
Kingdom are shut against them by Name, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

3. Drunkards. Not only such as drink away their reason, but withal, yea, above
all, such as are too strong for strong drink. The Lord fills his mouth with
woes against these, and declares them to have no inheritance in the Kingdom of
God, Isa. 5. 11, 12, 22. Gal. 5. 21.

4. Liars. The God that cannot lie has told them that there is no place for
them in his Kingdom, no entrance into his hill; but their portion is with the
Father of lies (whose children they are) in the Lake of burnings, Psalm. 15. 1,
2. Rev. 21. 8, 27. John 8. 44. Prove. 6. 17.

5. Swearers. The end of these, without deep and speedy repentance, is swift
destruction, and most certain and unavoidable condemnation, Iam. 5. 12. Zech.
5. 1, 2, 3.

6. Railers and Back-biters, that love to take up a reproach against their
Neighbor, and fling all the dirt they can in his face, or else wound him
secretly behind his back, Psalm. 15. 1, 3. 1 Cor. 6. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 11.

7. Thieves. Extortioners, Oppressors, that grind the poor, overreach their
Brethren, when they have them at an advantage, these must know, that God is the
avenger of all such, 1 These. 4. 6. Hear, O ye false and purloining and wastful
servants: Hear, O ye deceitful tradesmen, hear your sentence. God will
certainly hold his door against you, and turn your treasures of unrighteousness
into the treasures of wrath, and make your ill-gotten silver and gold, to
torment you like burning Metal in your Bowels, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. James 5. 2, 3.

8. All that do ordinarily live in the profane neglect of God's Worship, that
hear not his word, that call not on his name, that restrain prayer before God,
that mind not their own, nor their families souls, but live without God in the
world, Ioh. 8. 47. Ioh. 15. 4. Psalm. 14. 4. Psalm. 79. 6. Ephesians. 2. 12. and 4. 18.

9. Those that are frequenters and lovers of evil company. God has declared,
he will be the destruction of all such, and that they shall never enter into
the hill of his rest, Prove. 13. 20. Psalm 15. 4. Prove. 9. 6.

10. Scoffers at Religion, that make a scorn of precise walking, and mock at
the messengers and diligent servants of the Lord, and at their holy profession,
and make themselves merry with the weakness and failings of professors: Hear,
ye despisers, hear your dreadful doom, Prove. 19. 29. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Prove. 3.
34.

Sinner, consider diligently, whether thou art not to be found in one of these
ranks; for if this be thy case thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity; for all these do carry their marks in their foreheads, and are
undoubtedly the sons of death.

And if so, the Lord pity our poor congregations; Oh how little a number will
be left, when these ten sorts are set out! Alas on how many doors, on how many
faces must we write, Lord have mercy upon us! Sirs, what shift do you make to
keep up your confidence of your good estate, when God from Heaven declares
against you, and pronounces you in a state of damnation? I would reason with
you, (...) God with them; How can thou say, I am not polluted? Jer. 2. 23.
See thy way in the valley, know what thou have done. Man, is not thy conscience
privy to thy tricks of deceit, to thy chamber pranks, to thy way of lying? Yea,
are not thy friends, thy family, thy neighbors, witnesses to thy profane
neglects of Gods worship, to thy covetous practices, to thy envious and
malicious carriage? may not they point at thee, as thou go, there goes a
gaming Prodigal; there goes a drunken Nabal, a companion of evil-doors; there
goes a Railer, or a Scoffer, a loose-liver? Beloved, God has written it, as
with a Sunbeam, in the book out of which you must be judged, that these are
not the spots of his Children, and that none such (except renewed by converting
grace) shall ever escape the damnation of Hell.

Oh that such of you would now be persuaded t^ repent and turn from all your
transgressions; or else iniquity will be your ruin! Ezekiel. 18. 30. Alas for poor
hardened sinners! Must I leave you at last where you were? Must I leave the
tipler still at the Ale-bench? Must I leave the wanton still at his dalliance?
Must I leave the malicious still in his venom? And the drunkard still at his
vomit? However you must know that you have been warned, and that I am clear of
your blood. And whether men will hear, or whether they will forbear, I will
leave these Scriptures with them, either as thunderbolts to awaken them, or as
searing Irons to harden them to a reprobate sense, Psalm. 68. 21. God shall
wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one, as goes on
still in his trespasses. Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Prove. 1. 24, etc.
Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded, etc. I will mock at your calamity -- when your destruction comes as
a whirlwind.

And now I imagine, many will begin to bless themselves, and think all is well,
because they cannot be spotted with the grosser evils above mentioned. But I
must further tell you, that there are another sort of unsanctified persons,
that carry not their marks in their foreheads, but more secretly and covertly
in their hands. These do frequently deceive themselves and others, and pass for
good Christians, when they are all the while unsound at bottom. Many pass
undiscovered, till death and judgment bring all to light. Those self-deceivers
seem to come even to Heaven's gate with confidence of their admission, and yet
are turned off at last, Mat. 7. 22. Brethren, Beloved, I beseech you deeply to
lay to heart, and firmly to retain this awakening consideration: That
Multitudes miscarry by the hand of some secret sin, that is not only hidden
from others but (for want of observing their own hearts) even from themselves.
A man may be free from open pollutions, and yet die at last by the fatal hand
of some unobserved iniquity. And there be these twelve hidden sins, by which
souls go down by numbers into the Chambers of death. These you must search
carefully for, and take them as black marks (wherever they be found)
discovering a graceless and unconverted estate. And as you love your lives,
read carefully, with a holy jealousy of your selves, lest you should be the
persons concerned.

1. Gross Ignorance. Ah how many poor souls does this sin kill in the dark,
Hos. 4. 6. while they think verily they have good hearts, and are in the ready
way to Heaven! This is the murderer that dispatches thousands in a silent
manner, when (poor hearts!) they suspect nothing, and see not the hand that
mischiefs them. You shall find whatever excuses you have for ignorance, that
it is a soul-undoing, evil, Isa. 27. 11. 2 These. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 3. Ah would it
not have pitted a man's heart to have seen that woeful spectacle, when the poor
Protestants were shut up a multitude together in a Barn, and a Butcher comes
with his inhumane hands warm in humane blood, and leads them one by one
blindfold to a Block, where he slew them (poor Innocents!) one after another
by the scores in cold blood? But how much more should our hearts bleed, to
think of the hundreds in great Congregations, that ignorance does butcher in
secret, and lead them blindfold to the Block? Beware this be none of your
case. Make no pleas for ignorance. If you spare that sin, know that that will
not spare you. Will a man keep a Murderer in his Bosom?

2. Secret reserves in closing with Christ. To forsake all for Christ, to hate
father and mother, yea, and a man's own life for him, this is a hard saying,
Luke 14. 26. Some will do much, but they will not be of the Religion that will
undo them; they never come to be entirely devoted to Christ, nor fully to
resign to him: They must have the sweet sin: They mean to do themselves no
harm: They have secret exceptions, for Life, Liberty, or Estate. Many take
Christ thus hand over head, and never consider his self denying terms, nor cast
up the cost; and this error in the foundation marrs all, and secretly ruins
them for ever, Luke 14. 28. Mat. 13. 21.

3. Formality in Religion. Many stick in the bark, and rest in the outside of
Religion, and in the external performances of holy duties, Mat. 23. 25. and
this oft-times does most effectually deceive men, and does more certainly undo
them, than open looseness; as it was in the Pharisees case, Mat. 23. 31. They
hear, they fast, they pray, they give alms, and therefore will not believe but
their Case is good, Luke 18. 11. whereas resting in the work done, and coming
short of the heart-work, and the inward power and vitals of Religion, they fall
at last into the burning, from the flattering hopes, and confident persuasions
of their being in the ready way to Heaven, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Oh dreadful case;
when a man's Religion shall serve only to harden him, and effectually to delude
and deceive his own Soul^

4. The prevalency of false ends in holy duties. Mat. 23. 25. This was the bane
of the Pharisees. Oh how many a poor soul is undone by this, and drops into
Hell, before he discerns his mistake! He performs good duties, and so thinks
all is well, and perceives not that he is actuated by carnal Motives all the
while. It is too true that even with the truly sanctified, many carnal ends
will oft-times creep in; but they are the matter of his hatred and humiliation,
and never come to be habitually prevalent with him, and to bear the greatest
sway, Romans 14. 7. But now when the main thing that does ordinarily carry a man
out to religious duties, shall be some carnal end, as to satisfy his
conscience, to get the repute of being religious, to be seen of men, to show
his own gifts and parts, to avoid the reproach of a profane and irreligious
person, or the like; this discovers an unsound heart, Hos. 10. 1. Zech. 7. 5,
6. O Christians, if you would avoid self-deceit, see that you mind, not only
your acts, but withal, yea, above all, your ends.

5. Trusting in their own righteousness, Luke 18. 9. This is a soul undoing
mischief, Romans 10. 3. When men do trust in their own righteousness, they do
indeed reject Christ's. Beloved, you had need be watchful on every hand, for,
not only your sins, but your duties, may undo you. It may be you never thought
of this, but so it is, that a man may as certainly miscarry by his seeming
righteousness, and supposed graces, as by gross sins; and that is when a man
does trust to these as his righteousness before God, for the satisfying his
justice, appeasing his wrath, procuring his favor, and obtaining of his own
pardon: for this is to put Christ out of office, and make a Savior of our own
duties and graces. Beware of this, O professors; you are much in duties, but
this one fly will spoil all the Ointment. When you have done most, and best, be
sure to go out of your selves to Christ, reckon your own righteousness but
rags, Psalm 143. 2. Phil. 3. 8. Isa. 64. 6. Neh. 13. 22.

6. A secret enmity against the strictness of Religion. Many moral persons,
punctual in their formal devotion, have yet a bitter enmity against
preciseness, and hate the life and power of Religion, Phil. 3. 6. compared with
Acts 9. 1. They like not this frowardness, nor that men should keep such a stir
in Religion. They condemn the strictness of Religion, as singularity,
indiscretion, and intemperate zeal, and with them a lively Preacher, or lively
Christian, is but a heady fellow. These men love not holiness, as holiness,
(for then they would love the height of holiness) and therefore are undoubtedly
rotten at heart, whatever good opinion they have of themselves.

7. The resting in a certain pitch of Religion. When they have so much as will
save them (as they suppose) they look no further, and so show themselves short
of true Grace, which will ever put men upon aspiring to further perfection.
Phil. 3. 13. Pro. 4. 18.

8. The predominant love of the World. This is the sure evidence of an
unsanctified heart, Mar. 10. 37. 1 John 2. 15.

But how close does this sin lurk oft-times under a fair covert of forward
profession? Luke 8. 14. Yea such a power of deceit is there in this sin, that
many times when every body else can see the man's worldliness, and
covetousness, he cannot see it himself, but has so many colors, and excuses,
and pretenses for his eagerness, on the world, that he does blind his own eyes,
and perish in his self-deceit. How many professors be here, with whom the world
has more of their hearts and affections than Christ? Who mind earthly things,
and thereby are evidently after the flesh, and like to end in destruction? Romans
8. 5. Phil. 3. 19. Yet ask these men; and they will tell you confidently, they
prize Christ above all, God forbid else! and see not their own earthly
mindedness for want of a narrow observation of the workings of their own
hearts. Did they but carefully search, they would quickly find that their
greatest content is in the world, Luke 12. 19. and their greatest care and main
endeavor to get and secure the world, which are the certain discovery of an
unconverted sinner. May the professing part of the world take earnest heed,
that they perish not by the hand of this sin unobserved. Men may be, and often
are kept off from Christ, as effectually, by the inordinate love of lawful
comforts, as by the most unlawful courses, Mat. 22. 5. Luke 14. 18, 19, 20, 24.

9. Reigning Malice and Envy against those that disrespect them, or are
injurious to them, 1 Ioh. 2. 9, 11. O how do many that seem to be religious
remember injuries, and carry grudges, and will return men as good as they
bring, rendering evil for evil, loving to take revenge, wishing evil to them
that wrong them, directly against the rule of the Gospel, the pattern of
Christ, and the nature of God, Romans 12. 14, 17. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. Neh. 9. 17.
Doubtless where this evil is kept boiling in the heart, and is not hated,
resisted, mortified, but does habitually prevail, that person is in the very
gall of bitterness, and in a state of death, Mat. 18. 34, 35. 1 John 3. 14, 15.

Reader, does nothing of this touch thee? Art thou in none of the forementioned
Ranks? O search and search again; take thy heart solemnly to task. Woe unto
thee, if after all thy profession thou should be found under the power of
ignorance, lost in formality, drowned in earthly mindedness, envenomed with
malice, exalted in an opinion of thine own righteousness, levened with
hypocrisy, and carnal ends in Gods service, imbittered against strictness:
this would be a sad discovery that all thy Religion were in vain. But I must
proceed.

10. Unmortified Pride. When men love the praise of men, more than the praise
of God; and set their hearts upon men's esteem^ applause and approbation, it is
most certain they are yet in their sins, and strangers to true conversion. John
12. 43. Gal. 1. 10. When men see not, nor complain of, nor groan under the
pride of their own hearts, it is a sign they are stark dead in sin. O how
secretly does this sin live and reign in many hearts, and they know it not, but
are very strangers to themselves! John 9. 40.

11. The prevailing love of pleasure, 2 Timothy 3. 4. This is a black mark. When
men give the flesh the liberty that it craves, and pamper, and please it, and
do not deny and restrain it: when their great delight is in gratifying their
bellies, and pleasing their senses; whatever appearance they may have of
Religion, all is unsound, Romans 16. 18. Tit. 3. 3. A flesh-pleasing life, cannot
be pleasing to God, They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, and are
careful to cross it, and keep it under, as their enemy, Gal. 5. 24. 1 Cor. 9.
25, 26, 27.

12. Carnal security, or a presumptuous and ungrounded confidence, that their
condition is already good, Rev. 3. 17. Many cry, Peace and safety, when sudden
destruction is coming upon them, 1. These. 5. 3. This was that which kept the
foolish Virgins sleeping, when they should have been working; upon their Beds,
when they should have been at the Markets, Mat. 25. 5, 10. Prove. 10. 5. They
perceived not their want of Oil, till the Bridegroom was come; and while they
went to buy, the door was shut. And O that these foolish Virgins had no
successors! where is the place, yea where is the house almost, where these do
not dwell? Men are willing to cherish in themselves, upon never so slight
grounds, a hope that their condition is good, and so look not out after a
change, and by this means perish in their sins. Are you at peace? Show me upon
what grounds your peace is maintained. Is it a Scripture peace? Can you show
the distinguishing marks of a sound Believer? Can you evidence that you have
something more than any Hypocrite in the world ever had? If not, fear this
peace more than any trouble; and know that a carnal peace does commonly prove
the most mortal enemy of the poor soul; and while it smiles and kisses, and
speaks it fair, does fatally smite it, as it were under the fifth rib.

By this time methinks I hear my Reader crying out with the Disciples, Who then
shall be saved? Set out from among our Congregations all those ten ranks of the
profane, on the one hand, and then besides, take out all these twelve sorts of
close and self-deceiving Hypocrites on the other hand, and tell me then,
whether it be not a remnant that shall be saved. How few will be the Sheep that
shall be left, when all these shall be separated, and set among the Goats? For
my part, of all my numerous hearers, I have no hope to see any of them in
Heaven, that are to be found among these two and twenty sorts that are here
mentioned, except by sound conversion they be brought into another condition.

Application. And now, Conscience, do thine office, Speak out, and speak home
to him that hears or reads these lines. If thou find any of these marks
upon him, thou must pronounce him utterly unclean, Levit. 13. 44. Take not up a
lie into thy mouth: speak not peace to him, to whom God speaks no peace. Let
not lust bribe thee, or self-love, or carnal prejudice blind thee. I subpoena
thee from the Court of Heaven, to come and give in evidence: I require thee in
the name of God to go with me to the search of the suspected house. As thou will answer it at thy peril, give in a true report of the state and case of him
that reads this Book. Conscience, will thou altogether hold thy peace at such
a time as this? I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us the truth.
Mat. 26. 63. Is the man converted, or is he not? Does he allow himself in any
way of sin, or does he not? Does he truly love, and please, and prize, and
delight in God above all other things, or not? Come put it to an issue.

How long shall this soul live at uncertainties? Oh Conscience, bring in thy
verdict. Is this man a new man, or is he not? How do thou find it? Has there
passed a thorough and mighty change upon him, or not? when was the time, where
was the place, or what was the means, by which this thorough change of the new
birth was wrought in his Soul? Speak Conscience: Or if thou can not tell time
and place, can thou show Scripture Evidence, that the work is done? Has the
man been ever taken off from his false bottom, from the false hopes, and false
peace wherein once he trusted? Has he been deeply convinced of sin, and of his
lost and undone condition, and brought out of himself, and off from his sins,
to give up himself entirely to Jesus Christ; Or do thou not find him to this
day under the power of ignorance, or in the mire of profaneness? Have thou not
taken upon him the gains of unrighteousness? Do not thou find him a stranger
to prayer, a neglecter of the word, a lover of this present world? Do not
thou often catch him in a lie? Do not thou find his heart fermented with
malice, or burning with lust, or going after his covetousness? Speak plainly to
all the forementioned particulars: Can thou acquit this man, this woman, from
being any of the two and twenty sorts here described? If he be found with any
of them, set him aside, his portion is not with the Saints. He must be
converted and made a new creature, or else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God.

Beloved, be not your own betrayers, do not deceive your own hearts, nor set
your hands to your own ruin, by a wilful blinding of your selves. Set up a
tribunal in your own breasts. Bring the word and conscience together. To the
Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. Hear what the word concludes of your
estates. O follow the search, till you have found how the case stands. Mistake
here, and perish. And such is the treachery of the Heart, the subtilty of the
Tempter, and the deceitfulness of Sin, Ier. 17. 9. 2 Cor. 11. 3. Heb. 3. 13.
all conspire to flatter and deceive the poor soul, and withal so common and
easy it is to be mistaken, that it is a thousand to one but you will be
deceived, unless you be very careful, and thorough, and impartial in the
enquiry into your spiritual conditions. Oh therefore ply your work, go to the
bottom, search as with candles, weigh you in the balance, come to the Standard
of the Sanctuary, bring your Coin to the Touchstone. You have the archest
Cheats in the world to deal with: a world of counterfeit Coin is going, happy
is he that takes no Counters for Gold. Satan is master of deceits, he can draw
to the life: he is perfect in the trade: there is nothing but he can imitate.
You cannot wish for any Grace, but he can fit you to a hair with a Counterfeit.
Trade wearily, look on every piece you take, be jealous; ^rust not so much as
your own hearts. Run to God to search you, and try you, to examine you, and
prove your reins, Psalm 26. 2. Psalm. 139. 23, 24. If other helps suffice not to
bring all to an issue, but you are still at a loss, open your cases faithfully
to some godly and faithful Minister, Mal. 2. 7. Rest not, till you have put the
business of your eternal welfare out of question, 1 Pet. 2. 10. O searcher of
hearts, put thou this soul upon and help him in the search.

Chap. V. Showing the Miseries of the Unconverted.
SO unspeakably dreadful is the case of every unconverted soul, that I have
sometimes thoughts, if we could but convince men, that they are yet
unregenerate, the work were upon the matter done. But I sadly experience, that
such a spirit of sloth and slumber ( Romans 11. 8. Mat. 13. 15.) possesses the
unsanctified, that though they be convinced that they are yet unconverted; yet
they oft-times carelessly sit still, and what through the avocation of sensual
pleasures, or hurry of worldly business, or noise and clamor of earthly cares,
and lusts, and affections, Luke 8. 14. the voice of Conscience is drowned, and
men go no farther than some cold wishes, and general purposes of repenting and
amending, Acts 24. 25.

It Is therefore of high necessity, that I do not only convince men, that they
are unconverted; but that I also endeavor to bring them to a sense of the
fearful misery of this estate.

But here I find my self aground at first putting forth. What Tongue can tell
the Heirs of Hell sufficiently of their misery, unless 'twere Dives's in that
flame, Luke 16. 24. Where is the ready Writer, whose Pen can^ decipher their
misery, that are without God in the World? Ephesians. 2. 12. This cannot fully be
done, unless we knew the infinite Ocean of that bliss and perfection which is
in that God, which a state of sin does exclude men from. Who knows (says
Moses) the power of thine anger? Psalm. 90. 11. And how shall I tell men, that
which I do not know? Yet so much we know, as one would think would shake the
hear^ of that man, that had the least degree of spiritual life and sense.

But this is yet the more posing difficulty, that I am to speak to them that
are without sense. Alas this is not the least part of man's misery upon him
that he is dead, stark dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1.

Could I bring Paradise into view, or represent the Kingdom of Heaven to as
much advantage as the tempter did the Kingdoms of the world, and all the glory
thereof, to our Savior: or could I uncover the race of the deep and devouring
Gulf of Tophet in all its terrors, and open the Gates of the infernal furnace,
alas he has no eyes to see it, Mat. 13. 14, 15. Could I paint out the Beauties
of Holiness, or glory of the Gospel to the life; or could I bring above-board
the more than Diabolical deformity and ugliness of sin, he can no more judge of
the loveliness and beauty of the one, nor the filthiness and hatefulness of the
other, than the blind man of colors. He is alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in him, because of the blindness of his heart,
Ephesians. 4. 18. He neither does nor can know the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. His eyes cannot be savingly opened, but by
converting grace, Acts 26. 18. he is a Child of darkness, and walks in
darkness, 1 Ioh. 1. 6. yea the light in him is darkness, Mat. 6. 2, 3.

Shall I ring his knell, or read his sentence, or sound in his ear, the
terrible trump of Gods Judgments, that one would think should make both his
ears to tingle, and strike him into Belshazzar's fit, even to appale his
countenance, and loose his joints, and make his knees smite one against
another? Yet alas! he perceives me not, he has no ears to hear. Or shall I
call up all the Daughters of Music, and sing the Song of Moses, and of the
Lamb? yet he will not be stirred. Shall I allure him with the joyful sound, and
the lovely Song, and glad tidings of the Gospel? with the most sweet and
inviting calls, comforts, cordials, of the divine promises, so exceeding great
and precious, it will not affect him savingly, unless I could find him ears,
Mat. 13. 15. as well as tell him the news.

Shall I set before him the feast of fat things, the wine of wisdom, the bread
of God, the tree of life, the hidden Manna? he has no appetite for them, no
mind to them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Mat. 22. 5. Should I press the choicest grapes, the
heavenly clusters of Gospel privileges, and drink to him in the richest wine
of Gods own cellar, yea of his own side, or set before him the delicious
honeycomb of Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 19. 10. alas, he has no taste to discern
them. Shall I invite the dead to arise and eat the banquet of their funerals?
No more can the dead in sin favor the holy food wherewith the Lord of life
has spread his table.

What then shall I do? shall I burn the brimstone of hell at his nostrils? or
shall I open the box of Spikenard, very precious^ that fills the whole house
of this universe with its perfume, Mark. 14. 3. John 12. 8. and hope that the
favor of Christ's ointments, and the smell of his garments will attract him?
Psalm. 45. 8. Alas! dead sinners are like the dumb Idols, they have mouths, but
they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears, but they hear
not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they handle not;
feet have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat,
Psalm. 115. 5, 6, 7. They are destitute of all spiritual sense and motion.

But let me try the sense that does last leave us, and draw the Sword of the
word; yet lay at him while I will; yea though I choose mine arrows out of God's
quiver, and direct them to the heart, nevertheless he feels it not; for how
should he, being past feeling? Ephesians. 4. 19. So that though the wrath of God
abides on him, and the mountainous weight of so many thousand sins, yet he
goes up and down as light as if nothing ^iled him. Romans 7. 9. In a word he
carries a dead soul in a living body, and his flesh is but the walking Coffin
of a corrupted mind, that is twice dead, Jude 12. rotting in the slime and
putrefaction of noisome lusts, Mat. 23. 27, 28.

Which way then shall I come at the miserable objects that I have to deal with;
who shall make the heart of stone to relent? Zech. 11. 12. or the lifeless
Carcass to feel and move? That God that is able of Stones to raise up Children
unto Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. that raises the Dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. and melts the
Mountains, Nah. 1. 5. and strikes water out of the Flints, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. that
loves to work like himself, beyond the hopes and belief of man, that peopleth
his Church with dry bones, and planteth his Orchard with dry sticks; he is able
to do this. Therefore I bow my knee to the most high God, Ephesians. 3. 14. and as
our Savior prayed at the Sepulcher of Lazarus, John 11. 38, 41. and the
Shunamite ran to the man of God for her dead Child, 2 Kings 4. 25. so does your
mourning Minister kneel about your graves, and carry you in the arms of prayer
to that God in whom your help is found.

Oh thou all powerful Jehovah, that workest, and none can let thee, that have
the keys of Hell and of death, pity thou the dead souls that lie here
intombed, and roll away the grave stone, and say as to Lazarus, when already
^tinking, Come forth. Lighten thou this darkness, O inaccessable light, and let
the dayspring from on high, visit the darksome region of the dead to whom I
speak: for thou can open the eyes that death it self has closed. Thou that
formedst the ear, can restore the hearing. Say thou to these ears, Ephphatah,
and they shall be opened. Give thou eyes to see thine excellencies; a taste
that may relish thy sweetness; a scent that may savor thine Ointments, a
feeling that may sense the privilege of thy favor, the burden of thy wrath,
the intolerable weight of unpardoned sin, and give thy servants command to
prophecy to the dry bones, and let the effect of this prophecy, be, as of thy
Prophet, when he prophesied the valley of dry bones into a living Army,
exceeding great, Ezekiel. 37. 1, etc. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and
carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the
valley, which was full of bones; He said unto me, prophecy upon these bones,
and say unto them, O ye dry bones, bear the word of the Lord. Thus says the
Lord God unto these bones, Behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye
shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you,
and cover you with Skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded, and as I
prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came
together bone to his bone. And when I beheld, Lo the sinew^ and the flesh came
up upon them, and covered them above, but there was no breath in them, Then
said he unto me, Prophecy unto the wind, prophecy son of man, and say unto
the wind: Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four winds, O breath and
breathe upon these slain, that they may live, So I prophesied as he commanded
me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their
feet, an exceeding great army.

But I must proceed, as I am able, to unfold that misery, which I confess no
tongue can unfold; no heart can sufficiently comprehend. Know therefore that
while thou art unconverted.

1. The infinite God is engaged against thee.

It is no small part of thy misery, that thou art without God, Ephesians. 2. 12. How
does Micah run crying after the Danites; You have taken away my Gods, and what
have I more? Judges 18. 23, 24. O what a mourning then must thou lift up, that
art without God, that can lay no claim to him, without daring unsurpation!
Thou may say of God, as Sheba of David; We have no part in David, neither
have we inheritance in the Son of Jesse, 2. Sam. 20. 1. How pitiful and
piercing a moan is that of Saul in his extremity; The Philistines are upon me,
and God is departed from me, 1. Sam. 28. 15. Sinners, but what will you do in
the day of your visitation? whither will you flee for help? where will you
leave your glory? Isa. 10. 3. What will you do when the Philistines are upon
you? When the World shall take its eternal leave of you; when you must bid your
friends, houses, lands, farewell for evermore? What will you do then, I say,
that have never a God to go to? Will you call on him, will you cry to him for
help? alas he will not own you, Prove. 1. 28, 29. he will not take any knowledge
of you, but send you packing, with an I never knew you. Mat. 7. 23. They that
know what it is to have a God to go to, a God to live upon, they know a little,
what a fearful misery it is to be without God. This made that holy man cry out,
Let me have a God, or nothing. Let me know him and his will, and what will
please him, and how I may come to enjoy him, or would I had never had an
understanding to know any thing, etc.

But thou art not only without God, but God is against thee, Ezekiel. 5. 8, 9.
Nah. 2. 13. Oh if God would but stand a neuter, though he did not own, nor help
the poor sinner, his case were not so deeply miserable. Though God should give
up the poor creature to the will of all his enemies, to do their worst with
him; though he should deliver him over to the tormentors, Mat. 18. (...) that
devils should tear and torture him to their (...) most power and skill, yet
this were not half ^o fearful. But God will set himself against the sinner; and
believe it, It Is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of the living God,
Heb. 10. 31. There^s no friend like him, no enemy like him. As much as Heaven
is above the Earth, Omnipotency, above Impotency, Infinity above Nullity, so
much more horrible is it to fall into the hands of the living God, than into
the paws^ of Bears or Lions, yea Furies, or Devils. God himself will be thy
tormentor; thy destruction shall come from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.
9. Tophet is deep and large, and the wrath of the Lord, like a river of
Brimstone, does kindle it, Isa. 30. 33. If God be against thee, who shall be
for thee? If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a
man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. Thou, even
thou, art to be feared; and who shall stand in thy fight, when once thou art
angry? Psalm. 76. 7. Who^ is that God, that shall deliver you out of his hands,
Dan. 3. 15. Can Mammon? Riches profit not in the day of Wrath, Prove. 11. 4. Can
Kings, or Warriors? No, they shall cry to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on
us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the
Wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand? Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.

Sinner, methinks this should go like a dagger to thine heart, to know that God
is thine enemy. Oh whither will thou go, where will thou shelter thee? There is
no hope for thee, unless thou lay down thy weapons, and sue out thy pardon, and
get Christ to stand thy friend, and make thy peace. If it were not for this,
thou might go into some howling wilderness, and there pine in sorrow: and
run mad for anguish of heart and horrible despair. But in Christ there is a
possibility of mercy for thee, yea a proffer of mercy to thee, that thou may
have God to be more for thee, than he is now against thee. But if thou will not
forsake thy sins, nor turn thoroughly and to purpose unto God, by a sound
Conversion, the wrath of God, abides on thee, and he proclaims himself to be
against thee, as in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 5. 8. Therefore, thus says the Lord
God, Behold, I, even I, am against thee.

I. His face is against thee. Psalm. 34. 16. The face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them. Woe unto them whom God
shall set his face against. When he did but look upon the host of the
Egyptians, how terrible was the consequence? Ezekiel. 14. 8. I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign, and proverb, and will cut him off
from the midst of my people, and you shall know that I am the Lord. 2. His
heart is against thee: He hates all the workers of iniquity. Man, does not
thine heart tremble to think of thy being an object of God's hatred? Ier. 15.
1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward
this people, cast them out of my sight, Zech. 7. 8. My soul loathed them, and
their souls also abhorred me. 3. His hand is against thee, 1 Samuel 12. 14, 15.
All his Attributes are against thee.

First, His Justice is like a flaming Sword unsheathed against thee. If I whet
my glittering Sword, and my Hand take hold on Judgment, I will render vengeance
to mine adversaries, and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows
drunk with blood, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41. So exact is Justice, that 'twill by no
means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. God will not discharge thee, he will not
hold thee guiltless, Exodus 20. 7. but will require the whole debt in person of
thee; unless thou can make a Scripture claim to Christ and his satisfaction.
When the enlightened Sinner looks on justice, and sees the balance in which he
must be weighed, and the sword by which he must be executed, he feels an
earthquake in his Breast. But Satan keeps this out of sight, and persuades the
Soul while he can, that the Lord is all made up of mercy, and so lulls it
asleep in sin. Divine justice is very strict; it must have satisfaction to the
utmost farthing; it denounces indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish,
to every soul that does evil, Romans 2. 8, 9. It curses every one that
continues not in every thing that is written in the Law to do it, Gal. 3. 10.
The justice of God to the unpardoned sinner, that has a sense of his misery is
more terrible than the sight of the Bailiff or Creditor to the bankrupt debtor,
or than the sight of the Judge, and Bench to the Robber, or of the Irons and
Gibbet to the guilty Murderer. When Justice sits upon life and death, Oh what
dre^dful work does it make with the wretched sinner? Bind him hand and foot,
cast him, into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
Mat. 22. 13. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, Mat. 25. 41.
This is the terrible sentence that Justice pronounces. Why sinner, by this
severe Justice must thou be tried; and as God lives, this killing sentence
shall thou hear, unless thou repent and be converted.

Secondly, The holiness of God is full of antipathy against thee, Psalm. 5. 4,
5. He is not only angry with thee (so he may be with his own Children) but he
has a fixed, rooted, habitual displeasure against thee; he loathes thee, Zech.
11. 8. and what is done by thee, though for substance commanded by him, Isa. 1.
14. Mal. 1. 10. As if a man should give his servant never so good meat to
dress: yet if he should mingle filth, or poison with it, he would not touch it.
Gods Nature is infinitely contrary to sin, and so he cannot but hate a sinner
out of Christ.

O what a misery is this, to be out of the favor, yea, under the hatred of
God! Eccles. 5. 4. Hos. 9. 15. that God can as easily lay aside his Nature, and
cease to be God, as not be contrary to thee and detest thee, except thou be
changed and renewed by grace! O sinner, how dare thou to think of the bright
and radiant Sun of purity, upon the beauties, the glory of holiness that is in
God! The Stars are not pure in his sight; Job 25. 5. He humbles himself to
behold things that are done in Heaven, Psalm. 11. 3. 6. O those light and
sparkling eyes of his! what do they espy in thee? and thou have no interest in
Christ neither, that he should plead for thee. Methinks I should hear thee
crying out astonished, with the Bethshemites, Who shall stand before this holy
Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 20.

Thirdly, The power of God is mounted like a mighty Cannon against thee. The
glory of Gods power is to be displayed, in the wonderful confusion and
destruction of them that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. He will make his
power known in them, Romans 9. 22. How mightily he can torment them: For this end
he raises them up, that he might make his power known, Romans 9. 17. O man, art
thou able to make thy party good with thy Maker? No more than a silly Reed,
against the Cedars of God, or a little Cock-boat against the tumbling Ocean; or
the Childrens Bubbles, against the blustering Winds.

Sinner, the power of Gods anger is against thee, Psalm. 90. 11. and power and
anger together, make fearful work. 'Twere better thou had all the world in
arms against thee, than to have the power of God against thee. There is no
escaping his hands, no breaking his prison: The thunder of his power who can
understand? Job 26. 14. Unhappy man that shall understand it by feeling it! If
he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. He is wise in
heart, and mighty in strength; who has hardened himself against him, and
prospered? Which removes the Mountains and they know it not, which overturneth
them in his anger: Which shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars
thereof tremble: Which commands the Sun, and it rises not, and seals up
the Stars. Behold he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him,
What do thou? If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop
under him, Job 9. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. And art thou a fit match for such an
antagonist? O consider, this you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. 22. Submit to mercy. Let not dust
and stubble stand it out against the Almighty. Set not Briars and Thorns
against him in Battle, lest he go through them, and consume them together; but
tay hold on his strength, that you may make peace with him, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Woe
to him that striveth with his Maker, Isa. 45. 9.

Fourthly, The wisdom of God is set to ruin thee. He has ordained his arrows,
and prepared the instruments of death, and made all things ready, Psalm. 7. 12,
13. His counsels are against thee, to contrive they destruction, Ier. 18. 11.
He laughs in himself, to see how thou will be taken and ensnared in the evil
day, Psalm. 37. 13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that the day is
coming. He sees how thou will come down mightily in a moment; how thou will
wring thine hands, and tear thine hair, and eat thy flesh, and gnash thy teeth
for anguish and astonishment of heart, when thou see thou art fallen
remedilesly into the pit of destruction.

Fifthly, The truth of God is sworn against thee, Psalm. 95. 11. If he be true
and faithful thou must perish, if thou go on, Luke 13. 3. Unless he be false
of his word, thou must die, except thou repent, Ezekiel. 33. 11. If we believe
not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. That is, he
is faithful to his threatenings, as well as promises, and will show his
faithfulness in our confusion, if we believe not. God has told thee, as plain
as it can be spoken, That if he wash thee not, thou have no part in him, John
13. 8. that if thou live after the flesh, thou shall die, Romans 8. 13. That
except thou be converted, thou shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 18. 3. and he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. Beloved,
as the immutable faithfulness of God in his promise and oath, afford Believers
strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18. so they are to Unbelievers, for strong
consternation and confusion. O sinner, tell me, what shift do thou make to
think of all the threatenings of Gods word, that stand upon record against thee?
Do thou believe their truth, or not? If not, thou art a wretched in^idel, and
not a Christian; and therefore give over the name and hopes of a Christian. But
if thou do believe them, O heart of steel that thou have, that can walk up
and down in quiet, when the truth and faithfulness of God is engaged to destroy
thee! That if God Almighty can do it, thou shall surely perish and be damned.
Why man, the whole book of God does testify against thee, while thou remainest
unsanctified: It condemns thee in every leaf, and is to thee, like Ezekiel's
roll, written within and without with lamentation and mourning and woe, Ezekiel.
2. 10. and all this shall surely come upon thee, and overtake thee, Deuteronomy. 28.
15. except thou repent. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one jot, or
tittle of this word shall never pass away, Mat. 5. 18.

Now put all this together, and tell me, if the case of the unconverted be not
deplorably miserable As we read of some persons, that had bound themselves in
an oath, and in a curse to kill Paul: So thou must know, O sinner, to thy
terrer, that all the Attributes of the Infinite God are bound in an oath to
destroy thee, Heb. 3. 28. O man, what will thou do? Whither will thou fly? If
Gods Omnisciency can find thee, thou shall not escape. If the true and faithful
God will save his Oath, perish thou must, except thou believe and repent. If
the Almighty has power to torment thee, thou shall be perfectly miserable in
Soul and Body to all eternity, unless it be prevented by thy speedy Conversion.

II. The whole Creation of God is against thee. The whole Creation ( says
Paul) groaneth and travelleth in pain, Romans 8. 22. But what is it that the
Creation groaneth under? Why, the fearful abuse that it is subject to, in
serving the lusts of unsanctified men. And what is it that the Creation
groaneth for? Why, for freedom and liberty from this abuse; for the creature is
very unwillingly subject to this bondage, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. If the
unreasonable and inanimate creatures had speech and reason, they would cry out
under it, as bondage unsufferable, to be abused by the ungodly, contrary to
their natures, and the ends that the great Creator made them for. It is a
passage of an eminent Divine; The liquor that the drunkard drinks, if it had
reason as well as a man, to know how shamefully it is abused and spoiled, it
would groan in the Barrels against him, it would groan in the Cup against him,
groan in his Throat, in his Belly, against him. It would fly in his Face, if it
could speak. And if God should open the mouths of the Creatures as he did the
mouth of Balaam's Ass, the proud man's garments on his back would groan against
him. There is never a creature but if it had reason to know how it is abused,
till a man be converted, it would groan against him. The land would groan to
bear him, the air would groan to give him breathing, their houses would groan
to lodge them, their beds would groan to ease them, their food to nourish them,
their clothes to cover them, and the creature would groan to give them any help
and comfort, so long as they live in sin against God. Thus far he. Methinks
this should be a terror to an unconverted soul, to think that he is a burden to
the Creation, Luke 13. 7. Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? If the poor
inanimate creatures could but speak, they would say to the ungodly, as Moses to
Israel Must we fetch you water out of the Rock, ye rebe's? Numb. 2. 10. Thy
food would say, Lord, must I nourish such a wretch as this, and yield forth my
strength for him, to dishonor thee withal? No. I will choke him rather, if
thou will give me commission. The very air would say, Lord, must I give this
man breath, to set his tongue against Heaven, and scorn thy people, and vent
his pride and wrath, and filthy communication, and belch our oaths and
blasphemy against thee? No, if thou but say the word, he shall be breathless
for me. His poor Beast would say, Lord, must I carry him upon his wicked
designs? No, I will break his bones, I will end his days rather, if I may have
but leave from thee. A wicked man, the earth groans under him, and Hell groans
for him, till death satisfies both, and unburdens the earth, and stops the
mouth of Hell with him. While the Lord of Hosts is against thee, be sure the
Hosts of the Lord are against thee, and all the creatures as it were up in
arms, till upon a man's convertion, the controversy being taken up between God
and him, he makes a convenant of peace with the creatures for him, Job 5. 22,
23, 24. Hos. 2. 18, 19, 20.

III. The roaring Lion has his full power upon thee, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Thou art
fast in the paw of that Lion, that is greedy to devour; In the snare of the
Devil, led captive by him at (...) will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. This is the spirit that
works in (...) Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. His Drudge^ they are, and
his lusts they do. He is the Ruler of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12.
that is, of ignorant sinners that live in darkness. You pity the poor Indians,
that worship the Devil for their God, but little think that it is your own case.
Why, it is the common misery of all the unsanctified, that the Devil is their
God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Not that they do intend to do him homage and worship, they
will be ready to defy him, and him that should say so by them; but all this
while they serve him, and come and go at his beck, and live under his
government. His servants you are, to whom you yield your selves to obey, Romans
6. 16. Oh how many then will be found the real servants of the Devil, that take
themselves for no other than the Children of God? he can no sooner offer a
sinful delight, or opportunity for your unlawful advantage, but you embrace
it. If he suggest a lie, or prompt you to revenge, you readily obey. If he
forbid you to read, or pray, you hearken to him, and therefore his servants you
are. Indeed he lies behind the curtain, he acts in the dark, and sinners ^ee
not who sets them on work; but all the while he leads them in a string.
Doubtless the L^ar intends not a service to Satan, but his own advantage: yet
it is he that stands in the corner unobserved, and puts the thing into his
heart, Acts 5. 3. John 8. 44. Questionless Judas when he sold his Master for
money, and the Chaldea^s and Sabeans when they plundered Job, intended not to do
the Devil a pleasure, but to satisfy their own covetous thirst: yet 'twas he
that actuated them in their wickedness, John 13. 27. Job 1. 12, 15, 17. Men may
be very slaves and common drudges for the Devil, and never know it; nay they
may please themselves in the thoughts of a happy liberty, 2 Pet. 2. 19.

Art thou yet in ignorance, and not turned from darkness to light? Why thou art
under the power of Satan Acts ^6. 18. Do thou live in the ordinary and wilful
practice of any known sin? Know that thou art of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Do
thou live in stri^^ or envy, or malice? verily he is thy Father, Io^. 8. 40.
41. O dreadful case! However Satan (...) his slaves with diverse pleasures, Tit.
3. 5. (...) to (...) them into endless perdition. (...) with the ^pple in his
Mouth, (...) thou see not the deadly sting (...) that is now thy temprer will
be one (...) could b^^ give thee to see how (...) how filthy (...) thou
gratified, all whose pleasure is to set thee on work to make thy perdition and
damnation sure, and to hear the (...) hotter and hotter, in which thou must
burn for millions of mi^^ions of Ages.

IV. The (...) like a Mountain upon thee. Poor Soul ^ Thou feel it not, but
this is that which seals thy misery upon thee. While unconverted, none of thy
sins are blotted out, Acts 3. 19. They are all upon the score against thee:
Regeneration and remission are never separated; the unsanctified are
unquestionably unjustified and unpardoned, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 9.
14. Beloved, it is a fearful thing to be in debt, but above all in God's debt:
for there is no arrest so formidable as his; no prison so horrible as his. Look
upon an enlightened sinner, who feels the weight of his own guilt, oh how
frightful are his looks, how fearful are his complaints? His comforts are
turned into Wormwood, and his Moisture into Drought, and his sleep departs
from his eyes. He is a terror to himself and all that are about him, and is
ready to envy the very stones that lie in the Street, because they are
senseless, and feel not his misery; and wishes he had been a Dog, or a Toad, or
a Serpent rather than a man, because then death, had put an end to his misery,
whereas now it will be but the beginning of that which will know no ending.

How light soever you may make of it now, you will one day find the guilt of
unpardoned sin to be a heavy burden. This is a Millstone that whosoever falls
upon it shall be broken, but upon whomsoever it shall fall it shall grind him
to powder, Mat. 21. 44. What work did it make with our Savior? It pressed the
very blood (to a wonder) out of his veins, and broke all his bones: and if it
did this in the green tree, what will it do in the dry?

Oh think of thy case in time. Can thou think of that threat without
trembling, Ye shall die in your sins, John 8. 24. Oh better were it for thee to
die in a Goal, die in a Ditch, in a Dungeon, than die in thy Sins. If death, as
it will take away all thy other Comforts, would take away thy sins too, it were
some ^itigation. But thy sins will follow thee, when thy friends leave thee,
and all worldly enjoyments shake hands with thee: Thy sins will not die with
thee, 2 Cor. 5^ 10. Rev. 20. 12. as a prisoners other debts will; but they will
to judgment with thee, there to be thine accusers, and they will to Hell with
thee, there to be thy tormentors. Better to have so many fiends and furies
about thee, than thy sins to fall upon thee and fasten in thee. Oh the work
that these will make thee! O look over thy debts in time! How much art thou in
the Books of every one of Gods Laws? How is every one of Gods Commandments
ready to arrest thee, and take thee by the throat for innumerable Bonds that it
has upon thee? What will thou do then, when they shall altogether lay in
against thee? Hold open the eyes of conscience to consider this, that thou
may despair of thy self, and be driven to Christ, and fly for refuge, to lay
hold upon the hope that is set before thee, Heb. 6. 18.

V. Thy raging l^sts do miserably enslave thee. While unconverted thou art a
very servant to sin, it reigns over thee, and holds thee under its dominion,
till thou art brought within the bond of Gods Covenant, John 8. 34. 36. Tit. 3.
3. Romans 6. 12, 14. Romans 6. 16, 17. Now there is no such Tyrant as sin. Oh the
filthy and fearful work, that it does engage its servants in! would it not
pierce a man's heart to see a company of poor creatures drudging and toiling,
and all to carry together faggots and fuel for their own burning? Why, this is
the employment of sins drudges. Even while they bless themselves in their
unrighteous gains; while they sing and swill in pleasures, they are but
treasuring up wrath and vengeance for their eternal burnings; they are but
laying in Powder and Bullers, and adding to the Pile of T^pher, and slinging in
Oil to make the flame rage the fiercer. Who would serve such a Master, whose
work is drudgery, and whose wages is death? Romans 6. 23.

What a woeful spectacle was that poor wretch possessed with the legion? Would
it not have pitied thine heart to have seen him among the Tombs, cutting and
wounding of himself? Mark. 5. 5. This is thy case, such is thy work. Every
stroke is a thrust at thine heart, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Conscience indeed is now
asleep; but when death and judgment shall bring thee to thy senses, then will thou feel the raging smart and anguish of every wound. The convinced sinner is
a sensible instance of the miserable bondage of sin. Conscience flies upon him,
and tells him what the end of these things will be; and yet such a slave is he
to his lusts, that on he must, though he see it will be his endless perdition;
and when the temptation comes, lust gets the bit in his mouth, breaks all the
cords of his vows and promises, and carries him headlong to his own destruction.

VI. The furnace of eternal vengeance is heated ready for thee, Isa. 30. 33.
Hell and destruction open their mouths upon thee, they gape for thee, they
groan for thee, Isa. 5. 14. waiting as it were with a greedy eye, as thou
stand upon the brink, when thou will drop in. If the wrath of a man be as
the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 20. 2. more heavy than the sand, Prove. 27. 3. what
is the wrath of the infinite God? If the burning furnace heated in
Nebuchad^^zzar's fiery rage, when he commanded it to be made yet seven times
hotter, were so fierce as to burn up even those that drew near it, to throw the
three children in Dan. 3. 19, 22. How hot is that burning Oven of the
Almighty's fury? Mal. 4. 1. Surely this is seventy times seven more fierce.
What think thou, O man, of being a saggo^in Hell to all eternity? Can thine
heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with
thee, says the Lord of Hosts? Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thou dwell with everlasting
burnings? Can thou abide the consuming fire? Isa 33. 4. When thou shall be as
a glowing Iron in Hell, and thy whole body and soul shall be as perfectly
possessed by Gods burning vengeance, as the fiery sparkling Iron, when heated
in the ^iercest forge? Thou can not bear God's whip, how then will thou
endure his scorpions? Thou art even crushed, and ready to with thy self dead,
under the weight of his finger, how then will thou bear the weight of his
loins? The most patient man that ever was, did curse the day that ever he was
born, Job 3. 1. and even wish death to come and end his misery, Job 7. 15, 16.
when God did but let out one little drop of his wrath. How then will thou
endure when God shall pour out all his Vials, and set himself against thee to
torment thee? when he shall make thy conscience the tunnel, by which he will be
pouring his burning wrath into thy soul for ever; and when he shall fill all
thy powers as full of torment, as they be now full of sin? When immortality
shall be thy misery, and to die the death of a brute, and be swallowed into the
gulf of annihilation, shall be such a felicity, as the whole eternity of wishes
and an Ocean of tears shall never purchase? Now thou can put off the evil
day, and can laugh and be merry, and forget the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.
11. but how will thou hold out, or hold up, when God will cast thee into a bed
of torments, Rev. 2. 21, and make thee to (...) down in sorrows? Isa. 50. 11.
When roarings and blasphemy shall be thine only music, and the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
indignation, shall be thine only drink? Rev. 14. 10. When thou shall draw in
flames for thy breath, and the horrid stench of sulphur shall be thy only
perfume? In a word, when the smoke of thy torment shall ascend for ever and
ever, and thou shall have no rest, night nor day no rest in thy conscience, no
ease in thy bones, but thou shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a
curse, and a reproach for evermore? Ier. 42. (...)

O sinner, stop here; and consider. If thou art a man, and not a senseless
block, consider. Bethink thy self where thou stand, why upon the very brink
of his ^urnace. As the Lord lives, and thy soul lives, there is but a step
between thee and this, 1 Samuel 20. 3. Thou know not when thou lie down, but
thou may be in before the Morning, thou know not when thou risest, but
thou may (...) drop in before the Night. Dare thou make light of this? Will thou go on in such a dreadful condition^ as if nothing ailed thee? If thou
put it off, and say, this does not belong to thee; look again over the
foregoing Chapter, and tell me the truth, are none of these black marks found
upon thee? Do not blind thine eyes, do not deceive thy self: see thy misery
while thou may prevent it. Think what it is to be a vile cast-out, a damned
reprobate, a vessel of wrath, into which the Lord will be pouring out his
tormenting fury, while he has a Being, Romans 9. 22.

Divine wrath is a fierce, Deuteronomy. 32. 22. devouring Isa. 33. 14. everlasting,
Mat. 25. 41. unquenchable fire, Mat. 3. 12. and thy soul and body must be the
fuel upon which it will be feeding for ever, unless thou consider thy ways, and
speedily turn to the Lord by a sound conversion. They that have been only
singed by this fire, and had no more but the smell thereof passing upon them;
Oh what amazing spectacles have they been! Whose heart would not have melted,
to have heard Spira's outcries; to have seen Chaloner that monument of
Justice, worn to Skin and Bones, Blaspheming, the God of Heaven, cursing
himself, and continually crying out, O Torture, Torture, Torture, O Torture,
Torture, as if the flames of wrath had already took hold on him? To have heard
Rogers crying out, I have had a little pleasure, but now I must to Hell for
evermore; wishing but for this mitigation, that God would but let him lie
burning for ever behind the back of that fire (on the earth) and bringing in
this sad conclusion still, at the end of whatever was spoken to him, to afford
him some hope, I must to Hell, I must to the furnace of Hell, for millions of
millions of Ages? O if the fears and forethoughts of the wrath to come be so
terrible, so intolerable, what is the feeling of it?

Sinner, it is but in vain to flatter you, this would be but to toll you into
the unquenchable fire; know ye from the living God, that here you must lie,
with these burnings must you dwell, till immortality die, and immutability
change, till Eternity run out, and Omnipotency is not longer able to torment,
except you be in good earnest renewed throughout by sanctifying grace.

VII. The Law discharges all its threats and curses at thee, Gal. 3. 10. Romans
7. Oh how dreadfully does it thunder? It spits fire and brimstone in thy face.
Its words are as drawn swords, and as the sharp arrows of the mighty, it
demands satisfaction to the utmost, and cries Justice, Justice. It speaks Blood
and War, and Wounds, and Death against thee. Oh the Execrations, and Plagues,
and Deaths, that this murdering piece is loaded with (read Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16,
etc.) and thou art the mark at which this sno^ is levelled. O man, away to the
strong hold, Zech. 9. 12. away from thy sins, haste to the sanctuary, the City
of refuge, Heb. 13. 13. even the Lord Jesus Christ, hide thee in him, or else
thou art lost without any hope of recovery.

VIII. The Gospel it self bin death the sentence of eternal damnation upon thee,
Mark 16. 16. If thou continuest in thine impenitent and unconverted estate,
know that the Gospel denounces a much forer condemnation, than ever would have
been for the transgression only of the first Covenant. Is it not a dreadful
case to have the Gospel it self fill its mouth with threats, and thunder, and
damnation? To have the Lord to roar from Mount Sion against thee? Joel 3. 16.
Hear the terror of the Lord. He that believes not shall be damned; except ye
repent ye shall all perish, Luke 13. 3. This is the condemnation that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, John 3. 19. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, Ioh. 3. 36. If the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? Heb. 2. 2, 3. He that despised Moses's Law died without mercy:
Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, that has trampled
under foot the Son of God? Heb. 10. 28, 29.

Application. And is this true indeed? Is this thy misery? Yea, it is as true as
God is. Better open thine eyes and see it now, while thou may remedy it, than
blind and harden thy self, till, to thine eternal sorrow, thou shall feel what
thou would not believe; and if it be true, what do thou mean to loyter, and
linger in such a case as this?

Alas for thee, poor man, how effectually has sin undone thee, and deprived
and despoiled thee even of thy reason to look after thine own everlasting good?
O miserable Caitiff, what stupidity and senselesness has surprised thee? Oh!
let me knock up and awake this sleeper. Who dwells within the walls of this
flesh? Is there ever a soul here, a rational understanding soul? Or art thou
only a walking Ghost, a senseless lump? Art thou a reasonable soul, and yet so
far brutified, as to forget thy self immortal, and to think thy self to be as
the beasts that perish? Art thou turned into flesh? that thou savourest nothing
but gratifying the sense, and making provision for the flesh? Or else having
reason to understand the eternity of thy future estate, do thou yet make
light of being everlastingly miserable? which is to be so much below a brute,
as it is worse to act against reason, than to act without it. O unhappy soul,
that wast the glory of man, the mate of Angels, and the image of God! that wast
God's representative in the world, and had the supremacy amongst the
creatures, and the dominion over thy Maker's works! Art thou now become a slave
to sense, a servant to so base an Idol, as thy Belly? for no higher felicity
than to fill thee with the wind of man's applause, or heaping together a little
refined earth, no more suitable to thy spiritual, immortal nature, than the
dirt, and sticks? Oh, why do thou not bethink thee where thou shall be for
ever? Death is at hand, The Judge is even at the door, Jam. 5. 9. Yet, a little
while and time shall be no longer, Rev. 10. 5, 6. And will thou run the hazard
of continuing in such a state, in which if thou be overtaken, thou art
irrecoverably miserable.

Come then, arise, and attend thy nearest concernments. Tell me whither art
thou going? What, will thou live in such a course, wherein every act is a step
to perdition? And thou do not know, but the next night, thou may make thy
Bed in Hell? Oh! if thou have a spark of reason, consider and turn, and hearken
to thy very friend, who would therefore show thee thy present misery, that thou
might in time make thine escape, and be eternally happy.

Hear what the Lord says; Fear ye not me, says the Lord? Will ye not tremble
at my presence? Jer. 5. 22. O sinners do ye make light of the wrath to come?
Mat, 3. 7. I am sure there is a time coming, when you will not make light of
it. Why, the very Devils do believe and tremble, James 2. 19. What! you more
hardened than they? Will you run upon the Edge of the Rock? will you play at the
hole of the Asp? will you put your hand upon the Cockat^ice's den? Will you
dance about the fire, till you are burnt? or dally with devouring wrath, as if
you were at a point of indifferency, whether you did escape it, or endure it? O
madness of folly! Solomon's madman, that casts firebrarnds and arrows, and
death, and says, Am I not in jest? Prove. 26. 18. is nothing so distracted as
the wilful sinner, Luke 15. 17. that goes on in his unconverted estate without
sense, as if nothing ailed him. The man that runs on the Cannons mouth, that
sports with his blood, or lets out his life in a frollick, is sensible, sober
and serious, to him that goes on still in his trespasses, Psalm 68. 21. For he
stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty. He runs upon him, even upon his neck, upon the thick Bosses of his
Buckler, Job 15. 25, 26. Is it wisdom to dally with the second death, or to
venture into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. as if
thou were but going to wash thee, or swim for thy recreation? Will thou, as it
were, fetch thy vieze, and jump into eternal flames, as the children through
the bon-fire? What shall I say? I can find out no expression, no comparison
whereby to set forth the dreadful distraction of that soul, that shall go on in
sin.

Awake, awake, Ephesians. 5. 14. Oh sinner, arise and take thy flight. There is but
one door that thou may fly by, and that is the strait door of conversion and
the new birth. Unless thou turn unfeignedly from all thy sins, and come in to
Jesus Christ, and take him for the Lord thy righteousness, and walk in him in
holiness and newness of life; as the Lord lives, it is not more certain that
thou art now out of Hell, than that thou shall without fail be in it, but a few
days and nights from hence. O set thine heart to think of thy case. Is not
thine everlasting misery or welfare that which does deserve a little
consideration? Lo^^ again over the miseries of the unconverted. If the Lord
has not spoken by me, regard me not. But if it be the very word of God, that
all this miser^ lies upon thee, what a case art thou in? Is it for one that
has his senses, to live in such a condition, and not to make all possible
expedition for preventing his utter ruin? O man, who has bewitched thee, Gal.
3. 1. that in the matters of the present life thou should be wise enough to
forecast thy business, foresee thy danger, and prevent thy mischief, but in
matters of everlasting consequence should be slight and careless, as if they
little concerned thee? Why, is it nothing to thee to have all the Attributes of
God engaged against thee? Can thou do well without his favor? Can thou
escape his hands, or endure his vengeance? Do thou hear the creation groaning
under thee, and hell groaning for thee, and yet think thy case good enough? Art
thou in the paw of the Lion, under the power of corruption, in the dark and
noisome prison, fettered with thy lusts, working out thine own damnation; and
is not this worth the considering? Will thou make light of all the terrors of
the Law; of all its curses, and thunderbolts; as if they were but the report of
the Childrens pot^ guns, or thou went to war with their paper pellets? do
thou laugh at hell and destruction, or can thou drink the envenomed Cup of
the Almighty's fury, as if it were but a common portion?

Gird up now thy lovns like a man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou
me, Job 40. 7. Art thou such a Leviathan, as that the scales of thy pride
should keep thee from thy Makers coming at thee? Will thou esteem his Arrows as
straw, and the instruments of death as rotten wood? Art thou chief of all the
Children of pride, even that thou should count his darts as stubble; and
laugh at the shaking of his spear? Art thou made without fear, and contemnest
his barbed Irons? Job 41. Art thou like the horse that paweth in the valley,
and rejo^ceth in his strength, who (...) out to meet the armed men? Do thou
mock at fear, and art not affrighted, neither turnest back from Gods sword;
when his quiver ratleth against thee, the glittering spear and the shield? Job
39. 21, 22, 23. Well, if the threats and calls of the word will not fear thee,
nor awaken thee, I am sure death and judgment will. Oh what will thou do when
the Lord comes forth against thee, and in his fury falls upon thee, and thou
shall feel what thou read? If when Daniel's enemies were cast into the Den
of Lions, both they and their wives and their children, the Lions had the
mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces, ere ever they came at the
bottom of the Den, Dan. 6. 24. what shall be done with thee, when thou fallest
into the hands of the living God? When he shall gripe thee in his Iron arms,
and grind and crush thee to a thousand pieces in his wrath?

Oh do not then contend with God. Repent and be converted, so none of this
shall come upon thee; Isa. 55. 6, 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Chap. VI. Containing DIRECTIONS for Conversion.
Mark 10. 17. And there came one, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
BEfore thou read these Directions, I advise thee, yea, I charge thee before
God, and his holy Angels, to resolve to follow them (as far as Conscience shall
be convin^^d of their agreeableness to Gods word, and thy estate, and call in
his assistance and blessing that they may succeed. And as I have sought the
Lord, and consulted his Oracles what advice to give thee, so must thou
entertain it, with that awe, reverence, and purpose of obedience that the word
of the living God does require.

Now then attend. Set thine heart unto all that I shall testify unto thee in
this day; for it is not a vain thing, it is your life, Deuteronomy. 32. 46. This is
the end of all that has been spoken hitherto, to bring you to set upon
turning, and making use of Gods means for your conversion. I would not trouble
you, nor torment you before the time with the forethoughts of your eternal
misery, but in order to your making your escape. Were you shut up under your
present misery, without remedy, it were but mercy (as one speaks) to let you
alone, that you might take in that little poor comfort, that you are capable of
here in this world. But you may yet be happy: If you do not wilfully refuse the
means of your recovery. Behold, I hold open the door unto you, arise take your
flight; I set the way of life before you, walk in it, and you shall live and
not die, Deuteronomy 30. 19. Ier. 9. 16. It pities me to think you should be your own
Murderers, and throw your selves headlong, when God and men cry out to you, as
Peter, in another Case, to his Master, Spare thy self. A noble Virgin, that
attended the Court of Spain, was wickedly ravished by the King and hereupon
exciting the Duke her Father to revenge, he called in the Moors to his help,
who when they had executed his design, miserably wasted and spoiled the
Country, which this Virgin laying so exceedingly to heart, shut her self up in
a Tower belonging to her Father's house, and desired her Father and Mother
might be called forth; and bewailing to them her own wretchedness, that she
should have occasioned so much misery and desolation to her Country, for the
satisfying of her revenge, she told them she was resolved to be avenged upon
her self. Her Father and Mother besought her to pity her self and them, but
nothing could prevail, but she took her leave of them, and threw her self off
the battlements, and so perished before their faces.

Just thus is the wilful destruction of ungodly men. The God that made them
beseeches them, and cries out to them, as Paul to the distracted Jailer, when
about to murder himself, Do thy self no harm. The Ministers of Christ forewarn
them and follow them, and ^ain would have them back. But alas! No
expo^tulations, nor obtestations will prevail; but men will hurl themselves
into perdition, while pity it self looks on.

What shall I say? would it not grieve a person of any humanity, if in the time
of a reigning plague he should have a receipt (as one said well) that would
infallibly cure all the Country, and recover the most hopeless patients, and
yet his friends and neighbors should die by the hundreds about him, because
they would not use it? Men and Brethren, though you carry the certain Symptoms
of death in your faces, yet I have a receipt that will cure you all, that will
cure infallibly. Follow but these few Directions, and if you do not then win
Heaven, I will be content to lose it.

Hear then, Oh sinner, and as ever thou would be converted and saved, embrace
this following counsel.

Direct. I. Set it down with thy self, as an undoubted truth, that it is
impossible for thee ever to get to Heaven in this thy unconverted state. Can
any other but Christ save thee? And he tells thee he will never do it, except
thou be regenerated and converted, Mat. 18. 3. John 3. 3. Does he not keep the
keys of Heaven? And can thou get in without his leave, as thou must, if ever
thou come thither in thy natural condition, without a sound and thorough
renovation?

Direct. II. Labor to get a thorough sight and lively sense and feeling of thy
sins. Till men are weary and heavy laden, and pricked at the heart. and stark
sick of sin, they will not come to Christ in his way for ease and cure, nor to
purpose enquire, What shall we do? Mat. 11. 28. Acts 2. 37. Mat. 9. 12. They
must set themselves down for dead men before they will come unto Christ, that
they may have life, John 5. 40. Labor therefore to set all thy sins in order
before thee. Never be afraid to look upon them, but let thy spirit make
diligent search, Psalm. 77. 6. Enquire into thine heart and into thy life, enter
into a through examination of thy self, and of all thy ways, Psalm. 119. 59. that
thou may make a full discovery, and call in the help of God's Spirit, in the
sense of thine own inability hereunto, for it is his proper work to convince of
sin. John 16. 8. Spread all before the face of thy Conscience, till thine heart
and eyes be set abroach. Leave not striving with God, and thine own soul, till
it cry out under the sense of thy sins, as the enlightened Ja^lor, What must I
do to ^e saved? Acts 16. 30. To this purpose.

Meditate of the numerousness of thy sins. David's heart failed when he thought
of this, and considered that he had more sins than hairs, Psalm. 40. 12. This
made him to cry out upon the multitudes of Gods tender mercies, Psalm. 51. 1.
The loathsome carcass does not more hatefully swarm with crawling worms than an
unsanctified soul with filthy Iusts. They fill the head, the heart, the eyes
and mouth of him. Look backward, where was ever the place, what was ever the
time, in which thou did not sin? Look inward, what part or power can thou
find in soul or body, but it is poisoned with sin? What duty do thou ever
perform into which poison is not shed? Oh how great is the sum of thy debts,
who have been all thy life long running upon the hooks, and never did, nor
can pay off one penny? Look over the sin of thy Nature, and all its cursed
broad, the sins of thy life. Call to mind thy Omissions, Commissions, the sins
of thy thoughts, of thy words, of thine actions, the sins of thy youth, the
si^s of thy years, etc. Be not like a desperate Bankrupt, that is afraid to
look over his Books. Read the Records of Conscience carefully. These Books must
be opened sooner, or later, Rev. 20. 12.

Meditate upon the aggravations of thy sin, as they are the grand enemies
against the God of thy life, against the life of thy soul; in a word, they
(...) publi^k enemies of all mankind. How do David, Ezra, Daniel and the good
Levites aggravate their sins, from the consideration of their injuriousness to
God, their opposition to his good and righteous Laws, the mercies, the warnings
that they were committed against, N^^. 9. Da^. 9. Ezra 9. O the work that sin
has made in the world. This is the enemy that has brought in death, that has
robbed and enslaved man, that has blacked the Devil, that has dug Hell;
Romans 5. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 4. John 8. 34. This is the enemy that has turned the
Creation upside down, and sown dissension between man and the creatures,
between man and man, yea between man and himself, setting the sensitive part
against the rational, the will against the judgment, lust against conscience,
yea worst of all, between God and man, making the lapsed sinner both hateful to
God, and a hater of him, Zech. 11. 8. O man, how can thou make so light of
sin? This is the Traitor that sucked the blood of the Son of God, that sold
him, that mocked him, that scourged him, that spit in his face, that dug his
hands, that pierced his side, that pressed his soul, that mangled his body,
that never left, till it had bound him, condemned him, nailed him, crucified
him, and put him to open shame, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6. This is that deadly poison,
so powerful of operation, as that one drop of it shed upon the root of mankind,
has corrupted, spoiled, and poisoned, and undone his whole race at once, Romans
5. 18, 19. This is the common Butcher, the bloody Executioner, that has killed
the Prophets, burnt the Martyrs, murdered all the Apostles, all the Patriarchs,
all the Kings and Potentates, that has destroyed Cities, swallowed Empires,
butchered and devoured whole Nations. Whatever was the weapon that 'twas done
by, sin was it that did Execution, Romans 6. 23. do thou yet think it but a
small thing? If Adam and all his Children could be dug out of their Graves,
and their Bodies piled up to Heaven, and an inquest were made, what matchless
murderer were guilty of all this blood; it would be all found in the skirts of
sin. Study the nature of sin, till thy heart be brought to fear and loath it.
And meditate on the aggravations of thy particular sins, how thou have sinned
against all God's warnings, against thine own prayers, against mercies, against
corrections, against clearest light, against freest love, against thine own
resolutions, against promises, vows, covenants of better obedience, etc. charge
thy heart home with these things, till it blush for shame, and be brought out
of all good opinion of it self, Ezra 9. 6.

Meditate upon the desert of sin: It cries up to Heaven: It calls for
vengeance, Genesis 18. 21. Its due wages is death, and damnation. It pulls the
curse of God upon the Soul and Body, Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 28. The least sinful
word or thought, lays thee under the infinite wrath of God Almighty, Romans 2. 8,
9. Mat. 12. 36. Oh what a load of wrath, what a weight of curses, what treasure
of vengeance have all the millions of thy sins then deserved? Romans 2. 5. John
3. 36. Oh Judge thy self, that the Lord may not judge thee, 1 Cor. 11. 31.

Meditate upon the deformity, and desilement of sin. It Is as black as Hell, the
very image and likeness of the Devil drawn upon the Soul, 1 John 3. 8, 10. It
would more affright thee, to see thy self in the hateful deformity of thy
nature, than to see the Devil. There is no mire so unclean, no vomit so
loathsome, no carcass or carrion so offensive, no plague or leprosy so noisome
as sin, in which thou art all enrolled, and covered with its odious filth,
whereby thou art rendered more displeasing to the pure and holy nature of the
glorious God, than the most filthy object, composed of whatever is hateful to
all thy senses, can be to thee, Job 15. 15, 16. Could thou take up a Toad
into thy bosom? Could thou cherish it, and take delight in it? Why, thou art
as contrary to the pure and perfect holiness of the divine nature, and as
loathsome as that is to thee, Mat. 3. 33. til^ thou art purified by the blood
of Jesus, and the power of renewing grace.

Above all other sins fix the eye of Consideration^ on these two. 1. The sin of
thy nature. It Is to little purpose to lop the branches, while the root of
original corruption remains untouched. In vain do men lave out the streams,
when the fountain is running, that fills up all again. Let the Axe of thy
repentance (with David's) go to the root of sin, Psalm. 51. 5. Study how deep,
how close, how permanent is thy natural pollution; how universal it is, till
thou do cry out with Paul's ^ee^^ng, upon thy body of death, Romans 7. 2. Look
into all thy parts and powers, and see what unclean vessels, what fi^es, what
dunghills, what sinks they are become. He^ miser, quid sum? vas ster quilimi
(...) faetore and horrorc. August. (...). c. 2. The heart is never soundly
broken, till thoroughly convinced of the heinousness of original sin. Here fix
thy thoughts. This is that, that makes thee backward to all good, prone to all
evil, Romans 7. 15. that sheds blindness, pride, prejudice, unbelief into thy
mind, enmit^, unconstancy, obstinacy, into thy will; inordinate heats and colds
into thy affections; insensibleness, benummedness, unfaithfulness into thy
conscience, slipperiness into thy memory, and in a word, has put every wheel
of thy soul out of order, and made it of an habitation of holiness to become a
very hell of iniquity, James 3. 6. This is that that has defiled, corrupted,
perverted all thy members, and turned them into weapons of unrighteousness, and
servants of sin, Romans 6. 19. that has filled the head with carnal and corrupt
designs, Mic. 2. 1. the hand with sinful practices, Isa. 1. 15. the eyes with
wandering and wantonness, 2 Pet. 2. 14. the tongue with deadly poison, James 3.
8. that has opened the ears to tales, flattery, and filthy communication, and
shut them against the instruction of life, Zech. 7. 11^ 12. and has rendered
thy heart a very mint and forge for sin, and the cursed womb of all deadly
conceptions, Mat. 15. 16. So that it pours forth its wickedness without
ceasing 2 Pet. 2. 14. even as naturally, freely, and unweariedly, as a fountain
does pour forth its waters, Ier. 6. 7. or the raging Sea does cast forth mire
and dirt, Isa. 57. 20. And will thou yet be in love with thy self, and tell us
any longer of thy good heart? O never leave meditating on this desperate
contagion of original corruption, till with E^hraim thou bemoan thy self, Ier.
31. 18. and with deepest shame and sorrow smite on thy breast as the Publican,
Luke 18. 13. and with Job abhor thy self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.
6, 22. The particular evil that thou art most addicted to. Find out all its
aggravations. Set home upon thy heart all Gods threatenings against it.
Repentance drives before it the whole herd, but especially sticks the arrow in
the beloved sin, and singles this out, above the rest, to run it down, Psalm.
18. 23. O labor to make this sin odious to thy soul, and double thy guards,
and thy resolutions against it, because this has, and does, most dishonor God
and endanger thee.

Direct. III. Strive to affect thy heart with a deep sense of thy present
misery. Read over the foregoing Chapter again, and again, and get it out of the
Book into thine heart. Remember when thou lie down, that for ought thou
know, thou may awake in flames, and when thou risest up, that by the next
night thou may make thy bed in Hell. Is it a just matter to live in such a
fearful case? to stand tottering upon the brink of the bottomless Pit, and to
live at the mercy of every disease, that if it will but fall upon thee, will
send thee forthwith into the burnings? Suppose thou saw a condemned wretch
hanging ove^ Nebuchadnezzar's burning fiery furnace, by nothing but a twine
thread, which were ready to break every moment, would not thine heart tremble
for such an one? Why thou art the man: This is thy very case, O man, woman,
that read this, if thou be yet unconverted. What if the thread of thy life
should break? (Why, thou know not but it may be the next night, yea the next
moment) where would thou be then? Whither would thou drop? Verily upon the
crack but of this thread, thou fallest into the lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone where thou must lie scalding and sweltering in a fiery Ocean, while
God has a Being, if thou die in thy present Case. And does not thy soul
tremble as thou read? Do not thy tears bedew the paper, and thy heart throb
in thy bosom? Do thou not yet begin to smite on thy breast, and bethink thy
self what need thou have of a change? O what is thy heart made of? Have thou
not only lost all regard to God, but art without any love and pity to thy self?

O study thy misery, till thy heart do cry out for Christ, as earnestly, as
ever a drowning man did for a Boar, or the wounded for a Surgeon. Men must
come to see the danger, and feel the smart of their deadly sores and sickness,
or else Christ will be to them a Physician of no value, Mat. 9. 12. Then the
manslayer hastens to the City of refuge, when pursued by the avenger of blood.
Men must be even forced and fired out of themselves, or else they will not come
to Christ. ^Twas distress and extremity, that made the Prodigal think of
returning, Luke 1^. 16, 17. While L^^o^icea thinks her self rich, increased in
goods, in need of nothing, there is little hope. She must be deeply convinced
of her wretchedness, blindness, poverty, nakedness, before she will come to
Christ for his gold, raiment, eye salve, Rev 3. 17, 18. Therefore hold the eyes
of conscience open, amplify thy misery as much as possible. Do not fly the
sight of it, for fear it should fill thee with terror. The sense of thy misery
is but as it were the suppuration of the woun^, which is necessary to the Cure.
Better ^ear the torments that abide thee now, than feel them hereafter.

Direct. IV. Settle it upon thy heart, that thou art under an everlasting
inability ever to recover thy self. Never think thy praying, reading, hearing,
con^^^sing, amending will do the Cure. These must be attended; but thou art
undone if thou restest in them, Romans 10. 3. Thou art a lost man, if thou hopest
to escape drowning upon any other plank^ but Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12. Thou
must unlearn t^y self, and renounce thine own wisdom, thine own righteousness,
thine own strength, and throw thy self wholly upon Christ, as a man that
swimmeth casts himself upon the water, or else thou can not escape. While
men trust in themselves, and establish their own righteousness, and have
confidence in the flesh, they will not come savingly to Christ, Luke 18. 9.
Phil. 3. 3. Thou must know thy gain to be but loss and dung, thy strength but
weakness, thy righteousness rags and rottenness, before there will be an
effectual closure between Christ and thee, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Isa.
64. 6. Can the lifeless carcass shake off its grave cloths, and loose the bonds
of death? Then may thou recover thy self who art dead in trespasses and sins,
and under an impossibility of serving thy Maker, (acceptably) in this
condition, Romans 8. 8. Heb. ^1. 6. Therefore when thou go to pray, or
meditate, or to do any of the duties, to which thou art here directed, go out
of thy self, call in the help of the Spirit, as despairing to do any thing
pleasing to God, in thine own strength. Yet neglect not thy duty, but lie at
the pool, and wait in the way of the Spirit. While the Eunuch was reading, then
the Holy Ghost sent Philip to him, Acts 8. 28, 29. when the Disciples were
praying, Acts 4. 31. when Cornelius and his friends were hearing, Acts 10. 44.
then the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and filled them all. Strive to give up thy
self to Christ: Strive to pray, strive to meditate, strive an hundred and an
hundred times, try to do it as well as thou can, and while thou art
endeavoring in the way of thy duty, the Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee, and help thee to do, what of thy self thou art utterly unable unto, Prove.
1. 23.

Direct. V. Forthwith renounce all thy sins. If thou yield thy self to the
contrary practice of any sin, thou art undone, Romans 6. 17. in vain do thou
hope for life by Christ, except thou d^part from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Forsake thy sins, or else thou can not find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. Thou can
not be married to Christ except divorced from sin. Give up the Traitor, or you
can have no peace with Heaven. Cast the head of Sheba over the wall. Keep not
Dalilah in thy lap. Thou must part with thy sins, or with thy soul. Spare but
one sin, and God will not spare thee. Never make excuses, thy sins must die, or
thou must die for them, Psalm. 68. 21. If thou allow of one sin, though but a
little, a secret one, though thou may plead necessity, and have a hundred.
shifts and excuses for it, the life of thy soul must go for the life of that
sin, Ezekiel. 18. 21. and will it not be dearly bought?

O sinner, hear and consider. If thou will part with thy sins, God will give
thee his Christ; Is not this a fair exchange? I testify unto thee this day,
that if thou perish, it is not because there was never a Savior provided, nor
life tendered, but because thou preferredst (with the Jews) the Murderer before
thy Saviou^, sin before Christ, and lovedst darkness rather than light, John 3.
19. Search thy heart therefore with Candles, as the Jews did their Houses for
Leaven, before the Passover: Labor to find out thy sins, enter into thy
Closet, and consider, What evil have I lived in? What duty have I neglected
toward God? What sin have I lived in against my Brother? And now strike the
darts through the heart of thy sin, as I^ab did through Absalom's, 2 Samuel 18.
14. Never stand looking upon thy sin, nor rolling the morsel under thy tongue,
Job 20. 11. but spit it out as poison, with fear and detestation. Alas, what
will thy sins do for thee, that thou should stick at parting with them? They
will flatter thee, but they will undo thee, and cut thy throat, while they
smile upon thee, and poison thee while they please thee, and arm the justice
and wrath of the infinite God against thee. They will open Hell for thee, and
pile up fuel to burn thee. Behold the Gibbet that they have prepared for thee.
Oh serve them like Haman, and do upon them the Execution, they would else have
done upon thee. Away with them, crucify them, and let Christ only be Lord over
thee.

Direct. VI. Make a solemn choice of God for thy portion and blessedness, Deuteronomy.
26. With all possible devotion and veneration avouch the Lord for thy God. Set
the world with all its glory, and paint, and gallantry, with all its pleasures
and promotions on the one hand, and set God with all his infinite excellencies,
and perfections on the other, and see that thou do deliberately make thy
choice, Josh. 24. 15. Take up thy rest in God, Job. 6. 68. Set thee down under
his shadow, Cant. 2. 3. Let his promises and perfections turn the scale against
all the world. Settle it upon thy heart that the Lord is an all-sufficient
portion, that thou can not be miserable, while thou have a God to live upon,
take him for thy shield and exceeding great reward. God alone is more than all
the world. Content thy self with him. Let others carry the preferments and
glory of the world, place thou thy happiness in his favor, and the light of
his countenance, Psalm. 4. 6, 7.

Poor sinner, thou art fallen off from God, and have engaged his power, and
wrath against thee. Yet know that of his abundant grace, he does offer to be
thy God again in Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. What say thou man? Will thou have
the Lord for thy God? Why, take this counsel, and thou shall have him. Come to
him by his Christ, Ioh. 14. 6. Renounce the Idols of thine own pleasures, gain,
reputation, 1 These. 1. 9. Let these be pulled out of the Throne, and set Gods
interest uppermost in thine ^eare. Take him as God, to be chief in thine
affections, estimations, intentions; for he will not endure to have any set
above him, Romans 1. 24, Psalm. 73. 25. In a word, thou must take him in all his
Personal Relations, and in all his Essential Perfections.

First, In all his Personal Relations. God the Father must be taken for thy
Father, Ier. 3. 4, 19, 22. O come to him with the Prodigal, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am not worthy to be called thy
Son, but since of thy wonderful mercy, thou art pleased to take me^, that am of
my self a dog, a swine, a devil, to be thy child, I solemnly take thee for my
Father, commend my self to thy care, and trust to thy providence, and cast my
burden on thy shoulders. I depend on thy provision, and submit to thy
corrections, and trust under the shadow of thy wings, and hide in thy chambers,
and ^ly to thy name. I renounce all confidence in my self, I repose my
confidence in thee, I depose my concernments with thee. I will be for thee, and
for no other. Again, God the Son must be taken for thy Savior, for thy
Redeemer and Righteousness, John 1. 2. He must be accepted as the only way to
the Father, and the only means of Life, Heb. 7. 25. O then put off the raiment
of thy captivity, on with the wedding garment, and go and marry thy self to
Jesus Christ. Lord I am thine, and all that I have, my body, my soul, my name,
my estate. I send a bill of divorce to my other lovers. I give my heart to
thee, I will be thine undividedly, thine ever lastingly. I will set thy name on
all I have, and use it only as thy goods, as thy loan during thy leave,
resigning ad to thee. I will have no King but thee: Reign thou over me. Other
Lords have had dominion over me: But now I will make mention of thy name only,
and do here take an o^th of fealty to thee, promising and vowing to serve, and
love, and ^ear thee, above all competitors. I disavow mine own righteousness,
and despair of ever being pardoned and saved for mine own duties, or graces,
and lean only on thine all-sufficient sacrifice and intercession, for pardon,
and life, and acceptance before God. I take thee for mine only guide and
instructor, resolving to be led and directed by thee, and to wait for^ thy
counsel, and that thine shall be the casting voice with me. Lastly, God the
Spirit must be taken for thy sanctifier. Romans 8. 9, 14. Gal. 5. 16, 18. for
thine Advocate, thy Counselor, thy Comforter, the teacher of thine ignorance,
the pledge and earnest of thine inheritance, Romans 8. 26. Psalm. 73. 24. John 14.
16. Ephesians. 1. 14. John 14. 26. Ephesians. 4. 30. Awake thou Northwind, and come thou
S^^th, and blow upon my Garden, Cant. 4. 16. Come, thou Spirit of the most
high^ here is a house for thee, here is a Temple for thee. Here do thou rest
for ^ver; dwell here, and rest here. Lo, I give up the possession to thee, full
possession. I send thee the keys of my heart, that all may be for thy use, that
thou may put thy goods, thy grace into every Room. I give up the use of all
to thee, that every faculty, and every member may be thine i^^^^ument, to work
righteousness, and do the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, In all his essential per^ections. Consider how the Lord has
revealed himself to you in his word: will you take him as such a God? O^
sinner, here is the blessedest News that ever came to the sons of Men. The Lord
will be thy God, Genesis 17. 7. Rev. 21. 3. if thou will but close with him in his
excellencies. Will thou have the merciful, the gracious, the sin-pardoning God,
to be t^^ God? O yes, (says the sinner,) I am undone else. But he farther
tells thee, I am the holy and sin-hating God. If thou will be owned as one of
my people, thou must be holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. holy in heart, holy in life. Thou
must put away all thine iniquities, be they never so near, never so natural,
never so necessary to the maintaining thy fleshly interest. Unless thou will be
at defiance with sin, I cannot be thy God. Cast out the leaven, put away the
evil of thy doings, cease ^o do evil, learn to do well, or else I can have
nothing to do with thee, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Bring forth mine enemies, or there
is no peace to be had with me. What does thine heart answer? Lord I desire to
have thee as such a God. I desire to be holy as thou art holy, to be made
partaker of thy holiness. I love thee, not only for thy goodness and mercy, but
for thy holiness and parity. I take thy holiness for my happiness. Oh! be to me
a fountain of holiness: set on me the stamp and impress of thy holiness, I will
thankfully part with all my sins at thy command. My wi^ful sins I do forthwith
forsake; and for my infirmities that I cannot get rid of, though I would, I
will strive against them in the use of the mea^s. I detest them, and will pray
and war against them, and never let them have quiet rest in my soul. Beloved,
whosoever of you will thus accept of the Lord for his God, he shall have him.

Again, he tells you; I am the All-sufficient God, Genesis 17. 1. Will you lay all
at my feet, and give it up to my dispose, and take me for your only portion?
Will you own and honor mine All Sufficiency? Will you take me as your
happiness and treasure, your hope and bliss? I am a Sun and a Shield, all in
one: will you have me for your all? Genesis 15. 1. Psalm 84. 11. Now what do thou
say to this? Does thy mouth water after the Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt? Art
thou loath to exchange the earthly happiness, for a part in God, and though
thou would be glad to have God and the World too, yet can thou not think
of having him, and nothing but him, but had rather take up with the earth
below, if God would but let thee keep it, as long as thou would? This is a
fearful sign. But now if thou art willing to sell all for the Pearl of great
price, Mat. 13. 46. If thine heart answer, Lord I desire no other portion but
thee. Take the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil whosoever will, so I may have the
light of thy Countenance. I pitch upon thee for my happiness, I gladly venture
my self on thee, and trust my self with thee. I set my hopes in thee, I take up
my rest with thee, let me hear thee say, I am thy God, thy Salvation, and I
have enough, all I wish for. I will make no terms with thee, but for thy self.
Let me but have thee sure, let me ^e able to make my claim, and see my Title to
thy self, and for other things, I leave them to thee, give me more or (...),
any thing or nothing, I will be satisfied in my God. Take him thus, and he is
thine own.

Again, he tells you; I am the Sovereign Lord: If you will have me for your
God, you must give me the supremacy, Mat. 6. 24. I will not be an underling.
You must not make me a second to sin, or (...) worldly interest. If you will be
my people, I must have the rule over you. You must not live at your down list.
Will you come under my yoke? Will you bow to my government? Will you submit to
my discipline? to my word? to my rod? Sinner, What say thou to this? Lord I
had rather be ^t thy command, than live at mine own list, I had rather have thy
^ill to be done, than mine, I approve of and consent to thy Laws, and account
it my privilege to lie under them. And though the flesh rebel, and often break
over bounds, I am resolved to take no other Lord but thee. I willingly take the
Oath of thy supremacy, and acknowledge thee for my Liege Sovereign, and resolve
all my days to pay the tribute of Worship, Obedience, and Love, and Service is
thee, and to live to thee, as the end of my Life. This is a right accepting of
God.

To be short, he tells you; I am the true and faithful God. If you will have me
for your God, you must be content to trust me, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Prove. 3. 5. Will
you venture your selves upon my word, and depend on my faithfulness, and take
my bond for your security? Will you be content to follow me, in poverty, and
reproach, and affliction here, and to see much going out, and little coming in,
and to tarry till the next world for your preferment? Mat. 9. 21. I deal much
upon trust, will you be content to labor, and suffer, and to tarry for your
returns till the Resurrection of the Just? Luke 14. 14. The womb of my Promise
will not presently bring forth; will you have the patience to wait? Heb. 10.
36. Now Beloved, what say you to this? Will you have this God for your God?
Will you be content to live by faith, and trust him for an unseen happiness, an
unseen heaven, an unseen glory? Do your hearts answer, Lord we will venture our
selves upon thee, we commit our selves to thee: We roll upon thee, we know whom
we have trusted, we are willing to take thy word, we will prefer thy promises
before our own possessions; and the hopes of Heaven before all the enjoyments
of the Earth. We will wait thy leisure. What thou will here, so that we may
have but thy faithful promise for Heaven hereafter. If you can in truth, and
upon deliberation, thus accept of God, he will be yours. Thus there must be in
a right conversion to God, a closing with him suitable to his excellencies. But
when men close with his mercy, but yet love sin, hating holiness and purity, or
will take him for their Benefactor, but not for their Sovereign; or for their
Patron, but not for their Portion, this is no through, and no sound Conversion.

Direct. VII. Accept of the Lord Jesus in all his Offices, with all his
inconveniences, as thine. Upon these terms Christ may be had. Sinner, thou have
undone thy self, and art plunged into the Ditch of most deplorable misery out
of which thou art never able to climb up. But Jesus Christ is able and ready to
help thee, and he freely tenders himself to thee, Heb. 7. 25. John 3. 36. Be
thy sins never so many, never so great, of never so long continuance, yet thou
shall be most certainly pardoned and saved, if thou do not wretchedly neglect
the offer that in the name of God is here made unto thee. The Lord Jesus
calls unto thee, to look unto him and be saved, Isa. 45. 22. to come unto
him, and he will in no wise cast thee out, John 6. 37. Yea he is a suitor to
thee, and beseeches thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. he cries in the
streets, he knocks at thy door, he wooeth thee to accept of him, and live
with him, Prove. 1. 20. Rev. 2. 30. If thou die it is because thou would not
come to him for life, John 5. 40. Now accept of an offered Christ, and thou art
made for ever. Now give up thy consent to him, and the match is made, all the
world cannot hinder it. Do not stand off because of thine unworthiness. Man, I
tell thee, nothing in all the world can undo thee, but thine unwillingness^
Speak man, art thou willing of the match? Will thou have Christ in all his
celations to be thine; thy King, thy Priest, thy Prophet? Will thou have him
with all his inconveniences? Take not Christ hand over head, but sit down
first, and count the cost. Will thou lay all at his feet? Will thou be content
to run all hazards with him? Will thou take thy lot with him, fall where it
will? Will thou deny thy self, take up thy Cross, and follow him? Art thou
deliberately, understandingly, freely, fixedly, determined to ^^eave to him in
all times, and conditions? If so, my soul for thine, thou shall never perish,
John 3. 16. but art passed from death to life. Here lies the main point of thy
salvation, that thou be found in thy covenant-closure with Jesus Christ, and
therefore if thou love thy self, see that thou be faithful to God and thy soul^
ere.

Direct. VIII. Resign up all thy powers and faculties, and thy whole interest
to be his. They gave their own selves unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Present your
bodies as a living Sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. The Lord seeks not yours, but you.
Resing therefore thy body with all its members to him, and thy soul with all
its powers, that he may be glorified in thy body and in thy spirit which are
his, 1 Cor. 6. 20. In a right closure with Christ, all the faculties give up to
him. The Judgment subscribes, Lord thou ^t worthy of all acceptance, chief of
ten thousand: Happy is the man that fin^eth thee. All the things that are to be
desired, are not to be compared with thee, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. The
understanding lays aside its corrupt reasonings and cavils, and its prejudices
against Christ and his ways. It is now past questioning and disputing, and
casts it for Christ against all the World. It concludes, it is good to be here,
and sees such a treasure in this field, such value in this pearl, as is worth
all, Mat. 13. 44. Oh here is the richest bargain that ever I made, here is the
richest prize that ever man was offere^, here is the sovereignest remedy that
ever mercy prepared, he is worthy of my esteem, worthy of my choice, worthy of
my love, worthy to be embraved, (...), admired for ever more, Rev. 5. 12. I
approve of his (...) his terms are rightteous and reasonable, full of equity
and mercy. Again the will resigns. It stands no longer wavering, nor wishing
and woulding but is peremptorily determined: Lord thy love has overcome me,
th^^ h^st won me, and thou shall have me: Come in Lord, to thee I freely open,
I consent to be saved in thine own way, thou shall have any thing, thou shall
have all, let me have but thee. The memory gives up to Christ: Lord here is a
storehouse for thee. Out with this trash, lay in thy trea^ure. Let me be a
granary, a repositor^ of thy truths, thy promises, thy providence. The
Conscience comes in; Lord I will ever side with thee. I will be thy faithful
Register, I will warn when the sinner is tempted, and smite when thou art
offended. I will witness for thee, and judge for thee, and guide into thy ways,
and will never let sin have quiet in this soul. The affections also come in to
Christ. O says love, I am sick of thee. O says desire, now I have my longing.
Here Is the satisfaction I sought for. Here Is the desire of Nations. Here Is
bread for me, and balm for me, all that I want. Fear bows the knee with awe and
veneration. Welcome Lord, to thee will I pay my homage. Thy word and thy rod
shall command my motions. Thee will I reverence and adore, before thee will I
fall down and worship. Grief likewise puts in, Lord thy displeasure and thy
dishonor, thy peoples calamities, and mine own iniquities shall be that that
shall set me abroach, I will mourn when thou art offended, I will weep when thy
cause is wounded: Anger likewise comes in for Christ: Lord nothing so enrages
me, as my folly against thee, that I should be so befooled and bewitched as to
hearken to the flatteries of sin, and temptations of Satan against thee. Hatred
too w^^^ side with Christ. I protest mortal enmity with thine enemies that I
will never be friends with thy foes, I vow an immortal quarrel with every sin.
I will give no quarter, I will make no peace. Thus let all thy powers give up
to Jesus Christ.

Again, thou must give up thy whole interest to him. If there be any thing that
thou keep back from Christ it will be thine undoing, Luke. 14. 33. Unless
thou will forsake all (in preparation and resolution of thy heart) thou can
not be his Disciple. Thou must hate Father and Mother, yea and thine own life
also in comparison of him, and as far as it stands in competition with him,
Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26, 27, etc. In a word, thou must give him thy self, and
all that thou have without reservation, or else thou can have no part in him.

Direct. IX. Make ch^ice of the Laws of Christ as the rule of thy words,
thoughts and actions, Psalm. 119. 30. This is the true Converts choice. But here
remember these three rules. 1. You must choose them all. There Is no coming to
Heaven by a partial obedience; Read Psalm. 119. 6, 128, 160. Ezekiel. 18. 21. None
may think it enough to take up with the cheap and easy part of Religion, and
let alone the duties that are costly, and self-denying, and grate upon the
interest of the flesh. You must take all or none. A sincere Convert, though he
makes most conscience of the greatest sins and weightiest duties; yet he makes
true conscience of little sins, and of all duties, Psalm. 119. 6, 113. Mat. 23.
23. 2. For all times, for prosperity, and for adversity, whether it rain or
shine. A true Convert is resolved in his way, he will stand to his choice, and
will not set his back to the wind, and be of the religion of the times. I have
stuck to thy testimonies, I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes
always, even to the end. Thy testimonies have I taken, as an heritage for ever,
Psalm. 119. 31, 111, 117, 44, 93. I will have respect unto thy statutes
continually. 3. This must not be done hand over head, but deliberately and
understandingly. That disobedient Son said, I go ^ir, but he went not, Mat. 24.
30. How fairly did they promise? All that the Lord our God shall speak unto
thee, we will do it; and it is like they spoke as they meant, but when it came
to trial it was found that there was not such a heart in them, as to do what
they had promised, Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 29. If you would be sincere in closing with the
laws and ways of Christ, First, Study the meaning, and latitude and compass of
them. Remember, that they are very spiritual: they reach the very thoughts and
inclinations of the heart; so that if you will walk by this rule, your very
thoughts and inward motions must be under government. Again, that they are very
strict and self-denying, quite contrary to the grain of your natural
ine^inations, Mat. 16. 24. You must take the strait gate, the narrow way, and
be content to have the flesh curbed from the liberty it desires, Mat. 7. 14. In
a word, that they are very large: For thy Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm.
119. 96. Secondly, rest not in generals (for there is much deceit in that) but
bring down thy heart to the particular commands of Christ. Those Jews in the
Prophet seemed as well resolved as any in the world, and called God to witness,
that they meant as they said: But they stuck in generals. When Gods command
crosses their inclination, they will not obey, Ier. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
compared with Chap. 43. v. 2. Take the Assemblies larger Catechism, and see
their excellent and most compendious exposition of the Commandments, and put
thy heart to it. Art thou resolved in the strength of Christ, to set upon the
conscientious practice of every duty that thou find to be there required of
thee, and to set against every sin that thou find there forbidden? This is
the way to be found in Gods statutes, that thou may never be ashamed, Psalm.
119. 80. Thirdly, Observe the special duties that thy heart is most against,
and the special sins that it is most inclined unto, and see whether it be truly
resolved to perform the one, and forgo the other. What say thou to thy bosom
sin, thy gainful sin? What say thou to costly and hazardous, and flesh
displeasing duties? If thou hal^ est here, and do not resolve, by the grace
of God, to cross thy flesh, and put to it, thou art unsound, Psalm. 18. 23.
Psalm. 119. 6.

Direct. X Let all this be completed in a solemn Covenant between God and thy
soul, Psalm 119. 106. Neh, 10. 29. For thy better help therein, take these few
Directions.

First, Set apart some time, more than once to be spent in secret before the
Lord.

1. In seeking earnestly his special assistance, and gracious acceptance of
thee.

2. In considering distinctly all the terms or conditions of the Covenant,
expressed in the form hereafter proposed.

3. In searching thine heart, whether thou art sincerely willing to for sake
all thy sins, and to resign up thy self, body and soul unto God, and his
service, to serve him in holiness and righteousness, all the days of thy life.

Secondly, Compose thy Spirit into the most serious frame possible, suitable to
a transaction of so high importance.

Thirdly, Lay hold on the Covenant of God, and rely upon his promise of giving
grace and strength, whereby thou may be enabled to perform thy promise.
Trust not to thine own strength, to the strength of thine own resolutions, but
take hold on his strength

Fourthly, Resolve to be faithful, having engaged thine heart, opened thy
mouth, and subscribed with thy hand unto the Lord, resolve in his strength
never to go back.

Lastly, Being thus prepared, on some convenient time set apart for the
purpose, set upon the work, and in the most solemn manner possible, as if the
Lord were visibly present before thine eyes, fall down on thy knees, and
spreading forth thine hands toward Heaven, open thine heart to the Lord in
these, or the like words.

O Most dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee accept of thy
poor Prodidigal now prostrating himself at thy Door; I have fallen from thee by
mine iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell by my wicked practice: But of thine infinite Grace thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ if I will but turn to Thee with all my Heart:
The terms of our Communion are either from which, or to which.
Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I am now come in, and throwing down my
weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy.

And because thou requirest, as the Condition of my Peace with Thee, that I
should put away mine Idols and be at defiance with all thine Enemies, The terms
from which we must turn, sin, Satan, the World and our own Righteousness, which
must be thus renounced,
which I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with against Thee, I here from the
bottom of my heart renounce them all, firmly Covenanting with thee not to allow
my self in any known sin; but conscientiously to use all the means that I know
thou have prescribed, for the death and utter destruction of all my
corruptions. And whereas I have formerly inordinately and idolatrously let out
my affections upon the World, I do here resign up my heart to Thee that made
it, humbly protesting before thy Glorious Majesty, that it is the firm
resolution of my heart, and that I do unfeignedly desire Grace from Thee, that
when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice this my resolution through thy
assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me in this world, rather than to
turn from thee to the ways of sin; and that I will watch against all its
temptations, whether of Prosperity, or Adversity, lest they should withdraw my
heart from thee: beseeching thee also to help me against the temptations of
Satan, to whose wicked Suggestions I resolve by thy grace never to yield my
self a Servant. And because my own righteousness is but menstruous rags^ I
renounce all confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am of my self a
hopeless, helpless, undone creature, without righteousness or strength.

And forasmuch as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most graciously to
me wretched sinner, The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate or
mediate.
to be again my God through Christ, if I would accept of thee: I call Heaven
and Earth to record this day, that I do here solemnly avouch thee for the Lord
my God, and with all possible veneration, bowing the neck of my Soul under the
feet of thy most Sacred Majesty, The ultimate is God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, who must be thus accepted.
I do here take thee, Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my
Portion, and chief good, and to give up my self, Body and Soul, for thy
Servant, promising and vowing to serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of my life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, The mediate terms are
either principal, or less principal.
the only means of coming unto thee, I do here upon the bended knees of my Soul
accept of him as the only new and living way, by which sinners may have access
to thee, The principal is Christ the Mediator, who must thus be embraced.
and do here solemnly join my self in Marriage Covenant to him.

O Blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bested, poor and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked; a most loathsome, polluted wretch, a
guilty, condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory, but
since such is thine unparalled love, I do here with all my power accept thee,
and do take thee for my Head and Husband, for better for worse, for richer, for
poorer, for all times and conditions, to love, honor, and obey thee before all
others, and this to the death; I embrace thee in all thine offices: I renounce
mine own worthiness, and do here avow thee to be the Lord my Righteousness, I
renounce mine own wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only guide? I renounce
mine own Will, and take thy^ Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
Covenant with thee to take my Lot, as it falls, with thee, and by thy grace
assisting, to run all hazards with thee, verily supposing that neither life nor
death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy holy laws, The least
principal are the Laws of Christ which must be thus observed.
as the rule of my life, and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom, I
do here willingly put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my shoulder to thy
burden; and subscribing to all thy Laws, as holy, just, and good, I solemnly
take them as the rule of my words, thoughts and actions, promising that though
my flesh contradict and rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my
whole life according to thy direction, and will not allow my self in the
neglect of any thing that I know to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings; I
am bold humbly to protest, That unallowed miscarriages, contrary to the settled
bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant, for so thou
have said.

Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known guile, or reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any flaw or falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this day
forward, to look upon as my God and Father, that ever thou should find out
such a way for the recovery of undone sinners. Glory be to thee, O God the Son,
who have loved me, and washed me from my sins in thine own Blood, and art now
become my Savior and Redeemer. Glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who by
the finger of thine Almighty Power have turned about my Heart from Sin to God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou
art now become my Covenant friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant Servant, Amen. So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth let it be ratified in Heaven.

The AUTHORS Advice.
THis Covenant I advise you to make, not only in Heart, but in Word; not only
in Word, but in Writing; and that you would with all possible reverence spread
the Writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him as your Act and
Deed. And when you have done this, set your hand to it. Keep it (...) a
Memorial of the Solemn Transactions that have passed between God and you, that
you may have recourse to it in Doubts and Temptations.

Direct. XI. Take heed of delaying thy Conversion, and set upon a speedy and
present turning. I made haste, and delayed not, Psalm. 119. 60. Remember, and
tremble at the sad instance of the foolish Virgins, that came not till the door
of mercy was shut, Mat. 25. and of a convinced Felix, that put off Paul to
another season, and we never find that he had such a season more, Acts 24. 25.
O come in while it is called to day, lest thou should be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin; lest thy day of grace should be over, and the things that
belong to thy peace should be hid from thine eyes. Now mercy is wooing of thee.
Now Christ is waiting to be gracious to thee, and the Spirit of God is striving
with thee. Now Ministers are calling, now Conscience is stirring; now the
Market is open, and Oil may be had, thou have opportunity for the buying. Now
Christ is to be had for the taking. Oh! strike in with the offers of Grace. Oh!
now or never. If thou make light of this offer, God may swear in his wrath thou
shall never taste of his Supper, Luke 14. 24.

Direct. XII. Attend conscientiously upon the Word as the means appointed for
thy Conversion, James 1. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Attend, I say, not customarily,
but conscientiously; with this desire, design, hope and expectation, that thou
may be converted by it. To every Sermon thou hear, come with this
thought, Oh, I hope God will now come in. I hope this day may be the time, this
may be the man by whom God will bring me home. When thou art coming to the
Ordinances, lift up thine heart thus to God. Lord let this be the Subbath, let
this be the Season, wherein I may receive renewing Grace. Oh let it be said,
that to day such a one was born unto thee.

Object. Thou will say, I have been long a hearer of the word, and yet it has
not been effectual to my Conversion. Ans. Yea, but thou have not attended upon
it in this manner, as a means of thy Conversion, nor with this design, nor
praying for, and expecting of this happy effect of it.

Direct. XIII. Strike in with the Spirit, when he begins to work upon thy
heart. When he works convictions, O do not stifle them, but join in with him,
and beg the Lord to carry on convictions to conversion. Quench not the Spirit;
do not out-strive him: do not resist him. Beware of putting out convictions by
evil company, or worldly business. When thou find any troubles for sin, and
fears about thine eternal State, beg of God that they may never leave thee till
they have wrought off thy heart thoroughly from sin, and wrought it over to
Jesus Christ. Say to him, Strike home, Lord, leave not the work in the midst.
If thou see that I am not yet wounded enough, that I am not troubled enough,
wound^ me yet deeper, Lord. O go to the bottom of my Corruption, let out the
lifeblood of my sins. Thus yield up thy self to the workings of the Spirit,
and hoise thy Sails to his gusts.

Direct. XIV. Set upon the constant and diligent use of serious and fervent
Prayer. He that neglects prayer, is a profane an unsanctified sinner, Job 15.
4. He that is not constant in prayer, is but an Hypocrite, Job 27. 10. (unless
the Omission be contrary to his ordinary course, under the force of some
instant temptation.) This is one of the first things Conversion appears in,
that it sets men on praying, Acts 9. 11. Therefore set to this duty. Let never
a day pass over thee, wherein thou have not, Morning, and Evening, set apart
some time for set and solemn prayer in secret. Call thy family also together
daily and duly, to worship God with thee. Woe be unto thee if thine be found
amongst the families that call not on Gods name, Ier. 10. 25. But cold and
lifeless devotions will not reach half way to Heaven. Be fervent, and
importunate. Importunity will carry it. But without violence the Kingdom of
Heaven will not be taken, Mat. 11. 12. Thou must strive to enter, Luke 13. 24.
and wrestle with tears and supplications, as Jacob, if thou meanest to carry
the blessing, Genesis 32. 24. comp. with Hos. 12. 4. Thou art undone for ever
without grace, and therefore thou must put to it, and resolve to take no
denial. That man that is fixed in this resolution; Well I must have grace, and
I will never give over, till I have grace, and I will never leave seeking and
waiting, and striving with God, and mine own heart, till he do renew me by the
power of his grace; this man is in the likeliest way to win Grace.

Obj. But God hears not sinners, their prayer is an abomination.

Ans. Distinguish between sinners. 1. There are resolved sinners: their prayers
God abhors. 2. Returning sinners; these God will come forth to, and meet with
mercy, though yet afar off, Luke 15. 20. Though the prayers of the unsanctified
cannot have full acceptance; yet God has done much at the request of such, as
at Ahab's humiliation, and Ninevehs Fast, 1 Kings 21. 26. Jonah 3. 8, 9, 10.
Surely thou may go as far as these, though thou have no grace: and how do
thou know but thou may speed in thy suit, as they did in theirs? Yea, is he
not far more likely to grant thee, than them; since thou ask in the Name of
Christ, and that not for temporal blessings, as they, but for things much more
pleasing to him, viz. for Christ, Grace, Pardon, that thou may be justified,
sanctified, renewed and fitted to serve him? Turn to these soul encouraging
Scriptures, Prove. 2. 1, to 6. Luke 11. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Prove. 8. 34. 35.

Is it not good comfort, that he calls thee? Mark 10 49. Does he set thee on
the use of means, and do thou think he will mock thee? Doubtless, he will not
fail thee, if thou be not wanting to thy self. O pray and faint not, Luke 18.
1. A person of great Quality having offended the Duke of Buckingham, the Kings
great Favorite, being admitted into his presence after long waiting,
prostrates himself at his feet, saying, I am resolved never to rise more, till
I have obtained your Grace's favor, with which carriage he did overcome him.
With such a resolution, do thou throw thy self at the feet of God. It Is for thy
life, and therefore follow him, and give not over. Resolve thou will not be put
off with bones, with common mercies. What though God do not presently open to
thee? Is not grace worth the waiting for? Knock, and wait, and no doubt but
sooner or later, mercy will come.

And this know, that thou have the very same encouragement to seek and wait,
that the Saints now in glory once had: for they were once in thy very case. And
have they sped so well? and will thou not go to the same door, and wait upon
God in the same course?

Direct. XV. Forsake thy evil Company, Prove. 9. 6. and forbear the occasions of
sin, Prove. 23. 31. Thou will never be turned from sin till thou will decline
and forego the temptations of sin.

I never expect thy Conversion from sin, unless thou art brought to some
self-denial, as to fly the occasions. If thou will be ^ibling at the bait, and
playing on the brink, and tampering and meddling with the snare, thy soul will
surely be taken. Where God does expose men in his providence, unavoidably, to
temptations, and the occasions are such as we cannot remove, we may expect
special assistance in the use of his means. But when we tempt God by running
into danger, he will not engage to support us, when we are tempted. And of all
temptations one of the most fatal and pernicious, is evil company. Oh what
hopeful beginnings have these often stifled! Oh the souls, the estates, the
families, the towns that these have ruined! How many a poor sinner has been
enlightened, and convinced, and has been just ready to give the Devil the slip,
and has even escaped his snare and yet wicked company have pulled him back at
last, and made him seven fold more the Child of Hell. In one word, I have no
hopes of thee, except thou will shake off thy evil company. Christ speaks to
thee, as to them, in another case; If thou seek me, then let these go their
way, Joh. 18. 8. Thy life lies upon it: Forsake these, or else thou can not
live, Prove. 9. 6. Will thou be worse than the beast, to run on, when thou see
the Lord with a drawn sword in the way? Numb. 22. 33. Let this sentence be
written in Capitals upon thy Conscience, A COMPANION OF FOOLS SHALL BE
DESTROYED, Prove. 13. 20. The Lord has spoken it, and who shall reverse it? And
will thou run upon destruction, when God himself does forewa^^ thee? If God do
ever change thy heart it will appear in the change of thy company. Oh fear, and
fly this Gulf by which so many thousand souls have been swallowed into
perdition. It will be hard for thee indeed, to make thine escape. Thy
Companions will be mocking thee out of thy Religion, and will study to fill
thee with prejudices against strictness, as ridiculous and comfortless. They
will be flattering thee, and alluring thee; but remember the warnings of the
Holy Ghost, My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say come
with us, e^st in thy lot among us; walk not thou in the way with them, refrain
thy foot from their path. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away. For the way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they
stumble. They l^y wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their own
lives. Prove. 1. 10. to the 18. Prove. 4. 14. to the 19. My soul is moved within
me, to see how many of my hearers are like to perish both they and their
houses, by this wretched mischief, even the haunting of such places, and
company, whereby they are drawn into sin, Once more I admonish you, as Moses
did Israel, Number. 16. 26. And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart, I
pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men. Oh! flee them as you would those
that had the Plague-Sores running in their foreheads; these are the Devils
Panders, and Decoys; and if thou do not make thine escape, they will toll
thee into perdition, and will prove thine eternal ruin.

Direct. XVI. Lastly, Set apart a day to humble thy soul in secret, by fasting
and prayer, to work the sense of thy sins and miseries upon thy heart. Read
over the Assemblies Exposition of the Commandments, and write down the duties
omitted, and sins committed by thee against every Commandment, and so make a
Catalogue of thy sins, and with shame and sorrow spread them before the Lord.
And if thy heart be truly willing to the terms, join thy self solemnly to the
Lord in that Covenant, set down in the IXth. Direction, and the Lord grant thee
mercy in his sight.

Thus I have told thee, what thou must do to be saved. Will thou not now obey
the voice of the Lord? Will thou arise and set to thy work? Oh man, what answer
will thou make, what excuse will thou have, if thou should perish at last
through very wilfulness, when thou have known the way of life? I do not fear
thy miscarrying, if thine own idleness do not at (...) undo thee, in neglecting
the use of the means, that are so plainly here prescribed. Rouse up, Oh
sluggard, and ply thy work. Be doing, and the Lord will be with thee.

A Short Soliloquy for an Unregenerate Sinner.
AH wretched man that I am! What a condition have I brought my self into by
sin? Oh! I see my heart has but deceived me all this wh^^e, in flattering me,
that my condition was good. I see, I see, I am but a lost and undone man; for
ever undone, unless the Lord help me out of this condition. My sins! My sins!
Lord, what an unclean, polluted wretch am I! more loathsome and odious to thee,
than the most hateful Venom, or noisome carcass, can be to me. Oh! what a Hell
of sin is in this heart of mine, which I have flattered my self to be a good
heart? Lord, how universally am I corrupted, in all my parts, powers,
performances? All the imaginations of the thoughts of my heart, are only evil,
continually. I am under an inability to, averseness from, and enmity against
any thing that is good; and am prone to all that is evil. My heart is a very
sink of all sin: And Oh the innumerable hosts, and swarms of sinful thoughts,
words, and actions, that have flown from thence. Oh the load of guilt that is
on my soul! My ^^ad is ^ull, my heartfull, my mind and my members, they are all
full of sin. Oh my sins! How do they stare upon me! How do they witness against
me! Woe i^ me, my Creditors are upon me, every Commandm^^^ takes hold upon me,
for more than ten thousand (...) Talents, yea ten thousand times ten thousand.
How endless then is the sum of all my debts? If this whole world were filled up
from Earth to Heaven with paper, and all this paper written over, within and
without, by Arithmeticians: yet when all were case up together, it would come
unconceivably short of what I owe to the least of Gods Commandments. Woe unto
me! for my debts are infinite, and my sins are increased. They are wrongs to an
infinite Majesty: And if he that commits Treason against a silken Mortal, is
worthy to be racked, drawn and quartered: What have I deserved, that have so
often lifted up my hand against Heaven, and have struck at the Crown and
Dignity of the Almighty?

Oh my sins! my sins! Behold a Troop comes! Multitudes! Multitudes! there is
no number of their Armies. Innumerable evils have compassed me about: Mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me; they have set themselves in array against
me. Oh! it were better to have all the Regiments of Hell come against me, than
to have my sins to fall upon me, to the spoiling of my soul. Lord, how am I
surrounded? How many are they that rise up against me? They have beset me
behind and before: They swarm within me and without me: They have possessed all
my powers, and have fortified mine unhappy soul, as a Garrison, which this broo^
of Hell does man, and maintain, against the God that made me.

And they are as mighty, as they be many. The Sands are many, but then they are
not great: The Mountains great, but then they are not many. But woe is me! my
sins are as many as the Sands, and as mighty as the Mountains. Their weight is
greater than their number. It were better that the Rocks and the Mountains
should fall upon me, than the crushing and insupportable load of my own sins.
Lord, I am heavy laden; let mercy help, or I am gone. Unload me of this heavy
guilt, this sinking load, or I am cr^^hed without ^ope, and must be pressed
down to Hell. If my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my sins laid in the
balances together, they would be heavier than the Sand of the Sea, therefore my
words are swallowed up: They would weigh down all the rocks and the hills, and
turn the balance against all the Isles of the Farth^ O Lord, thou know my
manifold transgressions, and my mighty sins.

Ah my Soul! Alas my Glory / Whither art thou humbled? Once the Glory of the
Creation, and the Image of God; now, a Lump of filthiness; a Coffin of
rottenness, replenished with stench and loathsomness. O what work has sin made
with thee? thou shall be termed Forsaken, and all the rooms of thy faculties
Desolate, and the name that thou shall be called by is, Ichabod, or, Where is
the Glory? How art thou come down mightily? My Beauty is turned into deformity,
and my Glory into shame. Lord, what a loathsome Leper am I? The Ulcerous Bodies
of Job or Lazarus were not more offensive to the eyes and nostrils of men, than
I must needs be to the most holy God, whose eyes cannot behold iniquity.

And what misery have my sins brought upon me? Lord, what a case am I in? Sold
under sin, cast out of Gods favor, accursed from the Lord, cursed in my body,
cursed in my soul, cursed in my name, in my estate, my relations, and all that
I have. My sins are unpardoned, and my ^oul within a step of death. Alas! What
shall I do? Whither shall I go? Which way shall I look? God is frowning on me
from above; Hell gaping for me beneath; Conscience smiting me within;
temptations and dangers surrounding me without. Oh, whither shall I flee? What
place can hide me from Omnisciency? What power can secure me from Omnipotency?

What meanest thou, O my soul, to go on thus? Art thou in league with Hell?
Have thou made a Covenant with Death? Art thou in love with thy misery? Is it
good for thee to be here? Alas what shall I do! Shall I go on in my sinful
ways? Why then certain damnation will be mine end: and shall I be ^o besotted
and bemadded, as to go and sell my soul to the flames, for a little Ale, and a
little ease, for a little pleasure, or gain, or content to my flesh? Shall I
linger any longer in this wretched estate? No, if I tarry here, I shall die;
What then? Is there no help, no hope? None except I turn, Why, but is there any
remedy for such woeful misery? Any mercy after such provoking iniquity? Yes, as
sure as God's Oath is true, I shall have pardon, and mercy yet, if presently,
unfeignedly, and unreservedly I turn by Christ to him.

Why then I thank thee upon the bended knees of my soul, O most merciful
Jehovah, that thy Patience has waited upon me hitherto: For had thou took me
away in this estate, I had perished for ever. And now I adore thy grace, and
accept the offers of thy mercy. I renounce all my sins, and resolve by thy
grace, to set my self against them, and to follow thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of my life.

Who am I, Lord, that I should make any claim unto thee, or have any part or
portion in thee, who am not worthy to lick up the dust of thy feet' Yet since
thou hold forth the golden Scepter, I am bold, to come and touch. To
despair, would be to disparage thy mercy; and to stand off when thou biddest me
come, would be at once to undo my self, and rebel against thee, under the
pretense of humility. Therefore I bow my soul to thee, and with all possible
thankfulness accept thee, as mine, and give up my self to thee, as thine. Thou
shall be Sovereign over me, my King, and my God: Thou shall be in the Throne,
and all my powers shall bow to thee, they shall come and worship before thy
feet. Thou shall be my Portion, O Lord, and I will rest in thee.

Thou call for my heart. O that it were any way fit for thine acceptance! I
am unworthy, O Lord, everlastingly unworthy to be thine. But since thou will
have it so, I freely give up my heart to thee: Take it; it is thine. Oh that it
were better! But Lord, I put it into thine hand, who alone can mend it. Mould
it after thine own heart; make it as thou would have it, holy, humble,
heavenly, soft, tender, flexible, and write thy Law upon it.

Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly: Enter in triumphantly: take me up to thee for
ever. I give up to thee, I come to thee, as the only way to the Father, as the
only Mediator, the means ordained to bring me to God. I have des^royed my self,
but in thee is my help. Save Lord, or else I perish, I come to thee with the
rope about my Neck. I am worthy to die, and to be damned. Never was the hire
more due to the servant, never was penny more due to the labourer, then Death
and Hell, my just wages, is due to (...) for my sins. But I fly to thy merits,
I trust alone to the value and virtue of thy Sacrifice, and preva^^^cy of thine
intercession. I submit to thy teaching, ^ make choice of thy Government. Stand
open (...) doors, that the King of Glory may come in.

O thou spirit of the most high, the comforter and sanctifier of thy chosen;
come in with all thy glorious train, all thy courtly (...), thy fruits, and
graces. Let ^^e be thine habitacion.^ I can give (...) But what is thine (...)
already; but here with the poor Widow, I cas^ my two mi^es, my soul, and my
body into thy treasury; fully resigning them up to t^^^e, to be sanctified by
thee, to be servants to thee. They it all ^e thy Patients, Cure thou their
Malady; they shall be thy Agents, Govern thou their Mo^^c^s. Too long have I
served the world, too long have I hearkened to Satan, but now I renounce them
all, and will be ruled by thy Dictates, and Directions, and guided by thy
Counsel.

O blessed Trinity! O glorious Unity! I deliver up my self to thee; receive me;
write thy name, O Lord, upon me, and upon all that I have as thy proper goods.
Set thy mark upon me, upon every member of my body, and every faculty of my
soul. I have chosen thy precepts. Thy law will I lay before me: This shall be
the Copy, which I will keep in my eye, and study to write after. According to
this rule do I resolve, by thy Grace, to walk: After this law shall my whole
man be governed. And though I cannot perfectly keep one of thy Commandments,
yet I will allow my self in the breach of none. I know my flesh will hang back:
But I resolve, in the power of thy Grace, to cleave to thee, and thy holy ways,
what ever it cost me. I am sure I cannot come off a loser by thee, therefore I
will be content with reproach, and difficulties, and hardships here, and will
deny my self, and take up my Cross, and follow thee. Lord Jesus thy Yoke is
easy, thy Cross is welcome, as it is the way to thee. I lay aside all hopes of
worldly happiness. I will be content to tarry till I come to thee. Let me be
poor and low, little and despised here, so I may but be admitted to live, and
reign with thee hereafter. Lord, thou have my heart and hand to this agreement.
Be it as the laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reversed. To this, I
will stand; In this resolution, by Grace I will live and die. I have sworn and
will perform it that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have given my free
consent, I have made my everlasting choice. Lord Jesus confirm the Contract,
Amen.

Chap. VII. Containing the Motives to Conversion.
THough what is already said of the Necessity of Conversion, and of the
Miseries of the Unconverted, might be sufficient to induce any considering mind
to resolve upon a present Turning, or Conversion unto God: Yet knowing what a
piece of desperate obstinacy and untractableness the heart of man naturally is,
I have thought it necessary, to add to the means of Conversion and Directions
for a Covenant-closure with God in Christ, some Motives to persuade you
hereunto.

O Lord, fail me not now at my last attempts. If any soul has read hitherto,
and be yet untouched, now Lord fasten in him and do thy work; Now take him by
the heart, overcome him, persuade him, till he say^ thou have prevailed, for
thou wast stronger than I. Lord; did thou not make me a Fisher of men? And
have I toiled all this while and caught nothing? Alas that I should have spent
my strength for naught! And now I am casting my last; Lord Jesus, stand thou
upon the Shore, and direct, how, and where I shall spread my Net, and let me so
enclose with arguments the souls I seek for, that they may not be able to get
out. Now Lord for a multitude of souls I Now for a full draught^ O Lord God,
remember me I pray thee, and strengthen me this once, O God.

But I turn me unto you.

Men and Brethren, Heaven and Earth do call upon you, yea Hell it self does
preach the Doctrine of Repentance unto you. The Angels of the Churches travel
with you, Gal. 4. 19. the Angels of Heaven wait for you, for your repenting and
turning unto God. O sinner, why should the Devils make merry with thee? Why
should thou be a morsel for that devouring Leviathan? Why should Harpies and
Hell Hounds tear thee, and make a feast upon thee, and when they have got thee
into the Snare, and have fastened their Talons in thee, laugh at thy
destruction, and deride thy misery, and sport themselves with thy damnable
folly? This must be thy case, except thou turn. And were it not better thou
should be a joy to Angels, than a laughing stock and sport for Devils? Verily
if thou would but come in, the Heavenly Host would take up their Anthems, and
sing, Glory be to God in the Highest; the Morning Stars would sing together,
and all the Sons of God shout for joy, and celebrate this new Creation as they
did the first. Thy Repentance would, as it were, make Holy Day in Heaven, and
the glorious Spirits would rejoice in that there is a new Brother added to
their society, Rev. 22. 9. another Heir born to their Lord, and the lost Son
received safe and sound. The true penitents tears are indeed the Wine that
cheareth both God and Man.

If it be little, that Men and Angels would rejoice at thy Conversion, know
that God himself would rejoice over thee, even with singing, and rest in his
love, Luke 15. 9. Isa. 62. 5. Never did Jacob with such joy weep over the N^ck
of his Joseph as thy Heavenly Father would rejoice over thee, upon thy coming
in to him. Look over the Story of the Prodigal. Methinks I see how the Aged
Father lays aside his estate, and forgets his years: Behold how he runs!
Luke 15. 20. Oh the haste that mercy makes! The Sinner makes not half that
speed. Methinks I see how his Bowels turn, how his compassions yearn. (How
quicksighted is love!) Mercy spies him a great way off, forgets his riotous
courses, unnatural rebellion, horrid unthankfulness, debauched practices (not a
word of these) but receives him with open Arms, clasps about his Neck, forgets
the nastiness of his Rags, kisses the Lips that deserve to be loathed, the Lips
that had been joined to Harlots, that had been commoners with the Swine, calls
for the fatted Calf, the best Robe, the Ring, the Shoes, the best cheer in
Heavens Store, the best attire in Heavens Wardrobe, Luke 15. 6, 9, 23. yea the
joy cannot be held in one breast, etc. others must be called to participate:
the friends must meet and make merry. Angels must wait but the Prodigal must be
set at the Table under his Fathers wing. He is the joy of the feast: He is the
sweet subject of the Fathers delight. The Friends sympathize, but none knows
the felicity the Father takes in his new born Son, whom he has received from
the dead. Methinks I hear the Music and the Dancing at a distance. Oh the
Melody of the Heavenly Choristers! I cannot learn the Son^, Rev. 14. 3. But
methinks I over-hear the burden, at which all the harmonious Quire with one
consent strikes sweetly in, for thus goes the round at Heavens Table, For this
my Son was dead, and is aliv^ again; was lost, and is found, Luke 5. 23, 24,
32. I need not farther explain the parable. God is the Father, Christ the
Cheer, his Righteousness the Robe, his Graces the Ornaments, Ministers, Saints,
Angels the Friends and Servants, and thou that read (if thou will but
unfeignedly repent and turn) the welcome Prodigal, the happy instance of all
this grace, and blessed subject of this joy and love.

O Rock! Oh Adamant! What! not moved yet? not yet resolved to turn forthwith,
and to close with mercy? I will try thee yet once again: If one were sent to
thee from the dead, would thou be persuaded? Why, hear the voice from the
dead, from the damned, crying to thee that thou should repent. I pray thee
that thou would send him to my Fathers house, for I have five Brethren, that
he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment. If
one went unto them from the dead, they will repent, Luke 16. 27, 28, etc. Hear,
O man, thy Predecessors in impenitence Preach to thee from the infernal
Gibbets, from the Flames, from the Rack, that thou should repent. O look down
into the bottomless Pit. See thou how the smoke of their torment ascends
for ever and ever, Rev^ 14. 11. How black are the Fiends? How furious are their
Tormentors? It Is their only music to hear how their miserable Patients roar,
to hear their bones crack. It Is their meat and drink, to see how their flesh
frieth and their fat droppeth, to drench them with burning metal, and to rip
open their bodies, and to pour in the fierce burning brass into their bowels,
and the recesses and ventricles of their hearts. What thinkes^ thou of those
chains of darkness, of those instruments of cruelty? Can thou be content to
burn? See thou how the worm gnaweth, how the oven gloweth? how the fire
rages? What say thou to that River of Brimstone, that dark and horrible
vault, that gulf of perdition? Will thou take up thy habitation here? O lay
thine ear to the door of Hell. Hear thou the curses and blasphemies, the
weepings and the wailings, how they lament their folly, and curse their day?
Mat. 22. 13. Rev. 16. 9. How do they roar and ^ell, and gnash their teeth? How
d^ep are their gronas? How feeling are their mo^ns? How unconceivable are their
miseries. If the sh^ieks of (...), and Abiram, were so terrible (when the Earth
(...) asunder, and opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and all that
apper^ained to them,) that all Israel fled at the cry of them, (...) 16. ^3,
^4. Oh how fearful wor^id the cry be, if God should take off the covaring, from
the mou^h of Hell, and let the cry of the damned aseend in all its te^ror among
the Children or men? And of all their moans and miseries, this the piercing,
killing emphasis and burden, for ever, for ^v^r. Why, as God lives, that made
thy soul, thou art but a few hours distant from all this, except thou repent
and be converted.

Oh! I am even lost and swallowed up in the abundance of those arguments that I
might suggest. If there be any point of wisdom in all the world, it is to
repent and come in, if there be any thing righteous, any thing reasonable, this
is it. If there be any thing in the world that may be called madness, and
folly, and any thing that may be counted sottish, absurd, brutish,
unreasonable, it is this, to go on in thine unconverted estate. Let me beg
thee, as thou would not wilfully destroy thy self, to sit down and weigh,
besides what has been said, these following Motives, and let conscience speak,
if it be not reason, that thou should repent and turn.

1. The God that made thee does most graciously invite thee.

First, His most sweet and merciful nature does invite thee; Oh the kindness of
God, his working bowels, his tender mercies! they are infinitely above our
thoughts, higher than heaven, what can we do? Deeper than hell, what can we
know? Job 11. 7, 8, 9. He is full of compassion, and gracious; long suffering,
and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86. 15. This is a great argument to persuade
sinners to come in. Turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, ^low to anger, of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. If
God would not repent of the evil, it were some discouragement to us, why we
should not repent. If there were no hope of mercy, it were no such wonder, if
rebels should stand out; but never had Subjects such a gracious Prince, such
Piety, Patience, Clemency, pity to deal with, as you have. Who is a God like
unto thee that pardons iniquity? etc. Mic. 7. 18. Oh sinners: See what a God
you have to deal with; if you will but turn, He will turn again, and have
compassion on you, he will subdue your iniquities, and cast all your sins into
the depth of the Sea, V. 19. Return unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I
will return unto you, Mal. 3. 7. Zech. 1. 3. Sinners do not fail in that they
have too high thoughts of Gods mercies, but in that, 1. They overlook his
Justice. 2. They promise themselves mercy out of Gods way. His mercy is beyond
all imagination, Isa. 55. 9. great mercies, 1 Chronicles. 21. 13. manifold mercies,
Neh. 9. 19. tender mercies, Psalm. 25. 6. sure mercies, Isa. 55. 3. everlasting
mercies, Psalm. 103. 17. Isa. 54. 8. and all thine own, if thou will but turn.
Art thou willing to come in? Why the Lord has laid aside his terror, erected a
Throne of Grace, holds forth the golden Scepter: Touch and live. Would a
merciful man slay his enemy, when prostrate at his feet, acknowledging his
wrong, begging pardon, and offering to enter with him into a Covenant of peace?
Much less will the merciful God. Study his Name, Exodus 34. 7. Read their
experience, Neh. 9. 17.

Secondly, His Soul encouraging calls and promises do invite thee. Ah what an
earnest suitor is mercy to thee! how lovingly, how instantly it calls after
thee! how passionately it wooeth thee! Return, thou backsliding Israel, says
the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine
iniquity. Turn O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto
you: return and I will heal your backslidings. Thou have played the Harlot with
many Lovers, yet return unto me, says the Lord, Jer. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 22. As
I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked but
that he turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. If the wicked will turn from
all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in
his righteousness that he has done shall he live. Repent and turn your selves
from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away
from you all your transgressions, and make you a clean heart, and a new spirit,
for why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dies, says the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves, and live ye,
Ezekiel. 18. 21, 23, 30, 31, 32.

Oh melting, gracious words! The voice of a God, and not of a man! This is not
the manner of men, for the offending Sovereign to sue to the offending
traitorous varlet. Oh how does mercy follow thee, and plead with thee! Is not
thy heart broken yet? Oh that to day you would hear his voice!

2. The Doors of Heaven are thrown^ open to thee; The Everlasting Gates are set
wide for thee, and an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven administered
to thee. Christ now bespeaks thee, (as she her Husband) Arise and take
possession, 1 Kings 21. 15. View the glory of the other world as set forth in
the map of the Gospel. Get thee up into Pisgah of the promises, and lift up
thine eyes westward, northward, southward, and eastward, and see the good land
that is beyond Jordan, and that goodly mountain. Behold the Paradise of God,
watered with the streams of glory. Arise and walk through the land, in the
length of it, and in the breadth of it, for all the land which thou see, the
Lord will give it to thee for ever, if thou will but return, Genesis 13. 14, 15,
17. Let me say to thee, as Paul to Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? If
thou believe indeed, ^o but view what glorious things are spoken of the City
of God, Psalm. 87. 3. and know, that all this is here tendered in the name of God
to thee. As verily as God is true it shall be for ever thine, if thou will but
thoroughly turn.

Behold the City of pure transparent Gold, whose foundations are garnished with
all manner of precious stones, whose gates are pearls, whose light is glory,
whose temple is God. Believe thou this? if thou do, art thou not worse than
distracted that wilt not take possession, when the gates are flung open to
thee, and thou art bid to enter? O ye sons of folly, will ye embrace the
dunghills, and refuse the Kingdom? Behold, the Lord God takes you up into the
mountain, shows you the Kingdom of Heaven, and all the glory thereof, and tells
you, All this will I give you, if you will fall down and worship me: If you
will submit to mercy, accept my Son, and serve me in righteousness and
holiness. O fools, and slow of heart to believe! will you court the harlot,
will you seek and serve the world, and neglect the eternal glory? What! not
enter into Paradise, when the flaming sword, that was once set to keep you out,
is now used to drive you in? But you will say, I am uncharitable, to think you
infidels and unbelievers. Why, what shall I think you? either you are desperate
unbelievers that do not credit it, or stark distracted, that you know and
believe the excellency and eternity of his glory, and yet do so fearfully
neglect it. Surely you have no faith, or no reason; and I had almost said,
conscience should tell you so, before I leave you.

Do but attend what is offered you, Oh blessed Kingdom! A Kingdom of glory, 1
These. 2. 1. a Kingdom of righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. a Kingdom of peace, Romans
14. 17. an everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1. 11. Here thou shall dwell, here thou
shall reign for ever; and the Lord shall set thee in a throne of glory, Mat.
19. 28. and with his own hand shall set the Royal Diadem upon thine head, and
give thee a Crown not of thorns (for there shall be no sinning nor suffering
there, Rev. 21. 27. 22, 3, 4, 5.) not of Gold (for this shall be viler than the
dirt in that day) but a Crown of Life, James 1. 12. a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. a Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. Yea thou shall put on glory as a
robe, 1 Cor. 1. 15. 53. and shall shine like the Sun in the firmament in the
glory of thy Father, Mat. 13. 43. Look now upon thy dirty flesh, thy clay, thy
worms meat: this very flesh, this lump, this carcass shall be brighter than the
Stars, Dan. 12. 3. In short, thou shall be made like unto the Angels of God,
Luke 20. 36. and behold his face in righteousness, Psalm. 17. 15. Look in now
and tell me, do thou yet believe? If not, conscience must pronounce thee an
infidel, for it is the very word of God that I speak.

But if thou say, thou believe, let me next know thy resolutions. Will thou
embrace this for thy happiness? Will thou forgo thy sinful gains, thy forbidden
pleasures? Will thou trample on the worlds esteem, and spit in the harlots
face, and stop thine ears at her flatteries, and wrest thee out of her
embraces? Will thou be content to take up with present reproach and poverty, if
it lie in thy way to Heaven, and follow the Lord with humble selfdenyal, in a
mortified and flesh-displeasing life? If so, all is thine, and that for ever.
And art not thou fairly offered? Is it not pity but he should be damned, that
will needs go on and perish, when all this may be had for the taking? In a
word, will thou now close with these proffers? Will thou take God at his word?
Will thou let go thy hold-fast of the world, and rid thy hands of thy sins, and
lay hold on eternal life? If not, let conscience tell thee whether thou art not
distracted, or bewitched, that thou should neglect so happy a choice, by
which thou might be made for ever.

3. God will settle unspeakable privileges at present, upon thee, 1 Cor. 3.
22. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. Though the full of your blessedness shall be deferred
till hereafter, yet God will give you no little things in hand.

He will redeem you from your thraldom, John 8. 36. He will pluck you from the
paw of the Lion, Col. 1. 13. the serpent shall bruise your heel, but you shall
bruise his head, Genesis 3. 15. He shall deliver you from the present evil world,
Gal. 1. 4. Prosperity shall not destroy you; Adversity shall not separate
between him and you, Romans 8. 35, 37, 38. He will redeem you from the power of
the grave, Psalm. 49. 15. and make the King of Terrors a messenger of peace to
you. He will take out the curse from the Cross, Psalm. 119. 71. and make
affliction the fining-pot, the fan, the physic, to blow off the chaff, purify
the metal, and purge the mind, Dan. 12. 10. Isa. 27. 9. He will save you from
the arrest of the Law, and turn the curse into a blessing to you, Romans 6. 14.
Gal. 3. 14. He has the keys of hell and death, and shuts that no man
opens, Rev. 3. 7. and 1. 18. and he will shut its mouth, as once he did the
Lions, Dan. 6. 22. that you shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 11.

But he will not only save you from misery, but install you into unspeakable
prerogatives. He will bestow himself upon you, he will be a friend unto unto
you, and a father to you, 2 Cor. 6. 18. he will be a Sun and a Shield to you,
Psalm. 84. 11. in a word, he will be a God to you, Genesis 17. 7. and what can be
said more? What you may expect that a God should do for you, and be to you,
that he will be, that he will do. She that marries a Prince, expects he should
do for her like a Prince, that she may live in a suitable state, and have an
answerable dowry. He that has a King for his Father or Friend, expects he
should do for him like a King. Alas, the Kings and Monarchs of the Earth, so
much above you, are but like the painted Butter-flies amongst the rest of their
kind, or the fair colored Palmer-worm amongst the rest of the worms, if
compared with God. As he does infinitely exceed the glory and power of his
glittering dust, so he will beyond all proportion exceed, in doing for his
Favorites, whatever Princes can do for theirs. He will give you grace and
glory, and withhold no good thing from you, Psalm. 84. 11. He will take you for
his Sons and Daughters, and make you Heirs of his promises, Heb. 6. 17. and
establish his everlasting Covenant with you, Ier. 32. 40. He will justify you
from all that Law, Conscience, Satan, can charge upon you, Romans 8. 33, 34. he
will give you free access into his presence, and accept your persons, and
receive your prayers, Ephesians. 3. 12. Ephesians. 1. 6. 1 John 5. 14. He will abide in you
and make you the men of his secrets, and hold a constant and friendly communion
with you, John 14. 23. John 15. 15. 1 John 1. 3. His ear shall be open, his
door open, his store open at all times to you. His blessing shall rest upon
you, and he will make your enemies to serve you, and work about all things for
good unto you, Psalm. 115. 13. Romans 8. 28.

4. The Terms of mercy are brought as low, as possible, to you. God has
stooped as low to sinners, as with honor he can. He will not be thought a
fautor of sin, nor stain the glory of his holiness, and whither could he come
lower than he has, unless he should do this? He has abated the impossible
terms of the first Covenant, Ier. 3. 13. Mark 5. 36. Acts 16. 31. Acts 3. 19.
Prove. 28. 13. He does not impose any thing unreasonable, or impossible, as a
condition of life upon you. Two things were necessary to be done, according to
the Tenor of the first Covenant by you. 1. That you should fully satisfy the
demands of Justice for past offenses. 2. That you should perform personally,
perfectly, and perpetually the whole Law for the time to come. Both these are
to us impossible, Romans 8. 3. But behold Gods gracious abatement in both. He
does not stand upon satisfaction, he is content to take off the surety (and he
of his own providing too) what he might have exacted from you, 2 Cor. 5. 19. He
declares himself to have received a ransom, Job 33. 24. 1 Timothy 2. 6. and that
he expects nothing but that you should accept his Son, and he shall be
righteousness and redemption to you, John 1. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And for the
future obedience, here he is content to yield to your weakness, and remit the
rigor. He does not stand upon perfection (as a condition of life, though he
still insists upon it as due) but is content to accept of sincerity, Genesis 17.
1. Prove. 11. 20. Though you cannot pay the full debt, he will accept you
according to that which you have, and take willing for doing, and the purpose
for the performance, 2 Cor. 8. 12. 2 Chronicles. 6. 8. Heb. 11. 17. and if you come
in his Christ, and set your hearts to please him, and make it the chief of your
cares, he will approve and reward you, though the vessel be marred in your
hands.

Oh consider your Makers condescension. Let me say to you, as Naaman's servant
to him: My Father, if the Prophet had b^d thee do some great thing, would
then not have done it? how much rather, when he says unto thee, wash and be
clean? 2 Kings 5. 13. If God had demanded some terrible, some severe and
rigorous thing of you, to escape eternal damnation, would you not have done it?
Suppose it had been to spend all your days in sorrow in some howling
Wilderness, or pine your selves with famine, or to offer the fruit of your
bodies for the sin of your souls, would you not have thankfully accepted
eternal redemption, though these had been the conditions? Yea farther, if God
should have told you, you should have fried in the fire for millions of ages,
or been so long tormented in Hell, would you not have gladly accepted it? Alas,
all these are not so much as one sand in the glass of eternity. If your
offended Creator should have held you but one year upon the rack, and then bid
you come and forsake your sins, accept Christ, and serve him a few years in
self-denial, or lie in this case for ever and ever: Do you think you should
have stuck at the offer, and disputed the terms, and have been unresolved,
whether you were best to accept of the motion? O sinner return and live; why
should thou die, when life is to be had for the taking, and mercy should be
beholding to thee (as it were) to be saved? Could thou say indeed, Lord, I
know that thou wast an hard man, Mat. 25. 24. thou had some little excuse;
but when the God of Heaven has stooped so low, and bated so far, if now thou
should stand off, who shall plead for thee?

Obj. Notwithstanding all these abatements, I am no more able to perform those
conditions, (in themselves so easy) of faith and repentance, and sincere
obedience; than to satisfy and fulfill the Law.

Answ. These you may perform by Gods grace enabling, whereas the other are
naturally impossible in this state, even to believers themselves. But let the
next consideration serve for a fuiler answer.

5. Wherein you are impotent, God does offer grace to enable you. I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, Prove. 1. 24. What though you are
plunged into the ditch of that misery, from which you can never get out? Christ
offers to help you out; he stretches his hand to you, and if you perish, it
is for refusing his help. Behold I stand at the door, and knock: if any man
open to me, I will come in, Rev. 3. 20. What though you are poor, and wretched,
and blind, and naked, Christ oftereth a cure for your blindness, a cover for
your nakedness, a remedy for your poverty, he tendreth you his righteousness,
his graces, I counsel thee to buy of me gold, that thou may be rich, and
white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and anoint thine eyes with
eye salve, that thou may see, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Do you say the condition is
impossible, for I have not wherewith to buy? You must know, that this buying is
without money, and without price, Isa. 55. 1. This buying is by begging, and
seeking with diligence and constancy in the use of God's means, Prove. 2. 3, 4.
God commands thee to know him, and to fear him. Do thou say, Yea but my
mind is blinded, and my heart is hardened from his fear? I answer, God does
offer to enlighten thy mind^ and to teach thee his fear: that is presented to
thy choice, Prove. 1. 29. For (...) hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear
of the Lord. So that now, if men live in ignorance and estrangement from the
Lord, it is because they will not understand, and desire not^ ^e knowledge of
his ways, Job 21. 14. If thou cryest after knowledge, if thou sea^e^t her as
Silver, etc. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. Is not here a fair offer? Turn you at my
reproof. Behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, Prove. 1. 23. Though of your
selves you can do nothing, yet you may do all through his Spirit enabling you,
and he does offer assistance to you. God bids you wash and make you clean, Isa.
1. 16. you say you are unable as much as the L^^pard to wash out his spots,
Ier. 13. 23. yea but the Lord does offer to purge you, so that if you be fi^thy
still, it is through your own wilfulness, Ezekiel. 24. 13. I have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged, Jer. 13. 27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?
when shall it once be? God does wait when you will be made clean, when you will
yield to his motions, and accept of his offers, and let him do for and in you,
what you cannot do for your selves. You do not know how much God will do upon
your importunity, if you will but be restless and instant with him, Luke 11. 8.
and 18. 5.

If God has not bound himself by express promise to wicked men, to give them
grace in the diligent use of the means, yet he has given them abundant
encouragement to expect it from him, if they seek it earnestly in his way. His
most gracious nature is abundant encouragement. If a rich and most bountiful
man should see thee in misery, and bid thee come to his door, would thou not
with confidence expect, at thy coming to find some relief? Thou art not able to
believe, nor repent: God appoints thee to use such and such means, in order to
thy obtaining faith and repentance: does not this argue that God will bestow
these upon thee, if thou do ply him diligently in prayer, meditation,
reading, hearing, self-examination, and the rest of his means? Otherwise God
should but mock his poor creatures, to put them upon there self-denying
endeavors, and then when they have put hard to it, and continued waiting upon
him for grace, deny them at last. Surely if a sweet natured man would not deal
thus, much less will the most merciful and gracious God.

I intended to have added many other arguments, but these have swollen under my
hands, and I hope the judicious reader, will rather look upon the weight than
the number.

The Conclusion of the whole.
AND now, my brethren, let me know your minds, What do you intend to do? Will
you go on and die, or will you set upon a through and speedy conversion, and lay
hold on eternal life? how long will you linger in Sodom? how long will you halt
between two opinions? 1 Kings 18. 21. Are you not yet resolved whether Christ
or Barabbas, whether Bliss or Torment, whether the land of Cabul, 1 Kings 9.
13. or the Paradise of God be the better choice? Is it a disputable case,
whether the Abana and Phar^har of Da^^^us, be better than all the streams of
Eden? or whether the vile puddle of sin, be to be preferred before the water of
life, clear as Cristal, proceeding, out of the throne of God and of the Lamb?
Can the world in good earnest do that for you, that Christ can? Will it stand
by you to eternity? Will pleasures, titles, lands, treasures, descend with you?
Psalm. 49. 17. 1. Tim. 6. 7. If not, had you not need look after somewhat that
will? What mean you to stand wavering, to be off and on? Foolish Children! how
long will you stick between the womb and the world? Shall I leave you at last
no farther than Agrippa, but almost persuaded? Why you are for ever lost, if
left here. As good not at all, as not altogether Christians. You are half of
the mind to give over your former negligent life, and to set to a strict and
holy course: you could wish you were as some others be, and could do as they
can do. How long will you rest in idle wishes, and fruitless purposes? When
will you come to a fixed, full, and firm resolve? Do not you see how Satan
gulls you, by t^mpting you to delays? How long has he tolled you on in the way
of perdition? How many years have you been purposing posing to amend? What if
God should have taken you off this while?

Well, put me not off with a dilatory answer: Tell me not of hereafter. I must
have your present consent. If you be not now resolved, while the Lord is
treating with you, and wooing of you, much less are you like to be hereafter,
when these impressions are worn out, and you are hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Will you give me your hands? Will you set open the doors,
and give the Lord Jesus the full and present possession? Will you put your
names into his Covenant? Will you subscribe? What do you resolve upon? If you
are still upon your delays, my labor is lost, and all is like to come to
nothing. Fain I would, that you should now put in your adventures. Come, cast
in your Lot, make your choice: Now is the accepted time, now is the day of thy
salvation; to day if you will hear his voice. Why should not this be the day
from whence thou should be able to date thine happiness? Why should thou
venture a day longer, in this dangerous and dreadful condition? What if God
should this night require thy soul? O that thou might know in this thy day,
the things that belong unto thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes! Luke
19. 42. This is thy day, and it is but a day, John 9. 4. Others have had their
day, and have received their doom; and now art thou brought upon the stage of
this world, here to act thy part for a whole eternity. Remember, thou art now
upon thy good behavior for everlasting. If thou make not a wise choice now,
thou art undone for ever. Look what thy present choice is, such must thine
eternal condition be, Luke 10. 42. Luke 16. 25. Prove. 1. 27, 28, 29.

And is it true indeed? is life and death at thy choice? yea it is as true as
truth is, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. why then, what hinders but that thou should be
happy? Nothing does or can hinder, but thine own wilful neglect, or refusal. It
was the passage of the Eunuch to Philip; See here is water, what does hinder me
to be baptized? So I may say to thee: see, here is Christ, here is mercy,
pardon, life, what hinders but that thou should be pardoned, and saved? One
of the Martyrs as he was praying at the stake, had his pardon set by in a box
(which indeed he refused, deservedly, because upon unworthy terms.) But here
the terms are most honorable and easy. O sinner, will thou burn with thy
pardon by thee? Why do but forthwith give up thy consent to Christ, to renounce
thy sins, deny thy self, take up the Yoke and the Cross, and thou carriest the
day, Christ is thine, pardon, peace, life, blessedness, all are thine: and is
not this an offer worth the embracing? Why should thou hesitate, or
doubtfully dispute about the case? Is it not past controversy, whether God be
better than sin, and glory better than vanity? Why should thou forsake thine
own mercy, and sin against thine own life? When will thou shake off thy sloth,
and lay by thine excuses? Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou know not
where this night may lodge thee, Prove. 27. 1.

Beloved, now the holy Spirit is striving with you. He will not always strive.
Have thou not selt thy heart warmed by the word, and been almost persuaded to
leave off thy sins, and come in to God? Have thou not felt some good motions in
thy mind, wherein thou have been warned of thy danger, and told what thy
careless course would end in? It may be thou art like young Samuel, who when
the Lord called once and again, he knew not the voice of the Lord, 1 Samuel 3. 6,
7. but these motions and items are the offers, and essays, and calls, and
strivings of the spirit. O take the advantage of the tide, and know the day of
thy visitation.

Now the Lord Jesus stretches wide his arms to receive you. He beseeches you
by us. How movingly how meltingly, how pitifully, how passionately he calls!
The Church is put into a sudden ecstasy upon the found of his voice, The voice
of my beloved, Cant. 2. 8. O will thou turn a deaf ear to his voice? It is not
the voice that breaks the Cedars, and makes the mountains to skip like a
Calf, that shakes the Wilderness, and divides the flames of fire, it is not
Sinai's Thunder; but the soft and still voice. It is not the voice of Mount
Ebal, a voice of cursing, and terror; but the voice of Mount Gerizim, the voice
of blessing, and of glad tidings of good things. It is not the voice of the
Trumpet, nor the noise of War, but a message of peace from the King of peace,
Ephesians. 6. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 20. Methinks it should be with thee as with the
Spouse; My soul failed when he spoke, Cant. 5. 6. I may say to thee, O sinner,
as Martha to her Sister. The Master is come, and he calls for thee, John 11.
28. Oh now with Mary arise quickly, and come unto him. How sweet are his
invitations! He cries in the open concourse, If any man thirst let him come
unto me and drink, John 7. 37. Prove. 1. 21. He broacheth his own body for thee.
O come and lay thy mouth to his side. How free is he! he excludes none.
Whosoever will let him come and take the water of life freely. Rev. 22. 17.
Whose is simple, let him turn in hither. Come eat of my bread, drink of the
wine which I have mingled. For sake the foolish, and live, Prove. 9. 4, 5, 6.
Come unto me, etc. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls, Mat. 11. 28, 29. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out, John 6. 37. How does he bemoan the obstinate refuser? O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered by Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Mat. 23. 37. Behold me, behold me:
I have stretched out my hands all the day to a rebellious people, Isa. 65. 1,
2. O be persuaded now at last, to throw your selves into the arms of love.

Behold, O ye sons of men, the Lord Jesus has thrown open the prisons, and now
he comes to you (as the Magistrates once to them, Acts 16. 39.) and beseeches
you to come out. If it were from a Palace, or a Paradise that Christ did call
you, it were no wonder if you were unwilling (and yet how easily was Adam
tolled from thence?) but it is from your prison Sirs, from your Chains, from
the Dungeon, from the Darkness that he calls you, Isa. 42. 6, 7. and yet will
you not come? He calls you unto liberty, Gal. 5. 13. and yet will you not
hearken? His Yoke is easy, his Laws are Liberty, his Service Freedom, Matthew.
11. 30. James 1. 25. 1 Cor. 7. 22. and (whatever prejudices you have against
his ways) if a God may be believed, you shall find them all pleasure and peace,
and shall taste sweetness and joy unutterable, and take infinite delight and
felicity in them, Prove. 3. 17. Psalm. 119. 165. ^ Pet. 1. 8. Psalm. 119. 103, 111.

Beloved, I am loath to leave you. I cannot tell how to give you over. I am now
ready to shut up, but fain I would drive this bargain between Christ and you,
before I end. What! shall I leave you as I found you at last? Have you read
hitherto, and are not yet resolved upon a present abandoning all your sins, and
closing with Jesus Christ? Alas, what shall I say? What shall I do? Will you
turn off all my importunity? Have I run in vain? Have I used so many arguments,
and spent so much time to persuade you, and yet must sit down, at last in
disappointment? But it is a small matter that you turn me off: You put a slight
upon the God that made you; you reject the bowels and beseechings of a Savior,
and will be found resisters of the Holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. if you will not now
be prevailed with to repent and be converted.

Well, though I have called you long, and ye have refused, I shall yet this
once more lift up my voice like a Trumpet, and cry from the highest places of
the City, before I conclude with a miserable Conclamatum est. Once more I shall
call after regardless sinners, that, if it be possible. I may awaken them. O
earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Jer. 22. 29. Unless you be
resolved to die, lend your ears to the last calls of mercy. Behold, in the name
of God I make open proclamation to you. Hearken unto me, O ye children. Hear
instruction, and be wise and refuse it not, Prove. 8. 32. 33.

Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk, without money and without
price. Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ^e
that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your
ear and come ye unto me; hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting^ Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, Isai. 55. 1, 2,
3.

Ho, every one that is sick of any manner of disease or torment, Mat^h. 4. 23,
24. or is possessed with an evil spirit, whether of pride, or fury, or lust, or
covetousness, come ye to the Physician; bring away your sick. Lo, here is he
that heals all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the people.

Ho, every one that is in debt, and every one that is in distress, and every
one that is discontented, gather your selves unto Christ^ and he will become a
Captain over you. He will be your protection from the arrests of the Law; He
will save you from the hand of Justice. Behold he is an open sanctuary to you,
he is a known Refuge, Heb. 6. 18. Psalm. 48. 3. Away with your sins, and come in
unto him, lest the avenger of blood seize you, lest devouring wrath overtake
you.

Ho, every ignorant sinner, come and buy eyesalve that thou may see, Rev. 3.
18. Away with thine excuses; thou art for ever lost, if thou continuest in this
estate, 2 Cor. 4. 3. But accept of Christ for thy Prophet, and he will be a
light unto thee, Isa. 42. 6. Ephesians. 5. 14. Cry unto him for knowledge, study
his word, take pains about the Principles of Religion, humble thy self before
him, and he will teach thee his way, and make thee wise unto salvation, Mat.
13. 36. Luke 8. 9. John 5. 39. Psalm. 25. 9. But if thou will not follow him, in
the painful use of his means, but sit down, because thou have but one talent,
he will condemn thee for a wicked and slothful servant, Mat. 25. 24, 26.

Ho, every profane sinner, come in and live: Return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon thee. Be in^^eated. Oh return, come: Thou that have filled thy
mouth with oaths, and execrations, all manner of sins and blasphemies shall be
forgiven thee, Mark 3. 28. if thou will but thoroughly turn unto Christ, and
come in. Though thou wast as unclean as Magdalen; yet put away thy Whoredoms
out of thy sight, and thine adulteries from between thy breasts, and give up
thy self unto Christ, as a vessel of holiness, alone for his use, and then,
though thy sins be as (...), they shall be as wool, and though they be as
crimson, they shall be as white as snow, Luke 7. 37. Hos. 2. 2. 1 These. 4. 4.
Isa. 1. 18.

Hear, O ye drunkards, How long will you be drunken? put away your wine, 1 Samuel
1. 14. Though you have rolled in the vomit of your sin, take the vomit of
repentance and heartily disgorge your beloved lusts, and the Lord will receive
you, 2. Cor. 6. 17. Give up your selves unto Christ, to live soberly,
righteously and godly; embrace his righteousness; accept his government; and
though you have been swine he will wash you, Rev. 3. 6.

Hear O ye loose companions, whose delight is in vain and wicked society, to
sport away your time in carnal mirth and jollity with them, come in at wisdoms
call, and choose her, and her ways, and you shall live, Prove. 9. 5, 6.

Hear, O ye scorners, hear the word of the Lord: Though you have made a sport
at godliness, and the professors thereof; though you have made a scorn of
Christ, and of his ways; yet, even to you does he call, to gather you under the
wings of his mercy, Prove. 1^ 22, 33. In a word, though you should be found
among the worst of that black roll, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. yet, upon your through
Conversion, you shall be washed, you shall be justified, you shall be
sanctified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, ver.
11.

Ho, every formal professor, that art but a lukewarm and dough-baked Christian,
and restest in the form of godliness, give over thy halving, and thy halting,
be a throughout Christian, and be zealous and repent, and then though thou have
been an offense to Christ's stomach, thou shall be the joy of his heart, Rev.
3. 16, 19, 20.

And now bear witness, that mercy has been offered you. I call Heaven and
Earth to record against you this day, that I have set before you life and
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that you may live, Deuteronomy.
30. 19. I can but woo you, and warn you: I cannot compel you to be happy, if I
could, I would. What answer will you send me with to my Master? Let me speak
unto you as Abraham's servant to them, and now if you will deal kindly and truly
with my Master, tell me, Genesis 24. 49. O for such a happy answer, as Rebekah
gave to them, Genesis 24. 57, 58. And they said we will call the damsel, and
inquire at her mouth: And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Will thou go
with this man? and she said I will go. O that I had but thus much from you! Why
should I be your accuser, Mat. 10. 14, 15. who thirst for your salvation? Why
should the passionate pleadings and wooings of mercy be turned into the horrid
aggravations of your obstinacy and additions to your misery? Judge in your
selves. Do you not think their condemnation will be doubly dreadful, that shall
still go on in their sins, after all endeavors to recall them? Doubtless, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, yea for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the
day of Judgment, than for you, Mat. 11. 22, 24.

Beloved, if you have any pity for your perishing souls, close with the present
offers of mercy. If you would not continue and increase the pains of your
traveling Ministers, do not stick in the birth. If the God that made you have
any Authority with you, obey his command and come in. If you are not the
despisers of grace, and would not shut up the doors of mercy against your
selves, repent and be converted. Let not Heaven stand open for you in vain. Let
not the Lord Jesus open his wares, and bid you buy without money and without
price, in vain. Let not his Ministers and his Spirit, strive with you in vain,
and leave you now at last unperswaded; lest the sentence go forth against you,
The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in
vain. Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them, Jer. 6. 29, 30.

Father of Spirits, take the heart in hand that is too hard for my weakness. Do
not thou have ended, though I have done. Half a word from thine effectual
power, will do the work. O thou that have the Key of David, that openest when
no man shuts, open thou this heart as thou did Lydia's and let the King of
glory enter in: And make this soul thy captive. Let not the tempter harden him
in delays. Let him not stir from this place, nor take his eyes from these lines
till he be resolved to forgo his sins, and to accept of life upon thy
self-denying terms. In thy name, O Lord God, did I go forth to these Labors,
in thy name do I shut them up. Let not all the time they have cost, be but lost
hours; let not all the thoughts of heart, and all the pains that have been
about them, be but lost labor. Lord put in thine hand into the heart of this
Reader, and send thy Spirit as once thou did Philip, to join himself to the
Chariot of the Eunuch, while he was reading the word. And though I should never
know it while I live, yet I beseech thee, Lord God, let it be found at that
day, that some souls are converted by these labors, and let some be able to
stand ^^r^h and say, that by these ^ers^asions, they were won unto thee. Amen,
Amen. Let him that read hsay, Amen.

Mr. Alleine's Counsel for Personal and Family-godliness.
BEloved, I despair of ever bringing you to salvation without sanctification:
Or possessing you of happiness, without persuading you to holiness. God knows I
have not the least hope ever to see one of your faces in Heaven, except you be
converted and sanctified, and exercise your selves unto godliness. I beseech
you study personal godliness, and family-godliness.

1. Personal godliness. Let it be your first care to set up Christ in your
hearts. See that you make all your worldly interests to stoop to him, that you
be entirely and unreservedly devoted unto him. If you wilfully, and
deliberately, and ordinarily harbor any sin, you are undone, Psalm 68. 21.
Ezekiel. 18. 20. See that you unfeignedly take the Laws of Christ, as the rule of
your words, thoughts, and actions; and subject your whole man, members and mind
faithfully to him, Psalm. 119. 34. Romans 6. 13. If you have not a true respect to
all Gods Commandments, you are unsound at heart. Psalm. 119. 6. Oh study to get
the Image and impress of Christ upon you within. Begin with your hearts, else
you build without a foundation. Labor to get a saving change within! or else
all external performances will be to no purpose. And then study to show forth
the power of godliness in the life. Let Piety be your first and great business.
It Is the highest point of Justice, to give God his due. Beware that none of you
be a Prayer-less person; for that is a most certain discovery of a Christless
and a graceless person of one that is a very Stranger to the fear of God. Psalm.
14. 4. I^b 15. 4. Suffer not your Bibles to gather dust. See that you converse
daily with the word, John 5. 39. That man can never lay claim to blessedness,
whose delight is not in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Let meditation and
self-examination be your daily exercise.

But Piety, without Charity, is but the half of Christianity, or rather impious
hypocrisy. We may not divide the Tables, See therefore that you do Justly, and
love mercy, and let Equity and Charity run like an even thread, throughout all
your dealings. Be you temperate in all things, and let Chastity and Sobriety be
your undivided companions. Let Truth and Purity, Seriousness and Modesty,
Heavenliness and Gravity, be the constant ornaments of your speech. Let
patience and humility, simplicity and sincerity, shine out in all the parts of
your conversations. See that you forget and forgive wrongs, and require them
with kindness, as you would be found children of the most High. Be merciful in
your censures, and put the most favorable construction upon your brethrens
carriage, that their Actions will reasonably bear. Be slow in promising,
punctual in fulfilling. Let meekness and innocence, affableness, yieldingness
and courtesy, commend your conversations to all men. Let none of your
relations want that love and loyalty, that reverence and duty, that tenderness,
care and vigilanc^, which their several places and capacities call for. This is
throughout godliness. I charge you before the most high God, that none of you
be fourd a swearer, or a liar, a lover of evil company, or a scoffer, or
malicious, or covetous, or a drunkard, or a glutton, unrighteous in his
dealing^ unclean in his living, or a quarreller, or a thief, or a backbiter, or
a railer: For I denounce unto you from the living God, that destruction and
damnation is the end of all such, Prove. 13. 20. Iam 5. 12. Rev. 21. 8. 1. Cor.
6. 9, 10 Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.

2. Family godliness. He that has set up Christ in his heart, will be sure to
study to s^t him up in his house. Let every family with you be a Christian
Church; 1 C^r. 16 19. every house a house of prayer; let every householder say
with I^shua, I and my ^^^se wi^^ serve the Lord; Josh. 24. 15. and resolve with
David, I will walk within my house with a perfect heart, Psalm. 101. 2. Let me
press upon you a few duties. In general.

First, Let Religion be in ^^^r families, not as a matter by the by (to be
minded at leisure when the world will give you leave) but the standing business
of the house. Let them have your prayers as duly as their meals. Is there any
of your families, but have time for their taking food? wretched man! can thou
find time to ^at in, and not find time to pray in?

Secondly, Settle in upon your hearts, that your souls are bound up in the
souls of your family. They are committed unto you, and (if they be lost through
your neglect) will be required at your hands. Sirs, if you do not, you shall
know, that the charge of souls is a heavy charge, and that the blood of souls
is a heavy guilt. O man, have thou a charge of souls to answer for, and do
thou not yet be^tir thy self for them, that their blood be not found in thy
skirts? will thou do no more for immortal souls than thou will do for thy
beasts that perish? what do thou do for thy children, and servants? thou
providest meat and drink for them, agreeable to their natures, and do thou
not the same for thy beasts? thou give them mediclnes, and cherishest them
when they be sick, and do thou not as much for thy swine? More particularly.

1. Let the solemn reading of the word and singing of Psalms, be your family
exercises, Isa. 34. 16. Ioh. 5. 39. Psalm. 118. 15. [See Christ singing with his
family, viz. his Disciples, Mat. 26. 30 Lu 9. 18.]

2. Let every person in your families be duly called to an account, of their
profiting by the word heard or read, as they be about doing your own business.
This is a duty of consequence unspeakable, and would be a means to bring those
under your charge, to remember and profit by what they receive. See Christ's
example in calling his family to an account, Mat. 16, 11, 13, 15.

3. Often take an account of the souls under your care, concerning their
Spiritual estates; [Herein you must be followers of Christ. Mat. 13. 10, 36,
51. ^ark 4 10, 11.] make inquiry into their conditions, insist much upon the
sinfulness and misery of their natural estate, and upon the necessity of
regeneration and conversion, in order to their salvation. Admonish them gravely
of their sins, encourage beginnings. Follow them earnestly, and let them have
no quiet for you, till you see them in a saving change. This is a duty of high
consequence, but (I am afraid) fearfully neglected. Does not Conscience say,
thou art the Man?

4. Look to the strict sanctifying of the Sabbath by all your households, Exodus
20. 19. Lev. 23. 3. Many poor families have little time else. O improve but
your Sabbath days as diligently in laboring for knowledge, and doing your
Makers work, as you do the other days in doing your own work, and I doubt not
but you may come to some proficiency.

5. Let the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of solemn Prayer, be daily offered up
in all your families, Psalm. 92. 1, 2. Exodus 30. 7, 8. Luke 19, 10. Beware they
be not found among the families that call not upon Gods name, for why should
there be wrath from the Lord upon your families? Ier. 10. 25. O miserable
families, without God in the world, that are without family Prayer! what! have
you so many family sins, family wants, family mercies, what! and yet no family
Prayer^? how do you pray with all prayer and supplication, if you do not with
family Prayer? Ephesians. 6. 18. Say not, I have no time, What, have thou all thy
time on purpose to serve God, and save thy soul? and yet is this it for which
thou can find no time? find but a heart, and I will find time. Pinch out of
your meals, and sleep, rather than want for Prayer. Say not My business will
not give leave. This is the greatest business to save thy self, and the souls
committed to thee. Besides, a whet will be no let. In a word the blessing of
all is to be got by prayer, Ier. 29. 11, 12. 2 Samuel 7. 29. and what is thy
business without Gods blessing? say not, I am not able. Use the one talent, and
God will increase, Mat. 25. 24. etc. Helps are to be had, till thou art better
able. But if there be no other remedy, thou must join with thine abler
neighbor, God has special regard to joint-prayer, Iam 5. 4 10 19 Ac^s 12. 5,
10, 12. 2 Cor. 1. 11. and therefore you must improve family advantages for the
performing of it.

6. Put every one in your fami^^^s upon private prayer. Observe whether they do
perform it. G^t them the help of a form, if they need it, till they are able to
go without it. Direct them how to pray, by mindi^g them of their sins, ^ants,
and mercies, the materials of prayer. This was the practice of John, and of
jesus, Luke 11. 1, 2, etc.

7. Set up Catechizing in your families, at the least once every week. Have you
no dread of the Almighties charge, that you should teach these things
diligently to your children, and talk of them as you sit in your houses, etc.
Deuteronomy 66, 7, 8, 9. and 4. 9, 10. and 11 18, 19, 20. and train them up in the way
wherein they should go, Prove 22. 6. the margin. Has God so commended Abraham,
that he would reach his children and household, Genesis 18. 19. and that he had
many instructed Servants, Genesis 14. 14. see the margin, and given such a promise
to him thereupon, and will not you p^t in for a share, neither in the praise,
nor the promise? Has Christ honored Catechi^ing with his presence, Lis. 2.
46. and will you not own it with your practice? Say not, they are careless, and
will not learn: What have you your authority for, if not to use it for God, and
the good of their souls? You will call them up, and force them to do your work;
and should you not at least be as zealous in putting them upon Gods work? say
not, they are dull, and are not capable: If they be dull, God requires of you
the more pains and patience, but so dull as they are, you will make them to
learn how to work; and can they not learn as well how to live^ Are they capable
of the mysteries of your Trade, and are they not capable of the plain
Principles of Religion? well, as ever you would see the growth of Religion, the
cure of Ignorance, the remedy of Profaneness, the downtal of Error, fulfill you
my joy in going through with this duty.

Will you answer the calls of divine providence? would you remove the
incumbent, or prevent the impending calamities? would you plant nurseries for
the Church of God? would you that God should build your houses, and bless your
substance? would you that your children should bless you? that your servants
should bless you? Oh then set up Piety in your families as ever you would be
blessed, or be a blessing; let your hearts and your houses be the temples of
the living God, in which his worship (according to all the forementioned
directions) may be, with constancy, reverently performed. Prove. 29. 1. He that
being often reproved hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed and that
without remedy. Oh be wise in time that you be not miserable to Eternity.

Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, etc.
1. A Discourse concerning Old Age tending to the Instruction, Caution and
Comfort to the Aged. By Rich. Steel Minister of the Gospel.

2. BApris^^^ (...) Renewed, being some Meditations on Psalm (...) By O.
Heywood M. A.

FINIS.

