A LETTER FROM General Monck, November the 12th:

Directed (and delivered) to the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen. and
Common Council of the City of London: Inviting them and all true Englishmen,
to give him assistance in his cordial undertakings for the Redemption of the
Liberties of the People of England.

Printed in the Year 1659.

TO THE Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.
Right Honorable,
UPon the first notice I had of the late force put upon the Parliament, I
directed a Letter to you, to acquaint you, that my Resolutions, were accord ng
to my d^ty, to stand by them, and to endeavor their re-establishment; though
with the hazard of whatsoever was dear to me: and that the Army under my
command was very cordial and unanimous in that undertaking; but that Letter
coming to a mischance, I have at the desire, and with the concurrence of the
Officers here, again written to you, to let you know that we are still constant
to our first resolutions, in which we are the more confirmed since we have been
informed that the Authors of that force, have proceeded so far as to null, and
make void Acts of Parliament, (which the KING when he was at the highest, never
pretended to do, and which no true English man can endure to see done by any
but Parliaments themselves, and are now contriving by their own power and
authourity to set up a new Government over the three Nations: if this be
suffered I know not to what purpose all this blould has been spilt, all this
treasure spent* and all those Engagements made. We must take upon our selves
the guilt of all, and look upon this slavery we have brought upon our selves,
as a judgment upon us for our murder, rapines and perjuries: I take God to
witness I have no other end, then to restore the Parliament to it is former
freedom and authourity, and the people to their just rights and liberties, in
which I am sure I cannot want your assistance. It is not the desire of any here
that those which truly fear God should be hindered of their liberty to worship
him according to their several persuasions or that the congregated Churches
should be abridged of any of the privileges and freedoms they have bin used
to enjoy, or even to claim; there are many Members of those Churches with us,
which can give this testimony, yet we could be content that some men would not
under pretense of maintaining that liberty, endeavor the overthrow of the
National Ministry, and by consequence leave the greatest part of the people to
utter ignorance and Athisme; however this is not the thing for which we at
present contend, we shall leave this and all other things to the Parliament,
the confessed supreme judicature of the Nation, but for the defense of that we
are all resolved to venture to the utmost. If this Good Cause shall miscarry in
my hands through want of your timely assistance, it will be too late for you to
endeavor to support it with your own strength, and if it prosper, it will be
dishonorable for a City so famous, and so much concerned, that its liberties
should be asserted without its own help: I know you are so sensible of the
interest of Gods people, the rights of the whole Nation, and of your own
Charter (which cannot be safe in the hands of of these overturners, and which
has been already indirectly threatened by them) that you will not be wanting to
that opportunity which God has put into your hands: but now while their Army
is waiting upon me in the North, use your utmost endeavors in the South, and
therefore I shall need to use no other persuasion to English men, and men that
have engaged along in the same Cause: but shall pray to God to unite your
hearts, and strengthen your hands in this good work, and remain,

Edinburgh, 12 November. 1659. Your Lordships very humble Servant GEORGE MONCK.

Wednesday the 23th of November.
THis day the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Common Council being met at
Guild Hall, information was given to the Court, that there were two Gentlemen
at the door with a Letter from General Monck, after some debate whether the
Gentlemen should be called into the Court to deliver the same, it was voted
(not above 9 or 10 of 200 then present dissenting) that they should,
accordingly they were called in and delivered the said Letter, affirming that
it came from General Monck, and that it was sealed with his own Coat of Arms,
which was publicly read and very well resented, and after the reading thereof,
one or two of the Court pretending that since the Letter was written, there was
an agreement made by General Moncks Commissioners and the Officers of the Army,
in consideration whereof, till further issue of that agreement do appear, it
was at present laid aside.

This is published to the end that what ever has been, or shall be Printed,
that the Court was dissatisfied, may have no credit, the same being very false
and scandalous

FINIS.

