TRUTHS MANIFEST REVIVED, OR A farther discovery of Mr. Stucley and his
Churches causeless excommunication of Mrs. Mary Allein.

WHEREIN The former Narrative and observations on Mr. Stucleys Sermon, are
reprinted and his late Scandalous Pamphlet, falsely entitled (Manifest Truth)
answered and refuted.

By TOBIE ALLEIN of Exon.

MATTHEW. 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues; yea the time comes
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.

PRO. 10.18. He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a
Slander is a fool.

LONDON. Printed by R. D. for Francis Eglesfield, at the Mary-Gold in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

An Advertisement TO THE READER.
FOrasmuch as my Narrative was soon out of print, and came not to the hands of
many, that desired a sight thereof, and many that have seen it may perhaps,
desire fuller satisfaction in the case, especially considering, that my fierce
Adversary, by his new erected Pamphlet called (Manifest Truth) by unsufferable
falsities and odious reflections represents us, and it, unworthy of any credit
to all, designing thereby to veil and vizard his and his Churches
unwarrantable practice, after seeking and sending unto him to condescend to a
true stating of the case, and a fair hearing, and debate of the business by
godly Ministers and Christian friends of each side, in order to peace; all
being rejected by him, I am (for the farther vindication of Truth, satisfaction
of others, and reparation of our bleeding names and Reputations so massacred
and torn in pieces by this Land-Leviathan) forced a second time to the Press,
to reprint my Narrative, together with some few sheets by way of reply and
answer to his scurrilous Pamphlet: nothing but truth is presented, and your
patience and impartial consideration is desired by Thy friend

TOBIE ALLEIN.

WE underwritten Neighbors to Mr. Toby Allein Citizen of the City of Exeter,
having for several years now last past had knowledge of him, Do bear Testimony
that he is of good name and reputation, well esteemed of, and beloved for his
godly conversation, and his honest and just dealings toward men, to whose
words credit is given, and his actions well resented, And has been entrusted
with, and executed the public Office of one of the Stewards or Bailiffs
within the said City, elected thereunto by the Major and Common Counsel of the
same: And always well-affected to the Commonwealth, and very active in, and as
Captain, raised a Company for His Highness service.

James Pearse, Major. Henry Prigge, Sheriff. Thomas Bampfylde Recorder. Thomas
Westlakes, Town Clerk of the said City. Thomas Ford Alderman. James Marshall.
Simon Snow Alderman. Christopher Clarke, juni. James Gould Alderman Bernard
Bartlet. Ralph Herman Alderman. John Pym. Richard Evans Alderman. William Bruen
Richard Crossing Alderman. John Aclaud Nicolas Broking Alderman. Walter
Holditch. Richard Sweet Alderman. Thomas Tacke. Henry Gaudy Receiver. Stewards
of the City of Exeter.
John Gupwill. Edmond Star. William Pynny.
Edward Anthony. William Pyne. William Shower. Henry Mills Notary Public.
John Goswell.


To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
AS I never deserved, so I never desired to be in Print; But necessity that
knows no law, has compelled me; And that I hope may be a sufficient excuse for
me, I am the husband of one of those poor women whom Mr. Lewis Stucley and his
Church in Exon; (as much as in them lay) lately delivered unto Satan, and not
content by that unrighteous censure to defame her. Mr. Thomas Mall, (assistant
to the said Church) has since (questionless with Mr. Stucleys consent and
privity) published the notes of the Sermon (preached upon that occasion, and at
that very time) to spread those false Reports they have raised, as far as
possible they can. The Sense of this dishonor, and Reproach upon my Wife and
my self in her, has occasioned me to make a true report of all transactions of
theirs in and about that matter: So to vindicate my nearest relation, and
undeceive those who otherwise are in danger of believing lies. I shall not
trouble the Reader with Mr. Malls impertinent quotations of many learned and
reverend men, because what he says from them, is nothing to our purpose. The
question is not what Excommunication is, or whether a particular Church may
excommunicate, or (if it be) let the Learned dispute it. The only question is,
whether Mr. Stucley and his Church have walked by the rule of Christ, in the
Application of that Censure to these persons; And this I deny, and say, there
were no crimes proved that might argue the parties guilty, or deserving such a
Censure, in the judgment of any impartial and understanding men; and their
unblamable walkings before, and since, may justly challenge Mr. Stucley, and
his Church to answer what they have done, before the Tribunal of him, who shall
judge the World in righteousness. For this I appeal to all that shall be
pleased to exercise their patience in perusing the following Narrative together
with those short observations that I have made upon such sad passages in Mr.
Stucleys Sermon, as have an odious reflection upon the censured parties beyond
all truth and reason. I shall no longer detain the Reader, but only desire him
to consider impartially of what is here offered and judge accordingly.

Thine and the truths friend TOBY ALLEIN.
Exon. May 10. 1658.
THE NARRATIVE.
ABout the year 1648. the Ordinances of Christ, being all of them administered
by Mr. Mark Down in his Church at Exeter, I, and my wife considering with our
selves, that for the space of two or three years then last past, we had not
partak't of the Lords Supper, and being desirous to partake thereof, we thought
it our duty to endeavor to be admitted to join with that Church in that
Ordinance, and having made our addresses, we were (after examination) admitted,
and did partake in all ordinances with them.

About two years after, Mr. Stucley beginning to gather a Church in Exeter in
the congregational way, A friend of ours, telling us what purity of Ordinances
and excellent Administrations they had amongst them, even to admiration, And
desiring me to ride to Bideford to behold the Gospel Order they had in Mr.
William Bartlets Church there, and the excellent manner of administration of
the ordinances by him, we being by this great report of purer ordinances and
administrations, rapt up into a fools paradise, forthwith desired our friend to
propose us to Mr. Stucleys congregation for our reception, which he did
accordingly, And upon notice from him at the day appointed, we presented our
selves at their meeting; And (being desired) we spoke our experiences, and so
were dismissed until another time, when we were sent for by them, and
accordingly came, and were admitted; and continued in fellowship with them
about four years; After which time during our said fellowship: There was a
Petition, in the name of the Church, brought to my house for me to sign, The
substance of which was to pray the Lord Protector not to accept of the Kingly
Office, And it was said, there was a clause in it, to pray the Lord Protector
to dissolve the Parliament. Whereupon I told the party that brought it, That
the Parliament were wise enough for state affairs, with which they were
entrusted, And for me, or any private person, to meddle with such great matters,
were very foolishness, and so refused to sign it; The party that brought this
petition told me, that it was to be signed only by seven of the Church in the
name of the whole; And accordingly it was signed by some few of the Church, and
sent up, others of the Church not knowing thereof, until the rumor thereof was
spread about the whole City, The which my wife observing, said, This is no fair
dealing, and desired me to be wary what I did. This being the first disrelish
my wife had of their proceedings, it was seconded by a friend that came to my
house, who asked me whether I had signed the Petition that the Church had sent
up? To whom I answered, I had not, he replied I am glad with all my heart you
did not, for (said he) there is that in the Petition for which some eminent
Statesmen have lost their heads, and said, It was judged by the long
Parliament to be Treason for any one to Counsel or persuade the King to
dissolve the Parliament, as you may see in the Cases of the Archbishop, and
Strafford. My wife hearing this discourse, her heart began to grow, and could
not but vent her self a little, saying, that she feared the Church carried on
some particular man's interest, and begged me I would be exceeding wary what I
did, and have respect to my self, her, and our children; But yet (as to the
Church was very quiet) the next time that we went to the Church-meeting, was a
day of prayer; At which time, one amongst the rest prayed much after the rate
of the Petition; And had this passage concerning the Lord Protector: Lord
humble him, what would he have? Is he not high enough already? And a great deal
more of such stuff, when I and my wife came home, she asked me how I like those
passages, and said me thinks it is like Mr. Feaks praying; I answered her, and
said, If he pray so again, I will never hear him more: Hereupon my wife began
to flagg in her affection toward their way, and now every thing that was
amiss began to be thought on by her, and in particular, the expressions of
some of their members, who, in making out their experiences at their
admissions, spoke of such sins as are not to be named, which thing she said
bordered too nigh Auricular confession.

The next time my wife went to the meeting, was a day appointed by the Church
for thanksgiving, for that God was pleased to prevent some insurrection by the
fift-Monarchy-men, and for that the Lord Protector would not accept the Kingly
office, when she had waited long at the place, the people were dismissed without
doing any thing for that time, for that the Lord Protector had then given but
his first negative answer. My wife returned home much discontented that I had
not told her the occasion of that days meeting before she went, and said, that
for her part, she apprehended that some of them did carry on a selfish carnal
design.

After this there was a Covenant brought into the Church, to be debated in
order to the taking there of, and all or a great part thereof was assented unto
by them; but my wife having a Copy thereof from the Elder, she utterly dislik't
it, especially, two perticulars therein; The one whereof was a Tying of them up
wholly to hear them when they preached, and no other without their leave; and
the other was, that we were to exspect a greater blessing from God on their
Ministry then any others.

All these particulars being laid together made such impressions on her
thoughts, that she resolved, not to join any longer with them on such terms,
or in the manner as formerly, But forthwith went and joined her self to Mr.
Mark Downs Church from whence she formerly departed, professing her hearty
sorrow for her departure thence, and saying, she was persuaded the Lord had
manifested his displeasure against her for the same, which she apprehended by
reason of those many visitations on herself, and the death of her children; The
Thursday next before the Sacrament at Mr. Stucleys Church, I did
notwithstanding desire her to go with me to the meeting in way of preparation
thereunto, but she refused, alleging the reasons before mentioned; whereupon
one of Mr. Stucleys Church, that was likewise absent from the meeting, seeing my
wife at work in her porch, asked her, what was the reason that she was not at
the meeting; she answered, I think I shall not come there any more, thereupon
he asked her, saying, why then did you come among us, you may go among the
Presbyterians to Mr. Forde, who is for general admission, as (said he) he
declared, at the last general meeting of the Ministers in Exeter: hereupon my
wife desired me to go with her to Mr. Forde, which I did, and she asked of him,
whether he did ever declare himself to be for general admission to the Lords
Supper, who answered, he was never of that opinion, and whosoever said that he
was, did much wrong him. This traducing of Mr. Forde, and their common
slighting of others, that are not of their way (though never so godly) helped
to heighten her dissatisfaction.

Within few days after came one (now an Elder of their Church) to admonish my
wife for not coming to their private meetings; To whom she answered, she
intended to come no more amonst them; for that there was such kind of praying
and carrying on designs, that she could no way close with, and referred him to
me for the farther knowledge of her mind: shortly after he brings with him one
more, and after that others came, but she would give them no other answer then
formerly, nor admit of any other private discourse, with them (remembering how
Mr. Parr was entangled by them) unless they would admit two persons, whom she
should appoint to hear their discourse; This would not presently be granted,
pretending, that no others were to have to do with the business of their Church,
which I look upon as a dangerous principle; but at length they consented; and
when both parties met together; They were asked what they had to lay to her
charge, who answered to this effect, that they charged her for going from their
Church; which they said was Schism, and no other thing had they to charge her
withal; to whom the other party answered, saying, you are the Schismatics in
rending from other Churches, and produced Mr Cawdries Book to prove the same;
which was all the substance of the debate at that meeting. Shortly after this,
Mr. Stucley desires to speak with my wife, who sent him word that she would not
come to him single or alone, but if he and Mr. Mall pleased to meet two other
Ministers with her, that she should nominate, she would submit to their joint
determination: But this was utterly refused by him; although it was offered him
again and again. After the former Admonition by those of the Church, I my self
used arguments to persuade her to return to Master Stucleys Church; pressing
them with so much eagerness, and harshnesse, that I have cause to repent, for
strayning the strings so high, that it brake out into some words of heat, and
discontent; but at length, I and my wife accorded to have the Case justly
stated, whether those things before mentioned, at which she was so much
offended, were sufficient cause to withdraw from Mr. Stucleys Church, and go to
another. Now where to find fit persons for the resolving of this question, we
knew not for the present, being both of us tender to engage the Ministers of
this City, least it might prove of ill consequence, or beget some Animosity
between them upon the determination of the question; and therefore we mutually
agreed to go to Taunton; where we thought we might be well satisfied by some
friends there, without more ado; the time for our journey was prefixed and the
day came, but a friend that was to accompany us, being employed upon some
public business, our journey was put off, and no other day appointed; My wife
having waited about ten days longer, and I too often pressing arguments against
her withdrawing from Mr. Stucleys Church, she became impatient of farther
delay, and told me that she would go somewhere to be resolved, and rising early
in the morning, having given a charge to her chiefest Servant-maid to be
careful of her children until her return, she went away, but whether she went
I knew not for the present, which exceedingly troubled me; I then apprehending
the ill use would be made thereof. Toward the evening of the same day I
understood that my wife was gone to Honiton, whether I rode that evening unto
her, and we lodged there that night in a very friendly manner, and the next
morning when I awaked, asking her whether she intended her journey, she told me
that I had too long delayed her, and that she was now resolved for Taunton to
her friends, to be satisfied about the former question; and for that purpose
had sent to a Kinsman of ours in Somerset, to bring my Mare, which he there
kept, and furniture with him to Honiton, to carry her to Taunton; which was
brought that morning accordingly; And I had then a great mind to have carried
her thither, but our friend with us, having urgent occasions to return to
Exeter, we willingly came home together with him; resolving upon another
journey thither afterward; which we undertook accordingly. But failed of that
full fatisfaction we expected* Mr. Stucley having been there with our friends
before hand, and (as I have cause to suspect) had tampered with them about our
business; Shortly after we were returned from Honiton, I remembered my wife of
her failing or miscarriage, in not acquainting me with her journey, who
answered (with tears) that she was sensible of the evil thereof, but intended
no harm thereby, and desired the Lord to humble her, and forgive her for it,
and prayed me to forgive her, which I did with all my heart.

Now, Reader, I have given thee the true and impartial state and story of the
occasion, manner and end of my wifes going to Honiton, which Mr. Stucley has
represented by a false perspective, or multiplying-glasse, and most unworthily
terms, running away from her husband; whereof she never had the least thought.
Behold, and wonder, this is her capital crime, that he paralels with incest,
This (by his doctrine) is a sin unpardonable by a husband, without his Churches
satisfaction: But (that I may not digress, but go on with the story) take
notice, that his Church (poor souls) being possessed and bemisted with prejudice,
though they knew neither the occasion, nor end of her journey, they too gladly
take advantage thereby, and hereupon two others of his Church were sent to my
wife, with whom she refused conference, unless upon the terms before
expressed, and began to be very rough with them; telling them, that they should
forbear her house, for that she apprehended they did set her husband at
variance with her, she having seen a letter of Mr. Savery, one of their
members, written unto me, carrying so much (if not more) in the sense thereof;
and she having likewise heard the expression of another member of theirs, who,
speaking concerning my wife; said unto me, if the unbeliever depart, let her
depart: After this Mr. Stucley, with Mr. Mall, pretended they had a mind to
treat with two other Ministers (but such as themselves should nominate) about
the premises, whereupon my wife proposed Mr. Forde and Mr. Mark Down to treat
with them, both of which Mr. Stucley refused, saying, he had burnt his fingers
with Mr. Forde already, and Mr. Down was an Engaged or a prejudie'd man. So
that proposal took no effect: Hereupon reports were brinted, by several of the
members of Mr. Stucleys Church; That they had an intent to proceed against my
wife, by way of excommunication, whereat I took occasion to abstain from their
private meetings, at which they were much offended, and sent to me, to come to
the Church, which occasioned me to write them this following letter in answer,
which I thought good here to insert at large, that the Reader may see the truth
of what Mr. Stucley says, that I never did or said any thing to prevent it.

A letter from Mr. Toby Allein to Mr. Lewis Stucley to be communicated to his
Church, before they excommunicated his wife.
CHristian friends, The occasion of my writing to you is this, Mr. Rolls and
Mr. Eveleigh were with me yesterday, desiring me to come to your meeting this
day, which I was minded to do, but considering with my self, what was best to
be done, I chose rather to write because of my unfitness to speak, especially
before some, who have already much defamed me, as to make me a perjured man;
And why? Because Mr. Mark Down baptized my child, other defamations there have
been, but I spare, and forgive without their asking me mercy, If you desire a
reason of my forbearance of your company, It is this, when my wife and you
differed, I could seldom meet with any of you, but a little after salute,
presently the discourse was about my wife, in which I could take no felicity,
it being but as vinegar or gravel to my teeth, especially the saying of one, If
the unbeliever depart, let her depart, This and such like sayings begat in me
some dissatisfaction, which, for want of better observation, I thought zeal,
which, when my good father heard of, I remember his advise was this, next to
peace with God, and your own conscience, which is the effect of the former,
preserve peace in your family, especially with your wife, which I have done,
and shall maintain, and if any be offended thereat, let them be offended,
although you be very dear unto me still, for whom I suffer daily; As for my
absence from your private meetings, to me it seems unreasonable any one should
ask a reason thereof, you know what debates and discourses you have had about
my wife, and how disagreeing to a husbands affection would it have been, if I
should have been there, especially, being of another apprehension as to that
thing, then you were, for I perceive after long and serious consideration, that
the first ground of my wifes distaste with you, was her earnest love to me,
fearing some evil might happen as to my life, or estate by joining with you in
a Petition you sent up to my Lord Protector, which was occasioned thus: There
was a man of good understanding came to visit me, Amongst the rest of our
discourse, he asked me whether I had signed the Petition the Church sent up, I
answered, no; He replied, I am glad with all my heart you did not, for there is
that in it, for which some eminent Statesmen have lost their lives, And that
was for seeking to dissolve the Parliament, which my wife hearing desired me I
would have a care. After wards other things followed, which increased this
dissatisfaction; and truly made me to stagger; Such things as these (indeed)
are the only way to break and Ruin the Church; Besides this, how am I
perplexed to hear daily the Scoffs and Taunts wherewith some of our brethren
have every where at their doors, and shops, and tables vilified her, for whom
I am to leave father and mother: For my Forbearance of the Lords Table, I have
(I confess desired to be humbled for it) abstained too long, too long. But you
know who is unsatisfied with me (Thomas Savery) and as I suppose, can hardly
sit with me, And as to the other Churches of Christ here, I have forborne in
part to partake with them, because I would not offend you; But having well
consulted with those more wise and godly then my self, I have taken up this
resolution to seek the Lord to prepare me to partake with both, as occasion
offers; and I shall endeavor to wipe off (what I can) that ill name, which I
fear is too justly laid on us (separatists.) Now, I shall desire you to send me
word, whether I shall meet you at the Lords Table the next time, that I may
dispose of my self according as I shall hear from you, and If you have any
thing to offer me in writing, I shall kindly receive it, and return you answer
with all humility; praying daily for you all, I recommend you to God, and
remain,

Yours to command in any service for Christ, Toby Allein.
Exon. 4. Feb. 1657. To my honored friend Mr. Lewis Stucley to be communicated
to the Church, who (they say) are unsatisfied.




This Letter was sent and delivered into Mr. Stucleys hands, at the meeting of
the Church; who did not communicate the same according to the direction thereof
(and therein (I think) was neither faithful to me, nor his Church) But the
reason thereof (as one of the members told me) was, for that he apprehended
there was somewhat in it that might dissatisfie the Church; But what that
should be, I know not, unless he feared it might hinder their proceedings
against my Wife, neither could I ever get their answer thereunto, whether I
might partake with them, and other Churches of Christ also, as occasion should
present, whereof I speaking to some of their members, their answer was, That
they were loath to admit me to partake with them in my sins: and I demanding of
them, what were the sins they charged me withal? they told me it was
disorderly walking; and being asked in what particulars; They did instance in
my carrying my child, and baptizing it at Master Downs Church, and my not
coming to their private meetings. The next news we heard, was a Summons in
writing, sent by Mr. Stucley unto my Wife, giving, her notice of his Churches
resolutions to proceed to Excommunication of her, on Monday the eighth of March
then following; which was in these words.

The Summons.
Mrs. Allein, This paper is to give you notice, that all our endeavors for the
reducing you having proved ineffectual, The Church is resolved to proceed upon
you, on Monday next, and then to Excommunicate you, unless the Lord give you
grace, to endeavor the satisfying of the Church before that day; And this I
thought fit to enform you of, that you may attend the said meeting; my prayer
is daily for you, for surely whatever you think, I am

Your soul-friend, Lewis Stucley.
March 4. Exon, 1657. To Mrs. Mary Allein, at her house. These in Exon.



My Wife having received this Summons, did, for the present return answer to
Mr. Stucley, by the messenger that brought it, only by word of mouth; That
before he proceeded to the work, he should read the 58. of Isaiah, But
afterward she understanding that he had sent the like Summons to Mrs. Parr,
who was also a late member of his Church, and long since deserted them; The
said Mrs. Parr and my Wife, being willing to do what (they conceived) becomed
them in such a case, and (if it might be) prevent their violent proceedings,
sent unto them this ensuing Letter, in answer to their said Summons as
follows.

Mrs. Parr and Mrs. Allein, their answer to Mr. Stucleys Summons.
SIr, having received a summons under your hand, we have sent you our answer as
follows: That we know our selves guilty of no crime, that may justly deserve
Excommunication from any Church of Christ: However, as we desire not to be
Judges in our own cause, so we think it not equal, to be put upon trial by
you, and your Church, who are also parties, as well as we; we desire to have
our cause heard by understanding and impartial men, whosoever they be, and when
we shall see reason from Scripture, to convince us, you may rest assured, that
we shall submit to the Law and will of Christ; If this will not satisfy, but
that you, and your Church will proceed against us, we hope to suffer with more
comfort then you can lay on your censure, because we remember what Solomon
says, Prove. 26.2. And know what our Savior foretold, Ioh. 16.2. And that even
Gods servants have suffered, as much as this, from Gods enemies, we tremble to
think you are not afraid to draw that sword against us; who (through grace we
hope) are no way faulty as those were, whom we read to have been delivered to
Satan, 1 Cor. 5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. We hope we have, and desire still to lament,
and repent those evils we know our selves guilty of before the Lord; But we
think it no evil in us, to communicate in the Ordinances of Christ, with any of
Gods people, that will admit us into communion with them, and therefore we
desire you seriously to consider what you do; And this we desire, as those that
wish very heartily well to your soul, and all the souls that are of your Church.

Susanna Parr. Mary Allein.
Exon, March 7. 1657 These for Mr. Lewis Stucley, Preacher of the Gospel, and
his Church in Exon.




This Letter was carried and delivered unto Mr. Stucleys hands, when he was
assembled with his Church, at the house of Mr. Andrew Raddon Postmaster in
Exon, the Eighth of March 1657 to excommunicate Mris Parr, and my Wife, in the
morning before he began his own exercise, in order to that work, And the
messenger (according to directions) at the delivery thereof spoke aloud, so as
all the people might hear him, saying to Mr. Stucley, Sir, here is a Letter
from Mrs. Parr, and Mrs. Allein, which they desire may be communicated to the
Church, who thereupon opened it, and he (with two others of his Church, having
looked it over) pocketted it up, and did not communicate the same to the Church,
but afterward told the people, that he had received a paper, that had more of
design in it, then any show of humility, or repentance, and that he thought it
not fit to be communicated to the Church: And so proceeded on in his Sermon
(since in print) wherein having desamed them, with the highest defamations
almost imaginable, he stood up and pronounced the sentence following.

The Sentence.
FOrasmuch (Brethren as) Mrs. Susanna Parr, and Mrs. Mary Allein, have been
convicted of great sins, and forasmuch as they have neglected to hear the
Church, we therefore, in the name of Christ, deliver them over to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of Christ.

Upon pronouncing of which Sentence, the Church made a hideous howling cry,
that did even astonish diverse then present which occasioned the party that
noted Mr. Stucleys Sermon, to write his prayer, which he made after he had
pronounced the Sentence; which was as follows.

The Prayer
BLessed Lord, we have left them where thou bidst us leave them, and we pray
thee let them have such awakenings by Church Censures, that they may not stay
long there. Lord, O that God would be pleased for them, fetch them away thence,
Lord, there-hence, Lord, if they belong unto thee, fetch them back again, Lord,
back again. O let them not rest there, O let them have no quiet in their
spirits there, Lord, O let Satan torment them home, O let them be driven by
Satan among us, we pray thee Lord, if they had not fallen out with thy Law,
they had not fallen out from thy house, they begun with thee, yea long time
before, before we gave this sentence. And now it is given, the Lord second it
upon them, that they may know, that we have not done it in a revengeful way,
give them to understand that we have wished well to their souls to day, and
that we had not set upon this work, but that we know not how to answer the
contrary, we know not how to answer the neglect thereof one day longer, and
therefore we delivered them up, that their souls may be saved in the day of
Christ, we beseech thee that thou would make them know, that they are under
the curse of God; Let them know that they are gone out of this place accursed;
O let them know that all their prayers, are accursed prayers? and all the bread
they presume to eat is accursed bread to them: And let them know, that their
estates and privileges are accursed to them, and that if they live and die in
their sin, they are accursed for ever; Awaken them thoroughly, O Lord; would to
God they had been here to day, but they are gone with the curse of God at
their heels, all their company will be accursed company to them, and we can see
them no more; we may not go unto their houses any day more, we may not come
near them, as in the days of old. O Lord, That they might be ashamed, let them
be ashamed, They have foreheads of brass, but O that they might be ashamed; O
Lord, how glad would we be to see these poor worms crawling to this house
another day; surely, there is that upon their backs that they will not get off,
till they repent; there is that upon them will damn them, unless they return,
there is that upon them will cost them eternal flames, unless they return. Now
the Lord pity them, we would fain have these wretches, their flesh destroyed;
some of us have seen a great deal of pride, and a great deal of self
conceitednesse, and a great deal of hatred, and a great deal of self
confidence, and a great deal of deceit, and a great deal of hypocrisy; O how
has Satan befooled these creatures, they thought to have gotten themselves a
name in thy house, and thou have turned them out of thy house, thou will not
allow them a name in thy house; they shall not be so much as within our gates;
O for ought we know, they shall be no more dwellers where God dwells; what a
sad thing is this; but Lord, pare off that flesh, and then they may return and
stand at thy gate, and beg a blessing; O that this day may come, O this
ordinance has been strangely wronged in our days, neglected by some, and
despised by some, and wronged by others, But it is thine own appointment, Lord,
And good Lord, If it be thy will, let this be the fruit, the return of their
Spirits to thee, by giving them repentance, and endeavors to be brought in, and
reconciled to the house of God, that they might know what it is to break
covenant with thee; good Lord, let them never be quiet, O, we know there be
many Agents here will be endeavoring to bear to them this very sentence, O,
let them remember to write down in their books this days curses. let it lie
upon their hearts when they ly adying; O let not thy name be taken in vain this
day, It will not, there is a righteous God in the heavens, in the heavens,
their is a holy God above, a God that will find out this sin, and make them
know that they have offended one of thy little ones; O it were better a
millstone had been hung about their necks to day; O surely this is worse then
a mill stone, a heavy millstone, and therefore likely they have offended
many little ones in so doing: we shall pray for ought we know no more for them,
let us not pray for them, avoid their company, but remember in ours prayers
that such and such persons are this day accursed, and the influences of heaven
shall be taken from them, their reading hours shall not prosper to them, and
their hearing hours shall not prosper to them, before they hear his Rod: all
the influences shall be stopped till they return to thee; God is banished out of
their presence, O we pray thee, let us beware to look to our feet, to walk in
thy ways, and be with us in the remaining part of this day; we bless thee
Lord we have done the work, we were long a doing of it, and blessed be God we
have some peace in our consciences since we have done it, yea blessed be God,
we have done it, and blessed be God we go according to our light, and blessed
be God we do not endure a Rebel among us, a Rebel among us; make us fathful to
thee, and upright before thee, and to live as becomes thy people, and so pray
and engage together, and Covenant with thee, and one with another, that this
might be the last hour that we take the rod into our hand; O we pray thee, let
this be the last Excommunication, let this be the last rod we take into our
hand, and let it be the last hour we are put upon cursing work, we pray thee,
let us be put upon blessing work, the Lord be with us in the remaning part of
this day; And all we beg for the Lord Jesus sake.

The prayer being ended Mr. Mall stood up, and said to the Congregation, Now we
have separated the precious from the vile, let us renew our solemn league and
covenant.

And taking his text out of Nehemiah, 9. last ver. preached thereupon, and
vented most uncharitable and invective passages, and reflections on my wife.
Some of which are insinuated in his pretended reasons, set down in the Book
after Mr. Stucleys Sermon, the particulars whereof, I shall here omit, as too
tedious to relate; and in regard he was so modest, as to print but a piece of
his Sermon (being it seems ashamed of the rest, as he might well be) I shall
here pass it over without troubling the reader therewith, it sounding much to
the same tune with Mr. Stucleys Sermon; of some part whereof, I shall give you
a brief account by and by.

And now having given you a true account of the whole story and state of the
business as to the matter of fact, that has been so transacted and falsely
represented by Mr. Stucley, I leave it to all unbyassed judicious Christians;
to consider and judge upon the whole matter; whether there were any just cause
or ground, etc. warrantable by the Laws of God, or man, for this their
practice and proceeding, or whether it was not merely and only for her
deserting them, and returning to her former Pastor.

And so having finished my Narrative, I now come to take notice of, and make
brief answers or solutions to some of the most notorious passages, and pieces
of defamation, set down in Mr. Stucleys printed Sermon, and herein, it is not
my purpose to take any notice of such passages therein, as seem to Reflect upon
the Presbyterian Ministers in general, or those of this City in particular:
Only, (as I am bound in duty) I shall endeavor to clear the innocence of her,
who is in so near relation to me. And this, if I should forbear to do, well
might the world think me an unworthy man, in suffering my wifes reputation, and
honor, to be buried under the reproach, and calumny he has cast upon her.

In Mr. Stucleys printed Sermon in Mr. Malls Book, page 7.
The ground of our union with them was their visible closing with Christ; now
when that visibility cease, the union is to be dissolved, etc.

Solution.

What visibility, or outward appearance of Religion ceased in my wife, except
that she for just reasons, refused any longer to hold communion with Mr.
Stucleys Church; and betook her self again to her former Pastor? It seems by
this, that visible holiness cease in all, that have no longer a mind to
continue in their separation, what a reproach is here cast on all the Churches
of Christ, that are not independent that there is no visible holiness in the
members of them: nay more, that they oppose God and Christ in his Laws, as it
follows in the same, 7. page: for my part, I know no opposition my wife has
made to the Laws of Christ, more then formerly whilst she was a member of Mr.
Stucleys Church, but that she has of late left them, I am sure her behavior
toward me, and my family, is with the same circumspection as formerly; cannot
a person outwardly close with Christ, except in Mr. Stucleys Church? must they
needs be held to cast away Christ's cords, to have broken the covenant with God,
and neglected his house, that like not the ways of Mr. Stucleys congregation?
Reader, this might serve to satisfy the members of that Church, who were
engaged as far as himself, But (I hope) will not satifie any understanding and
indifferent men.

But she contemned admonition private and public.

Sol. The Truth is this (whatever Mr. Stucley was pleased to say) that she did
not refuse admonition, even by them, Only, Knowing that they waited for her
haltings, she refused to appear before Mr. Stucley, or to talk with any of his
Church; unless she might have leave to bring some Ministers or friends with
her; and there was good cause, for she knew that Mrs. Parr going to, and
treating with them alone, had been overreacht by them, whilst they had
witnesses of what passed, and she had none. Besides, what if she had refused
admonition from Mr. Stucley and his Church, so long as she was no more a member
of it, but was in actual communion with her former Pastor, she had left Mr.
Stucleys Church, and all communion with it, and therefore was under no special
obligation to receive admonition from him, or any of his Church, and to speak
the Truth, that was her only fault, that she left them; And her refusing
admonition was, her not submitting to be treated withal alone, for fear she
might be again entangled by them. Neither my wife, nor Mrs. Parr were looked on
as Refractory, and Rebels to God and man, till they had no more any mind to
stay with them: this was their fault, which (I hope) God has forgiven them,
though for this they are excommunicated by Mr. Stucley and his Church.

These reject him as their Lawgiver and head, etc.

Sol. What? because they refuse to be of Mr. Stucleys Church? that is the matter
that has kindled all this fire, there is no Church, but Mr. Stucleys and such
like, all other are looked upon as Babylonish, and Synagogues of Satan; wonder
not I so charge them, Besides many expressions sounding this way: Consider how
Mr. Stucley applies, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. And to put it out of all doubt when I
my self was reasoning with Mr. Stucley to this purpose, That I thought I might
communicate in the Lords Supper with his Church, and others also, meaning the
rest of the Churches in Exon, He told me, that I could not partake of the table
of the Lord, and of the table of Devils. And whereas Mr. Stucley makes it so
intolerable an evil, for good men to be forced to live amongst wicked men, I
grant it, But say withal, that these excommunicate persons as they communicate
in ordinances with godly Christians, so they have frequent civil society with
no other then (if comparisons be not odious) give as good Testimony of the
grace of God, as Mr. Stucley himself, or the best of his Church. He styles them
Dogs, etc.

Sol. It Is an Easy matter for Mr. Stucley, to call these poor oppressed women
dogs, he and his Church only, are the children and Saints; But if thou will
set aside their leaving his Church, There is nothing in them, for which they
may not compare with the best Saints in his Church, And I dare say this City,
in which they were born and bred, and have ever lived, can say no otherwise, I
appeal to all that know them; But it is policy for him, first to debase and
vilify those, that he intended his Church should Curse; He that will kill a
dog, must give it out that he is mad.

Page 9. Mr. Stucley cites Prove. 5.8, 9. Remove thy way, far from her, etc. And
adds, that it is dangerous to come near the house of such, etc.

Sol. What is this but to insinuate my wise, such a one as is spoken of in that
place i. e. a very strumpet.

I cannot forbear to say (it so nearly concerns me) that this insinuation, is
a base and slanderous belying her, who never came into the least suspicion of
any such crime, Had Mrs. Parr been guilty of such lying, as this, I, and others
had been more satisfied in her excommunication then we now are, or can be.

Page 9. Whereas in the same page toward the end, Mr. Stucley says, He ought
to pull off the masking robes and vizards, etc.

Sol. He discovers himself, what many before now never believed him to be
(viz.) A man that cares not what dirt and filth he casts on any that cares not
for his independent ways. They have deceived him (as he says,) But the truth
is they were deceived in him, and his Church, expecting when they entered into
fellowship with them, that purity which they never found, And now when they
were disappointed, and so apprehended their oversight, and went about to mend
their fault, by returning to those congregations to which they formerly
belonged, he judges them causelessly.

Page 10. He calls my wife a Lawless woman, that knows no subjection, etc.

Sol. I cannot forbear to say, this is a most notorious belying her, whom I
know to be far otherwise, I have cause to bless God for so good and obedient a
wife, and one that orders the affairs of my family and calling, with so much
care and diligence as my heart can wish: Insomuch that I have often left the
whole management of my trade and employment on her head and care, for a whole
month together, in my absence, when I have kept above 500. people on work; For
what he charges her, about her going once to Honiton, I have sufficiently
answered in the Narrative, to which I refer the Reader.

Page 10. Again, These have turned their backs on pure ordinances, etc.

Sol. As if no pure ordinances could be found, but in Mr. Stucleys Church, or
some other of the same edition. Reader, be pleased to take notice, They were in
actual communion with the rest of Gods people in this City, before they were
excommunicated, And therefore did not turn their backs on pure ordinances; but
such is the pride of Independents, they think there are no pure ordinances but
in their own Churches.

Page 12. The like stuff you have page 12. That now my wife and Mrs. Parr are
not in Mr. Stucleys Church, they are not amongst Gods people, Cannot enjoy the
benefit of the covenant, See in what a sad condition all are, that are not
Independents. But I hope God and good men will judge better then Mr. Stucley and
his Church.

Page 13. They are turned out from beholding the conversation of Gods people,
etc.

Sol. Sill Mr, Stucleys Church are Gods people and no other. But for that which
he so much commends, I do assure thee, neither I, nor my wife could ever see
such eminency of godliness in their conversations, I shall not asperse them, I
will only say, I know many, very many no Independents in this City, of as
unblameable and godly conversation as any of them, And my wife may see the
conversation of those (I hope) notwithstanding she is excommunicate by Mr.
Stucley,

Page 13. In the same page, God will loose us, this day from that particular
tie, etc.

Sol. My wife (I hope) is not in so sad a condition because Mr. Stucley and his
Church are loose from their tie, If she have other as godly and honest to
admonish and exhort her, as ever she had, I forbear comparisons.

Page 14. I have no mind to discant upon Mr. Stucleys fancy, in the fourteenth
page, where he frames a parley between God and the Devil it is absurd enough.

Sol. Only I must say, he has again slandred my wife, In saying she has
removed the bounds, and that she is a Lawless woman; The contrary to my
knowledge is most true, and for this there are in this City as many godly
Christians to witness, as far exceed the number of Mr. Stucleys Church. I know
it is a sad thing to be justly excommunicated, Matthew. 18.18. But I know many
have been excommunicated by the Pope, and some by the Pharisees, The question
is whether those persons were justly excommunicated? And that I deny, And leave
it to the Impartial Reader to Judge by the Narrative.

Page 15. He cites Mr. Grenhams opinion of excommunication. They are among
Zijms and Iijms, etc.

Sol. He need not cite Mr. Grenhams opinion to persuade me or my wife, what a
sad thing excommunication is. I only say the curse that is causless, shall not
come: The Popes Bull is but a beast, when it roars the loudest.

Page 17. Whereas contumacy is urged as the reason of excommunication, and Mr.
Rutherford is quoted, with a sufficient slur upon him and the Presbyterians.

Sol. I Reply that cannot be contumacie, For that one act of indiscretion she
has acknowledged to my self; And (if an error) 'twas such (I hope) as was
pardonable by the husband, without Mr. Stucleys indulgence. There was no
persisting in any crime, but only her not coming to Mr. Stucleys Church, And
Mr. Stucley cannot but remember the many overtures she made, for a meeting of
him and Mr. Mall, with other Ministers, and her willingness to submit to their
determination, which he refused, as if he had been Lord Bishop Paramont, and
his Church infallible, for which I refer you to the Narrative; But now
(for-sooth,) Contumacie must be the foil to set off the fact, and a decoy to
draw the Church, into this unwarrantable practice.

Page 19. My wife is accused for neglecting fellowship, and covenant breaking,
and running away, etc.

Sol. I answer she holds fellowship with the people of God, And for covenant
breaking, she is so far guilty, as she was no more willing to be confined to
Master Stucleys Church, but indeed, of her own accord went from it, for reasons
mentioned in the Narrative before.

If she had made a covenant (which yet she never intended) to walk with Master
Stucleys Church, and not with other people of God, It is an unlawful covenant,
and so better broken then kept.

For her pretended scandalous running from me, I have given a satisfactory
answer in the Narrative by which the Reader may judge what a scandalous abusing
her it is, to charge her with deserting her husband, and family, when in mine
own conscience, I know the contrary, and that she never entertained the least
thought of it, And except Master Stucley, and his Church, there is not one
sober man that knows her, ever saw cause to suspect her of such an unnatural
act. She continues to dwell with me as a dutiful and obedient wife, she never
ran from me, but only went as far as Huniton with a purpose to go as far as
Taunton, There to entreat the advice and assistance of some near relations for
satisfaction touching those differences, occasioned upon her deserting their
Church.

Page 19. Whereas he charges her with her companion, whom he sets off with a
dash.

Sol. I answer that the woman has been her keeper for many years in childbed,
as she was of many other women of good account and quality in this City, and
was my wifes keeper (when in child bed) all the time she was in Mr. Stucleys
Church, and yet then no exception against her; Besides she being a midwife, was
a fit companion for my wife then great with child, for what Mr. Stucley hints,
and some of his members have said of that woman, I am persuaded they can never
prove it, but do very much abuse and slander her therein.

Page 19.20. When Mr. Stucley presses Tit. 2.5. Know Reader that he has
omitted somewhat that he spoke in preaching to insinuate into his Auditory a
suspicion of my wifes chastity, wherein he did most unworthily abuse her. Sol.
And so has he done in what is printed Page 20. where he accommodates D.
Tailors words; to insinuate her to affect merriment, and expensive company, and
account the house a prison which I can truly say she is so far from as (if
comparisons be not odious) I know none farther; and she utterly detests it.

That which follows is to the same Tune, All that I will say is, that it is
clean contrary, she never looked on me as a Nabal, but has ever showed me as
much tenderness; and affectionate kindness as my heart could wish; she never
left her trust, otherwise then any good housewife must do, when she is forced
to be from home, she went out in a journey, which she intended to dispatch with
all speed, and then to return again to her family; of whom she gave a special
charge to her chiefest maidservant at her going abroad: How scandalous a report
have they made of what had nothing blamable but a little indiscretion in the
manner of it, and of this she was presently sensible, and cried me mercy.

Page 20.21. For Mrs. Parr who is charged with lying, etc. you may see by what
is said in the end of the 20. page, she was not well pleased with the
proceedings of Master Stucleys Church, and for that let her answer.

Sol. Only this I can say, she was looked on by them as a precious soul, till
she had a mind to hear some other Ministers, and here began the quarrel which
could not be ended but in her Excommunication, because she was peremptory in
her resolution, not to be tied from hearing of others; how far she might forget
her self in discourse with them, which they call tripping in her tongue, etc. I
cannot say, only (if she did) it was partly occasioned by their tampering with
her, for going out sometimes to hear some other Ministers of the City, in which
she was so resolved, as she chose to leave Mr. Stucleys Church, and so did, and
was in communion with other Churches in this City for a long time before they
excommunicated her.

Page 21. He says, for my Wifes coming amongst them, it was somewhat
observable, etc.

Sol. It is observable indeed how Mr. Stucley persists in his unworthy design
and endeavors to slur and vilify her, whom (whatever malice says) I have
cause to say to the glory of grace, God has blessed with some good measure of
knowledge of him and his will, and of her self, and her duty, which she has
manifested in the general course of her conversation (the best character of a
Christian) as all that know her, can bear her witness.

Page 21. And whereas in the same page, he charges her for omission of the
Church-duties of admonition, etc.

Sol. Note, what a good shepherd Mr. Stucley is, that in the whole space of
about 4. years, whilst she was of his Church, he could never spy this fault,
so as to reprove her for it, till she had left his Church, and then he can find
it in his heart to curse her for it.

Page 21.22. Mr. Stucley tells another story, but very partially and untruly,
charging my Wife with abusing her sister, etc.

Sol. The truth of the story is this: About four years since, I observing my
brother not to thrive in his way of husbandry, which he then used, out of my
affection to him, and care of his good, I set him in a way of Sergemaking,
wherein neither he, nor his wife, having any insight, I gave them all the
encouragement and assistance I could, both by my advice and instruction
therein, and sparing him mine own servants of all sorts, to carry on his work,
and took off all the serges he made, and sold them at the same prizes with mine
own, which otherwise he could not possibly advance to that rate, and my Wife
being also very loving to him, and his Wise, her sister in Law, and desiring
their good, and thriving in their Trade, and knowing their gains, ad observing
her sister in Law not to be so careful and industrious as she should be, and as
that Trade required, and their expenses rising somewhat high, she advised her
said sister, to have a care that they did not spend more then they got, whereat
her sister took great distaste, but showed no more care then formerlie, my Wife
fearing their going back in Trade, when she went up into the Eastern parts,
wished her sisters mother to give her the like advice as she had done, which, I
apprehended she did, and her said sister being much offended as it, instead of
embracing this counsel, which would have done her no hurt, she complains to
several of the members of Master Stucleys Church, and had engaged a strong
party for her, before my Wife knew thereof, insomuch that it came to a hearing
before Master Stucley, and by his means they were reconciled and in token
thereof, kissed each other, and afterward frequented each others company in a
very friendly manner, at the Lords Table, and their own Tables, upon occasion,
for the space of above a year together, even until the time of my Wifes
withdrawing from Mr. Stucleys Church.

Reader, judge how fit it is for Mr. Stucley to rake up this petty business,
an offense indeed taken and not given, and to aggravate it in pulpit and print
beyond all truth, near three years after they had been reconciled, and the same
had been buried in oblivion, of purpose to bespatter and abuse my Wife; But I
wonder not at it, when I consider how suitable it is, to what himself once told
me upon occasion of writing a Letter to Mrs. Parr, That when he wrote Letters
of that nature, he would have as much of reflection in them, as he could, that
they might be ashamed to show them.

Page 23. My wife (I can truly say) puts a great price upon all Gods
Ordinances, and in particular on excommunication; she is not so ignorant as not
to know the consequence of it, only she might perhaps speak slightly of their
excommunicating her, when they threatened her with it, as a man may slight the
Popes Excommunication without any prejudice to Gods Ordinance.

Page 23. Whereas Mr. Stucley. page 23. in his comparing her sin, with the sin
of the incestuous person, says, The incestuous person did not separate from
the Church to avoid the censure, but so have these, etc.

Sol. Reader, take notice of a gross untruth: How can it be said, that my Wife
separated from the Church to avoid the censure, whereas, (themselves being
judges) they had nothing to censure her for, before she left them, they never
so much as pretended any cause or ground for a censure until she had deserted
them, and long after, although they most unworthily sifted my late domestic
servants to find somewhat to accuse her of, but could find none. Note, the
pretended crime or cause of Excommunicating her, was in time, long after she
had left Mr. Stucleys Church; when she left Mr. Stucleys Church she had done
nothing in the least that might incur a Church-censure, and therefore it
could not be rationally imagined, that she should desert the Church to avoid a
Church-censure. To this I say no more, but liars need good memories.

For their perjury, Covenant Breaking, and schism which are charged on them, in
page 23.

Sol. I confess they have relinquished Mr. Stucleys Church, and that's their
fault, and yet I dare assure you, my Wife had not done this had they not
meddled with state affairs, and had Mr. Stucley and his Church allowed her to
communicate in the Ordinances with other Churches, as there was occasion: They
held it their sin to be tied to one Congregation, and to be debarred fellowship
with others, especially there being so many opportunities of it in this place.

Whereas in the application, page 24. Mr. Stucley charges other churches and
Ministers for want of discipline; I shall leave it to those Ministers to
vindicate their own practice: I do not pretend to so much knowledge and
learning, as to meddle at all with it, only I wish, that they were all free
from lying, that Master Stucley gives the Sacrament unto in his Church, I know
none that's offended at their exercise of discipline, only I, and many others
think we have cause to be offended at these their procedings, because we know
as bad tolerated amongst them, and nothing said to them, because they have a
mind to stay with them, which these poor women had not; Alas (poor souls)
that they must needs fall into those foul faults, that Mr. Stucley, and his
Church can by no means brook or endure.

For this third use of Information, page 27. we desire to apply it for the
comfort of these poor oppressed and despised women; made as the Scum and
offscouring of all things, by his and his Churches abusing of Gods holy
Ordinance, hoping the wise disposer of all things will order it to their
spiritual advantage, by giving them grace to cleave to God, when they are cast
off by men, and to hold communion with others of Gods people to better purpose
now they are excommunicated by them. Once we are sufficiently informed, that
they may be cast out of Mr. Stucleys Church, and yet be in the readier way to
heaven.

For the last use of Exhortation, I must needs say it is very proper for
himself and his Church, I wish them to take it home to themselves, they have
need enough of it, it is very true, as he says The leaven is among them, the
leaven of the Pharisees, etc. There are none that know them, but are too well
acquainted with their great thoughts they have of themselves, as the only
Church and people of God in Exon, and what other Churches have been called and
counted by them, That God will in due time discover the hypocrisy of liars I
know well, and that God would bring to light their proceedings is my hearty
desire and prayer; I pray too, that their may be no more liars found amongst
them then their are as yet, nor any that are disobedient; for my Wife, I know
she has kept her bounds at home so well, as I desire nothing more then her
perseverance in that obedience and duty she has yielded me hitherto.

I shall not trouble the Reader any farther with Mr. Malls reasons, that are
annexed to Mr. Stucleys Sermon, only I desire him to consider, how the whole
drift of his discourse, which was a kind of Sermon on that sad and black day,
aims at this, that they only are Zion, and the Israel of God, and all others
as bad as the strangers, from whom Israel separated in Nehemians time.

For their renewing their Covenant that day; I wish they have done it heartily,
and remember what they are bound to by their Covenant in Baptism, (viz.) To
forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, and
the carnal desires of the flesh, so as not to be led by them. So I say, Amen.

FINIS.
To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
UPon first view of Mr. Stucleys Pamphlet called (Manifest Truth) as I could
not but wonder, so I could not casily resolve, whether his pride and arrogance,
or his passion and impudence were most predominant, each appearing at such a
magnitude, which at first made me think that as it deserved, so it needed, no
other answer but silence, which (as the Philosopher says) is the best answer
to foolish questions: And the rather for that he has therein so pourtraied
himself to the life, that all that are judicious may read what is the man by
his manners. But in the second place considering that this Lion couchant,
contents not himself to rend my Wife in pieces, but also sucks the blood of my
reputation, to satisfy his greedy Appetite, and makes lies his refuge for all
his unjust actings, it being granted to every man to speak in the defense of
his own innocence, publicly questioned and wrongfully slandred: (this wound
reaching to the very soul) I have resolved (by Gods assistance) in a few
following sheets, to discuss and examine his late precious piece or Pamphlet,
and to discover both it, and 'its Author to the world in their Proper colors.
And herein 'its not my purpose to deal with every thing that lies fair to
exception: were I every way as able as my Antagonist, much less is it my
purpose to write after his blotted Copy; I have learned better of my Lord and
Master Christ, when I am revilea not to revile again, remembering what one
says, that no Adversary (suppose the Devil himself) is to be answered either
with affection or passion; but by sound reason and Religion, and I have reason
to believe, That Mr. Stucley might have done himself and his Church better
service by his silence or a modest Retractation, then he has done with all his
passion and bitter Exclamations. I hope all men are not so prepossest to look
upon all he says, as Oracles; nor every one bound up, by an Implicit faith,
to believe as he and his Church believe. Wise and impartial Judges are wont to
reserve an ear for the defendant, ere they determine the Cause: All that I
expect, is the like common Justice from all, that shall be pleased to exercise
their Patience in perusal of my ensuing defense, which how weak soever, it, or
the Author be, yet having Truth and innocence for our support, which is strong
and prevalent, is commended to thy impartial consideration by thine and the
Truths suffering friend

TOBY ALLEIN.

IT would be to little purpose to spend time, in descanting on the borrowed
Title, and many passages in Master Stucleys Book, that discovers more frothy
wit, then Christian wisdom or gravitie.

It would be also tedious and troublesome to enumerate the odious railing names
and Epithites of Cham, Ismael, Shimei, Rabsheka, apostate; broadfac'd lie,
brasenfac'd lie, putid lie, egregious lie, with such like excrementitious
stuff, that has dropped from his venomous pen; and wherewith his Book is full
fraught, as if composed at Bedlam or Billings-gate, unbeseeming any sober
Christian, much more a Pastor of a congregation.

I pass by the taking notice of his many quibbles, scoffs, and jeeres, his
pride and arrogance, his passion and impudence so obvious in every leaf, that
he that runs may read; And with reference to these things, content my self only
to say (as Catalus to his insulting Nonius) what a deal of dung does this cart
carry, such unsavory unsanctified language suits not a sanctified spirit,
fitter for the cookingstoole then the press.

But to come to particulars; In the first place, I shall only glance on some
passages of his Epistle.

That there is poison and gall in ink (as he affirms) I shall not question,
since his Book puts it out of question, the Reader will find it growing upon his
dung-heap.

In the next place Mr. Stucley presents himself unto the Reader, as in a great
straight or dilemma; whether he should be silent, or answer my Narrative (which
he styles a false report) and lays down reasons; pro and con.

But why is this preamble?

I tell thee Reader, Hypocrisy was never more in sashion then in our times:
The vilest, and most abominable practice and design in the world must have
this preface and varnish of Religion and conscience to cover 'its ugly face and
form. It Is sad to see how men cover wickedness with holiness even the garment
of God; But how think you, shall Mr. Stucley gain reputation to his ensuing
report of 48. lies, without painting the rotten post, and making a fair
prologue to so foul a piece.

And therefore it is, that first he insinuates himself to be a man of peace, he
tells you that he takes little pleasure in a Salamander life, Though in the mean
while, we all know, that it was his first work, after his coming to Exeter to
vent his Antinomian Tenants, and that in pulpit in contradiction to Mr.
Bartlets Orthodox Divinity and sound practical truth; And who knows not who
has been the firebrand, that has kindled the coals and blown the flames of
contention in Exeter ever since Mr. Stucley set foot there; And yet this is the
peaceable man you must take his own word for it, for he says he is a Minister,
but first he should have done well to have taken (Ordination) along with him,
and yet I should have much doubted of his hundreds of Ministers; that he
boasts, he could have to certifiy for him, I think the number would have fallen
very short, only some few of his votaries that he has helped unto, or kept in
good benefices and places, and some others for fear of ejecting probably might
have done him that Office, we well know, who rules the roast in these parts.

I shall for brevitie sake pass over his reasons for his silence, as not
bearing weight with his more preponderating considerations, to excite him to
answer.

Answer he must, first to prevent the Gospels suffering, secondly for his
Churches satisfaction.

The Gospel will suffer, and his labors be obstructed, if he be silent under
Calumnies and misrepresentations (as he insinuates my Narrative to be) And
therefore (he says) he is bound in conscience, But what to do? what bound in
conscience to ly for God? he needs it not, what, bound in conscience to deny
and evade Truth by shiftings and shuflings? To maintain unwarrantable
practices by impudence and insolent carriage, denying to give any account or
satisfaction to any for your actings? what to slander censure and trample on
poor honest Souls justly dissenting from you, thereby to raise and keep up
your own and your Churches tottering Independent interest, on the ruins of
their persons and reputations? Surely the Gospel needs no such support.

Mr. Stucleys Pamphlet (in the eye of judicious Christians) gains little glory
to God, little advantage to the Gospel, little credit to his Ministry, or
edification to his Church, and Christ will give him little thanks one day, for
such imprudent and preposterous zeal, being not according to knowledge, and
will say, who has required these things at your hands.

Pray Sr. Tell me, where was your conscience and zeal to preserve the Gospel
from suffering, when you raised that false report on Mr. Forde, reporting to
one of Taunton that he said, That lying was the property of a woman: and when
you abused Mr. Down and Mr. Bartlet by reports to my Brother at the same time?
where was your tender respect of the Gospel, when you too frequently aspersed
Mr. Forde, and would be picking of holes in his Sermons, and telling your
members, that he was much dissabled by his sickness, whereby many refused to
hear him for near two years together? Who taught your members to call his
Sermons preachments, Raylings etc. Is not this your very shiboleth to
distinguish a right Independent? And why have you and Mr. Mall, now also
withdrawn from his Lecture: is it not to confirm your disciples?

Reader, Note, this is the man that is so careful that his own name be not
reproached, least the Gospel suffer, and yet whispers and broaches untruths
against three godly Ministers to take away their good names, without any
respect to the Gospels suffering; how stands this together?

In the next place, whereas Mr. Stucley tells you, how he adores Gods goodness
to him, in hiding his infirmities from me, whom he styles a Cham, that would
soon have published it to my Brethren.

I answer, that it is not I, but his own harsh irregular actings that have
proclaimed not only his infirmities but enormities also to the world; For my
part I am convinced, it is sinful to publish others infirmities, much more to
curse them for it. But I adore the divine providence, in that Mr. Stucley
himself should occasion a discovery of his own foul enormities. God has a
time to discover the Hypocrisy of liars: A time when they shall proceed no
farther, but their folly shall be manifest unto all: God will bring to light
the hidden deeds of darkness in due time, it is neither pride nor policy can
hinder. Had I published Mr. Stucleys privity to the uncommissionated opening of
other men's letters, and taking Copies of Master Snows, and Mr. VVestlakes
Postletters, to lay up by him; suggesting to his Church members that these men
endeavored the ruin of the Church, and that God had broken their designs:
and appointing thanksgiving days for the same (a mere trick to alienate their
affections from them) I say, had I published these pranks; I suppose they would
not come under the notion of Mr Stucleys infirmities but somewhat of a higher
nature. Is it not a petty piece of Burglary think you, to unlock and break open
the closed Cabinet of another man's breast and bosom, to rob him of his
secrets, his heart Jewels? is not this somewhat above an infirmity? If not I
should have concealed it, but I dare not be accessory to such things, and
therefore I say, My Masters beware of your letters.

Next Mr. Stucley proceeds to rejoice, That Shimei his railing tongue, and
Rabshekahs letters should conduce to his and his Churches reputation.

Stay Reader, peruse my Narrative: where I pray does Mr. Stucley find Shimei
his railing tongue or Rabshekahs letters? does he not dream? Is it not in his
Pamphlet, he love to triumph before the victory: first let him take my answer
intended for his conviction, and then if it conduce to their reputation, much
good do it them, I hope God will work good out of it, when his eyes shall be
opened to see his error, and to make him sensible of his high flown conceits
of his; and his Churches infallibilities, and to make him really to adore the
divine justice toward him, who seeks to advance his and his Churches glory and
greatness, by the defamation of honest conscientious Christians, who endeavor
to walk honestly both in the sight of God and men.

In the last place he ends his Epistle with an Apology for his tartness in his
ensuing Book; and pleades the Law of nature for doing right to himself,
forgetting) it seems) the Law of grace, that forbids wronging his Neighbor,
God is not to be found (as one says) in the raging fire of opposition, but in
the sweet breathings and soft voice of Truth and love.

I leave his Epistle, and proceed to take a short survey of what follows in his
Pamphlet.

In his first page, he cavils at the Title of my Book in that 'its called,
Truths manifest, and seeks to cloud it, with a thick fog or mist of 48. lies
which I doubt not ere I have done, will call him father, and be justly laid at
his own door: of these in their proper place.

In his second page, he has a firivolous quibble or exception against the
Author, in that, it is said Toby Allein a (late) member etc. which he says
denotes; either my excommunication, or dismission, or Apostacy from them, etc.

I answer I was in the first place denied Communion with his Church, some of
them told me, they were offended at Mr. Downs baptizing my child, and at my
forbearing them private meetings, and I must not be admitted in such sins; In
the next place I gave them notice that for their unjust excommunicating my
wife, and refusing to give any reason or satisfaction about it, and for other
reasons (which the reader will see ere I have ended) I did withdraw from them,
and could walk no longer with them; and so I styled my self (a late member) as
I hope was proper enough, though not actually excommunicated, nor dismissed by
them; and yet for all this I hope, I am no otherwise an Apostate, then Luther
was, who said he was an Apostate, but it was from error to truth.

But Mr. Stucleys Church is now become offended and must be satisfied, ere they
will say farewell to Toby.

Well satisfaction must be had, and I hope I shall satisfy those that are
capable of satisfacton; The Church requires satisfaction because I say; They
have unjustly cursed my wife; And I require satisfaction because they did
unjustly curse her.

Mr. Stucley pray Sr. be ingenious; have I not offered by word and writing;
that I was ready to receive your charge (if you had any against me) and to
submit to the determination of godly judicious, and indifferent Ministers or
private Christians? And have you not refused this; Calling them forreiners; and
will refer it to none but your own Church, Mr. Eveleigh, Owen, etc. parties
as deeply guilty as your self, in this male administration, these must be the
indifferent Judges. To determine whether you and themselves have done right, or
wrong in your proceedings, none else must intermeddle in your Church affairs,
and why? It Is your principle, a principle without Scripture precept or
president, a punctilio, or device to wave and evade the hearing of the
Judicious, least the nakedness of your cause appear, and your shame be
discovered. Sr. I hope you did Reverence learned Mr. Buroughs, if so, pray
take the pains to look into his Heart-divisions page 43: where he says.

Those in the Congregationall way acknowledge, that they are bound in
conscience to give account of their ways to the Churches about them, or to any
other, who shall require it, this (says he) not in an Arbitrary way, but as a
duty they own to God and man.

Observe, he makes no distinction, but says to the Churches about them; or any
other, that shall require it. And this he speaks not only as his own opinion,
but as the judgment of those of the congregationall way in general. Pray tell
me, how you will reconcile your practice with this judgment? I would willingly
know why? or upon what different principle it was, that you refused to give Mr.
Nicolls, Mr. Bartlet, Mr. Down any account or satisfaction touching the reason
and grounds of those your proceedings, when those three Ministers desired it,
after you had sent them your monition (in the nature of a mandatum) that they
were to take notice that you and your Church had Excommunicated Mrs. Parr and
my wife: did you advise with any of the Churches in Exeter or elsewhere before
your precipitate proceedings? Pray let us know in your next how it was resented
by your brethren of the congregational way, at your late convention, at the Act
in Oxford (if truly stated by you which I must suspect) did they commend your
practice (as it is reported) and intend to draw it into president, or did they
blame you for it? Have you known any power either Episcopal, or
Archiepiscopall, (but only Papal) that claim such an absolute Independent
jurisdiction, as to deny all Appeals; and refuse to give any account of their
ways, and administrations) when desired) before Independency was set up? Pray
what meant you by your notice to the Ministers in Exon, was it not, that they
should deny these poor souls communion upon pain of your and your Churches
high displeasure, must your (Ipse dixit) satisfy, without ground or reason? If
this be your principle, we doubt not but within a few pages to show who are the
Schismatics, whether Mr. Stucley and his Church, or Toby Allein; But of that
by and by, I pass on to his observations on my Testimonial.

Reader, here see (this peaceable man) how his heart rises and swells against
the chamber of Exon. (as he call's the Subscribers to my certificate) he will
not be guilty of such a piece of incivility, as to suffer them to pass without
abusing them, he must have a fling at them, now they come in his way.

In the first place he gibes at their Administration of justice, we must (says
he) carry our selves warily, least we be bound to the good behavior warily,
not honestly, he begins with a jeer.

Page 3. Next, in his third and some ensuing pages; He call's them my
Compurgatours, prolocutours, Seconds, guard, etc. and tacit'ly represents them,
as men dissaffected to the Supreme Magistrate, with his jearing (Spectatum
admissi, etc.) and that his Highness affections to him, is an eie-sore to the
chamber, etc.

Reader this is the peaceable man still, If thou will believe him, he takes no
pleasure in a Salamander life, and yet Toby Allein and his wife are not
subjects high enough to wreak and fret his malice upon.

No, the chamber: they must know that he is offended at them also, and they and
all the world must know, what a favorite of the Protectors, Mr. Stucley is, he
put's it in print. But alas (poor man) how vain is it to be angry with those
that care so little for it: doubtless the chamber takes notice of it, so far,
as to be sorry for his simpleness, and that such a spirit of envy and
contention should lie Couchant, and discover it self from under Mr. Stucleys
pastoral Robe, They can bear a few gibes and jeeres from Mr. Stucley, and look
on it as his weakness, and that it would be weakness in them to engage in a
Contest with him about such things so inconsiderable. The Eagle scorns to catch
flies; I shall only say, that had I said and insinuated so much of the chamber
of Exeter, as Master Stucley has done, It might have been called, an Impudent
lie.

But we leave him in his sweat of discontent against the chamber, and shall
speak a word of his query, why I had not gotten a Certificate from the
Ministers or from his Church, I having (as he says) reported his Church to be
the honestest people that ever I came amongst.

To this briefly, That as for the Ministers -- Certificate I might have had it,
had I needed it; And as for his Churches Certificate, I left it for him to take
the benefit of that, being the best he can get; And as for his Church, If I
reported them to be the honestest people, etc.

I do now find I was in a great mistake, and must retract and ask them
forgiveness; I shall promise to say so no more till I have better evidence for
their honesty: I am not the first that have been deceived by these
Independents; and therefore I hope I may expect a pardon of Course. Next Mr.
Stucley raises queries, upon the contents of my Testimonial, (simple ones God
knows:) how easy is it to pay him home in his own Coin; May it not be ask't of
him, 1. whether he as not an unrighteous Steward in his causeless cursing my
wife? Secondly whether he be not better affected to his Independent party and
interest, then to the Common wealth? thirdly whether he has not raised more
divisions in the Churches of Christ in Exeter by gathering a Church out of
other Churches, then ever was known in Exeter before? But to let that pass, I
shall only add,

That the Certifiers (however Mr. Stucley represents them) are known to be men
of that worth, loyalty and integrity, that they disdain for any respects
whatsoever to certify any thing but what they know to be really truth: And had
they not been so, doubtless he would have long since informed against them; or
else had neglected his duty.

Page 4. Whereas in his fourth page he insinuates that I am to have a trial at
Law against him, etc.

Reader, be pleased to take notice, that after Mr. Stucley had libellously
slandred my wife in pulpit and print, before I printed my Narrative I demanded
(by several letters) satisfaction for this public defamation, as a breach of
the Laws both of God and man: Telling him, that if he would show the matter of
fact truly stated, and a possitive Scripture, or Law of man, for such a
procedure on such a fact or 'its parallel, he should convince me.

I likewise sent him a charge; consisting of four particulars, (to wit) first
his application of Prove. 5.8.9. and Tit. 2.5. to my wife, insinuating her to be
a harlot and unchaste: Secondly his reporting her to be a woman knowing no
subjection at home or abroad, Thirdly, his saying, that she went from them to
avoid Curch censure: Fourthly his reporting that she never gave any reason for
her leaving them: I charged him that in these particulars he had scandalized my
wife, and therein broken both the Law of God and man. I desired a debate of
these particulars by himself and Master Mall (his assistant,) and two others
whom he thought fit with my self and three other godly Christians that I should
bring, promising that if he could prove either of them, nay, if I did not
disprove all of them, I would lay down and beg him mercy.

His answer was, that this charging him with particulars, he did not like, and
that it was not the way of gaining him; But that I was to tell him his fault
between me and him alone; And failing in that first assay; Then I was to take
with me, one or two of that particular fellowship (meaning his Church) and that
until then he saw no reason at all to call in foreign helps.

Note Reader, this learned Rabbi, he tells me that I must first tell him of his
trespass privately, which himself has published on the housetop, in pulpit
and press.

I thought he had known better how to distinguish, as to the Application of
Admonitions, and that there is a vast difference between the case of private
personal wrongs; And public Church male administrations.

Next (says he) I must take two or three of his Church; They were partakers in
the fact of cursing my wife; And they are to admonish him for that, which they
joined with him to do.

Note, he wholly declines my proposal, and has found out this shift, he tells
me the Church are offended, that I take offense at their proceedings; And
summons me to his consistarie before Mr. Eveleigh, Owen, and the rest, judges
in their own cause: for them to debate, and determine whether he and they had
done right or no: you may imagine what a piece of justice I might expect from
them. Right Lidford Law. Hereupon I gave notice to the Church by letter, that
forasmuch as they had abused the Ordinance of Christ, in Excommunicating my
wife on such pretended crimes as were apparent falsities; I had therefore
withdrawn from them, and could neither in reason nor conscience join with such
a Congregation as live wholly under an Arbitrary form of Church Government, and
admitted of no appeals in the case of unjust excommunication.

And so, after Mr. Stucleys denial of a friendly debate often proposed by me,
I was enforced to commence my suit at Law, to right my self in way of a legal
proceeding. And this is the action of the case, he there speaks of.

It would be almost infinite to follow him in every of his impertinencies and
frothy fancies, I purposely wave many as inconsiderable, and shall speak only
to the most material, that I tire not the Reader.

Mr. Stucley has done with my Testimonial, and now taking leave of the
chamber, with his pace tantorum virorum, a jeering farewell, he passes to my
Epistle.

He begins with a whipper: Scandal and contumacy (says he) was proved against
my wife, and therefore her censure was not unrighteous: good Logic, were it
true; yea, but he will prove it by his Sermon notes (alias) his printed libel:
I refer you, says he, to the notes of my Sermon in print. A very strong
evidence, a cogent argument. He and his Church must curse my wife for deserting
them and joining to her former pastor, but scandal, and contumacy must be the
gloss and pretense for their proceedings. Mr. Stucley preaches, and prints her
guilty; And that is his proof. They say so; And therefore it is so; they are
satisfied, and therefore others must me.

The Pharisees say that Christ had a Devil, and therefore it must be so;
probatum est.

Suppose a vile wretch (being met with a parcel of his Desciples, as bad as
himself) do preach and print blasphemy (as many do in these days) is it true?
or is it ever the less blasphemy, because he preaches and prints it, and his
Desciples own and maintain it? This is sorry stuff.

Next we are now come to the point, the whole stresse of the business in
difference between Mr. Stucley and my self lies in this, namely, whether my
wife were guilty of Crimes deserving excomminication, or not deserving? whether
guilty of contumacy, or not guilty? in a word, whether his curse be causeless
or not?

I am not ignorant that I am to encounter, one, that Goliah-like seems to be
armed Cap-a pe; He is a Scholar, which I pretend not to, therefore the
disadvantage lies on my side; But I trust my cause is good, and my design is
satisfaction, and therefore shall not fear to take leave humbly to propose a
few queries to serious consideration.

First, whether a particular Church may impose, press or practice any thing
that is not warranted by Scripture precept, Apostolical iustitution, or
primitive Church practice?

Secondly, whether, If such things be imposed pressed or drawn into practice,
by a particular Church, the Church members may not refuse it as arbitrary and
after their declaring dissatisfaction in point of conscience may not withdraw
from such Church, till they receive satisfaction; and for non-satisfaction,
wholly desert it.

Thirdly whether a particular Church denying, or tying up it is members by
Covenant, compact or otherwise from communion with other Churches of Christ in
the ordinances, and it is refusing to admit the members of other Churches of
Christ (professed believers and orderly livers) to communicate with them, in
the ordinances, be warrantable by Scripture rule, Apostolical institution, or
primative practice, or on the contrary, be separation and schism in such
particular Church.

Fourthly, whether there be any Scripture Rule, or Parsident, for a particular
Church, to erect private meetings, and there to pray, preach, and carry on
designs and particular interests, relating to state affairs to promote
self-edification in stead of sole-edification? -- and if not.

Fifthly, whether a Churchmember, seeing the danger, and taking offense at such
practices, having declared against it, may not in conscience abstain and
withdraw from such, and join in the ordinances with other congregations of Gods
people, without incurring the guilt of Shcisme.

In the next place I shall point Mr. Stucley, to some passages of the late
reverend and learned Mr. Buroughs in his heart-divisions page 173. and 174.

If (says he) the cause of leaving communion be just, then those who gave this
cause are the schismatiks, not those who withdraw upon it, thus the Governors
of the Church may be the schismatics and a private member withdrawing may be
free.

And again, if Governors impose that which is not necessary (though in it self
not sinful) and will not bear with the weaknesses of such, as think it to be
evil, if upon that, they be forced to withdraw in this the Governors are the
Schismatics.

And again in page 50. The power of the Church (says he) extends not to the
punishment of every thing, that either may by the Governors of it be conceived
to be evil, or that is indeed evil, but only such things, as some way or
other appear to be against conviction and are obstinately persisted on, etc.

And in page 52. those that will go farther, they will punish for every evil,
and if they use means to convince them, and they be not convinced, they will
judge them obstinate, and proceed against them accordingly, those challenge and
exercise not the power of Christ, but Antichrist.

And again page 67. this is generally held by our Brethren (says he) If a man
be rightly cast out of communion with one Church, he is thereby cast out of
all. If this be so (says he) then surely many things must be suffered, before
we proceed to cast out a member, it must not be for every error of miscarriage,
thus also Bp. Davenant in his rules for peace, these may not be cut off from
communion with particular Churches, who remain joined to the Catholic Church.

And again page 90. Prelatical spirits indeed account it their honor to force
men to be of their mind; it is their glory, that they can say to the consciences
of men, bow down before us: a gracious spirit abhorrs the thought of such a
Tyrany.

These things thus-premised and considered, I apply it to the case in hand, in
these few ensuing queres.

First I enquire, what other meaning or construction but imposing and pressing
things unnecessary, can be made or put on those passages and practices in your
Covenant (for so your Elder Mr. Eveleigh named it to me and my wife) (viZ.)
that we should hear you, when you preached, and noe others, without your leave,
and that we must expect a greater blessing on your Ministry, then any others,
and that we must frequent your private meetings, or be accountable to you and
your officers for our default? Have you any Scripture-rule or primitive Church
practice for these, and for such pressing of them (as your Elder did) on me and
my wife to subscribe unto them? and as for your denying liberty to communicate
at the Lords table with other Churches of Christ, where is your Scripture-rule
or reason for it? Is not this an imposing and pressing of things unnecessary.

In the second place I enquire, whether I and my wife did not refuse to
subscribe this Covenant upon grounds of dissatisfaction, in point of
conscience: pray ask your Elder, did I not tell him I must first see direct
proof, or sound consequence from Scripture, to convince me that this was an
injunction of Christ and not arbitrarie, ere I could submit to it.

And pray ask him farther, did not my wife tell him that she found no such rule
of Christ, not obligation upon Christians, and could not in conscience submit
or yield to be so tied up, but desired to stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ had made her free, or that effect, this, I say we did refuse to be
engaged unto in point of conscience.

Thirdly, I enquire farther, did not my wife tell Mr. Eveleigh and Mr.
whitehorne, two of your members, that came to admonish her for not coming to
your private meetings, that she was offended at your carrying on selfish
designs and interests, under pretense of serving God, at such times, appearing
both in your prayers and practices, and that she could not, with a good
conscience join with such, but would leave you, especially after she had heard
Capt. Rolls his strange praying, and the Churches perrilous petitioning the
Protector, which you sent me to subscribe, whereof the danger was represented
to her as my Narrative does express, had she not just cause to take offense at
this? were not such things enough to stumble a woman, to make her fear and in
point of conscience and prudence also, to avoid this apprehended danger, both
to soul and body? Pray let it be considered.

But now I mention this petition, I must take heed for Mr. Stucley is offended
as you may see in page 7.

Where he makes the Reader believe he has gotten me into his Net, into a
dilemma inextricable; That unavoidable I must be either a Traitor, or a lier,
here he puts a bold face on a bad matter; But pray not too fast, let us along
with you.

Reader take notice that in my Narrative I was telling the grounds and occasion
of my wifes withdrawing from them, That she heard a friend say, that there were
dangerous passages, in their Church Petition, which they brought me to sign;
And in particular a clause, to pray the Protector to dissolve the Parliament,
and I told you also that this (amongst other things) did, (as it well might)
trouble her, and cause her, to cautionate me to be wary what I did, and at
length for this and other reasons before recited, to withdraw from them.

For my part I never read the petition, nor knew 'its contents whether there
were any treasonable undertaking in it or nor, let the contrivers and
subscribers look to that, I did mention it in my Narrative only to show the
occasion and ground of my wifes dissatisfaction, and one reason of her
deserting them, I had not the least design to alienate the chief Governors
affections from him and his Church (as he suggests) I fear not the guilt of
misprision of Treason; But yet seeing Mr. Stucley puts me so hard to it, I
shall see whether we can extricate our selves out of Mr. Stucleys dilemma, and
that I may not be guilty of misprision of Treason, and others may see who is
the Traitor or the liar, I shall here insert what I have heard (and doubtless
Mr. Stucley will not deny) was the heads or substance of their Church-petition
as follows.

Should this change be (viz.) the Kingly office be accepted, how much will the
liberty of the Saints be hazarded; And will you put on the yoke of intolerable
slavery on their necks with your own hands, and rivet it fast by a
Parliamentary Power from falling of.

Can your Highness be ignorant, that there is too much of an imposing spirit
in matters of conscience, still remaining in the midst of us, who would
gladly deny liberty to those who have earned it with their blood; and must we
again forsake our inheritances and estates, etc.

We cannot but remember your Highness; That the itch that was upon the spirits
of men (nothing could satisfy them, unless they could put their fingers on
their Brothers conscience to pinch it) is not yet healed, what assurance will
the Parliament give, that your Army, who are at present a fence between us, and
fiery spirits) shall be continued?

And is it not sufficiently known that many of those persons that cry up
Monarchy, as hereditary, are crying down of a Military Basis, as inconsistent
with magna charta and the liberty of the Nation?

If the Militia be kept in your Highness hands, it was that which was thought
unreasonable for the King to pretend to: If left in the Parliament, so chosen
by the Nation as now qualified; may it not easily be presaged how suddenly they
shall be disbanded? or what ground or hope has your Highness, that the
spirits of the Common people are now more wary in picking and choosing
Representatives then of old?

Did you not lately see what need you had of your counsel to set guards on the
Parliament, to keep out Malignant and violent spirits, though we fear,
notwithstanding all their vigilance, there are but too many crept within those
doors.

How unreasonable is it, that they who came together by virtue of this
Government should now be permitted to pull it down?

If it were thought unreasonable that any should sit without a recognition: Is
it not most intolerable (pardon our boldness) that the subverters of the
Government, should be let alone their months being long since expired? Does it
lie in your Highness breast to secure the Government against such Invadors?
Will not this as dangerously dissappoint, and discompose the Nation as any
thing that could have been invented, by the greatest enemies to your peace and
welfare?

Lastly are not the same weeds, nettles and briars thriving under this
Parliament as under tholast; And are there not the same reasons, for their
dissolution, as for the former?

May it therefore please your Highness to lay these things close upon your
heart, and not to consent to such alterations and subversions of Government,
etc. Reader; there needs no Paraphrase; These heads were given by one of their
own members (no Apostate) and therefore I think Master Stucley will not say,
it is a lie or a false copy, only I cannot pass it by, without a query or two.

First I ask why Mr. Stucley himself, had not printed their petition in his
Book, he says he was not ashamed to tell the world of it, and yet conceales
it; If it were so honest why had you not printed it?

Secondly I would ask him, whether it were recomended to him and his Church by
his holiness from Rome; or was it composed within the walls of Mr. Raddons
Posthouse in Exeter at their private meetings?

Thirdly, I would know whether those that subscribed it were Englishmen,
Italians, or Spaniards.

Fourthly whether Religion does challenge any other place then to be a settler,
no sticker in the State?

Fifthly whether some eminent Statesmen did not discourage Mr. Mall (your
Agitator) from presenting it, and whether it were not turned back to be laid
aside, or amended?

Sixthly, whether such Church work might not justly offend weak members, and
put them upon thoughts of satisfaction before they join farther with such a
Church?

Doubtless Mr. Stueley will take some pains to give some solution and
satisfaction to these queries in his next, which I shall content my self to
wait for with patience; And that I may no farther digress, I return to
examine his allegations of my wifes supposed crimes and contumacy, deserving
excommunication; and here I find he would make the world believe, that 'twas
not for deserting them and going to her former Pastor: this he thinks will not
hold, though this in truth was at the bottom. But now (for-sooth) it must be
running away from her husband.

Reader for satisfaction in this, read my Narrative, which shows the true
cause, manner and end of my wifes going to Honiton, which he falsely call's
running away.

The truth is, her spirit was troubled at those sorry actings in the Church,
which I have before set forth; she saw mad Church work amaking, she feared
entanglements and could not in conscience continue longer with them as I
pressed her to do; therefore she desires satisfaction, and on that occasion and
no other, she went to Honiton in order to go to Taunton to Mr. Newton, and my
Brother Allein, Ministers of Taunton for solution of her doubts. I appeal to
the impartial Readers.

What think ye? might not this intended tying up by covenant to a particular
Congregation, and debarring her of the liberty of Church privileges in
Communion with other Christians; and their engaging in State affairs in so
unheard of a manner, make a good woman to use means for satisfaction, and quiet
of her conscience, when she had told them and me, she could not in conscience
continue with them? and she was told, she could not leave them: might not this,
I say, cause her to be importunate for satisfaction without danger of
excommunication?

Object. But they object; she went away, and I knew not of it.

Ans. I answer; she had told me before that she would go somewhat for
satisfaction; and I had before agreed to her going to Taunton for it. But
suppose I did not for present know whether she was gone; what then? must she
therefore be run away? None but an Independent will judge so.

Object. But it is farther objected, why then did ye grieve at her going away
and said, she would leave you?

Ans. To this I answer, it is false, I never said she would leave me, whatever
you vouchers Capt. Rolls, and Owen do tell you. They are your own Disciples;
and have been her accusers and judges.

Secondly I say, I had reason to be troubled: first at the ill use and
advantage I apprehended such as you (who watched for her haltings) would make of
it. And again secondly, because I had no sooner complied and condescended to
the healing of her troubled spirit, but had too much hearkened to some of your
cruel counsels and instigations against her.

Let me put Mr. Stucley a querie or two?

First let me ask him did I ever complain to him or his Church or any other,
that my wife was run away, and require a Church proceedings about it? or did he
or his Church ever ask me whether she did run away or not, or whether there
were a reconciliation, did any of them examine the case before they proceeded
to curse her?

Secondly, did not he and his Church (being madded at her leaving them) in
point of policy or rather revenge conspire to spread and foment this false
report, and then call it a public Scandal, past her husbands pardon, and such
as he and his Church must take cognizance of ex officio, and curse her, for
unless she would cry peccavi, though innocent. This will be the case another
day, whatever they pretend to hide it now. She had left them: they could not
brook it, therefore they seek occasion and finding none, They feign and frame
somewhat that they may have some show for the work: it must be done in
Terrorem. Strict Discipline against the wife, may chance deterr the husband
from going away; for they now fear his departure too. To loose a Church member
may be ominous.

Thirdly, I ask Mr. Stucley this question, If he and his Church had so good a
cause, and could prove their pretended crimes against my wife, why was this
conscientious Pastor so rigid, as to refuse a hearing and debate of their
accusations before Mr. Ford, Mr. Down, and others nominated by my wife, whereby
he and his Church might have been cieared and justified in their proceedings,
had their pretended delinquent been convicted?

Where was this man's wisdom or charity (I would fain know?) who rather then he
would abate a hairs breadth of his greatness and honor (that proves his
shame) he will give my wife to the Devil, send her packing to hell; where is
this man's Scripture-rule, or Church president for such a wilful procedure?

Hear learned Zanchie, treating about Church power in the point of
excommunication.

What is more grievous (says he) to the whole body of the Church, then to cut
off a member from the Body? If a Church (says he) be small and consists not of
many learned men, (as Mr. Stucleys I am sure does not) excommunication ought
not to be done, unless the neighbor Churches be first consulted withal. A
surgeon (if he fear God and be wise) does not cut off a hand or an arm,
before he has first heard the judgment of the skillful neighbor physicians.

And the late reverend Mr. Vines in his Treatise of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, page 212. says.

The proper and Adequate, and immediate object of debarriment from the
Communion of the Church is a Sandalous person, that holds either a course, or
has committed the act of a scandalous sin, which he explaines to be, some
Atrocious or grievous sin of the first magnitude, If any that is called a
Brother be a fornicatour, Idolater, covetous, etc. 1 Cor. 5. and 1 Cor. 6.9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, nor
fornicatours, Idolaters, adulterers, abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor coveteous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, and such
were some of you, etc.

And page 213. He tells us it must be an open and manifest sin, else it is not
Scandalous: And known it must be either by evidence of fact, confession or
conviction.

Now let Mr. Stucley show wherein my wife was guilty of any such Atrocious or
grievious sin, and if not, why falls he upon this highest work of
excommunication?

Little flies (says Mr. Vines) must not be knocked down with so great a hammer.

Object. True (says my Adversary.) But there was contumacy that your wife was
guilty of.

Ans. I answer first, if no crime, no contumacie.

But secondly suppose a fault, I deny any contumacy: what contumacy? when she
had made so many overtures to be tried by indifferent judges, godly indifferent
Ministers or people: what contumacy? when the poor women wrote to Mr. Stucley
their desires, to be communicated to his Church, to have their cause heard by
understanding and impartial men whosoever they be, and gave assurance, that
they would submit to the Law and will of Christ, which letter, this faithful
Pastor pocketted and concealed from his Church, you see what a good will he had
to the work; he would curse them right or wrong, where is the contumacy in her?
was it not Tyranny in him? does he not deserve a Bishopric.

By this time (I suppose) the Reader sees, how pertinent and applicable Mr.
Malls quotations are to the case of my wifes unjust excommunication; And
whether she were guilty of crimes or contumacy deserving such a cruel censure,
unjustly inflicted by Mr. Stucley and his Church, I leave it to the judicious
to consider.

Before I pass, I take notice that in his 5. page he tells you, that I am
willing to wave the question about the impertinency of Mr. Malls quotations,
and to refer it to the learned, and says that I should have studied the
question, and not contented my self with an implicit faith in the learned, etc.

To this I answer, I think the question is now put out of question, and by what
has been cited out of those learned men before named, it plainly appears that
his quotations are frivolous and impertinent to the case in hand, let the
Reader judge.

And as for an implicit faith in the learned, I say an implicit faith in Church
affairs, is no way satisfactory unto me; And therefore I desire Mr. Stucley to
satisfy me; whether he did not tie up his Church Members to an implicit faith
in him, when he did upon that black day of his curse, make his members
subscribe a Church Covenant or oath, That they would submit to his guidance and
teaching as their Pastor, (absolutely) without any restriction or limitation?
why had it not been added, he guiding and teaching according to the rule of
Gods word? what is this but to pin their faith on his sleeve? what is it but an
implicit faith on Mr. Stucley. St. Paul durst not be so bold; he bids the
Churches be followers of him; and the other Apostles, as they are followers of
Christ; are we not bid, to the Law and to the Testimony? bid search the
Scriptures, bid try the spirits? Must we take up all you say upon Trust? are
there no deceivers gone forth into the world, and into the Church too? Wolves
in sheeps clothing such as (like the Devil) transform themselves into Angels of
light, creep into houses and captivate silly women, etc. Pray Sir tell me why
was this omitted in your Church Covenant or oath, which Mr. Mall has inserted
in his Book? should not oaths and covenants be plain and express? or will you
supply it with an and caetera. Have you not herein outwitted the Pope, and made
him a younger Brother? Surely there is somewhat lies in this pad, pray explain
your self next.

Reader I am sensible that I have been too tedious hitherto, and should I trace
this fox in his wiles and cunning fetches in every page, I should tire both you
and my self to unkennell him; I profess I am heartily sorry to see his
impudence; he would make the world believe the Crow is white, and that it is
night at noon by his Logic all are lies, but what he himself says; he sees he
is engaged head and ears; and must make lies his refuge to maintain his and
his Churches unjust act, like the boy that bid his mother call whore first.

For a man to Cloister himself up, and like the Owl to decline the light of a
hearing, and to be ashamed to give account to Ministers and others that are
dissatisfied, does not this in the eye of every judicious Reader speak him
guilty and unworthy?

What has been already said, answers many of his foul Aspersions I shall now
contract my self and cursorily run over the rest.

And first for his affirmation that I and my wife consented to Mrs. Parrs
suspension, in page 8. I profess we never knew of any suspension of her, much
less joined in any; her answer was (as to me) fair and satisfactory, (Viz)
that she remembered not the things for they accused her, and if she were
convinced of it, she, would be sorry for it. I never voted it satisfactory and
neither knew nor joined in any such suspension, therefore that is an untruth on
Mr. Stucleys part.

And next as for Mr. Stucleys insisting on my wifes neglect of admonition. etc.

I answer that she did declare unto some or one of the officers, her dislike
and dissatisfaction at their carriage in several particulars as soon as she had
a convenient opportunity, which proved fatal to her in the end.

Take notice reader, it was not a Brother or a Sister singly, or a few members,
but 'twas the whole Church', they were all as it were hung together in a
string. Their tying up the members by compact; their intermedling in State
affairs, their carrying on self designs, their practical forbidding communion
with other Churches; their traducing those that are not of their way, was a
disease epidemicall, that run through the whole body, and was discove'rd by
degrees to be the very product of their private meetings, as if it had been a
part of their Religion. And would it not have been looked upon as a piece of
pride and presumption for my wife to reprehend a whole Church; and should she
not (think you) have been accounted against (as Mrs. Parr) for a contentious
woman, that raised discord and disturbance in the Church.

I shall (for brevity's sake) leap over many of his pages, the sum of what he
there alleges; being answered occasionally in my former sheets.

I also pass by his silly probabillities in the 14. page; which he brings to
induce a belief in the reader, that my wife ran away, and intended not for
Taunton, it is fully answered.

His Queries; whether dame must ride upon the Mugle of the Mare? and whether
Honiton be in the way to Taunton, and the like are so sordid and ridiculous, as
it is unworthy an answer, better be fitting the Tongue of a stageplayer then the
pen of a Minister, every child sees 'its weakness; and therefore I content my
self with the saying of the wise man, answer not a fool according to his folly,
least thou also be like unto him.

'Its merely forged to say, that John Mongwell reported that Dame ran to
Ireland with another woman's husband.

It Is false also that I could not for a while be admitted into my wifes chamber
at Honiton: and also false that my wife confessed that she had left me because of
a different way: and that Honiton and Exeter rang of this Scandal; all of this
stuff proceeded from Mr. Stucleys forge.

It Is likewise most untrue that he affirms in the 16. page, that my wife
refused conference with those of the church that were sent unto her: she would
have conferred with them, if others might have been present: she well knew they
came to intrapp her, as they did Mrs. Parr, dealing with her singly.

I only add, that the action of my wife in going to Honyton was not
Scandalous. It was honest and upon conscientious grounds and ends, as in my
Narrative is set forth.

In his 17. page he falls upon me for neglecting Church Fellowship i. e.
Neglecting their Conventicles at Mr. Raddons posthouse, to hear my wife
vilifyed and abused, and others reproached and slandred; and see self designs
promoted. Reader thou have heard what broth is boiled at those meetings.

Note; these subtle foxes must have their private meetings, to distill their
principles, and gradually to discover their practices among their choice
disciples of their own gang, that make no bones to swallow any thing that their
infallable Master does impose or command: witness their Subscripsion to his
imposed Covenant, binding them to follow his guidance and teaching absolutely
without any restriction or limitation: witness, their stickling Church State
petition and the like, of which thou have already heard.

For my part I am far from decrying or declaiming against the meetings of Gods
people, either in public or or in private, as there is or may because or
occasion.

But what need this private meeting, so constituted by strict injunction and to
be frequented upon pain of Castigation I profess I can see neither warrant
for it, nor good of it: what is done: there you have partly heard is it not to
strengthen the members in their separation from other Churches of Christ, and
to infuse farther dividing principles, to widen the Breach, that they may work
their own ends? why not public meetings that all Gods people may see and
hear what they do, what they pray, and what they preach and practice as other
Churches do.

I am of opinion that we ought to admonish, instruct, comfort and edify any of
Gods people of what society soever, at all times as there is occasion and
opportunity. But not of your vowcher Mr. Owens opinion, that we are to love
those of your Society, as a man loves his wife above other women, I know no
such rule.

I must confess, I am very much for public meetings, since I so much observed
their private transactions; I much better like our public administration of
justice in open legal Courts in the face of the country, since I have taken
notice of some chamber proceedings before private Comittes. Mr. Raddons
Posthouse was the Conclave, where Mr. Stucley and his Church did curse Mrs.
Parr and my wife.

As for Mr. Stucleys cavills, and exceptions against me for my pretended
neglecting Church fellowship; I referr the Reader to my letter in my Narrative,
which was to have been communicated to his Church; had he been faithful, which
will give a satisfactory answer.

I must say somewhat to Tom Savery's letter, which for the excellency of it Mr.
Stucley has put in print, page 19.

The very reading of it with observation and reference to the matter then in
Question, makes good what I have said concerning it in my Narrative.

Note in the beginning of his letter, he says, His soul is grieved for my
disorderly walking, I mean (says he) your absenting your self from our
private meetings etc. Then follows; if the wife of your boosome divert you,
etc. That is (see the scope of his letter) divert you from our private
meetings, what then? he tells me out of Luke 14.26.27, 33: if any one come to
me and hate not his father and mother and wife etc. he cannot be my disciple.
See his good Application: If my wife divert me from their private meetings (you
have heard what they are) If I do not hate my wife I cannot be Christ's
disciple. An excellent conclusion, a very sound inference. I hope,
notwithstanding his doctrine) that I may come to Christ without coming to such
private meetings as theirs are: and I hope my wife may divert me from error,
from danger, from their private meetings, and yet not divert me from Christ, or
from his ordinances, so as to give me occasion to hate her. Does Tom Savery
think that to be at Mr. Raddons chamber in praying and preaching up self
interests, and promoting dividing principles, is a waiting on God in his
gallories? if it be so to him, it is not so to me; pray give liberty of
conscience to others, as well as take it your selves. Mr. Stucley has well
vindicated Tom Savery.

I take no farther notice of his descant on my letter to him and his Church, or
of Tom Saveries letter to me; a common eye sees how frivolous his exceptions
are.

But now he comes with his Kill-cow in his 22. page.

Behold yet greater abominations (says he) Well, what is the matter? He says,
that I fear at the workings of the spirit in those mournings and lamentings
which God was pleased to bestow upon his people upon that sad day; And that I
blasphemously called it a hideous howling cry, and accounted so just a censure
to be like the Popes bull, a beast, when it roars the loudest.

For answer, I bless God, I am not ignorant, how horrid a sin it is to jeer at
the workings of Gods spirit in the mournings, sighs or groans of his children;
and it is not Mr. Stucley, nor the Devil himself (the grand accuser of the
brethren) can justly accuse me for any such thing. I can (I bless God) appeal
to the searcher of hearts, in the uprightness of my heart, that I am free from
any such sin, or the least thought thereof; And I do not in the least recant
what I said, I did say, and do say still, that they made a hideous howling cry
or noise; in so much that one of them fell down in a sown, or counterfeited;
and others told me, that they were fearful to tarry longer among them, and
truly I was and am serious, and do not jeer: I think they might well make a
hideous howling cry, when they were about such hideous work; They were not
about Gods work, I dare say, it was the Devils. They were perverting and
misapplying Gods Ordinance.

What to curse, and cast out Gods servants to the Devil, unjustly denying them
an indifferent hearing: and when they had no warrant from Gods revealed word,
to pretend an immediate word, an Enthusiasme or Revelation for it? what else
meant your fictitious Parley between God and the Devil in your printed libell,
telling your Church that the Devil demanded those women to be given him by God,
and that God bid your Church give them to the Devil, and bid the Devil take
them, and torment them, representing them as the immediate subjects of the
Devils fury and vengeance by your unjust curse, pray what meant your, take her
Devil, was not this enough to make your members (if conscientious, any of them)
to make a hideous cry? yea to howl too, for fear that the Devil would have
visibly appeared to encourage you in such a work, as (it is credibly reported)
he has since given you a visit in your house. It Is well you have gotten an
inspiration, I am sure you had no written word of God, applicable to this case;
and therefore what if I compared it to the Popes Bull, I think it very near of
kin: yours as just and Right as his, and no otherwise.

And as for the copy of your prayer, It was taken by a man, who (whatever Mr.
Stucley says to disparage him) has been and is esteemed by honest men to be
honest and religious, such as will not falsify any thing therein; But the truth
is, it is such a misshapen piece that Master Stucley is ashamed to father it; and
therefore in his page 24. he brings in his compurgatours: and who are they? his
Church Officers and other accomplices in this unjust act; they are birds of a
feather, they must witness that it was not his prayer, and say they, somewhat
was inserted, and somewhat was omitted; but they set not down a word what this
Somewhat was: a very fair testimonial, ask my fellows, etc.

As for the story of my wifes abusing her Sister, I have made a true report
thereof in my observations on Mr. Stucleys printed Sermon, to which I refer
the Reader, assuring him that it is not all Mr. Stucleys shufling untruths and
evasions can acquit him from unfaithfulness and unworthiness in that business.

And the like I say of his reflections in his letters: what I have averred
touching it, is true; and it is sufficiently verified by himself in his
scurrilous Pamphlet against me and my wife, in which you see that practice
exemplified to the life.

And as for his charging me with neglect of fraternall correption in 18.
Particulars in his 28. page

I shall only give this short answer, that it is a false charge; Liars need
good memories.

Reader cast back thy eye, and peruse my letter in my Narrative and see how
many of these things I complained of, that concerned him and particular members
of his Church; what was this but admonition, and what effect had it? 'twas
clapped up and not communicated, least it should dissatisfy the Church: a fine
shift to stifle my complaints and hide them from the Church, and after charge
me with neglect of fraternall correption.

Mr. Stucley may also remember that I told him that I heard that the Church had
sent up a dangerous petition, and that it was ill resented: And that he was so
far from disowning or disliking it, that he wished that he were in London, to
present it with his own hands. And since he knows that I have sent him several
letters showing him the particulars wherein the unrighteousness of his censure
lay, and yet he most impudently denies all?

I could go through all the eighteen particulars, and show how I have
discovered to the parties concerned, my dissatisfaction, and reprehended them
for their practice as occasion did serve. But in regard most of these are
answered in my precedent sheets, as I have occasionally met with them, and
others of them will fall in to be spoken to in my answer to his 48. pretended
lies, I do (for brevity sake) wave them here, and shall proceed to his
Catalogue of lies, to give brief answers to such as are not already spoken to;
as follows.

And as for his first pretended lie. That his Sermon contained many foul
untruths and base reflections, who sees it not? And that he printed it, what
was it, but to spread false reports? I utterly deny that any person was
employed by me to write his Sermon or prayer, but after I heard what good stuff
it was, I was willing to have it written out fair, that my self and others
might read it, and where is the lie in all this?

To his second supposed lie, I do still aver that my report in my Narrative
of all transactions relating to my wifes excommunication is true. And for his
pretended care or counsel to prevent this censure I know none, but only his
desires for my joining in that cruel act were sufficiently evidenced; but the
Lord in mercy prevented it.

To the third, I say still, and that truly (and think the Reader is convinced)
that there were never any crimes proved against Mrs. Parr or my wife deserving
such a censure. If he can make any appear, why does he yet lie in his hole,
and refuse to come forth before the judicious to evince it, and answer what he
has done: he thinks his pen must plead for him, and he may print lies, Cum
Privilegio.

I utterly deny that I ever joined in Mrs. Parrs suspension; I was satisfied in
her answer; and if she were suspended, it was unjustly done.

To the fourth, I have answered before in my Book, and (I think) have
sufficiently evinced it to be an unrighteous censure: I shall say little more
to that before I see Mr. Stucley prove it to be righteous, which he can never
do: he shuns the light, for my part I little thought that he and his Church
should ever have been so far left to themselves, as to proceed so unrighteously.

I did not desire their forbearance of my wife upon any such account, as he
pretends; it is true, that I wished them to forbear their vexings of her (almost
daily) as they did, for fear least she, being big with child, might have
miscarried by reason of their continued vexations.

To the fifth, I say, we were fixed as members to Mr. Downs Church, as really
as any other members of that Church, and did receive the Sacrament there, and
that without any such conditions as he supposes: yet I conceived, and was
resolved by an able Minister, that I might (notwithstanding) sit down with Gods
people in any other congregation, as providence should order, or as occasion
was offered.

To the sixth, I say we were not admitted of Mr. Stucleys Church, until almost
a year after we had spoken our experiences; and for the difficulty of out
admission, if it had been either for ignorance or scandal, Mr. Stucley was
often enough with us, and might in all that time have told us so much; But
never a word of any such thing till he had a mind to curse my wife for
deserting him.

To the seventh, I say Mr. Eveleigh one of the Church Officers, and others
called the paper which was brought into the Church to be debated (a Covenant)
and told me that the greatest part thereof was assented unto, and therefore if
it be lies, you see who was the Author, and that I did dislike it I have
already demonstrated.

To the eighth; I say, my wife did join to Mr. Downs Church, as in my Narrative
is expressed, and that which Mr. Stucley call's Admonition preceding it, was
only Mr. VVhithornes asking her the reasons of her absence from their
Thursdayes private meetings, when she had been absent not above three or four
times, for which I think the reader is satisfied she had some reason to
abstain.

To the 9. the traducing of Mr. Forde and slighting of honest godly people
different from your principle, has been too frequent among you, and the lie
and slander returns on your selves.

To the tenth, I say I have sufficiently set forth, the occasion, manner, and
end of my wifes going to Honiton, which is the Truth, and will stand firm
another day, when all Mr. Stucleys foisted probabilites, will be found to be
nothing but the scum of his malicious Calumniating spirit.

To the 11th. and 12th I say I deny not that I had hopes to prevail with my
wife to return to Mr. Stucleys Church, as my Narrative shows, but when I had
considered her grounds of dissatisfaction, and their harsh proceedings in order
to excommunication, I abstained from their private meetings, especially after
that one of the honestest of the confederacy had counseled me to pluck up my
spirits; and hold the rains of Government strict in my hands, and to forbid my
wifes brothers, Sisters and friends to come near my house, and to turn away
such servants as would not be pliable to this work, and to take in others, and
to bear a stiff hand on my wife, and that then she would go from me, and I
should not look after her; and that then she would be weary and repent, and I
should receive her on mine own terms. I did presently guess from whom this
counsel came, for asking the party when he was with Mr. Stucley, he answered
he had been with him about two hours before, and would needs engage me to go to
Master Stucley; which I thought to have done, but my heart failed me, and I
durst not go, fearing least he should engage me to some such wicked course as
was proposed. You see where to repair for good counsel how to order your wives.

The thirteenth, has neither head nor tail, I shall answer it when Mr. Stucley
explaines himself, if it be then worth an answer.

To the 14. I aver that he opened the letter which Mrs. Parr and my wife
sent, and most falsely and unfaithfully told the Church, that it had more of
design then humility in it. If it had any design, it was to prevent his and
his Churches harsh and heady running into a mischievous act: and if it be (as
he says) that none of the Church saw it, I say, the worse, the more
unfaithful, and inexcusable was Mr. Stucley for that: it was sent, and
directed to be communicated to the Church, and he would not show it them, nor
ask counsel of any in so weighty a business, but lead his Churchhead long into
sin. The letter concerned them all, but he conceales it: and did he not therein
show himself more a lord and Master, then a Steward and dispencer of Gods
Ordinance? If this be his faithfulness, let me never be under such a faithful
Shepherd.

To the 15. To this I have answered already, I only add, that Ratcliff that
noted Mr. Stucleys prayer, and others also that heard it, do a verre it to be
his prayer, such a one as it was.

To the 16. I answer I have examined more narrowly this particular and find,
that Mr. Malls doctrine was, that there is great reason, Scripture reason, when
in severing the precious from the vile, the Church should renew their covenant:
and he applied it to the business of excommunication then acted, and pressed
the renewing of their covenant. Pray where is the great difference from what I
have set down in my Narrative that denominates it to be a lie? And as for his
posture, whether he sat down or stood up, 'its not much material. If I
mistake in that, I am sure I am right in all the rest.

To the 17. I suppose Mrs. Parr is answering for her self: and as for my wife
I say again, she found faults and saw cause enough to leave them, and did
desert them before she was admonished for neglecting their private meetings

To the 18. I answer, that if you did not look on other Churches as Babylonish,
etc. Pray tell me how do your words and opinions agree? pray what means your
cry? come out of Babylon, what means the saying of one of your officers, to
one that was going to the Sacrament at Mr. John Bartlets Church (viz.) what
will you never come out of Babylon? and what meant that Independent Book, One
blow more to Babylon?

To the Nineteenth I answer, here Mr. Stucley shifts, and pretends he
understood not my meaning; and that he meant not the Churches in Exon, when all
this while his conscience tells him, that I was meaning and speaking to him of
the Churches of Christ in Exon, could he think I was speaking of communicating
in Spain or France in their mass. I remember well, he spoke these words to
me, without intermssion; Can you (said he) partake where there are Drunkards?
can you partake where there are liars? can you partake of the Table of the
Lord, and the Table of Devils? and as for the argument you recite out of my
letter; of your acknowledging the Churches in 'Exon to be true Churches. Reader
it is well known, with how much ado he showed them as much; Note, this was
spoken by him above two months before he owned the Churches here to be Churches
of Christ: the associated Ministers in the County of Devon, know enough of Mr.
Stucleys mind. About owning other Churches I need say nothing.

To the twentiteh, I say, let the judicious Reader judge, What other
construction can be made of Mr. Stucleys citing of Pro. 5.8.9, and Tit. 2.5.
and his applying Doctor Tailors Exposition thereupon to my wife, then to
insinuate and beget in the Reader a suspicion of my Wifes chastity? and by
spreading his false and scurrilous Pamphlets into Dorset, Cornwall and other
places in the west to induce the people to believe those honest women to be as
vile and notorious as is imaginable.

To the 21.th there needs no answer, but the experience of the people of this
place; let them judge if I lie in this.

To the 22th I answer it is well known that my wife was of Mr. Downs
congregation, and received the Sacrament there before she joined with Mr.
Stucleys Church: and for Mrs. Parr she attended on the other Ministers. And
therefore I think owned them: sure there were no others in Exon that she owned,
till Mr. Stucley came.

To the 23th imputed lie, Mr. Stucley, Pray be not angry, I must tell you
again, that your saying that my wife is a lawless woman, that knows no
subjection, is a most notorious belying her indeed, and to persist in it as you
do, in saying that she has taken the power of rule out of my hands (in the
particulars you there instance) is a bold untruth. I am sorry and ashamed to
see you so impudent in averring such apparent falsehoods. Pray tell me, did I
ever complain to you of my wifes disobedience? what tatling gossop was it from
whom you had this tale? did she not tell you, 'twas not I, but my wife that put
the girts into the pot? why had you not printed that also, to prove my wifes
taking the government out of my hands? well, this looks but like a sneaking
trick, to pry and peep into other folks cupboards and kitchens to discover
their houshold-affaires; but I am sure all is but a false gossopps tale at best.

As for the 24.25.26. pretended lies, I referr the reader to my answer to the
18th.

To the 27th. I have answered already, and begged them mercy for my mistake, if
I did so far forget my self as to say that they were the honestest people that
ever I came amongst: I have recanted that error.

For his denial of slurring Mr. Rutherford in calling him the Champion of
Presbytery, I shall referr it to the judgment of the Reader, that considers
how Mr. Stucley esteems of the Presbyterians, and what a stickler he is against
that way.

To the 29th. I have sufficiently spoken, and showed his base abuse of, and
blind proceedings against my wife, and challenged him to a public debate of
it, which he refuses; I am sure he can never prove what he says in his
pamphlet, unless he can get some Knights of the Post to be his witnesses.

To the 30th. I tell Mr. Stucley that I was never burdened with old Dame, but
once when he told me a lie upon her, and then I was so zealous as to call her
Naughty woman, but my mouth was never so foul as to call her whore, as he
suggests. Had I done so, I would have begged her mercy, for I believe, she is
as truly honest as Mr. Stucley himself. But had she been such as Mr. Stucley
reports, yet why might not my wife go with her, with less ignominy then Mr.
Stucley may keep such a one for a Nurse in his house constantly for a year and
more. As for Mr. Mongwell, he has given it under his hand that Mr. Stucley
has slandred both him, and her in his false reports.

To the 32. it is not worth an answer, yet I say, I might well avouch the
tenderness and kindness of my wife, which I had ever found, though his and
his Churches dealings occasioned a sudden heat or discontent for once.

To the 33 and 34. I say Mrs. Parr was questioned by the Elder of their Church
for going to hear Mr. Forde, to the neglect of their own officers, and was
told that she should be called to account for it, I have spoken to this
already, and therefore shall only ask this question, if she had been so guilty
of lies and devisions as they charge her to be, why were those things let
alone, some of them for two years and more, and then they must prove so
mortal? why did they let her lie so long in her sin? but I doubt not she will
sufficiently clear herself, therefore I forbear.

To this 35. I say Mr. Stucley repeats false. Reader, look into my Narrative, I
do not there say that he never reproved my wife in four years; but that he
never reproved her in that time for her neglect of admonition of others.

To the 36. 37. 38. 39. and 40. pretended lies, all which do concern the story
of the difference between my wife and her Sister in Law, I answer that what I
have set down in my Narrative relating to that business is the very truth;
and yet observe how confidently this bold man speaks passages in that
business, as if he had been present and privy to every thing spoken or done
about it, when in the mean time, he prints all this merely upon relation and
hearsay, and has no better authority for it then if he had taken it out of
Esops fables.

To the 41.42. I answer that my wife and her sister were reconciled friends;
and feasted, talked, journied, and went to the Lords Table together many times,
and how durst this pastor suffer them, if he knew them to be enemies all this
while.

To the 43. Imputation; I confess I was in a mistake, but noe wilful one. I
said it was near three years when as it was not above a year and half: this was
a mistake only in point of time which I have now rectified, but I am sure
'twas long enough, the differences were dead and buried by an amicable
composure, but Mr. Stucley must rake up any thing to make a stinking stir
withal.

To the 44. I shall only bid my adversary repeat right: my words are; they had
nothing to censure her for, before she left them; And this is the Truth. I have
and do challenge him to bring forth any crime that deserved Church censure,
before she deserted them: as for her forbearing their private meetings, which
Master Stucley calls Church meetings, I think the Reader is convinced, She had
sufficient cause.

To the 45. I say, that I lament his impudence: it is known to the whole City
that it is their principle, and practice to deny their members to communicate in
the Ordinances with other Churches. I can prove that some were refused by him,
only because they would not be confined to his Church, and he has denied it
me as I have already shown, can ye partake of the Table of the Lord, etc.

To this 46. I shall only wish Mr. Stucley to be as good as his word, I make
noe question but you have heard how your member Mr. Robert Spragne was
convicted for two lies against the chamber of Exeter: I fear they had another
original, and his was but the second edition, however they were public
offenses, and therefore pray instruct him to go to the chamber and acknowledge
his error in spreading two lies against them, that they may forgive him, or
else according to your doctrine, he will be in a sad case, for you told me
lately, that we ought not to forgive, unless the offending party ask us
forgiveness.

To the 47. for answer I refer the Reader to my answer to his 18th pretended
lie, I only demand whether you would grant that there was any other Church of
Christ in Exeter, till about the beginning of April last, did you not before
that time style your selves (the) Church of Christ in Exeter? pray what means
your calling those of your own Church and noe others, Brother and Sister by way
of contradistinction? what means that Tenent of some (if not all) of you, that
you must love those of your own fellowship above any other of Gods people, as a
man loves his wife above other women? and why should not Mr. Savery grant Mr.
Forde the Minister, to be one of the visible Church of Christ, when he was so
hardly pressed to it?

To the last I shall only say, That as for Mr. Malls Sermon, I refer it to
the Reader to judge by his reasons that are extant in his Book; And if any
other construction (then mine) can be made thereof I shall be well content: for
the Truth is, I believe the poor man was merely drawn in.

And now to conclude, Reader do but reflect, and consider the whole story and
state of the business laid before thee, and then judge impartially of Mr.
Stucley and his Churches proceedings, and at whose door all the lies and foul
practices must be laid. I profess it is far from me to take any content to
imbroile in differences; or to make discoveries of others nakedness, could I
avoid it, as all that know me can bear me record: but in this case, I may truly
say, he has compelled me, it is noe time for truth and innocence to seek out
corners, and to hold 'its peace, when falsehood and upstart Novellisme is so
clamorous and impetuous.

Mr. Stucley, (you see) has declined a hearing, and denied satisfaction to the
unsatisfied, and plays the part of the Athenian Commander, who having ill
stewarded the Treasury of the Common wealth, studied not so much how to give an
account, as not to give any account at all, which has necessitated me to this
work.

Pardon me (right courteous Reader) If I have been a little exasperated by Mr.
Stucleys intemperate dealing, and if I have uttered ought, more fit for him to
hear, then me to speak, It being almost impossible for any man that is
conversant in his writings, but to contract somewhat of his eloquence: consider
the case in hand, and it is such as will even put words into the mouth of
Cr^^sus Son, who (as it is storied) was dumb from his Nativity. Public Injury
calls on me to speak more loud and largely in mine own cause, but modesty
bids me forbear. My design is not to derogate from him, but (if possible) to
convince him and to satisfy others, truly honest and conscientious. I deny
not his personal abilities, yet (without presumption) dare appeal and say, he
has neither shown that soundness of judgment, that is to be reverenced in
some, nor that meekness of spirit that is required in all: my prayer therefore
is, that God will give him these and all others graces that may make him more
isntrumental for his glory and the good of his Church.

FINIS

