THE DECLARATION AND SPEECH OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Monck, To the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel of the City of
LONDON.

On Saturday Night last at Guild Hall.

With His Excellencies Letter to the Parliament, And the Resolves and Answer of
the HOUSE.

London, Printed for G. HORTON.

A Remonstrance of the Citizens of LONDON, touching Liberty and Freedom.
AT a Common Council held at Guild Hall London, the 8th of this instant, a
Petitionary Remonstrance was presented to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of the Citizens of London, in Common Council assembled;
Wherein they thankfully acknowledged the just and prudent Resolution of that
Honorable Council, expressed in their Declaration of the 20 of December last
past; and withal humbly Remonstrating, That no Power or Persons whatsoever,
might impose any Law or Tax upon any of those Citizens, with whose general
Concernment that Court was entrusted, until the Authority thereof be derived
from their Representatives in Parliament. By which means, they doubted not,
next under God, to have their languishing Trades revived, and their Hearts and
Purses together enlarged to a cheerful and liberal Contribution toward their
lawful Government and Protection, according to Magna Charta and the Petition of
Right.

Upon the presenting whereof, It was put to the Vote, Whether they should
prosecute those lawful means that may lead to the attainment of a Free
Parliament, etc. But the Lord Mayor dissenting, the Resolve and Sense of the
Court, was transmitted to the Council of State: Whereupon the Lord General
Monck was ordered to march into the City with his Army, for reducing of the
Citizens to the Obedience of the Parliament; in order whereunto, the several
Regiments both of Horse and Foot took their respective stations throughout this
great Metropolis, strong guards being placed at all the Gates and Posterns; and
the streets planted with Soldiers, continuing in their Arms, and sometimes
upon motion, for many hours together: At which time, diverse Aldermen and
Common Council were seized and committed to custody, their Names being as
follows: Alderman Vincent, Alderman Bludworth, Col. Bromfield, Lieut. Col.
Jackson, Major Cox, Major Chamberlain, M^. Ern(...), Mr. Foord, Mr. Spencer,
Mr. Penning.


This being done, His Excellency sent a Letter to the Parliament, dated from
Guild Hall London; Which being read, The Resolve of the House was,

Resolved,

That the Answer to this Lett^^ is to send unto General MONCK the Resolves of
the Parliament, that the Gates of the City of LONDON, and the Perculisses be
destroyed* and that he be ordered to put the said Vote in Execution accordingly.

Resolved, That the present Common Council of the City of London elected for
this year be discontinued and be and are hereby declared to be null and void,
and that the Lord Mayor have notice thereof.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill for the choice
of another Common Council with such qualifications as the Parliament shall
think fit, with Order to meet at 8 of the Clock in the Speakers Chamber on
Friday morning.

The House having received a Report from the Council of State of some
Resolutions taken by the Council in the City of London,

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State has
done in Ordering that the Commissioners for Government of the Army, do appoint
Forces to be and continue in the City of London, for preserving the peace
thereof and of the Commonwealth and for reducing of the City to the Obedience
of the Parliament.

Resolved,

That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have done, in
Ordering that the Commissioners for the Army do take Order that the Posts and
Chains of the City of London be taken away.

Resolved,

That the Gates of the City of London, and the Percullisses thereof be
forthwith destroyed.

Resolved,

That the Commissioners for Government of the Army be and are hereby empowered
to apprehend and seize any of the Nine late Officers, who were Ordered by the
Parliament to leave the Town, who have not obeyed the former O^der in going to
the places appointed for them; or any other dangerous Persons who have been in
Arms against the Parliament and Commonwealth.

Resolved,

That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State and
Commissioners of the Army have done in seizing and apprehending of Mr. Vincent
Merchant, in Bishopsgate street, and Mr. Thomas Brown Grocer in Wood-street.
D^niel Spencer in Friday-street Lawrenc^ Bromfield in Tower-street, Major
Chamberlain, and Richard Ford in Seething-Lane, Major Cox at the Swan in
Dowgate, Mr. Bludworth Mr Fenning in Fan-Church street, and Lieutenant Colonel
Jackson.

The Commissioners of the Army being to continue the Government thereof, care
is taken to preserve the peace of the City, in these sad and deplorable Times:
And the House have read the Bill for settling the Militia of the City of London,
and the Liberties thereof the first time, and referred it to the Council of
State to present Names of Commissioners for the Militia of London.

In pursuance of the aforenamed Resolves and Orders, most of the Posts and
Chains about London were pulled down, the City Gates broke and cut a pieces,
and the Percullisses taken down and destroyed: Which being done effectually at
Cripple-Gate, Bishops Gate, and Ald-Gate, where many Thousands sad Objects with
no small Terror beheld these unexpected Ruins, the Soldiers afterward went
to Aldersgat^, Newgate, and some other places; but the Work did not prove so
feasible, for they being both of an extraordinary and impregnable strength,
proved the more difficult; so that a longer time was required: However, they
dismounted the Gates from off the Hinges, and with Iron Wedges and great
Hammers, rent and tore a pieces part of the Percullisses.

An Account whereof being given to his Excellency the Lord General at
Guild Hall, about four of the clock in the afternoon he marched from thence to
White Hall; and, in the Evening, the Council being sat, his Excellency
ascended the stairs, representing to their Lordships, an account of his
Transactions amongst the Citizens, in Obedience to the Resolves and Authority
of that Honorable Council, for the pulling up of the Posts and Chains, and
destroying of the Gates and Percullisses. Which by Them was well resented, and
hearty Thanks from the Members returned.

After all which, the Guards of Horse and Foot being placed, and the City
Constables with their several Watches set, betwixt eleven and twelve of the
Clock on Friday Night, a considerable Company of Foot (commanded by the Captain
of the Round-Guard) came to Newgate, where the said Captain would have
dismissed the Constable and his Watch; but they refused it, saying, They must
obey the ancient Orders and Customs of the City, and could not depart their
duty without Orders from the Lord Mayor.

The Captain replied, That since they were to make a Garrison of the City,
there ought to be no other Watch or Guards kept, but what should consist of
their own Military Force; and that they had not been nine years out of their
Native Country, but they had sufficient Experience, how to manage the public
Affairs of a Nation, in defense of Civil and Christian Liberty against all
restless Spirits whatsoever: But upon the importancy of Constable, the Captain
wheeled off with his men, and peaceably marched them through the Gate, toward
the Gate, without any further dispute or Opposition.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
The Lord General Monck having on Saturday last communicated a Letter to the
Parliament; wherein He was pleased to remind Them the time of their fitting and
the peoples expectation (according to the prefixed time) of their Dissolution:
as also, of the unsafe and pernicious proceedings of certain Members,
reflecting upon Col. Lambert, and Sir Henry Vane, as well as upon the
continuance of some Members in the House impeached for Treason; his Excellency
was pleased to retire into the City, accompanied by ^^^ers Officers and
Gentlemen, and two Troops of Horse, the rest of the Army being drawn up in
Moor-fields, where they continued during his Conference with the Lord Mayor,
which continued for some hours; but about 6 in the Evening, his Excellency,
with his Lordship, went to Guild Hall, where diverse Alderman and Common Council
were assembled; and ascending the stairs, the Voice of the people was for a
Free Parliament; The General declared, That he doubted not but to do them all
good desiring them to be patient. And being accompanied into the Court by
Alderman Robinson, and some other persons of quality, his Excellency declared
his further Resolutions, That He was resolved to live and die with them; and
that He would stand by them in the defense and preservation of their just
Rights and Privileges with the hazard of Life and Fortunes, and that to the
last drop of blood He would ^id and assist Them in all lawful ways for Recovery
of their ancient and Fundamental Proprieties, Liberties and Freedoms, and that
there should be a lawful Constitution and free Election, only with this
Qualification (without any Oath or Engagement) None to be excepted, but such as
have bin in actual Arms for the late King against the Parliament, and that
Writs should issue forth against May next. Upon which, great was the
acclamations of the people, who cried out, Godbless our Deliverer, God bless
our Deliverer; proclaiming A Free Parliament by the ringing of Bells and the
multitude of fires, the like has not been seen the^e many years. This being
done, his Excellency went to the Bull-head in Cheapside; and on the Lords Day
in the Forenoon, went to Paul's to hear a Sermon, where he was mutually
embraced, with praise and triumph, by a numerous Concourse of many Thousands.

FINIS.

