SCOLDING NO SCHOLARSHIP: IN THE ABYSS OR, GROUNDLES GROUNDS OF The Protestant
Religion, as holden out by M. Menzeis in his Brawlings against M. Dempster.

We have heard of the Pride of Moab (he is very proud) even of his haughtiness,
and his Pride and his wrath; but his lies shall not be so,

Isaiah 16. V. 6. According to Protestants Translation. The house of God, which
is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth,

1 Timothy 3.15. Printed for the Author, 1669.

Sr. William Baird of Newbaith Bart.


AN Advertisement.
HAving but a very few things whereof to Advertise the Reader, I address no
Epistle to him; Yet one thing I must friendly tell him, being to ask a
Courtesy or two at his hands. 1. Then he shall know this short Reply to Mr.
Menzeis greater Book, was offered to the Press at Aberdene within a month
after it first appeared; but the Stationer being inhibited by Public Authority
(and that as is thought at M. Menzeis desire) I was forced first to make it to
be transcribed, and then fitted for abroad, where it is not easy to us, to
have any thing well Printed or returned in have. 2. I must beg upon this
account, the Errata and faults in Orthography may be excused, I not being
present to correct them. 3. I desire none would think tedious or superfluous in
some Sections, very many Quotations, yea some even here and there repeated; for
that in questions of fact, things cannot be otherwise proved; and to remit the
Reader either to the first Authors of them, or the places wherein they were
cited before, or in other Controversy Books, were to divert his thoughts and
attention, and put him to such pains as few will take. 4. I pray that he do not
mistake me in refuting M. Menzeis Grounds, for I only take to prove, that the
Scripture and Doctrine of the Primitive Church can be no ground to Protestants,
denying an Infallible Visible Judge, for both these as infallibly propounded by
the true Church, I most cordially embrace, and wish all may do with me.

AN Answer to a Letter sent from Aberdene, with Mr. John Menzeis his Reply to
Mr. Dempster, for Reclaiming a Country Gentleman from Popery.
SIR,
YOur Letter showing equally such zeal for the Protestant Cause, and affection
to me, has made me read the Book enclosed, with such a Character of the
Writer, as carefully, as if it contained Responses, and as impartially as if I
were a Seeker.

The Question here moved, I ingenuously grant, is the main Point (if solidly
answered) could best reclaim me, and most of my Profession, who amid'st so many
Storms raised against us, have no small motive to comply, if we could look at
present to our little Temporal Interest, without making a greater and Eternal
loss, whereof there could be no hazard, if Protestants (as is here debated)
could show any assured and infallible ground for what they profess.

This, Sir, is all Mr. Dempster through all his ten Papers requires, and we
with him; he propounds and states the Question most clearly and smoothly,
though in homely terms, by reason of his long absence from home; he makes no
Digression from the main Point, what ever be replied beside: (yet engages
after this Point once decided, to answer what ever is here retorted, instanced,
or urged against him) he answers humbly and mildly, however provoked with most
bitter and lofty words; Like another Fabius or old Warrior, he keeps his Post,
neglecting all the Flowrishes and Skirmishes of his insulting Adversary, who
having engaged under his hand, to defend the Protestant Religion (the only
occasion of this Dispute) strives still nevertheless ( f^de and art punica)
that is most deceitfully, to impugn the Catholic Roman Faith with a like
success to that of Hannibal, who let Carthage be demolished and redacted to
ashes, whilst he insisted in vain to Sack and Ruin Rome. And this is proper
to him with most Heretics; all Heresy tending rather to destruction then
edification, Atheism rather then Religion, and to question what has been
since Christ and his Apostles constantly believed in the Church of God, rather
then to settle their own new wavering and inconstant Faith, upon any solid
Principle or Ground.

Yet Mr. Menzeis most confidently thinking he had got as an unbloody, so an
undoubted victory (hearing his Adversary was dead) Petitions the Senate of
Aberdene as for a Triumph, that his Papers may be put in Print: His Learning,
Loyalty, and Religion most justly deserving it, for as he is of a daring and
stirring spirit, so in all things Martially minded, his Learning being most in
Polemics, his Loyalty much in debate, and his Religion ever in controversy;
nevertheless as Umpire in all, he deserves well a Crown, as his late late
Victory by the Pen a Chariot of Paper. This his Triumphal Chariot is not drawn,
but carried in the Air, with high and violent blasts; most suitable to his
fierceness in fighting with a scolding and railing Tongue, which makes his
Adversaries deepest wounds. Before it, go indeed some worthy Persons, at least
in black upon white, and in the Paper, follow immediately the flying Colors,
wherein his late Arms sent from Edenbrough, (viz. The Bible reversed) do shine,
with this new Motto, I take from the present Subject The Grounds of the
Protestant Religion. The acclamations of the People are not wanting in the
mouths of some sighing Sisters. He is Herald himself, sounding constantly his
own praises aloud; nothing is brought into the Treasury, as in Triumphs had
wont in old, but some hundred Marks for the charges of the Triumph (that is,
the Printing of the Papers) exported. One thing only is wanting, practiced in
such glorious shows, one Admonitor sitting with the Triumpher, to keep him in
mind of humane weakness, least too great honor should so puff him up, as to
think himself above the condition of men. And this defect, Sir, I intend to
supply, in perusing his Book, advertising him now and then of some weakness,
both in Conduct, Courage and Strength, as his Answers to the Question
propounded shall deserve.

And first, if I should answer his most invective Babbling, Scoldings, and
Railings, with all the Venom he spits out to Ciment the Grounds of his
Religion, I could easily pay him home, even with the general Applause and
Acclamations of most Protestants, amongst whom the more Moderate, and most
constant Professors scarce own him, his Religion, or Grounds; as best knowing
his Arragant, Proud, Contentious Spirit, his unbridled Tongue, his scandalous
Carriage in so many Encounters, his wavering Belief, unsettled Faith; and how
often he has been Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent: His Pulpit jars with his
Colleague in the time of the Covenant, his base compliance with the Usurper in
the time of Rebellion, his variance with his Bishop at the time, the Government
of the Church was re-establisht; how many living Witnesses have heard him
Preach and foment Schism, and Divisions in the Church, Sedition in the State,
and even treacherous and Treasonable Sermons against his Prince and King. I
instance only that base and perfidious bewraying of Gods Word, belying of the
known truth; and betraying of his Country and King, in that most unchristian
Sermon, upon these words, How long will thou mourn for Saul, whom I have
rejected? Applying them to our most Gracious Sovereign; which I should have
been ashamed to relate, if this notorious Impostor, and most absurd abuser of
Gods Word, had not first in the Preface of a Sermon in Print, and now again so
often in this his Book most deceitfully and maliciously cried out, Papists
could be no good Subjects, as if their Tenets did tend to Rebellion; whilst
all Loyal Protestants in the three Kingdoms, both love and respect our Loyalty,
how ever they hate our Profession; and look upon him, with all his Covenanting
Fry, as a most fiery Incendiary of Rebellion. Now Sir, if such a man (whom you
most cry up for his Eloquence, as, if like another Samson, his strength
consisted in his hair) be a Person fitted to give the Grounds of Religion,
defend the Protestant Faith, or convert any one to his Belief, for that with a
Pharisaical countenance, a Puritanical tone, and a strong voice, coloring some
slight Learning and reading of Pamphlets, with plagiary Phrases and Passages,
to stuff up a Book in Print, and turn the Glass twice in his Sermons, let any
be judge.

As that Philosopher of old, hearing himself praised by the rabble, who
commonly approve nothing but such stuff as is in themselves, did presently make
an examen of his actions: I hope Protestants seeing their Religion Defended by
such a Writer, will more diligently enquire of its weakness, which they can
never better see, then in his Papers, where having undertaken to give the
Grounds of the Protestant Religion (the only Subject of this Dispute, either by
Word or Writ) in them all has not (as his Adversary well re-marks) so much as
ten lines to settle, clear, or defend them in the least; but scraping together
objections against Catholics (so often answered by them) borrows some passages
to no purpose at present, and heaps up undervaluing words, with such injurious
scoldings, railings, and imprecations against an Old, Grave, Learned, and
Modest Man, that after he has called him an impudent Liar, a Knave, Rogue,
Sycophant, Fool, a dull and Lethargick-head, a Neat-herd in Ignorance, a Devil
in Malice, and what not? He imprecates in fine (out of his corrupt Bible,
changing the word Imperet, with im^re^et) the same curse Saint Michael did in
their conflict to the Devil, such is the Pride, Passion, and poison of his
heart, so contrary to the Spirit of God. After this, what may we expect of such
a person, if we hear the Wise man's saying, In malevolam animam non introibit
sapientia: True Wisdom never enters into a wicked and malicious soul; yet Sir,
to satisfy your loving and friendly desire, I intend to examine more at
length, what Wit and Learning he shows, and first in his two long Epistles
Dedicatory, and to the Reader, which could receive no Answer, from Mr.
Dempster, as appearing but a twelvemonth after his death: After this, God
willing, I will positively refute (which he so urges may be done) First, his
great Principle of No Infallible visible Judge of Controversy, and then both
his Ruinous Grounds.

SECT. I.
Some brief Reflections on the Title of Mr. Menzei's Book, and his two long
Epistles Dedicatory, and to the Reader.

HIs Title being in Latin Papismus Lucifugus, (according to that saying, a
strong Thief shall have a strange name,) must needs be explained, and surely
understood of that New Gospel Light in the Covenant, for in it Mr. Menzeis was
a bright Star of the first Magnitude, or Fiery Comet himself, of which Light, a
Prelatick Poet in answer to a Satyr, upon the Consecration of a Bishop, Writes
thus, Your Phoebus from the West did rise
A light that did put out men's eyes,
Welcome Confusion.


This Light indeed Popery shuns, as all other New Lights against old received
Christian Verities; but not that either of Scripture or Antiquity, the only
true Light of the Christian World, as flowing from Christ the S^n of Justice,
and carried by so many holy Popes, Bishops, and Priests in Communion with them,
even unto the most remote corners of the Earth, as the conversion of all Kings
and Countries to the Christian Religion do testify, which Light Mr. Dempster,
no where declines, but constantly holds out to make nothing for clearing the
Grounds of the Protestant Religion, except it be in showing them both ruinous
and false, so that Mr. Menzeis here, Offendit in Luce and in limine, that is,
stumbles both in the light, and in the specious Title of his Book, whereof the
very first line is not to the purpose. The Question being only of the Grounds
of the Protestant Religion, and not of Popery at all.

He begins with a great show of humility, who am I, the meanest of the
thousands of Israel? Answer, Est qui se nequiter humiliat and interiora ejus
plena dolo, Eccles. -- 19. But let his late Bishop in the Church, Principal in
the College, and fellow Brethren in the Ministry bear witness of this, when
they have opposed him in the least: Yea, his own Jactancy through all his
Papers and Book, with his base revilings in every page, and under-valuing of
his Adversary. It is those his humble thoughts of his own abilities makes him
so boldly assert there was consultation used in the present Dispute, Surprizal
intended, and a choice Champion pitched upon to Encounter with him as a Hector.
But the known truth is to all them who had a hand in the undertaking (as they
did witness in his presence at the Meeting) that they had only yielded to his
Importunity in desiring a Meeting, and that they had taken him only who was
next at hand for the time, a man most able indeed for a civil Conference, but
most unable for a Clamorous Dispute, as being of a very weak Constitution, and
of a totally confiscated health. But all this Conference must be set out by him
in a disguised Dress; Mr. Dempster proclaimed an Ignorant, Catholics charged
with Calumnies, the better to Paint out his Victory and Triumph. As in like
case another Conference (as he quotes) by Dr. Prideaux; and Dr. Featly of late,
whom he might have spared to name, being as good at Calumniating Inventions as
either of them, and no doubt but he will be cited hereafter, as they now, who
nevertheless most deceitfully relates both the occasion of the Conference, and
what passed in it.

The clamours of women he speaks of, if any (for it was a most modest person
did speak) was only to suppress his clamours heard even at the Cross, and
witness to his face, that he had passed from his engagement to them, which was
to give and defend the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, as he had engaged
under his hand; and this his missive, was the Paper Mr. Dempster kept open at
the Meeting (which he would have generally supposed to have been the first
exchanged Paper with him) but it is particularly known to us, Mr. Dempster had
never then intended to write a line. But Mr. Menzeis cautious, and conscious to
himself, that it had been easy to reverse his Grounds, and Involve him in
inextricable difficulties (as shall hereafter appear) if he had answered
directly by word, refuses the performance of his promise, or to speak for the
Protestant Religion at all, but will only Impugn some Opinions of Authors in
the School, which are neither fit for the Pulpit, (where he did first challenge
them) nor the capacity of common hearers, and much less that which he chiefly
insisted on, any Point of our Faith.

The first is, That men are not bound presently to repent when ever they have
offended God, under the danger of incurring a new sin; Whereupon Mr. Menzeis
frames his Argument, as if this were a Dicision of the Catholic Roman Church;
and then says he, Mr. Dempster denied the Major, whence he took witness that
the Jesuit admitted the Minor, a rare Inference and quick. He passes under
silence the confirmation of the Major denied, because disgraceful to him, who
though he did think it a point of Faith, and that so unquestionable, yet could
never prove it by Scripture, contenting himself with a weak comparison, which
he is ashamed to set down in his Book. But however Doctors vary in prescribing
a limited time wherein we should repent, all hold the shortest delay both
surest and best, and public Repentance is generally taught to be necessary for
public transgressions, as public Recantations for open Calumnies, like to
that of Mr. Menzies against his Sovereign, How long will thou mourn for Saul,
etc. His Penitential Sermon being as yet to make, so well does he presently
repent. Yea, not only his Practice, but Doctrine also (if truly a Protestant)
is so far from presently repenting, that Teaching men's best actions to be
sinful, he must either confess repentance at no time to be commanded, or else
blasphemously avouch, God has commanded us to sin. Is it not a jearing of Gods
Commands, and a scoffing of men, to affirm the Commandments to be impossible,
and yet urge that even affirmative ones should be hourly, and instanly kept?
Forgetting two Maxims of the School, Nemo tenetur ad impossible, and Praecepta
affirmitativa obligant semper sed non pro semper.

In the second Argument, he both argues and and answers to himself, (Mr.
Dempster being silenced by his clamours) concerning the intention of Priests in
administering the Sacraments, which if requisite, he will have it to make all
Faith uncertain. But in vain, there being greater assurance of their intention,
then that Ministers use aright the Elements, and pronounce the words, or that
they teach not false Doctrine, and set not out corrupt Bibles. The assistance
of Gods Spirit promised to his Church, and his particular Providence in
Governing and Ruling it, assures us nothing necessary either to Faith or
Salvation can be wanting in her; No want of Intention can wrong them who are
come to age, they may supply by their own Intentions, Desires, and Acts of the
love of God: And for children whom Protestants* will have to be saved by the
faith of their Parents, and not by Baptism, Is it not more sure, that public
persons in the Church want not a right Intention, then that private men have
true Faith? The conferring of a Sacrament is not only Actio Hominis I hope, but
also Humana, as the Divines speak. What then if a Mad man in a frolic, or a
Comedian for a jeer, (as we read to have been done in derision of Christians)
should pour out water on any one, and pronounce the words? yea, what if a
Priest showing a new Convert how he is to be Baptized, should do the same? Were
these lawful and valid Baptisms, where nothing save the Intention is wanting.
It is easy to cavil at the chief Heads of the Christian Religion, but hard to
say any thing solidly against them.

After this; he comes to his Apologies, First, for so much writing on so little
purpose; Answer, he should have said, so little to the purpose, there scarce
being ten lines precisely to the purpose in all his Papers and Book.

Secondly, That he was not so speedy in Answering as Mr. Dempster, upon his
Incombacy's; and upon deliberating whether he should answer, the emptiness of
Mr. Dempsters Scriblings, who antidated his Papers, yet that he might guess
with Apelles, at his great have by his foul work. Answer, his greatest
Imcombacy's, as I am informed, are but to dite and declaim Bellarmines
Objections, or such like, out of other Controversy Books: And if it be an empty
Question to ask the Grounds of his Religion; Sure it must be an empty Religion,
and void of Grounds. Neither did Mr. Dempster Antidate his Papers, but did
write back to him as currantly as any man could do a missive Letter, never
intending they should see the Press, and finding very little solidity in his
Answers. He guesses at his great have by his foul work, but can show nothing
foul in it, save only when he resumes his filthy scoldings: but we may easily
guess at his little wit by his Foolish Work and Answers no where to the purpose.

His third Apology, is for the Acrimony and bitterness of his expressions,
which he says had their rise from Mr. Dempsters Dunghill Eloquence,
Repetitions, Praeteritions, Calumnies. Answer, Mr. Menzies scoldings are the
only Eloquence of the Dunghill: most Learned men oftentimes be not very Eloquent
in the Vulgar Tongue. As to his Repetitions, he is no good Disputant, who
passes from his medium before the Argument be answered. For Preteritions, all
wise men pass what is not to the purpose, as most of his papers and Book. And
as for Calumnies, I leave to his papers to justify his modesty, however Mr.
Menzies most injuriously Calumniate him.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he continues his Apologies for Disputing,
Writing, Printing, granting one might have said more in a very few sheets, for
the satisfaction of a lover of Truth, then he in all his Papers, and this is
most true; Nay, but he has been constrained to follow the anomalous motions of
a tautologizing Jesuit. Answer, These two words set together sound well in a
Pulpit, but signify nothing or little: for how can his motion be anomalous or
irregular, who steers still to the same point, constantly propounding the same
thing? Or how can he be said to Tautologize and use idle Repetitions, who
insists still in the same question, till he get a full and satisfactory Answer?
as if a man come to require his money from a Debtor, should hear from him many
news of the late Wars, and then asking again his money, the Debtor should speak
of our new League with many Foreign Princes: But the Creditor still mindful of
the main, did reiterate the occasion of his coming, and ask a new, when he
could expect his money? were this a tautologizing, and vain repetition? And in
this sense I grant Mr. Dempster tautologizes, and in no other.

But are not rather Mr. Menzies many Instances in this his Epistle against the
Catholic Faith, and so many times repeated in his Book, both tautologies and
anomalous motions, as altogether false, frivolous, idle, and impertinent to the
present Question, concerning the Grounds of the protestant Religion? wherefore
I reflect only on the last, viz. That Popish Principles, as improven by the
Jesuited party, are highly injurious to Princes, Ergo, The Protestant Religion
has solid grounds; for this should be his Inference in all he says: And this
an arch Covenanter is not ashamed to write, who so treasonably, and publicly
did preach against his lawful Sovereign; but the love and esteem, so many of
the Greatest and Wisest Monarchs in the Christian World have for Jesuits,
sufficiently vindicate them from all the Calumnies of such a disloyal person.

After this he says, If he know his own genius well, he takes no pleasure in
altercations: Answer He is then of a most austere Nature, who so shuns all
pleasure; for it seems Mr. Menzeis lives in altercations, as the Salamander in
the fire, all his Preachings and Writings being full of them.

He delights so to cavil, that he lets not pass Mr. Dempsters Orthographick
trespasses, which should have been at most imputed to his Amanuensis or
Scriviner. But, if Mr. Menzeis were as Orthodox as Orthographick, all were
well. In his voyage to London to complement the Usurper, he made himself
Orthographick in the English Tongue; but coming down an Independent, he was far
from an Orthodox mind, yet thinks to keep up some reputation amongst
Protestants, by his Imputations on Jesuits.

No hope, says he, of prevailing with the Jesuited Faction, whose Design as
appears, is to keep up a stated Schism in Christendom, they hinder the
conversion of Jews and Infidels. Answer, No Sir, it is only the Hidra of
Heresy, and chiefly yours, divided in so many heads, keeps up Schism and
Division from the Church, and amongst themselves; which Monster Jesuits strive
to suppress, they, yea, one of them, called Saint Francis Xavier, has
converted more Infidels to the Christian and Catholic Religion in ten years
time, then all the Protestants in the World, for a hundred and fifty, if all
Records of History be more worthy of credit, then you. The conversion of Jews,
Infidels, Heretics as ever in old times, so constantly now, is a mark of the
true Church, to which Heretics can no wise pretend, whose business is to
pervert Catholics, rather then to convert Infidels, as Saint Hierome well
remarks, so that in all prudence, this he should not have mentioned, his
younger brethren the Jansenists, (of whom he borrows most of his Objections
against Jesuits) speak not of this, being no little ashamed, when yearly the
notable conversions of so many thousand Infidels, only by Jesuits, and other
Priests in Communion with the Sea of Rome, come out, wherein neither they nor
he have any hand.

Next amongst many controverted points obstructive to the peace and unity of
the Catholic Church, he sets down first, the Churches Infallibility, as if the
true Church were not infallible, both according to the Scripture and Fathers
(as I shall, God willing, hereafter prove at length) or as if the Church being
infallible, peace and unity could not be had.

Secondly, the Popes Universal Supremacy, as obstructing Unity, forgetting what
St. Hierome says, l. 1. in Jovin. That even amongst the Apostels themselves,
one was made head, that the occasion of Schism and Division might be taken
away, Ut capite constituto Schismatis tolleretur occasio: Does the Popes
Supremacy in the whole Church hinder peace and unity, more then my Lord
Archbishops Primacy in the Kingdom? Is not this a fling at Bishops in their
Diocesses, and the Primate in each Nation, to say their Supremacy over
inferior Pastors, is a let and stop to Peace and Unity in the Church? So all
Covenanting Ministers speak with him, the Unity they aim at being nothing but a
Monopoly to set themselves above Pope and Primate, upon the ruins of both
Church and State.

Are not these strong and witty Objections, put in the Frontispiece of his
Book, as in the Van? The rest I prosecute not, they being the ordinary
controverted Tenets betwixt Protestants and us, answered in every Pamplet of
Controversy; but the last is too remarkable to let it pass: Nay, says he, Is
it not one of the first Queries wherewith Jesuits do assault our people, how
do you know Scripture to be the word of God? As if they would have people
rather turn Atheists, then remain Protestants. A very pretty Reply; shows not
this his Answer, Jesuits and others have great reason to move the Question, to
which so great a Divine can not better reply. Protestants call Scripture their
ground of Faith, but can evidence by no sufficient Motive of Credibility,
(standing to their principles) this Book they call Scripture, is the true and
Authentic Word of God, should not Mr. Menzeis then have settled, cleared, and
vindicated from all Objections and Cavils this his ground? but that could have
diverted him from Impugning the Romish Faith: no it would have done more
against it, then all his Calumnies of Idolatry; being more to the purpose, yea
ended, (to the Protestants great advantage) all the present debate, but all Mr.
Menzeis can answer, is to call the question Atheistical, and a demand proper to
Infidels; as if good Christians might not ask for Instruction, how they may
prudently believe, and firmly adhere to the grounds of their Religion and
Faith. In fine, he says, Many Romanists have called for Reformation. Answer,
true, and do as yet daily call for Reformation in Life and Manners, but not in
matters of belief, none of them with Protestants, presuming to correct Gods
Word, and reform the Doctrine of his Church, or to censure their Pastors, and
all the Ancient Fathers, with Pharisaical, and Puritanical pride. This way of
calling for Reformation was proper to protestants at their first rise, for
reforming the Catholic Roman Church, and again in the Covenant for the
reforming their own; They like Foxes indeed, (to use Mr. Menzeis comparison)
did raise such dust (not to say worse) with their tails and heads both, that
ever since, the very air they breath is infected, and their eyes so blinded,
that they cannot open them to see the manifest truth.

After all this, fearing his Book may have a reply, he desires all things then
be noticed he has said. Answer, No, this his demand is most unreasonable, that
at the time one only question is in debate, and that a main one, concerning the
Grounds of the Protestant Religion, any thing else should be taken notice of,
till this be put to a closure. On this all the Protestant Religion depends; let
their grounds be proved solid, and we have done; for by that we look not on his
Digressions as Golden Apples, to make us run out of our way in the least; they
being scarce like to the Apples of Sodom (in his confused Rapsody) that is
pleasant to the eye, though no less rotten in the heart, as who has best right
to the Root and Tree, may justly claim the Branches and Fruit; so whoever
proves he has the true Grounds of Religion, may easily prove all
Superstructures on this ground to be true, the accessory follows the
principal; and this is the chief and principal question amongst us; let this be
once decided in their favor, and we have no more process with them.

Secondly, he desires nothing be brought has been answered by Protestants.
Answer, if he had given example in this, he had never written a line: However,
if any thing has been solidly answered, to what I bring against his great
principle, of no Infallible visible Judge of Controversy, or both his grounds,
as I most sincerely protest, it never did come to my hands, so let Mr. Menzeis
send it me, and here an end.

Thirdly, That personal Criminations be laid aside. Answer, then these personal
Criminations, when he calls Mr. Dempster a dull and Lethargy-head, a Neat-herd,
a man of a Prostitute reputation, a Knave, a Sycophant, a Devil, should have
been blotted out of his Book. As Infamous persons are not received for
witnesses, so Calumnies can be no wise sooner refuted, then by showing that he
who calumniates has lost all reputation and credit. If it were not softly
insinuated, what a quick wit Mr. Menzeis is, who names Mr. Dempster a dull and
Lethargy-head: How learned a Pastor, who calls him a Neat-herd; how famous, who
challenges him to be of a prostitute reputation; how honest, who calls him a
Rogue and a Knave; how sincere and ingenuous, who terms him a Sycophant: and
how great a Saint, who compares him to a Devil, his sole authority in Print
might perhaps endanger Mr. Dempsters good name, wherefore he must not take ill
a little has been said of this, not for Criminations, but as Answers to
Calumnies, and notorious falsehoods; especially his Apology being the greatest
of his wrongs, as if Mr. Dempster had extorted them, he was forced to it,
because for sooth, he can suffer no man to withstand him, or not to be
satisfied with what he brings: This is all the Injury we read in Mr. Dempsters
papers, which can be no excuse certainly to him, who easily foreseeing what
might be replied, dare glory with Job, he takes injuries for a Crown, citing as
a Heroic word in Luther, Indies magis mihi placeo, superbus fio, quod video
nomen pessimum mihi crescere. I please my self more and more daily, yea I
become proud, to see that I have got a very ill name, and that it grows upon
me; which if true, his pleasure may be great, and his pride too, for few of his
coat after Luther have got a worse name, for changes in Religion, Jars and
contentions with his brethren, disobedience to his Bishop, and disloyalty to
his Prince.

Here presently to set up his good name a little, he plays the Prophet,
striving to pry into Mr. Dempsters Intentions and thoughts, why he slighted all
the points stated by him, and Instances only that he should prove, there be two
Sacraments and no more; but here the Spirit fails him in all his Divinations,
the only reason of this being, for that all other controverted Tenets with
Protestants are borrowed from diverse old condemned Heresies, and this only
proper to them.

However, Mr. Dempster should have proved seven Sacraments. Answer, No, not
this, or any thing else (in the present dispute, as not to the purpose) save
only, that Protestants for their Religion could show no solid ground, this he
sticks to, this he insists upon, and this only whilst Mr. Menzeis like a Bird
ever upon wing flies from branch to branch, a mark of no great Constancy, and
Solidity, either in Wit or Learning.

But he will needs bring in the Romish Religion by the head and shoulders upon
the Stage, and have Mr. Dempster to decline it be tried by Scripture, and the
Doctrine of the Church in the first three ages. Answer, The Romish Religion has
no part in the present Scene, neither is Master Dempster acting any thing
directly in defense of it, but Impugning the Protestant grounds, and this Mr.
Menzeis in his first answer clearly grants; his words are: The Thesis -- then
which we defend, and you impugn is this: The Protestant Religion is the true
Religion; No mention here of the Catholic Roman Faith, and yet Mr. Menzeis in
all his papers and Books speaks very little for the Protestant Religion, but
always against the Popish, laying aside the Thesis which he sets down himself,
as his Text so often in the Pulpit, to rail at random against us.

And this with a like Sincerity and Candor, as when he says, Quakerism is but
Popery under a disguise. Answer, then most men mistake it, thinking it so far
from Popery under what ever disguise, that it is nothing but Puritanism, in
puris naturalibus, and undisguised. Is the private Spirit our Ground and Guide?
Do we allow Laics and Women to preach? or private persons whatsoever, upon
pretense of New Gospel Light to reform the Church? This Presbyterians and
Puritans in the beginning of the Reformation, and again in the Covenant, did
with them: Yea on the same very ground, of adhering to the pure Word, and to
the Spirit and Light within them, against all Authority in Church and State; Is
not this the Quakers chief Argument against Protestants, when they ask their
Power and Call: We are come to Reform you, say they, and all your Hirelings,
even as you the Papists and Priests; We ground our selves on the pure and naked
Word; the Spirit speaks within us; we regard not men; Church, Councels,
Fathers have erred. Which Answer, Mr. Menzeis if constant to his own
principles, with all his Needle-headed Nicities (as he speaks) will hardly
refute. In fine, he says, Romanists boast his Papers shall have an Answer;
these six Months might have done it; Our Reply will discover we apprehend some
danger; etc.

Answer, Few Romanists do think his papers deserve a Reply, yea, nor their
pains to read them, as saying little to the purpose; much less do they esteem
the enterprise to answer them so high, as it should be called a boast: He who
rather contends with us in solidity of reason, then celerity of dispatch, will
neverthleess have this expected answer six Months before his Book did appear,
at which time he makes the Magistrates command the Stationer under the highest
pains, that he should Print no Reply. Yet after his Book has been a twelve
month under the Press at home, we may have a Book Printed at a start abroad,
neither is there such have in replying for any danger we apprehend, his
railings never having wronged Catholics in the least, but much Protesiants,
many whereof have turned Quakers, to hear Tub-preachers professing greater
Modesty, Sincerity, yea, and Solidity in belief, then he; who by his frequent
changes in Religion, from Prelaticks to Presbyterians, from Presbyterians to
Independants, from Independants to I know not whom again, is more like the
Weathercock on the Steeple (turning at every wind) then the Member of any one
Church.

His Exclamations wherewith he concludes his two long Epistles, are both
ludibrious and childish, in misapplying so many Scripture Phrases to the
Catholic Roman Church, whose Faith is so highly commended by the Apostle St.
Paul, and holy Fathers in all Ages; who ever amongst them did tax her of
Error, fly her Communion, renounce her Faith, decline her Censures, question
her Authority, disapprove her Doctrine, or challenge the Supreme power and
Headship of her Bishop? In the second age St. Irenaeus extols her Authority;
All Churches (says he, l. 3. c. 3.) round about ought to resort to the Roman
Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality. In the third, St. Cyprian
Ep. 55. calls her St. Peter's Chair, and the principal Church, to which
Infidelity or false Doctrine cannot have access.

In the fourth, St. Athanasius has his recourse, both to her Bishop and her,
against all his Adversary Heretics. In the fifth, St. Augustine thinks her
Sentence an end of Controversy, Scripsimus Romam, Roma rescriptum est,
quaestio finita est, etc. And in following ages do not St. Gregory, St. German,
St. John Damascene Venerable Bede, St. Bernard, St. Thomas of Aquine, and
generally all the Fathers and Doctors of the Church the same? So that I answer
his places of Scripture, as St. Augustine Petilian's the Donatist Heretic, l.
2. c. 5. He brings the words of the Law, but takes not heed against whom, as
the Devil speaks Scripture to Christ, not discerning to whom. Verba legis
dicitis sed in quos dicitis, non attenditis, sicut Diabolus verba legis dicebat
sed cui diceret non agnoscebat. And with the same St. Augustine, I answer to
all Mr. Menzeis pretended victory and triumph over Mr. Dempster.

Facile est ut quisque Augustinum vincat, quanto magis ut vicisse videatur, aut
si non videatur, vicisse dicatur facile est, St.

Aug. Ep. 174. SECT. II.
Wherein the Question is stated, as propounded by Mr. Dempster, and Mr. Menzeis
great Principle and Grounds set down as cleared by him; with the Design of the
Author thereon.

THe sole Argument that I find Mr. Dempster urges in all his papers, in
substance runs thus, in this one Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be a true Religion, which has no peculiar principle or
ground to prove that it is a true Religion, and conform to the true sense of
the word of God.

But the Protestant Religion has no peculiar ground or principle to prove it
self the true Religion, etc.

Then the Protestant Religion cannot be true.

Mr. Menzeis cavils at this Syllogism, as not being in form, both the premises
being Negatives, as well as the Conclusion. Mr. Dempster Answers, the second is
Affirmative, and only objectively Negative: As if one should say in Latin
(wherein the form of Syllogisms best appears) Sed omnis Religio Protestantium
est talis, ut nullum habeat peculiare fundamentum quo se probet veram, or else,
Est habens nullum peculiare fundamentum, etc. which the least Logician in the
College presently sees to be an Affirmative Proposition: And yet what Clamours
has not Mr. Menzeis made for this? as if at the first bout he had disarmed his
Adversary: So well this great Professor of Divinity is versed in Logic, that
he cannot resolve and answer a proposition, if not set down as to a Bajan: Like
to that young man who lately come from the Fencing-School, and hardly put to
it, mistaking the thrust, is put off his Guard, and so both wounded and mocked.

So the Syllogism standing in good Form, the first Proposition in it suffers no
debate. The second is denied by Protestants, whereupon they are required to
produce this peculiar Ground which proves their Religion to be true. Master
Menzeis after many Wheelings, Turnings, and Windings in his Scoldings,
Digressions, Retorsions, at the end brings two grounds for the Protestant
Religion. The first Scripture, and that clear in Fundamentals, or things
necessary to Salvation. The second, its agreement in Essentials, with the Faith
of the purest and most ancient Primitive Church, in the first three Centuries
or Ages.

To clear his first Ground (which in his sixth paper he storms to have called
his Achilles or strength, seeing he had given another, which it seems he holds
no less strong then it) he sets down, That all Scriptures are not clear:
Secondly, that Protestants do not exclude means of Interpretation. Thirdly, by
perspicuity, he understands in Terms, or by firm and clear consequence.
Fourthly, that by this perspicuity again, he means an External and objective
Evidence which is nothing impeached, by the misunderstanding of Heretics or
others. Fifthly, that by things necessary, is here understood, whither
necessary as means, or as commands. What he cites in his eight paper, as
Maxims taken out of George Scholarius a Grecian, is but to the same purpose
with what he has formerly said.

One only thing I add, which he urges most in all his Book, that though
Protestants do not exclude means of Interpretation in explaining of Scripture,
and in deducing consequences from it, yet no necessity there is, that we should
know that he who gives the true Interpretation and Sense, have the assistance
of the Holy Ghost, because forsooth, this savours rankly (says he) of that
Erroneous Popish Tenet, concerning the necessity of an infallible visible Judge
of Controversy: whereof he proves in his third paper there is none, for that a
Jurist without any such Infallible assistance, may be known to explain aright a
Municipal Law, and a Mathematician to demonstrate a Proposition of Euclydes.

This is the state of the Question, as propounded by Mr. Dempster, and this in
substance is Mr. Menzeis Answer to it, their debate is long; Mr. Dempster
constantly putting Mr. Menzeis to it, that he would prove these Grounds to be
peculiar to Protestants, and support their Controverted Tenets with us; but
this he still declines to bring any Positive proof for either, desiring his
adversary should rather Positively prove the contrary. No says Mr. Dempster,
make good your Assertion, as he who affirms should prove; I will not be so put
off of my medium, I have taken against you: Let us see the Grounds you build on
in the sense you take them, and without any Infallible visible Judge of
Controversy, assuring you either of the incorrupt Writings, and sincere
Doctrine of the Fathers in the first three ages, or of the incorrupt Letter,
and genuine sense of Scripture, first, to be solid and Infallible, and then to
agree peculiarly to you, and the business is done. You confidently assert both;
but what Sectary says not the same? their claim to the foresaid Grounds, say
ye, is merely pretended; rests to see how your own is proved as just. Many
Digressions and Retorsions against Popery are made: Many Protestant Writers
spoken of who have done this, but nothing as either borrowed from them, or as
laid out by himself is brought in: Many passages of the Fathers are misapplyed;
Many Cavils, Criminations and Calumnies are objected: Many strong words, as
Logomachies, Vertigo's, -- and Needle-headed Nicities, with Prophecies from
Poets are used; a great part of Erasmus Chilias spent in Proverbs: Much paper
blotted, but what concluded? I shall not here interpose my judgment, as Mr.
Menzeis publishes his victory, as Trumpet in the Triumph himself, leaving to
each one to read and judge of the papers; adding only of him, what was said of
a Prolix and tedious Orator, who on little matter spent much time in many
flourishes of words, and frequent Digressions. Nullum vidi qui magis operose
nihil diceret. Multa sed non multum. Magni passus sed extra viam. Seneca. That
is, I have seen none take greater pains to say nothing; he says many things,
but not much; he walks at a great pace, but out of the way. For me as I mind
not here, actum agere, so neither do I presume to add any thing to what Mr.
Dempster has said in his way of Disputing, which I acknowledge both the
shortest and best, to make Mr. Menzeis prove his Grounds; but he ever declining
this, and urging we should show in them any weakness or defect; this I here
undertake for Mr. Menzeis further conviction, and happily some Protestants
conversion, by the goodness and mercy of God. My design being to prove
positively the falsehood and nullity, as well of his great Principle, of no
Infallible visible Judge, as of both his Grounds, and that very succinctly, in a
few Sections, without Digressing in the least, or meddling with what has been
said.

SECT. III.
Wherein Mr. Menzeis great Principle, That there is no Infallible visible Judge
of Controversy in the true Church is Positively refuted, as the main Ground of
all Divisions, Schisms, and Heresies, and contrary to the Scriptures, Fathers,
and Reason.

AS all Rebellion in Kingdoms and Commonwealths, has its rise from contempt of
the lawful Authority of Princes and Magistrates, upon the specious pretense of
abuse of Power, against the Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberties of the Subjects:
So all Heresies in the Church begin with appeals from the Pastors of the
Church, (the only Judges established by Christ) to his Written Word, which is to
all Christians as their Law Book. LEX REX, cry out Rebels with their Calipha
Buchanan: LEX JUDEX, or nolo verba quae non sunt scripta, Answers the Heretic
with an Arian in the Council of Nice. They will believe what they read, and not
what they hear; though the Apostle teach us, that Faith comes of hearing, and
the reason is, because with Mr. Menzeis, they acknowledge none speaking in
matters of Faith and Religion Infallible.

No Infallible Visible Judge.
This is indeed that great Principle Protestants did broach to themselves in
the beginning of Reformation, and at their very first leaping out from the
Church, they would admit of no Infallible visible Judge, stand to no Sentence
or Decree of Church, Councils, Fathers. Now this Principle being supposed by
them to be solid, and an unquestionable truth, nothing can follow thereon, but
what is true. Ex vero nil nisi verum, and consequently any private Protestant
reading Scripture with a sincere intention, may, yea ought to adhere to what he
thinks to be in Scripture, should all the Protestant Church, with all her
Assemblies, Synods, Preachers be of a contrary mind. Upon this, Luther and
Calvin leave the Catholic Roman Church, and all visible Congregations in the
Christian World at that time, because says Chamiers Ep. 49. (though Mr.
Menzeis deny it was so) Then Apostasy averted the whole body from Christ. They
made all the Kings and people drunk, from the first to the last, says Calvin,
Inst. l. 4. c. 18. and Whitaker, Cont. 4. q. 5. c. 3. No Religion but the
Papistical had place in the Church. Duditius apud Bezam; Ep. 1. says more, if
that be true which the Fathers have professed, with mutual consent, it is
altogether on the Papists side.

Upon this same Principle, innumerable other Sects and Sectaries, have left
again Protestants, and the Protestant Church upon this, and this only
Principle; every particular man reading Scripture, and taking it as he thinks
both words and sense clear, is made his own Judge, and so as many heads almost,
as many sentences, and diverse Opinions in Religion: some thinking Scripture
clear for this, some for that Sect, some admitting or rejecting whole Books of
Scripture at their pleasure: Yea some, and that too too many seeing most clear
Scripture tossed and wrested by contrary Sects, suspend their Judgment,
renounce their Faith, and quit all Religion, not knowing with what party to
side. Others in fine, who think themselves deeper wits, as they are more
speculative and searching brains, having run through all can be said, to
ascertain any point of Faith (save only the Divine Oracle in the Church) have
turned Scepticks in Religion, grounding themselves on mere probability. Which
Seed of Infidelity (says the Author of a Treatise, Entitled Faith vindicated
from possibility of Falsehood) Sown, when the Infallible Authority of the
Church, as the rule of Faith, was renounced, dared, first appear publicly
above ground, in the Writings of Mr. Chillingworth, and the L. Falkland,
dressed up in a plausible Rhetoric, and set out under a yet more pleasant
Title to Protestants, as being against Popery, was most graciously received by
many. Yea when it appeared in Mr. Tilletson his Eloquent and Famous Sermon, did
begin to get credit, as an Evangelical truth; and all this upon the foresaid
great principle.

Upon it the holy work of Reformation by private men, opposing the Law and
Gospel, to the judicial Sentence and Decrees of the whole Catholic Church:
Upon it the glorious work of the Covenant by some factious Zelots against
Prince and Pastors in the Protestant Church: Upon it Preachers and Pulpits
clash at random, Sects and Sectaries multiply, the Christian world is put in
confusion with endless Jars and Debates in Religion: And all this because there
is no Infallible Judge of Controversy, to give Sentence in favor of any one
party silencing all others. In a word for that (according to Protestants) God
has given us a Law without a Judge, however inconsistent this may seem, with
Order, Providence and wisdom.

This one Principle, I say once more with the great St. Augustine, Sermon. 14. de
verbis Ap. Ruins the very Grounds of Religion. In aliis quaestionibus non
diligenter digestis non plena Ecclesiae Authoritate firmatis, ferendus est
disputator errans, ibi ferendus error: non tamen progredi debet ut fundamentum
ipsum Ecclesiae quatere moliatur: According to the same St. Augustine, ib.
whosoever run their heads, were they never so great, (with Mr. Menzeis) against
this Inexpugnable wall of the Church Authority, are crushed. Hoc habet
Authoritas matris Eccelsiae, hoc fundatus veritatis obtinet canon, contra hoc
robur, contra hunc Inexpugnabilem murum quisquis arietat ipse confringitur. Is
it not on the Church her Infallible Authority, St. Augustine admits the
Scriptures, contr. Ep. fund. c. 5. Ego vero Evangelio non crederem nisi me
Ecclesiae commoveret Authoritas; Does he not stick so close to the same
Authority of the Church, that he says, Ep. fund. c. 4. If any clear testimony
were brought out of Scripture against it, he would neither believe Scripture
nor Church, for that on the Church her Authority he believed the Scripture.
Quod si for^e in Evangelio aliquid apertissimum de Manichaei apostolatu
invenire potueris, infirmabis mihi Catholicorum Authoritatem, qui jubent ut
tibi non credam qua infirmata jam nec Evangelio credere potero, quia per eos
illi credideram.

Was not the Church Judge in Religion for the first two thousand years, before
any Scriptures were written? Was not again the Church of the Jews the same
Judge after the Law was given, till Christ his time, and this by the express
Order of God in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8. would God there direct them unto a
Judge, and punish them with death, for not obeying in matters of the Law and
Religion, an Authority which might any wise deceive them? Or in the Law of
Grace it self, has Christ in St. Matthew. 18. v. 17. commanded us to hear a
Church not Infallible or subject to error? Is not the Church of God built on a
Rock, so that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, S. Matthew. 16.19.
Has not the Church this promise from Christ, S. Matthew. 28.20. And lo I am with
you, even to the end of the world. Is not the Church called by the Apostle S.
Paul, 1 Timothy 3.13. The Ground and Pillar of Truth? However Mr. Menzeis will
have this ground sole Scripture. In fine, if these and such like Texts we
should hear the Church, receive her Decisions, obey her commands, be not clear,
what is clear in all the Scripture? or if they be subject to diverse
Interpretations, who can better judge of their true sense, then the same
Church? Will you say Natural Reason with the Socinians, or the private spirit,
with Anabaptists, and Quakers, or conferring of places and passages with
Protestants? Is there any one more rational then the whole Church of God? any
spirit to be trusted, rather then the Spirit of Truth promised to her? or any
one better versed in all the places of Scripture, then all the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church composing her Supreme Judicatory in a general Council.

Let us hear I pray you the Fathers upon this I mean the Authority both of
Church and Councils, as an Infallible Visible Judge, the better to silence Mr.
Menzeis vain glorious bragging. S. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 49. We must believe those
Priests that are in the Church, those that have a succession from the Apostles,
who together with Episcopal Power, have according to the good pleasure of the
Father, received the certain gift of truth.

And again the same S. Irenaeus c. 62. the Church shall be under no man's
judgment (he excepts not Mr. Menzeis, yea nor Luther, nor Calvin to reform her)
for to the Church all things are known, in which is perfect Faith of the
Father, and of the dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy
Ghost, who teaches all truth.

Origin praef. in lib. periarch. That only is to be believed for truth, which
in nothing disagrees from the Tradition of the Church, and in understanding
Scripture, we must not believe otherwise, then as the Church of God has by
succession delivered to us.

S. Cyprian de unit. eccl. That the Church cannot be adulterated with Heresy.

S. Chrysostom in c. 2. is, That all the Heretics in the World cannot pervert
her Doctrine.

S Cyril of Jerusalem, Catech. Mist. 18. That what she once has received from
Christ, she ever holds.

S. Cyril of Alexandria, l. 5. in Is. c. 54. That she is founded by Christ in
truth for (...).

S. Ambrose, l. 4. Hexam. c. 2. That she cannot fail.

Eusebius Caesariensis de praeparat Evang. l. 1. c. 3. That her Faith is
invincible to the very Powers of Hell.

S. Augustine l. 4. de bapt. c. 4. I know by Divine Revelations, that the
Spirit of Truth teaches the Church all truth.

S. Augustine again, l. de Utilit. cred. c. 16. Fear not to run to the bosom of
the Church, which by succession of Bishops descending from the Apostolical Sea,
manifestly even to the acknowledgment of all mankind, has obtained the height
of Authority, Heretics who on every side barked against her being partly by
the consent of Nations, partly by the Authority of Councils, partly by the
Majesty of Miracles condemned, to which Church not to yield primacy, is a point
either of highest Impiety, or headlong Arrogance.

In fine, the same S. Augustine Ep. 118. To think not right what the Catholic
Church practices, is most insolent madness.

I leave to the Physicians judgment, what foot of this Distemper and Madness
had the first Reformers of the Church, not only thinking and calling what she
practiced Idolatry and Superstition, but even judging and condemning her of
Apostasy, Schism, and Heresy, as Mr. Menzeis here of Arrogance and Pride; Odi
Ecclesiae illius fastum, I hate says he that Churches Pride, speaking of the
Catholic Roman Church, for calling her self Infallible, but let me answer him
as Plato Diogen. Calcas Ecclesiae fastum majore fastu, he most persumptuously
accuses her of Pride, no lawful established Judicatory, being proud in censuring
private Delinquents as they deserve, but Rebels to their lawful Judges in
censuring them, both Presumptuous and Proud with him.

But least any with Mr. Menzeis should apply all these Testimonies of the
Fathers, to the diffusive body of the Church, and not to the Representative in
a general Council, as if the one were Infallible in Believing, and not the
other in Teaching, according to that promise of Christ, in S. Matthew. 28.20. Go
teach all Nations, and lo I am with you all days to the end of the world. We
must remark that when the necessary good, and preservation of the Church
requires the performance of Christ's words and promises in future ages, no less
then in the Apostles time, then we are to take them, for all ages, except there
be some express limitation made, as to Preach, Baptize, remit Sins, feed his
Flock, lead men in all Truth, etc. Yet because each Apostle had a power over
all the Church, this is said to every one of them, but to their Successors, who
have not each one this power, together in a Council, which for this all the
Fathers in all ages have acknowledged as a Sovereign and Infallible Judicatory,
what ever Mr. Menzeis standing to his Great Principle, say to the contrary.

Thus S. Cyril l. 10. de trin. averres Decrees of General Councils to be most
Holy and Divine Oracles.

S. Leo Ep. 37.64. A Sentence inspired by the Holy Ghost.

S. Epiphanius haeres. 77. A Decision not to be questioned.

S. Athanasius Ep. ad Episc. Afric. The Word of God which endures for ever.

S. Basil Ep. 10. The Touchstone to discern Heretics.

Vincensius Lyrinensis in his Book against Heresies c. 4. says, all who will
not be accounted Heretics, must conform themselves to the Decrees of
Ecumenical or General Councils.

S. Augustine Ep. 162. Calls them the last Sentence can be expected in matters
of Faith.

S. Gregory the great l. 1. Ep. 24. Reverences the first four General Councils
as the four Evangills.

And Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor, Ep. ad eccle. Alex.
as witness Sozomenus, l. 1. c. 24. and Socrates l. 1. c. 6. holds the Decrees
of the Council of Nice, against Arius, a Divine Sentence flowing from the
mouths of so many, and great Bishops inspired by the Holy Ghost.

Wherefore S. Augustine de bapt. contra donat. l. 1. c. 7. concludes, That no
doubt ought to be made, of what is by full Decree established in a Council.
Neither is Mr. Menzeis Objection from him of any force, for when he speaks, l.
2. de bapt. c. 3. of mending Councils by Councils upon further experience, his
words are, Cum aliquo rerum experimento aperitur quod clausum est, and
cognoscitur quod latebat, clearly showing he means not any Decision of Faith
can be mended, which no experience can learn us, but Divine Revelation alone
can teach.

Thus to shun prolixity in Citations, do not all the Fathers who were ever
present at Councils, Subscribe their Canons and Decrees, annexing Anathemas and
Excommunications against all who oppose them in the least.

I hear Mr. Menzeis Reply to all this first* but where is that Infallible
Church the Scriptures and Fathers speak of? Answer, That is not here the
question, but that there is one, which is contradictory to his great Principle,
That there is no Infallible visible Judge. Only I add the Protestant Church
cannot be this, they speak of, she not being Infallible as themselves confess,
and consequently cannot be the Church and House of God, which the Apostle calls
the Ground and Pillar of Truth.

Secondly, How many Questions may be moved touching the lawfulness of Councils,
now the Fathers speak not of the Council of Trent, but only of lawful ones?
Answer, a contentious spirit will question any thing; but St. Augustine above
cited, tells you of what is by full Decree established in a Council, no doubt or
question ought to be made. Whatever Protestants object against the Council of
Trent, did not the Arians against the Nicene Council? Nolo verba quae non sunt
Scripta, that is, I will believe nothing but the written Word, which is but the
echo repeating now, what was at first cried out then.

Thirdly, God has obliged no man to hear Church or Council against his express
and clear Word. Answer, This is true, but is not the Church the most faithful
Depositary of Gods Word, best Judge of what is clear, and best Interpreter of
what is Obscure? For no Scripture, says St. Peter, Is of private
Interpretation; and does not Christ in his written Word most clearly and
expressly command us to hear his Church, if we will not be holden as Publicans
and Heathens.

Fourthly, No Council can be general, where all are not called, and sit with a
decisive voice. Answer, Should even Heretics be called to, and have in
Councils their decisive voices? What agreement could this make in Points
controverted? why not Socinians, Anabaptists, Quakers, as well as Protestants?
should Presbyterians sit with Bishops and Prelaticks in Protestant Assemblies?
what a pitiful shift is this? If so, let the Covenant be renewed, Bishops again
thrust out, and Mr. Menzeis set high, for yielding obedience to them, only
through compulsion and fear of loosing his place.

Fifthly, The Church her self when fallen in error, cannot be Judge, being
Criminal and Impeached of most heinous crimes, she cannot be both Party and
Judge. Answer, This Objection is all Utopian and Chymerical, if we hear the
Scripture and Fathers assuring us she cannot err: But giving, and not granting
she did; who then her Judge? When Subjects rise against their Sovereign,
Citizens against their Magistrates* Children against their Parents, leave they
to be their Judges, because arraigned by them? Even Heretics, must submit to
the Sentence and Censures of the Church, when they fall at variance with her;
though they turn Unnatural, she cannot become a Stepmother to them.

Sixthly, Infallibility in judging is proper to God. Answer, yes, none but God
has it Essentially, and by Nature, but none I hope will deny, he may make the
Pastors of his Church, as well Infallible in teaching points of Faith, as his
Prophets and Evangelists, in penning the Scripture Books, or at least as any
Protestant in reading and understanding them.

Seventhly, The Church of Rome is but a particular Church. Answer, we take it
not so, when we say the Catholic Roman Church, but for all Churches in
Communion with the Roman, as all Countries under the Roman Emperor, are called
the Roman Empire, and all people under the Law of Moses, the Jewish Church,
though that name taken strictly, belonged to the Tribe of Juda, because the
chief City appertained to that Tribe, where the High Bishop resided. So the
Universal Church is called the Roman Catholic Church, by reason of St. Peter
and his Successors, her high Bishops residing there, whence Rome is the Center
of Ecclesiastical Communion, infusing unity in the whole dispersed body, as the
Form of Universality or Catholickship. Wherefore St. Cyprian Ep. ad Cornel.
Calls her, Ecclesiam principalem unde unitas Sacerdotalis exorta est: That is,
the Principal and chief Church, the Source and Center of Unity amongst the
Priests of all other Churches, and consequently the people.

Eighthly, But whereon Grounded this Infallible Authority of the Church?
Answer, On the clear places of Scripture and Fathers above cited; It is the
Ground and Pillar of truth, therefore cannot err. It has the promise of Gods
Spirit to lead it into all truth, therefore cannot err. It is said to be built
on the Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail, therefore
cannot err. Christ has placed in it Apostles, Doctors, Pastors, and Bishops to
the consummation and perfection of the whole body, that we be not carried away
with every blast of new Doctrines, therefore it cannot err. It is the House,
the Spouse, the Mystic body of Christ, his Lot, Kingdom, and Inheritance in
this world, therefore cannot err. On the Authority of the Church the Fathers
have received the Originals, Translations, and Sense of Scripture Books, yea
some chief Points of Faith, not mentioned in Scripture, as persons in the
Trinity, Sacraments in the Church, keeping holy the Sunday, etc. therefore
cannot err. Christ has commanded, and that under pain of Damnation, to hear the
Church in matters of Faith and Religion, therefore it cannot err. All are
obliged to live in Communion with the Church, therefore cannot err. The Church
has from Christ, and ever has exercised a Judicatory Power in all belonging to
Faith and Worship, therefore cannot err. Christ has sealed constantly in all
Ages her Doctrine with Wonders, and Miracles, therefore it cannot err: To
conclude, if the Church and her Pastors assembled in Councils mistake clear
Scripture, misapply Scriptures, deceive, or be deceived, what particular man
can either justly censure her, and them, or solidly Ground himself? Magna vis
veritatis, great is the strength of Verity, and nothing more true then what is
here holden out, that to admit with Mr. Menzeis, of no Infallible visible Judge
of Controversy, is the only Fountain and Spring of all Divisions, Schisms, and
Heresies, to which this one Protestant Principle, opens so wide a Gate.

SECT. IV.
Wherein Mr. Menzeis first Ground of the Protestant Religion, to wit sole
Scripture, is shown to be no Ground to them; and that they have not reformed
the Church according to the uncorrupted Scriptures, but corrupted the Sciptures
to deform the Church.

SCripture then is Protestants ground of Religion, and in it all Fundamentals
are clear, this is very plausible, to the ignorant people, who think it to be
so upon their Ministers Tradition, and highly Glory both in reading and
explaining the Bible. Yet no peculiar Ground to them, as was required, all
Heretics for ought M. Menzeis has said, pretending with as great reason, the
same. Neither have Heresies, says St. Augustine, l. 1. c. 4. contr. ad verse.
leg. and proph. or certain Doctrines bewitching the mind sprung from any other
Head, then from good Scriptures not well understood. But to proceed with order,
before we come to the understanding of Scripture.

First, What Scripture, I pray you is this the Protestant Ground? Is it the
Scripture Translated, or in the Original Tongues? Mr. Menzeis speaks nothing of
this. The learned Chamiers cited as a chief Protestant Champion by him in his
Panstratia l. 1. c. 2. s. 15. Says only true Originals, adding, as for
Translations, the sense of Protestants is, that all of them, of what standing,
name, or credit soever they be, and with what Diligence, Sincerity or Learning
soever they were made, are only so far certain, as they agree with the first
Context, I mean says he, as they express that, sense which is certainly
manifest, to be the true sense of the Hebrew and Greek words. And Doctor Daniel
in his Treatise, the Dippers Dipped, has these words, p. 1. No Translation is
simply Authentical or the undoubted Word of God. To these Subscribe^ Doctor
Baron our Country man, inferior to no Protestant, I know, either in Loyalty
or Learning, Tract. 1. c. 2. p. 46. Laici illiterati, etc. Unlearned Laics,
says he, believe only Implicitly, confusedly, and (...) upon the Divine
Authority of Scripture forme^ly taken; by reason they can have no certain
express and distinct knowledge of the Doctrine contained in Scripture as such,
or of the agreement of Translations in vulgar Languages, with the Originals,
yea, they know not so much, but upon other men's testimony and report, as that
the Doctrine propounded to them to be believed, is set down in the Scripture or
written Word at all. Whence follows according to these learned Protestants,
the ground of the Protestant Religion must be only the Scripture in the
Original Languages, that is Greek, Hebrew and Syriack, which of a thousand
Protestants, 2. does not understand: Where then must all other Protestants
ground their faith (a very few number of Linguists being excepted) shall they
believe only Implicitly, and on other men's report, as D. Baron will have them?
But this is the Colliers Faith Mr. Menzeis jears, though I fear all his skill
in Languages, often force him to turn a Collier himself: or shall they rely on
Translations which Chamiers after all diligence used, and Doctor Daniel with
him, confess not to be the undoubted Word of God, but in so far as they are
known to agree with the Hebrew and Greek Texts, and how few undoubtedly know
this? Yea Protestant Translations of the Bible are so generally corrupt, that
you shall find none that has not been challenged, even by most learned
Protestants, for manifold corruptions, and that very gross. To begin at Luther,
let us hear Zuinglius of him, Tom. 2. ad Luther C. de Sacram. fol. 412. Where
after detection of many corruptions in Luther, he concludes thus, See how thy
case stands, that in the eyes of all men thou art seen to be a manifest and
common corrupter of holy Scripture, which thing thou can never deny before
any Creature, how much are we ashamed of thee, who hereto have esteemed thee
beyond all measure, and now find thee to be such a false fellow. Neither can
Luther deny his corruptions himself, for in that place of St. Paul, where a man
is said to be justified by faith, he grants l. Contra Cochleum p. 408. he puts
into the Text, the word, only, which the Apostle has not, Licet Paulus verbo,
sola non utatur qou ego usus sum; and is not this a main place Protestants use
against us, so well are they grounded in Scripture. Of Calvin, Charles
Molinaeus in his Translation of the New Testament, part. 2. fo. 110. says
Calvin in his Harmony, makes the Text of the Scripture to leap up and down, as
the truth it self declares, he uses violence to the Letter of the Gospel, and
in many places clearly transposes it, and besides this adds to the Text. Are
these the Reformers of the Church by the uncorrupted word, or corrupters of the
Word to deform the Church? Castalio says of Beza, That to note all his Errors
in translating the New Testament, it would require a great volume. Five times
he differs from himself, though one of the best Linguists ever Protestants had.
King James a great Scholar, as a great Monarch in the sum of the conference
before his Majesty, thinks the Geneva Translation the worst of all others. And
Mr. Parkes in his defense of the first Testimony concerning Christ's descending
into Hell, says, as for the Geneva Bibles, it is to be wished that either they
be purged from those manifold Errors, which are both in the Text, and at the
Margent, or else utterly prohibited. Now as to our own Translations in English,
Mr. Bruges in his Apology, Sect. 6. Says plainly, that the approved Protestant
Translation, has many omissions, many additions, which sometimes obscure,
sometime pervert the sense. And M. Carleil p. 116. remarkes that the English
Protestants in many places detort the Scriptures from their right sense, and
show themselves to love darkness more then light, falsehood more then truth,
they have corrupted and depraved the sense, obscured the Truth, deceived the
Ignorant, and supplanted the simple. And Mr. Broughton a chief Linguist in
England, in his Epistle to the Lords of the Privy Council, desires them to
procure speedily a new Translation, because that which is now is full of
Errors. And in his Advertisement of corruptions to the Protestant Bishops,
says, that their public Translation of Scriptures is such, as it perverteth
the Text of the Old Testament in four hundred forty eight places, and that it
causes millions of millions to reject the New Testament, and run to Eternal
flames. How many diverse and different Translations in Queen Elizabeth's and King
James times? how often what was first at the Margent, has been put in the
Text? Now if Translators of the Scripture in English, men furnished with so
many helps, endued with so many gifts, so well versed in the Hebrew, and Greek
tongues, so guided by all the Rules Mr. Menzeis gives to attain the right
meaning and sense of Holy Writ, have fallen into so many, and so gross errors
and Mistakes, as to have depraved, detorted, wrested, obscured the Scripture
and Word of God, so that it, as Translated by them decieveth the Ignorant,
supplanteth the simple, perverteth the Text in so many places, as that it
carries milions to Eternal Flames; What hope can any one have of meaner
Talents with fewer helps, and less learning and knowledge, to attain by his own
private reading of Scripture, the undoubted Truth, Steadiness in faith and
Religion, a full and satisfactory solution of all doubts, or security of
Salvation? and yet these very same so corrupt Translations (as their own
Ghospellers testify) are read in Churches, expounded in Pulpits, and put in
the hand of every one who understands neither Latin, Greek nor Hebrew, as his
sole ground of Faith; and Judge of controversy, whereby he is made able to
Judge, not only of Popish Errors, the Writings of the Fathers, and Decrees of
Councils, but even of his own Pastors Doctrine, his Churches Faith, and his
Countries Religion.

Secondly, to come to the Originals; Shall they then only be the Protestants
Ground of Faith? If so, I ask Mr. Menzeis where we shall find them? Yea we are
so far from having all the Originals, that it is doubted in what Language some
parts of Scripture were written. The purity of Originals is sometimes called in
Question, and Calvin Inst. l. 1. C. 13. Does imagine even these the Fountains
run not always clear. Luther Enar. in Is. Cries out on the Jews for crucifying
the Text, as well as Christ, and upon Genesis C. 24. Says again, he has often told
many words there be in the Hebrew Text, which the Hebrews themselves do not
understand. And to say true, amongst the Jews, the least of their three
Massoreshe's (so they call the Book which contains the many corruptions, and
diverse Lections in the Hebrew Text) counts eight hundred places disagreeing,
ambiguous or corrupt, neither do the most learned Rabbis agree in the Letter
of Scripture: In Hebrew it self, some reading according to the Points, or
Vowels put in by Rabbi Jacob, and some by these of Rabbi Aron, most different
one from another; all the points being added to the Text, Five hundred years
after Christ, and that by his professed Enemies the Jews, long after the Vulgar
Latin Translation which was made before the Text, and Letter of Scripture was
corrupt. But Protestants take in also with these the corruptions of the Greek
Text remarked in part by St. Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, and others, says
Eusebius, when the ancient Heretics the Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, etc.
had corrupted and adulterated the Word of God, to support their Errors, as
Protestants at present in all their Translations do. I know M. Menzeis will
tell me perhaps he has seen both the Hebrew and the Greek Texts; well but who
assures him they are not corrupt? Yes, but the Protestants have corrected them,
and that according to the Authenticks, which never any Protestant did see. The
most Learned amongst Protestants have never seen the Original Scriptures which
were first penned by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists; Copies are no
less subject to faults in the Letter, then Translations to mistakes in the
sense. Yea, the Authors of that great and famous Bible that is Printing at
London (if not yet ended) in so many Languages, witnesses in the Preface they
have set out, not so much as one Copy could be found they can assure to agree
in all things with the Original: their labor may be great in this vast Volume
to correct the Copies they find deficient, but their Authority is not
Infallible: In a word, no Infallible Authority is admitted by Protestants to
judge either of the Letter or Sense, For that savours rankly, says M. Menzeis
of that Erroneous Popish Tenet, of an Infallible visible Judge of Controversy.
And I Answer, to deny one in all these and such like cases savours rankly of a
tottering, wavering, groundless Faith, most like to that of M. Menzeis.

I say yet further, if no Translations of Scripture can be a ground of Faith,
as most learned Protestants grant, so neither any Original it would seem,
without some Infallible Judge; for I must ever be sure they are unccorrupted;
and again all the defect in Translations coming from the misunderstanding of
Originals; I ask who dare say he understands them, better then they who have
Translated, and upon this, as he himself reads, and conceives, ground his
Religion and Faith.

Thirdly, before all this, if M. Menzeis will prove it a solid Ground to rely
on sole Scripture, as the only ground of Faith, without any Infallible visible
Judge, or assurance, that he who tells me this is the uncorrupted Letter, this
the true and genuine Sense, has the peculiar assistance of the Holy Ghost: I
demand what Infallible Motive can prudently persuade Protestants that the Word
of God they rely on, was ever set down in Writing, or is extant at this day? Is
it the testimony of Scripture calling it self Gods Word, or the Innate Light of
the same Scripture, showing it self to be such, to a well disposed Intellect
and mind? If the first, do not Nicodemus and S. Thomas Gospels carry the same
titles, with these of St. Matthew and St. Mark? If the second, then the Fathers
of the first three ages (whom M. Menzeis most owns) were not well disposed
persons, who did not acknowledge some Books of Scripture till the Authority of
a Council at Carthage had declared them Canonical; and much less Luther, that
holy man, who rejects St. James Epistle with some others.

As Protestants ground their Faith, say they, on Gods word, so Quakers on the
Spirit: and we deny not but both be equally Infallible, if once known
Infallibly to be the Spirit or Word of God. But we demand of each Sect, what
Infallible External Rule or Motive they give us, to know either Gods Word
speaking in Scripture, or Spirit in them? Both answer with M. Menzeis, they
both show themselves to all who are well disposed. But this clears not us, the
well disposed heart being only known to God; let all then be objectively true,
(as M. Menzeis says his Religion is) which they both teach, (as certainly is,
what ever by Gods Word or Spirit is revealed) we only insist to know Infallibly
that God did reveal such Doctrine as theirs, either by his Word or Spirit. For
we receive now no Immediate Revelations, as the Prophets and Apostles did in
old times, nor have we Evidentiam in attestante, as the Divines call it, that
is any Evidence that it is God who speaks; points of faith being only
propounded to us by men, who either put the Scriptures in our hands to read, or
teach us by word of mouth. The Protestants great Principle, let us own no man or
Church as an Infallible Judge; yea M. Menzeis in his sixth paper, offers upon
this to turn Papist, if the Infallible assistance of the Propounder can be
proved necessary: but never clears what other way we can be Infallibly assured
that all which the Protestants do teach, was revealed by God. Unless it be in
his third paper, where speaking of the True and Genuine Sense of Scripture, he
tells us we may have it as from a Jurist, the Explication of a Municipal Law,
or from a Mathematitian, a demonstration of Euclides. But what a weak Answer is
this? Do any receive Demonstrations on Authority as Points of Faith? Or is the
assent I give to the Law so explained by a Jurist Infallible? If Christ himself
had not shown his Divinity by his Works and Wonders, he grants the Jews had
committed no sin in refusing to belive him: The Apostles Credentials were their
Miracles, both did thus evidence the Infallible assistance they had of Gods
Spirit to the World; and shall any man trust M. Menzeis boldly asserting there
is no necessity of any? was it not for this the power of Miracles was left in
the Church, as the marks of her assistance, and seals of her Doctrine, with
other Motives of credibility? Notwithstanding Protestants with M. Menzeis will
propound to us the Catalogue of Canonical Scripture Books, assure us of the
incorrupt Copies and Letter, enforce upon our Consciences the sense they give,
whilst so confidently obtruding all this, they neither dare, or do say, nor
can evidence by any external mark or sign, they have the particular assistance
of Gods Spirit; As if all this were clear in it self, with Mathematical
Demonstrations. But does Scripture in our Bibles, show it self better to be the
Word of God now, then when Christ was speaking in person? Then an external
Evidence, God did speak by his Son, is acknowledged as necessary by him, and
now shall any man reasonably say, there is no necessity of any, when he speaks
by his servants and Church? however this prove efficacious and strong for M.
Menzeis conversion, it would seem to me more then sufficient for his* or any
man's conviction.

Fourthly, to claim to Scripture, yet so as they can no wise evidence they take
it aright, is common to Protestants with all Heretics, so no peculiar Ground.
When Sectaries clash with Sectaries, is not all their babbling out of Scripture?
You shall see, says Vincentius Lyrinensis, c. 35. Heretics so abound with
Scripture, as they fly through all the Volumes of the holy Law, through Moses,
the Books of Kings, the Psalms and Prophets, etc. read the works of Paulus Sam
satenus, Priscillian, Eunomius, etc. you shall not find ae page which is not
Colored and painted out with the sentences of Old and New Testament. Nestorius
to support his Heresy gloried (as Gennadius reports in his Catalogue) in the
evidence of threescore Testimonies which he produced, as the Covenant in three
hundred, whereof scarce three any wise to the purpose. The Valentinians,
Marcionists, Arians, will submit to none but Scripture, as St. Augustine
witnesses of Maximinus the Arian Bishop in his first Bok against him. Neither
does it avail M. Menzeis to say Scriptures are clear in terminis, or made clear
by conferring of places, or show themselves clearly to a well disposed mind.

First, for that though a place of Scripture be clear in it self, yet when
diverse Sects take it diversely, a man may justly suspect his own judgment,
seeing so many of a contrary mind. So that it wants not difficulty to
determine always what is absolutely clear, there being many clear places as
would seem, not to be taken in the clear and obvious sense, as the passages
Heretics did most build on, will presently show. As when Marcion despises
Moses and the Prophets upon Christ's own clear words in S. John the 10. How many
soever have come before me are Thieves and Robbers. The Manichees affirmed
Christ to be the Sun, upon a like Scripture in St. John the 8. I am the light
of the world. The Waldenses taught no man could be put to death, no not by the
lawful Authority of a Judge, upon clear Scripture again, Exodus 20. Thou shall
not kill, etc. The Devil cites clear Scripture to Christ, and the Jews against
his death, we have heard in the Law the Messiah abides for ever.

Moreover many seeming Contradictions in Scripture, you shall find in Becan and
others, one might think clear. And many things are believed even by
Protestants, which be not in Scripture at all: as Persons in the Trinity,
Sacraments in the Church, and the Command of keeping holy the Sunday; the
Scripture neither naming persons, or telling what a person is, defining
Sacraments (as M. Menzeis does) or setting down their number; abrogating the
keeping of the Sabbath, or having for the Sunday any command. Many places of
Scripture again are flatly against Protestants, and clear for us, as for the
Real Presence, This is my Body, this is my Blood, S. Matthew. 26. For
Justification not by Faith only, but also good works. Ye see then how that by
works a man is justified, and not by Faith only, S. James 2.24. For Traditions
from the Apostles, besides the written Word. Therefore brethren stand fast and
hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle,
2 These. 2.13. And such like places cited in most Books of Controversy, for all
Controverted Tenets, Protestants never being able to bring any one clear place
of Scripture against any of our Tenets, not evidently mistaken or confessedly
corrupted, as when they make S. Paul say, a man is justified by faith only;
Luther above cited, granting he has put in the word only, which Saint Paul has
not; or, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, in place of Idol, as
is clearly the word Pesel in the Hebrew Text.

Secondly, as to conferring of places, and explaining the more obscure, by
these which are clear, did not Arius boast of this against the Fathers of the
Council of Nice, proving the unity in Nature of the Father and Son, out of
these words in S. John the 10. I and my Father are one. No, says the Arian,
this place as obscure to us, and passing the reach of Humane capacity, must be
explained by this other more clear in St. John 17. where Christ prays his
Apostles, May be one with him, as he and his Father are one; that is in will
and affection, and surely the second place is clearer to us, and consequently
according to M. Menzeis Rule, the Arian Heresy must prevail; neither will he
ever be able standing to his Rule, to answer an Arian Cobbler making this
Objection, as Learned Writers remark. Eutyches conferring these two places, The
Word was made flesh, in S. John 1. and the water was made Wine, in S. John 2.
fell in this detestable Blasphemy, That the Humane Nature was changed into the
Divine, as the Water was converted into Wine. And without all doubt again, the
second is the clearer place to us, the first, that two Natures should be united
in one Person, surpassing as the Divines teach, even the Natural capacity of
Angels. Manicheus explains the same passage, The Word was made flesh,
Figuratively, and in show, as Protestants, This is my body, and that by a clear
place of S. Paul to the Phil. 2. v. 7. where it is said, Christ took upon him
the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. Most clear words as
would seem in favor of this Heresy, and such that if Protestants could bring
any, with as great a show against the real presence, all their Pulpits should
sound with them till their hearers became deaf. But there be none in all the
Scripture so clear against the real presence I say, as the words quoted have a
seeming clearness against the real Incarnation of Christ, the four Evangelists,
and S. Paul speaking in so express and formal words for the former, that the
Fathers with St. Chrysostom, Hom. 6. have recourse to the words for the real
presence as clearer, to prove, that giving in the Sacrament his body and blood,
he must have taken the Nature of Man. Nestorius on the contrary will have these
words of S. John the 2. Dissolve ye this Temple, and in three days I shall
raise it again, to be taken Literally, and not Figuratively; and upon this
holds out a new Heresy, that the Son of God did dwell only in his Holy
Humanity as in a Temple. Valentine and Apollinaris reading in S. John 3. no man
has ascended into heaven, but he that descended from Heaven, gain says the
Mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and will needs have his flesh to have descended
from Heaven, as his Manhood afterward ascended thither. And this Heretical
Exposition, they confirm by conferring the ensuing places in St. Paul to the
Ephesians 4. He that descended, the same is also he who ascended. And in the
first to the Corinths 15. The first man of Earth Earthly, the second Man of
Heaven Heavenly. A thousand such Errors in the greatest Fundamentals of
Christianity have Heretics drawn out of the clear Fountains and Brooks of holy
Writ, by the deceivable, and deceiving search of weighing places; Why not
Protestants with them? they sail on the same Sea, and deep of Scriptures with
them; they direct their course by the same Card of conferring clearer and
obscurer places: the same Rule they apply to all the crooked lines of their
Errors and Deviations. What can be answered to all this: M. Menzeis Principle
always standing, No Infallible visible Judge, but to have recourse with him to
the well disposed mind, wherefore*

Thirdly, I say this does not yet satisfy to the Question, no not with all the
means of Interpretation M. Menzeis does bring, it being as hidden, Intricate,
Doubtful and Inscrutable, who performs all these Conditions aright, as to find
out certainly and infallibly the true sense of Scripture, without an Infallible
Judge. Yea supposing one uses them aright, yet let us learn from no lesser
Protestant then Doctor Jeremy Tailor, what certainty of the true sense men can
attain by them: His words are so remarkable to my purpose in a Discourse of
liberty in Prophesying, Sect. 4. that here I even set them down at length.
First then says he, Sometime the sense is drawn forth by the Context, and
Connection of Parts. It is well when it can be so. But when there is two or
three Antecedents and Subjects spoken of: What Man, or what Rule shall
ascertain me, that I make my Reference true, by drawing the Relation to such an
Antecedent, to which I have a mind to apply it, another has not. Secondly, One
other great pretense is, the conference of places, which is of so indefinite
capacity, that if there be ambiguity of words, variety of sense, alteration of
Circumstances, or difference of Style amongst Divine Writers, then there is
nothing which may be more abused by wilful people, or may more easily deceive
the unwary, or that may more amuse the most diligent observer. Thirdly,
Oftentimes Scriptures are pretended to be expounded by a proportion and Analogy
of reason, but it is with Reason as with men's tastes, When a man speaks reason,
it is but reason he should be heard, etc, yet because it must be reason that
must judge of reason, unless other men's understandings were of the same Air, the
same Constitution and ability, they cannot be prescribed unto by another man's
reason; especially because such reasonings as usually are in Explication of
particular places of Scripture depend upon minute Circumstances and
Particularities, in which it is so easy to be deceived, and so hard to speak
Reason regularly and always, that it is the greater wonder, if we be not
deceived. Fourthly, Others pretend to Expound Scripture by Analogy of Faith.
This he says is but a Chimera, a thing in the Clouds, which varies like the
right and left hand of a Pillar, etc. Fifthly, Consulting of Originals, is
thought a great matter to Interpretation of Scriptures; but this is to small
purpose, for indeed it will expound the Hebrew and the Greek, and rectify
Translations: But I know no man that says, that the Scriptures in Hebrew and
Greek are easy, and certain to be understood, and that they are hard in Latin
and English. The difficulty is in the thing, however it be expressed, the least
in the Language, etc. Then numb. 6. he says in general, All these ways of
Interpreting Scriptures, which of themselves are good helps, are made either by
design, or by our infirmities, ways of Intricating and Involving Scriptures in
greater difficulty, because men do not learn their Doctrines from Scripture,
but come to the understanding of Scriptures, with preconceptions and Idea's of
Doctrines of their own, and then no wonder Scripture look like Pictures;
wherein every man in the room thinks they look on him only, and that
wheresoever he stands, or how often soever he changes his Station. So that now
what was intended for a remedy, becomes the Promoter of our Disease, and our
Meat becomes the matter of sickness: and the Mischief is, the wit of man cannot
find a remedy for it; For there is no Rule; no Limit, no certain Principle by
which all men may be guided to a certain, and so Infallible Interpretation,
that he can with any Equity prescribe to others to believe his Interpretations
in places of Controversy or ambiguity.

Osiander in his confutations of the Book which Melancton wrote against him,
observes there are twenty several Opinions concerning Justification, all drawn
from the Scriptures, by the men only of the Augustan confession. There are
sixteen several Opinions concerning Original sin; and as many Definitions of
the Sacraments as there are Sects of men that disagree about them. Lastly, He
concludes Number. 8. since those ordinary means of Expounding Scripture as
searching the Originals, Conference of places, Parity of Reason, and Analogy of
Faith, are all dubious, uncertain, and very fallible: He that is the wisest,
and by consequence the likelyest to Expound truest in all probability of
Reason, will be very far from confidence; because every one of these, and many
more are like so many degrees of Improbability and uncertainty, all depressing
our certainty of finding out truth in such Mysteries, and amidst so many
Difficulties.

Remark well all this discourse from so great a Protestant Doctor, finding no
certainty of the true sense of Scripture, by all the means of Interpretation,
and reflect with all a little in how hard a condition Protestants stand,
admitting no Infallible visible Judge in Controversy, but boldly undertaking to
decide all that which is controverted by sole Scripture, Explained by such
fallible means, and yet more fallible men. It is but a Labyrinth of windings
and turnings to pass from Scripture as clear in words, to conferring of places,
and deducing consequences, after Prayer used, and diligent search made, with a
well disposed mind, then to the inward motion, or the private Spirit, against
which the Prophets and Apostles so generally exclaim, Ezekiel in his 13.
Chapter, woe be to the foolish Prophets, who follow their own Spirit. S. Peter
in his 2 Epistle Chap. 1. No Prophecy of Scripture is of Private
Interpretation. Neither is the question here, what is inwardly required in
every private man to believe Scripture (but what is the external, visible, and
infallible Rule of Faith) for that is out of all doubt with us. Faith is a
supernatural and infused virtue, to which the pious motion in the will is no
less requisite, then the Supernatural light in the understanding to assent to
what is revealed by God. But seeing neither this light nor pious motions as
they are supernatural, and incline only to believe a revealed truth, do
manifest themselves to be such: Therefore many thousands even well disposed
persons, and who seek God in the sincerity of their hearts, oftentimes persuade
themselves (till they be better instructed) they believe such a thing as a
revealed truth by God, which is a condemned Error by him. And this none can
deny, who will not maliciously condemn a world of zealous Ignorants, yea some
even most learned and holy Fathers, who with St. Cyprian in the Point of
Rebaptization, have believed an Error for a revealed Truth, before it was
clearly decided by the Church.

However, whether it be this, or something else M. Menzeis calls a well
disposed mind; others the Spirit, or the private spirit, the Spirit of the
Righteous man, and so forth; I say, it cannot be either with the holy
Scripture, or alone, the Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversy. 1. Because
none without some Particular help can be Infallibly assured of this Interior
Motion, Affection, or Spirit, whether it be Natural, or Supernatural, from God
or the Devil, the Spirit of Darkness or Light, now no man, as M. Field
confesses, L. 4. C. 7. Proves any thing is, or may be doubted of, by that
which is as much to be doubted of as it self. 2. We are counseled in the 2
Epistle of St. John Chapter 4. Not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits
if they be of God: But if the Spirits must be brought to the Touchstone of
Trial, if they must be judged and approved by some other well known and
undoubted Authority, they are not the sole Rule and Supreme Judge of Faith and
Controversy: Because this Spirit is secret and hidden, our Faith public and
evidently credible; this Spirit particular, our Faith Catholic or Universal;
this Spirit the gift of every particular man, our Faith subject to no private
censure. Wherefore M. Hooker Eccl. Pol. L. 1. Sect. 14. and Whitaker against
Stapleton C. 2. C. 4. Ingeniously grant, that the outward Letter of Scripture,
sealed with the inward and private Spirit, is not a sufficient Warrant for
every particular man to receive or reject Scripture Books, but that the public
Authority of Gods Church, is necessarily required. Whence I say further with S.
Augustine l. Contr. Ep* fund. c. 5. That Authority which we obey and believe,
testifying the Books of the holy Ghospel, the same must we believe, witnessing
this to be the sense of the Ghospel, that is not the private Spirit, but the
same Authority of the Church. Thirdly, This private Spirit is so far from being
the Judge of controversy upon any pretense of adhering to Scripture, either as
clear in it self, or explained by it, that instead of compounding debates and
keeping unity (the chief Office of this Judge) it is the very Root of
Dissension, and Fountain of Heresies and Schisms, for as by experience we see
it to be different in diverse persons, so as the Bell to fools, it speaks as
they fancy, it inclines as they are affected, it points out the Object
according to the Color which is in the eye; It is like a false light which
makes the Aspect of best and fairest Figures vary; It is often a blind zeal, or
a prejudicate Opinion, which hinders to see what is clear in Scripture, as S.
Augustine l. 3. de Doctr. C. 10. well Remarks, If the Prejudice, says he, of
any Erroneous Opinion preoccupate the mind, whatsoever the Scripture has to
the contrary, men take it to be a Figurative Speech. So that it furnishes to
every Sectary reading Scripture, his own Spectacles, in conferring places, his
own Rule of proportions: His private Weights to ponder Reasons* his particular
Forge to coin Opinions, his secret Touchstone to try Doctrines, his own Reed
to measure the Temple, Sanctuary and Altar: Makes him his own high Priest,
Pastor, and Judge, setting up within himself a Supreme Judicatory, giving ever
sentence in his favor, and censuring all the world beside; So that none
standing to this Rule, can be compelled to the unity of the Church, and yet
none can be accounted Heretics, as the learned Suares, l. 1. de defi. fid. C.
11. most judiciously remarketh, if we take Scripture as men read, who think
themselves well disposed, or Expounded by it self according to the Dictamen of
the private Spirit, for ground, for who can swarve from Scripture as clear,
according to his particular Judgment and Spirit, which he even esteems to be
the Spirit of God.

Scripture therefore cannot be Judge of Controversy, as M. Menzeis will have
it. 1. By reason the sentence of this Judge must breed a certain and Infallible
assurance of all that can come in doubt, which Scripture cannot do. It being
infallible indeed in it self, but not to us, who may doubt if such a Book be
Canonical, such a Copy conform to the Original, such a Translation Authentic,
such a place clear, such a sense genuine.

2. The Judge of Controversy ought to give a clear sentence, which the learned
and unlearned may equally understand, and as the Law, says the Apostle, is not
for the just, but the unjust, so the Judge of Controversy is not only for the
well disposed, but more in some manner for others, and especially the unlearned
and unstable, who according to St. Peter, Wrest the Scriptures to their own
damnation; Yea the most learned amongst the Fathers, as S. Basil, and S.
Gregory Nazianzen, after much pains in the study of Scripture, as testifies
Ruffinus l. 11. Hist. C. 9. refuse to interpret them, but according to the Rule
and Uniform consent of their Forefathers, not relying on all the means of
Interpretation M. Menzeis prescribes; and they had reason, the Scripture being
the Book S. John describes to be clasped with seven Seals, Apoc. 5. v. 16.
which Ezekiel terms the enrolled volume, written within and without. S.
Ambrose Ep. 44. A Sea containing most profound Senses of Prophetical Riddles.
S. Augustine l. 2. de doctrina. Christ. C. 6. hard in the Style, Discourse,
Places, as well as in the Subject and Matter: which makes him cry out, l. 12.
Confess. c. 14. O the wonderful depth of thy speeches, O the wonderful depth;
S. Hierome Ep. 13. C. 4. Says the Text of Scripture has a Shell to be broken,
before that we can taste the sweetness of the Kernel: and Vincentius Lyrinensis,
C. 2. That all take not holy Scripture by reason of its deepness in one and the
same sense, but some interpret one way, some another, so that there may seem to
be picked out as many senses as men; for Novatus does Expound one way, and
Sabellius another, otherwise Donatus, otherwise Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius,
otherwise Photinus, Apollinaris, and other Heretics with them: therefore very
necessary it is for the manifold turnings and by-ways of Errors, that the Line
of Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation be levelled according to the
Square of the Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense, whereof Tertullian de
Praescript. gives this reason, for that the sense adulterated, is alike
perilous as the Style corrupted. But what danger of this, says M. Menzeis if
Scripture be clear, men cannot mistake (if not wilfully blinded) what is so*
Could not the Lawmakers speak as clear as the Judge? Answer, we have seen there
is nothing almost in Scripture, but has been, and so may be mistaken: Therefore
the necessity of a Judge, however the Law speak clear, has been acknowledged by
the greatest men, and best wits in the world; Aristotle in the first Book of
his Morals, and fourth of his Politics, And Plato in his Republic, prefers
good Judges even to best Laws: Judges have been ever established by the Laws in
all Nations, as by Scripture, in the Church of God; and the necessity of one to
keep concord and unity, is partly grounded on the nature of most clear Words
and Sentences, which may be taken according to the Letter or Sense, Properly or
Figuratively, Morally, or Mystically, and so forth: Partly on the diversity of
Opinions, men commonly judging as they are affected, and diversely of one and
the same thing as their understandings, inclinations, or interests leads them.
His Majesty's Secretary of State may write no doubt, as clear as the Lords of
Council and Session speak, yet his Letters are directed to them in most
businesses of weight, least others should take them otherwise then written, or
wrest them to their own ends; even so is it of Scripture written by the
Prophets, and Evangelists, and delivered to the Pastors and Doctors of the
Church.

Whence Catholic Romans build their Belief upon Scripture, not taken as they
fancy, but Explained by Apostolical Tradition conserved in the Church, and the
unanimous consent of the Fathers, and if any doubt arise of both these, on the
General Definition and Decision of the present Catholic Church.

Protestants, as M. Menzeis holds out, ground their Faith on Scripture, which
they have corrected, or rather corrupted, as clear in it self, or made clear by
diligent reading and conferring of places with prayers, and (as they imagine) a
well disposed mind, that is a Prejudicate Opinion that their own Tenets are
right.

Now let any man judge, which of these two is most conform to Scripture it self
in both Testaments, to the practice of the Church in all ages; to the consent
of Fathers above cited, and Reason. For first, This the Protestant way would
seem vain, arrogant and presumptuous, in so far as that a man who follows it,
must be so confident of himself, that if he fancy Scripture to be clear for
such a Tenet, were all the Christian World in a contrary judgment, yea had all
Christians been so from the time of the Apostles, yet must he stand to his
fancy grounded upon clear Scripture, as he thinks; So that no persuasion can
remove him from it, for that it is a point of his Faith, but for a man to be so
peremptorily resolute in the sense he has found in Scripture by his private
reading, is very presumptuous, I say, for wherein can he ground prudently such
a strong assent, as is required in Divine Faith, which ought to be above all
can be said against it. Shall it be on the clearness of the words? conference
of places? on his skill in Tongues? on his weighing the precedent and
consequent places? or on the assistance of the Spirit given to him? If so, is
it not intolerable pride and presumption in any one man, to think that no
other was ever so clear sighted, or quick witted, to see and understand in
Scripture what is clear? no other in such a multitude of Doctors and Fathers,
so well versed in the Original Languages, so circumspect to confer places, so
exact to weigh Circumstances, so acute to draw Consequences, in fine, so well
disposed to find the Truth, so fervent in Prayer, so particularly enlightened,
directed, and assisted by the Spirit of God? What is whymsical, Phanatick, and
Foolish, if this be not? wherefore Doctor Field ashamed any should think this
to be Protestant Doctrine, says, None of their Divines teach the Scriptures to
be so clear, that they may be certainly understood by reading and conferring of
places. For the Rule of Faith says he, in his Appendix 2. p. p. 12. is Doctrine
descending by Tradition from the Apostles, according to which the Scriptures
are to be Expounded. And in his fourth Book C. 14. The Rule of Faith is the
consenting judgment of them that went before us, the Rule without which we
cannot know the meaning of the things that are in Scriptures, for who shall be
able to understand them, but he that is settled in these things which the
Apostles presupposed in their delivery of Scripture. Afterward in the 15. Chap.
having said, There is no question but there be many obscurities in Scripture.
And in the 18. Chapter having set down many senses of Scriptures, in the 19. he
writes thus, We confess that neither conference of places, nor consideration of
what follows, or goes before, nor looking into Originals, are of any force,
unless we find the things which we conceive to be understood and meant in the
places interpreted to be consonant to the Rule of Faith, (that is, Tradition
conserved in the Church) neither is there any of our Divines that ever taught
otherwise. Where you see by Doctor Field, M. Menzeis is discarded from being a
Protestant Divine; the Scripture however clear, is declared to be no Rule or
Ground of Faith, but according to the sense of them that went before us; as all
other means besides Tradition in his 16. Chapter are propounded to be but probable
Conjectures, and not infallible grounds. And this most rationally, for what
private man, as I have said, can assure himself, that either the finding out
the true sense of Scripture, as to him, is tied to the means of Interpretation
M. Menzeis sets down, or that he makes a right use of all these means? For as
the same Dr. Field judiciously remarks, and ingenuously grants with S.
Augustine, contra. Ep. Fundam. and de Util. cred. few men have leisure, fewer
strength of understanding to examine the particular Controversies, so many, and
so intricate in these our days: and that the way to satisfy their Consciences
in this most important affair, is to find out the true Church, and rest in her
judgment. Ad sapientiam, says S. Augustine, in Ecclesia Spirituales pauci
perveniunt; caeteram vero turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi
simplicitas tutissimam facit; that is, few, even Spiritual ones in the Church
attain to perfect knowledge, the rest being made most sure, not by their
quickness in understanding, but by their simplicity in believing.

2. This the Protestants way is but a trifling loosing of time, never having
been found able to settle debates amongst themselves, as witness 60. Synods
holden in 60. years time, says Rescius l. de Atheismo, in which all taking
Scripture for their ground, without any Infallible Judge, did so little agree,
that they parted not so much as good friends. Neque dantes dextras
fraternitatis aut humanitatis. How many Examples of this amongst Lutherans, and
Calvinists, Prelaticks, and Presbyterians, and even in our confessions of
Faith, and Covenant among our selves? I know M. Menzeis Answer will be, their
Dissentions are not in Fundamentals, (of these I shall speak presently in the
next Section) only here I ask, why then so great cruelty, so much blood, so
many Excommunications and Curses? If they did not think them so, who moved such
troubles, they were either most cruel, or mad, as Tertullian, l. de praescr.
most truly says, in Disputing out of Texts of Scripture (that is as every man
reads and understands) there is no other good got but either to make a man sick
or mad. It is not so in the Catholic Church, what ever M. Menzeis says of
Jesuits and Dominicans, neither party having ever contested in any thing, that
was once decided by the Church.

3. The Protestants way is Preposterous, Religion being Established before the
Scriptures, and they only written to true believers, whence Tertullian
prescribing against all Heretics, says, We do not admit them to dispute from
Scripture, till first they can show who their Ancestors were; from whom, by
whom, when and to whom, the form of Christian Religion was delivered. Whereupon
to conclude all this, I ask at M. Menzeis, is every particular man amongst
Protestants infallibly assured by Scripture of what he believes? If so, why not
then Catholics, and all the Catholic Church? they receive the Scriptures with
Protestants, yea Protestants only from them: their Churchmen read the
Scriptures with as great diligence, they be in a far greater number, they have
ten for one who have Expouded it; they apply no less all the means for a right
Interpretation, they study the Originals, confer Places, pray many hours both
day and night, have no Wives, Children, or Family to divert them, most of them
have renounced all pretense to Riches, Honors, and all Temporal Interests,
wherewith they might be Biased any wise in what they profess: The
extraordinary and unparallelled pains they take in the most Barren, Savage, and
cruel nations of the Earth, for their conversion to Christianity would seem
sufficient to evidence both the good disposition of their minds, and the
sincere intention of their hearts, beyond the Preachers, of whatsoever Sect:
Their manifold Writings witness enough the solidity and quickness of their
wits; and even their Wonders and Mracles in latter ages, in all most Authentic
Records of History, would make believe they want not the assistance of the the
Spirit, yea, and of the power of God; and yet that we should think that they
are blinded, Protestants see clear; they mistake Scripture, Protestants take it
aright; they are misled by the Spirit of Error, Protestants directed by the
Spirit of Truth; what Reason, Proof, or Probability for this? But why do
Protestants pretend it is so? Forsooth chiefly, because they acknowledge one
high Bishop in the whole Church, as Protestants a primate in each Kingdom, with
the Negative voice to silence all private sowers of Dissension, and keep unity;
because they take the Canons and Rules of their Faith from Scripture explained
in general Councils, and the Unanimous consent of the Church and Fathers, and
not by private Reading; because in a word they reverence Public Authority
established by God in his Church, above particular Opinions and Conceits. Why
then should Scripture be called a Ground to Protestants, who neither did
receive it from Christ and his Apostles (as all Historians, and Chronologues
marking the rise of Protestancy in Luther his days do evidence) nor have it
incorrupt, as their own Doctors, and Ghospellers do acknowledge: Nor take it in
the true sense upon public Authority, but as they fancy upon private Reading,
and Interpretation against the Apostle? And not rather to Catholics, who
having received the Scriptures from Christ and his Apostles, as the Word of
God, left to his Church, which she is bound to have an Eye to in all her
Decisions, Statutes, and Laws; so that none of them be Repugnant to it in the
least, neither by adding or pairing in Words or Sense, but all fully consonant
and conform to both: In acknowledgement whereof, in all her General Councils,
she places it above Pope, Prelates, Pastors, who in all the search they make
into former Councels, Fathers, Schoolmen, Tradition or practice of the Church,
intend nothing else (generally speaking) then to find out by all possible
diligence, the true sense and meaning of what is taught us in General and
Particular Terms in the Written Word. Yet Protestants with all Heretics most
vainly bragg of Scripture as their Ground, and Catholics be calumniated to
abandon it; as if Loyal Subjects did less rely on the Acts of Parliament, and
fun^^mental Laws, who receive them, their Sentence, and meaning from the lawful
Judges established in the Kingdom; then Outlaws and Rebels pretending to adhere
immediately to them, as they themselves read, Think them clear, or expound.

SECT. V.
Scripture however clear in Fundamentals, clearly mistaken by Protestants, and
clearly making against them.

LEt us come at last to the Fundamental Points of the Protestant Religion,
which Mr. Menzeis holds out to be clear in Scripture. Whereupon his Adversary
demands, what things he esteems Fundamental? He Answers, to ask a Catalogue of
Fundamentals, is to ask how to make a Coat to the Moon in all her changes. And
this his quick Reply he borrows, from a learned Divine, as he calls him, (Mr.
Chillingworth is the man, as I conceive, for he has the same words, a mere
Sceptick in Religion, and who takes away all certainty in Faith) and to say
true, the Protestant Religion is so Obnoxious to Reformations, Alterations,
Innovations, that it is most fitly compared by him to the Moon in all her
changes. Yea Protestants are of so different Opinions, even in what they call
Fundamentals, that scarce two set down the same, Perkins in Cath. Reform. p.
407. and in his Exposition of the Creed, p. 503. will have all Fundamentals
included in the Apostles Creed. Duplessis in his Treatise of the Church, C. 5.
in the Decalogue. Du Moulin, after Melancton in C. 4. Matt. the Creed and
Decalogue. Luther Tom. 7. in Enchir. f. 118. in the Creed, Decalogue, and Lords
Prayer. Whitaker Contr. 1. q. 4. p. 340. in the Creed, Lords Prayer, and
Sacraments. Sadeel Praef. Resp. ad Turr. to believe Christ crucified, and the
Pope to be Antichrist. Chillingworth in his Treatise Entitled, the Religion of
Protestants a safe way to Salvation, p. 408. n. 35. says plainly, Protestants
do not agree, touching what Points are Fundamental, and page 166, we know not
precisely, just how much is Funtamental: Again page 23. he that will go about
to distinguish what was written, because it was profitable, from what was
written, because necessary, shall find an intricate business of it, and almost
impossible, that he should be certain, he has done it, when he has done it.
Wherefore he says in the same page, n. 27. that Protestants give not a
Catalogue of Fundamentals, it is not from Tergiversation, but from Wisdom and
Necessity, and when they had done it, it had been to no purpose, there being,
as matters now stand, as great necessity of believing those Truths of
Scripture, which are not Fundamental, as those that are. And yet other
Protestants with M. Menzeis, harp upon nothing more then the Distinction of
Fundamentals from not Fundamentals, as if those were necessarily believed,
these not. I know in other places of the same Treatise, this Author contradicts
himself, which shows not only Protestants disagree in Fundamentals, one from
another, but even the same man from himself; so well grounded they are in these
their Fundamentals and Grounds, wherein, notwithstanding their monstrous
Divisions, they vainly bragg to agree. But how can it be discerned, whether all
Protestants, or a few agree in Fundamentals, unless it be precisely known, what
and how many Fundamentals there be? Potter, in fine, extends the number of
Fundamentals beyond all his Brethren have said; his words are, page 24. it is
Fundamental to a Christians Faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he
believe all revealed Truths of God, whereof he may be convinced they are of
God. And does not this diversity of Opinions equal the changes of the Moon? Or
is not all this a most clear and manifest Demonstration, however Scripture be
clear in Fundamentals (which now I do not dispute) at least it is not so even
to the Learned and most sharp sighted Protestants, who so little agree in
that Point, that scarce two are of the same Judgment and Mind. If others did
thus mistake what is perspicuous in Scripture, Mr. Menzeis would presently tell
us, no wonder they do so, by reason of their evil disposed intellect. But that
Protestants, and these not of the Vulgar sort, but even the Pillars of their
Religion, and Defenders of their Faith, by Volumes in Print, should not see
what in Scripture is most clear, but so vary and divide in such a multiplicity
of Opinions, and yet maintain Scripture in these same things, wehrein they so
vary, is clear, what a wonderful thing is this? Or who I pray you, can trust
men, both at once saying Scripture is clear in Fundamentals, and yet setting
down the same Fundamentals diversely? By this plainly confessing either their
own blindness, and so that they are not good Guides, nor to be believed, when
they speak of what in Scripture is clear, or else that their Doctrine in this
is false.

What M. Menzeis holds Fundamental, so great a secret it is, that neither will
he tell us himself, nor can any other know it, he having so often changed
House, and built upon diverse Grounds. Yet that he should not seem to say
nothing, a mark he gives us, to know what in Scripture is Fundamental, to wit,
if we find it commanded to be believed by all, or a Character of necessity to
be put upon it.

Whereupon I reflect first M. Menzeis Doctrine is here very Incoherent, for
both he teaches, it is commanded in Scripture all men believe Fundamentals, as
things absolutely necessary to salvation; and nevertheless the Catalogue of
these same things, he will have impossible, as a Coat to the Moon. Would not
this argue he is ignorant himself, of what all should know and believe?
Otherwise surely, he should never have judged this Catalogue impossible, it
being easy to a man to call to memory what he knows, yea we know no more then
we can call to memory, says the Roman Orator, Tantum scimus, quantum memoria
tenemus.

Secondly, I reflect, that rejecting the Infallible Authority of the Church,
teaching every particular person what is Fundamental, and what we must
necessarily know, and explicitly believe to attain salvation; and pretending
all this is clear, and may be found, by the marks he has given in Scripture; he
remains obliged to a very hard task. 1. To prove in General, from evident and
clear Scripture, that all things necessary to be believed are clear and evident
in Scripture. Let him answer then, First where he reads this, and to the
Fathers teaching the contrary as we shall see below. 2. To prove every
Fundamental Point in particular immediately, and clearly from Scripture: And
this so, that the words cannot be taken obviously and literally in any other
sense. For if they can be so taken, then I have no Infallible Evidence but they
should be so taken, without some Infallible Guide, telling me they should not
be so taken in the place alleged. As for example, these words, This is my
Body, undoubtedly may at least signify, and that most Obviously and
Literally, that Christ's Body is really in the Sacrament, as when I say, this
is a piece of Gold, this a piece of Silver, these words literally signify
real Gold and Silver: Wherefore, if I will take the words Figuratively, as
clearly so spoken in Scripture, some other place of Scripture must be brought,
or some other Infallible Authority, telling me this in express words, otherwise
I cannot have that certainty of it, which is required in Divine Faith. 3.
Amongst all the clear places in Scripture, to pick out the Fundamental ones,
how hard is it for every one? Not to say Morally impossible, M. Menzeis himself
granting he cannot do it, more then make a Coat to the Moon. For by this means
all should be obliged to know all Texts of Scripture, and then to examine
diligently each one, first, whether it be evident or obscure, least it should
appear upon examination to be evident, which at the first sight did not seem
so. And secondly, Whether it be generally commanded, and have a Character of
necessity to be believed by all, for then according to M. Menzeis Rule, I know
it to be a Fundamental, but Chillingworth, his learned Divine, tells him a
little above, to distinguish what was written because it was profitable, from
what was written, because necessary, is an intricate piece of business. S. Paul
to the Heb. 2. C. 6. V. requires no more as necessary (as would seem) then that
he who comes to God, believe, he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who
diligently seek him. S. John 3. Chapter 6. says, he that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life; the Prophet Royal, that all who fear the Lord are blessed;
and many other such passages there be in Scripture, which might make a ^^n
think one thing or two at most were necessary to Salvation, as sometimes the
believing of one Point, sometimes the doing of one good action; Heaven is
promised to Prayer in one place, full Remission of sins to Alms deeds in
another, etc. and yet who will say either of these two is sufficient for
working a man's Salvation? Add to all this, I find in Scripture, If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments, S. Matthew. 19. Yet Protestants teach
that to be impossible, and consequenly this Fundamental must lead all to
despair, as that other make all to presume; it being a Fundamental again
amongst Protestants, that every man should believe he is one of the Elect,
which being an Article of his Faith, may reasonably secure him, and yet all not
being of this number, some from this Fundamental must or should at least
presumptuously believe a lie. Further the eating of blood and strangled meat,
is generally forbidden by the Apostles, to all the Gentiles converted to the
Christian Faith, as it was before to the Jews, whence I infer; what is
generally commanded to all, should generally be believed by all; and so if M.
Menzeis Rule be good, this must come in amongst the Fundamentals of the
Protestant Religion; which if it be so in the Pulpit I know not, but at Table I
am sure it is not. A hundred such absurdities follow, upon seeking Fundamentals
in Scripture, by these deceiving signs and uncertain marks M. Menzeis gives
us, without any Infallible Guide.

2. It is to be remarked, that Protestants neither agree in setting down
Fundamentals, nor cannot give a precise Catalogue of Points of Faith, they
think to be Fundamental, as was required of M. Menzies; but that also they
mistake the very Notion and name: A Fundamental verity in the Christian
Religion, being either that which makes us believe all the rest, or without the
express knowledge and belief whereof, none can be saved. Now the Question
amongst us, is not about this; but whether a Man may either suspend his assent,
or positively dissent, from lesser things then these, when they are revealed by
God, and propounded to him by the same Authority with the former. For then say
Catholics he is equally obliged to believe them, by reason of the form^^
Object, which is Divine Revelation, and can in nothing deceive, or should in
any thing be called in question, though in respect of the Material Object or
thing revealed, we be not so obliged to know it. For there is nothing less or
more certain when God speaks, he being the first verity, yea verity it self,
who delivers all he says with one and the same Infinite Certainty, where no
degrees, of more or less certitude can have place.

Protestants it would seem, as they take Fundamentals, will not be tied to
this, whence they receive in communion with them, and as the true Members of
their Church, some who hold most contrary Tenets, as M. Menzeis, the Waldenses,
Wickliffians, Hussists, who in his seventh Paper grants the whole body of the
Church collectively taken, cannot err in Essentials or Fundamentals, yet so as
that in some whole ages the Integrals may be vitiated. But if he understand by
Integrals lesser Points of Faith, as to their Object and Matter, yet equally
revealed by God, and propounded by his Church to us, with chief Mysteries,
(wherein the Protestants mistake, and Error in their Distinction of
Fundamentals and Integrals consists) his Assertion is both Erroneous and
Heretical, because an Act of Faith grounded on the Motive of Gods Infinite and
infallible Veracity in revealing, is a Vertual and Implicit Belief of all he
has revealed, so that the true Belief of one Article, implies a belief of all.
Wherefore S. Athanasius says in his Creed, whosoever does not hold the
Catholic Faith whole and inviolate, he shall perish for ever. And S. Hierome
l. 3. contr. Ruff. for one word or two contrary to the Faith, many Heretics
have been cast out of the Church. Yea, S. Gregory Naz. tract. de fide, says,
nothing can be more dangerous then those Heretics, who when they run through
all things uprightly, yet with one word, as with a drop of poison corrupts the
true and sincere Faith of our Lord, and of Apostolical Tradition. S. Basil as
Theodoret reports l. 4. Hist. c. 6. being desired to relent a little to the
time, Answered, That such as were instructed in the Divine Doctrine, do not
suffer any Syllable to be corrupt, but for its defense if need require,
willingly embrace any kind of death. And the Church in her Public Decrees of
General Councils strikes with the Thunder bolt of Gods Curse and
Excommunication all such as refuse to believe any one Point decided to be of
Faith; which she could not justly do, if every Article she declares were not
necessarily believed, when known to be decided by her. So does the Church of
England Excommunicate all who hold any thing contrary to the 39. Articles,
though they judge them not all Fundamental. As the Athenians punished without
remission the least word against the received opinion of their Gods, and the
Jews (says Joseph contra Appion.) the least transgression of the Law. So God
threatens that he shall be blotted out of the Book of Life, who ever shall
deminish any word of the Revelation, Apoc. 22. v. 19. Yet Luther rejecting
whole Epistles of Scripture, in M. Menzeis Book is called a holy man; but so
speaks not Luther of him denying the Real Presence, who in his Book against
the Sacramentarians, says plainly, They believe in God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost in vain, all these things avail them nothing, for as much as they
deny, this Article of the Real Presence, and attach him of falsehood, who said
of the Sacrament, This is my Body. And he had reason, for St. Thomas 2.2. q. 5.
a 3. with other Divines teach he has no Spiritual Faith, who believes not
every thing little or great, Fundamental or not, Proposed to him by the same
Authority. Whereupon they infer, that no Sectary upon his own choice adhering
to this or that, believes any thing. So Tertullian, l. de praesc. speaking
against Valentine, says, some things of the Law and Prophets he approves, some
things not, that is, difalloweth all, whilst he disproveth some.

3. From all this appears, how idly this distinction of fundamntals, and
not fundamentals in the Protestans sense was brought in by them, it serving to
no other purpose, then to palliate their divisions at present, and deceive
Ignorants in the pretended succession, they claim to in old condemned
Heretics, whose Errors they will have to be no Fundamentals. As M. Menzeis
taking Hierome of Prague, John Huss, Wickcliff, the Waldenses, and Grecians,
for true Protestants, before Luther, to make up an imaginary Succession in the
Protestant Church: which to do with any apparent show of Truth. 1. He should
prove those Sects to have been the Catholic Church spread through the whole
world, and owned as such by the Fathers of those times. 2. Justify their
Doctrine, which we find partly in their own Writings, partly in the most
Authentic Records of the Ages wherein they lived, to have been in many things
most false, erroneous, and unchristian. 3. Their succession from the Apostles
times, finding their Bishops and Pastors in the Registers of the Church History
or Fathers. Neither will he make this good by the Authority of Friar Reiner,
who speaking of the Waldenses, whom he names Lionists, says at most (even as
Illiricus quotes his words) some affirm they have been from the time of Pope
Sylvester, others from the days of the Apostles. (M. Menzeis to make the
Argument stronger, will have Friar Reiner to say absolutely they were from the
time of the Apostles, with his ordinary ingenuity*) but what I pray you
concludes he from this? Those who said so, being Lionists themselves, as
witnesses Pili^hdorphius. So a little before Waldo, there arose Heretics who
falsely bragged of the same, even as after them Protestants do now. But if you
or they either sir, were in all ages from the Apostles, tell us the Authors in
every age who marked the succession of your Pastors, where lived your people,
etc. and then refute the great number of learned Writers, who lived when such
Sects did start up in a sudden, as a Mushrome in a night, marking their Rise,
and noting their Errors, which certainly they had never done, if such Doctrine
had been professed before, as that of the true and visible Church.

But to speak a word in particular of every one of those Sects; with what
ignorance and falsehood M. Menzeis calls them true Protestants, you shall
presently see. And first in John Huss, to whose name, I am sure, he has a more
just claim then to his Religion, if we trust all the most Authentic Records of
Huss his Doctrine.

I cite not for this the Juridick Acts of the Council at Constance, because
Popish; not Father Gordon of Huntley, no less eminent for his Learning then
Birth, because a Jesuit, though living in Prague in Boheme, where Hussits most
abound, and having made most diligent enquiry of their Tenants, he found as he
witnesses, Cont. 3. de Euch. c. 17. they did hold Invocation of Saints, Prayer
for the dead, the Fastings and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church with free
will, confession of Sins, seven Sacraments, etc. But I hope he will trust Fox,
a most fiery Protestant speaking thus upon the 2. Chapter of the Revelation. What
did Huss at any time teach or defend in the Council, wherein he did not seem
superstitiously to consent with the Papists? what did the Popish Faith decree
concerning Transubstantiation; which he likewise with the Papists did not
confirm? who celebrated Mass more Religiously then he? or more Religiously
observed the Vows of Priestly Chastity? Concerning Free Will, Predestination,
informed Faith, (that is without Charity) the cause of Justification, and merit
of good Works, what other thing did he hold, then is taught at Rome? All this
he, and more in his Monuments, that he did acknowledge seven Sacraments* and
the Popes Supremacy, p. 216. and 227. And if he should as yet disown Fox as a
private Writer, yet must he trust Luther as a man extraordinarily sent by God
to Reform the Church, and the 14. Apostle: The Papists burned Huss, says he,
(Colloq. Germ. C. de Antich*) when as yet he departed not a fingers breadth
from the Papacy, for he taught the same which the Papists do, only he found
fault with their Vices, against the Pope he did nothing. To the same purpose
Luther has much more, Tom. 2. in Assert. art. 30. and Tom. 3. in Ps. 2. But in
fine, should not Huss himself be trusted better then any, his works are extant,
and perusing them, you shall find he did hold seven Sacraments upon the fifth
of S. James; Transubstantiation in his Book of the Lords Supper, Chapter 2. and 3.
the Sacrifice of the Mass in his Sermon of Funerals; Purgatory and Prayers for
the Dead in the same place, confession of sins to a Priest in his Treatise of
penance, invocation of Saints in his Epistles 22.30.35. Veneration of Relics
upon Ps. 115. yea in his question of believing, the Popes Supremacy as to his
office, dignity and power: though with this Caveat, common to him with Wicliff,
that ecclesiastical dignity, as well as Civil, was grounded on Inherent
Justice, and so lost by Mortal Sin, which neither Catholics nor Protestants do
teach: Nevertheless M. Menzeis is not ashamed to own Huss for a Protestant, so
constant is he in professing his Fundamentals, which he will have to be in
Scripture so clear. I insist not so much on the rest, yet to say a little of
every one. Of Hierome of Prague; Fox. page 585. relates whatever was his
Opinion in other things, yet stood he constantly in defense of the real
Presence, and Transubstantiation, saying, he did give more credit to S.
Augustine, and other Doctors of the Church (who affirmed the same) then to any
that denied it. Wikcliff again M. Menzeis is not ashamed to call a Protestant,
who in his own Writings so expressly holds against them. 1. Worship of Images in
his 9. Chapter of the Eucharist, Images, says he, we adore purely as signs, but God
we must adore with all our power: It is therefore granted, that Relics,
Images, and the Sacraments be with prudence to be adored. He did also hold
Invocation of Saints in his Sermon of the Assumption into Heaven of our blessed
Lady, Auricular confession on the 5. Chapter of James, seven Sacraments in his
Postscript on the first Ep. and 1. Chapter to the Corinths. Wherefore Melancton Ep.
ad Micon. thus censures him, I have read Wickliff and found in him many Errors,
he never held nor understood Justice of Faith, which is the Protestants main
Fundamental. With the same confidence M. Menzeis calls the Waldenses
Protestants, who held the Real Presence, that the Apostles were but Laymen,
that all Magistrates fall from their Dignity by mortal sin, that it is not
lawful to swear in any case, etc. as witnesses Illyricus in Catal. Wald.
Confess. Bohem. etc. And with these the Grecians upon a private Letter sent (as
he pretends) by a Patriarch to the Archbishop of Canterbury; though all who
ever conversed with Grecians know, they say daily Mass, hold
Transubstantiation, seven Sacraments, Prayer to the Saints, and for the dead,
etc. as all may see in the censure of the Oriental or Grecian Church; and deny
the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, and consequently make no
distinction betwixt these two Persons in the Godhead. But it is enough to M.
Menzeis it seems, that they disown the Pope, to be called Protestants, and so
Turks and Tartars may come in with them. Whence I leave to judge how constant a
Protestant M. Menzeis is, owning such Doctors and Doctrine, and what Credit
again he deserves, after so many clear Testimonies, and that even of learned
Protestants, and the very writings of the persons in question, convincing him
of most notorious falsehood and Error.

The most ancient and holy Fathers, as S. Ireneus Tertullian, Philastrius, S.
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, Theodoret, S. John Damascen, and others, who have
written a Catalogue of Heresies, did not certainly distinguish Fundamentals and
Integrals amongst Divine Truths, sufficiently propounded, as Protestants do,
when they condemned many lesser things as Heresies, and consequently damnable
Errors, then what they think to have no repugnancy with Fundamentals and
essentials in the Doctrine of the true Church; as in the Pelagians, Novatians,
Donatists, Monothelits, who all embraced the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion of
Christ, etc. S. Epiphanius, Here Is. 75. and S. Augustine, l. de here is. C. 33.
condemn the Arians for denying the Fasts commanded by the Church, the first
remarking, they were accustomed to eat flesh on Fridays, and in the Lent, yea
chiefly in the holy Week wherein Christ died. S. Hierome in his 2. book against
Jovinian condemns him, for saying Fastings, and all other Exercises of good
works, were not meritorious: S. Augustine in his Book of Heresies, c. 54.
condemns the Eunomians for teaching no sin could hurt a man, if so he had but
only Faith* S. Epiphanius haeres. 64. all who denied free will: S. Hierome,
Vigilantius, in his Book against him for affirming the Relics of the Saints
ought not to be reverenced: the same S. Hierome against Jovinian with S.
Augustine in his Book of Heresies, C. 82. condemn him, for holding Wedlock,
equal in dignity and merit to virginity. S. Augustine again l. Contr. Julian.
C. 2. the Pelagians for teaching the Children of the Faithful Parents did not
need Baptism, but were born holy, and in his 1. Book 2. C. and last against
Maximus, the Arians for not receiving Traditions. Now let M. Menzeis choose
either to acknowledge all these, and many such like condemned Heresies by the
Fathers to be no Fundamentals, and consequently that many other things then
these which Protestants call Fundamentals, are necessary to be believed under
the danger of incurring Heresy and E^ternal damnation: or owning them as such,
let him confess, Protestants Err even in Fundamentals with them, seeing all
here condemned is Protestant Doctrine, borrowed from those more ancient
Heretics, and condemned by the Fathers even then.

4. As to that he says all Fundamentals are clear in Scripture, and that
according to S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Irenaeus, S. Thomas of Aquine,
and Sixtus Senensis, holding what ever is obscure in one place, to be clear in
some other. I answer, very easily with a manifold distinction, 1. To such
eminent Doctors of the Church, as he cites, most Scriptures are clear I grant,
to all indifferently I deny. 2. To such as take the places of Scripture
commanding us to hear the Church; and hold fast the Traditions of the Apostles
conserved in her, as two main Fundamentals, for clearing all the rest, I grant,
to others I deny. 3. With Vincentius Lyrinensis c. 2. to such as level the Line
of Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, to the square of the
Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense I grant, to others I deny. 4. With Doctor
Field a Protestant in his 4. Book C. 14. to such as be first settled in those
things which the Apostles presupposed in their delivery of Scriptures, I grant,
to others I deny. Neither are these my Distinctions any wise to shift the
Argument, which makes nothing either against us, or for him. But to clear the
Fathers words in the very genuine sense they speak them. See S. Chrysostom his
meaning in his 14. Hom. on S. John. S. Augustines contra Cresconium. C. 33.
where he says, if any one fear to be deceived in this question, through its
obscurity, let him ask Council of the Church, which the holy Scriptures do
demonsrate without any ambiguity. That of S. Irenaeus in his 2. Book Chapter 47.
and more expressly in his 1. Book Chapter 49. S. Thomas his words, That what ever is
necessary to be believed under the Spiritual Sense, that some where is
manifestly declared by the Letter, as they do not specify to whom this
manifest declaration is made, so we grant it to the Church and her Doctors, for
to her all things are known, says St. Irenaeus in which is perfect Faith; as to
the Apostles it was given by our Savior Christ to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven,

5. But I would ask M. Menzeis did ever any of these Fathers receive the
Scriptures as the undoubted Word of God, otherwise then on the Churches
Authority? S. Augustine saying, I would not believe the Scriptures, if the
Authority of the Church did not move me to it, is no less clear for this, then
Scripture it self in Fundamentals. Or did ever any of them fancy to himself a
place of Scripture, as clear for any thing, the whole Church standing in a
contrary Judgment? For this is the only Point we debate with Protestants, and
clearly prove both by the Scriptures and Fathers against them.

6. However Scripture be clear in Fundamentals, in the sense I have given, that
is particularly, and in as many words, or generally, and as commanding us to
hear the Church, yet surely it does not set down all that is Fundamental in
express terms, if we trust the Fathers, whom M. Menzeis appeals to, as holding
Scripture clear in Fundamentals; or can all be so evidently deduced from
scripture, but by the Authority of the Church, that Heretics be silenced, and
Unity preserved in Faith. S. Chrysostom on 2 These. 2. says it is evident that
the Apostles did not deliver all things by Writing, but many things without,
and those be as worthy of credit as others. Which he could not have said, if
Fundamentals were only the infallible Truths, and they clearly revealed in
Scripture. S. Epiphanius, Here Is. 61. we must use Traditions, for the Scriptures
have not all things; yet no necessity of using Traditions, if all Fundamentals
were in Scripture, they only being necessary according to Protestants. S.
Augustine l. 5. de Bapt. Contr. Donat. Chapter 23. the custom of the Church in
baptizing Infants, is neither to be contemned, or any wise thought superfluous,
yet not to be believed if it were not an Apostolical Tradition. If this was not
in his Judgment, a Fundamental, hear himself again, l. 3. de Orig. Anim. C 9.
if thou will be a Catholic, believe not, teach not, say not, that Infants
prevented by death before they are baptized, can come to the pardon of their
Original sin. Is it not a Fundamental to believe Scripture to be the Word of
God, which S. Augustine takes on Tradition? What if a man should receive the
New Testament as sufficiently containing Fundamentals, and reject the Old with
the Manichees? admit of some of the Evangels, but not others with the Ebionits?
What if one should deny the word Person, the name and definition of a
Sacrament, the keeping of Sunday, because not clear in Scripture, and
consequently no Fundamentals according to M. Menzeis Rule. Marcion, and with
him the Anabaptists, teach Baptism should be conferred more then once. The
Donatists, that Baptism of Heretics, at least should be reiterated.
Sabellius, one only Person in the Godhead. Nestorius, two Persons in Christ,
and for this are accounted Heretics; yet no clear Scripture is brought
condemning their Errors. S. Augustine l. de unitate Eccl. says expressly of the
Donatists Error, this neither you nor I read in express words.

7. How many Scriptures are clear against Protestants in all controverted
Tenets? So that however it be clear in Fundamentals, it clearly speaks
against them. See for this the Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel; with the
Manual of Controversy, and after you have pondered the places quoted in them,
judge whether the Protestant Religion be rightly defined by M. Menzeis, The
Christian Religion as contained in Scripture, and their protestancy, only their
protesting against Popish Errors. Which Definition if good, having its Genus
proximum and differentiam ultimam, should distinguish Protestants from all
other Sectaries; but this it does not, it being common to them with most
Heretics, who have ever been: all of them professing with you Sir, to adhere
to the written Word they received, and as understood by themselves, as the
Arians, Nestorians, Pelagians, Photinians, etc. and all protesting against the
Churches Errors, and Popes Authority. For as the sole Roman Church did ever
oppose all Heretics, as the only zealous Defender of the true Faith and
Doctrine, which S. Paul calls the Depositum entrusted to her; So all generally
how soon they turn Heretics, Protest, prattle, Preach chieflly against her;
turn over all the Writings of Authors, who have made mention of Heresies, and
you shall find that all from the first to the last have opposed themselves to
that company of Christians, which was in communion with the Pope and Bishop of
Rome for the time; and that this company has opposed it self to them all,
neither did they oppose themselves all to any other company whatsoever. Yea
this was ever the distinctive mark of Heretics, not to communicate with the
Pope and Sea of Rome; as may be seen in the Writings of the Fathers. St.
Irenaeus l. 3. C. 3. S. Hierome Ep. 57. S. Cyprian, in his Epistle to Pope
Cornelius, S. Augustine in Ps. Contr. part. Don. and generally in all ages, and
by all, so that you protesting with them against the Church and Pope, take
their very Badg and Livery, and shamefully declare by this Charactaristick Mark
of your Defection, from the ever acknowledged true Church, and high Bishop
thereof, by all the Fathers, your Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism. It is very
plausible I must confess to poor Ignorants, when Preachers make them believe
they teach nothing, save only the pure Scripture and written Word, protesting
against all unwritten Traditions as Popish Errors. But if any man consider a
little with himself your Tenets in particular, he shall presently find, it is
openly against God, and his written Word ye protest, in all points of
Controversy, under the false pretense of protesting against Popery; and that
not so much as one Tenet peculiar to you is contained in Scripture. This I
evidence in most Articles of Popish Doctrine you protest against, where all may
see and judge how well your Religion is contained in Scripture.

Is it not to protest against the goodness of God to say with you, he created
some for Hell independently, of their works, and likewise against his Word, 1*
Tim. 2. where it is said, he will have all to be saved, and in the 2. Ep. of
St. Peter 3. where he is declared not willing any should perish.

Is it not to protest against his Mercy, and express word again, to say he died
not for all? The Apostle S. Paul, assuring he did die for all, and as that in
Adam all died, so in Christ all be restored to life, 1 Cor. 13.

Is it not to protest against his Justice and Word, to teach that he punishes
us for what we cannot do, as for the want of good Works, which Protestants will
have not to be in our power. Yet the Apostle says, Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust
that he should forget our work.

Is it not to protest against the Wisdom and Word of God, to say he obliges us
to perform things impossible, as Protestants call the Commandments? where as
Saint John in 1 Ep. C. 5. says they are not so much as heavy.

Is it not to protest against his Veracity and Word, to affirm that the Church
can teach Errors, and stand in need of Reformation; Christ having commanded us
to hear it, in S. Matt. 18. and the Apostle S. Paul 1 Timothy 3. calling it the
Pillar and Ground of Truth.

Is it not to protest against his Providence and Word, to assert that he has
given us the dead Letter of the Law, (without an Infallible Visible Judge,
leaving to every poor Ignorant to Interpret Scripture according to his fancy,
S. Peter, having said, no Scripture is of private interpretation, and Christ
having commanded us to hear his Church.

Is it not to protest against the Efficacy of Christ's Mediation, Sufferings,
Death, and also his Word, to hold that he has freed us from the pain, but not
from the guilt of sin. S. Joh. 1. Rev. 5. Saying he washed us from our sins in
his own blood. And S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. we are Washed, justified, Sanctified.

Is it not to protest against his Divine Order, to tie our Sanctification to
Faith only, and his express word in S. James 2.24. Ye see then how that by
Works a man is justified, and not by Faith only.

Is it not to protest against his Divine Appointment again and his Word, to
teach that good Works done in his Grace, and by his Grace, merit nothing? when
through all the Scripture Heaven is promised as a reward to our Works, and in
St. Matthew. 10. It is said, Christ shall render to every one according to his
Works.

Is it not to protest against his Divine Authority and Word, to deny the Real
Presence? All the Evangelists speaking so clearly, This is my Body, this is my
Blood.

Is it not to protest against his express Command and Word, to forbid Images as
Idols? He having ordered two Cherubims to be set on the Ark of the Covenant,
Exodus 25.

Is it not to protest against his own Practice and Word, to deny we should
honor his Saints, whom God himself Honors, yea, and glorifies. Them that
honor me, I will honor, 1 Reg. 2.30.

Is it not to protest against his Dispensation and Word, to deny the Power
given to his Apostles and their Successors to forgive sins? he having said in
S. John 20.23. Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven.

Is it not to protest against the Satisfaction which his Justice requires for
our sins, even after the guilt is forgiven, to deny Purgatory? The Scripture
witnessing that he did exact satisfaction of David, and many holy penitent
sinners after he had forgiven their sins. And S. Paul* 1 Cor. 3. If any ones
work burn, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire;
where we have clearly a purging, and punishing, yet saving fire.

Is it not to protest against Christ's Eternal Priesthood, according to the
order of Melchisedech, Ps. 109. and S. Paul, Hebr. 5. to reject the unbloody
and unspotted Sacrifice of the Mass, which the Prophet Malachy 1. C. 10. V.
calls a clean Oblation to be offered amongst the Gentiles, from the rising of
the Sun, even to the setting, and that in every place.

Is it not to protest against all God commands us and his Word? to take away
free Will in obeying, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I have set before you life and death, choose.

To conclude, what Point is there in all the Catholic Faith, which Protestants
protest against, which is not either Directly against Gods Divine Attributes,
Christ's Mediation, and Dispensation, his Churches Authority, his Saints, and
Servants honor, some part of Christian duty, belief, or life, or generally not
against his express written Word, as it is plain in it self, or expounded, by
the unanimous consent of the Fathers? And yet so impudently bold is this spirit
of Heresy, as to dare say, that that is contained in Scripture, which
Scripture most evidently contradicts; that is only in opposition to Popish
Errors, which impugnes the very Fundamental, and most substantial Verities of
the Gospel and Christian Faith; that by the pure and uncorrupted word, it will
reform the Church, when corrupting the Word, and correcting the Church as
subject to failings and Errors in Religion, it ruinateth both Church and Word.

What has been said in this, and the former Section, further instanced in two
Particular Controverted Points; The Real Presence, and two Sacraments.
THE Protestant Religion is, The Christian Religion as contained in Scripture:
Sole Scripture is their Ground, and in it all Fundamentals are clear; Says M.
Menzeis. How false all this is in general, does evidently I hope appear, by
what I have said above. Here I instance only further two particular Points, he
handles at length, the better to make see the falsehood of his strong and bold
Assertions, in the weakness and nullity of his Proofs. And this first in his
refuting one of our chief Tenets, viz. The Real Presence, then in maintaining
one of his own, to wit, That there are two Sacraments, and no more.

1. Then to prove Christ's body is not really in the Sacrament, these most clear
words, This is my body; must not, says he, be taken in the literal sense, but
Figuratively: why so, does the Scripture say this? no, no Scripture is brought.
What then? a Philosophical Demonstration as he pretends. The word this, in the
literal sense is inexplicable, and the Proposition implies a contradiction,
ergo, etc. But why the Pronoun this inexplicable, because let Romanists strain
their wits, Answers M. Menzeis; and squeeze their Authors, they cannot tell
what it can signify, whether the Bread, Body, or something indeterminately.
Who would not laugh here to see Mr. Menzeis, a professor of Divinity take such
a weak Argument for a Demonstration? most like in this to a certain Romantic
Knight Errand called Don Quicsot, who imagining to himself a Windmil to be a
Giant, and then fighting with it, as with a Hector, he did both blunt his
Sword, and batter his Reputation. For what, I pray you, does the Pronone this
signify in any proportion, but Indeterminately, till it be determined to some
particular thing, by the following words. So that let a man say a hundred times
this, he determines nothing but by the ensuing words, as here This is my Body,
makes a determinated sense, the last words determinating the first, which
alone, and of it self signifies nothing determinately, and so to seek what it
signifies determinately alone, and before the other words be pronounced, is to
quibble and speak nonsense, by seeking a determinate Object under a word,
which of its nature has none. And this is the first part of his Demonstration
for establishing, by a Logic Sophism, without any clear Scripture, a main
Point of Religion.

The second part of this Demonstration is, That it implies a manifest
contradiction, a true Affirmative Proposition, de praesenti, should produce its
Object. Why this, because in the instant of Nature wherein the Proposition is
conceived before its Object, as the cause before its Effect: the Proposition
should be true as is supposed, and not true, because the Object in that instant
is not. The same Argument he urges in the instant of time wherein the Copula
is pronounced, or Particle is, before the two last words. And for that
Catholic Authors give many and diverse Solutions of this Argument, as the
Custom is in the School, he will be satisfied with none. But because Mr.
Menzeis is good at Retortions, I retort his Argument thus: Is not this a true
Affirmative Proposition, de praesenti, which produces its Object in St. John
15. This is my command, that ye love one another. Now what difficulty in the
former Proposition, either in the word this, or in the Instants of Nature and
Time, or that a true affirmative Proposition make its own Object, which is not
here? do not these words make a new Command says Christ, as the former his
body? what if M. Menzeis could have brought an Axiom of Philosophy against the
Real Presence (as that Maxim, so commonly propounded and answered in the
School, quae sunt eadem cum uno tertio sunt eadem inter se) proving as would
seem, that the three persons being Identified, and the same thing with the
Godhead and Divine Nature, cannot be really distinguished one from another.
Should a Christian belly Christ, who is the first Verity, upon pretense he
speaks against natural reason? who will so reason with God; let him hear S.
Bernards most Excellent saying, Ep. 109. What is more against Reason, then that
one should strive to go beyond Reason by force of Reason. But true it is, no
Mystery of our Faith is against Reason, though some there be above the reach of
Humane Weakness. Wherefore as the former Maxim, though much stronger, then
what M. Menzeis here objects, is shown to have no repugnancy with the
distinction of persons by our Divines; So I easily answer him, the Proposition
is true in the instant of Nature, the Object being only extant in the instant
of Time wherein the Proposition is completely ended, because it affirms only
its Object to be extant, in that instant of time, and not before. In that
instant of Nature, wherein the Proposition precedes its Object, it affirms
indeed the Object to be, but not for that instant, as I say truly this day what
will be to morrow; In instanti naturae vera est propositio, sed non pro
instanti naturae, say they in the School. But M. Menzeis Argument if solid,
would prove against all Philosophy, there could be no Practick Knowledge, which
has no real Object, but what it makes to it self; for that in such conceptions
of the mind, the act of the understanding is ever prior to the Object, as its
cause; and so in that instant of priority (if his Objection have place) we
shall have a knowledge of nothing, because in it the Object is not. Yea it
should prove in all these places of Scripture, Let the Light be made, let the
Firmament be made, young man I say unto thee rise; I will, be thou healed, and
in such like, the Omnipotent Word of God not to be effectual, if the words did
not produce what they signify, as these other words, This is my body. So that
M. Menzeis here, taking this his trifling, and whimsical Sophism, for an
unanswerable Argument, shows not only his weakness both in Philosophy and
Grammar, but also manifestly that Heretics contradict Christ's most clear
words, and the Authority of his Church upon most insignificant and frivolous
objections. And upon such trifling Sophisms shall any Christian refuse to
believe, what Christ has taught in so express terms? what the Evangelists have
so accurately set down in holy Writ: what the Fathers have confirmed in so many
Volumes: what the Martyrs have subscribed with their blood: what the Church
does testify by her Pastors and practice: what God has sealed with so many
Miracles and Wonders; sometime appearing in the Consecrate Host in form of a
man; sometimes (when it has been stabbed by Jews and Heretics) making it gush
out in blood; sometimes by its virtue, casting out Devils, or quenching fire,
as so many Authentic Records, both of History and Fathers do witness. O
boldness and impudence of Heresy so to cavil at Christ's own words, and yet
proudly pretend, pure Scripture is its only Ground!

2. To instance how M. Menzeis again, from Scripture clear in Fundamentals,
proves that Fundamental Tenet of Protestants, yea their proper and only Tenet
(all the rest being borrowed from old condemed Heresies, as we have seen.)
There be two Sacraments and no more. After a huge work in his last Paper, and a
whole year spent, before the answer to this Query did appear, instead of clear
Scripture (which he was only desired to bring) he gives the following discourse.

1. To clear the state of the Question, he says, know we do not affirm, that
the word Sacrament is to be found in Scripture.

2. We understand by a Sacrament of the New Testament, a Substantial Visible
Sign instituted by God, recorded in the Gospel, to Seal up the Promises of
Salvation, which is to endure in the Church to the end of the world.

3. We do affirm in this sense, there be only two proper Sacraments in the New
Testament, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

4. Then coming to prove there be two Sacraments, and two only; that there be
two, he proves it thus, to Baptism and the Lords Supper, agree all the parts of
the foresaid Description, for you have, says he, the Divine Institution of
Baptizing with water,, Mat. 28.19. and of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24,
25. That they are Seals of the promises of Salvation is no less clear: And
first of Baptism, Act. 2.38, 39. and also of the Lords Supper, in so much that
the Cup is called the New Testament, which you must acknowledge to be no proper
speech, but it is only so called, because it is, sigillum foederis; hence also
in the Institution, mention is made of the remission of sins, and of the giving
of the Body of Christ, and sheding of his blood for us, holding forth that
forgiveness of sins, and all other blessings, purchased by the Death of Christ,
and promised in the new Covenant; are by this Ordinance sealed to the people of
God. And that these Ordinances are to continue to the end of the word, is no
less manifest from Matt. 28.20. and 1 Cor. 11.26. In fine, he proves there be
only two Sacraments, by this Argument, more cannot be produced out of
Scripture, as shall be proved, solutione objectionum ergo, etc.

Now to reflect how judiciously, and learnedly M. Menzeis here proves from
Scripture there be two Sacraments, and two only.

1. He does not affirm the Word Sacrament to be in Scripture.

2. Of all the Definition or Description he brings, not so much as one Particle
is affirmed in Scripture to be Essential to a Sacrament: (I do not dispute at
present how much of it is true in it self, or granted by us) I only desire it
may be made clear from Scripture, as clearly containing all Fundamentals of the
Protestant Religion, which is the only thing in question. But nothing is proved
by him, save only that Baptism, and the Lords Supper are of Divine Institution,
as many other things be, which are not Sacraments. To prove they are Seals of
the promises of Salvation, he cites for Baptism, Act. 2.28, 29. The words
omitted by him, I hear set down. But Peter said to them, do penance, and be
every one of you Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for remission of your
sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: for to you is the
promise, and to your children, and to all that are far off, whomsoever the Lord
our God shall call. No word here Baptism is a Seal of the promises of
Salvation. It is said indeed to be given for the Remission of sins, and that to
whom it is given, they receive the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which both
Protestants deny; maintaining there is no virtue in Baptism to confer either of
these Effects. It is said further, that to the Jews and their children, yea to
all that God shall call, promise is made, but that Baptism is a Seal of the
promise of Salvation, neither the Text, nor any consequence he draws from it
does evince it.

The way he proves from Scripture, the Lords Supper to be a Seal of the
promises of Salvation, is rare; for that says he, it is called the New
Testament, which we must acknowledge to be no proper Speech, but to be only so
called, because it is, Sigillum foederis. This is his Commentary on the Text;
but what a necessary and clear consequence is this? If ever such a consequence
as clearly deduced from Scripture was heard of, I leave it to the Reader to
Judge; So clearly are the Sacraments, and main Fundamentals of the Protestant
Religion, contained in Scripture, or clearly deduced from it.

But M. Menzeis thought it (as it seems by his so long a digression in his last
paper) a more easy task to impugn our Sacraments (though no part of the
present work) then to prove his own. No Scripture, Councils, or Fathers hold
out seven Sacraments. Answer, yes Sir, both Scripture, Councels, Fathers do;
not as bare signs with you, but as visible or sensible signs of the invisible
grace they produce in the Soul, as instituted by Christ our Lord, for our
Sanctification. In this sense, there be seven Sacraments set down in the
Gospel, Decreed by Counc^ls, approved by the Fathers. And

1* That the Fathers did so understand a Sacrament, is confessed by
Protestants, who even dare censure the Fathers for this: As Musculus loc. comm.
p. 299. did S. Augustine, for affirming inconsiderately, that the Sacraments of
the New Testament give salvation; Zwinglius, Tom. 2. de Bapt. fol. 70. All the
Ancient Doctors for supposing the water of Baptism to purge sin. The Century
Writers, Cent. 2. C. 4. Col. 47. In particular censures, S. Clement Disciple of
the Apostles, and Justin Martyr, for thinking Regeneration not only to be
signified, but wrought by Baptism: and in the 3. Cent. C. 4. S. Cyprian, for
teaching that the person Baptizing does give Sanctity, and the Holy Ghost, to
the Baptized.

2 That such a number of visible or sensible signs instituted by Christ, for
conferring grace, and taking away sin, is set down in Scripture, is clear from
the following Texts.

For Baptism, Acts 2.38. Be every one of you baptized for the Remission of
Sins. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved the Church, cleansing it by the Laver of Water.

For Confirmation, Acts 17. Then they did impose their hands upon them, and
they received the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 1.22. And he that confirms us with you
in Christ, and has anoyled us, God who also has sealed us, and given the
pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.

For Penance, S. John 20.23. Whose sins ye shall forgive, they are forgiven,
etc. Acts 16.18. And many of them that believed, came confessing their deeds.

For the Eucharist, S. Matt. 26. S. Mark. 14. S. Luke 22. This is my body, etc.
S. John 6. I am the living bread, I am the bread of life, he that eats of
this Bread, shall live for ever.

For extreme Unction, S. James 8.14. If any be sick, let him bring in the
Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, anoyling him with Oil, in
the name of our Lord, etc. And if he be in sins, they shall be remitted him. S.
Mark 6.13. And they anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed them.

For Holy Order, 2 Timothy 1.6. I admonish thee, that thou resuscitate the grace
of God, which is in thee, by the imposition of my hands.

For Matrimony, Ephesians. 5.32. This Sacrament is great.

In all which places of Scripture we have manifestly the External Sign, either
called a Sacrament, or to it annexed the forgiving of sins, or conferring of
Life and Grace, which makes it a Sacrament of the New Law. So that there is no
lurking here under ambiguity of words, as M. Menzeis will have it. However
Heretics vary in explaining Scripture, the Word of God does not vary, nor his
Church in understanding it.

3. As for the Fathers and Councils, See the Summary of Controversies, of the
efficacy and number of Sacraments, where the places are marked, and the Manual
of Controversy, Art. 28. where both Scripture and Fathers are cited at length.
Luther himself de Captiv. Babyl. grants S. Dennis Disciple of S. Paul to
stand for seven Sacraments. S. Augustine has them all. Baptism in his 28.
Epistle to S. Hierom. Confirmation in his second Book against Petilian, C. 104*
Penance in his 2. Sermon upon the Ps. 101. Eucharist, in his 26. Treatise of
S. John, and his Ep. 120. to Honoratus, where he calls it both a Sacrifice and
a Sacrament. Extreme Unction in his 5. Book of Baptism, C. 5. Holy Orders, in
his 2. Book against Parmen. C. 13. Matrimony in his Book of Faith and good
Works, C. 7. And de bono Conjug. C. 24.

So that, when he speaks of two Sacraments of the Church (Gemina Ecclesiae
Sacramenta) he understands there is two chief ones, to wit Baptism by reason of
its necessity to salvation. And the Eucharist for its Excellency, and necessity
both in his opinion. But to insist further on this here, is neither to the
present purpose, or any part of what I did at first undertake. M. Menzeis
running here and there, as in a Labyrinth, to show the fathers take not always
the word Sacrament in the strict and proper sense, does only involve himself in
unextricable difficulties, standing to his ground of Scripture clear in
Fundamentals, which no where defines what properly a Sacrament is, or any where
resolves and determinates what may be ambiguous and doubtful, either in it
self, or the Fathers. How then shall we be assured of this without an
Infallible Visible Judge? When some take even the clearest Scriptures and
Writings of the Fathers in one sense, some in another. But the Catholic Church
having received the Sacraments from Christ and his Apostles, and constantly
Administrated them in the sense, and for the ends they were Instituted, has
sufficiently declared both the Number and Nature of Sacraments, according to
the Tradition of the Apostles, and constant practice of the same Church, which
is an infallible Ground to us, whilst all Heretics, with M. Menzeis are so
intricate in the present Question, by the Diversity of Notions, they either
find in Authors, or fancy to themselves, (some admitting not only seven, says
Mr. Menzeis, but seventeen Sacraments, some, seven times seven, some seventy
seven, yea, and more) that they lie still either in the Lurking Holes of
Obscurity and Ambiguity, the better to Palliate their Errors, or wander up and
down in their unsettled Belief, following their Fallible Conjectures, uncertain
Opinions, and Groundless Faith.

SECT. VI.
Mr. Menzeis second Ground of the Protestant Religion, Viz. The Doctrine of the
Church in the first three Centuries or Ages, proved no Ground to them, yea
their very Ruin.

AS Historiographers remark, the greatest Empires have begun to decay, how soon
they left off to ground their greatness on new Conquests: And the Naturalists
observe, that Trees, and Plants do presently fade, when their Roots do not
spread as the Branches spring up: So the Protestant Religion should have
instantly been chocked in its Rise, and as smothered in the Cradle; If
Protestants standing constantly to their first Principle, had still rejected
the Doctrine of the Church, under the specious pretense of adhering only to the
pure and naked Word as a Ground most pure and clear, Scriptures making* so
clearly against them. Wherefore, though the first Reformers (as I shall
presently show) did disclaim the Doctrine of the Church in any Age after the
Apostles, as infallible, or Ground of Faith, disclaim the Fathers, disclaim
Miracles, disclaim a Succession from any: Yet others after the first heat of
passion had a little relented, finding all this most disgraceful, and a most
evident Conviction of their Errors, and fearing their Religions both fall and
ruin, if not speedily propped; claim a Succession, though from Old condemned
Heresies, with M. Menzeis here, from the Waldenses, Wickliffians, Hussits, as
we have seen: Cite the Fathers, though either to no purpose, or else
corruptedly with Du Plessis, so evidently confuted by the Cardinal Du Peron,
pretend to Miracles with M. Pool in his Nullity of the Romish Faith, though
falsely, most Protestants disowning Miracles since the Apostles time, and all
the world witnessing, it did never see a Miracle amongst them; yea they grant
in fine, the diffusive body of the Church to be infallible in believing, but
not the Representative, or Pastors even assembled in a General Council,
Infallible in Teaching, with M. Menzeis again here: Who upon this gives us for
a second Ground of the Protestant Religon; The Doctrine of the Church in the
first three Centuries or Ages.

The sole reason he gives for the Churches Doctrine, as being a Ground of Faith
at that time is, because, if the Catholic Religion was not then purely
conserved in her, it was no where to be found (ab sit says he blasphemia) which
without blasphemy cannot be thought. Whereupon I first reflect, that if it be
blasphemy to deny, the Catholic Religion must always be purely conserved in
some Church; many chief Protestants surely speak open blasphemy, who most
boldly affirm before the Reformation made by Luther and Calvin, no Church to
have conserved true Religion in its purity at all. Luther comment. in 1 Cor.
1.15. I was the first to whom God vouchsafed to reveal these Doctrines which
are now Preached; this praise they cannot take from us, that we were the first
that brought light to the world: Without our help, no man had ever learned one
word of the Ghospel. This M. Wotton both acknowledges and confirms in Exam.
Jur. Romans Luther might well say he was the first, a Son without a Father, a
Scholar without a Master, etc.

Calvin in an Epistle of his to Melancthon, It does not a little concern us
(says he) that not the least suspicion of any Discord risen amongst us
descends to Posterity, for it were a thing more then absurd, after we have been
constrained to make separation from the whole world, if we in our beginning
should also divide from one another.

Chillingworth, Chapter 5. Sect. 55. as for the External Communion of the visible
Church, we have without Scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake
it.

Bucer. p. 660. All the world erred (he speaks before the Reformation) in that
Article of the Real Presence.

Bibliander, in orat. ad princip. Germ. c. 72. it is without all question, that
from the time of Gregory the great, the Pope is the Antichrist, who with his
abomination has made drunk all Kings and people from the highest to the lowest.

Brochard, on the second Chapter Rev. p. 4. when the first assault was made upon
the Papacy by Luther, the knowledge of Christ was wanting in all and every one
of his members.

White, in his defense, C. 37. Pa. 136. Popery was a Leprosy breeding so
universally in the Church, that there was no visible company of men, appearing
in the world, free from it.

Bennet Morgentern, in his Treatise of the Church, calls it ridiculous, to say
any before Luther had the purity of the Gospel.

Simon Voyon, Cat. Doct. in his Epistle to the Reader, says, when Pope Boniface
was installed, then was that universal Apostasy from the Faith, which was
foretold by Paul.

M. Jewel upon the Revelation fol. 110. The truth was then unheard of, when
Luther and Zwingle came to preach the Ghospel.

Febustian Francus, in his Epistle of abrogating Ecclesiastical Statutes, says,
for certain, through the work of the Antichrist, the External Church, together
with the faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure, and for these thousand and four hundred years, the Church has been
no where External and Visible.

From all which Testimones of most renowned Protestants, yea, and of the very
first Reformers is evidently proved: First, that they did not think any visible
Church to have conserved at all times, the purity of the Gospel, which M.
Menzeis calls blasphemy to deny. Secondly, that they claim not a Succession
from any that went before them (except only from the Apostles) what ever later
Protestants do falsely pretend. Thirdly, that they own no more the diffusive
body of the Church infallible then the Representative, seeing no Church
prosessing the Doctrine they did teach, is acknowledged by them for many
hundred years before the Reformation. Fourthly, That Popery was the only
Religion generally prevailing, and openly professed, for no less time then
fourteen hundred years before Luther. Fifthly, how well M. Menzeis agrees with
other Protestants in this his second Ground of Faith.

You shall presently, God willing, hear both greater and better witnesses
deposing against him; but first I ask what peculiar reason he has, why the
Church in her childhood, and younger age, should be a ground of Faith, and not
afterward, and in her full maturity? as we grant her, the fullness of Divine
Wisdom even from her birth, which did not increase by age, so by age it cannot
decay. We shall now presently see, how like the Protestant Church is to that of
the three first Centuries; but before this, I would know, why M. Menzeis gives
her Doctrine rather for a ground, then in following times? Is there any
peculiar promise made to her, any particular reason militates for her, or any
testimonies of the Scriptures, or Fathers given to her in one time, rather then
in another? was her Doctrine then purer? her Condition more flourishing, her
authority greater? Does not M. Menzeis grounding his Faith upon the Doctrine of
the Church in any age after the Apostles, confirm that Romish Tenet of the
Church Doctrine as a Ground in other Ages, by parity of reason?

Secondly, I reflect that M. Menzeis, who will admit of no Infallible Visible
Judge of Controversy, of no Infallible Tradition not contained in Scripture,
nor of any Assembly of the Fathers, and Pastor of the Church in a General
Council as infallible in their Decrees: Here either acknowledges the Records
of the Ecclesiastic History, and Writings of the Fathers, as witnessing
infallibly to us, the Doctrine of these ages, or else must grant he has no
infallible assurance that this his second ground of Faith is solid and
Infallible. There being no other way left us (without particular Revelation) to
know what Doctrine the Church did teach, and believe in the first three Ages,
save only the Writings of the Fathers, and Tradition of the present Church;
which consequently M. Menzeis must either here own as Infallible, or avouch he
builds his Faith upon a sandy and fallible ground.

The first Reformers standing better to their own Principles then he, and of
much greater sincerity and learning, grant plainly the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, to hold many things in opposition to them.

Luther L. de servo arbitr. C. 2. and in his Table Conferences C. de patrib.
Eccl. The Authority of the Fathers is not to be regarded; in the Writings of
Hierome, there is not a word of true Faith in Christ, and sound Religion:
Tertullian is very Superstitious: I have holden Origin long since accursed: of
Chrysostom, I make no account: Basil is of no worth, he is wholly a Monk, I
weigh not him a hair; Cyprian is a weak Divine, affirming there yet further,
that the Apology of Melancthon does far excel all the Doctors of the Church,
yea even Augustine himself. Calvin L. 3. Inst. C. 5. It was a custom 1300.
years ago (that is in the second age) to pray for the dead, but all of that
time, (says he) I confess were carried away with Error.

And in the fourth Book of his Institutions, Chapter 9. he will stand to no
Decision of Councils, Fathers, Bishops, but try all by Scripture alone;
granting generally all the Western Churches to have defended Popery, Resp. ad
Versipell. p. 134.

Melancthon on the first Cor. 3. speaks plain, presently from the beginning of
the Church, the ancient Fathers obsc^^ed the Doctrine of Justice by Faith,
increased Ceremonies, and devised new Worships.

In like manner, Peter Martyr 1. devotis p. 477. that in the Church, Errors
did begin, Immediately after the Apostles; and therefore as long as we stand to
Councils and Fathers, we shall be always in the same Errors.

Whitaker cont. 2. q. 5. C. 7. it is true which Calvin and the Centurists have
written, that the ancient Church did Err in many things, as touching Limbo,
free Will, merit of Works, etc.

Chemnitius in Exam. conc. trid. pa. 200. most of the Fathers did not dispute,
but avouch, that the souls of Martyrs heard the petitions of those who prayed
to them, they went to the Monuments of Martyrs, and Invocated Martyrs by name.

D. Fulk in his confutation of Purgatory, grants Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierome,
Augustine do witness, that Sacrifice for the Dead is a Tradition of the
Apostles; yea in his retentive, says, Prayer for the dead prevailed within the
first 300. years. And in his Answer to a counterfeit Catholic, That Pope
Victor in the second Age, did practice Supremacy in the Church.

The Centurists do reprehend Cyprian, Origin, Tertullian in the third Century;
and S. Gregory Nazianzen in the fourth, for teaching Peter's Primacy; as they do
also S. Cyprian in the third Century, of Superstition for saying, that the
Priest (at Mass) holds the place of Christ, and offers up Sacrifice to God the
Father. Sacerdotem Cyprianus inquit, vice Christi fungi and deo patri
sacrificium offerre. And generally confess, the Fathers of the third Age do
witness, and that not in obscure terms invocation of Saints; videas, in
doctorum hujus soeculi Scriptis non obscura vestigia invocationis Sanctorum.
They say further in the second Century, S. Irenaeus admits free Will, even
in Spiritual actions, and that S. Clement every where asserteth it, so that the
Doctors and Parstors of that Age, were in this manner of blindness, say they,
reckoning out in this number, S. Cyprian, Theophilus, Tertullian, Origin,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Justine, Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Tatianus, etc. As does
also Abraham Scultetus with them. Yea Doctor Humphrey in his Jesuitisms, pa. 2.
and else where Eccl. C. 15. says, it cannot be denied, but that S. Irenaeus, S.
Clement, and other Fathers of the first and second age called Apostolicks (for
that they were Disciples of the Apostles, or immediately followed them) have in
their Writings the Opinion of free Will, and Merit of Works; The Cen^ury
Writers, and Scultetus Tax for the same Clement of Alexandria, S. Cyprian,
Justin Martyr, etc. In the third Century, they say, Origin made good Works, the
cause of Justification, and in the 5. accuse, S. Chrysostom for handling the
Doctrine of Justification impurely, as attributing Merit to Works.

M. Whitaker says, that not only Cyprian, but almost all the most holy Fathers
of that time were in that Error, as thinking so to pay the pain due to sin,
and to satisfy to Gods Justice, in so far as Luther on the 4. chapter to the
Gallathians calls for this, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, and other Fathers
Justice-workers of the old Papacy. And M. Wotton in his defense of M. Perkins,
forbeareth not to censure, for this very Point of Merit, the undoubted and
confessed Writings of Ignatius, Disciple of S. John.

Chemnitius in his Examine, par. 4. p. 20. affirms the Ancient Fathers Erred
in making Pilgrimages to Relics of Saints; and Osiander with the Centurists,
Cent. 4. that S. Hierome did foolishly contend, that the Relics of Saints
ought to be worshipped.

For owning Traditions, Chemnitius in his Exam. Par. 1. p. 87.89.90. reproves
Clement of Alexandria; Origin, Epiphanius, Hierome, Ambrose, Basil, Maximus,
Damacene, and M. Whitaker, de Sacr. Script. S. Chrysostom as speaking
inconsiderately when he admits them. D. Reynolds in his Concla. 1. p. 689.
somewhat more moderate, leaves the censuring of S. Epiphanius, for this to the
Church.

M. Whitgift in his defense against Cartwrights Reply, grants Ignatius Disciple
of the Apostles, to have said of Heretics, They do not admit the Eucharist to
be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins.
And M. Beacon in his Treatise, the Relics of Rome, says the Mass was begotten,
conceived, and born anon after the Apostles time, if it be true, what
Historiographers write.

Calvin L. 1. Inst. C. 4. confesses in the Primative Church, Confession,
Penance, and Absolution by the Priests: and the Century Writers, that in the
times of S. Cyprian and Tertullian, there was used private confession, even of
thoughts, and lesser sins, then so commanded as necessary. Where any judicious
Reader may evidently see, how by chief Protestant Authors, both the Primitive
Church, and the Fathers are censured for many Errors. Yea and for the very
same, which are most objected against the Romish Church, a most invincible
Argument from the confession of our Adversaries; That the Church and Fathers of
the three first Ages, did teach the self same Doctrine with the present Roman
Church, and with Pope Pius in his confession of Faith in all those Points
quoted by them, Free Will, Merit of Works, Invocation of Saints, honoring of
Relics, Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, S. Peter's Primacy amongst the
Apostles, the Popes Supremacy in the Church, Mass, Traditions, the Real
Presence, Confession, Penance, Absolution, etc. So that if M. Menzeis will
stand to his own word, and trust the Writings of his brethren, He is here again
engaged to turn Papist.

Many more such Quotations could I produce from chief Protestant Writers,
acknowledging both the Church and Fathers, of the first three Ages, holding
most controverted Tenets, flatly against Protestants. And yet so confident M.
Menzeis is, he dare take the Church Doctrine at that time, for a Ground of the
Protestant Religion, and this no doubt to show the deepness of his Learning,
and how well he is versed in Antiquity, till presently we hear the Fathers
themselves speaking, the better to make both his Weakness and Igorance appear.

But before I enter upon this, I remark M. Menzeis in his 8. paper, says, we
agree with Protestants in all their Positive Tenets, and only in their
Negatives disagree. How true this is, I do not now dispute; yet must here
reflect, that all chief Heresies, for the most part, with that of Protestants
have ever consisted in Negations, and in denying some Points of Faith,
generally received in the Church. Sabellius denied three persons in the
Godhead, Eutiches two Natures in Christ; Nestorius in Christ one Person: The
Monothelites two wills in Christ, as two Natures: The Arians, Christ to be
consubstantial with his Father: The Macedonians, the consubstantiality of the
Holy Ghost: Marcion, that Baptism in the Church should be conferred but once,
The Novatians, that sinners after Baptism could be absolved upon Repentance;
and even such Heresies Protestants most claim to; as the Grecians deny the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son; the Waldenses deny
Princes and Magistrates to conserve their Digities and Power when fallen in
mortal sin: The Hussits deny that the predestinate could sin; the Albigenses,
Marriages to be lawful; the Wickliffians, Free Will, and so forth. Negatio est
Malignantis naturae, say the Philosophers, Negations are of a Malignant Nature,
whence we see, that as Atheism consists in denying God, so Heresies are most in
Negations, as flowing from the Spirit of Pride, contradiction, Rebellion.

However it is time we show what conformity there is betwixt Protestants
Negative Tenets, and the Doctrine of the Church in the first three Centuries,
or Ages; M. Menzeis provoking so confidently his Adversary to bring any
Essential difference from the Authentic writings of these Fathers, and upon
this engaging to turn Papist. I do not here question further then I have done
in my second reflection, how he who admits of no Infallible Visible Judge, can
be sufficiently assured of their Authentic Writings, for if he take this only
upon their conformity with Scripture, they can make no peculiar Ground to him,
rather then other men's Writings, having the like conformity with it, or can
they be caled properly a distinct Ground from it; But having seen how many
chief Protestants disown the most ancient Fathers, challenge them of manyfold
Errors; censure their Doctrine (a most strong conviction against M. Menzeis,
that they take not their Writings for a Ground) let us hear themselves deposing
clearly in our favor against him, and see if they who have confounded so many
Atheists, convinced so many Infidels, converted so many Heretics, may even
happily prevail with M. John. I cite here only the Fathers in the first three
Centuries after Christ, as M. Menzeis makes only his appeal to them: In which
Ages, the Church being still under persecution, had not indeed so many Writers
as in following times, to witness her Doctrine against all Heretics: Yet you
shall God willing see how clearly the chiefest of them dissent from Protestants
in all controverted Tenets, and most disgracefully belly him.

The Fathers of the first three ages clearly speaking against Protestants in
all Chief Controverted Tenets.
I Begin even at what is most Principal, to wit, the Popes Supremacy, this
Potestants deny. But in the first Age, S. Denis de divinis nominibus, C. 3.
calls S. Peter first Bishop of Rome, the Supreme and most ancient top of
Divines. Where both Primacy and Supremacy is given to him. S. Clement Disciple
of S. Peter in his first Epistle, declares him both the ground stone of the
Church, and the most powerful of the Apostles.

S. Ignatius Disciple of S. John, in his Epistle to the Romans, extolling their
Church, calls her, The Church that presides at Rome.

In the second Age, S. Irenaeus l. 3. contra Valent. C. 3. says, the Romish
Church is the greatest and most ancient: And again, l. 3. C. 3. all Churches
round about ought to resort to the Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful
Principality.

In the third Age, Zepherinus Pope, in his Epistle to the Bishops of Sicily
decreed, That the greater causes of the Church, were to be determined by the
Apostolic Sea, because so the Apostles and there Successors had ordained.

In the third Age, Origin on the 6. Chapter to the Romans says, The chief charge of
feeding Christ's Sheep was given to S. Peter, and the Church founded upon him.

In the same Age, S. Cyprian Ep. ad Jul. We hold Peter the Head and Root of the
Church; and again, Ep. 55. he calls the Church of Rome S. Peter's Chair. Yea in
the second Century, Amandus Polonus, M. Spark, and M. Whitaker, (though
Protestants) confess, that Victor then Bishop of Rome (whom M. Whitgift calls a
godly Bishop) carried himself as Pope, or Head of the Church.

So well has Protestant Doctrine in this Point, a Ground in the Fathers of the
first three Ages; that Danaeus a Protestant, in his Answer to Bellarmine,
acknowledges Sovereign Authority to have been practiced by the Popes of the
third Age, the Centurists, Cent. 3. that Tertullian did think the keys to be
committed chiefly to S. Peter, and the Church to be built on him; and S.
Cyprian to have taught, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of all
others, the Mother Church.

Now shall all this be called Protestant Doctrine, that S. Peter was Head and
Root of the Church, that the Church was founded upon him, that the chief charge
of Christ's Flock was given to him, that he is the Supreme amongst Divines; that
the Church of Rome is his Chair, which for this has a more powerful
Principality, as greatest, so that the greater causes in the Church ought to be
decided by her? where by parts, all the Controversy of the Popes Supremacy is
holden out against them.

Secondly, Protestants deny we should believe any thing not contained in
Scripture, upon Apostolical Tradition conserved in the Church.

But in the first age, S. Denis, Eccl. Hierarch. C. l. speaking of the
Apostles, says, These our first Captains of Priestly Function, did deliver to
us the chiefest and most Substantial Points, partly in written, partly
unwritten Institutions.

In the same Age, S. Ignatius, apud Eusebius. l. 3. Hist. C. 36. does exhort all
to stick to the Traditions of the Apostles.

In the second Age, S. Irenaeus, L. 3. C. 4. what if the Apostles had left no
Scriptures at all, ought we not to follow the Order of Tradition, which they
have delivered unto those, to whom they did commit their Churches? and to which
assent many Barbarous Nations who believe in Christ without Character or Ink.

In the same Age, Origin Hom. 5. in lib. number. there are many things in
Ecclesiastical Traditions which all ought to do, and on the 6. Chapter to the
Romans, he says, to baptize Infants is one.

In the third Age, Tertullian de praescr. teaches Heretics are to be confuted
rather by Tradition then Scripture; and L. de Cor. mil. speaking of the
Ceremonies of Baptism, the Sign of the Cross, Sacrifice for the Dead, etc. he
adds, of these, and such like things, if thou require a ground in Scripture,
thou shall find none: Tradition did begin them, Custom has confirmed their
Practice, and Faith does observe them.

In the same Age S. Cyprian l. 1. Ep. 12. says, he that is Baptized, ought to
be anointed, but of this Unction, there is no mention in Scripture; and in his
second B. Ep. 3. he admonishes Water should be mixed with Wine in the Chalice
at Mass, upon a like Tradition from the Apostles. See in what I have cited
heretofore, how the Fathers have received the Scriptures upon Tradition, and
many most substantial Points with it, and upon due consideration of all this,
let any one judge, whether the Fathers of the first three Ages, in these their
most Authentic Writings I know, do make a ground for Protestant or Catholic
Doctrine, speaking so plainly, the chiefest and most Substantial Points of our
Faith, were delivered partly in Written, and partly in Unwritten Institutions,
exhorting us to stick to Traditions conserved in the Church, which serve for
conversion of Infidels, conviction of Heretics, and generally ought to be kept
by all.

3. Protestants deny the unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood offered
up to God in the Mass.

Yet in the first Age, the very Liturgies of the Apostles are extant, and in
that of S. James, we offer unto thee (O Lord) the unbloody Sacrifice for our
sins: And S. Andrew in the Book of his Passion, written by his Disciples, says
unto the Tyrant. I sacrifice daily the Immaculate Lamb to Almighty God.

And in the same Age, S. Clement, Ep. 3. It is not lawful to celebrate Masses
in other places, but in these wherein the proper Bishop shall appoint, these
things the Apostles receieved from our Lord, and delivered to you.

S. Ignatius, Ep. ad Smyrnens. It is not lawful without a Bishop to offer, or
Sacrifice, or Celebrate Mass.

In the second Age, S. Irenaeus l. 4. ad u. here is. C. 32. calls the Body and
Blood of Christ, the Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church having
received from the Apostles, offers to God through the whole world.

And Tertullian, l. de Veland. virg. it is not permitted that women should
teach, or speak in the Church, nor Baptize, nor Offer. Origin hom. 13. in Exodus
you think your selves guilty, and unworthy if any part of the Consecrated Host
be lost through your negligence.

S. Hippolitus, Orat. de Antichr. brings in Christ speaking thus, Come you
Bishops and Priests, who have daily offered my precious Body and Blood. How
clear are the following Fathers, S. Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Athanasius,
S. Basil, etc. with S. Augustine for this? as even in the third Age, S. Cyprian
Sermon. de coena. dom. the Eucharist is a Holocaust to purge our sins, and in his
Epistle, ad Cyrill. he calls it a Sacrifice seven times.

4. Protestants deny the Real Presence, and Transubstantion.

But in the first age, S. Ignatius in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses (often cited by
Eusebius, Athanasius, S. Jerome, Theodoret and other ancients) speaking of the
Saturnian Heretics, says, They admit not of Eucharists and Oblations, because
they do not confess the Eucharist to be our Saviors flesh, which suffered for
our sins; and in his Epistle to the Romans, I do not delight in any corruptible
food, nor in the pleasures of this life, I desire the bread of God, the
heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ the Son of God.

S. Denis Areop. l. de Eccl. Hierarch. C. 3. O most Divine and holy Sacrament,
vouchsafe mercifully to open the Veils of those signifying Signs, wherein thou
hidest thy self, and appear plainly unto us.

In the second Age, S. Irenaeus, l. 4. C. 34. disputing against the Heretics,
who denied Christ to be the Son of God; asks how it shall be manifested unto
them, that bread upon which thanks are given, is the body of our Lord, and the
Challice, his Blood, if they say he is not the Son of the Maker of the world.

S. Cyprian sermon. de coena dom. The Bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples,
being changed not in shape, but in nature by the Omnipotency of the word is
made flesh.

In the third Age, Origin, We eat the bread offered by Prayer, made a certain
holy Body. And again, hom. 5. in div. loca Evang. When thou receivest the holy
Food, thou Eatest and Drinkest the Body and Blood of our Lord, then the Lord
enters under thy roof, etc.

In the same Age, Tertullian l. 4. contra Marcion. C. 40. The Bread taken and
distributed to his Disciples he made his body. What can be said more clearly
then all this, either for the Real Presence, or Transubstantiation, which is
nothing but the change of the Bread in Christ's Body, here so plainly asserted.

Add to this, for communion under one kind, denied by Protestants, it is said
to have been so given to Infants; by S. Denis l. Eccl. Hierach. C. ult. to both
Infants and sick, by S. Cyprian, sermon. de lapsis n. 10. and by Tertullian l. ad
Uxorem, to have been carried to private houses, yea and over Sea by Eusebius l.
5. hest. which could not be done, but under one kind.

5. Protestants deny purgatory and prayers for the dead. But in the first Age,
S. Denis Eccl. Hierarch. part. 3. C. 7. says the Venerable Prelate approaching
powereth forth his holy Prayer upon the dead, by that Prayer he does beseech
the Divine clemency to forgive all the sins of the dead committed trhough
humane Infirmities, and to place him in light, and in the Region of the living.

In the same Age, S. Clement l. 8. Constable. C. 48. has a long Prayer accustomed
to be said for the dead. Again the same S. Clem. Ep. 1. de S. Petro, tells us,
S. Peter taught them among other works of mercy, to pray and give alms for the
dead. And in the Liturgy of S. James Apostle, we have Prayers also for them.

Tertullian l. de Corona. militis, numbreth prayer for the dead amongst the
Traditions of the Apostles, and speaks thus, l. de anima C. 58. Seeing we
understand that prison which the Gospel demonstrates to be places below, and
the last farthing, we interpret every small fault there to be punished, by the
delay of the Resurrection, no man will doubt but that the soul does recompense
something in the places below, Ibid. we make yearly Oblations, says he, for the
dead. Origin hom. 6. in Exodus he that is saved, is saved by fire, so that if a
man have something mixed with Lead, that the fire does purge and resolve, that
all may become pure Gold.

S. Cyprian, l. 4. Ep. 2. It is one thing to be purged a long time for sins by
Torment, and cleansed by a long fire, and another thing to purge all sins by
patience and sufferings. What fire is more clear then S. Augustine and others
be with S. Cyprian and Origin here for a purging fire? I know Protestants
Expound that place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3. v. 13, 14. of the fire of Tribulation
in this life, but not so, S. Augustine in Ps. 37. where citing the words of the
Apostle, he shall be safe, yet so as by fire, says, and because it is said, he
shall be safe, that fire is contemned, yet that fire shall be more grievous
then what ever a man can suffer in this life; and then entering in a most
fervent Prayer continues, Purge me, O Lord, in this life, that I need not that
mending fire.

6. Protestants deny Invocation and honoring of Saints. But in the first Age,
S. Denis eccl. Hierarch. C. 7. says, I constantly affirm with the Divine
Scripture, that the Prayers of the Saints are very profitable for us in this
life, when a man is inflamed with a desire to imitate the Saints, and
distrusting his own weakness, he betakes himself to any Saint, beseeching him
to be his helper and petitioner to God for him, he shall obtain by that means
very great assistance.

In the same Age S. Clement l. Apost. Constit. 5. We command you, that the
Martyrs be in all honor among you, even as James the Bishop, and Stephen our
fellow Deacon have been amongst us, for God has made them blessed, and holy men
have honored them. In the second Age, S. Cornelius Ep. 1. exhorts to beseech
God and our Lord Jesus Christ, that his holy Apostles making Intercession for
you, he would purge you from your sins.

And Justin Martyr Apol. 2. We worship and adore both God the Father and his
Son, etc. as also the company of his followers, and the good Angels, and we
worship them both by words and deeds, and in truth even as we our selves have
been taught and instructed.

In the third Age S. Cyprian l. 4. Ep. 9. The sufferings and days of Martyrs we
celebrate with a yearly remembracne.

And Origin in Lament. I will begin to fall down on my knees, and pray to all
his Saints to succor me, who dare not ask God, for the exceeding greatness of
my sins. O Saints of my God, with tears I beseech you to fall down before his
mercy for me a wretch.

7. Protestants deny the use of the sign of the Cross, and Images.

But in the first Age, S. Denis l. 2. Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2. The sign of the
Cross is so much honored, that it is often used both in baptism and other
Sacraments.

In the same Age, S. Martial Ep. ad Burdegal. Remember the Cross of our Lord,
keep it in your mind, speak often of it, have it in the Sign, for it is your
invincible Armor against Satan. Tertullian l. de Coron. milit. c. 3. In every
thing we do, we sign our forehead with the sign of the Cross, of which
practice, Tradition is the defender, Custom the conserver, and Faith the
observer. And in his time he says l. 2. de pudicit. The Image of Christ
bearing a Lamb, was graven on the Chalices used in Churches; And how famous is
the memory of many more Images in the first three Ages, as that of our Savior
sent to Abgarus Prince of Edessa, of which see Evagrius l. 4. c. 26.
Mataphrastes, in the life of Constantine, S. John Damascon in his book of
Images. That which the woman cured of a Flux set up in brass at Caesaraea
Philippi; as witness Eusebius in his 7. Book Chapter 14. So Zomenus l. 5. c. 20.
and Damascene again, Ibid. a third made by Nicodemus, which being afterward
taken by the Jews, and in mockery crucified, was honored by God with many
Miracles, as is related by S. Athanasius, or some other most ancient Author of
the Book Entitled, of the Passion of our Lords Image. Besides these, Theodorus
Lect. l. 1. Collectan. makes mention of one of our blessed Lady, drawn by S,
Luke* Eusebius relates, that he did see many ancient Images of Christ placed
betwixt S. Peter and S. Paul, as much witnesses S. Augustine l. 1. De cons.
Evan. c. 10. Damasus in the life of S. Silvester, writes that Constantine in
the place where he was Baptized, Erected Silver Images of our Savior and S.
John Baptist, as also others in the Church of S. John Lateran, which the first
Christian Emperor had never done, nor S. Silvester permitted, if the practice
of the Church from the Apostles had not been such.

8. Protestants deny Free will, after the fall of Adam, but in the first Age,
S. Clement l. 3. recognit. Asks how does God judge every man by his deeds
according to truth; if he have not in his power to do what is commanded, if
this be held, all things are frustrate, in vain shall the study be of following
better things; In the same Age S. Ignatius Ep. ad Magn. If any man do wickedly,
he is a man of the Devil, not made so by Nature, but by his own free will.

In the second Age, S. Justin Martyr in Apol. Unless mankind can both fly foul
and undecent things, and follow fair and good things of his own free will; it
is without all cause and blame of theirs, howsoever things be done.

S. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 72. not only in works, but even in Faith has Almighty
God reserved liberty of will to Man, saying, be it to thee according to thy
Faith.

In the third Age, S. Cyprian in Deuteronomy. and l. 3. ad Quirin. c. 52. The freedom
of believing or not believing, is placed in the will.

In the same Age Origin hom. 12. in Number. O Israel, what does thy Lord God
require of thee? let them be ashamed of these words, who deny free will in man;
how should God require of man, unless man had in his power, what to offer to
God requiring.

9. Protestants deny merit of Works.

But in the first Age, S. Ignatius Ep. ad Romans says, Give me leave to become
the food of beasts, that by that means I might merit and win God. In the
second, Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. We think that men who by works have showed
themselves worthy, etc. shall by their Merits live and Reign with him.

In the third, S. Cyprian l. de Unit. eccl. We must obey his Precepts and
Admonitions, that our Merits may receive their reward.

And in his Sermon. de Eleem. If the day of our return shall find us unloadned,
swift, and running in the way of good works, our Lord will not fail to reward
our merits.

10. Protestants deny the possibility of keeping the Commandments, which S.
Basil. orat. in illud attend tibi; calls a wicked thing to say. S. Hierome on
the 5. of S. Matthew, Blasphemy: S. Augustine, sermon. 61. de tempore, a denial
both of the justice and holiness of God.

In the the third Age, Tertullian as cited by the Centurists, Cent. 3. says, No
Law could tie him, who had not in his power due obedience to the Law. This is a
maxim in Philosophy; wherefore Origin hom. 9. in Jos. says plainly, the
baptized may fulfill the Law in all things.

Now not to be more tedious or prolix in ciing either Passages or Fathers
(whose Quotations could easily make a just Volume) of the Sacraments I have
spoken in the former Section; and of the Pastors of the Church, their
infallible Authority in a general Council, in the third: which with what is
here said, are the main things and most substantial denied by Protestants, but
clearly asserted by the Fathers cited, who all confessedly did live in the
first three ages, a very few excepted; I have brought, of the fourth and fifth
age, only as witnesses of what was practiced in the Church before their time;
leaving the Canons of the Apostles, and many things by Tradition from them
conserved in the Church, and witnessed by the Fathers, with the Decrees of most
holy Popes and Martyrs of the first and second Age, as these of Anacletus,
Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus, Pius, Anicetus, Soter, etc. holding out so many
of our Tenets against Protestants: and this to shun Cavils and Exceptions,
which they might take either at their writings or place, as they do. As for the
same cause many other most renouned Authors, as Policarpus, Cornelius,
Prochorus, Methodius, Nilus, Agapetus, Dorotheus and others, upon this only
account, with the Book of Hermes (of whom S. Paul to the Romans, Chapter 16. makes
mention) called the Pastor, which Hamelmanus and M. Hooker both Protestants,
grant to have been reckoned by the ancient Fathers in the number of
Ecclesiastical Books, and particularly as seems to Hamelmanus by no less men
then Irenaeus, Clement, and Origin. Yet this Book in such esteem with them, he
will have to be impure, as laying the ground of Purgatory, Prayer for the dead,
Merit and Justification of Works, of professed Chastity in Priests and
Churchmen, of fasting from certain Meats at times, etc. But I hope M. Menzeis
will make no exception against most Authors I have produced, unless passing
from his appeal to the Fathers of the first three ages; he pass also from his
second ground of Faith, as certainly after all has been said he should do,
seeing I may justly speak home to him here, with S. Augustine in his 11. Book
against Julian, the Pelagian Heretic, c. 10. What the Catholic Fathers and
Doctors have found in the Church, that they hold: what they have received from
their forefathers, that they have delivered to their children. Whilst we had
no debate as yet with you before them as Judges, our case was pleaded amongst
them; we were not as yet contesting with you, and nevertheless by their decree
we have the victory over you. Neither is this victory imaginary (as that of M.
Menzeis) but real, as the three Arguments I have brought make good; which by
way of recapitulation, I set before him in this one Argument: the Doctrine of
the Church, and writings of the Fathers in the first three Ages, can be no
ground to Protestants for what they teach: First, if the chief Reformers disown
them. Secondly, if most learned Protestants accuse them of many Errors.
Thirdly, If their own Writings in all controverted Tenets be flatly against
Protestant Doctrine: but all this is true from the places produced; then their
Writings can be no ground to them. Yet Protestants will needs make up their
Religion from the Writings of the Fathers, as some Poets from the Centons and
broken Verses of Virgil and Homer, the life of Christ. They challenge the
Fathers for their Heresy upon a word or two picked out of places wherein they
have an Orthodox sense: In so many hundred Volumes of the Fathers writings,
that some word or passages seem to favor Heresy, what wonder? Gods own Word,
if we will stick to the naked Letter, seeming to favor so many, as we have
seen above. They oppose Fathers to Fathers, and sometimes one to himself, so
they are possessed with the Spirit of contradiction, that all may turn
Problematick, and be controverted among them. They cite the Scriptures against
the Fathers, as if their new and giddy headed start-ups, did better understand
them, then the most ancient and solid Divines; they will at times, by passages
of the Fathers or Scripture, strive to condemn the practice of the Church, and
Decrees of Councils: but whoever amongst the Fathers did so? does any one of
the Fathers (with the first Reformers) oppose Scripture as understood by them)
to the Authority of the Church, or to the same Scripture, as explained by her?
Does any of them attach the Roman Church of Error? To say such a Church, so
great and glorious in the Christian world, did Apostatize, and none did remark
her Apostasy; is like a general Eclipse of the Sun, remarked by none. The least
Errors of particular Heretics, the Fathers have so narrowly sifted, so
sharply censured, so solidly confuted: and shall we think, they have either not
spyed, or spared to censure the corruptions of a whole body and Church. But let
wise men and greatest Shcollars be at variance as they please, about some
places both of Scriptures and Fathers, as surely it will be to the Worlds end;
God has given us both a sure and short way, promised by the Prophet, wherein
even ignorants and fools cannot err, Christ having left us the present
Catholic Church in all ages, as the most faithful Depositary of his Doctrine,
and the Infallible Visible Judge of all that can be controverted in matters of
Faith.

Before I end this Section, to give you but a scantling with what sincerity and
candor Heretics cite the Fathers; this I borrow from M* Menzeis in his third
paper, where in general, he most confidently says, That whatever the ancient
Apologists, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Athenagoras have said for the
Christian Religion, the same Protestants may say for their own. Whereupon
having diligently read over the first of these Apologies, which is that of
Justin Martyr (as any may do in an hour) I have found him so grossly mistaken in
citing this Father, that I may justly say, he could not more forfeit his
reputation. This I evidence in four chief Points asserted by us, and denied by
Protestants.

The first is Free Will, for which Justin in his Apology is so clear, that
having said, If men had not in their Free Will, to fly what is filthy, and
choose what is honest, they should be no wise to blame for what ever action; he
will have it a Demonstration, That men have freedom to live virtuously, or fall
in sin, because we see them by experience to pass from one of these contraries
to the other. His words are, ac nisi libero arbitrio and ad turpia fugienda*
and ad honesta deligenda facultatem habeat mortalium genus, non fuerit in causa
sive culpa qualiumcunque demum, factorum: Sed enim libero id delectu tum recte
per virtutem vivere, cum per peccatum labi, ad hunc demonstramus modum: hominem
eundem ad contraria subinde transire videmus.

The second is Merit of Works, in acknowledging a reward to them, his words
again are, Atque hoc etiamsi paucis persuaferimus, maximum tamen inde feremus
lucrum; nam ut boni agricolae amplam a domino capiemus mercedem.

The third is the efficacy of Baptism, in cleansing us by water from all former
sins, and making us the children of God, Ut ne necessitatis and ignorantiae
liberi permaneamus, sed ^^^ectus and scientiae filii fiamus, ac remissionem
ante commissorum peccatorum consequamur in aqua.

The fourth the Real Presence, saying of the Consecrated Bread and Wine in so
express words; Not as common Meat and common Drink do we take these things, but
even as by the Word of God, our Savior JESUS Incarnate had flesh and blood for
our Salvation, so we are taught that the Eucharist is the flesh and blood of
the self same JESUS Incarnate: His words are; Non enim ut communem panem neque
communem potum ista sumimus; sed quemadmodum per verbum dei, caro factus Jesus
Christus Servator noster, and carnem and sanguinem habuit: ad eundem modum,
etiam eam in qua per preces verbi ejus ab ipso profecti gratiae sunt actae,
alimoniam, incarnati illius Jesu carnem and sanguinem esse edocti sumus. Nam
Apostoli in commentariis a se scriptis, quae Evangelia vocantur ita tradiderunt.

Diverse other things in the same Apology I pass, these few things being
sufficient, to show M. Menzeis ingenuity, and how he with other Heretics dare
cite the Fathers, who even most evidently and expressly condemn them.

But to close this Section (which citations have made longer then I intended)
with one Query I ask M. Menzeis where he shall find, so much as in one of the
Fathers, any point of Doctrine taught by the present Roman Church condemned of
Heresy: as many Protestant Tenets they hold against us, are declared Heretical
by so many, as by S. Ireneus l. 1. c. 20. to say with Simon Magus, that men are
not saved by good works; by S. Epiphanius haeres. 8. to say with Cerinthus,
That children may be saved without Baptism. By the same S. Epiphanius, to say
with the P^o^^ma^s, That God has commanded some impossible things. By S.
Augustine, l. 20. contr. Faust. to pull down Altars with the Manichees. By the
same S. Augustine l. 2. Contra lit. Petil. C. 32. and 34. To say with the
Donatists, That the Baptism of Christ, and that of S. John Baptist were all
one: by S. Epiphanius haeres. 75. and S. Augustine haeres. 53. To say with the
Arians, that Fasts of the Church are not to be observed, nor Prayers, nor
Sacrifice to be used for the dead. By Sozomenus l. 5. c. 20. and Eusebius l. 7.
C. 14. To forbid with Julian the Apostate, the use of Images, and Sign of the
Cross. by S. Hierome l. contr. Helvidianum. To equal marriage with Virginity.
By the same S. Hierom l. contr. Vigilant. To say with Vigilantius, Saints are
not to be Invocated, nor their Relics to be honored. By S. Hierome again, l.
3. contr. Pelagian. To brag as the Pelagians did, that they were sure of their
Salvation. By S. Augustine to say with Jovinian That such as are regenerate by
Baptism, and once received in Gods grace and favor cannot finally fall away.
By S. Hierome contr. Vigilant. To say Churchmen ought to marry. By S. Cyril in
Epist. ad Calo-syrium Episc. of Madness as well as Error. To say with some in
these days, Christ's body did not remain in the Eucharist, if it were kept
until the morrow. By S. Augustine l. 6. contra Julian. C. 2. and 3. and ad
Bonifac. C. 2. and 4. To say with the Pelagians, That the children of the
Faithful are born holy, and need no Regeneration by Baptism. By S. Augustine l.
de haeres. C. 54. To teach with the Eunomians, A man is saved by Faith only. By
S. Augustine l. 1. C. 2. and ult. contra Maximin. To deny Apostolical
Traditions in the Church. By S. Cyprian Ep. 55. to say with most Heretics, To
Peter's Chair and the Principal Church, Infidelity or false Doctrine can have
access. By Irenaeus l. 3. C. 3. to deny all Churches round about ought to
resort to the Roman Church, by reason of her more powerful Principality; By all
the Fathers in the Council of Calcedon Act. 16. To deny that all Primacy and
chief Honor is to be kept for the Archbishop of Old Rome. So that the
Protestant Religion is not only void of all Solid Ground either in the Divine
Scriptures, or Holy Fathers, but also in most clear and express words is
condemned as Heretical by both. It being indeed nothing but a new Heresy,
patcht up of many old condemned Errors, joined to some fresh Notions and
Conceits, flowing from the same Spring and Spirit of Pride and Rebellion
against all the Ancient Fathers and present Pastors of the Church; Its frequent
changes, show it is not from God: Its Monstrous Divisions in so many Sects,
that it has not the Unity of Faith: Its inconstancy in Principles, Tenets, Form
of Worship and Government, that it is not built upon the Rock, and consequently
has no solid Foundation or Ground.

Conclusion of all that has been said, wherein also the true Grounds of the
Catholic Religion are set down.
A Little Error in the beginning, turns great in the end, says the Prince of
Philosophers Aristotle in his Physics: which as it is most true in the first
Principles of all Natural Sciences, so it is in the Grounds of the Christian
Faith. The innumerable by-ways of Sectaries; their monstrous and manifold
Divisions from the true Church and amongst themselves; so many Controversies
among Christians in our days, such wranglings and jars for Religion, flow all
from one Spring, to wit, The mistake of true Principles and Grounds. And this
one Error in the beginning, makes them run themselves in so many, and infinite
great in the end.

Pride and Contention (the two Pillars of Heresy) will let them acknowledge no
Authority of Councils or Fathers, yield to no evidence of Reason, submit to no
Judge. Whence Controversies are driven to nothing, but idle and endless
Contentions and Quarrels: Councils are called Conventiles when they sentence or
censure them; the Church is changed into a Synagogue; the Fathers forfeit their
credit; places, and passages from Scripture, are applied or misapplyed as they
list; Now a jeer, now a jest in handsome Language (which jovial and jeering
humors most look upon) are their common Answers to solid Reasons: Evidence in
Motive of credibility is mocked at: Faiths certainty is changed into
probability: a few Fundamentals comprehending chief Mysteries (what or how many
they cannot tell) are judged only necessary to be believed; Errors in Integrals
(as they call them) which make the greatest part of Christian Doctrine, are
taught to be things indifferent to our belief: In them even the Apostles were
not in allible, say Rainolds and Whitaker, with some other Protestant Divines;
In them the whole Church may err, says M. Menzeis; and upon this, as if she had
erred, come in all Sectaries to reform her: she is old, and her Spirits
exhausted; they have the fullness of the Spirit: her Eyes by age are dimmed, she
sees not what is manifest in Scripture, they as younger see clear: she is too
Superstitious in her Religious Ceremonies, they as more familiar with God use
none: like Prophets Extraordinarily sent by God, they preach against Priests
and people: they set out a New Gospel of their own, as if they were Apostles
and Evangelists, finding no true Scripture before: Yea as if they had Christ's
own power, they abandon the Ancient Church as the Synagogue, and make up a new
one, changing both the Priesthood and Sacrifice: No more pennances and
satisfactions of men to Gods Justice for their offenses, because Christ has
satisfied for all: No more fasting, except very seldom, and that only for
temporal ends: No good Works are left in our power, they are too hard, yea
impossible, seeing even our best actions are sins, Faith only justifies, and
to believe is an easy task: So the strait path is made plain, and the narrow
way broad to them: Whilst others strive to work their salvation with fear and
trembling, chastizing their bodies with the Apostle S. Paul, least they become
reprobates; They live secure, that each of them is one of the Elect, making
even this an Article of his Faith. And this they persuade to simple ones with
some refined words, uttered in the tune of the Sybilles, giving responees from
the belly, so far they are fetched with a deep sigh, as if they breathed
nothing but zeal: some more Learned, relying on the acuteness of their wits, go
willingly along with them, not to captivate their understandings, or submit to
any Visible Judge; (...) men of interest comply outwardly with the prevailing
party, keeping their own retentions of mind; and this it is which their
Preachers for the most part desire of us, that we would but comply in hearing,
that is, believe one thing, and force our Consciences to profess another. Come
hear us say they, and you shall not be troubled, we seek no more, and of their
most understanding hearers they get no more, as I have often heard from
themselves. We are not (say they) so Proud and Arrogant as Papists, to call our
Church and her Doctrine Infallible, the Scripture is only so: By it judge of us
and what we teach, as you your selves read and understand: This is the liberty
of the children of God, to be tied to no Churches Faith, to no Councels
Decrees, to no Fathers Doctrine: The Word as clear in it self, or explained by
it self; the Spirit speaking inwardly in our hearts, and every man's Natural
Reason directed by certain Rules for the right understanding of both, is the
only means God has left for the conversion of Infidels, conviction of
Heretics, and settling of every good Christian in his belief. O Liberty,
Liberty and Freedom of the children of God, from the Popes Supremacy, Councels,
Infallible Authority, the Churches Jurisdiction in matters of Faith and
Religion, and generally the usurped power of any Visible Judge.

This is M. Menzeis, and Protestants great Principle, (which as I have
demonstratively I hope above proved) makes all our Debates in Religion, and
takes away all cerrainty in Faith.

But because to ruin Protestant Grounds, and give no better in their place,
were rather to destroy then edify, to throw down then to build, and in a
Controversy of Religion, rather to set up Atheism, then root out Heresy, (as
M. Menzeis continually cavilling at our Tenets, but never once settling his
own, with so much labor has done) I therefore do here for a Conclusion briefly
here set down, and clearly prove solid, the Grounds of the Catholic Faith.

The Ground then of true Faith and Religion Established by Christ and his
Apostles, not only solid and infallible in it self, but also clear and
perspicuous to all, yet special and particular to us in Communion with the Sea
of Rome, to which no Secta^y, Schismatic, or Heretic does or can pretend;
removing all Doubts, deciding all Controversies, silencing all sowers of false
Doctrine and Errors, keep^ng Unity, stopping Divisions, quieting men's
Consciences, instructing the Ignorant, settling the Unstable, captivating the
understanding of the most Learned to the obedience of Faith, and which the
greatest and quickest wits of the Christian World, (that is all the holy
Fathers) have ever built their faith upon; Is Scripture and Apostolical
Tradition conserved in the Church, as delivered expounded by her, both as an
infallible Propounder and Judge. Whence if any man here ask the Analysie and
resolution of our Faith? I answer him in a very few words: We believe such
things as are from Scripture, and Apostolical Tradition taught in the Church,
to be true, because God has revealed them: The reason again why we believe God
did reveal such things is, for that we see evident Motives of credibility in
this Church, and none else, wherein God shows himself Author of her Doctrine,
confirming it with diverse infallible Marks, and chiefly Miracles, (...) which
manifestly appear both his Subscription and Seal. Digitus Dei hic est,
Pharaoh's Magicians could not but acknowledge this, Exodus the 8. V. 19. Seeing
only the Dust of the Earth suddenly by Aaron changed into Vermin, they cried
out, The hand of God is here: So that there be two things to be remarked in the
Resolution of Divine Faith. The first is, God revealing, Deus revelans: And the
second is, God showing himself Author of such a Revelation; Deus proponens se
authorem revelationis, say the Divines. What God has revealed, is taught us by
his Church as an infallible Propounder; that he is Author of the Revelations
made to her, he attests in the Motives of credibility, as infallible marks,
that it is he who speaks: So all in our Faith is infallibly from God, and all
infallibly propounded to us. The things revealed by the true and infallible
Church; and the Revelation by infallible Motives, which being clear to all who
have Eyes, Ears, and Understanding, make evidently credible, and infallibly
certain all and every one Point of our Religion and Faith.

Now to prove what I have set down, to be the only true solid and infallible
Grounds, of the true Christian and Catholic Faith. 1. That Scripture is this
Ground, is granted by M. Menzeis, and all Protestants, so needs no proof as to
them. 2. That sole Scripture without the Declaration and Exposition of the
Church, as an infallible Propounder, Expounder, and Judge, cannot be this
Ground, is proved at length in my fourth Section, and presently you shall see
it again. 3, That Apostolical Traditions are necessarily joined with Scripture;
Is 1. proved from clear Scriptures, most expressly commanding us to receive
them, 2 These. 2.13. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word, or by Epistle. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Now I
command you brethren in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw
your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the
Traditions which he received. 1 Corinthians. 11.2. Remember me in all things, and
keep the Traditions as I delivered them to you. 2. By the Authority of the
Fathers of the first three ages quoted in my sixth Section, with that of S.
Chysostome, S. Augustine and others above mentioned. 3. From manifest and
Demonstrative reason, in some chief Points which all Christians believe without
any express Scripture, as I have instanced in persons in the Trinity,
Sacraments in the Church, the keeping of Sunday, etc. and in many Heresies
condemned by the Church, Councils, Fathers, yea and Protestants themselves,
without any clear Scripture can be brought against them* as S. Augustine
avoucheth of the Error of Donatists, etc.

Rests then only to prove that the Church's Authority as an infallible
Propounder is necessary, to make all these Divine and infallible Truths in
themselves, contained either in Scripture, or delivered by Apostolical
Tradition, both solid and infallible Grounds to us.

For this I presuppose, 1. From the Apostle S. Paul, Hebrews 11. That without
Faith it is impossible to please God. 2. From the same Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5.
That there is but one Faith, one Baptism, one Lord JESUS Christ. 3. From him
again, Hebr. 10.23. That we must hold fast the profession of our Faith without
wavering. From which Texts, importing the Necessity of Faith, the Unity of
Faith, and the steadiness in believing required in Divine Faith, it does follow
that some infallible means which all may make use of, must be appointed by God
to attain to this Faith so absolutely necessary to all. For to say God has
commanded us, and that under the pain of Eternal Damnation, to believe
undoubtedly; and not furnished infallible means to attain to such belief, were
to accuse his Goodness, Providence, and Wisdom. And this no Christian or
rational man will deny, so that all the Question that can be moved, is about
the infallible means to attain without doubt or wavering to Divine Faith, which
may persuade infallibly all sort of persons, that such things are revealed by
God, removing all reasonable doubts that can arise, either concerning Gods
Revelation (which is the formal object of Faith) or the things he has revealed
(which makes its material Object) and this means I say again, must not only be
solid and infallible objectively and in it self (as M. Menzeis will have the
Protestant Religion and Grounds of it) but also subjectively, and to us; it
being the same thing, as to make a persuasive motive, not to appear, and not to
be, according to that Maxim, Idem est non esse and non apparere. Wherefore a
ground however infallible in it self, yet not appearing so to us, and known to
be such avails nothing as to our belief. The Mathematicians Demonstrate, the
Sun to be many times greater then the Earth, and their Demonstration no doubt
is both certain and evident in it self, yet never shall persuade a Country
clown that it is greater then his Cap, for that no Demonstration of this is
clear and certain to him. Even so is it in the Ground of Faith, it must be both
solid and and infallible in it self, and it must be known to be such by all who
prudently rely upon it.

This presupposed, to conclude all that has been said, and fully prove both the
Ground of Faith in the Catholic Roman Church, solid as the Rock it is built
on, and the means for conveying it to us infallible; I first show against M.
Menzeis, or rather for him and his conversion, the necessity of an infallible
Propounder of what ^e must undoubtedly believe (for if this can be made good,
he engages again to turn Papist) 2. That the true Church is this infallible
Propounder. ^. That the Catholic Roman Church is the only true Church. 1. Then
as to the necessity of an infallible Propounder: If no men, no Church be
infallible in propounding, then holy Scripture, and consequently all that is
contained in it, is only delivered to us by fallible means, and so no
infallible certainty in Faith. The consequence is clear, for most infallible
Truths may be changed, altered, corrupted, and both fallibly and falsely
propounded to us, as the first and chief Mysteries of the Christian Religion by
Heretics have been. 2. Faith comes of hearing, says the Apostle then as there
be infallible believers and hearers, so must there be infallible Teachers, for
Hearing and Teaching are Correlatives. 3. No other infallible means is, or can
be assigned by Protestants to Ignorants, yea to all who understand not the
Original Languages, for what is contained in Scripture, save only the Authority
of their Pastors and Church, but this Authority in propounding is not
acknowledged infallible by them, then no infallible means is left. 4. There is
no less necessity the Church be infallible in propounding, then the Evangelists
in penning, and the Apostles in Preaching, no disparity can be given, Gods Word
being equally infallible in it self before both, as i^ is now. 5. Our Savior
Christ most expressly owns the necessity of an infallible propounder, granting
the Jews had not sinned in refusing to believe him, if by his Works and Wonders
he had not evidenced himself to be the Son of God, and consequently infallible
in his Doctrine. 6. For this, the gift of Miracles is given to the Apostles,
and left in the Church, to show their infallible assistance in propounding. If
you answer that was necessary at first, but not now, because it is the same
Doctrine you teach, which the Apostles did propound infallibly: You say
nothing, for that it is we doubt of, or rather undoubtedly we deny, that your
Doctrine is the same. You presently appeal to Scripture, but in vain, till
first you answer to all that is objected in my fourth Section, how ye know
infallibly what ye call Scripture to be Gods Word, then the Letter you read to
be uncorrupted, the sense you give to the genuine, etc. and to all the clear
places of Scripture I have brought against most of your particular Tenets. I do
not here ask ye (...) prove that to be infallibly Gods Word which was preached
by the Apostles, this they did sufficiently themselves: Neither that the
Doctrine of Authentic Scripture is infallibly true, (that was also done before
there was a Protestant in the world) but coming from those Generals (which make
all the Answers of your best Writers) we desire ye show by some infallible sign
that your Bible is Gods pure Word; and your Glosses on it conform to the Sense
and Letter. To reply, Scripture does evidence it self by its innate light to be
Gods Word, so that all may sufficiently know it by this, and all be obliged to
believe it, is refuted by Christ himself, presently telling us his own hearers
had not sinned in not receiving it as such, if he had given no External
Evidence of his infallibility in propounding; for as I have remarked above,
Scripture has no greater Efficacy, Evidence, or Light in our Books, then in
our blessed Saviors own mouth. Neither will the Majesty of the Style, or the
purity of the Doctrine do it, both these being as great in the the Books of
Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, which Protestants reject, as in the Ecclesiastes
and Canticles, which they receive. Besides that the first of these two is
imaginary, as to the Letter, there being less Majesty in the Letter of
Scripture, then in the Philosophers and Orators Writings, as is con^essed by
Paul. And the second is in question chiefly in Protestant Bibles, which do not
agree with any Original or Copy that before Luther can be found, if we trust
their own Authors whom I have quoted.

Lastly, If all Councils, all the Fathers, all the Pastors of the Church be
fallible, then let Protestants bring nothing but Scripture against us, (for we
will receive nothing but upon infallible Authority) and all their Volumes of
Controversy shall not come to one line. Yea further, could they bring
Scripture for what they teach (as they will never be able to do) yet without an
infallible Propounder and Judge, well might we dispute, but conclude nothing,
wrangle, but agree in nothing to the Worlds end. For as sole Scripture without
an infallible Church propounding, and Explaining it, so a naked Church without
infallible Marks, and a Doctrine without infallible Motives, prove nothing.

Secondly, I say the true Church is this infallible propounder, on whose
Authority we must rely. For proof of this, It is to be observed, that in holy
Scripture there be three Foundations or Grounds of Faith mentioned by the
Apostle S. Paul. The 1. Is our blessed Savior Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Another
Foundation no man can lay then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. The 2. Is
the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.29. Built upon the Foundation of Apostles
and Prophets. The 3. The Church, 1 Timothy 3. The house of God, which is the
Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

From which clear places of Scripture, I remark, 1. The Foundation of Faith is
ever a Living, Visible, and Speaking Ground, to wit, Christ, the Apostles,
Prophets, and Church, the dead Letter of Scripture being no where called this
Ground. 2. That these three Grounds of Faith, both in the Old and New Law,
properly speaking make but one, according to the same Apostle, for another
Foundation no man can lay, says he, beside Christ JESUS. So that the Prophets,
Apostles, and Church must not be thought different Foundations from Christ, all
their Virtue in upholding Faith, and Veracity in propounding Faith (Whence they
are called the Foundation and Ground of it) coming from the particular
assistance of his Spirit, Strengthening, Inspiring, and Directing them. Hence
also is their infallibility, for the Foundation of Christ stands sure, says the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19. And consequently is altogether infallible. 3. That the
Church here called a Ground which supporteth our Faith, is not to be said the
only diffusive body of all true Believers, but more the Representative Church
in her chief Pastors, as the Prophets and Apostles in old. Wherefore some few
Catholic Authors so often objected, as holding the Canons and Decrees of
Councils only infallible, when they are generally received by the whole Church;
in my opinion are highly mistaken, and surely to be understood (if any in
Express terms speaks so) of Councils not wholly Ecumenical, or not Lawfully
convocated, and knownly approved by the Pope, or whereof some rational doubt
may be made in things essentially required; in which cases I grant the general
belief of the Church could best warrant the infallibility of their Decrees.
Otherwise a few particular persons might cope with General Councels, as Luther
and his Adherents at first, Vendicating to himself the Negative voice, as if he
had been high Bishop in the whole Church; which were to take away all possible
means of preserving Unity in Faith, yea to foment all Schisms and Divisions,
every one pretending the whole Church holds no such Doctrine; whilst he who is
a Member dissents. So that such Doctors if they should allow no obligation in
receiving the Decrees of the Representative Church, to the which they do and
must submit even this their Sentence, could neither be thought Catholics or
rational men.

But however some few speak or think, God did promise us an infallible Church,
Isa. 2. V. 2, 3. Wherein he should teach us his ways, and judge amongst the
Nations himself, not personally, for he never went out of Jewry, but by her
Pastors. He has established this infallible Church, in St. Matthew. 16. V. 19.
Upon the Rock. Christ has commanded us to hear her, in St. Matthew. 18. V. 17.
And the persons we should hear in this Church, as well as the end wherefore we
would hear them, and rest upon their Authority, is clearly set down in these
words, 4. Ephesians. 11. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists,
some Pastors and Teachers, for perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, till we all come in the Union of Faith, that we henceforth be no more
children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, etc.
From all which places of Scripture, it is Demonstratively manifest, that as the
true Church is infallible, and we bound to hear her, yea and to rely upon her
Authority, as the Pillar and Ground of our Faith; so is it most evidently
clear, that as she speaks only to us infallibly by the voice of her Pastors
and teachers united, it is them we should hear, seeing God in her, (not
personally as I have said, but by them) both Judges and Teaches, as the
infallible Propounders of his Divine Truths (with the Prophets and Apostles in
old) and the infallible Judges of our Controversies and Debates.

2. The same is proven from the unanimous consent of the Fathers, quoted at
length in my third Section, for the infallibility both of the Church and
Councils; And may be confirmed even by the confession of many Rational and
Moderate Protestants, who receive the Scripture, and consequently all, and
every Point contained in it, as the Word of God, upon the sole Authority of the
Church; As M. Whitaker against Stapleton, p. 1. c. 11. I deny not but the
Churches Tradition is the Argument whereby to convince, what Books are
Canonical and what not. M. Fulk in his Answer to a Counterfeit Catholic; The
Church has judgment to discern the Word of God from the Writings of Men. M.
Covel in his defense of Hooker, Doubtless it is a tolerable Opinion of the
Church of Rome, to affirm, that the Scriptures are holy in themselves, but so
esteemed of us for the Authority of the Church. And M. Hooker in his
Ecclesiastical Policy, we all know that the first outward Motive leading men so
to esteem of Scripture, is the Authority of the Church. And as these own her
Authority in Propounding the Scripture Books, so other Protestants in resolving
all Doubts, and deciding all Debates; as Bancroft Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his Sermon on the 8. of February 1588. God, says he, has bound
himself to his Church of purpose, that men by her direction might in matters of
doubt be relieved, he speaks of the Representative Church, which only
directs. Master Field in the Epistle to his Treatise of the Church; Seeing
the Controversies of Religion are grown in number so many, and in Nature so
Intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding to
examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out, which among all the Societies of men
in the World, is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of Faith,
that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, that so they may embrace her Communion, follow her Doctrine, and rest in
her judgment? Here again the Representative Church both Judging and Teaching.
M. Hooker in the Preface of his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy: We are right
sure of this, that Nature, Scripture, and Experience have taught the World to
seek for the ending of Contentions, by submitting it self to some judicial and
definitive sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth, may under any
pretense refuse to submit. And what is this but a General Council? M. Bilson in
his perpetual Government is clear for it; To have no Judge, says he, for the
ending of Ecclesiastical Contentions were the utter subversion of all peace.
Synods are surest means to decide doubts. Sr. Edwin Sands in his Relation of
the Religion used in the West parts of the World. The Protestants are as
severed and scattered Troops, each drawing a diverse way without any means to
take up their Controversies, etc. No ordinary way to Assemble a General Council
of their part, which is the only hope remaining ever to aswage their
Contentions.

3. Reason evinceth it: The true Church is the School of infallible and Divine
Truths, then she must have infallible Masters and Propounders. A fallible
Church is most properly named by a Learned Writer, a Spiritual cheat; it may
well be called the Ground of Opinion, Doubt and Despair, but not of Infallible
and Divine Faith. If the Sheep hearing the voice of their Pastors, and
following them be misled, who shall be their sure Guide? And if all the
Fathers, and Doctors of the Church together assembled, may mistake either the
uncorrupted Letter, or true sense of Scripture; who I pray you can assure
himself he takes it aright? No infallibility in matte^^ of Faith and Religion
is left upon Earth; (...) the high Bishop and chief Pastors of the Church
unanimously Teaching and Propounding, cannot err; It were more then madness any
man should say the contrary, and yet hold himself infallibly secure of what he
believes.

Would a Protestant be but once at the pains to speak to an Infidel for his
conversion to the true Church, calling all her Pastors, even assembled in a
Council fallible: I should willingly hear what he could so much as say in
general for Protestancy, yea or for the Christian Religion. No doubt he should
first speak of one true God, then of Christ and Faith in him, as necessary to
salvation, telling his Proselyte, how out of his Goodness and Mercy toward us,
he had made himself Man, and died upon the Cross for our sins; Yet afterward
had risen again, and by his Miracles, showen both his Civinity and Power, and
by these strange Works and Wonders, having established his Church, he had
delivered his Will and Doctrine to her in his Written Word, called the Holy
Scripture. Upon this, the Infidel no little astonished at such a Discourse,
surely should ask him some Ground for it, and how he could be persuaded it were
true? Here I imagine the Bible is produced, as the Word of God, and sole ground
of Faith: But who assures me of this, says the infidel? It was attested by many
Miracles which Christ and the Apostles did work, who first pre^^hed it, Answers
the Protestant, they were holy men, chosen by our Savior Christ, for the
conversion of the World: they did Teach his Word Infallibly; They did set it
down in Writing, confirmed it with Wonders, and left it to the Church. How long
ago replies the Infidel? Nigh 1700. years answers again the Protestant. One
Question more, says the Infidel; have you any infallible Witness in your
Church, or any Infallible External Motive, that this is the same Word of God
that was Preached by the Apostles, and delivered by Christ; or that in
confirmation of it, ever any Miracle was wrought? The first needs none, says
the Protestant, it is clear to all well disposed persons; turn Protestant and
you will Evidently see it to be the Word of God; and the second is sufficiently
attested in it. Presently the Infidel having received further instruction in
most Points of Protestancy, and made more earnest to see how all that has been
taught him, is true; desires he may have for a time the Bible, and diligently
perusing it, finds some things in the Historical Books, look like Fables, many
more in the Prophets he does not understand, many seeming contradictions
betwixt the two Testaments, many points he was taught by his Protestant Master,
not in Scripture at all, yea many things clearly against it. Of all which he
asks his Master a diligent account; And first whether at present there be no
man, or company of men can resolve him infallibly of all these doubts? None,
concludes the Protestant but Scripture it self, for since the Apostles there is
in the Church no Judge, no Propounder infallible. If so, Sir, you conclude
nothing with me, says the Infidel, but here I end with you; for the Book you
ground all you have said upon, as if it were clear and infallible to me, like
the first Principles in our Philosophers Schools, is so deeply obscure, and
highly above the reach of reason, that without some powerful motive and
inducement, no reasonable man can believe it. And since you grant it was at
first propounded with infallible Motives which now have ceased, It seems God
would have it believed no more. For who can prudently believe things not clear
in themselves, or at least not so to us, without some infallible Propunder
evidencing by Supernatural Motives (as Miracles) that such a Doctrine is from
God? Neither can a Protestant standing to his Principles say any more; whence
no conversion of Infidels amongst them.

But no end of their cavelling with us. They here urge, 1. Suppose the true
Church were infallible in her Pastors assembled in a Council; yet all we bring
in proof of this, may be retorted against our private Teachers, who are not
infallible in propounding. But to this it is easily answered, that as God most
infallibly, both by his general Providence, and particular Promise directs,
rules, and governs his Church; so she by virtue of his special assistance
oversees infallibly her private persons, in order to our certainty in Faith.
For in the holy Hierarchy of the Church, God has placed Watchmen most vigilant
over their flocks, who suffer them not to be misled: they have discovered the
very least Errors, sown in Corners, and branded their Authors as false
Teachers. Wherefore as unity in belief is the Form and Soul of that great body
of the Catholic or Universal Church, so whatever Doctrine is commonly taught
and received in her without any contradiction from her Pastors, is sufficiently
known to be infallible.

2. They object there is no infallible Propounder of this Article of our Faith;
The Church is Infallible, Answer, Yes, 1. God shows himself the Propounder of
this in the Marks of the Church, which we shall presently see. 2. As our
Savior Christ calling himself the Son of God, and working Miracles, did
sufficiently, yea, infallibly evidence to the Jews, that it was true what he
said: So the Church calling her self infallible, and working the like Miracles
in all Ages, does infallibly evidence to the world that it is true what she
says, otherwise it would follow that God did employ his Omnipotency and Power
to work Miracles in favor of an Impostor, thus cheating the world with a lie.

3. Therefore I say, the Catholic Roman Church, is the only true Church, in
which the Doctrine of Christ is infallibly propounded, and certainty in Faith
and Salvation to be found. This Point is of highest concern according to the
Fathers; For, it is only the Catholic Church, says Lactantius, l. 4. that has
the true Worship and Service of God: That is, the Wellspring of Truth, the
dwelling place of Faith, the Temple of God, into which, whosoever enters not,
and from which, whosoever departs, is without all hope of Life and Salvation.
Whosoever is divided from her, says S. Augustine in his Epistle, 152. how
laudable soever he seems to himself to live, for this only crime, that he is
separated from the unity of Christ, he shall be excluded from life, and the
wrath of God shall remain upon him. And again in his 50. Epistle, as a Member
cut off wants the spirit of life, so a man separated from the body of Christ,
cannot have the spirit of Justice, etc. They have not the Holy Ghost who are
out of the Church. S. Cyprian de Unitat. Eccl. The Spouse of Christ cannot be
defiled with adultery, whosoever divided from this Church cleaves to the
Adulteress, he is separated from the Promises of the Church, he cannot have God
for his Father, who has not the Church to his Mother. S. Irenaeus l. 3. C. 40.
in the Church God has constituted Apostles, Prophets, Doctors, and all the
rest of the Operation of the Spirit, whereof those are not partakers who repare
not unto the Church; where the Church is, there is the Spirit of God.
Vincentius Lyrinensis, contr. haeres. C. 1. and 2. says, That he having very
often most diligently inquired of many Holy and Learned men, how he might
certainly distinguish the true Catholic Faith from all Heresies, it was ever
answered him by the Law of God, and the Tradition of the Church, Divinae legis
authoritate and Catholicae ecclesiae traditione. Then making to himself the
common Objection of Protestants, seeing the Rule of Scripture is perfect, what
necessity of joining to it the Tradition of the Church? He presently Answers,
because all take not Scripture one way, and in the same sense, because of its
deepness. All the Fathers run upon this, out of the Catholic Church, no true
Religion, no Divine Faith, no infallible Guide, no sure way to Salvation, no
hope of Heaven, no means to attain Eternal Happiness and Life.

Wherefore God by his Divine Appointment, Order, and Decree having tied us, and
that under no less pain then the damnarion of our Souls, to live in the Unity
and Communion of this Church, in which only he has placed the Chair of his
Doctrine, and Channels of his Graces. I presuppose, 1. This Church may be
easily known, and that by clear Marks in all Ages, and by all, she being so
amply great, and Eminently high, that the Prophet Isa. Chapter 2. calls her, The
Mountain of the Lords house established in the top of Mountains, and exalted
above the Hills, to which all Nations should flow 2. Tat those Marks be the
same now, which did evidence her in Christ's, and in the Apostles time; for all
things are best conserved by the same means by which they received their being,
says the Philosophers, Conservatio continuata productio. 3. That whatever
Church is found to have these Marks, should be undoubtedly acknowledged for the
true one, otherwise they could not have proved her the true Church at first.

This presupposed, that the Catholic Roman Church is the only true Church, I
most evidently prove in short (for this has been often done in large volumns)
and that by a very few undoubted Signs, and as it were most legible Characters
of the Primitive Church in the time of the Apostles, paralelling the one with
the other.

Three things are chiefly remarkable in the Apostles, and Church under them. 1.
Their Sanctity and Holiness of Life. 2. The great conversion of Infidels
wrought by them. 3. Their manifold and wonderful Miracles. These be the Marks
of their mission, by which they show themselves to be the servants of God, to
be sent by God, and that God by his Virtue and Power concurreth and cooperateth
with them. Their Holy, Humble, Poor, and Austere Life, makes them like to their
Master Christ, and fit Instruments for the great Employment they are going
about: Miracles make their Credential Letters, and witness the fullness of their
power; Conversions are the end of their Embassy, which as it was to last till
all the Nations of the earth were brought to the Unity of Faith, and bosom of
the Church, according to that Promise of Christ, There shall be one shepherd,
and one Fold, so their true Successors are constantly known by the same Signs
in all Ages, as the undoubted Marks and Badge of the Apostles.

I begin at Miracles, which I call the Apostles Credentials, and make the chief
infallible Mark of the true Church, and all infallibly credible which is taught
in her, as the great Seal God sets to her Doctrine. In the first Age, the
Miracles of the Apostles and Disciples are set down in holy Scripture, so need
no other Testimony. In the second Age, Justin Martyr quaest. 28. reports many
wrought by the bodies, and at the Sepulchers of Martyrs, and Irenaeus, l. 2. C.
58. innumerable others for the conversion of the Gentiles. In the third Age
many most great ones are wrought by S. Gregory surnamed Thaumaturge, or worker
of Miracles, related by S. Gregory Nissen in his Life, and S. Basil de Sp.
Sanct. c. 29. diverse whereof by the Sign of the Cross. S. Cyprian sermon. de
laps. relates with many others, three very strange Miracles in this Age,
confirming the Real Presence. In the fourth Age, a dead body is restored to
Life by the holy Cross, when it was first found by the Empress Helena, as
witness Ruffinus, Nicephorus and others. Many other Miracles are wroughe by
Relics, witnessed by S. Chrysostom, orat. contr. gentes, by holy Water
attested by S. Epiphanius, haer. 30. by Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament;
witness S. Gregory Nazianzen orat. 11* by Prayer to our Lady says the same
Author, in S. Cyprian, by the Merits of Martyrs, as relates S. Ambrose Sermon.
21. In the fifth Age, S. Augustine l. 22. de civit. c. 8. many by the Relics
of S. Stephen, and an house dispossessed of Devils by saying of Mass, S.
Chrysostom says, by the sign of the holy Cross. Eusebius Cremon. writes, S.
Hierome being dead, the blind, deaf, dumb, and sick were cured by touching and
kissing his Corpse. In the sixth Age, Miracles are wrought to confirm the
Sacrifice of the Mass, witness S. Gregory l. 4. dial. C. 57. by the Relics of
S. Martin, as is related by S. Gregory of Tours, de Miracul. S. Martini l. 1.
c. 11. Two others says S. Gregory, l. 3. dial. C. 3. by John the first, and
Agapitus, both Popes. In the seventh Age, we have Miracles in defense of vowed
Virginity, related by Sigibert, an. 670. wrought by Relics, in Bid, l. 5. c.
11. By the Images of S. Anastasius, at the very sight whereof ^evils fled, and
diseases were cured, in act. 2. Synod. Nicen. In the eighth Age, diverse
Miracles are wrought at the translation of S. Augustines Relics from Sardinia
to Ticinum, by Luitprand King of the Long^bards, after he had redeemed it with
a great sum of money from the Sarazens, witness Oldardus Ep. ad Carol. Magn. A
Crucifix in the City of Berith, stabbed by the Jews, bleedeth, and the blood
cures all diseases, witness Crantius with the Magdeburgians Cen. 8. In the
same age Pope Leo the third, having his tongue cut, and his Eyes pulled out by
the Pagans, had them both restored by the Intercession of S. Peter, as it is
Recorded by Anastasius, Baronius, and many others. In the ninth Age,
innumerable Miracles are done at the Tomb of S. James, and by a Picture of S.
John Baptist, related by Curopalates, Baronius, and other most approved
Authors, as also most famous Miracles of three Popes, Stephen the fifth,
Paschalis the first, and Formosus. In the tenth Age by S. Romuald, and S.
Dunstan to be seen in Surius, Baronius, etc. by touching S. Peter's Chains in
Sigibert, an. 965. In the approbation of the single life of Priests, and the
exemplary punishment of them who opposed it; see for this Matthew of
Westminster, an. 975. And Osbert in the life of S. Dunstan. In the eleventh
Age, by three Popes, Leo the 9. Victor the 2. and Gregory the 7. the Authors
you have in Baronius, who with him confirm them. By S. Edward King of England,
for which see Alredus in his life; by S. Anselme Bishop, S. Odilo Abbot, S.
Chunegunde Virgin, related by Surius and other Writers of their lives. In the
twelfth Age, the Miracles of S. Malachy, Apostle of Ireland, are recounted by
S. Bernard (whom even Calvin calls a holy man) one whereof confirms Extreme
Unction, and another the Real Presence. Many likewise are to be seen in the
Life of S. Bernard himself, and one most notable in confirmation of the whole
Catholic Roman Faith. In the thirteenth Age, we have the many famous Miracles
of S. Dominic, S. Francis of Assisium, S. Antony of Padua, S. Lovis of France,
S. Celestine Pope, and S. Clare witnessed by S. Antonine, S. Bonaventure,
Petrus Cardin. Camerasc. Baronius and others, all most renowned Writers. In the
fourteenth Age, the Miracles of S. Nicholas Tolentine, S. Roch, S. Katherin of
Siena, are Chronicled by S. Antonine, Surius, Baronius, etc. In the fifteenth
Age, S. Antonine 3. par. hist. tit. 23. testifies thirty eight dead persons to
have been restored to life, by the Prayers and Merits of S. Vincent. Many sick
are also cured by the Intercession of our blessed Lady, at her house in Loreto,
and the Turkish Army terrified by Miracles from sacking it, as Reports
Tursellin l. 2. hist. laur. In the sixteenth Age, many great Miracles done by
S. Francis of Paula, S. Ignatius of Loyola, and S. Terese are Authentickly
proved in the process of Canonization, and the Authors of their lives. In the
same Age, S. Francis Xavier, called commonly the Apostle of Japonie, and the
first Jesuit sent to the Indies, raises four from death, and works
innumerable other Miracles attested by the Viceroys, Governors, Prelates,
Pastors, and people of those Countries, in which it is reported he Baptized
about twelve hundred thousand souls with his own hand. Some moderate
Protestan^^ even honor his memory, and make mention of his admirable
Conversions; and if others should deny his Miracles, we might come to that S.
Augustine calls the greatest of all, to wit, that he should have converted so
many, and wrought none.

Many thousand more Miracles are recorded in the Writings of the Fathers in all
Ages, in the Monuments of the Church, yea, and in the Histories of each
particular Christian Nation; as in France, that famous apparition of our
Savior Christ in the Consecrate Host at Paris, in the time of King Lovys the
9. to which were eye witnesses, most inhabitants of that great City: In Spain,
that miraculous Cross placed on the Altar by an Angel, at the conversion of a
King of the Moors, desirous to hear Mass, which is kept in the Town of
Caravaca, and works Miracles to this day. In Italy, the wonderful Translation
of that holy house wherein our blessed Savior lived at Nazareth, to Loreto, at
which so many Miracles have been wrought by the Intercession of our Lady, and
attested by so great Gifts and Offerings, that of a mean Cottage, it is now the
richest Chapel in the World. In Flanders, the miraculous cures at our Ladies
Chapels of Hall and Sichem, written in two Books, by that Famous and Learned
Author Justus Lipsius, and of which he gives this Testimony in his first
Chapter; Behold, things done in the Eyes of us all, behol^ them celebrated with
the Concourse, Applause, Fruit and Benefit of whole Countries; what truth can
there be in Humane Affairs, if no credit be given to these things? In Poland,
that most notorious Miracle of a man raised to life after he had been seven
years dead, and brought before the King sitting in Justice, to witness he had
sold such a piece of Land to the Church. In England we have from their best
Authors, how in a public Assembly the opposers of a single life in Priests are
all smothered under the ruins of the room, only S. Dunstan and those who with
him defended it, being miraculously preserved; where also the many Miracles of
S. Winefride, Virgin, to the great good and constant cure of the multitude
having recourse to her Chppel and Fountain, continue even in our days. In
Scotland, a Miracle makes the arms of one of our chief Cities, others of S.
Mungo, S. Fiaker, S. Margaret, etc. are famous in our Chronicles, yea the ever
continued Miracles in many places consecrated in old time to God and his
Saints, make the people as yet to frequent the very rubbish and ruins of our
Chapels.

Now to reflect a little upon what I have said. 1. The Miracles I here speak
of, are for the most part the same, or like to those which Christ and his
Apostles did (...) as the sudden cure of naturally incurable Diseases, the
raising of the Dead, the casting out of Devils, etc. 2. They have been done in
all Ages, in the Catholic Roman Church, and in no other. 3. The Workers of
them, are Popes, Bishops, Priests, Eremits, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and others,
all knowingly opposers of Protestancy; all living in Communion with the Sea of
Rome. 4. They are witnessed by the most Learned, Judicious, and Virtuous
Witnesses of the Christian World, yea are so notoriously Evident, that
Heretics cannot but avouch them, with the Centurists of Magdeburg and others.
5. Many of them are not only Personal Miracles, Witnessing the holiness of the
Person that Works them (as these which serve for the Cononization of our
Saints) but also Dogmatical, confirming our Doctrine against Protestants, as
being wrought by Relics and Invocation of Saints; the Sign of the holy Cross,
holy Water, saying of Mass, Exorcisms, Pilgrimages to holy Chapels of our
blessed Lady and other Saints; by real Apparitions of our Savior Christ in
form of a Man in the Consecrate Host, etc.

What then can Protestants Answer with any show of Probability, to this first
Mark of the Catholic Roman Church? Shall they grant a false Religion to have
so many Miracles, and theirs which is the true, to have none? or shall Christ's
promise in S. John Chapter 14. made to faithful Believers prove false, that
Protestancy may at least seem to be true? They will rather deny these Miracles
which I have brought, and all others since the Apostles, for their Negative
Faith, Engages them ever to a strong Denial, as all their New Religion is but
a denying of most Ancient and known Christian Truths; Yet shall any man upon
their bold denial distrust such a crowd of so Famous Witnesses, and Writers?
Shall they say many Miracles have been fained? so some Gospels; but what makes
that more against these of the Catholic Roman Church, then those of Christ and
his Apostles? What has not been counterfeited? Gold, Silver, Jewels, Wines;
does it follow there be none true, or that no man can distinguish things
Sophisticated from pure and real? Could not S. Justin, S. Irenaeus, S.
Chrysostom, S. Basile, and S. Augustine, relating so many done by Relics,
and Invocation of Saints, judge of true ones? Or were S. Athanasius, and S.
Hierom, relating the Miracles of S. Anthony, S. Gregory of Nisse, and S.
Basile, those of S. Gregory Thaumaturgus, Severus Sulpitius, and S. Gregory of
Tours, those of S. Martin, Theodoret, those of S. Nicolas, S. Gregory the
great, those of S. Bennet, S. Bonaventure, those of S. Francis, so easily
deceived? shall they deny the Workers of such Miracles, to have been Members of
the Roman Church, or them to have been wrought in Confirmation of the present
Romish Faith? But it is by saying of Mass, making the sign of the Cross,
Invocating of Saints, honoring of Relics, they have been done. Shall they
have recourse in fine to the false Miracles of Infidels, Heretics, Magicians,
the Antichrist or Devil? So did the Arians, Eunomians, and other Heretics, as
reports S. Ambrose in his Sermon of S. Gervase and Protase, S. Hierome against
Vigilantius, and Victor Uticensis in his second Book of the persecution of the
Wandales, and is the same the Jews did say to Christ, but more then either Men
or Devils can do. All those things which Heretics, or Infidels have done, or
that Antichrist shall do, being but like these of Pharaoh's Magicians, little
curious Trifles of a short lasting, and that may proceed from Natural Causes:
But so are not the Miracles I speak of, for they are the very same with those
of Christ and his Apostles; they are attested by the holy Fathers and Doctors
of the Church, who could best judge of true and real ones; and as they have
been wrought in the Catholic Roman Church, and in her only in all Ages, so in
every Age have they brought in some Nation of Infidels to the bosom of the
same Church.

This is the second thing remarkable in the Apostles, and no less Conspicuous
in the Catholic Roman Church. Whosoever then desires to see this second Mark
of the true Church verified in the Roman Church* Let him but cast an Eye over
all the Nations which were ever converted from Infidelity to Christianity since
the Apostles, and then but take a view in their respective Histories and
Records, who were their Apostles? out of which Church they were sent, and to
which Church they did at first bring in their Proselytes and Converts. And he
shall find all this great Work to have been done by no other then Popes,
Bishops, Priests, and Religious men, all living in Communion with the Roman
Church, all acknowledging her Headship over other Churches, all teaching her
Doctrine, all submitting to her Authority, and all propagating her Faith. See
for this in general, the Theater of the Conversion of all Nations, Written by
Mermannius, and the History of the Church by Baronius, and Spondanus, ^ll in
particular, the Records of each Nation; yea and the Magdeburgian Centurists,
though Protestants: It being so notoriously evident, that even our adversaries
cannot deny it, and if they should, the very Walls of Churches, Chapels,
Monasteries, adorned with Crosses, Statues, Images, and other marks of the
present Roman Religion, might sufficiently prove it against them. Pope
Alexander the 1. is glorious for the conversion of so many of the Roman
Senators and Nobles: Pope Sylvester, for that of the first Christian Emperor
Constantine the great, the Bulgarians are converted by Pope Nicolas the 1. the
Bohemians by Stephen the 7. Norway by Adrian the 4. the Pomeranians by Nicolas
the 3. all Popes. S. Elutherius Pope, sends to this our Island two of his
Clergy, who convert King Lucius and his Subjects; Scotland ows its conversion
to Pope Victor by his Envoys and Legates; Ireland to Pope Celestine, who sent
thither S. Patrick, England to S. Augustine sent by S. Gregory the great:
Clovis first Christian King of France is converted by S. Rhemigius Bishop of
Rhemes; the Franconians by S. William; the Thuringians, Hassits, and a great
part of Germany, by S. Boniface; the Flemins by Eligius; the Danes and Swedes
by Ansgratius; the Sclavonians and Hungarians by the two Adelberts; the
Polonians by Aegidius, Tusculanus sent by Pope John the 13. run thus through
all the other Kingdoms and Provinces of the Christian World, you shall
constantly find the same: And this as in all former Ages, so in ours, witness
the Conversions of the Japonians, Indians, Brasilians, Mexicans, Peruans,
Canadas, Algonquins, and many other Savage Nations in America, the Coasts of
Afric, and remotest corners of the Earth, where the Catholic Roman Church ever
like to her self in the Primitive times, and her Pastors and Preachers to the
Apostles, continue their Labors to this day, with such success by the
blessings of God, that they have converted ten to the Christian Faith, for one
Protestants have perverted. But what Kingdom, Province, or Town did ever
Protestancy enter in, which it did not find Catholic? Never so many Sects of
Heretics, yet not one goes to convert Infidels, all their business is with
Papists, and all their Forces employed against the Roman Church, a clear
Demonstration she is the only true Church, so generally opposed by them all.
But whatever they can do is in vain, she being built on the Rock, against
which all the Powers of Hell shall not prevail. Their Disputes serve for
n^thing but to clear her Doctrine, their Controversies but to confirm her
Faith, their Persecutions but to Crown her sufferings, their unchristian Maxims
against the Evangelical Counsels of voluntary Poverty, vowed Chastity, and a
retired, humble, devote, austere, and obedient life, but to make more
gloriously appear, the incomparable Sanctity, Holiness, and Virtues of her
Saints.

And this is the third thing remarkable in the Apostles and Primitive
Christians, which in all following Ages has so gloriously shined in the
Catholic Roman Church, their examplary holiness in following Christ by
renouncing to the World, living chaste, contemning both Riches and Pleasures,
their holy hatred of themselves, the hardship of their travels, and labors for
the conversion of others, their continual Fasting, and frequent Prayer. This
Mark of the Churches Sanctity is set down in the Creed, I believe the holy
Catholic Church; It is confirmed by Authority of Scripture, S. Paul in the
beginning of all his Epistles almost, calling the Churches to which he writes,
holy, as in that to the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, Philippians, and
Colossians, as S. Peter calls the Church generally the holy Nation, it is also
Visible to all; as the goodness of a Tree is seen by the Fruit, so the holiness
of the Church, by her Works.

Now let us see in what Church the greatest Lights of the Christian Religion
have shined? what Church has most Monuments of Christian piety? in what Church
the Examples of Christ and his Apostles, have been most narrowly followed? Who
have built most glorious and goodly Edifices of Churches to the honor and for
the service of God; who so many Monasteries to harbor his more devoted
Servants; who so many Hospitals for the poor? who best Evidenced true Faith by
good Works? who have most put in practice all the hardest Maxims of the Gospel?
who taken greatest pains for the Salvation of Souls? who show'n greatest love
toward God, and greatest charity to their neighbor? whether Papists giving so
liberally to God and his Church, or Protestants taking back what they had
given? By their Fruits ye shall know them, says our Savior Christ, our actions
give testimony of our Faith. The holy Fathers writing so many lives of our
Saints, witness enough their unparalled piety, yea and God himself working so
many Miracles by them. How many Princes and Monarchs in the Catholic Roman
Church, have laid down their Crowns at the foot of the Cross, have quitted
Kingdoms, renounced pleasures, forsaken the World, taking themselves to a poor,
humble, mortified, and austere life? how many thousands, yea millions of
Eremits, Monks, and other Religious persons, men and women have totally
consecrated their lives to the service of God? No Age, no Order, no degree of
Persons in this Church wants most Eminent men in Sanctity and Holiness: Above
30. Popes have been all most glorious Martyrs, besides many more Saints, as our
Gregory's, Leo's, Celestines, etc. our holy Bishops are in number above the
Stars of the firmament, and our Priests and Religious like the Sand of the Sea:
S. Henry Emperor, S. Lovis K. of France, S. Edward King of England, S.
Malcolme and S. David Kings of Scotland, with S. Helena Mother to Constantine
the great, S. Margaret, S. Cunegund, S. Elizabeth, and many others all Kings
and Queens, have shown the Sanctity of our Monarchs. See the holy Court, and
History of the Church for the holiness of so many amongst the Nobility and
Gentry, and the Lives of our Saints, and Writings of the Fathers, for the
eminent virtues of innumerable ^f others, both amongst the Gentry and Commons.
S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Bernard, and other holy Fathers
having honored their Memory, and Festival days with most Eloquent Sermons in
their praise, as God by his Omnipotency and Power, has sealed their sanctity
with undoubted Miracles, both in their Lives, and in their Deaths.

What can all the Sectaries which have ever been, shown like to this, or what
can they say against it? shall it be that all are not Saints even amongst our
most Austere Religious men? but neither were all Saints amongst the Apostles;
and the Primitive Church even in their time wanted not its scandals, which
shows it was not only composed of the Elect: the total separation of the good
from the bad, is not the work of men now, but of the Angels at the last day;
till then as the Tares grow up in the best Fields of Corn, so shall there be
ever many wicked and scandalous in the true Church. But out of it, no Saints,
no safety for sinners, no Sacraments that sanctify, no means of reconciliation
with God.

I insist not here any further on the other Marks of the true Church, as their
Antiquity, Universality, Unity, and the very name of Catholic, which are to be
found at length verified of the Roman Church, in many whole and large Volumes.
No other Church having ever been generally called by this name, or known under
it, but all by their private Denominations, as the Arians, Pelagians,
Eutychians, Macedonians, etc. in Old; so the Lutherians and Calvinists now. And
if we call this Catholic or Universal Church also the Roman Church, we speak
with S. Paul calling the Catholic Faith spread through the whole world,
theirs. No other Church having constantly appeared visible in her Pastors and
people, by a continued succession from the Apostles, which held S. Augustine in
her, Tenet me in Ecclesia, says he, Successie facerdotum, I am holden in the
Church by the succession of Priests, then he reckons out the only high Priests
and Bishops of Rome as the lawful Successors of S. Peter, as in his 162.
Epistle, he says, in the Roman Church has ever been the Authority of the
Apostolic Sea, In ecclesia Romana semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit
authoritas. No other having unity in Faith, or the means to preserve it by
General Councils, which have all been holden in her. No other, and specially
the Protestant Church, having either Universality or Antiquity, as is clear
from their late Rise, and little Extent.

Whatever Protestants and other Sectaries sophistically or Subtly Object
against all this, is but weak, and should stumble none, many stronger
Objections, Atheists, Infidels, and Heretics have made against God, our
Savior Christ, and the holy Scripture. The first Principles most clear by the
light of Nature, suffer their Objections, whence the Scepticks amongst
Philosophers, as the Socinians amongst Heretics, those admitting of nothing as
unquestionably clear, and these as infallibly true.

Wherefore to conclude all, I have said: the Catholic Roman Church being so
gloriously marked, so generally attested, and so notoriously known to be the
true Church established by Christ and his Apostles, ever conspicuous and
visible, ever working Miracles, converting Infidels, making Saints; ever
holding Councils, deciding controversies, keeping unity, opposing Heretics,
and maintaining true Faith upon Solid and Infallible Grounds, having so clear
testimony from the Fathers, from Scripture, from God; having charisma veritatis
certum, the Gift and Grace of certain and infallible Truth, says S. Irenaeus;
origines firmas, sure beginnings says Tertullian, Veritatem undequaque
munitam, verity solidly grounded and guarded, says S. Epiphani^s, haeres. 55.
authoritatem stabilissimam, most solid and constant Authority, says S.
Augustine, Ep. ^8. may (...) not say justly with our Countryman Richard of S.
Victor, l. 1. de Trinit. c. 2. Si error est quem credimus a te decepti sumus.
If it be Error we do believe (in this Church, and upon her Authority) it is
thou (O God) who has deceived us, for with such signs this Doctrine is
confirmed, that it can be from no other but thee.

Let the impartial Reader here compare both Protestant Grounds and Doctrine
with ours, and see, after all their Objections and Cavils, what they bring for
their new, doubtful, and inconstant Opinions, against our old infallible and
constant Faith: what against our just claim, our clear right, our long and
uninterrupted possession. They come in with the Scripture in hand, as the
Fundamental Law against which there can be no prescription, but what Scripture,
I pray you, save that they have wrested from us? olim possideo, prior possideo,
says Tertullian, it was first delivered to us, we have it of old, and we
conserve it whole and entire. But not so Protestants; the many Books they
reject shows it is but like a torn bond in their hands, blotted in as many
places, as there be things put in of new, or others rased out in their Bibles.
And then as they bring it, it is altogether forceless, and can make no security
as a rent Charter without Subscription, Witness, or Seal: Gods Subsciption
would be seen and acknowledged if it were presented by them, as at first by the
Apostles with Supernatural (...) Motives: witnesses, if they could show it
handed down from age to age by infallible Propounders; his-Seal in Miracles.
But the Protestant Church granting her self to be fallible, and being destitute
both of infallible Motives of credibility and miracles, can be no sure
propounder of Gods Word, neither can it as propounded by her, be any sure
ground to us.

Yea, Examine well all the Principles Protestants build their Pretended
Reformation upon, and you shall find them all mearly Whimsecal, Paradoxal* and
improbable. For what Probability can there be, 1. Of what they say against us,
that the Popish Church (as they call it) which they grant to be most ancient,
should have continued so long, and ever possessed the greatest part of the
Christian World holding Councils, condemning Heresies, converting Infidels,
working Miracles, and that the Protestant Church which they will have to be the
Catholic or Universal, all this time was no where to be found, never once made
mention of by any Author; without Councils, Statutes, or Laws published to the
World; never converting one Kingdom, opposing one Heresy, having one Writer of
note witnessing her Faith and Doctrine, her doings or sufferings, her Pastors
or People: That the ancient Congregation diffused through the whole World,
should be Heretical, and the new one in some few corners be Orthodox: That
corruption of Doctrine did enter so insensibly into the Roman Church, that no
Councils, no Fathers did see or censure it, who have observed many lesser
things in private men; that all the Fathers I have quoted in my 6. Section,
should have unanimously holden ever since the Apostles, what Protestants call
Popish Errors, or that so many Learned men in the Roman Church, who have dived
into the very depth of most abstract Sciences, could not see before Luther,
what in Scripture was clear.

2. What probability for what they vent of their first Apostles and Reformers?
that God did send one Apostate Friar (who in the Monastery as he confesses
lived so mortified, chaste, and devote, but quitting it, is so hurried with his
passions of Lust, and stings of Conscience even for this his new Doctrine, as
may be seen in the Preface of his Works in Latin, and his Table Conferences)
without any visible mark of his Mission, to reform both his Word and Church, in
opposition to all her ordinary Pastors at that time: that the Church before him
(I mean Luther) as he himself glories, should have been destitute of the true
Letter and sense of Scripture, of true Worship, true form of Government, etc.
that notwithstanding so many solemn promises made by God, the Word should not
depart out of the mouths of Pastors, nor the true Church be so much as
obscured, yet that Christ should have suffered the light of the Gospel to be
under a Bushel, and the Cuhrch invisible for more then a thousand years: That
his Reformation should be the work of God, and the world ever worse since it:
That Protestancy should bring back true Faith, which is divided into so many
Heresies, and has caused so many Troubles, Divisions and Schisms.

3. What show of probability or solidity in Protestant grounds? that the ground
of Faith (which they will have to be sole Scripture as every one reads, and
understands) should support all the Heresies in the World: That this Ground
given us for keeping of Unity, should make all our Divisions in Religion: To
deny the Authority and Tradition of the Church infallible, and yet take
Scripture on it; that the whole Representative Church in a General Council is
not infallible in its Decrees, and yet private men reading Scripture are
infallible in what they believe: That what was at the Margent in their first
Bibles, would be now put in the Text: That pure Scripture should be a clear
Ground for Protestancy, and not one Point specifical, or special to it, to be
found in Scripture in express words: In fine, that Protestants should have the
pure Word, and rely on the Originals; their best Writers granting they have not
found so much as an Authentic Copy any where.

If you will see what probability at last they have either for their Doctrine
or Church, consider amongst Protestants (with the Author of a late Answer in
Writ) Faith without Unity, a Body without united Members, a Law without a Judge,
a Church without an Altar, Religion without a Sacrifice, Sacraments that do not
sanctify, Divine Service without Religious Ceremonies, Preachers without a
call, Doctrine without Infallibility, Belief without a ground; Commands
impossible to be kept, Exhortation to what is not in our power, Reward without
Merit, Reprobation without demerit, Sin punished where there is no free will,
new Apostles without Mission or Miracles, Reformation without Authority, the
private Spirit against the whole Church, new lights against old revealed
Verities, single men's Opinions against the common consent of the Fathers,
Scripture received or rejected upon the Catalogue of the Jews; in a word,
wavering Pastors, unsettled Government, unstable Faith.

FINIS.

