AN HISTORICAL RELATION Of the First DISCOVERY OF THE ISLE OF MADERA.

Written Originally in Portugueze by Don Francisco Alcafarado (gentleman of the
Bedchamber to the Infanta Don Henry younger Son of John the first King of
PORTUGAL;) Who was one of the First Discoverers, thence translated into French,
and now made English.

-- Barbaras bas Segetes
Imposuit Tartar --
LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the sign of the of the Pope's Head at
the Entrance into the New Exchange in the Strand. 1675.

AN HISTORICAL RELATION OF THE DISCOVERY Of the ISLE of MADERA.
AFter a tedious War, England enjoying a profound Peace, under the reign of her
victorious Monarch, Edward the third. London her Metropolis (where then resided
the King) surfeiting in Riches and Plenty, did allure the young Gentle men to
participate of her pleasures: These, having now no employment for their swords,
did betake themselves to such Recreations as best suited with their natures.)
Amongst whom Lionel Machin a younger Brother, of a good but a decayed Family,
(impoverisht in the former wars) slighting the Vanities and Feastings, to which
his Companions (who were thereunto addicted) might by their examples invite
him, did deport himself with a more reserved behavior. His Beauty and Courage,
together with the good Fortune, which usually attended his generous
undertakings, rendered him more considerable than was usual for Persons of his
Age and Estate.

Thus generously demeaning himself, Love insensibly crept into his heart for
Arabella Darcy, a most fair and beautiful youn g Lady, the non-paril not only
of the Court, but Kingdom famous for such wonders; he publicly made his
addresses of love unto, which Passion he unadvisedly cherished, without
considering that his Mistress being in the prime of yourh and Beauty, Heir to a
great Estate, and allied to a most honorable Family, had by these motives
attracted many Lords and Noblemen to be her Servants: Notwithstanding Lionels
merit made him more kindly be received by Arabella, than any of his other
Rivals, who had submitted themselves under the Empire of so fair and charming a
Sovereign.

But I intend not to write the particular History of their Loves; and therefore
shall omit by what means he at length arrived to so much happiness: Let it
suffice to know none of the Lords addresses were acceptable to Arabella, she
desiring nothing more than to make Lionel her Husband. This was not well
rellished by her Relations, by whom, her Father and Mother coming to understand
the reciprocal kindness of our Lovers, which they in vain saught to obstruct,
they immediately made their complaints to the King, representing what a
detriment such a marriage would prove to their Family, they having before
concluded a very advantageous match for their Daughter (which she now refused
to embrace) and therefore they most humbly besaught his Majesty to use his
Royal Authority to hinder it. The King thought the best means was, that Lionel,
by his Order, should be arrested, and that during his imprisonment Arabella
should be compelled to marry the Nobleman her Parents had before designed her.
At the same time both the one and the other was executed, Lionel being sent to
Prison, and Arabella, in spite of all her repugnance, forced to take the Lord
for her husband: Who presently after the wedding retlred with his Wife from
London to his house at Bristol, a Seaport Town situate on the River Avon,
which joining with another River called the Severn, coming from the Province of
Gloucester, both together disemboug themselves into the Irish Ocean.

Lionel hears the news of this Marriage with a great deal of Sorrow, and being
assured, that Arabella's affection toward him was not diminished, he lost all
patience to be detained in Prison, and therefore employed his Friends to
supplicate the King for his liberty, which was not very difficult to obtain,
his Majesty having no farther end in the business, than to content the Ladies
Parents (whose marriage being now solemnized) and she removed a great way off)
he at small entreaty granted Lionel his liberty. But as the violence, which
others use to hinder our desires, does rather augment than diminish their
force. So Lionells passion by his imprisonment grew stronger, revolving in his
mind, during his restraint, diverse ways how to be revenged of those he thought
had done him wrong; and resolved, being now at liberty, to execute them. For
this purpose, secretly gathering together such of his Friends and Kinsmen in
whom he put the most considence, judging it necessary with some reasons to
persuade them to be assistant to him in his designs, he thus expressed himself.

You cannot but think, that the resentment I have for the late affront put upon
me is the cause of your present convention. And I am persuaded, if I were so
base a Fellow to forget it, yet you have so much honor as not to let me
neglect a revenge. The apparent injustice done me in forcing the Lady Arabella
contrary to her inclinations to espouse him, who it at present her Husband, is
no doubt a great affliction to her, but more to me, who was and still am her
Lover. Revenge and love hurry me on strange undertakings, for I am resolved to
take her from him, and free my Mistress out of the hands of a man she hates,
The action, I confess, is both bold and dangerous, but I should think my self
unworthy of such Friends, if I had not courage to attempt it with your
assistance. I would willingly undertake this concern alone, and not expose you,
my Friends, to the dangers that attend this enterprise, but I should be unjust
to you my worthy Kinsmen, not to let you participate in the revenge, for though
the injury is only done me, yet the affront is put upon our whole Family. I
were therefore much too blame, if I went singly to retort abuses done us all.
Were the enterprise solely on my account, I would not doubt your aid, since
enemies who openly offend us are more pardonable, than those complemental
Friends, who in time of necessity refuse us their help, should therefore any of
you abandon me, I have more reason to complain of him, than of a professed
Enemy. But since I doubt not thereof, let us, Dear Friends, consider how we may
make our affronters sensible of the Injustice they have done us.

This Harangue of Lionell produced all the desired effects in the minds of them
who heard it, they unanimously promising not to leave him, but resolving to run
his Fortune. Whereupon it was thought necessary, they should then part, and
take several Roads to Bristol, there to watch all means, and take necessary
measures to relieve Arabella. The vicinity and commodity of the Sea did seem
greatly to facilitate their enterprise. France being pitched upon as a
commodious retreat, the great antipathy between that Crown and England,
promising them all the security they could desire. They did not question good
success, it depending on their courages, which were highly excited by diverse
heroique actions, which had been gloriously achieved when Love was the cause
of undertaking them.

This resolution taken was instantly put in execution, and being all safely
arrived at Bristol, as they had before projected; they there again consulted
how farther to prosecute what they had begun, and it was thought convenient by
them all, that one of their Company should endeavor to procure a service in
the house of Arabella's Husband, my Lord -- but we know not his name, for the
Engglish to whom we are beholding for this Relation, held it discretion to keep
it secret. Their eyes were instantly upon one judged most proper for that
purpose, who willingly undertook it, and was entertained by the Lord as his
Groom. It was his good fortune to have assigned to his care a fair pied Horse,
on which Arabella often rode, when she went to take the Air, either in company
of her Husband or alone. The innocence of those times esteeming a Ladies honor
to be a sufficient guard, though the present Age is not of that opinion.

Bristol being as great a Town of Trade as most in England, there were always
in the Harbor many Ships ready to set Sail. One of the best sailing and
strongest Vessels Lionel and his Companions resolved to seize; the negligence
of the Commander, and vigilence of Lionel gave them great hopes there would not
be much difficulty in effecting their desires: The better to carry on their
work they bought a Shallop, with which they every day rowed out to Sea, as on
their pleasure, so that when they should seize on Arabella and the Ship they
might do it with more facility and less suspicion, both on the People a shore
and those aboard the Vessels, which rode at an Anchor near the Ship they
intended to make use of.

Whilst these things were doing by the Conspirators, Arabella had hourly notice
from her new domestic of what ever was resolved on in their Cabal, and
accordingly took her measures: in a short time all things being favorable, and
the wind come fair at North Arabella had notice, that, in a day or two, they
intended to put their design in execution.

The place Lionel had chosen daily to come to with his shallop was behind a
Cape of Land very convenient for his purpose, because little frequented, and by
reason of the solitariness of the place not at all subject to any rancounter
might unluckily happen in that juncture of time, the Groom also to favor the
business, had omitted for three Days to give any Drink to the pyed Horse which
was his Charge.

Arabella (when she knew all things were in readiness and that Lionel and his
Companions waited for her in the shallop, with impatience expecting that happy
Hour they had so long waited for) mounted on Horseback on pretense of taking
the Air, and rode toward the Cape before mentioned, the Horse being extreme
thirsty, hearing the Waves beat against the Shore, and thereby knowing the
nearness of the water rushed furiously on in spite of the bit or those that
led him, all that the pretended Groom could do was to catch hold on the reins
seeming thereby, to stop him when indeed he only guided him toward the
Shallop, which he might the easier do because the Horse, seeing himself led
toward Water which he much desired, did not unwillingly submit to be so
guided. Lionel and his Comrades seeing what was done a Shore leaped out of the
Shallop (where they attended the beginning of that good fortune should put an
end to their Disgrace) and most officiously, laying hold on the Horses bridle
dismounted the Lady, and immediately with the cunning Groom embarked in the
Shallop, so that before the other Servants could come to the Sea side. Our
adventurers were got a good distance thence having with Sails and Oars
dilligently endeavored so to do.

The Day appointed to put this Action in execution was also designed for
seizing the Vessel we before spoke of, which was the easier accomplished in
regard that at the same time the Owners made a farewell feast a Shore, to which
the Master, Mariners, Officers, and Soldiers were invited, so that the Vessel
being in a manner empty, was without difficulty surprised by Lionel and his
Friends, upon which so soon as they were embarked loosing the sails, and
cutting the Cable, they steered their Course for France, the Wind blowing a
brisk gale carried the Ship swiftly away, which was very happy for our Lovers.
What a noise the recital of this adventure made, not only in Bristol, but also
throughout all England, what descants was made thereof, or what dangers the
Actors underwent, and what punishment they deserved, let the Reader imagine,
for we intend not to particularize them in our Relations.

The Eyes of Love are not always blind, for Lionel considering the quality of
the offense he had committed, and against whom, soon bethought himself that the
Husband of Arabella was a person of such Quality, as having not only his own
power but also the Authority of Justice in his behalf, would not fail to make
all the Ships then in Harbor pursue the Ravishers of his Wife and Honor,
Lionel therefore to prevent being overtaken, made all the sail he could not
caring how soon he lost the sight of Land. At Night he altered the Course that
in the Day he had steered, the better to blind any that should pursue him; all
that Night they sailed with such a swiftness as usually accompany's them that
run headlong into their own ruin, the Day ensuing he found himself out of
danger of pursuit. But the Wind, which hitherto had continued favorable and
gentle, now began to be so impetuous that it seemed rather to blow a Storm then
a fair gale.

Arabella now began to reflect on what was past, and consider her former and
present condition, musing on these things she came upon the deck, the better to
divert her melancholy, where seeing nothing but a Tempestuous Sea, and an Air
she had not been accustomed unto, she then perceived what a miserable estate
she had reduced her self unto; the poor Vessel being now become the sport of
the Sea and Wind was a general grief and affliction to them all.

After five Days of Navigation, without discovering the Land they looked for,
the wind became so cross and vehement as it quite forced them from the coasts
of France whether their desires tended; the Friends of Lionel, who were not so
amorous as himself, soon became sensible of their deplorable estate, perceiving
how equally fortune treated them making no distinction between the innocent and
guilty, and that they were all like to share in the common danger. But Lionel,
was most extremely tormented to consider, that he was not only the means of
bringing himself into that ruin but also his Friends, and chiefly her whom he
Loved more dear more than his Life.

Thirty Days were they in this Calamity running through the vast and dangerous
deserts of the Ocean, destitute of all Hope and Hourly expecting death: when
one morning about Sunrising, they began to have some Hopes for they thought
they kenned Land, which in a little time they plainly discovered, it showing it
self to be an Island* High, craggy, and covered with trees; this gave all the
Company a great deal of Joy, though Arabella received the most consolation, for
she now hoped after so dangerous and wearisome a Navigation, to find that
repose which was necessary for her, an end of all her pains and a new manner of
living.

Lionel was very much troubled to find a safe Port in this unknown Land,
fearing to be split against some Rock, he therefore sounded, and not without a
great deal of circumspection, came safely to an Anchor. They could not perceive
any humane Creature on Shore, and those which were best skilled in Navigation
thoughtit not inhabited, which they were the more induced to believe, because a
great number of Birds differing in bigness, sort, and color came and perched
themselves upon the Yards, Masts, and Shrouds of the Ship without being any
thing afraid of the Men, or endeavoring to avoid their being taken.

To be more fully informed both Curiosity and necessity made the most hardy to
get out the boat and go a Shore, Lionel would fain have been one of them, but
neither Arabella or his Companions would suffer it, not thinking it convenient
he should stir out of the Vessel till the return of his other Friends, which
they soon did filled with very good news, reporting though the Island was
uninhabited yet the Air was good and the Earth fertile. Upon these tidings
Lionel and Arabella with most of the Men (leaving the rest aboard to look after
the Ship) went into the Boatand landed on the banks of that Land where never
before any man had set his Foot.

It being very fair weather and a clear season, the Sun as it rose higher
discovered to our Voyagers a most dainty and delicious Country, the Mountains
and Hills all covered with shady Trees, the Valleys filled with small Currants,
and many bubling Springs of pure and clear Water. The Island was also filled
with sundry Beasts, who, unacquainted with the sight of man, the presence of
our adventurers did not affright, finding all things thus accord to their
wishes it encouraged them to proceed to a further discovery with a great deal
of confidence: some distance from their first Landing they found a place
surrounded with Laurels and other shady Trees (though they knew not how to call
them) whose branches filled with large leaves were so conjoined as they made a
perfect Arbor pleasant and shady, from the Mountain Adjacent descended a fine
River which formed a most curious Pond close by the Arbor. This our Voyagers
thought a convenient place for their refreshments and so with Boughs and the
like Materials they made it fit to receive them, resolving for some time after
such hardships as they had endured to take the pleasures so sweet a Country did
afford them. Now therefore every one betook himself to what his Fancy prompted
him, some employing themselves more exactly to search into the Woods. Others to
run over the Hills and Dales to find what might be further worth their
discovery. Whilst the rest betook themselves to carry Necessaries aboard and
bring others a Shore from their Ship.

But the misfortune which attended our fugitives was too great to let this
tranquillity last long, for the Night which succeeded the Thirteenth Day after
their arrival there, happened so horrible a storm which came from the North-East
that all the force and industry of those who found themselves on board the Ship,
which was then at an Anchor, could not withstand the fury of the Wind and Sea.
But they were forced to abandon her to their rage, and for two Days they were
in the same Jeopardy they so lately were delivered out of, at the end of which
they once more discovered Land; the Vessel being leaky and they unskilful
Mariners they were forced to run her a shore, which was but the beginning of
new Miseries, for they no sooner were Landed but they found themselves on the
Coast of Africa in the Kingdom of Morocco. The Mores who from the Mountains
beheld this pitiful shipwreck descended and seized upon the poor Christians,
haling them into slavery and imprisoning them in the Jayl of their Capital
City. Thereby making it appear that these Monsters of Men were more cruel then
the Elements, for the latter intended to spare their lives when the former were
so unmerciful as to make them undergo a perpetual bondage.

The day light which succeeded this unhappy night, was more uncomfortable to
those ashore than the darkness had been terrible, or the storm frightful to
them aboard, for there appearing no ship in Port, neither when the Tempest was
over any returning (for they till then had hoped, that the extremity of the
weather had only forced her out to Sea) notwithstanding their valor, all the
courage they had could not draw them out of despair, for now they saw
themselves destitute of any means ever to return from that unknown part of the
World. The most understanding of them judging, that by reason of the few people
on board, and their unexperience in Maritime affairs, the Vessel must of
necessity be swallowed up of the waters.

After this deplorable accident, those amongst them, who had been the chief
Instruments of bringing themselves and friends into this miserable estate,
began seriously to repent of their folly, though the Lady was the most
concerned, well knowing this sad Voyage was chiefly made on her account, so
that she fell into a deep melancholy, but dangers being infinite more horrible
in themselves than we can paint them; it is impossible for us to describe the
grief which possessed her breast, for so deeply was she afflicted that from
that moment to the time of her death she uttered not one word: Excess of sorrow
is always mute, rejecting the common way of easing it self by sighs and
lamentations.

Three days was death in killing so amiable an unfortunate, she expiring with
all manner of contrition and repentance, Lionel had some further time granted
him by God, that his sorrows might be increased, and he afflicted; for it was
but just, that he who was the most criminal, should undergo the greatest
sufferings. After the death of his beloved Mistress, with many groans and deep
complaints he lay at her feet, refusing either sustenance or comfort from his
Friends, though they pitying his sad disasters, endeavored with their best
rhetoric to succor him* notwithstanding which, all their charitable Offices
could not prolong his life more than five Days, at the end of which he dyed in
their embraces after he had desired them to bury his body in the same grave
with Arabella, which they did at the Foot of the fair Tree (we before spoke of)
The branches serving for the Pall and the Trunk for his monument They adorned
this poor and Rustique monument with a great Cross made of Wood as a mark of
his Religion, and on the Tree made an inscriptionrelating his Love and
Adventures, at the end of which Epitaph they requested, that if ever any
Christians came to inhabit that solitary place they would over his grave erect
a Church, and dedicate it to our Savior Jesus to worship and adore his holy
name, and pray for the Souls of our unhappy Lovers.

Lionel and Arabella dead, the other gentlemen resolved not to stay any longer
in that place, but employed themselves, some to fit up their Shallop, others to
prepare water, and the rest to kill birds and make provision for their Voyage,
they thinking it a great deal better to commit themselves to the mercy of the
Sea in their small Shallop, than spin out a lazy and idle life in that, to them
unpleasant place. They soon had left the Land, but by misfortune steering the
same course the storm beforementioned obliged their friends in the Ship to
take, they consequently fell in with the Coast of Africa, which they looked
upon as a Land of comfort. But they had only escaped the danger of the deep to
be slaves to the Barbarians, and passing through diverse hands they at length
came to be bought by the King of Morrocco, where they found their companions,
whom before they thought ship wrackt, and this was their only consolation to
find them in the same Captivity with themselves.

The Prison for Slaves in Morocco was like that which is this day used at
Algiers: in it were always many Christian Slaves of diverse Nations, and
amongst others there was a Spaniard, born at Sevile, by name Jean de Morales, a
man very skilful in Navigation, having been for many years a Pilot. His
curiosity was mightily pleased with the Narrative our captive English made him
of their adventures, the many years they were together gave him the larger
means to know, what he so much desired, for he not only learned the marks to
find, but the situation of this new Land, and also all the miraculous passages
had happened to the English, in their unhappy Voyage, of which Relation he
hoped to make good use for a discovery, so soon as the time of his Slavery
should be at an end.

But the better to apprehend those things, which are necessary to be known in
our History, I must make a small digression, and let me not be thought tedious,
if I spend some time on so profitable a subject.

The King Dom John the first, of happy memory, having made an end of his Wars
with Castile, and not judging it convenient to abandon his Subjects to
idleness, which peace might very much prompt them unto, he resolved to employ
his arms against the avowed enemies of our Religion. Pursuing this generous
resolution, he set a foot a good Army, with which he invaded Africa, and
conquered the Town of Centa, situate precisely in the Straight of the
Gibralter, which he made himself Master of, in the year of our Lord one
thousand four hundred and fifteen. In which Expedition his Subjects served him
as if his Children, and his Children, as if they had been his meanest Subjects.
The Prince of Portugal and all his Brethren were in this Expedition, amongst
whom Dom Henry the youngest, Grand Master of the Order of Christ, did signalize
himself by many glorious undertakings, among which none redounded more to his
honor than the furtherance of this action we are now about to relate.

This Infant was always much addicted to the Mathematical Sciences; and more
particularly to Cosmography, which made him when at Centa in the African
Expedition often converse with diverse Moors and Jews, who had Cognizance of
remote places, by them he understood their Coasts and Seas and upon such
information did conceive an extreme desire to discover and conquer them, not so
much out of Ambition to enlarge his own Dominions, as to increase the Kingdom
of God. With this resolution, after the Conquest of Centa, he retired to the
Algarves, and built on a convenient place of Cape Saint Vincent a Town to serve
him as an Arsenal for his Shipping, which he named Terca Nabal, and it was also
called The Town of the Infant. Hence he began his new discoveries and
Conquests, setting out his Fleets from thence for the Atlantic and Occidental
Oceans, which were then held innavigable, and had it not been for him might
have so continued. Albeit the Greeks to elevate their own actions say, by
Herodote with more Ostentation than truth that the Inhabitants of the Euxine
Sea held for certain that the Atlantic had communication with the Red or
Arabian Sea, and they also affirm, that it is writ in the Annals of Egypt, that
one of their Kings named Necus, caused certain Phoenicians to set out upon a
coasting Voyage, who sailing from the Red Sea, ran through the Ocean, passing
by the Pillars of Hercules* and so come back to Egypt, which Voyage he says
they made in two years. The same Greeks likewise report that in the time of
Xerxes a certain Captain named Sataspes doubled the Cape of Good Hope, and so
returned into Egypt by the Straight of Cadize. And Strabo writes upon the Faith
of the Grammarian Aristonicus, that Menelaus did sail from Cadiz to the Indies.
Pomponius Mela also affirms that Eudoxus flying from Jatythius King of
Alexandria, sailed from the Arabian Gulf, till he came to Cadiz. This is the
same, Pliny, Solin, Makian, Artimedore, Zenophon, Lampsacene, and others write.
But this is certain that at the time of our first Conquest and discoveries
there was not any cognizance either in Europe or Africa of any such dangerous
navigations, and the Portugals affirm, that the People of Asia, whom they have
likewise lately discovered, know no more thereof than the other, which does not
at all strengthen the Relations of the abovesaid Authors, but rather diminish
them, if we believe the credit of what we have now alleged.

Jean Gonsalve Zaxoe Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Don Henry, was the
principal Person served the Infant in his discoveries, about which he did
employ the Revenues of the Order of Christ. This Gentleman was the first that
King John made Knight at the taking of Centa, he served the Infant with very
good success in all his African expeditions, and it is held he was the first man
which introduced the use of Artillery aboard Ships. Having the command of the
Princes navy he passed the straights in search of some parts of Africa, in the
Year, One Thousand Four Hundred, and Twenty, he had before in the Year, One
Thousand, Four Hundred, and eighteen, discovered the Island of Porto Santo,
upon which he was cast as he went in search of Cape Bajador.

The fifteenth of March in the Year One Thousand Four Hundred, and Sixteen, Don
Sancho (the youngest, Son of Don Fredinando King of Arragon and) great Master
of the Order of Calatrava died in Castile, and left by his Testament
considerable sums of Money to redeem Christian Spanish slaves in Morocco, with
which Money a Foist was sent to Africa, and and was returning thence for Tariff
with some number of redeemed Christians, amongst which was our Jean de Morales,
At that time was Gonsalve cruising in the Straights with his Masters Fleet, and
whereas the Differences betwixt the two Crowns of Portugal and Castile were not
yet so fully reconciled but that there remained some misunderstandings between
them. This made the Subjects of each King as they found themselves stronger, to
plunder the weaker, as they met one another at Sea, and Gonsalve discovering
the Foist, wherein were the redeemed Captives, sent after her some light
Vessels, who after a small Chase came up with her, boarded, and without
resistance took her; Gonsalve seeing the misery of those whom he had now made
Prisoners and knowing the Clemency of his Prince, gave them all their liberty
except Jean de Morales, because it had been told him he was a man of great
experience in Martime affairs, thinking him a fit present for Don Henry and
that he would be very useful in the Discoveries the Prince was then a making*
Jean de Morales, being informed of his new imprisonment and the cause for which
he was detained, did not grieve, but on the contrary freely offered to serve
the Infant and promised to endeavor to answer the Hopes they had done him the
honor to conceive of him, and to render himself more gracious with Gonsalve,
communicated unto him some part of the secret of the New Island he intended to
discover, and to gain the more Credit to his relation told him the History of
Lionel and Arabella. Gonsalve no sooner understood this narrative but he
returned to Tarca Nalbal more rich in Hope than in the prizes during his
Voyage, he had taken, being there arrived he told the Infant what a lucky
rancounter he had met, presenting him Jean de Morales, giving to him an account
of his profession and secrets. Don Henry received him with a great deal of
kindness, and having heard what he could say conceived an extreme impatience to
execute an enterprise so agreeable to his nature. To his effect he resolved
Gonsalve should go to Lisbon, where the King his Father, was to communicate to
his Majesty, what he knew in the premises, and the better to content the King,
and satisfy his Ministers, he sent with him Jean de Morales, to the end he
might answer all Objections which might be made by those who having neither
mind nor courage to undertake such Actions are accustomed to thwart them, who
are the propounders by alleging the difficulties, and impossibilities such
discoveries bring along with them, thereb y endeavoring to persuade others,
that things of this nature will never be attained unless they appear extreme
feasible.

Whilst Gonfalve was on his journey to Court, accompanied with the Captains
Jean Laurence, Frances Carvalail, Ruy Paes, Alvare Alfons, and Francis de
Alcafarano (who writ this History) and also with two other Gentlemen very
skilful in Navigation, called Antony Gags, and Laurence Gomoz* Don Henry gave
order to equipy a Fleet to follow this discovery. which he resolved, in case
the King denied him assistance, himself to prosecute.

The favorable reception, which the King made Gonsalue and the Pilot,
occasioned by the great advantage and the smallness of the risque and charge,
which the Infant propounded as sufficient for the enterprise, were not
sufficient motives to some Statesmen to forward the business, but on the
contrary envying the grandeur of the Infant, did what lay in their power to
obstruct the design.

Though Gonsalve was received with a great deal of honor at Lisbon, yet the
King making no haste in the affair, he gave the Infant notice of the great
impediments his pretensions met with, and what pains he was at to persuade
those Ministers to receive the treasures he freely offered the King, and that
the difficulty was made greater, because it was apprehended he would convert
them to his particular advantage. On this advice, the Prince being resolute not
to leave the discovery, came himself to Court, where he was no sooner arrived,
but he removed all obstructions, which hindered the Expedition; so that in the
beginning of June in the year 1420, Gonsalve was set to set to Sea with one
Ship very well equippied, and another Vessel, which rowed with Oars, with which
on such occasions they used to serve themselves. So inconsiderable was the
Fleet which parted from Lisbon, for a discovery of so great importance.

There ran a rumor among the Portugals, that off the Island Porto Santo (to
which place Gonsalve intended first to steer) toward the North-east there
usually appeared a perpetual obscurity, which always extended it self from the
Sea to the Sky, and never diminished, but always did appear in the very same
manner, this every one knew to be true that lived in Porto Santo, and because
in that infancy of Navigation, they wanted the use of the Astrolabe, and other
instruments since invented, it was judged miraculous, if not impossible to go
and return from that black place or Cloud, but that they, who should venture,
must of necessity for their boldness lose their lives. This ignorance of the
Sea and its secrets was the cause, that this obscurity was generally called an
Abyss. Some said it was the mouth of Hell, and were upheld in their opinions by
Divines, as simple as themselves, who offered to prove both by Argument and
Authorities, that it might very well be so. The Historian who pretend to be
more knowing than the others, did esteem it to be the Island anciently called
Cipango, which God had wonderfully hidden in the Clouds to protect the Spanish
and Portugueze Bishops and Christians, who had retired themselves thither, out
of the persecution of the Moors and Saracens. And that it was directly contrary
to God's pleasure to endeavor a clearer discovery, for if he had pleased to
have it performed he would have manifested his approbation by such miracles as
usually precede his allowance, and that besides diverse such ancient Prophecies
under severe penalties, forbid the further search into this Mystery.

Gonsalve sailed toward the Isle of Porto Santo in very fair weather, and
proper for his voyage; but fearing in the dark he might pass something worthy
of note, he made them every night lower their Sails, and lie at Hull,
proceeding only in the day, that he might the better see any land they should
accidently discover. This was no such hindrance unto him, but that in a little
time he arrived at Porto Santo; where he and the rest of his company were
showed the black Cloud beforementioned (which Jean de Morales judged to be the
beginning of that Land they saught after.

Here they held a Counsel, and resolved to stay in the Isle that quarter of the
Moon to see if that cloud of Darkness did either vary its shape or diminish its
bigness, but it always continuing in the same form and magnitude gave them a
great deal more cause to despair, than hope for a good effect.

The Pilot Jean de Morales was of opinion by the information he had received
from the English, and the course he had made them steer, that the Island he
saught after was not far from thence, and told Gonsalve that the rays of the
Sun lying very hot on the Earth, and drawing thence the humidity (of which
there was a great quantity, by reason of the multiplicity of Trees) made a
gross vapor to ascend, which filling the Sky with its foggyness was the
reason of the obscurity they saw, and that he was confident by these tokens,
the Land they so much coveted to discover, was not far from that place.

All of them were of a contrary opinion to Morales and tumultuously cried, how
that he being a Castilian, and by consequence an Enemy, was very well pleased
to see their Nation exposed to evident dangers, that it was enough for men to
encounter men, without commencing a war against the Elements, that it became
only Heathens and Infidels to penetrate into the secrets of God, that they were
to expect nothing but death from that cloud, and that to proceed further was
only to dare the Almighty, that the Infant was ill served to have his Servants
exposed to such unprofitable dangers, but the King was worse used in regard
they were his most faithful Subjects, who might serve him in more feisible
undertakings, than to search after a supposed Land on no other ground than the
Pilots vain imaginations.

They farther argued that Gonsalve was a Nobleman of great merit, he might
expect large recompenses from his own deserts without precipitating himself and
them into such certainty of peril; that valor was never shown in pushing
forward despair, that it was no charity under pretense of Religion to find out
people and seize on their Countries, whereby they showed themselves rather
covetous of their own than God's glory, but that they ought to be content with
those Lands they already possessed, and finally affirmed they were but men, and
therefore would not undergo what seemed to be above Mortals strength.

All these clamours did not stagger their Commanders resolution, he therefore
for the present gave them good words, resolving (because he was of greater
courage than all of them) to surmount the difficulties, which now seemed
greater, by reason of the averseness of these men, and communicating his
thoughts only to Jean de Morales, he hoisted his sails, and weighed anchor,
steering his course directly toward the Bugbear shadow, making all the sail
his Vessels could bear, by that means the sooner to obtain the Land he hoped to
find. The nearness of the obscurity did augment their fears, it appearing
higher and bigger as they nearer approached to it. About mid day the Sea seemed
altogether darkened, an unusual blackness filling the whole horizon, neither was
there any sign of Land, for the gross cloud, into which they where now entered,
covered both Sea and Sky. This was the cause of a strange confusion, and the
vicinity of their supposed danger, made them all cry out and earnestly entreat
Gonsalve that he would not proceed, which if he did, they looked upon
themselves as dead men, beseeching him not to be the destruction of so many
innocents.

Their outcryes did not at all startle their Captain, but calling together the
Officers, Mariners, and Soldiers, and placing himself to be heard by them all,
more to justify his constancy, than satisfy their desires, he made them this
Oration.

Do you think, my Friends, and Comrades, that I esteem my life less than you do
yours, if not, none certainly ever went about to persuade you, that if you
miscarry I have any means to save my self; that indeed would be the greatest
injustice in the World, that I should reap the Glory, and you the Hazards of
this enterprise, but equally we are to participate in both, if therefore I at
present appear more hardy then suits with your content. It is because I highly
esteem you, for I am insinitely glad you understand what perils you expose your
selves unto, that it may hereafter be famed, you deliberately and of purpose,
not by chance, did confront these more than humane dangers, I do not therefore
at all wonder at your fears, but I do not by any means approve of the way, you
would put in execution to remove them, with what justice can you pretend, to
more glory than other Nations, if you do not thus expose your lives, if you
follow but the footsteps of your noble Ancestors, you may trace them in such
adventures as we are now a making. For what reason did we come from our
Country? for what reason did our Master send us hither? wherefore among
thousands, which tendered themselves for this employment, did he make choice of
us? wherefore does he show himself a father to our Families? wherefore does he
take so kindly our Devoir? it is not surely that we should do our business by
halfs, or leave off our adventures, before finished: Consider, that as there is
but one life, so there is but one death, and it is neither without reason, that
you should fear the Elements more than men for twice, by either of them, you
cannot die. If you do not refuse to hazard your lives against the Enemies of
your King, what is it that you dread in the wind or water, do you think a wave
or a gust of wind, more cruel then the Sword or Lance of an Enemy, is not the
peril the same you meet with, in any rancounter, seeing you cannot but once
receive your deaths. Think upon that grounds we are entered into the service of
our King and Prince, is it not to make discovery of unknown Provinces, which
your courages are to conquer and lay at their feet, this ought not to be
abandoned by your disobedience and fear, especially being commanded on this
Voyage, by their immediate orders. Truly, Friends, it is more scandalous to
return home, and die with shame at Lisbon then unhappily perish in the Sea, if
so ill fortune should attend as. Let us bravely then undergo this risque, for
be you certainly assured, when once our resolutions are fixed to proceed, we
shall find all things as easy as we can wish. The Night is never more dark,
then when day approaches; the strange consternation we are now in, is the
greater sign our locked for good fortune, draws near: Courageously, Friends,
examine the cause of your temerity, reason will soon inform you, the Cloud
which is the cause, is but a shadow, if both nature and fortune did expose us,
I would be the first should take the care of our lives, but seeing we have
nothing but our foolish fancies to fear, which is misbecoming valiant men to
dread, let us in the Name of God proceed.

This discourse worked so powerfully, on those to whom it was addressed, that
it made all their fears vanish and composed their minds so firmly, that
unanimously they protested Gonsalve should not only govern them as their Chief,
but command them as absolute Master of their Lives, and Liberties, they
resolving to obey him blindly, and without dispute in all things,

Though the weather was fair, yet the Sea, being extreme rapid, the current
carried the Vessels contrary to their Course, to prevent which Gonsalve fitted
out two Shallops to tow them committing, one to the Care of Anthony Gago, and
the other to Gonsalve Lovis, Men of Known Valor and Experience, they rowed
directly toward the cloud which they approached nearer and nearer, as the
Current permitted them.

The Voyage continuing for some time in this manner, the Cloud, into which they
where now entered, seemed to lessen and decrease toward the East, but the
waters made a terrible noise, notwithstanding they passed the obscurity, and
having so done (a Cloud, which hung on the Earth, hindering their clearer
prospect) they thought they discovered land, and saw many armed men of a
prodigeous bigness thereon. But they after found, that the Shore being full of
high Rocks was the occasion of their mistake. The Air presently clearing, and
the Sun shining out, they plainly made the Land. This happiness they received
with the greater joy, because not by them expected; The first place presented
it self to their view was a high point of Land, to which Gonsalve gave the name
of Cape St. Laurence.

Which point having doubled, they saw a brave and fertile Country, full of fair
and high Trees, which in Woods and Groves extended themselves from the
Mountains through the Valleys, to the very Seaside. The Cloud was now so far
retired, as it seemed only to crown the heads of the Mountains. This pleasant
sight gave the minds of our Voyagers a great deal of content, the dangers and
hazards they had formerly mutined about being now forgot they embraced one
another with joy, rendering thanks first to God, and then to their Commander by
whose encouragement and persuasion, they were now come to so glorious an end of
their labors, highly praising their Pilot, who had so successefully conducted
them, Sailing on they saw a large Bay, which Jean de Morales judging to be the
place, where the English had formerly resided, came there to an Anchor. Some
were instantly preparing to go a shore, but the Sun, being then set, 'twas
thought fit to defer it till the morning. Gonsalve commanded a good Watch to be
kept that night, because sleep is a Rock, and the more dangerous, because no
Pilot finds it in his Sea charts.

The day following Ruy Paes by order of Gonsalve made himself ready to go a
shore, which he did (in one of the rowing shallops beforementioned) with a well
armed company of soldiers, he landed on the the very same place Lionel before
had done, and by certain tokens Jean de Morales had given him, found with much
satisfaction the footsteps of the English, and diverse trees notched with a
hatchet, which he knew to be infallible signs of men having been there, passing
thence into the Forest he saw the great Tree, and coming nearer perceived the
Cross, and read the Epitaph of out Lovers, which absolutely confirmed the
Pilots relations. This spectacle caused a great deal of compassion in Ruy Paes,
and his Companions, making them shed some tears, thereby confirming what long
since Seneca wrote, that Pity is the first degree of Kindness among men.

After these recognizances the same day they returned to Jean Gonsalve, and
assured him that they had met with all things, as Jean de Morales had before
related, upon which knowledge he disposed himself to disembarque, which he did
with all the precaution and solemnity imaginable, taking possession of the
place, for and in the Name of Don John King of Portugal, and of the Infant Don
Henry Master of the Order and Knight of Christ, the water was blessed by two
religious, and with it the Air and Earth cleansed by calling on the name of
God. An Altar was also erected, and Mass said where Lionel and Arabella lay
buried. This Ceremony was performed on the Feast day of Saint Elizabeth.

Now, because Gonsalve would not omit any thing whereby he might attain the
perfect knowledge of the place, he commanded his people to make the Tower of
the whole, and strictly search Hills, Dales, and Woods to see if they could
discover either man or beast, commanding them if they found any they should
bring them a live or dead: But they who were sent on this errand found no
living creature, but diverse Birds of differing sorts, shapes, and colors, who
suffered themselves to be taken by the hand without any pain or trouble.

Jean Gonsalve, esteeming himself rich in so easy a purchase, returned aboard,
where calling the chiefest of his Men to counsel, it was resolved they should
not part from thence without a more particular examining the place* which they
had then leisure enough to do: Now because the shore was full of Rocks, which
did not in many places show themselves above the water, 'twas thought
convenient to make further discovery in their Shallops, as they had already
begun; than in their grearer Vessels, for fear some of the Currents might force
them on the Rocks. So Gonsalve taking the Shallop of his own Vessel, and
committing the charge of the other to Captain Alvare Alfons, they passed the
point which was toward the West, seeing four fair Rivulets run into the Sea,
the water of which being extreme clear and good, Gonsalve caused some bottles
to be filled to carry to the Infant.

Passing still on they saw another Valley, which was likewise watered with a
dainty Rivulet, here they they landed some Soldiers, who found nothing, but a
great many Fountains, and a huge grove of Trees, which grew together in form of
an Arbor, on of the biggest whereof Gonsalve took and made a great Cross of,
since which this place is called Holy Cross, sailing on they weathered a point
of Land extending it self farther than ordinary into the Sea, memorable for the
many large Birds, the multitude of whom was so great, that the men in the
Shallop was fearful of being devoured by them, they therefore called this place
Punt a dos Gralhos, a little further was another Valley full of Cedar Trees,
which made a goodly show. On an adjacent Hill there grew one much higher than
the rest, which Nature seemed to have set there for a Beacon.

From this Valley of Cedars they came to another, where was a spacious Lake,
which forming it self by the Seaside into a large Basin or Pond, promised
something extraordinary; Gonsalve Ayvez was therefore with a good number of
Soldiers ordered to go a shore; who, having by the Valley ascended the
Mountain, returned without any further knowledge then that by the Valley they
could discover the place from whence they first set out, and thereby knew it to
be an Island, and no part of Africa, as many of them had before conjectured.

Gonslave however not yet content, but still imagining there might be yet some
Inhabitants, ordered his people daily to go from place to place, to see if they
could make any further discoveries, by this means they found a very fair and
large plain free from Trees (which covered in a manner all other places) and
only overgrown with most beautiful Fennel, called in Portugueze Funchal, upon
this Place afterward was founded a Town, to which was given the name of
Funchal, heretofore the Metropolis of the Eastern Islands as to Spiritualities,
and still so as to temporalities.

The Portugueze more modest than other Nations, who vain-gloriously give great
Names to their Plantations and discoveries; have always been contented either
to continue the old names of their Colonies, or if they gave them new
appellations to bestow such on them, as were most agreeable to the nature of
the Place, as for instance this famous City is called Funchal from the
abundance of Fennel there found growing, before ever the Town was built.

Three large Rivers, having their Randevouze in this Valley, just at
disembouging themselves into the Sea, make two small Islands, which do in a
manner land lock the Haven, and secure the Port from the Wind and Sea, as if it
were a Mole.

Notwithstanding the great peace and tranquillity Gonsalve found, yet would he
not permit his people to be idle, but always busied them in some employment or
other, he himself still coasting the Country, came to a large Rock, which he
called Praya Fermosa, or the Fair Rock, because of its greatness, and the
delicate water issuing thence, which gently breaking its waves against the
stones made a sweet melody. Passing still on, they found between two points a
furious Torrent, the waters whereof were so clear, that it oblidged the
curiosity of them all to look thereon: In the company were two soldiers of
Lagos, (for whom the General had a great esteem) these being very skilful in
swimming resolved to pass the Torrent, but they were no sooner in, but in
spite of all their resistance they found themselves carried down the stream by
the strength and swiftness of the current, and had undoubtedly there been
drowned, had not their Companions succored them. This adventure gave the
Torrent the name of Soccorides more happily than that of Agravados was given to
the Arabian Sea, of which our Historians make mention.

Being now come again to Cape St. Lawrence, by which ran a River, making the
appearance of a Port, into it Gonsalve, with his Shallop entered, imagining he
might there find somewhat more of moment than hitherto he had seen, because on
the sand he thought he saw the traces of certain Animals, which searching for,
of a sudden, a great number Sea-wolves came rushing out of a hollow place,
which they found at the bottom of a great Mountain, close by the Sea. This
concavity served these Creatures, as a den to which they retired themselves,
when they left the Sea. This being the most remarkable thing they found in the
Island or their Voyage.

Gonsalve afterward took the name, and Title of Comerados Lobos, as Scipio and
Germanicus assumed theirs from the Provinces they conquered to the Roman
Empire, this name and Title Gonsalve's (...) own and are called by to this day.

The Night after, they had come into this place the Wind came so strong as it
forced the very rivers back again, and made so hideous a tempest, as they were
afraid, they should have lost their Vessels, and thereby all the good success
they had had in their new discovery, but it clearing up toward day, the
General, for fear of such an after-clap, and having now seen all that he could
desire, retired with his Vessels close to the aforesaid small Isles or place of
safety, and there he made provision of wood, water, birds, plants, and the
Earth it self, not only for Sea accommodation, but also to present the King and
Infant, which having done he embarked all his people, and set sail for
Portugal, where he safely arrived in the end of the month of August in the same
year one Thousand four Hundred and Twenty, he made no anchorage at Algarues but
directly entered the River and Port of Lisbon (where he found his Master the
Infant expecting him) having not lost one man in this Voyage, but having added
to his Majesty's Dominions the best Island in the Oriental Ocean.

The King and Infant, received Gonsalve, with a great deal of Joy, and made him
a welcome proportionable to the service he had rendered them, for the which,
having given public thanks to God for his mercies, in giving them leave to
discover new Seas and Lands, wherein to glorify his most holy Name, they
thought it convenient that the relation of the Voyage of Jean Gonsalve Zarco,
should be made in a public Audience, and therefore invited all the Ambassadors
and Ministers of foreign Princes to hear the relation of what he did so highly
esteem.

Which day of audience being come the King* Royal Family* Grandees of the
Kingdom, Ambassadors, and foreign Ministers being present* Gonsalve was
introduced into the Hall accompanied with the most considerable persons that
were with him in his Voyage, when, having kissed his Majesty's Hand, and paid
the Infant what respects were due unto him, the King commanded Gonsalve to
speak, he then made an exact account of his Navigation, and what befell him at
Porto Santo, of the great fear had possessed his men on sight of the dark
Cloud, notwithstanding which, and their Mutiny, how he persuaded them to go on
their Voyage by informing them how much it imported the service of his most
sacred Majesty, and how much detriment it would prove to the whole Nation,
should they abandon it: In what manner afterward they discovered the Island,
he informed the King of the bigness, fertility, and situation thereof, he also
told the King the History of the English, of the solitude and plenty of the
place to which the King without any meditation gave the name of MADERA, by
reason of the great quantity of Wood, Gonsalve had told him was growing
thereon. He then presented the King and Infant, the Trunks of the Trees, the
Birds, Water, and Earth, he had brought from thence. It was soon after resolved
by his Majesty and Council that the Spring following, Gonsalve should return
with a plantation to Madera, as Governor of the place: which together with
Title of Count the Eldest of that Family hitherto enjoy.

This Voyage was began in the Month of May Anno one thousand, four hundred,
twenty and one, the King gave Gonsalve leave to take all the criminals and
condemned persons throughout the whole Kingdom, but he would not accept of
them, but took all manner of care to provide necessaries for his Voyage, which
having done he parted from Lisbon with his Wife Constance Roderiquez de Sa (who
was descended from the ancient Family of Almeyda) Jean Gonsalve his Heir, and
Hellen, and Beatrix, his two Daughters. In few days he arrived at Madera, and
having moored his Anchors in the place from whence the English first, and after
he landed, in honor of Lionel Machin, who was the first discoverer he called
that Harbor Porto Machico or Machino, which Name to this day it retains.

Gonsalve immediately began to lay the foundation of a Church resolving that
the first Edifice should be Dedicated to our Savior Jesus Christ, as Lionel in
his Epitaph had desired of the future Inhabitants of the Isle, and to be more
just to his memory raised the structure over the grave where he and his
Mistress lay buried, and cutting down the great Tree he built there an Altar.
Our unhappy Lovers bones having at length this honorable repository.

But the Town he thought more convenient to build in the aforesaid, Valley of
Funchal, because near it were the two small Isles, with made so convenient a
Harbor for shipping, and also allured thereunto by the beauty of the place,
most proper for situation, such a small original had the Town of Funchal, which
soon after became so illustrious, and in which the first Altar was erected in a
Church dedicated by Gonsalve to God our Savior, and the second commended to
the Patronage of Saint Catherine by Consiance his Lady; contrary to what Jean
de Borros has written, who supposes the founding of two other Churches. This
mistake makes me not credit what h e writes* that Gonsalve should set fire to
the Woods, which lasted for seven years and could not be quenched so long as
any trees were left to feed it, which has since made fuel excessive scarce in
the Island, for it appears plainly a fable since there is Wood and Trees still
there in abundance, enough to boil Sugars to set awork one hundred and fifty
Mills, for so many are now in the Isle, wherefore his relations seem fabulous
and incredible.

After the death of Don John his Son and Successor, Don Duart, considering what
great expenses his Brother the Infant Don Henry had been at to discover and
people the Isle of Madera, gave him the issues and profits thereof during life.
This donation was made at Cintra the six and twentieth day of September, one
thousand four hundred thirty and two: And also for the same Reasons, the King
gave in perpetuity the Spiritual Jurisdiction thereof to the Order of Christ,
which was afterward confirmed by King Don Alphonso, in the year one thousand
four hundred thirty and nine.

As also to encourage such other of his Subjects, as should endeavor to
deserve it: He gave Jean Gonsalve Zarco, and his descendants a Title of honor,
and new Coat of Arms (now let it not seem strange that the Gentleman should
alter his blazon, since the Kings of Portugal themselves have changed their
Royal and ancient Arms, which were a Cross Argent in a Field Azure, to those
which they now bear.) The Escutcheon therefore his Sacred Majesty bestowed on
him* was a Castle Argent in a Field Sinople supported with two Sea-Wolves. And
his Title of Honor. Marquess de Camara dos Lobos, from the Sea-Wolves we
formerly mentioned, which Coat of Arms and Title, still belong to the Posterity
of this our worthy Discoverer.

FINIS.

