MIRABILE PECCI: OR, THE Non-Such Wonder OF THE PEAK in Darby-shire. DISCOVERED
In a full, though succinct and sober, Narrative of the more than ordinary
Parts, Piety, and Preservation OF MARTHA TAILOR, ONE Who has been supported in
time above a year in a way beyond the ordinary course of Nature, without the
use of Meat or Drink.

By H. A.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible on London-Bridg, and G. Calvert
at the Golden-Ball in Duck-Lane.

^. Jonst. de admirand. hominis ut seque in lib. Nutrimenti usus quamvis ad
vitam sit necessarius; inventi tamen plurimi, qui, non obstante sat longa
illius carentia, vixere.

D. Sennert. Med. Pract. l. 3 sect. 2. c. 2. Experientia ipsa testatur
uonnullos ultra septem dies sine cibo vixisse.

J. H. Alsted. Encyclopaed. l. 13. Phys. par. 5. reg. 12. Q. An corpora quaedam
sine nutritione naturaliter possint ad annum, biennium, and amplius vivere?

R. Plantae nonnullae, ut est Semperviva, sine nutrimento aliquam diu vivere
possunt: contentae scilicet lenta sua succositate. Quaedam etiam bestiae, ut
glires and serpents, ob humorem viscosum intra corpus collectum, sine novo
alimento, hyeme pinguescunt. Quidam denique homines, ex pituita dulci and lenta
undique in venas impacta, ad aliquot annos nutriuntur: in quibus scilicet calor
est exiguus, ita ut pituitam illam non facile posset absumere. Ad hanc tamen
causam naturalem accedere potest causa supernatulis; praesertim quando
septennium and amplius durat (...); cujus exempla vide apud Historicos and
Medicos.

August. de Civit. Dei l. 24. c. 8. Sicut non fuit impossible Deo quas voluit
instituere, sic ei non est impossible in quicquid voluerit, quas Instituit
mutare naturas.

Secundum Mat. c. 4. v. 4. (...).

Ad Corinth. c. 12. v. 9. (...),

For the ever Noble, truly Worthy, and much Honored, M. L. R. L. P.
Madam,
THese Lines esteem it a great part of their Happiness, that they may but
prostrate themselves to your service: I know your experience can over-act an
hearsay Testimonial to the Truth of Martha Taylor's amazing Story. This poor
Attempt of mine may contribute something to your Remembrance, though very
little to your Information; for you have seen and searched into this wonderful
Abstinent; you are well skilled in Nature, and in the puzling Architecture of
the Humane Body, as your judicious, prosperous, and charitable Applications do
sufficiently and frequently demonstrate; and then, which is your greatest
glory, you are well acquainted with the urgent Business, and profound Concerns
of another World. Your more than ordinary Candor, free Entertainment and
numerous Courtesies conferred upon (immeritorious) Me, when I did twice or
thrice visit your Country to take a view of this wonderful, aerial, foodless
Creature, has begot this Presentment, or, may I call it, mean and barren,
Remuneration, from him who is, and will be

March 30. 1669. Your Admirer and Humble Servant, H. A.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
MAny in their Histories of England give a large and true account of several
Wonders of Nature in that Division of Darby-shire, which is usually called, The
Peak; a Country, much noted for its uneven surface, being all over shattered
into deep and fruitful Vales, shagged Hills, vast and barren Rocks, and
Skie-invading Mountains: from which Mountains it got its name; for it
signifies, To appear aloft. Camden in his Britannia relates its Commodities,
its Ornaments, its Wonders. Speed also in his Maps of England, does the same.
But none so particular as Mr. Hobbs in his ingenuous and well-compos'd Poem, De
Mirabilibus Pecci; out of whom take the following Distick.

Alti censentur septem Miracula Pecci:
Aedes, Mons, Barathrum, binus Fons, Antraque bina.
Metaphras'd into English, thus: The most, seven Wonders in the Peak account,
Chatsworth, that stately-house: The maimed-Mount
Main-To^ which climbs the Clouds: The strange Abyss
Which men call Elden-Holl, like Hell it is.
A double Spring, th'ebbing and slowing Well:
And Buxton-Bath, of which some Wonders tell:
Two Caves there are, the one (not modest called)
The Devil's Arse, with wide mouth, strongly walled
By Natures skill, where Waters run: And then
There is Pool's Hole, a strange long wandering Den.


Here Is a Catalogue of the Wonders of that Country; many Travelers, and others
have journied a great number of miles to take a view of these: but all these
laid together, may bow the head, and give place to this so great a Wonder of
Providence; The total Fast of Martha Tailor. Concerning which I writ the
ensuing sheets upon the irresistible Importunity of some Friends, who knew that
I had seen and conversed with her several times; and with her Visiters,
Gentlemen, Divines, Physicians, some of both the Watch that were set upon her,
and with some of her most sober knowing Neighbors on purpose to get the Truth
concerning her: for I was ready at the first to suspect everything that was
reported of her; but, upon further Trial, I became convinced of the reality of
what I have here given an account of. But though at present I be fully
satisfied, yet I do submit these things to the further enquiry of Time and
Judicious Ones. I never had any Obligments upon me from her Self, Friends or
Favorites; all I appear for, is the Truth, as far as I know it. In this
Discourse I must confess I did swim against the stream of my own Inclinations,
Time, Employment; Studies and Reading, skill in the criticism of Nature, or
Anatomy, and the Mystical Structure of the House of Clay, is really
exterraneous unto me. These Papers for any thing I know, may not only be crude
and indigested, but also guilty of supervacaneous Repetitions, because of their
have Birth; and then I never saw them together, after the two first sheets,
till they appeared in public view, being carried away as fast as they were
writ by the unwearied Solicitations of an esteemed Friend. The Sections and
Paragraphs are not so much for Method, as for convenient Pauses, or breathing
Places, to the Reader. You may think that I have made Martha Tailor, as to her
pious Seize, an excellent Creature, and so she was to me, and hundreds of
other Visiters; but if the Waters have not at all times run so high and clear,
you must suppose this Life has no perfection in it, as long as we dwell in
corrupted flesh, hedged round about with Sense and various ensnaring Objects.

If Martha Tailor be yet in the Land of the Living, as its supposed she is, I
would desire these sheets may put her on forward to shine forth in an humble
holy Profession, that she do not blemish her former self, nor disgrace that
happy and fair Appearance which once she made; for if she do, here will be an
abiding Monument set up against her. Let her consider the following Places, and
beware. Mat. ^0.22. Heb. 3.14. and 10.38. Psalm. 125.5. Revel. 2.4, 5. 1 Cor.
10.12.

Read, improve, and give God the Glory.

Farewell.

THE INTRODUCTION. PART I.
SECT. I.
THE Mind of Infinite Wisdom in the first making of the World, was that Humane
Bodies should be supported by the use of Creatures; this was the reason that
the great Architect did in such a copious manner provide all convenient
necessaries for the supply of Adam in the State of Innocence; there was a full
Table ready furnished for him, that he might upon his first approach into life,
and his stately Dwelling, see the way how to maintain himself there. The first
of Genesis is a very ample discovery of this: God tells him he had not only
made the inferour Creatures for his Dominion, Solace, and Advantage, but also
for meat to live upon, in the 29, and 30. Verses; nay, he gives him a command
to use them for that end, Chap. 2. Verse 16. Yet, though it be thus according
to the ordinary dispensation of Heaven, it cannot be denied, but that God is an
unlimited Agent, he must not be always bound up to one Method in the Actings of
his Providence, He only can do what he pleases, and which way he pleases:
Many things seem impossible with Men, but with God all things are possible,
Mat. 19.26. That our poor, frail, dying, Bodies, should be preserved alive for
forty days together, without the ordinary use of creature props, seems to us an
impossibility, yet with God it is possible. There are many vast Mysteries in the
Operations of Divine Providence, that now and then make their appearance in
this nether Region, concerning which the most knowing man are at a great loss,
and far to seek; of which they may speak in the language of the Psalmist, That
when they think to know these, they are too painful for them; or as the Margent
reads it from the Hebrew, they are labor in their eyes, Hic labor, hoc opus
est, Difficulties on every side, too hard for them to overcome.

Now the most are ready to hiss every thing off the Stage of the World, which
does not fall within their own cognizance or experience: All things that are
strange they reduce presently to their own ken, and try them by their own
convictions and former knowledge, to which if these wonders do not bear a very
fair correspondence, then away with them, they are presently thrown over board
for Imposters. But if these men had weighed them in another, far truer
Balance, the Almighty Power of a wonder-working God, then its likely they
might have found a due weigh in this Coin, which would have put them upon a
further and better search, as to see whose superscription was impressed upon it,
and what was its innate truth and worth. I must confess, there is a miscarriage
on both hands, I dare not commend an easy belief, nor an obstinate unbelief,
in the concern of the stupendous productions of Nature, to believe every
thing, and to believe nothing, as they are opposites, so they are equal
extremes and absurdities; as the one degrades the greatest Truths, so the other
advances the most irrational falsehoods: The one has low thoughts of the most
sacred Verity, because there are many things in it, which are higher then the
reach of sense and carnal reason; the other has a very great esteem for a mere
Legend of lies, because it is full of seeming wonders. In things which fall
within the limits of nature, there is no question but the most prudent rational
way is to strike a middle stroke, between the two dangerous extremes of
unadvised credulity, and senseless incredulity. There are several Magnalia or
Wonderments of Art and Nature found out within these two or three last
Centuries, which our most inquisitive Progenitors did not so much as dream on:
Had some diving Head-pieces but run the venture in those times to have whispered
forth, by a probable conjecture, the hidden world in America, the amazing
Nature of the Lodestone, the profitable Invention of Printing, or the like,
those ingenious ones its very likely had got no more credence, then we use to
give, though upon better grounds, to them who now tell us of a world in the
Moon. The rational Bishop Virgilius was in the year of Christ 745. condemned by
Pope Zachary for an Heretic, because he asserted, and stood to it, that there
were Antipodes; which was a thing generally decry'd by the learning of that Age
to be a fable, a fond, and a foolish thing; of this humor were Lactantius,
Austin, and Lucretius, as Alstead tells you in his Geography c. 7. reg. 4. That
gallant Seaman Magalanus, who had the happiness first to purpose to discover
the vast Continent in the West Indies, might as soon have persuaded his
Countrymen, the Genoues, to whom he first laid bare his mind, that there was
an habitable earth in each Planet, as one in that unthought-at Coast. You see
by this time, that it is not the wise-mans part to discredit every thing that my
lie beyond the limits of his own present Apprehensions, but rather to do what
he can to climb over the difficulty, and then he will see not only the
probability and reallity, but also the rarity of the thing: Thus do you in the
ensuing Story, which I do not question has as much of Truth, as Strangeness in
it

SECT. II. Martha Taylor's Parentage, Place of Dwelling, the Time of her Birth,
and her Childhood.
1. HEr Fathers name is William Tailor, one who is Originally, and as to his
present state or degree, a plain Countryman, whose employment lies in the Lead
Mines: He has no more easy way to advance a livelihood, then that which was
of Divine determination, by the sweat of his Brow: A man of no larger
Politics, then how to get an homely, honest maintenance for him and his; he
has so much of Religion in him as to keep free from Lying, Looseness, or the
Debauchery of the Age, and to have a good esteem for holy things. The Man is of
good Credit amongst the better sort of Neighbors. His Wife was of something an
higher Rank then himself, both as to Birth and Education; A person in her
common carriage very careful, and cautious about her words and actions; I am
ready to suppose, in the judgment of charity, upon some trial of her, that she
has a taste of those good things which refer to another world. This couple has
lived many years together, had several Children, and among the rest this
Martha, which is the occasion of this Discourse.

2. The Place of her Dwelling is Over-Haddon, so called as I conjecture from
its being high, and looking over Haddon-hall, from which fair House of the Earl
of Rutland, it is about a mile distant, as such from Bakewell a considerable
Market Town, in the High Peak in Derbyshire; The House they dwell in is but an
ordinary Cottage, yet not so little but there is room enough for God to do
great things in; Wonders have been brought forth in a Stable or a Manger before
now; it is not the highness of the place that should make us turn our eyes
toward it, but the greatness of the work that may be done there. But now to
her that lies in it.

3. Martha Tailor, the talk, the wonder of that Country, was born about the
beginning of February in the year 1651. Her Childhood was not guilty (that ever
I heard) of any extravi^ant Actions: The Buds which then appeared did not
foresignifie any distastful fruits in a more blow ^age; Her early blossoms did
not predict four grapes in an Autumn season. Some sober, prudent Observers have
told me, That from her first Confinement to her Couch, when growing Infirmities
began to chain her to her weary Bed, that then Pi^u^ Discoveries in a more
considerable way began to display themselves; then rousing afflictions, the
usual Prognostics of a dying state, made (...) to purpose begin to enquire
after life. This (...) her labor after the knowledge of the Word of Go^, and
delight her self in turning over those (...) P^g^s; where frequently she would
be gathering Pearls to ad^rn her self and others with. Yet you must suppose it
was but still morning here, you may expect greater things when you proceed
nearer the Noon of Heavens Dispensations with her.

SECT. III. The Beginning and Progress of her Afflictions, and what they were.
1. I Am ready to suppose, that the Fountainhead of all her Afflictions was
her lameness, which took its beginning in the year 1661. which is now about
eight years ago, by the unhappy stroke of a Miller her next Neighbor, over the
Hips or small of the Back: whether he did it in jest or earnest I cannot
certainly determine, but I think the latter was affirmed to me; however the
occasion was no offense given on her side, she was so happy as to be harmless,
her Innocence in this case might be a good piece of a Pillar for her to lean
her self upon, when wearied under that great weight of Afflictions, which was
bound fast unto her. Poor Martha, upon this fatal stroke, was taken with a
lameness in the lower parts, indisposing them for their proper use; which was
followed at the heels with a general indisposition and incomposure of the whole
inward and o tward frame; for her distempers did so crowd in upon her, that she
was suddenly compelled to lay down the whole Body as an useless lump; to which
condition she has been confined ever since; only once or twice about April
1662. for some few days, she made a shift to go abroad: But upon the beginning
of May in the said Year 1662. she bid farewell to the open, refreshing Air, and
then entered close Prisoner to her tedious Bed. From which place, since that
time, she has never moved, without the help of other hands and feet besides
her own; where I suppose she is like to lie till Death bring her an
Habeas-Corpus, and make her free among the dead; in which estate only the weary
be at rest, and oppressing Diseases cease from troubling.

All along this tract of time, she has been troubled with other infirmities
besides lameness, as private bleeding, often sick, and seldom free from less
or more of a Fever.

2. But to make a nearer approach to the time of her constrained Fast; you must
know that there were many Afflictions gathered together to bring about the
thing; though she had for four or five years together by times lain under
various Distempers, yet about the close of August, and beginning of the
following Month, in the Year 1667. they combine together into a body, and add
others to their number, that they might the more vigorously produce the strange
ensuing Effects. For in the entrance of November, in the mentioned Year, did
begin her strange and wonderful Bleedings at several external Parts, as at the
Mouth, the Nose, the Ear, the Eye, from which last part did continually distill
perfect Tears of blood, so that one would have thought Life would have Wept it
self away out at the Eye. One very probable cause of this her admired Bleeding,
might arise from her violent continued Vomiting, which broke open convenient
Passages, through which the Blood might vent it self; it is an ordinary known
case, that the over-straining of the Body does break the Veins, and so less or
more produces an Efflux of Blood from some or other parts. This extraordinary
Vomiting continued all along November, so that she neither took in meat nor
drink, but presently threw it up again, nothing could be persuaded to abide
within her Stomach. This strong Vomiting did arise (as I conjecture) from those
Corrupt Crudities, Nauseating Vapors, and Filthy Humors, begot by her long
lying in Bed, and the want of convenient Exercise, which did weaken and vitiate
the natural Attractive, Retentive, and Concoctive Faculties, and stir up the
Stomach against every thing that was sent down into it. This preternatural
Vomiting did further introduce a very strange Hiccough, audible many paces from
the house, which would move her whole Body, and pluck down her Head with great
torment: To which was adjoined a sort of Convulsions, or the often Distortion
of her Joints by the Cramp: So that now Cramps, Convulsions, Strange sighings,
and the Hiccough, (all of them the Genuine Offspring of a disordered Stomach,
and continued violent Vomiting) were all in open War against the Ease and Life
of this poor tormented Creature. These things had made her the real wonder of
all Sober, Sympathizing Spectators; to see a poor Fellow Creature almost
constantly upon the Rack, under the most Exquisite Pains, Burnings, Cramps,
Vomitings, and the most strange Bleedings and Hiccoughs, that ever I read or
heard of. Now these all laid together, by the beginning of the ensuing
December, had near upon reduced the Microcosme into a Chaos, had almost wholly
taken Nature off the hinges, and well near shattered into pieces, a poor, frail
dying Body; so that for certain, her more Noble Immortal Part, had then bid
farewell to its falling House of Clay, had not Divine Providence stepped in, and
put under an everlasting Arm.

Yet these Distempers prevail so far, as for a Fort-night together within
December, they take away the use of Speech and Senses, so that she had very
little to witness she was alive, excepting some remaining heat and breath.

3. About the middle of this Month she revives a little, gets something of the
exercise of Sense and Speech; but still has that violent Hiccough, and
frequent sick fits: As she had received neither meat nor drink for this
fourteen days, so now being come to her self she finds an utter loathing of,
and an inability to receive necessary Food for the support of Life: The very
approach of Meat or Drink was a great trouble to her, the very sight or smell
of either, though at a remove, would beget her sorrow; yea, the very thoughts
of either would make her sick before hand. She found now so much ease and
satisfaction in the abstaining from the use or thoughts of any Food, that now
she lays down the first fixed Determinations to have to do with neither come
Life or Death. This makes her give her self over into the Hands of an Almighty
Power, and there to rest satisfied, hoping and expecting to be upheld in some
extraordinary way by immediate support, or else to be transported to that place
where none of these things were necessary: Seeing the sensible streams would
not run, she resolves to be contented without them, till she could ascend to
the Fount in-head. No question but we may expect, hope, and pray to be enabled
to live without the use of means, when the Great Lord of the Universe denies
the enjoyment of it. That holy Man in our Queen Mary's days (of whom Mr. Fox
speaks in his Acts and Monuments) who through the inhumanity of his barbarous
Persecutors, was denied any thing at all to live upon, believes and prays, That
God would either find Meat, or take away the Stomach, and enable him to live
without it, was to a wonder answered in the latter of his Petitions, so that he
subsisted to his Martyrdom with great de^ight, without the thoughts of Meat or
Drink, or the sense of any need of either. As I hinted in the Introduction, so
I say again, That Infinite Wisdom and Power has done many stupendous
Actions, without the use of means. That God which Created the World, without
any pre-existent matter to work upon, can when it pleases him, support and
under-prop it, or any of its Inhabitants, without borrowing the aid of any
Sublunary Means, Second Cause, or Creature Help.

4. Yet, to come to my main business, I must tell you, That this poor afflicted
Maid, being (as I told you) troubled with a Feavorish heat upon her, did
sometimes desire a drop of Wine, or Milk, or Water, in which Prunes had been
laid, or for the most part simple Water to cool her Lips withal; but then she
received it with the greatest struggling, and self-countest that ever I saw in
my life; as if so be it had been something which ha^ come to have tormented
her. The bringing near her a little Water in a Spoon would make her very sick,
and awaken her violent Hiccough, so that she for the most part was forced to
strive-long with her self before she could receive the Water to her Lips; which
she made so small use of, that when the Spoon was brought away again, the most
Critical Eye could perceive little or nothing wanting. I am persuaded, that the
refreshing coolness which the Senses then made use of, did enjoy from the Water
in the Spoon, were sufficient satisfaction without letting any of it down into
the Stomach, for coolness and refreshing smells were very delightsome to her;
as is abundantly evidenced by her living many Weeks together without touching
any thing with her Lips, only she had Spring Water, or Green-herbs, or
Fresh-flowers, held or laid at a distance from her, for nigh her she could not
admit them, They being (as her self would language it) too strong for her Brain.

5. At this rate she has lived for about sixteen Months together: only once in
the beginning she sucked some small quantity of a Baked Apple; and it may be,
some very few times she has taken an inconsiderable bit of Sugar, about the
bigness of a small Pease; and since the close of the last Year, instead of a
small drop or two of liquids, in the space sometimes of one, two, or more days,
she has delighted her taste by the sucking of a Raisin, Prune, or Fig, one of
which will last her a long while together; and when when she has done with it,
all the Pulp is left behind: Once, I confess, out of curiosity, or a desire to
eat if possible, she did swallow down part of a Fig, but had like to have dyed
for the space of twenty four hours after it, till by Vomiting she threw it up
again. This might be, either because of the loss of the Concoctive Faculty, and
the Offensive Humors in the Stomach, or because the common Passages by which
Nature should convey such things through the body are removed and displaced.
There has long lain behind and before, something fallen out of the Body; which
some noted Practitioners in Physic and Chyrurgery, several judicious Women,
and at least two approved, experienced Mid-wives, do really judge and assert to
be the Bowels or Guts behind, and the Bladder and Matrix before. Now, it is no
wonder that such great and continued weakness should bring down these, for it
has often been known in the like case. These ejected or dilapsed inward Parts,
did for a long time lie by her dry and consuming away, and put her to great
unknown torments, before her modesty would permit her to make her case known;
which afterward was something eased by anointing or bathing.

6. Now you may stand and wonder here, at the way of the preservation of this
poor Creature, how she should have been upheld thus long in time, under these
multitudes of st^ange Distempers, though she could have made some competent use
of Meats and Medicines, Physical Cordials or Spirits; but, then that she used
none of these, and yet is preserved out of the jaws of Death: Here, here is the
wonder!

Thus I have showed you the whole of what Martha Tailor has had to live upon.

7. Thus also I have given you an account of several of her Bodily Afflictions:
Many others I suppose here were which I forgot, or never heard of; I shall
Subjoyn one or two more, to those mentioned above; as, her Want of Sleep, when
she slept most, it was but very little, and not sound, but mere Slumber-like,
the usual time of it was in the Morning, the continuance seldom above an Hour
or Two. But the she did often live whole Weeks without any sleep at all, and
sometimes many of these Weeks together; as the United Acknowledgment of several
that Waked with her did sufficiently testify. Further, she was often much
afflicted in the weakne^s or loss of the external Senses; as, sometimes Seeing
was weak, sometimes Hearing was weak; these two more Noble Senses, which do
contribute so much to the comfort and advantage of the Rational Creature, were
often at a low ebb, little or nothing serviceable to our afflicted Martha: Her
Smelling also was now and then quite gone: The Vomiting, and the strong
Hiccough or Convulsions forementioned, were beyond all controversy the ground
of this weakness, or deficiency of the Senses, blocking up or blemishing their
Organs or Instruments, and their hidden, useful, natural humors or qualities.
Thus much with brevity for her External Afflictions.

8. I shall now proceed in a word or two to give you a glance at her more
Inward Sorrows, which were much comprised under, and caused by two things;
Reproach and Temptations. For the Reproach, it was her happiness they deserved
that name, they might have been far greater ground of trouble if they had been
just Accusations; but yet at the first, she was but too ready to lay these
heavy to her heart, as you have it spoken of one eminently pious, Psalm. 69.20.
Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness. Who is not so tender
of a good Name, as that the least blemish and aspersion cast upon it, seems
more wounding then the cutting of a Sword? Slander and Calumny looks but too
insufferable, even to good and worthy natures. The constant reproach and scoffs
of disbelievers did very often add bitterness to her wormwood. Diverse sorts of
Persons there were who employed themselves to vilify her, and cry her up for a
Cheat, round about the Country: Though the best Arguments they enforced their
unworthy Reports with, were only Suspicion, Conjecture, or Malice, what could
they otherwise rise from, seeing they spoke without trial; they did,
Audabatarum more pugnare, wink and fight against the Truth in her concern.
Ignorance of the cause, possibility, or former experiences, concerning things
truly admirable, is looked upon by some as reason good enough, not only to
question them, but also to deny their reality. How rational these were in
Martha's case, will be shown in third Part of this Treatise, to which I refer
you. But as these were the cause of her inward Trouble, so also were her
Temptations. The Devil, the grand Tempter, who constantly drives a great Trade
this way, took all advantages to disturb her peace, to draw her over to his
side, or at leastwise to draw her from her God; he showed his malice in doing
his utmost to hinder her from a way of grace; he laid what Remoras his craft
could invent to stop her in the way to JESUS CHRIST. He would either have her
rest satisfied in a State of Nature, or contented in the bare external
performances of Practical Duties; or else, bid farewell to Religion, to all
Hopes of Help from Christ, and future Happiness in Heaven; or lastly, run her
self upon one of the two destructive Rocks of Presumption or Despair.

With this Crafty and Unwearied Adversary Martha had about a year ago very
sharp Contests; and afterward the like with some of his Instruments, Heretical
Ones, who did their utmost to Proselite her to their Whimsies and Conceits.
Camden in his Britannia tells us, That the Peak had formerly in it noisome and
hurtful Wolves, whence he says Worme-hill had its Name from Wolf-haunt; though
the care and industry of former times has utterly destroyed those Brutes, yet
there abide others which deserve their Name, and are of a more dangerous
Nature. With these Martha, under her great distress, was put to many a tough
Disspute, and large and troublesome Discourses.

9. Her troubles of Body and Mind, were often much aggravated by her being at a
remove from many necessary helps: External helps for the Body, such as should
allay or mitigate the pains of the afflicted Members and Parts: Inward helps,
about Soul concernments, by her solitariness, her own inquisitive
thoughtfulness, about the urgent business of a dying state, and appearance in
another world, her great distance from sound, serious, and pious Acquaintance.
But in all these, she found some mitigation, yea, some considerable ease, by
casting Anchor upon Divine goodness, and by seating down upon some or other
Shelf of the Rock of Ages. Though she was in her greatest weakness, often at
Ebbs and Tides, sometimes driven out by Storms upon the blustering Waves,
sometimes again shor'd upon a convenient Lee-harbour.

SECT. IV. The frame of her Body all the time of this her being debarred Meat
or Drink.
1. HEr Upper Parts were the most fresh and flourishing. As, her Face,
excepting that it was a little fallen in about the ends of the Mouth, was
pretty plump or fleshy, considerably free from decay, and of a rud^y or lively
color. This pure Complexion of her Face, was the admiration of all intelligent
Beholders, to see a frail, brittle Body, under those great Afflictions, and
that continued Abstinence from outward Supplies, look so lovely, so beautiful,
not reduced to Skin and Bone, not at all ghastly or terrifying, but rather a
delightful Object, worth the looking on, and taking pleasure in. Thus she
continued for three Quarters of a Year or more together; and for the following
Month held the same quantity of Flesh, though I think not altogether so fair in
the Face.

Her Arms also all along this tract of time have been well covered over.

Her Pulse pretty smooth, even, and lively in its motions; seldom diverted out
of the usual course, but when she was under some immediate sorrow of Body or
Mind.

Her Eyes, though often very weak, were sometimes quick and durable in their
beholding or dwelling upon objects, so that she would know that she looked upon
at the first glance, and continue reading for an hour or more together.

Her Lungs commonly showed themselves undecay'd by the audibleness and
continuation of her Discourse: She would, when freed from the troublesome
Hiccough, talk pretty loud and long together.

Now do but ly these Considerations in the Balance with her great sorrows, and
no sustenance, and you will see they are ponderous; especially if you consider,

2. That her lower Parts from top of the Ribs and downwards were a mere
Sceleton, a dry Carcass covered over with Skin. You might have laid your
Fingers betwixt the Ribs, and feel the Belly (through double Linen) fallen down
from the Breast to the Backbone, where it lay as flat, as if Nature had never
enjoyed any hollow place betwixt, or any proper Inhabitants in that Dwelling.
When you had been satisfying your Curiosity by a strict search here, you would
have supposed your Hand to have been examining an half-consum'd Carcass within
a Grave. Here also modest Inquisition might have stood amazed to behold that
color and flesh on the Face and Arms, and yet find that vast decay in the
nether Parts.

The late sober and searching Observation of some well-skill'd in Anatomy has
told us, that the Vertebrae or Joints in the Back, are easily felt through the
Belly by the touch of the Finger: And that her Body is devoid of Muscles or
fleshly Membranes. It may have been long thus with her, but was not known
before the close of the last year, for want of some knowing Ones to make the
Trial.

3. She has since the beginning of the year 1668. avoided no Excrements by
Stool or Urin; neither has she had any moisture in her Mouth or Nose. She did
(I think) at the first sometimes sweat a little, and since had now and then
some small Pimples or Out-breaks upon the Wrists of her Arms, which some
suppose to be the result of those few drops of weak Liquids, which might
sometimes pass down into her Stomach; and that the abiding Power of Nature,
having no other way left, does use that strong one, to Evacuate her Dregs.
Others, again say, That as long as there is my remaining blood, which is in her
like water in a standing Pool, it will corrupt, and that the corrupted part
does in that manner Vent it self by the Pores: We all know, as to our own
Bodies, that Nature, with very small help, does by these little insensible
Holes in the Skin, send forth those Vapors and Humors which would endanger the
Body, if they should take up their lodging within the same.

4. The two Senses of Hearing and Smelling were once (that I say not oftener) so
incomparably acute and quick, that she would apprehend and distinguish their
several Objects at a vast remove. A considerable Ecclesiastic Person, who did
many times visit her, told me, That for most of the time he had taken notice of
her, he found she had all her Faculties and senses, excepting that of Seeing,
in as great vigor, as he thought it possible to be in an unglorified Body.

Our gross way of feeding does very much dull and clogg up the Senses in their
exercise; we little know the great comfort we should enjoy in them, if we did
not so much indulge to the irregular Appetite: Temperance or sobriety, both as
to the quantity and quality of what we live upon, would abundantly quicken and
put into right motion all the Senses. It Is undeniable, that many Brutes, who
are compelled to satisfy themselves with a spare and thrifty way of feeding,
do quite exceed us in Sense. But, I suppose, if you take them in their greatest
excellency, our Martha did once outvie them, and that was in Smelling; not
only that she could take pleasure in Smells, for in that its very probable Man
exceeds all other Animals; but she over-did them in the very thing, in which
some say they surpass Man, which was the drawing nourishment out of Odors; for,
as I told you in the preceding Section, thus she lived for many Weeks together.

As concerning other things referring to the temper or frame of her Body under
her Afflictions, you had them touched upon before.

THE SECOND PART.
SECTION I. Concerning her Parts and Piety.
THough she may appear eminent in these, especially the latter, yet the rariety
of them does not lie so much in their greatness, as the way of their
Attainment: She was not Cultivated by Education at home or abroad; the Country
where she was Born and Bred, is but too great a stranger to Accomplishments of
either Nature. The Inhabitants are more taken up with a strict search about the
hidden things of Nature among the Rock and Hills, then they are about those
more enriching ones of Reason and Religion. Their Hands and Thoughts are so
much employed about that dull and heavy Mineral, which is the standing Traffic
of those Parts, that they cannot afford to wear time or pains upon the more
refined or spiritual Ornament of Body or Mind. The very Breeding of that
Country has been noted for something more then ordinary Rustic: The Religion
of very many there is but few degrees beyond ignorance. Vulgar and pedantick
conceptions look upon those more noble improvements to be requisites only
becoming them who have great estates and leisure; of this barren and
low-spirited humor were the most of Martha's Neighborhood, and first
acquaintaince; so that she had in the beginning none to discipline or direct
her, I mean very little Humane or Christian help; this may make what follows
cast forth brighter beams.

2. Her Parts or External Excellencies, which made her so taking to the Eyes
and Ears of her unprejudiced Visitors, were her Deportment, Reading, Prayer,
and Discourse. For,

1. Her Deportment, which was very lovely, raising up her head in Bed, and
bowing her self to all with a smiling grateful Countenance, continually giving
suitable terms of Respect and Decency. Her Courtesy, her Candor, and Comely
Carriage, quite over-acted her original as to place and persons. She was in
the^e things handsome without humor, and courteous without being conceited.
None experienced the contrary carriage in her, but them who did openly declare
themselves small Friends to her Person, true Religion, or her God.

2 Her Reading; though she was pretty exact in her Mothers Tongue, yet the
greatest observable was the way of her attaining it, which was by her own
industry, having but little direction beyond the bare knowledge of the
Alphabet. She did of her self pursue Letters into Words, Words into so^^ ^^es,
and Sentences into her own Heart, (...) were but spiritual. A desire of
inform^^ (...) her self with her own Eyes out of the Book of Life, was the
first motive to lay out her afflicted hours upon the learning to Read; which
having fully and happily obtained, she laid out upon the holy Bible, or some,
or other chosen Books: And here now she bestowed all her Breathing Seasons, all
the Spare Minutes, which the Absence from Company, violent Pains of Body, or
the Weakness of the Eyes would befriend her with.

3. For Prayer; She was observed to be constant in it, either in Confessing
Sin, Begging Mercy, or Praising God. She seemed to be made up of Prayer when
most afflicted. The near approach of the Bystanders Ear might be satisfied in
this, That her Voice, when at the weakest, would be spending it self upon her
God, by fervent, pious Ejaculations, to hold up an heart-chearing Intercourse
between Heaven and her hungering Soul. For an affectionate Joyner in this great
Duty, when I Visited her, I must confess, I never found her Parallel: She
seemed by a sensible, serious, struggling, melting frame of Spirit, to go (as
it were) out of her self into an upper Region; so that when a rousing Prayer
has been ended, she would be puzzled to reduce her self, and compose the
humane frame. Her own personal way of praying, which was much concealed, and to
her self, was usually short and sententions, but very significant,
comprehensive, humble, and powerful.

4. Her Discourse; which, if you consider the Style of it, and compare it with
the common Dialect of that Country, you will find it did for the most part very
much excel. The Peak Country has a very course Language, very thick and
homespun; but hers was of a finer, unaffected m^ke; usually pretty fluent and
oratorical, but never dull and sordid. Some took much notice of this, as a
thing rather strange then contemptible; no question, but it is a very lawful Art
to advantage good discourse, and pious conference, with powerful taking
Language. It Is, if I may so call it, a sacred Fraud, every way lawful to steal
the Ears and Hearts of those with whom we converse to the considerate
observation of the deep concernments of an Eternal and better State. The Sword
of Rhetoric in a Wife Man's hand may wound the Champions of Irreligion, and win
the Day for Heaven. The applauded wit of the Age, in which we live, does but
too much prostitute it self to the greatest Ribaldry. Our Martha had the
happiness, to enjoy a considerable, clear, smooth Phrase, not guilty of bombast
or boyish vanity; which for the most part she bestowed upon the best of things.
I confess her ignorance of other Tongues then what she was born to, did
sometimes in the beginning Months of her afflictions produce some small
mistakes of Words and Terms, which afterward were polished to a more acute and
regular way of speaking.

5. But the manner of her Speech was not worth the taking notice of, if you
compare it with the matter of the same.

Her ordinary sayings were very considerable; with which I question not but I
by my own, or friends Collections, might have Stuffed more Sheets, then at this
time I must have leave to Bestow* upon Her Story. Most of these were Scripture
Dialects and of them I shall give you no account: I know others who have writ
upon Young Maids, under some such like Visitations, have bestowed twenty,
forty, or more Pages, upon the mere repetition of Scripture Passages: These I
do not, I dare not reflect upon, though I shall not imitate.

It was the good Assertion of one of her Judicious Visitors, That he never
heard her speak any thing untheological; and that, though she pretended to
nothing of Inspiration, nor any thing extraordinary, but what was the Effect of
her Reading and Diligence; yet whatsoever Discourse did c^^urr, he never found
her lost in it, but that she was clearly with good Language, and to purpose
able to talk of it.

The ordinary Subjects of her Discourse were upon the Blacks and Whites, the
Storms and Sunshine of the Christians Life.

She thought no time lost in which she could but say something against sin, and
for Holiness; in which she could but cry up the Promises to lost returning
sinners, and the Advantages of Affliction to them that belong to God; in which
she could but sufficiently dilate upon the miseries of a besotted World, and
the glorious enjoyments of the New Jerusalem.

SECT. II.
BUt I shall here give you a Copy of some of her ordinary sayings, as they were
not much above a Month ago taken from her own Mouth, by the Hand of a Friend:
They were short Answers to Questions proposed, but I shall take no notice of
the Questions.

I bless my God he has wrought in me a desire exercise my self in all ways
and duties of Holiness, so as he may receive glory, others edification, and I
comfort in the Day of Jesus.

I desire, I resolve for sincerity: I know that its God that works all in me
and for me; of my self, as to pious actions, I can do just nothing; it is He,
He, that is become all to me, and I am nothing but what I am in him; my motion,
my being, is in Him, and of Him.

The Reproaches of the World, which are many, and crowd in upon me, do not,
cannot rob me of my Joy which I have in Christ Jesus, my Lord, my Portion, my
Righteousness, my Life, my All.

I in Christ, or rather in me, does oppose Sin, Error, Deceit, yea, all manner
of uncleanness both of Flesh and Spirit: and it is He that gives me the
Victory over all Enemies Visible and Invisible. So that to him belongs all the
Praise, and be shall have it: I discaim any share in it, let him have all. I
know by Nature wrath was my Portion, and that I was born in open Rebellion to
God: Now if Christ through his unspeakable goodness and sorrow did redeem me
to himself, I am sure I ought to be zealous of good works, and to glorify Him
with my Soul and Body which are his.

If I was able to feed upon all the good Creatures of God, where as n^w I
cannot, yet they could none of them satisfy or solace my poor, weak, hungry
Soul: It is the enjoyment of him, who is the Bread of Life, the Life of my
Life, that is, my satisfaction, to whom be glory.

2. Sin is the Serpents fruit, and so it come^ to be of that Poisonous Nature,
that it infects the World, sets God and Men at difference, wound^ the soul, and
begets the sting of Death.

Holiness, as I shall speak of it, is a Believer^ serious Conversation which he
lives in Christ, by which he is doing what he can to re-gain tha^ Image of God
he lost in Paradise, and to get himself ready for an happy estate in Heaven,
where all Holiness dwells.

Afflictions are the actings of Gods dear love toward Believers, for whom the
Lord loves he afflicts; Afflictions are those strange seeds, which while
they are taking root in the Believers heart do beget war, weeping, and sorrow,
but yet at length they do bring forth the profitable, the pleasant, and
peaceable fruits of righteousness.

The promises, which are many, great, and precious, are the rich manifestations
and assurances of Divine goodness; by which God designs to encourage the poor
Believer, and bear up his heart under all his sorrows. The Reconciliation of
the Promises and Providence of God, seems to be one of the greatest mysteries,
and sweetest studies in the world: To see how sweetly these join themselves
together at the journies end, though they seem to thwart one the other all the
way.

The Word of God, I mean the Word of Reconciliation, is (as it were) God
speaking forth himself to us in Jesus Christ. It is the rule and Guide to
Holiness, to God, and Happiness.

To speak of Heaven is a very great difficulty, for it is unspeakable kingdom of
Glory; eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart
of man to conceive of those things which God has there prepared for them that
love him. How should I then tell what Heaven is, any further then thus, That
there is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore; and that which makes all
these excellent, is that they are everlasting.

Death is no evil Messenger to the Saint, for the Sting is taken away, and he
gains by dying: Christ has been the death of Death, and so Death is no death
to the Saint: It is but, as it were his dissolver out of Flesh into Spirit, so
that when Death comes the Saint may triumph, and bid it welcome.

What I said of Heaven, I may speak just backward concerning Hell. The torments
are unutterable, and for their extremity expressed by weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth, these also are the more terrible because everlasting.

As I am crucified to the world, and the world to me; and as I know the Devil
is my Adversary, and God a present Help in time of trouble; so I look upon all
the scandals that are cast upon me to be as Pearls in my Crown.

I look upon my preservation without the use of creatures to be the
manifestation of Infinite Power, for the benefit and advantage of them that
fear God, to let them see how God can preserve life by and if himself, and for
the hardening of the obsti^^^^ and impenitent; for my own awakening, and
^^^^ging into a way of holiness,

3. Thus I have given you a taste of her sayings, out of the Paper above
mentioned; which I have compendiz'd and put something into another order,
inserting also some few short Sentences which I heard my self, or were
communicated to me by worthy friends; doing what I could to keep to her very
words. But I can assure you, that much of what she used to discourse was little
inferior to these, for she is well versed in the Scripture, and of a quick
apprehension.

SECT. III.
I Suppose its now time to show you something of her Piety or Person.

1. Of these you may have gathered something by what went before. They were
introduced by a great work upon her Spirit: For you must know, that all
November, and in the beginning of December in the year 1667. she were
exceedingly puzzled to know what would become of her to all Eternity, having Sin
and Death before her, she was put to her utmost shifts to obtain a Christ.
There are many indeed that think men Mortality may land them in Heaven witho^t
a work or Grace, which we usually call Regeneration; upon which conceit (its
very probable) that notable Ruler of the Jews, mentioned John 3.1. had built a
very high Fabric of Hope; he comes in a secret manner to own Christ as a
Teacher come from God because of his Miracles, verse. 2. but Christ takes little
or no notice of what he says, but does upon the matter tell him all this will
not serve thy turn, though thou be a Pharasee, one of the strictest Sect, yet
thou must either be born again, or else thou cannot see the Kingdom of God,
verse. 3. Nicodemus was here at a very great stand, he could not tell what to
make of the words of Christ, verse. 4. But Christ affirms the same again with as
great vehemence, and rather greater fullness, with the reason of what he says,
verses 5, 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and will be flesh and
corrupt, notwithstanding external Profession; nay, the outward washing of
Baptism will not serve the turn alone without the Laver of Regeneration, not
Works of Righteousness, which we have done, will do the business for us, but
there must be the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit.
3.5. There must be a transformation by the renewing of the mind, Romans 12.2 This
being born of the Holy Ghost, or being Baptized with it and fire, as Mat. 3.11.
This being bathed and burnt, till the filth and d^oss of Nature was done away,
was the grant difficulty with our afflicted Martha. She told me, That upon this
account she was once in great darkness, and under sad distress; to allude to
that ^f Paul, Romans 7.9. Being without the Law she thought her self alive, in a
condition good enough to carry her to Heaven; but when the Commandment came,
when she understood her own and ^e condition by the Word of God; then sin
revived, then she found it rouse up it self and discover life and strength, and
then she died, she found her self dead under trespasses and sins: This kept her
for a season upon the Waves, under Storms and Winds (as I said before) without
sight of Sun or Star, but (as she told me) it was her happiness that before she
was split upon the Rock of Despair, the Sun of Righteousness broke forth from
behind the Clouds, with healing under his wings. She was often put to cry out,
Phosphere read diem: But the glorious Day Star appearing, brought in hope and
hearts-ease with it: So that (upon her own Confession) she has enjoyed much
comfort, calm, and Halcyon days (...).

2. Now I have showed you a little of the beginning Work; here was the
Foundation, as laid upon the great, elect, and precious Corner Stone. But to
proceed, I shall a little show you the Superstructure in some few things, as
her Knowledge, Gratitude, Patience, Hope, Zeal, Love, and Perseverance.

SECT. IV.
1. HEr Knowledge; She was very large in this comprehending skill in all the
most necessary Truths and Duties, notably read in the Bible, and several other
good Books. She enjoyed but a short while to labor in, but had done abundance
of work. She was able to discourse in ail the ordinary known things within the
Sphere of Religion. The strangness of this appeared in her small helps at the
first, all were ignorant about her, no knowing Heads to conferr with, and then
she was far from the Church, and the ordinary use of means; but of these
something has been said. Her Knowledge was not only Speculative and Notional,
it was not Aerie, and only dwelling in the Head, but Practical and
Experimental. She had the happiness not only to know, but also to taste the
Truth of the Gospel: She did not only know there was a God, but she tasted and
saw how good this God was. This was a means to lead her up to God and Christ,
to fill her heart with thoughts of them, and to breed strong and warm
affections toward them. Her Knowledge did discover it self to be a gracious
Illumination, by its foundness, humility, and self-applications; it did not
only know God, but was ready to glorify him as God, it showed it self to be a
good understanding in that it did the commandments of God. The strength of her
Knowledge was made apparent by her discovering the Sophismes, and detecting the
strange whimsies and wild practices of various Opinionists, who did every day
assault her.

2. Her Gratitude did stream forth both to God and Men: To Men, in being
exceeding thankful for the least Cou^tisie imaginable, an humble rational
^eproof should have been received with cheerful thanks: I saw her once weep
that she was not able to make any re^uital to those her Friends, who ^owa^d
then came to visit her out of pure Love, and for Pious ends. It also appeared
in her constant importuning Heavens Remuneration to be given into the Bosom of
them, who did her but the meanest good turn. Her thankfulness to God was much
of her business, she was not only happily employed in returning Praise to the
Great Provider for those things which all serious Hearts would have made
Arguments of Gratitude, but also (which was the wonder) she was usually
thankful for the greatest afflictions which lay upon her. She forne^ that
before afflicted she went astray, and that miseries of Body made her enquire
the more industrio fly for the good old way, the way of eas^ and happiness.

She would bless God for every thing; like good and holy Bradford the Martyr,
in his Rep^ to (...), says he, If the Queen will give me (...), I will thank
her; if she will Banish me, I will thank her: If she will burn me, I will thank
her: If she will condemn me to perpetual Imprisonment, I will thank her. I
never saw, nor heard, that Martha, under her greatest sorrow, did the least
repine at the hand of God, but was ready always to vent her Groans with this
Language, Blessed be God. She continually having a fixed eye upon the great
undeserved mercy of God, would not so much as send forth one Sigh without
improving that breath to the praise of God. Thus Servulus a ^rimitive Saint,
lying a long time under grievous afflictions, in such a condition as one could
scarcely make a distinction between Life and Death, would often and ordinarily
be breathing forth, God be thanked. The poor persecuted Members of Christ have
been formerly known by the Name of, The praising People.

3. Her Patience was so eminent when she was most exercised under sorrows, that
one of her constant impartial Visitors, told me, That in her afflictions she
had exercised as much patience as ever he read or heard of, excepting Christ
himself. She would ordinarily witness her patience by her lying still and quiet
under her greatest troubles: She would with a very composed countenance bear up
head and heart under sickness and pains of body, and scoffs and reproaches
upon her Name and Innocence; never complaining of the greatness or continuance
of these. It is the glory of Patience to be silent and submissive under the
greatest lashes of Providence, to receive the Rod with a smiling Face, to bear
its own burden cheerfully without inordinate sorrow, or fretting discontent.

The truly patient Soul labors more to improve, then remove the Cross.

This can (as it were) stand still upon the floting Waves, contemplating the
All-seeing Eyes of Heaven. It can with Paul and Sil^^ sing in the Stocks, and
exalt and triumph though the Enemies gets the day. Thus the Followers of Jesus
in the first days of the Gospel did take cheerfully the spoiling of their
goods, they went away rejoicing that they were counted Worthy to suffer
Affliction; they did joy, nay, they did glory in tribulation.

I will not say, but Martha might be a little startled when affliction did at
first make the onset, but she would presently reassume her forces, and stand
out against the shock, or combined strength opposition. Patience is
well-skill'd in Chemistry, it an draw meat out of the eater, and fetch sweet
out of the strong; it can exstract matter of serving and praising God out of
the greatest paenal evils that can fall upon it, while on this side the bounds
of Eternity. One once asking Martha, Why she blessed God for the evil of
sorrow, she replied to this purpose, That she tasted Honey at the end of the
Rod.

4. Her Hope, or if you will Faith, for I shall unite these together; they
being pretty near akin, or at the least near Neighbors, usually living under
one roof, and drawing breath together. She had an advantageous Art of casting
Anchor upward, and of Hawking Expectation within the Vail; she would live very
well upon a Promise; this was the ground of her stocking up such precious
Treasures; yea, she would make a good shift to live upon things not seen.
Because there was no use of these rare Graces in another world, therefore, I
suppose, she determined to make her utmost advantage of them while she was in
this. By these she stayed and supported her Soul upon the chief Cornerstone,
under the greatest sorrows, difficulties, improbabilities, and contradictions
of Sense and carnal Reason: She looked upon the engaged Power and Truth of an
ever gracious God, to be sufficient for her to content her self, and bear up
her heart withal. This was the ground of her solemn Resignation and sound
Dependence; this made her give her All to God, and expect and look for All from
God. She did not only roll her self on God, but acquiess and rest satisfied in
him alone: She saw the barrenness, nay, the baseness, and universal emptiness
of Self and the Creature, and this made her go beyond both to Christ, as one
willing to close in with and stick to him upon any terms. She looked upon a
Christ obtained by the greatest losses to be the greatest gain; this made her
think her shipwreck very happy, because by it she was unexpectedly thrown upon
the sho^^s of Eternity: She was ready to think ad say, That (...) had not
perished and been miserable s;he should (...) have been saved or ha^py. She so
employed these two noble useful Grace^ ^^at she always lived either by
Evidence, or (...) Recumbence. She was often observed to make very fair for
Assurance, though she delighted to language all her Discourse in thi^ affair by
those humble, sweet, and commendable words, Good Hope.

5. Her Zeal was notably displayed in the warmth and fervor of her Love and
Language for God and the Gospel: She would not hear the Holy Name of the one
abused, but she would throw forth some prudent Reproof or R^m^r^ into the way
of the Profane: She would not hear the Duties or Dignities of the other set
light by, or scoffed at, but she would with humble boldness attempt their
vindication. Pious zeal, not only puts a luster upon, but life into all the
Affections of the Soul; its that which makes us run and not be weary, and walk
and not f^int; it makes us in a manner fly about the business of God. Where
this is prudent, knowing, and sanctified, it puts valor into the heart of the
^hristian, and makes him do all that ever he can, keeping his proper sphere
against Sin, and for a life of Holiness. When our Affections gro^ du^l and
heavy, its good to put life into them again, by fetching this Coal from the
Alter, not from the common Hearth. The warmest Region is not too hot for the
well-advised, sober Saint, yet indiscreet Zeal, which is the Torrid Zone,
proves too hot for him to dwell in.

6. Her Love was once so happy as to embrace every thing that came from God; by
this Affection she would run and pursue after the desirables of another world.
Her soul seemed to act freely and superlatively in this: It was her judgment,
That the best way to Love God in a due measure, was to love him out of measure.
Some have observed her weep and sigh for love to God. Its the good saying of an
eminent Person of this Nation, speaking concerning Seraphick Love, That he
alone loves Gods as much as he ought, that loving him as much as he can,
strives to repair the deplored imperfection of that Love, with an extreme
regret to find it no greater. Once a pious Suffolk Minister, weeping as he sat
at Table, and being asked the reason of it, he answered, Because he could love
Christ no more. True Evangelick Love knows no doubts, no dangers, no
difficulties; this having God for its only object, can do as Jacob did, Endure
the scorching heat by day, and the most bitter pinching cold by night: The
words of the Spouse in that last of the Song of Solomon, are surpassing to this
purpose, Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for Love
is as strong as death, jealousy [or ardent burning love] is as cruel as the
Grave; the Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, which have a most vehement Flame.
Many Waters cannot quench Love, neither can the Floods drown it; if a man would
give all the substance of his House for Love it would be utterly contemned.

7. Her Perseverance did consist in her abiding Patient under sorrows; her
continuing firm in the Faith, notwithstanding reproaches and frequent
temptations to the contrary. Its an humane thing to err, but an hellish one to
persevere in error. Its very good to enter into Heavens way, but a thousand
times better to go to the far end of it. Perseverance sets the Grown upon the
Head of all the Virtues and Graces, which the Believer is the owner of. These
considerations taught Martha how to distinguish between Sin and Duty, what was
Ornament and what disgrace.

Thus I have given you a brief Account of some of this Maids Inward
Excellencies, as they discovered themselves in her Actions: You may call them
by what Names you please, only I am sure they do very much adorn the true
Believer, and may fitly enough be c^lled the Virtues or Graces of the truly
Rational and Reformed Soul.

You must do me the favor to take this as an account of her Actings or
Behavior only in the year 1668. which was her more afflicted season. I suppose
she did never to purpose know what God or Sin was before. Few there are that do
sufficiently discern the way to Heaven, till they come to Weeping-cross.
Afflictions are like the Fullers Teasles, which are very sharp and scratching
in themselves, yet serve to make the Cloth pure and fine. The most excellent
Water-springs are hottest in the coldest Winter-season. The more the Camomil is
trodden with the Feet, the mope it spreads and grows. It has been an old
observation, that some Virtues and Graces are like Stars that shine not in the
day of Prosperity, but shine only in the night of Adversity: It Is probable we
had never known Jobs eminent Patience, had we not known his extraordinary
Afflictions. There is a very odoriferous water in the Damask-rose, but not to
be obtained till extracted by fire. We may allude to Job 22.29. When men are
cast down, then thou shall say, there is lifting up. When an Holy Man was asked
which we^^ the most pleasant and comfortable days that ever he enjoyed, he
answered, His Mourning days, these were his most joyful days, and therefore he
cried out, O give me my Mourning Day, give me my Mourning Days, for they were
the days of my greatest joy.

Thus I know it was with Martha Tailor, she was most eminent when most under
sorrow: If at any time she was guilty of humane failings, or did incline an ear
to the charms of the Flesh or Seducers, it was when most at ease, and freed
from afflictions.

But for the year above named she seemed very famous in the foregoing
Particulars: and was not dull or drowsy, but very lively in their exercise.

There was one thing then appeared in her which is (for any thing I know)
highly commendable, and that was, That she discovered a large love to Religion,
only upon its own account, or upon the account of the ever-glorious God, to
whom Religion tends: She seemed to be very much uninterested, not to close in
with it upon the account, of breeding, party, opinion, conceit, or the like;
but because of the great loveliness, and spiritual advantage which she saw in
it. It Is beyond all question that some take up a strict way of Religion, that
they may be looked upon as singular: But for this, you may take that of the
ingenious and illustrious Author of Wisdom, Tri^os, p. 199. An affected
singularity (says he) and that in trifles, is but the adultery and pedantry of
Morality: But if the thing be serious, and the singularity without affectation,
it is so far from being a just shame, that it is indeed the true gallantry of
virtue, that dares enjoy and own its single self, and stand fast, amidst the
stream of the worlds headiest current.

PART III. The Probability or Possibility in point of Nature, and in her
Concern.
SECTION I.
1. I Find this commonly asserted among the most famous Transmarine Physicians,
though I confess many of our most noted Homebred ones, with whom I have
conversed, have been ready at the first hearing to decry it as an
impo^sibility. The thing does indeed very strangely thwart ordinary Experience,
and vastly go against the grain of our common way of living. Which, I suppose,
was the ground of Hippocrates conjecture, That it was impossible to live beyond
the seventh Fasting-day, in lib. ejus (...) Pliny indeed goes something
further, but does not ascend so high as to twice the number of days, lib. 11.
cap. 24. This also was the ground of Harvets vigorous opposition against the
Learned Joubert, who writ the Story of one of these foodless Creatures.

2. The thing has appeared so far impossible, that it has made some, who could
not deny its reality as to matter of fact, run to refuge their Apprehensions in
a Miracle, and think they vindicate themselves sufficiently in the three famous
instances we meet withal in the Sacred History, concerning Moses, Elijah, and
the ever Blessed Jesus.

3. Others fly to the Aid of Angels, as if these good Spirits did in some
hidden way sustain the humane fra^e by some unthought-at inward or outward
Applications. But I think Sennertus reasons to the contrary are powerful enough
to stop the mouth of these; He says, The most of those that thus lived without
the use of Meat or Drink, were Persons little or nothing acquainted with
Religion, and some of them no better then Heathens. And it cannot be imagined
that the All-glorious God should work a Miracle without a Cause, and that upon
(or by) such in whom was found nothing singular or excellent, and for no
proposed end. I never heard of any thing mentioned by these Prodigeous,
Absteminous Ones, concerning Doctrine, Discipline, or Providence; nor any thing
referring to the Introduction, Illustration, Emendation, or Exaltation of
these. I am sure many eminent Protestant Writers, both at home and abroad, do
upon good grounds affirm that Miracles (as we understand them here in the
stricter sense) are altogether ceased. It Is something to the thing in hand, if
we consider, That those ever worthy Persons mentioned in the Scripture, were
under no decays of body, notwithstanding their miraculous fasting; and that
they were voluntary in it, whereas those of latter Ages were always
constrained to this abstinence by some disease, tedious distempers, or defects
of nature.

4. But further, some have been ready to give up the day to the Devil, as if he
either did move and act the body and its members, when the rational soul was
stepped forth into another habitation; or else, that he did, in a clanculous
and insensible manner, convey necessary food into the body, and in as strange a
way carry the excrements out of the same: This cunning trick of the Devil may
have been not only possible, but experienced; but yet it is altogether unlikely
in the case of several of those who have been thus preserved, because some of
them have returned again to eating and drinking, and others of them have
married and brought forth children; and that which showed they were not possessed
by any evil spirits, was the piety of some of them, their frequency in Prayers,
Reading the Scriptures, and other Exercises of Devotion and Holiness, as may be
seen in the Printed Relations concerning them.

But of these you may see several more in the forenamed eminent Sennertus,
Medicinae Pract. lib. 3. par. 1. sect. 2. chap. 2.

SECT. II.
I Shall now give you some few Considerations, which may make the thing
probable: As,

1. The Testimonials of some Learned Men, Men of Note and Credit. That pious
Father of the Church St. Augustine, in an Epistle of his to Casulanus de
jejunio, tells of one, Who in his time lived very many days without either
meant or drink; in which relation he gives you a Testimonial of the probability
of vast Abstinence. J. Jo^st^n of Poland, in his Thaum^tographia Naturalis,
speaking De Inedia stupendia, says to this purpose, Although the use of
Nutriment be necessary for the preserving life, yet there have been very many
found, who, notwithstanding the want of the same, have been kept alive. Zaculus
Lucitanus in his History of the chiefest Physicians, lib. 6. Hist. 2. says,
That Authors, not at all to be undervalu'd, do tell us, that several have lived
a very long while without meat and drink: And there he gives you his own assent
to the thing, with a Catalogue of twelve noted Authors, and their Works, in
which you may find the Persons Names, the Places where they lived, and the
continuance of their Abstinence. Beyerlink also in his Theatrum Tom. 1. de
Abstinen. and de cibo, gives you in an equal number of differing foregoing
Author, assuming the same thing. But I shall close up this with the Testimony
of our Doctor M. Causabon, in a late Treatise of his concerning Credulity and
Incredulity, ^. 49. where he says, I will say whom the credit of so many good
Authors, and the particular relations of so many examples, delivered with so
many circumstances, wherein no mistake or imposture can rationally be
suspected, that I do believe i^, that diverse men, and more women have lived
several years, some to their lives end, without any bodily food ordinary or
extraordinary, liquid or solid; yea, I believe it, as I believe that I my self,
with ordinary food and Gods blessing, have lived hitherto.

2. This may further appear probable, if you consider that there are several
inferior Animals, which live many Months together without feeding upon any
thing at all. They do, I confess, live a strange, inert, drousie, dead kind of
life; but yet live they do, and that as really as when they are more lively and
active: Its as certain there is fire in the spark, or in the unextinct embers,
as in the burning flame.

All the great searchers into the mysteries of the Creation, have given us many
wonderful examples of this nature. The two great Beginners were Aristotle^ and
Pliny, upon the account cried up by after Ages; The Natural History of the one,
and the History of Animals writ by the other, has given you many true
Relations referring this way, of which I shall give you some few hints*

The Bat and Swallow (both of them well known to us) do upon the first approach
of Winters bitter blasts, take their leave of the open Air, and betake
themselves to Caves, Clifts of Rocks, or Hollow-trees, where they lie hid for
five or six Months together, without the reception of any created thing to live
upon.

Some Creatures, which seem contemptible to us, are worth the taking notice of
upon this account, of which sort there is the Snail, the Fly, the Frog, and the
Snake, or Adder, with many others; all which lie hid all along the Winter
Months, in some secret holes or crannies, where they have no external thing to
live upon; but do, as many Philosophic Wits have strongly conjectured, subsist
by the aid of some unctious matter or humor which is lodged within themselves.

Some also say upon their own experience, that Bears and other furred Brutes,
in the Northern frozen Parts of the world, do for certain live after the same
manner, from the middle of September to the middle of April.

Many Pious and Learned Men have wondered at the meanest Creatures, to see
their strange Natures, and way of living. Austine could bestow serious thoughts
upon the silly Fly, and for its life (thought, as Voss^us says, not for its
use or end) preferred it to the glorious Sun in the Firmament. The great Zarchy
in his learned T^actu^^ de ^peribus Dei, sits down, and wonders at, and
contemplates the glorious Creator and Preserver of the World, even in his
meanest Creatures.

3. Another thing that shows the probability and reality of the sometimes
foodless subsistence of the Rational Humane Creature, is, the frequent Trials
that have been made by ca^eful Magistrates and skillful Physicians, such as did
their utmost not to be deceived: This I shall exemplify in two or three famous
stories.

The first is that writ, experienced, and vindicated by Franciscus Citesius,
whose eminency advanced him to be Physician to Lewis the thirteenth King of
France, and to Cardinal De Richelieu; he tells the Story at large in his
Abstinens Consolentanea, Concerning a Maid whose name was Joanna Balam, her
Father and Mother were but mean rustic people (which I acquaint you with to
show you how much she was parallel to Martha Tailor) she begun in March 1599.
and was first taken with a continued Fever, and then fell to sore Vomiting for
twenty days together, and after that was made Speechless for a like number of
days, after which she did utterly refuse all sort of Meat and Drink, her Belly
also fell down to her Back, the Musculi Intestina, and Viscera, did all appear
contracted and dried up; from the Ribs to the Thighs she was nothing but skin
and bone, and yet her Breasts were full, her Arms and Thighs pretty well
fleshed, her Face round, and her Lips somewhat red, she avoided no Excrements
from any part, and thus she live^ from twelve, till she was fourteen years of
age. To this Relation the learned Magistrate D. N. Rapinus, bears a sufficient
witness by his ingenious Verses, which runs before this Relation of Citesius,
some few of which are, -- -- Ecce duos jam Virgo per annos,
Vitam agitat; nullo freta vel usa cibe.
Observata Magistratu, and vicinia ab omni,
Qua fluit exiguo juncta Vigenna Goro.
Jam jejuna famem tolerat sine fraud biennem
Et jam praeclusis faucibus arcta gula est.
Mireris nullum suspenso a pectore ventrem:
Mireris nullas inde, vel inde vices, etc.


The next I shall give you is of a German Girl, whose Father was a plain and
Country-trades-man. She lived about seven years without Meat or Drink, the
strange report of her total abstinence roused up the noted Prince John
Casimire, then Count Palatine, to do his utmost to try the truth in her case,
which he did twice over, first in November 1584. sending two knowing Physicians
to try her, who give in their account, that the thing was real: She continuing
on to live without food for some years more, he sends again two other
deep-sighted Physicians to try her the second time, which they did by the
utmost scrutiny, in April 1588. One of the first of these Doctors of Physic,
viz. Henricus Smelius in the tenth Book of his Miscellanies, gives you this
Relation, with some other strange passages concerning her.

I might also have told you of that other Maid of Spire in Germany, whose
memory Joubert has made illustrious, and Langius mentions in his Epistles to
have lived four years without meat, tried by Fardinand the Emperor, and other
Magistrates in that Country. But the last I shall name, is that famous known
story of Apolloniae Scheieriana (or Chrier, as I think Quere^tanus calls her)
Who was born in the Town of Gats, within the jurisdictions of the celebrated
City Berne in Switzerland; She first lost the Appetite to Meats, then to
Drinks, and shortly after fell under an abhorrence of all Nutritives: Her fame
flying abroad in the Senate of Berne, presently gives forth a strict Order,
which brought her and her mother into an Hospital within their City, where she
was committed to the through search and observation of many watchful Eyes; who
all, after a competent time of trial, give in their Testimony to the Senate,
that she did beyond dispute live without any Aliment at all. And thus from the
year 1600. for several years on forward, she continued this her marvelous fast;
all which time the whole Abdomen, or the Belly from the Ribs to the Pudendum
Muliebre, was fallen down and hard, which was frequently viewed by her
multitudinous Visitors. But you may find her whole History writ by the care and
industry of the Learned Paulus Lentulus (who was then Professor of Physic at
Berne) with a Collection of several other Remarkables of the like Nature; as
also the united Testimonies and Eulogies of several of them, who were his
Eminent, Noble, Contemporaries.

I suppose these things makes a total Abstinence, appear something more
probable and real, then many have been free to conjecture.

I confess, many things of this nature may have been fabulous in all
likelihood: As, the A^^om, a People in India, who are without Mouths, and live
only by Odors and Air; the Luc m^ri^^s, who Inhabit the Northern Mountains,
in the most Remote Parts of Muscovy, near to the F^^^^n S^a, where the stern
Boreas ^^eps his Blustering Court, and has his Imperial Throne Seated; There
this People toward the close of N^vember every year, are glad to betake
themselves to Dens and Caves, where they lie Fro^en up till the grateful
influence of the Vernal Sun awake them out of this cold Sleep; of these see
Cit^s^us in his Abstin. Confol. ^^57, 103. etc. and Guva^ninus in Moscoviae
Des^^^ (...) Lu^^mor. We have also great variety of stories of Eremitical Men,
Superstitious Zealots, and Popish Votaries, who are reported to have banished
themselves from humane Society, into some or other solitary Places or De^arts,
and there to have lived without Meat or Drink for many Months or Years; as is
to be found in Sennertus, the above-named Citesius, and Gasp. Schottus in his
Physica Curiofa, p. 408. etc.

Further we read of seven Ephesian Boys, who under the persecution of Decius,
being terrified by his cruelty upon the Professors of the Gospel, did fly away
into a Cave, not far from the City Ephesus, where they were walled up, and are
reported to have slept for the long Night of three hundred years space, till
the more pleasant days of Theodosius the Emperor, in whose time their
Prison-doors were pulled down, and they were awaked out of their miraculous
sleep. This you may find in the applauded Nic^phorus in his Ecclesiastical
History, lib. 14. cap. 45.

Now let any one judge how probable these are, though I know several of them
are credited by some sober, prudent Men. Yet we have but small ground to
believe the prodigious Stories of the more remote and darker Ages, and Places
of the world, in which both Truth and Knowledge lay long buried under a
palpable Cimmerian Darkness. But we have no ground to disbelieve those Things,
which are within the Memory of those latter Days, and the Relations of
inquisitive knowing Men, and the sharp Trials of impartial eminent Magistrates.

SECT. III.
HEre I shall show you the Possibility of it in point of Nature, according to
the judgment of Citesius, as above, Joubert Sennertus, and Fortun^us Licetus,
with some others who have writ on this Subject; whom I mention here once for
all, that I may not interrupt you with too frequent Citations, which I know to
be a great trouble, and little satisfaction to the ordinary Reader.

1. I know very well, that History is copiously stored with the true Reports,
of several dull and solitary Melancholicks, of many in the more warm parts of
the world (which was frequent) and of some in the colder Climates, not at all
troubled with crasie Heads; who have fasted for seventeen, and ^o on to twenty
days without destruction, of my extraordinary decay to their weak and brittle
our-sides. This has been an inducement to stir up the former wits of the world
to search for the distaining cause; but the far l^rger and more astonishing
Abstinence of some in these latter days, has awaked the coetaneous profound
Head-pieces of Neighbor Nations, to make a much more deep, and double inquiry
into the way of Natures Support: From these I shall give the following concise
Account to evince a Possibility.

The most learned, pristine, and modern Physician and Philosophers do say, That
the great instrument of Life, in all Animate beings, is indwelling Natural
heat, which (its possible) has its seat in the Blood Now, as the Fire feeds
upon the combustible matter which is adjoined to it; or as you see the lighted
Match in the Lamp, or the burning Wick in the Candle, live upon the annexed
Oil or Tallow; so does this Innate-heat within the Body live upon a solid, a
moist, and a spiritual substance; which the later and more experienced
Physicians do comprise under the Humidit^^ radical and pr^^^ge^^um: This one
would think should presently be spent and consumed away, without new and fresh
supplies from Meat and Drink. So then the wonder is, how this Fire should live
without its ordinary and obvious Fuel: For where Natural heat is more
abundant, as it is in Children and Young Men, there is the greatest desire,
need, and use Meat and Drink.

3. But this you must know, that in these foodlesse Cre^tures, this
Natural-heat is reduced to a very slender proportion, and so can live upon very
sma^l supplies. (...) ^s I have seen a Candle, confined to a spare and thrifty
way of burning, by the density, or humility, or other deficiency of the ambient
Air, continue for some hours together, sending forth flame and light, without
any visible or considerable waste of the Wax or Tallow. Which has often made
me think there might be some truth in those many Stories which I have read in
several credited Authors, concerning Lamps now and then found in Italy, and
other places, in ancient Vaults or Urns, which have lasted for many years, that
I say not Ages, without extinction, till put forth by the purer and stronger
Air. I know one great cause of the duration of these Lights, is from the firm
make, and lasting constitution of the Burning Materials. It is a thing also
commonly known, that a few small pieces of Flaming-wood, buried under their own
Ashes, will continue fired for a great number of hours, and yet not much
consume away: Some say there is sound Outlandish-wood, that will thus endure
for many Months. Now,

4. Thus it is in these great Abstinents, that Natural heat seems (as it were)
to be raked up under Embers, that it might spend it self, and its proper
Pabulum or food, with the greater Pa^cimony. Nature does greatly lavish, or
thrust forth its own supports by Excrements, as, by Stool, Urin, Sweat,
Salivation, and the like; but in these admirable Fasters all these Passages are
for the most part closely stopped up: And then the Native Fervor (as was said)
is brought to such a small Degree, that it may not over-fast consume its
Aliment. Thus many whose years are greatly numerous, can live upon a very
small, because they have but little Heat, slender Evacuation, and ^old and
dense Bodies, and so consequently spend the Radical Humors very sparingly.

5. When the Cause cease then the Effects must needs fall: Now, in these
Abstenious Ones its usually so that the de^^re and necessity of Meat and Drink
is taken away; as the Stomach (especially at the beginning) is distempered,
stup^fi'd, and altogether mastered and overcome, by the abundant Influx of
Pituitous, Crude, and Naughty Humors, so that (...) can neither retain what it
had, nor give entertainment to any fresh Sustenence; and all the
Excrementitious Passages being stopped up, the Body cannot that way E^ it or
Evaporate any of its inbred Suppl^es; And it has been the rational Conjecture
of Delrius, quoted by Gast. Schottus, That the 'foresaid Phlegmatic abounding
Humors, which first took away the Stomach, are afterward made a good use of by
the Natura^-heat, in order to the underpropping Life. The Stomach, upon a small
recruit, may be enabled to turn these to a sort of Chyle, and then the Liver
falls to work, and draws them into it self, and presently transformeth them
into Blood, which it sends by the Vena Porta into the Body, and all its
Members. The knowing Ci^^sius speaking as I think) concerning the Chyle, says,
Attract us ab h^^^t^, qui v^ntriculi fuit excrementum, (...) limentum. Abst.
Cons. p. 89. For any thing ^ know, the worst of humors may be turned by
Natures skill and aid to outrime^t, not noxious, but useful: It Is a known
Report, that the grand Alith^idates did gradat^m obtain such an Art in eating
Poison, that his Body became invincible to its greatest power, as was afterward
experienced when he should that way have lost his life. Of which Martial the
neat Epigr^mmatist gives you an account in one of his Disticks, thus, Profecit
poto Mithridates saepe veneno,
Toxica ne possent saeva nocere sibi.


This humor, which at first might be putrid, does in a little time become so
tenacious and compact, that it is made very durable to the gentle heat which
lives upon it. This the applauded Sennertus thinks very probable in his first
and second thoughts upon the thing in hand, as may be seen both in his
Institutions and Practick Physic. And when it is once reduced to this
solidity, and the Volatile Spirits (or Vapo^rs) confined to a fixation, and
made to tarry and to do their office, then it is that these Meatless C^eatures
have their Lamps pretty well supplied with Oil, then they do with a greater
composure subsist under their total Abstinence, without destruction, though not
without decay.

6. Usually the Bodies of these Foodlesse ones are inwardly in a dissolving,
melting case, which dissolution or consumption may produce adapted nourishment,
for Natural heat to live upon. The obstruction of all external vents, together
with the coldness of their outsides, and the many humors that do naturally
attend their very Sex, they being usually Women, does befriend the indwelling
Fire with proper Materials for it to live upon

I think it is indubitable that some such like heat* by a like supply of humid
Matter, is the cause why Herbs and Plants live and thrive. As, our Reason lifts
us up above all other Animals, so our Sensation gives us what they have; and
Vegetation (or the way of the nourishing the humane frame) communicated to us
all the advantages which Plants enjoy; to these our Earthy Bodies do carry a
great and real correspondence in the manner and matter of their growth,
maintenance, and preservation. Doctor Harvet, who was learned Jouberts
Antagonist about the possibility in point of Nature, being reduced to a strait,
concerning the Lucomori, forementioned, whose brumal Fasting he supposed was
unquestionable, he granted, They did live, but it was only a Life of
Vegetation. Cites. ubi sup. 151.

7. The most excellent Zaculus Lucitanus has affirmed, that, though there may
be many causes why these are sustained alive, yet the in-being, or in-undation
of phlegmatic humor was the main cause: His own words are, Etsi non negem a
multis causis citra cibum diutissime homines posse vitam transigere; tamen
frequention, and magis communis est causa, quae ex a^undantia humoris piluitosi
elicitur. De Med. Prin^ H^st. p. 914.

The Foetus in the Mothers Womb does live and thrive after a very strange
m^nner, without either eating or drinking, and (for any thing I know) without
emitting any Excrements at all. They live upon a Sanguinal Humor, transmitted
to them though the Umbellick Veins.

8. The continual inlet of the humid Air, into the Bodies of these by the Mouth
and Nostrils, conveyed by certain secret Conduit-pipes into the Heart, and
other parts of the Microcosme, may afford some supplement to the Animal Spirits
and remaining Humors.

The constant, now undeny'd, Motion of the Blood and Heart, does very much
contribute to the being and life, the act and exercise of this innate Heat, and
so does conduce exceedingly to fermentation, and this ferment helps in the
continuation of life.

9. Thus I have given you a compendious Account of an appearing Possibility in
Nature it self. The^e things its true are but barren fare for strong, activ^,
and full Bodies to live upon, but you know these, which have been the subject
of our Discourse, are of weak, languish'd, and macerated outsides, poor
meager, almost-dying Carcasses; for if them who are of robust, cheerful, and
active Bodies could thus live, I should no more question that Miracles were now
in being, then I do that they were so in the Prophets and Apostles days.

SECT IV.
HEre I shall close up this part of the Discourse, by giving you some Arguments
to prove the vast improbability of a Cheat in our Martha's case; for it has
been, and yet is, the inconsiderate (that I ^ay not irrational) Assertion of
many (some of them) not far remote from her, That she is an undoubted Cheat,
either for the getting gain, or for the advancement of a Faction, or for both
of these.

The great foundation upon which they built at first was the Cessation of
Miracles, the improbability and impossibility in point Nature, and their own
inacquaintance with what some Men of splendid and mighty Names had writ in the
vindication of this total Abstinence.

But that Martha is no Cheat in the mentioned Affair, will appear by the
ensuing things.

1. She does willingly admit of all Visitors, be they under what rank or
notion soever, a^ the Great, the Learned, the Mean, the Orthodox, and the
Erroneous; only you cannot blame her if she have a care of her Soul, wherein
she used to make the Bible (her usual Companion) the Standard and Rule of her
Faith and Actions, not the private Thoughts of Men of differing Apprehensions.

2. The plainness, or, if you will, the simplicity of her Parents; they neither
looked, discoursed, nor acted, like persons skilled in Politi^ks. They d^d
appear to me, and many others upon considerable tria^s to be among the common
rank of Country head-pieces, though they were sober, yet not sub^ile. They are
not so poor, but they can make a very good shift to live without this craft.
They did their utmost at the first to make their Da^^hter eat and drink.

3. Martha's experience^, and approved sincerity. Though men of differing
humors gave her frequent Visi^s, yet I never heard of any who know her well,
that could accuse her of a false-hood. She used to tell of every drop of
liquids which she took, and would be offended with them, who out of ignorance
did diminish the quantity in their relations of her.

4. The Charity, and strong Testimony of her most considerate Neighbors, among
whom I could have given you twenty Names of Note and Observation, had I thought
it prudent to have bro^ght them upon the public Stage.

5. The Dryness of her whole Body; her non-evacuation of Excrements, by the
lower and larger passages, with the improbability of it, because the
Intestines, the Matrix, or the like, were long since erected and dried
together. These things have been often testified by a great number of
Eyewitness.

6. The continual Cleaving of her Belly to her B^^k, in such a lose manner, as
if they grew together shows sufficiently there can be no interposing meat o^
Drink.

7. The Inspection, and Circumspection of Physicians, Surgeons, Mid-wives,
and a double Watch that did attend her. The two Watche^ did consist of forty or
threescore Women, who did with strictness* observe her night and day by two ^t
a time for several Weeks at differing se^sons: The first was set by three
Neighbor Towns, for their own and the Countries satisfaction; the other, by
the means and appointment of the Right Honorable, and thrice Noble Earl of
Devonshire, who did himself Visit her, and did very commendably lay out much
care, cost, and industry, to try her to the uttermost. Now all these, with one
common voice, have given their Vote on Martha's side.

I suppose enough is said to satisfy the ration^l and it would not fall within
the limits of wisdom to endeavor the satisfaction of the contrary sort of Men.

The Wise usually think that Abstrusities in Nature, and the unfrequented and
more obscure Methods in Providence, deserve the attendance of ^nquisition, but
not of ^nfidelity. There ought to be a suspension of the judgment in things
that are dubious, but not a denial of those that are obvious.

PART IV. Containing Meditations raised from the foregoing Discourse for the
spiritual advantage of the illiterate and ordinary Reader.
THE PROEM.
THE most Readers that are in the World may be ranked under four sorts; the
Careless, the Curious, the Catching, and the Conscientious.

1. The Careless reads only (as I may say) for the sake of reading, that they
may be esteemed such as can, and does read: these men desire Letters more then
Learning, Praise more then Practice, and the Advantage of Carnal Self, more
then the Immortal Soul.

2. The Curious, who adore the gold on the Frame, but cares not for the truth
or goodness of the Glass; who respect the Colors (the Paint of Nature) more
then the fragrant smell, or the healing use of the Flower: These value
Rhetoric beyond Reason, and are more taken with the Garnish on the edges of
the Dish, then with the Meat that lies upon it: They are more for Fancy then
Faith, and labor at an higher rate to trim the Head with a few airy Notions,
then to try or adorn the Heart with solid Matter.

3. The Catching Reader bends his whole study, and lays out the all of that
little wit he has to find, or make faults in the Book he reads, that he may
scoff the Author, be he never so judicious and sober. It Is the jejune and empty
conjecture of some men that they cannot shine except all other lights be
crowded into darkness; they know no better way to make their own Names great,
then by diminishing the worth of others. But I shall leave these men to their
own happiness, which only dwells within their own heads.

None of all these share in the Design of my Labors.

4. The Conscientious; this good M^n reads that he may live: He (like Natures
Chemist, the Honey-gathering Be) desires to suck or extract Sweet from every
Flower, yea, from the meanest Herb he comes near. He longs to gather something
for God, and something for the good of his never-dying Soul, from every Line he
reads. He condoles and laments over his want of skill, that he cannot so read
as to edify himself either in knowledge or practice, by what he reads.

This honest, serious heart may think, that he foregoing and first Parts of
this small Treatise, are but dry and barren Lines, very little for
Soul-advantage. I shall therefore attempt to help this humble Soul by the
following Consectaries. I would not confine the prudent, skillful Reader, but
only endeavor to assist the weak, to whom, if I can but contribute a few
sparks of light, he may (its possible) make a new addition of his own, and blow
them all up into a pleasant Heat, and refreshing Flame.

CONSECTARY I. It Is hence very apparent, that the Providence and Care of God
has not done with the world.
1. AS this sacred Providence looks backward toward eternity, a^ the
foreknowledge and Predetermination of Infinite Wisdom, concerning the future
making or management of things in time, so I shall not speak of it; but only
as it refer to the government, and conservation, o^ pre^e^vation of all things
or beings, that ^re in this ne^her Region, the visible World. This latter is
usually called Actual Providence, and differs from the other, which is Eternal,
as the Execution does from the Decree, or the forehand-design, from the future
acting.

2. This Actual Providence of God, is displayed in the external Works o^ the
matchless Wisdom and ^ower of the e^^^ blessed Jehovah, in the creating,
orde^^ng, pro^ision, and underpropping of the World, and all its Inhabitants.
This sits at the Stern of all sublunary affairs, and sometimes without asking
leave of either W^^^l or Tide; nay, sometimes in spite of all their opposition
it can, and does conduct it is own Barge (or Vessel, whatever) to the designed
Port. This is Immediate Providence, when the Omnipotent, without
Creature-Ministration, does guide and uphold the Universe, and every thing in
it; which shows that his using secondary means is not from any want of power,
but the result of his own will and well-ordering Wisdom. This is not a common,
but an extraordinary administration of Providence, which thus swims against the
Stream, and runs up the steepest Hill, without any fainting at all; which thus
works against, or besides, the course or usual order of nature or common
actings. This employs it self only in miraculous Productions. So that I
question not, but that the first making of the World was a very stupendous
Miracle; to raise so vast a Being out of a former Nonentity to such an huge
Lump of substantial matter, fit to make all other terrene Essences out of it.
But I must not bestow time on this, because I do not look upon Martha Taylor's
Case as a Miracle.

3. Then there is the ordinary and usual Providence ^f God, which has the
Regiment, Disposal, and sustentation of the World in its own hands; and this is
it of which I shall speak with brevity. This, this is the main Spring which
moves the whole Wheels of the Creation: This is the weight which makes the
Clock of all created concerns strike at a lower or higher rate.

4. Consider the reallity here of its being or exercise. Many have denied it,
and more there are which take little notice of it, but refer all to Nature:
These are very unworthy and base to him who gave them their first beings; the
poor Ethnic World had better thoughts concerning God and Providence. Men that
were mere Heathens could spell out Providence from the whispers of their own
Conscience, the admirable Order, Tendency, Disposal, Constitution, Mutation,
and (foresaid) preservation of all things, and all their actions. To this
purpose Homer in his Poems written upon Ulysses, brings in that wise and
valiant Grecian Prince, speaking concerning his many and long dangers, upon the
rugged churlish Ocean, in this Language. ((...))
(...).
Which does in the very letter of it signify, But in those things I did
acquiess (or rest satisfied) which God had appointed in his own mind. And Plato
as he is quoted by Aristotle, in his Tract. de Mundo, cap. 7. says to this
effect, That God does hold (or manage) the beginning, middle, and end of all
things. And the learned Stagyrite himself declares his mind very fully (de lib.
c. 6.) That as all things are from God, so they do all subsist by God; and that
if Divine Aid be absent, Nature is not at all sufficient to underprop it self:
Which he illustrates by these apt Allusions, What the Master or Pilate is to
the Ship, what the Driver is to the Cart (or Chariot) and what the Captain is
to the Soldiers, etc. that God is to the World. They that are curious or
troubled with that dangerous disease, Atheism, may satisfy themselves, if
they will not put out the Eye of Nature, by an inquiry into Cicero lib. 2. de
Not. Deorum, and Seneca de Providentia ad Lucilium, and Galen lib. 3. de usu
partium corporis humani.

It Is sad to think that there should be so many men, as there are in our seeing
Times, who do either with their Lips or Lives refer all things, and their
motions, operations, or miseries, only to blind Fortune; or rather to a
Stoical Fate or Destiny, by which they bind over the ^reat Creator unto second
Causes; and thus they make Him, if any thing, Natures Servant, It has been (I
think) a thousand times over asserted, That there is a God, and therefore
Providence; and its almost as often repeated, That to deny actual Providence is
to deny God himself. And yet the foolish Epicurus granted that there was a Go^,
but denied Providence; which the learned (Sophi^s) of all Ages have detected as
a base absurdity: One, who was otherways a friend to Epicurus, says, that this
was Ep^curi gravissimus laps^^ Ca^send de vit. etc. Epicur.

5. But I suppo^e I may let the^e men alone, till the awakening Hand of God
make them of another mind. As it did once the bloody Caligula and cruel N^ro,
when the terrifying Thunder-cl^ps of Heaven made them hide their lofty heads,
and (to use my Authors words) agnoso^re D^um re^ humanas curare; they then were
forced to sneak and acknowledge that God did exercise care and cognizance in
reference to the things of the world. Horace tells you, by his own mouth, that
it was this angry voice of Heaven, which made him own providence, and throw
away the vain and irreligious Notions of Epicurus. Hor! l. 1. Od. 34.

Thus I have endeavored to sati^fie the Men, who may be of the Heathen-humour,
That infinite wisdom and power does rule and uphold the world.

6. This I know is more believed by the Conscientious Christian from the
Testimony of one Line in H^ly Writ, then from a thousand in humane Authors, but
yet the great Apostle uses the very same means to prove the same thing in that
f^ll place for the proof of Actual Providence, Acts 17 speaking concerning the
God that made the world, him who is Lord and Sovereign of heaven and earth,
ver. 24. He says in the following verse, He gives to all life and breath, and
all things: He determines times, and bounds and habitations. And he is not far
from every one of us: For in him we live, and move, and have our beings; as
certain also of your own Poets have said, etc. Here and twice more in his
Epistles, Paul is pleased to make use of Heathen Poets (as Aratus, Menander,
and Epimenedes) to carry on religious designs.

Scripture is very clear in the setting forth the Providence and Care of God,
and therefore he is said, To work all things, Ephesians. 1.11. By him all things
consist, Col. 1.17. He upholdeth all things, Heb. 1.3. And we are enjoined to
east all our care on him for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5 7. But I shall give you
one incomparable place which may serve for all, viz. Psalm. 104. the whole of
it, which you may read in your Bibles, and there you cannot but see the
powerful, wise, universal, and constant actings of Providence.

7. Providence is seen by the serious eye in its most common and lowest acts,
as the motion of the Clouds and Winds, the running of the liquid wandering
Streams, the moving and livelihood of the wilder Animals, as in that 104.
Psalm: Yea, the very Birds of the Air receive their food at the Hand of God;
the beauty and luster of the painted Lillies is from a Divine Art; the poor
silly Sparrow stands or falls according to the order of the increated Essence;
our ordinary Meat and Drink are from God; whose glorious Arithmetic has taken
observation, and an exact account, of every hair, long or short, which grows
upon the Believers Head, Mat. 6.24. to 33. and 10.29, 30. Though many of these
meaner things may seem never so fortu^tous or contingent, yet the disposal of
them is from the Lord, Prove. 16.33. God is every where present, and all things
are done by the influence of his Power, so that the most minute things are by
his steerage, nothing runs at random, nor is the product of chance. The Poet
(and many others) thought, that Providence was only engaged in the Magnalia of
the world, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovis. But we know that the mea^est
creatures, in all their actions, drive on the ends of an Infinite Majesty, who
is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Working.

8. The sound Believer, by intuition and contemplation, sees God in all things;
he is the only man who does practically, and to his comfort, understand that old
Verse, Praesentem monstrat quaelibet verba Deum.
Something of God is writ on every grass,
Which careless walkers tread down as they pass.


He Is ready to give God the Title to every thing, except^ng Sin, for he knows,
that he who is the summum Bonum, cannot be guil^y of that which is the summum
malum: He permits, orders, and determines the action, as it is an action, but
he cannot possibly have any thing to do with the evil of sin, or the depravity
of the Action.

Now, there is few that act l^ke the Believer, to see the Hand of Providence in
its common and smaller productions.

Though I am sure some among the Heathen Moralists did collect excellent
Divinity from this ordinary Manuscript: This was their Scripture, their
Theology. The ordinary effects of Nature wrought more Admiration in them, then
the most of Christ's Miracles did among the Jews.

Many of them knew better how to conjoyn the Mystical Letters of the Creation,
then the heedlesse Professors of this Age, who trample under foot the most
obvious and most significant Hieroglyphics, without drawing one conclusion
from them, for Soul-advantage, or the honor of God. But,

9. There are the more special and signal actings of this Providence, when it
does display it self in some or other singular things; and this has the
greatest observation bestowed upon it. The most illustrious Lamp of Heaven is
as really in being when it is obscured by the darkest Cloud, as it when it
sends forth its radiant and clea^est Beams; yet only then the beholders eye
gives it the most enlarged observance. So it is in the matter of Actual
Providence, when it improves the meanest helps to great advantage, when it
makes second causes in their lowest Ebb, bear up and carry forward very
weighty actions; when it does in a more hidden method draw straight Lines by
crooked Rules, and in a Cryptick way, give sufficient support to humane Bodies,
under great distempers by very small supp^ies, then its most taken notice of.

Hitherto we may refer the most, if not all, the seeming Miracles of these
lattes Ages of the World. Which have been ^ctions not done altogether beyond
the power of Nature, or in a total contradiction to natural causes, but Nature
mightily improved, supported, or success't by the holy skill and Art of sacred
Providence, and so they may deservedly be called wonders, though they have not
been advanced so high as to be undoubted Miracles.

Thus we are come to Martha Tailors case, which was beyond controversy a more
then ordinary discovery of the Care and Providence of God; whence you may read
the ground of my first thoughts, That the Care and Providence of God has not
done with the world. All that have seen her, or heard her story, have presently
set the Crown upon the Head of Providence.

10. I shall here close up this with a word of Apology, for the length of this
Consectary, and an engagement to greater brevity in those that follow.

Some father every thing upon Providence, others nothing, or the next to
nothing. Some are ready to refuge themselves in it, as if it were a proper
Asylum for their Enormities; others steal all away from it, and offer it up at
the Shrine of Fate, the starry Influence, or any thing before they will come to
the Door of God. As there is no need for us to look over, or deny second causes
(especially) in natural actions, for this would be presumption and a tempting
of God: So there is no need of tying God to give always attendance to second
causes in the ordinary method, degree, or way of managing them; He is a most
free, wise, and powerful Agent; whatsoever he uses (as was said before) is not
upon the account of his own weakness, but upon the acount of his own will,
which is sacred and not to be disputed.

That I might something open these things was the aim of the antecedaneous
Particulars, as also to lay a fair foundation for several of the following
ones; and in the last place that I might demonstrate I had no design to
derogate the glory of Heaven, or to eclipse the Beauty of Providence; for I am
one that dare not disown my God, and bow the Head to the Name of Nature; which
I had so often occasion to use in the first and second Parts. I dare not put
Nature up into the Throne with God, as the smooth Poet seems to do, speaking
concerning the rude and formeless Chaos, where the seeds of things seemed to
the eye of sense to be jumbled up together in an undigested Lump or Embrio,
where he says ( Metamorph. lib. 1. fab. 1.) Hanc Deus, and Melior litem Natura
diremit.

For I know nature to be Gods servant, and that it carries on his designs, and
is actuated by his Providence; this is it which directs the operations of all
individuals and single Essences.

There are many Relations in Sacred History, not carried beyond the bounds of
Providence in the use of means, that are so full of Labyrinths and various
turnings, that they were able to convert a Stoic. If you would have an
instance, you may read over the stories of Joseph and Moses; where you may find
many doublings, and redoublings; vast thwartings, and improbabilities, which
were not the effects of Chance; neither were they loose and straggling, as they
seemed to be, but all of them had a real tendency, to their own and Israel's
advancement.

Let this suffice to demonstrate the exercise of the Care and Providence of
God; which will be further opened by what ensues.

CONSECT. II. That humane unlikelihoods, or supposed Improbabilities in the
course of Nature, cannot hedge up the way against Omnipotency.
1. I Shall not speak to this glorious Attribute of God, as it is considered
Absolutely and in an Extraordinary way; for thus every act of it is a Miracle,
thus it works without means, contrary to means, and above all means: This is
altogether Independent and Unlimited, and therefore it is Infinite, and can do
every thing which does not imply a Contradiction or imperfection; for these are
the result of Weakness, not of Power; nay, therefore it is Omnipotency, because
it cannot (if I may use the word cannot) do these things which argue Impotency.
But,

2. That which I design in this Consectary, is the ordinary or actual power of
God; and that as it does sometimes manifest it self in the accomplishment of
very great Actions, by weak and low Me^ns. As in the combat between young
David, and that mighty man of war G^liah; to see the unarmed David, in his
blooming day, overcome and throw-down at his feet that moving Rock, the mighty
Champion of the Philistines, hedged round about with brass or steel. This is
the reason why five may chase an hundred, and the ^^tter number put a thousand
unto flight; why the weak things of the world confound them that are mighty,
and things which are not, bring to naught things that are.

3. It is the same mighty Hand of God by which this lower and so^^d Globe is so
firmly fixed in the midd^e of the moving yiedling air. Is it not a very
unlikely thing that such a vast heavy body as the Earth is (round by nature and
so fitted for motion) should keep its Center so many thousands of years without
tumbling out of its place.

Terra pilae similis, nul^o fulciminie nixa,
A^re sublimitam grave pendent onus.
The World has no other prop but the invisible hand of Heaven, Job 26.7. and
38.6.

4. But to keep close to the thing in hand; this Almighty Power does step over
all the Improbabilities that stand in the way of it, when it does uphold the
human body, without the external Use of Creature-help. What a wonderful thing
is it, to see a poor tattering Clay-house keep its foundation, and remain not
beaten down, when strong and violent Storms drive against it! to see poor
worm-eaten Clay-Walls stand out against the stern Encounters of the strongest
Winds, without any visible supports; nay, to see these abide unbattered down,
when they have no foundation but the Dust, not the firm Earth, nor the Rock,
but the loose and moving Dust, which every little Puff of Air blows away before
it! Job 4.19. This must of necessity be ascribed to the curious and adored Art,
of the Great Master Builder of the World.

5. There lay many Improbabilities in the way of Martha Taylor's Life; whole
Troops of Distempers, for several of the beginning Months; did almost
constantly scale the Walls, of the Souls crazy Habitation; and then she did
altogether abstain from Meat, Drink, or Cordials; so that all that were round
about her, expected her dying every day: How can we then but say, That
underneath were everlasting Arms!

6. What a strange thing it is, that the Body should live only upon Nature's
cost and charges; and have no provision to subsist upon, but what it makes
within its own Doors. How unlikely is it, that a little Phlegm, Rheum, moist
Humors, and such like things, should be the real supply of Life; as far as it
is upheld by second causes! for the Bodies of the most healthful and strong
Men, which are best able to make a sufficient use of Meat and Drink, are not
preserved alive only by these second causes; for it is in God we live, move,
and have our beings, and by him all things consist, and he upholds all things
by the word of his power.

7. As Infinite Wisdom is the Eye, so this truly admirable Power of God is the
Hand of that most vigilant Providence which conducts us safe through a thousand
Dangers and Miseries which we are continually subject to between our Cradle,
and our Graves. Man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upwards, Job. 5.7
What a wonderful story is that of Paul concerning himself, 2 Cor. 11? I was --
in prisons more frequent, in stripes above measure, in deaths often, once I was
stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the deep
In perils of robbers, in perils by my own Country m^n, in perils by the
Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the
Waters, in perils among false brethren, in weariness and painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
zakedness: And yet Paul lived through all these. Who (but an Atheist) would not
stand here and admire, and adore the wonderful Power and Providence of God!
Scultetus speaking concerning himself, says, Totum vitae meae curriculum
plenum est mirandarum divinarum liberationum ex magnis (...) periculis,
calamitatibus; nullum elementum, est, a quonon infestatus sum. Praesat. ad
curric. vitae.

8. This Power of God is the Hindg upon which the whole course of Nature
turns; nay, it is the Hand that moves it. It Is the saying of one, very
pertinent in this case, That it is not with the work of God as with the
Artificers Clock, which put into a Frame and hanged with weights, will go,
though the Artificer be off from it; but though God set all the Creatures in
frame, yet the motion of every wheel depends on God: There is not a drop of
rain falls till God utter his voice, and cause the vapors to ascend from the
ends of the earth, Jer. 10.13.

The groaning Creation which travels in birth to be delivered of sin, ( Romans
8.22.) hid been long since up in Arms against the great Rebel, Man, who was
the cause of all its Miseries, had not the interposition of an Infinite Arm,
caused it lie down with quietness. The angry and churlish Ocean had many an Age
ago broke over its weak and sandy Bounds, and had for certain entombed the
Earth, and all Inhabitants within its own bosom, had not the Omnipotent
confined it to the Womb of his Decree, wrapped it up within the swadling-bands of
darkness, and stilled ^ by rocking it in the Cradle of his Providence; as you
may see Job 38.8, 9, 10, 11.

SECT. III. Infinite Wisdom now and then chooses forth some of the meanest
things to do its mighty Works upon.
1. I Have read of very many who have been brought under a total Abstinence,
and continually lived for many Months or Years, together without either Meat
or Drink; and all of these have been of ordinary, if not poor and low,
Original. Some of the most curious Artists of them who have been most
profoundly learned, who have shone in their differing Spheres as Stars of the
first Magnitude, have taken their rise from the lowest ground, and have been
only of vulgar Extraction.

This Wisdom, at the Creation of the World, made choice of the meanest Dust as
a convenient Material, out of which to make the most ennobled sublunary
Creature: So that the most Rational and Magnanimous Men that are in the World,
are (as to their outside) but moving lumps of Clay, mere walking heaps of
congealed Atoms.

2. As to Spirituals; very many of them who have been famous for Religion and
Holiness, have sprung from the Plow and Distaff. The Image of God has often
been very splendid when it has only hung in a plain and homely Frame. I could
name you an hundred Martyrs and precious Saints, whose Revenues have not
amounted to a Farthing by the yea^.

Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastic History, tells of a poor Captive-Woman, who, by
her exceeding holy lif^, and abstinence, as well as other means, was the
occasion and instrument of converting the Nation inhabiting Iberia.

The holy and blessed Apostles, who made the whole World ring with Wonders,
were at the fir^^ but ordinary Men, only illiterate Mechanics.

This now is much for the advance of Infinit^ Wisdom; for God has (for this
end) chosen the foolish, weak, and mean things of the World, to confound (or
shame) the wise, the strong and noble. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29, 31. James. 2.5.
Eccles. 9.15. Magnates non semper sapientes.

SECT. IV. That Spiritual Comforts may be enjoyed, and Serious Holiness
exercised, under great and continued Bodily Afflictions.
1. That Spiritual Comforts may be enjoyed under Bodily Afflictions, was
evidenced in our Darby-shire Damsel, who was usually of a Serene Temper, as to
her Mind; the Sun did usually shine, after the first Storms were over; I seldom
or never heard of the gathering of Clouds again.

This sweet Flower grows not in every Believer's Garden, especially in the
Winter-season. To have Peace within Doors, when all is War without, is a very
excellent and rare thing. Few Children use to rejoice when they are whipped,
though it be by a Father's Hand, and that for their advantage; the most give
Grief a free Dominion, and send forth Sighs and Sobs to bear witness how they
are affected. But

2. All are not of this Drooping, or Discontented Constitution; for, some there
are, who can drown all external Sorrows, under the pleasant Streams of that Joy
they have within: Thus you find Peter and his Fellows, after they had been
imprisoned, threatened, whipped, and commanded, to speak no more in the Name of
Jesus, departing from the presence of the Council, rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame, Act. 5.41. So the Apostle of the Gentiles
says, We glory in tribulations, Romans 5.3. Many of those ever worthy and
renowned Witnesses, who sealed the Gospel with their Blood who mounted Heaven
in a Fiery Chariot, who afforded the Clay-lodgings of their Souls to the
undeserved malice of their Adversaries, to make Bond-fires on, for the Glory of
the Truth: Many (I say) of these Witnesses, did run to, and kiss the Stake,
meet the Fire with kind Embraces, and sing and triumph in the Flames, whiles
their Bodies were burning down to ashes.

3. Se^ious Holiness may be exercised under great and continued corporal
Distempers. Stars may, nay do, shine brightest in the darkest night: The Lilly
looks the more lovely, for growing among the Thorns. The real Saint usually
makes misery amiable, by a lovely pious deportment. The true Believer having a
right understanding of that of the ancient Worthy of the Church, Periissem,
nisi periissem, can with comfort write for his Motto, Sit miser, qui miser esse
potest, 2 Cor. 4.8.9. and 6.10. I am sure Martha Tailor was most eminent, when
she was most under trouble, in the year, 1668. We had once, a rare English
Matron, who lying under great Afflictions of Body, lamented the recovery out of
them, because of that Heart-warming Communion, she enjoyed with God under them;
and she was afraid, that the warmer and more parching Influences of the Sun of
Prosperity would cause those tender Plants to wither, which the quickening
Showrs of Affliction, had but a little before made to spring and grow.
Prosperity makes Weeds to grow in the exuberant Flesh, but adversity does
(...), beat or club down this body; that this slave may not rule over its lord,
the Soul.

SECT. V. We gather how imprudent, yea, how much beneath a life of faith it is,
to lay our expectations, hopes, or dependence upon the Creature.
Either the ordinary streams of the Creature may be dried up, or, if they run
so as to fill the Banks, we may be made incapable (as in Martha's case or
otherways) to make any use of them at all. The wise and great Disposer of these
Earthly Enjoyments, does sometimes either withdraw the Table, or else wholly
take away our Appetite, that we may see our happiness does not lie in these
things. To depend upon the Creature, is to lean upon a bruised Reed, to
under-prop Hopes and Expectation with a rotten Post, yea, to lay the Foundation
upon the Sand, and raise an imaginary Castle in the air, where we may think to
supply and save our selves when wants and dangers are abroad. When the Creature
is most full and overflows, yet it is but a fallible enjoyment. Meat and Drink,
Houses and Lands, Honors and Pleasures, and Riches, and smiles of Grandees,
are as poor empty Bubbles, mere impertinent Ciphers; set a thousand of these
together, and they all signify nothing, without God stand by them. Sit not
down in the dust: never desire a child's portion in this barren Land.

SECT. VI. This invites us to the boundless and unconfined Creator seeing the
Creature is now and then so useless.
Whether the World wax or wane, whether it ebb or flow, God is still the same
to them that fear him. Come, Fondlings, come, and throw the world out of your
Arms, and take up God. Do not say as that vile French Cardinal once did, That
he would not exchange his part in Paris for his part in Paradise. Let not the
Creature prevail over the brutish Appetite, but be so wise as to make an
adventure for an Happiness not known to Sense. Psalm. 73.25, 26, 27, 28. The Sun
of Righteousness is completely able to make it day to the true Believer, though
all the Stars of Creature Comforts should creep under a cloud, and disappear,
Psalm. 36.7, 9. and 44.6, 8. and 121.1, 2. Hab. 3.17, 18. Phil. 3.8. The
Channels and visible Cisterns may be dry; make sure work then, you have the Key
to the Fountain head. It Is no Paradox to say, That the man who enjoys God has
all things when he has nothing. Qui habeth habentem omnia, habet omnia. The
good Musculus, a man often poor enough, was many times compelled to fetch meat,
drink, and clothing, out of the following double Meeter, Est Deus in coelis,
qui providus omnia curat;
Credentes nunquam deseruisse potest.
God is in Heaven, who does care for all,
Lets but believe, and we shall never fall.


When streams are lowest, and the Creature gone. Let Us then be satisfied in God
alone.

FINIS.

