The Searching out the DECEIT, and bringing the Deceivers words and actions to
the Light, to be proved and tried with the Light, which is just, judging and
condemning that which is acted or spoken contrary to the Light.
This is given forth for the clearing of the Truth from Slanders cast upon it,
and for no other end. The ground and cause of our publishing this forth in
print to the Nation, is, we finding many slanders and false reports in Books
published to the Nation, by one who is called by name Henry Walker, which calls
himself a Minister of Christ; and also by George Horton, called, The Faithful
Scout, but is found deceitful. In whose books, many groundless false reports
and slanders are tried and proved by many witnesses, who have gone to search
out the matter, and have found them that published them, that they could give
no ground for the false reports which was cast upon a people whom every one
which is out of the fear of God nicknames, and scornsully calls QUAKERS; and
they are their mark, as David was, amongst such as God was not in their
thoughts, the proud and losty, which goes before the fall: and such as the Lord
regards, and trembles at his word, such the world regards not, as you may read
in Isaiah. And they shall speak all monner of evil of you, for my Names sake,
says Christ. And they shall be given ever to believe lies, says the Spirit
that gave forth the Scriptures, and we do see them fulfilled. And they shall
bend their tongues like a bow to tell Lies, saying, Report, and we will report
it; and this We find fulfilled in our days, and loading with reproaches the
people of God, as it was done unto Moses, which was a Quaker, as you may read,
Heb. 12, 21. but reproaches are our riches. So to clear the Truth from slanders
cast upon him who is called George Fox, and others, was we moved to write and
print these Papers, that all the simple ones, and honest hearted, may see, our
end of printing is to clear the Truth from false accusations cast upon it; and
that all things may be brought to the light by it, to be tried and proved: for
with the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened thee withal, we see these
Spirits that we have tried, to be like Priest, like People, all uttering forth
reproachful slanders and evil reports, not having any ground which to us they
make appear for what they have done or said against the innocent; who are found
slanderers in the dark: but their deeds are brought forth to the light, to all
who have an eye open to see them. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12. Jer. 9.2. 1 Timothy 4.3. Hos.
4.2. and the Scriptures fulfilled, Hos. 4 9. A horrible filthy thing is
committed in the land, Jer. 5.30, 31.

Printed in the year 1655.

Certain slanders, and false reports and reproaches being cast upon him, who
is of the world called George Fox and others, and an honorable Woman in the
Lord, whose being is in the North, one who is called Colonel Fells Wife; who
was slandered and reproached with false reports, by one Henry Walker near
Westminster Abbey dwelling, the truth cleared from the false accusations, and
the false slanders denied, which was giving a Bunch of Ribbons to him above
mentioned.

Two men whose names are Henry Clark and William Wilson, was sent the 7 day of
the first month to querie, to know and find out the grounds of the slanders,
that upon the truth it might not rest, but be castoff: so they went to the
Printer, and found that Henry Walker had given those things in to be Printed,
the false reports cast upon George Fox aforementioned, and Walker promised to
those two men, that if George Fox would give it under his hand, that he did
absolutely deny the reports and slanders which Walker had cast upon him and
published to the Nation in his news books, the said Walker said he would
prove it. Whereupon George Fox did give it under his hand, and in his writing
did deny all his slanders, false reports and Reproaches; and three men went
down to the said Walker to his house, upon the 8 day of the first month,
whose names are called Thomas Aldam, John Avison, and Henry Clark, expecting to
have found Walker to have done according to his promise, to have proved the
slanders, which he had promised to two men to do, but did not, and when the
three men came there, and did deliver the writing which George Fox had set his
hand to, wherein he did deny all the false slanders, and false reports cast
upon him: The said 3 men demanded of the said Walker to prove the slanders and
reports cast upon George and others, (according to his promise) but Walker
denied to prove it there, and said he would not mention any ones name; and bade
the men be gone out of his house, and denied the name which he had mentioned,
as he had published in his Book that a Gentlewoman had reported it; and then
said afterward that a Gentleman did report it, and after denied that the
Gentlewoman did report it, before Henry Clark and William Wilson, this thing
he denied which he had published in print to the Nation, neither would mention
the man's name nor any other which reported those slanders to him.

And here we do see him to be a liar, and a truce-breaker, saying, Report, and
we will report it, as they did by Jeremiah, as you may read Jer. 20. And read 2 Timothy 3. Thy first slander Henry Walker, thou scornfully calls the people of God
in thy printed paper Quakers; Moses the Judge of all Israel he exceedingly
feared and Quaked, Heb. 12.21. And he was reproached, and here thou shows what
Generation thou art in.

The second, thou give the Term of the old ringleaders, So it was said to
Paul. Act. 24.5. And here thou shows in whose steps thou walk.

The third false report and slander is, thou say it is said that George Fox
seduced Colonel Fells wife, which thing is false, and all seducers he denies;
and thou who art a slanderer, nor thy saiers, nor thou seducer art not worthy
her name to mention, who is honorable in the Lord: and many unsavory speeches
thou have uttered forth, which thou said thou heard of a Gentlewoman; and after
denied it, for in the living truth of God, Judge Fells wife is, which is the
Judge of all such false accusers, and slanderers, Read thy self, and see the
Scripture fulfilled upon thee, Pro. 10.18. Psalm. 101. Jer. 9 4. Jer. 6.28. Pro.
6.19.

And the fourth false report and slander is, that the said Woman which the said
Walker denied, said that she heard him boasting of his Favors, and Bunch of
Ribbons about Lancashire, which he had from Colonel Fells wife, and others:
which all is false: But this is like unto Walkers Preaching, who with the dark
world is called a Minister; who is proved to be a liar and a seducer, as he
speaks of, seeking to draw many to hearken to his evil reports, from the
truth, and against it. 2 Timothy 3.3. 1 John 2.26, 27. And as for slandering Judge
Fells Wife, for giving him a Bunch of Ribbons, or others, such unsavory things
and actions he denies to boast with, and she abhors thy words, who art a
scandalous fellow, and all such false slanders which thou casts upon the
Innocent, to make them appear odious in the eyes of the world, but the Lord is
their revenge, and does preserve them from the Seed of evil doers, to whom be
all Praise for ever. And because that Judge Fells Wife goes among the people of
God, which waits upon the Lord God in their meetings, which is the cause that
makes thee Walker, and the Heathens to rage and utter forth your envy against
the righteous Seed, as your Generation ever did; and of them that speak evil,
and so fulfill Christ's words. Jud. 11.

And whereas thou Walker says there was diverse stories told of him, and thou
speaks of a Gentlewoman having a Ribbon tied about her hand, who was coming to
a place where they met, Henry Walker we charge thee to name the place where
that meeting was, and the names of some which was there, and where they dwell
that saw it, or let thy mouth be stopped for ever, and be thou warned, lest the
Lord make thee a sudden example to all slanderers, who falsely accuse the
innocent. Jer. 9.4.

And thou speaks of the Woman's maid tying a Ribbon about her hand; and about
tying a Ribbon about her husbands wrest, which thou Walker say did desire to
go to Fox, which all the slanders and false reports is denied, and for meddling
with any such silly foolish doings; and many unsavory words which are not worth
mentioning, which thou have printed, who art found a fit fellow for such works
of unrighteousness. And thou speaks of the Ribbon was cast in the fire and
stunk: Now Walker we do demand of thee who have given out these unsavory
expressions, and have given them forth in print into the Nation, to declare to
us what is the name of this Gentlewoman, and the maid, and the name of her
husband, the Country they dwell in, and what town they dwell in, and the place
where these things was done, and who saw it, and where they dwell, that all thy
works and actions may be brought unto the light to be proved; so in this thing
manifest thy self, for with the children of the light thou art seen, who sees
thee made known to the Nation, to be a liar and slanderer upon record to be
noted, 2 These. 3.14. who art of thy Father, Joh. 8.44. Who shall have thy part
in the Lake, Rev. 21.8. For all such foolish things George denies, and the
slanders.

And in the fifth slanders thou have put forth that some thinks that this Fox
is a popish priest, thy thoughts and theirs be vain. Pro. 15.26. For all
Popish ways he denies.

And again thou say that some thinks he has not wit enough to take a
design for the Papists, here thou art hearing reports, and saying we will
report them, whose thoughts are vain, who know him not with your thinking nor
your thoughts, Pro. 16.26.

In the sixth slander, thou say that some are confident there be witches
amongst them; here again Henry Walker we charge and command thee in the
presence of the Lord God, to mention the names of that some, and let that some
mention the names of those witches, which that some says they are confident,
that witchcraft may be found out, else acknowledge thy self to be him that
slanders in the secret, for witchcraft we deny, for truth is now slandered to
be witchcraft, with the seed of evil doers, who fails in their confidence.
Gal. 3.1. Pro. 14.16.

And again Henry Walker, thou speaks of a Gentlewoman coming to George Fox,
telling of his hair, and buttons, and thou said the said George answered him
scornfully; which is false, for no scorner he is, and his buttons are neither
silk nor silver, how fain would thou take an occasion against him, who the
Fashions of the world, and the vanities of it does deny? who in that place at
Whitehall that day did give an answer sufficient to satisfy any rational man,
as touching his hair, in my hearing in Whitehall, who was then present with
him, who am called by the name of Thomas Aldam, a witness of it against the
false accusers. 2 Timothy 3.3.

And thou Walker said he abused diverse others, that was false, he abused none,
but told them the truth, thou may as well say now we abuse thee in telling
thee truth, to clear the truth from thy slanders.

And again Heny Walker, thou say he called a Minister a liar, thou said thou
was a Minister, and thou was proved to be liar, for thou said he denied the
fear of God, and it was witnessed against thee that he did not speak such a
word, but it was said by George Fox, that thou made proselytes, and the fear of
God was not denied by him called George Fox, but witnessed by him, exhorting
many to fear the Lord God in my hearing, and many others, Tho. Aldam, and to
depart from pride and filthiness, and to come into the fear of God. And again
thou denied and said Christ Jesus does not enlighten every one that comes into
the world, and here thou art a liar and a false witness, for John said who was
a true witness, that Christ Jesus was the true light, which lights every one
that comes into the world. John 1.9. And thou say he does not, and here thou
art proved a liar, and one that bears false witness, and thy voice is denied
and Judged with record.

And again thou say that George and the rest was thrust down the stayres;
there was a Rude rash unsavory fellow, in a disorderly manner, came without any
Just command, and tare George clothes, and gave out many unsavory expressions,
which many of the household was ashamed of to see the thing done, and did
dislike of his practice, for he had no command to do what he did to George;
from any Just authority, for after he was put down by that Rude fellow, George
was taken up again into the hall, and other friends with him, and the Rude
fellow condemned for doing what he had done to George and others.

And George and others went from thence in a peaceable and orderly manner. From
them who loves peace and unity, who does see the hand of the Lord God turned
against all such, who are slanderers and false accusers, who are swift to hear
evil reports of the innocent, to report them, to bring the innocent into
reproach and contempt with the world, which is our riches, as the seed of evil
doers did, and to thee and you all it is the word of the Lord God, thee, and
you to warn, therefore be thou warned, Henry Walker, and all of you warned, and
turn to the Lord God from persecuting of the innocent, least the Lord cut you
off in the day of his fiery wrath.

Tho. Aldam.

TO us whose names are called Thomas Aldam, George Rennold, and John Rouse, a
Paper was brought; which is titled the faithful Scout; making known to the
Nation diverse things done and said in the Nation, from the 2 day of March, till
the ninth, 1654. Published by George Horton, and Printed by Robert VVood, in
London, in which Paper called the faithful Scout, we find many impudent
expressions, aspersions, and reproachful words, cast upon the people of God,
which Scornefully the world calls Quakers, which faithful Scout so titled, is
seen with the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, in us made
manifest, to be an unreasonable man, and not to have faith, in whom the lying
and false accusing Spirit of darkness Rules, as his declaration in his Paper
does make it appear, and their own words spoken to our face, whose names are
above mentioned, who for the clearing of the truth, from false reports, and
false accusations, was moved to go to the Printers house to enquire for George
Horton, and to examine the matter, demanding of them what ground they had for
to Print and Publish such false reports, scandals, and untruths to the Nation,
cast upon the people of God scornfully called Quakers by the world. The Printer
and the said George Horton, said they had authority to Print reports, and what
words they pleased, and what they had Printed against us this week, they would
Print twice as much the next, if we was not civil: then I who am called Thomas
Aldam said, What uncivility do thou see by us? the Printer said, you are
impudent fellows, and come to make tumultes about my door, and was in great
rage; I said we came to enquire of thee, and George Horton, to make this appear
which to the Nation is published, to be truth, or else with the truth are you
witnessed against, to be slanderers in the dark, and false accusers of the
innocent, and do require of you to answer me.

Then I said to George Horton and the Printer, you have reported and published
to the Nation, that there are many impudent creatures residing in and about the
City of London, which entitle themselves Quakers, and have seduced many
innocent people; then I who am called Tho. Aldam, asked them what impudence or
wicked thing was done by them; or what had they seen: their answer was, They
heard say one went naked in Smith-field, I said, Did thou see it? he said no,
but a lad told him so. Then said I, Thou here charges them with seduceing
people, what is seducing? But the man fell into much bitterness and wrath, and
bid me be gone from his door, then said I, Friend thou say, thou was credibly
informed, that one went naked into Smith-field amongst the hay carts, and that
some demanded of him, why he walked in that Beastly garb, and to this many can
witness against thee, that there was no hay carts there, for it was about 9 of
the Clock at night, and that was false, and a lie, who art of thy father, read
John 8.44. Then I said to the Printer, Do thou call it a beastly garb, for a
man to go naked in obedience to the command of God? would thou not have
called Isaiah a beast if Isaiah had been here, or thou in his time, who went
three years naked? the Printer said it was a beastly part, for him to go so,
here I who am called Tho. Aldam said, I charge thee to be a Blasphemer, in
speaking evil of the people of God. And whereas thou say that some asked him
wherefore he went in that beastly garb, being naked, and his answer was, that
God had commanded him, and that a carter said he had command to whip him into
better manners, I said, did thou friend who art the Printer, or George Horton
hear or see this, or who did which you can name? their answer was, they did
neither see it, or hear it, something was true, they heard say one went naked,
and for the other, they had liberty to Print what words they pleased. Now for
the truths sake, was we three moved to enquire after this matter, that no lie
nor false slanders, and evil reports might rest upon the truth, to the clearing
of the truth to the understanding of all who have an eye open to see with, what
slandering false accusing, and evil reports have been cast upon the truth, By
the spirit of lies, and slanders, whose throats are become an open sepulcher,
saying, Report, and I will report it: and that you may see these men's ground of
report, was from a lad, or boy, as they declared to us, which one of them, the
Printer or the other, called credible information, to which boy we went, and
did require of him to let us know what he had declared to the Printer, and he
said, Nothing at all; and here with the light which comes from the Lord Jesus
Christ, which is made manifest in us, we see, comeprehend and Judge the lying
false accusing spirits, who in their envy have uttered against the truth, to
render the people of God odious to the world, now to all friends in the light,
and to the light in all consciences I speak, which with it the deeds is seen
and Judged, to it I appeal, that with it you may see, and try the spirits, and
with the Children of the light bear witness against all such as report lies,
and Print lies, and false accusations, who say they have authority to do what
is done, but woe and misery is their portion, who usurp authority to report
lies and Print them, to make others to believe their lies and evil reports, as
these two men have done, whose names are Robert Wood, and George Horton, which
with the spirit of truth are Judged, and the faithful Scout is found
unfaithful, without faith, in the unreasonable nature, for unreasonable men
have not faith, of which sort are these false accusers, who have uttered forth
their folly, who cannot prove the things to be truth they have publicly
declared to the Nation, but are found reporting the evil imagination of their
own hearts: and the man which went naked, is a sign of their nakedness, and a
sign to all unbelievers, liars, and false slanderers, in the dark, who the
innocent persecute, that their deeds and actions are naked before the Lord God,
and their nakedness appears, and folly is made manifest to all the children of
the light, who are set for signs and wonders, among the impudent creatures
which hate the light, whose deeds are evil, and the children of the light hate,
as they ever did, but woe and misery is coming, and their portion they must
receive with all liars, and false accusers; therefore now while you have time
repent, least the Lord cut you off in his fierce wrath, and make you a sudden
example, you who the innocent have falsely accused, for with the Simple eye are
you seen, and with it Judged, from one who is a friend to the establishing of
righteousness, and the searching out deceit, and to lay open the abomination of
these who are titled faithful Scouts, and men giving perfect intelligence of
actions done and said, but are found imperfect, and unfaithful men, in
receiving the false reports in these things above mentioned, but these
imperfect men, and unfaithful, who numbered the Innocent amongst the
transgressers, and evil doers, are discovered, which have loadened them with
evil reporaches, which are false, and the truth is cleared from the false
accusations cast upon the Innocent, to that of God in all consciences to be
manifest, with which I am one, a friend to your Souls; for the establishing of
righteous Judgment, and sweeping the land of evil doers, who are Slanderers of
the just, from one whose name is called

Tho. Aldam.
But one I am with justice, which is a terror to evil doers, and upon them
lays hold, and sets the innocent free, and them preserves in peace from the
hands of all unjust Oppressors, who smite with the tongue and fist of
wickedness, and the seed of God persecutes, as the seed of evil doers ever did.



FINIS.

