A LETTER From His EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Monck, (...)nd the OFFICERS
under his Command, TO THE PARLIAMENT; the Name of Themselves, and the Soldiers
under Them.

LONDON: Printed by John Macock. 1660.

A LETTER of his Excellency and his Officers, etc.
Mr. Speaker,
WE cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the wonderful Goodness of God to
you, in your Return to the Discharge of your remaining Trust; and to our
selves, and your Forces under our Commands, (after some difficulties) in
bringing of us, by a tedious March, in such safety to this place, to wait upon
you in asserting the Freedoms of our Native Country: and being here, (as we
have to our utmost Hazard and Power been instrumental in your Return, so) we
shall be still ready to pursue your Commands so far as possibly we may. To
evidence which, we have observed and executed your late Orders in relation to
the Chains, Posts, and Gates of the City; which was something grievous to Us,
and to the Officers and the Soldiers under our Commands; and that because we
do not remember any such thing was acted upon this City in all these Wars; and
we fear that many sober people are much grieved at it, and apprehend further
force to be offered to them, while they seem principally to desire the speedy
filling up of the House, which you have declared for, as well as we have
expressed our just desires of; and are apt to doubt, lest, what we have done,
may be so far from answering the expected end, as that it may increase the
discomposure of men's spirits in the Nation. Upon this occasion, it comes fresh
into our minds, that when by the treachery of some Officers of the Army you
were interrupted, we declared to the world, That the Ground of our undertaking
was not only your return to your Trust, but also, the Vindication of the
Liberties of the People, and the Preservation of the Rights of our Country, the
Protection and encouragement of the Godly and Faithful therein, as the
establishment of the Peace of these Nations. Which Declarations made before the
Lord, Angels and Men, in the day of our Extremity, we (as we expect the
blessing of the Lord upon our future Undertakings) cannot but still own, and
stand by.

We find that the asserting of the just Liberties of the People, is that which
the generality of the Nation is much in expectation of; and that many sober
people (together with our selves) are under fears lest this great price that
God has put into your and our hands, (as your Servants) should not be
improved, but that we shall run in Confusion again. Therefore we humbly crave
leave to present before you, some Grounds of our Fears: We are afraid that the
late wonderful and unparalleled Deliverance, is not so publicly and solemnly
acknowledged as it might be, that the Lord (who wrought so stupendiously) may
have the Glory of all: We are troubled that some as yet do sit in the House,
who are impeached of Treason: We cannot but observe that diverse Members of your
House, (who contrary to their Trust, acted in that Illegal and Tyrannical
Committee of Safety) are not actually disabled from sitting there:
notwithstanding Colonel Lambert has only the Vote of Indemnity to secure him
from as High Crimes as have been committed in this Nation, and is not obedient
to your Orders, yet he seems to be winked at. We understand that Sir Henry
Vane upon bare pretense is permitted to stay about the City, to the great
Dissatisfaction of your best Friends; that there are dangerous Consultations,
and that of those who had a chief hand in your late Interruption, and the
hazarding of the whole Nations, contrary to our Expectation. We find continued
in the Army some Persons of dangerous Principles, and such who were active
enough in the late Defection. Though we are far from wishing the ruin of any,
yet we could desire that your signal Indulgence to late Notorious Offenders,
did meet with that Candid Reception from them, as to be so much the more
ingenuous in their professed Repentance: But we observe that many of them do
seek to justify themselves, and are not without their Agents in print to
palliate their foul Enormities; which makes us yet to suspect that we are in
some danger of returning into the late distempers that You and the Nation are
but newly delivered from.

We are not ignorant, that there are those who lately struck at the Root of
English Parliaments in Practice and Design, thereby have inflamed the Nation,
and given great advantage to the Common Enemy, yet they are not without a
strange confidence to precipitate men into a belief, that they are the only
Persons against the One, and for the Other. With grief of heart we do remember
and would lament over the too palpable Breach of Engagements in this Nation;
Therefore we should think it a duty rather to mourn over the same, than to
promote any new Oath to be taken at this time: Yet we perceive that there is a
design to provoke the Parliament to enforce an Oath upon the Nation, and do
take notice, that amongst others, there are some who are most forward to
promote the said design, who have made the least (if any) Conscience in keeping
Engagements already taken. Here we must not silence our deep resentment of a
bold Petition, and of dangerous consequence, which was lately presented to you,
the consequence whereof (if you should answer their desires) would be to
exclude many of the most conscientious and sober sort of men from serving under
you in Civil and Military Employments, who have and would prove themselves most
faithful; and a door would be opened in design to retrive the Interest of those
who have (by the just Hand of our Gracious God) made themselves so apparently
obnoxious. Moreover (which is not the least part of the Venom of that
Petition) we clearly see the same Spirit, which of late would have pulled away
the by-you-declared-just Maintenance from Ministers, would now provoke you by
an Oath to endanger the forcing away of many of the most Godly from their
Maintenance. In urging our fears from the premises that concerns some of
different principles from us, we would not be thought to (as we do not) design
any thing that may incur the censure of unjust rigidity. We freely profess our
desires, that tenderness of Conscience may have its full just liberty, but we
cannot in judgment, account that tenderness of Conscience which will not
scruple at treachery it self; or any Unrighteousness to carry on corrupt
Designs.

Having presented You with our fears, we shall add our Resolution, That by the
help of God we shall stand by You in the pursuance of what we have declared
for: And therefore do make this humble Request to You: We could desire, That
whilst You sit, Your utmost endeavors may be to manifest your affectionate
desires for the Public Good of these Nations; Our further desire is, That
those Regiments under your consideration (whose Officers are not) may be
speedily passed. And in regard we find that the Grand Cause of the present
Heats and Dis-satisfactions in the Nation is, because they are not fully
Represented in Parliament, and seeing no other probable Expedient whereby to
keep the Nation in peace, then by filling up your Number; We must therefore
make this our main desire, upon which we cannot but insist, that you would
proceed to Issue forth Writts in Order to Elections: For the better effecting
whereof we entreat, That you would conclude upon due and full Qualifications,
that not only those who have been actually in Arms against the Parliament may
be excluded, but also such who in the late Wars betwixt King and Parliament
have declared their dis-affection to the Parliament: And because the distracted
condition of this Nation is at this hour so evident and pressing, we are
constrained for the just maintenance of Your Authority and the satisfaction of
all true English Men, earnestly to desire, That all the Writts may be Issued
forth by Friday next, returnable at the usual and legal time; For we think it
convenient to acquaint you, that to pacify the minds of this Great City, in
the prosecution of your late Commands, the Chief of Us did give an assurance
thereof.

And we must not forget to remember you, that the time hastens wherein you have
declared your intended Dissolution, which the People and our selves desire you
would be punctual in. Hereby the Suspicion of your Perpetuation will be taken
away, and the People will have assurance that they shall have a Succession of
Parliaments of their own Election; which is the undoubted Right of the English
Nation: You have promised and declared no less: Both the People and your Armies
do live in the Hope and Expectation of it. That we may the better wait for your
full and free Concurrence to these just Desires on the Nations behalf, upon
Mature Deliberation, we have thought it our duty as to continue the usual
Guards for the safety of your sitting, so for the present to draw the rest of
the Forces under our Command into the City, that we may have the better
opportunity to compose spirits, and beget a good understanding in that great
City, formerly renowned for their resolute adhering to Parliamentary Authority,
and we hope that the same spirit will be found still to breath amongst the
best, most considerable, and interessed persons there. This Action of ours, as
we hope it will receive your favorable interpretation, so we do believe it
will (through the blessing of God) be of good use for the present Peace, and
future settlement of these Nations. These are our thoughts which we communicate
to you, in the Names of our selves, and the Officers and Soldiers under our
Commands, We are,

White-Hal, Feb. 11. 1659. Your Honors most humble Servants, George Monck.
Colonels.
Tho. Sanders. Tho. Read. L'eon. Litcot. Ra. Knight. Jo. Clobery. Dan. Redman.
Jo. Hublethorne.
Ethelbert Morgan, Lieut. Coll. Majors.
Nathaniel Barton, Major. Tho. Johnson. Jer. Smith. Phil. Pryme. Fran. Nichols.
Peter Banister.




