AN APPEAL TO GOD and the KING:

Together with A True NARRATIVE OF Unparalleled Grievances, etc.

Wherein may be seen, as in a Mirror or Looking-Glass, the surpassing Miseries
of the English Nation, above other Nations, for having the best and most
wholesome Laws in the whole World; yet being so excessively corrupted by
Covetousness of Money in the Law-Practicers, as now they are: In the stead of
being an Help and Safeguard, are now become a mere Nuisance and Oppression to
the People; and unless some Expedient be found out for a just and due
Administration of Justice, without Fee or Bribe, it is impossible for This
Nation to be Happy, but must remain the most Miserable Nation in the whole
World.

Most humbly Presented by BENJAMIN ALBYN of London, Merchant.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1697.

JEHOUAH.
O Lord God of my Father, most Blessed and Glorious Trinity, FATHER, SON, and
HOLY GHOST, Three Persons, and One Almighty God in Unity; whose Unity is in
Trinity, and whose Trinity is in Unity incomprehensible; whose Essence is a
Substance without Composition, Immaterial and Spiritual; whose Life is
altogether entire, perfect all at once; One infinite Moment, without Beginning
or End, Eternal: Who is Reason, and a perfect Understanding; perfectly knowing
and understanding Himself, is immutable, and necessarily in Himself; whose
Infiniteness makes all Wonderful; His Mercy, Love, Goodness, and all his
Excellencies infinite: Whence arises his All Sufficiency, that possesses all
Goodness desirable or possible: Who is before all Time, and above all
Circumscription of Time, from Everlasting to Everlasting; who made Time, and
will dissolve it again: He is called the Rock of Ages, the Ancient of Days, and
Eternity itself, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; has called Himself I
AM: Whose infinite Essence gives Being to the whole Creation, and is All in
All; whose Attributes are more Excellent than to be discerned by so mean a
thing as Sense; His Wisdom, Power, Mercy and Justice, Goodness and Truth; also
his Immensity, Purity and Holiness is Incomprehensible and Eternal; And having
created the Heavens, and the Earth, and all that in them is, within Six days,
and rested on the Seventh, is therefore called the God of Sabbaths, which we
are commanded to keep Holy, according to his own Example and Reason for
Blessing and Hallowing that Day: His Name is a strong Tower; and being the
Father of Lights, King of Kings, his Dominion is Supreme; and being King of
Righteousness, from whom nothing is hid; delighting in his Mercy and Justice;
beholds all the Dwellers upon Earth; whose Vision is in his Attributes,
Providence; and in the Face of Christ his Eternal Son; who for us Men, and our
Salvation, came down from Heaven, and took upon Him the Nature of Man, without
Sin; to suffer for the Sins of them that believe, and to fulfill the Law;
became a Mediator betwixt God and Man, in whose Name and Merits alone it is
that I, who am but a poor worthless Worm, sinful Dust and Ashes, do now most
humbly present and prostrate my self before the Throne of his Majesty; begging
Mercy and Pardon for all my Sins and Iniquities, and to blot out all my
Transgressions. O Lord God, look down, and have Mercy upon me; lay no more upon
me than thou will enable me to bear: Counsel me in all my Difficulties;
sanctify mine Affections; create in me a clean Heart, and renew a right Spirit
within me: Let not the World, the Flesh or the Devil, have any dominion over
me: Teach me how to fear Thee, and Thee only; and enable me to put mine whole
Trust and Confidence in Thee, and in Thee only, and to hope in thy Mercy alone.
Sanctify unto me all thy Dispensations toward me, and, in thine own good
time, send me Deliverance out of all my Troubles and Afflictions thou have
visited me with; and, in the mean time, give me Patience to bear them. Behold
the Rage of mine Enemies; abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, turn their
Hearts, and confound their Devices, and plead my Cause with mine Adversaries,
and clear up mine Innocence from all their Aspersions, and give them true
Repentance for all their Sins, and let them amend and reform their Misdoings.
Incline the King's Heart courageously and continually to execute Judgment and
Justice, that so by Righteousness His Throne may be Established to Him, and His
Posterity, throughout all Generations: Enable Him to correct and purge out all
the corrupt Practices now used in the Laws of this Land; and grant that by the
good Advice of His Parliament by Thee the only Wise God directed, He may, in
His days, live to see Judgment and Justice run down like a mighty Stream, and
Righteousness flow like a broad River, that so He may be found worthy; that at
the last, when His Life shall end here, He may Reign with Christ to all
Eternity, in Life everlasting. O Lord, send a good Issue out of all mine
Afflictions; endue me with true Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding; give me
Sincerity and Integrity, and show me the Way wherein I should walk; and grant
in whatsoever I do, I may seek thine Honor and thy Glory. Give me neither
Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with Food convenient for me, and make me
joyfully and truly thankful unto Thee with mine whole Heart for all thy
Providence toward me, for the many Mercies and Necessaries of this life, and
of the life to come; particularly for my Creation and Preservation; but
especially, and above all, for my Redemption in the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
means of Grace, and the hope of Glory: To whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be
all Honor, Glory, and possible Praise, Might, Majesty, Thanks and Dominion,
henceforth and for ever-more.

Amen.
O Lord, in Thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded. Benjamin Albyn*

To the August, Imperial, and most Excellent MAJESTY of WILLIAM the Third, by
the most Wonderful Providence of the Almighty God made King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the True Christian Faith, and in His
Dominions over all Persons, and in all Causes, next under God, Supreme
Moderator and Governor:
The most humble Petition of Appeal, together with a True Narrative of his
Vnparallell'd Grievances, etc. is most humbly Offered and Presented by his most
humble Petitioner, BENJAMIN ALBIN of London, Merchant.
GREAT SIR,
AS You are God's Vicegerent here upon Earth, so You are most justly and duly
to be accounted my Dread Sovereign; and, without just Cause, I should not
presume thus to make mine Approach to Your most Sacred MAJESTY. Now, as Life,
and an honest Reputation, are to me of an equal Value, and one Sir Richard
Blackam has blackened and whispered away my Reputation on the Grounds of a
Causeless Statute of Bankrupt, maliciously taken out against me by one Samuel
Moyer, after a long and wrongful Prosecution of me in Your MAJESTY's High
Court of Chancery, where with most excessive Charge and Trouble I was, for many
Years, forced to defend my self; and after I had bin in some measure Righted by
a Decree in that Court, Three of his Counsel being afterward made Lords
Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal, Reversed my Decree, that had
bin Signed and Enrolled, without any manner of Reason, only for to please their
Client, of whom, for many Years together, they had all received extravagant
great Fees; and then the most Reverend and Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, by Reversing their Decree of Reversal, confirmed again unto me my
Right upon full Hearing of the Cause, brought before them upon mine Appeal;
(for which I pray God to reward them.) But leaving me to the Law for my Damages
sustained by the said Statute of Bankrupt, I have there had a Trial with the
said Moyer, who being quitted by the ingenuity of a favorite Counsel, and the
inclinations of the Judge, I was forced to pay him Costs; and the Court being
told by the Judge, that my Remedy at Common Law did lie only against the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal, by bringing mine Action against them; which
the Judge knowing very well, is an unpracticable Thing, unless I had a Million
of Money to spend, has left me without Remedy; for it is Money, and not Law,
that now does the Justice in many, if not most Causes; and if a Man have enough
of That, he is sure of his Cause in any Case. But as such Practices are unknown
to Your MAJESTY, that abominates all Injustice, and such Ways of
Unrighteousness, so doubtless Your most Excellent MAJESTY will not allow Money
to stand in Competition with, and jostle Justice out of its place in Your
MAJESTY's Government; which doubtless Your MAJESTY desires may be a Righteous
Government. I do therefore humbly make this my most humble Petition of Appeal
to Your most Gracious and Sacred MAJESTY, to be relieved against the manifold
Oppressions I lie under by mine Unparalleled Grievances, now showed to Your
MAJESTY: For having paid to the full all manner of Taxes due to Your MAJESTY,
which have bin required of me to pay; every Penny whereof being so much more
than I have gained since the Year 1690, when the said Moyer most wrongfully and
causelessly took out the said Statute of Bankrupt against me. I will hope for as
much Clemency from Your MAJESTY, being the Great Christian Sovereign and Father
of this Nation, as the Grand Signior shows to any manner of person, Native or
Foreigner, that by the Turkish Laws has bin aggrieved in his Dominions: It
being the Manner and Custom there, in Turkey, for any person whatsoever (that at
the Turkish Law has bin aggrieved by the partiality and injustice of an Unjust
Caddee or Judge) to put Fire upon his Head, with which he standing in the way,
or but in sight, as the Sultan or Grand Signior is passing along when he rides
abroad. As soon as ever the Grand Signior or Sultan espies the Fire, he
certainly and immediately commands the Man to be brought unto him; and then
hearing his Complaint, redresses him without any delay; and many times the
unjust Judge is put to Death, by being pounded all to Mash, and squobb'd all of
a Lump in a Mortar. Now, though such Ceremonies are not used here, yet I do
most humbly hope this my most humble Petition of Appeal to Your MAJESTY may do
as well: And as I am desirous to approve my self Your MAJESTY's most Loyal and
Obedient Subject, so,

Dread Sovereign, I do most humbly prostrate My self, my Life and mine All at
Your MAJESTY's Feet, begging Pardon for this Liberty, that it may be without
any Offense: And, as in Duty bound, I shall, whiles I breathe, pray for Your
Happiness to continue, and, if it may be possible, to be augmented in this
World, and in the World to come Life everlasting.

Amen. April 12. 1697. Benjamin Albyn.

To the High and most Honorable THE KING's Lords Justices.
May it please Your Excellencies,
THis mine humble Appeal to God and the King, being designed to be presented to
His MAJESTY before the Rising of the Parliament; but the Printer not being able
to get it ready in time, and His MAJESTY being gone out of the Land, I
therefore thought I must had stayed for His Return; but the Outragiousness of
one Sir Richard Blackam admits no delay, being such, as by force to seize and
take away my Goods, in the stead of paying me Money, and restoring unto me
sundry Notes for sundry Thousand Pounds, which in Kindness only I had
accommodated him withal: For Sir Richard having, contrary to all Agreement
with me, by sundry Arrests forced me to a Refferrence unavoidably; and I having
accordingly made choice of one Mr. John Freeman to be a Refferree for me
against one Sir Alexander Rigbey, a Refferree Sir Richard had chosen for
himself; who thinking fit to go off without effecting any thing in the matter,
Mr. Freeman became sole Refferree; and Sir Richard having smiled upon and
insinuated himself into him, he did not at all consider me or my Case,
(notwithstanding I gave him caution, and told him how that Sir Richard would
Wheedle a Thousand of him and me;) neither would Mr. Freeman regard any thing I
could say for my self, but plainly told me, when I spoke to him any of the
Things material for me, sometimes, I do not mind That; and at other times, I
do not regard That; and became so wholly inclined to his Interest, as to Award
me to pay him 380 Pounds, in the stead of making him to pay me 1018 Pounds,
without giving any manner of Reason for it; but only said (when I asked him the
Reason) I do not know; so it is, and I can do no otherwise; and if you were
in Blackam's Clothes, you would do the same Things that he does: And afterward
became so very hard upon me, as to make me give him Security for my compliance
with his Award, by causing me to order my Correspondent at Alleppo to consign
unto him some Goods of mine of greater Value; and afterward Sir Richard
Blackam refusing to do his part (which was easy, being only to deliver up my
Notes upon Oath, because lent him in kindness only; and I did not, nor do know
how many they were, or for what Sums) the Award became void. Yet afterward,
to please the said Sir Richard (as I believe, because Mr Freeman told me
himself) Sir Richard had sold him my Goods for 50 l. less than he was to allow
me for them, which was scarce half their Value as then worth; for he would
needs persuade me to sell them at very low Rates to Sir Richard, and make him a
Bill of Sale of them; and in the stead of my Notes, labored vehemently with me
to take Sir Richard's Bond: And because I refused so to do, he did in his Rage
tear the Bill of Sale he had appointed, and swore in those very Words, BY GOD I
WILL NOT CONCERN MY SELF, OR MEDDLE ANY MORE WITH THE MATTER. Whereupon, as I
thought it but reasonable, I wrote the necessary Orders to my Correspondent, to
prevent my Goods coming to his Hand, which I had ordered above a Year before to
be consigned unto him: For which fact, though mine Orders came too late to
prevent, and my Goods came consigned to him; yet he did upbraid and scandalize
me upon the Exchange, as if I had done some notorious Crime or unjust Action,
and, contrary to his said Oath, received and wilfully detained my said Goods
from me; notwithstanding, at their arrival, I had desired him either to secure
them, or deliver them to me. And now whether it be by Combination, or not, I
know not; nor should I had known it, if Sheriff Blewet had not told me on the
3d of June last. But, it seems, Sir Richard Blackam, by a Replevin from the
Sheriffs, has, with Officers and others, leaping over his next Neighbor, Mr.
Freeman's Wall, forceably taken away three Bales of my Silk, part of my said
Goods in Mr. Freeman's Hands; keeps all my Notes for I know not how many
Thousand Pounds, and 1018 Pounds he ought to pay me, if Contracts and Promises
ought to be performed; and what he will do next, I know not. Wherefore I
humbly pray, that he may answer and give speedy satisfaction to all the
matters; for though some do talk him Rich, and worth much; yet the more
considerate sort of people believe him to be so far from it, as to be worse
than nothing. Wherefore I do humbly pray I may not be delayed, but that in all
points he may be obliged to satisfy and fulfill his Contracts with, and all
his Promises to me, and by wicked Wheedles not be at liberty to evade, and may
give good reason for his defaming and burying me alive for so many Years last
past, as he has done. And now, on the 30th of June last, one Warner Dawes, an
Attorney, formerly complained of, has caused an Execution to be served upon my
Goods, breaking open my Counting House Door, Trunk, and Cabinet-Locks, spoiling
and imbezling away many Things whilst I was getting out a Summons for his
Appearance before the Lord Chief Justice, to show Cause why, having accepted of
Bond-Security for the Plaintiff's Debts of the Defendant, proceeds afterward
to take the Defendant's Goods in Execution, without re-delivering the said
Defendant's Bonds; and acquainting him, that the said Harwood the Plaintiff
would not accept the same; with which, though duly served, yet he evaded his
Appearance for two Days together: And though 'twas Mr. P. Brunskell's Debt for
which I being bound, had Assigned sundry Bonds; yet if I had not moreover paid
the Moneys, they would had carried away my Goods, perhaps of ten times the
value; and has since said, He would had blown off the Matter of fact with an
Affidavit, if had appeared before the Judge, as Mr. Brunskell told me; and
therefore he let him go.

Now, since it is so, that Attorneys can thus abuse Men, and by Affidavit can
blow off Matter of fact, and clear themselves, as he said he would do, I
humbly hope my demand for due Protection and Justice may be without any offense
to Your Excellencies; but being duly considered, allowed and approved of by
Your Excellencies, I may be righted, and made more capable of serving my King
and my Country: If not, and Your Excellencies, being the King's Vicegerents,
shall so think it fit, I humbly pray for an honorable Death, rather than any
longer to live under such Oppressions and Injustice, manifested in mine
Unparalleled Grievances, now presented to Your Excellencies. And howsoever
Your Excellencies do determine, I shall most humbly submit and endeavor to
approve my self dutifully to Your High and most Honorable Excellencies, as
being Your most faithful and obedient Servant outragiously afflicted with
excessive Wrongs and Abuses; for which I can obtain no Right or Justice at the
Law, though have spent much of my Substance in the Attempt and long Endeavor.

July 12. 1697. Benjamin Albyn.

The Preface to the Candid Reader.
SHARP is the Word, and Laudable Practice most applauded in this present Age;
and he that can cut the most Throats with the softest Feathers, is the
gallantest Man; and the more profound a Man is in his Hypocrisy, by
Dissimulation and Deceit, the greater Reputation he has for Parts of Wit and
Wisdom; (though, I think, the latter does not at all belong unto him;) and
downright Honesty and Plain-dealing is so much ridcul'd and despised, as to be
accounted not only Folly and Madness, but by some a most heinous thing; and
Covetousness in the Love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil, does so much
abound, and has so much possessed the Minds and Inclinations of the Lawyers
and Attorneys, as if they believed it their Deity and their Duty; and seems to
have so much the Ascendent and Preheminency above the Law, as plainly to banter
and baffle it, so as it is now become a mere Tool for the Rich to oppress the
Poor withal, and a Lottery for Moneyed Men to adventure in and enrich the
Lawyers with; and can be no farther aiding any Man, than Money makes it; and
unless a Man have enough of Money largely to fee Lawyers and pay Attorneys
Bills abundantly more than their Dues, no Justice can be had, and commonly the
longest Purse carries the Cause; and what by Law and Equity is Right in one
Reign, is Wrong in another, (whereas right and true Justice both in Law and
Equity is infallibly unalterable, if were done impartially, without respect of
persons,) and upon a full and due Consideration will be found the Cause why
Pride and Envy do much more abound in this little Spot of Land called England,
than (as I believe) in all the World besides, if put all together. So it is
plain, that Falsehood and Oppression, fortified with Pride and Envy, are the
Guise of this Nation, as by the Examples in the true Narrative following is
made manifest. And is it to be thought God will not arise? undoubtedly in his
good time he will, because his Word is true. Now as mine own Money was never my
Master, so I do think that the Money of these Three Men, S. M. Sir R. B. and J.
F. or any other by the Laws of God or Man ought not to tyrannize over me, as
apparently it has bin endeavored by them; and by the two latter being
enriched on a sudden most ungratefully, who had bin both partakers of my
Benevolence; the former, by gaining much by the little employment I gave him,
though I lost by him; and the latter, by receiving largely my Bounty, when he
could not pay his Debts; and was represented to me to be in a deplorable
Condition. And now these Two by their Tricks and Behavior toward me, show
themselves unwilling to let me live, or to have so much as an honest Reputation
amongst Men, although, to the best of my knowledge, I never wronged them in
Word or Deed: For Sir Richard Blackam, who, with a smiling Countenance, good
Words, and fair Promises, crouching and cringing, scraped his first
Acquaintance with me upon the Exchange, after my Return from Turkey; (where
Dealings are generally so honest, that Receipts for Moneys are seldom used, by
being either given or taken, but looked upon as needless;) and for many Years
together he sold to and packt Cloth for me, to the Import of many Thousand
Pounds; which though I constantly, fully and duly paid him, yet I lost much;
and do not remember to have gained by him, at any time, more than Ten Pounds,
which was, by Chance, only on one Pack of Mock-Medleys, as I often told him. So
finding my Trade with him, was to wrong my self, and served only to enrich and
give him an Employment, I did intend to deal no more with him who once told me,
to my Face, To be too honest was not well, and 'twas no Commendations. And
afterward, to make me amends, did, by his Wheedles, and extraordinary fair and
unusual Proposals and Promises, prevail with me to take another parcel of his
Cloth; and without any regard thereunto, Arrested me, and afterward Preferred
a Bill in Equity against me: To which, because I gave a full and fair Answer, I
was Fined, and forced to pay above Five Pounds; and having necessarily Filed a
Cross-Bill against Him and Mr. Freeman, to make manifest the whole Truth, if
possible; yet cannot get so much as one Twentieth part thereof answered, or
mine Exceptions filed, to be argued. Now if a Court of Equity will not allow
some, nor compel others, to set forth the whole Truth of the matter of fact,
how is it possible for Justice to be truly administered. Wherefore, as I have
in mine Answer upon Oath declared, That if it should not be admitted, for the
Reason therein expressed, as was there prayed, I should be forced to Appeal,
first to God, and then to the King's Majesty; for it is intolerable continually
to lie under the Scourge of the murdering Tongues of cruel and unreasonable
Men: So I now have done accordingly. For is it not by Words only that Men can
and do know the Minds of each other? and by Words only are not all Contracts,
Bargains and Agreements made? And if two Men make a Contract or Agreement
betwixt themselves, without any manner of Witness; and then if the one of them
afterward performs his part shall not the other be obliged to do his? or if
he refuse and deny his part of the Contract, what way is there but by a Bill in
Equity to purge his Conscience, and in his Answer upon Oath for him, to confess
or deny the Truth of the Matter of fact? But now it seems, if Men have but
Money enough, the Law-practicers will defend them either by not letting their
Clients answer one word truly to the purpose, or by helping them to plead and
Demurr to what cannot be denied in the Bill, and by that means the Truth is
stifled; and the Truth which truly was, is made not to be; and the Thing which
was not, is made to be; which indeed seems to be the great Virtue and chief Use
of a Law-practicer: Which, if duly considered, is most apparently the deepest
foundation for Knavery that can be, and seems to bear an invincible Fort of all
Villainy for Knaves to shelter themselves in. But is it not a mavelous and
stupendous thing to see a Nation so benumbed, as to suffer themselves to be so
gulled, especially having a Parliament whom they entrust, and whose Business
it is to look into and regulate all Miscarriages, and redress the Grievances of
the Nation? "Now I do know that, upon Oath, Sir Richard Blackam cannot deny
much of my Bill, if he be compelled to Answer without the Aid and Contrivance
of Lawyers and Attorneys, but must confess the most part of it; but more
particularly, and in short, must confess that he came sundry times to my
Lodgings in Mark-Lane; and many times in the Streets, when he met me, did
exceedingly importune me to take off his hands some of his Cloths,
notwithstanding I had denied and desired him to excuse me; yet telling me
'twould be a great Kindness to him, and a great Benefit to me, and I should
have them 20 S. per Cloth cheaper than those of some sorts he had sold to other
Men above a Year before for Readymoney, and were but newly laden on the Ships
then taking in Goods, to be laden for Turkey: That I should pay him for them at
mine own convenience; and that he would never ask or trouble me for Money; and
how he had bin forced to send 7 or 800 Cloths to Holland or Flanders; and that
he had still remaining upon his hands 11 or 1300 Cloths, which he said was a
great Estate to lie dead, and had but little hopes to sell or put them off by
those Ships, I was prevailed with to take 220 of them; and on no other terms.
And after we had thus agreed, I immediately desired it might be put into
Writing Verbatim before we parted: But he refused, laughing at me, and said,
The World would wonder at such a Contract; for 'twas never known or heard that
Goods were ever sold without a limitation of Time to pay for them. But after he
had fastened his Goods upon me, then he came (with another Wheedle, as I may
say) and pretended 'twas only for Mortality's sake he desired it might be put
into Writing for me to pay some days after the departure and return of the
Ships; because if he should die, his Executors might know how to demand their
Money; but if he lived, all should be according to our first Agreement. And if
he denies these few particulars, (though in his Answer he says not one word of
them or to them,) I must then be fully assured, that he neither fears nor
believes there is a God." Mr. Freeman having most ungratefully and insolently
done me much Wrong both at home and abroad, I have fully and truly set forth
that matter of fact according to the best of my knowledge and remembrance. Also
Mr. Samuel Moyer's unparalleled Malice for above Twenty, near Thirty Years
exercised toward me, I have truly represented, according to the best of my
knowledge and information; and being the Ground of the forementioned
Mischiefs, and also of many other ill Consequences befallen me, I have thought
it requisite to set forth some of them. As at my first coming into England one
Mr. Carry thought good to take from me 100 Ponnds on his deceased Son's account;
who though I believe died indebted to me many more, if not Thousands, and had
done me much Wrong with his Tongue; yet long before I came away from Turkey, I
had covered and buried all with him under a very fair Marble Stone I had caused
neatly to be laid over him at mine own Charge; which I do not remember to had
spoken of afterward in any particular, until the Covetousness of his
Relations, by wronging me, made me discover him mine Opinion, being De mortis
nil nisi bonum. Also Mr. Moyer's Cousin Farmer, a Packer, that sold me great
Quantities of Cloth, counterfeited my Mark upon an Iron Stamp, and therewith
Stamping inferior Cloths, changed them for my Cloths, that cost me, and were
better worth by 81 per Cloth: Of which Fact, though he was convicted both at
Common Law and in Equity, yet I could never have one Farthing Allowance either
for Damages or Charges. So the Sharpers and Cheats of the Town, finding that by
Law I could recover no thing, or have any Right, laid their Heads together to
cheat me of 1000 Pounds; and though I detected and convicted One of them of
Forgery, for which he stood in the Pillory, and though he consessed to have
received 250 l. which being in my Wrong, ought to be re-paid me; yet I can, by
no means, obtain an Hearing of that Cause in the Exchequer with him; neither
have I had one farthing Allowance for all. Also having received some accounts
(from Mr. Tho. Hatton of Alleppo) relating to the joint Account of Mr. T.
Barnadiston and John Barton for Factor Marine Duties owing, which, through his
inadvertency, were sent neither signed, nor in any-wise authenticated. Yet I
having paid a Thousand Dollars to the deceased Barnardiston's Kinsman, that
took care of his Concerns, upon his telling me John Barton had died indebted so
much to the said Barnadiston; I thought it but just to show to him the said
Accounts, to get a reallowance accordingly; but instead of duly considering
them, called them Sham-accounts, and has scandalized me much about them. Also
another Account of Money received and paid by my self, being, by my Directions,
showed unto him on purpose to be examined by him, that so, if there were any
Error, it might be rectified by me; he called it a Knavish Account, without
demonstration of any one particular Error; and not knowing but these may be
part of the things with which Sir Richard Blackam has blackened my Reputation
I have for that Reason set them forth. Also to make manifest the cruel
Consequences of Mr. Moyer's causeless Statute of Bankrupt, I have set forth
some of the unkind Usages I have found from near Relations, as well as Friends.
Though I must needs say, I do believe, Brother Mann, the Swordbearer's
unkindness and unjust Dealings toward me, proceeds also from his excessive
Gluttony and Ignorance, that puffs him up with Pride and Covetousness, that
makes him think by a nonsensical, dull and obstinate humor, to show himself a
Man of an high spirit, forsooth; which the poor Man is very ambitious of to be
accounted; though I have bin told, he is accounted a Man of a venomous Spirit,
which I think I ought not to conceal; because, to satisfy his Malice and
Revenge, rather than lose Time, he will put other people upon doing very ill,
unkind, and ruinous Things, that else they would not do or think of* His g eat
Glory is in Oppression; and when he is most intent in effecting any ill thing,
then he says, God forbid that he should do or think of that very thing; and
then he does it; even as he has told me, He has an Art to eat most, when he
seems to eat least; and by that means he passes for an harmless innocent Man
among some; but he is better known than he thinks he is. Also he having
covetoufly, contrary to his Promise before Marriage, prepared Writings for an
Estate to be passed by a Fine and Recovery, before a Judge, by his Wife, mine
own Sister, against her Will, unto him and his; and having showed them to her
at Ten of the Clock at Night, to certify her they were ready prepared; when
she having seen them, not being very well, became much troubled at it, and went
to bed, and next morning was found dead, and her Corpse almost cold, when 'twas
thought she only slept soundly; and 'twas but a little before, about one or two
days at most, before she died, that she complained and told a very near
Relation, how she was forced to study all the ways possibly she could to please
him; for if she did not, she verily believed he would turn her out of doors
into the streets; although, before Marriage, my Sister had settled upon him and
his Heirs the Fee-simple of another Estate in good Lands, worth 250 l. per Ann.
and now keeps my Right from me; though the whole matter is not worth One
thousand Pound; yet, he says, he will spend Fifteen hundred Pound but he will
keep That my Right from me, which, by Law, I am her Heir unto.

And I do believe there is not any one thing in the World can do a Man, in
any kind, so much mischief as a causeless Statute of Bankrupt; and though I
brought mine Action against the said Moyer for so doing, and as the Judge said,
I had proved all my Declaration but the Malice; which though was sufficiently
proved by the Fact, in the most of all other men's Opinions; yet by the
ingenuity of a Favorite Counsel, and the inclination of the Judge, I was cast,
and forced to pay Thirteen pound and Thirteen shillings Costs to Mr. Moyer's
Attorney, he being acquitted; and my Remedy at Law, it seems, lies only
again7s;t the Three Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, because it was their
Fact only, and not Mr. Moyer's, in regard what Mr. Moyer did, was by the Advice
of his Counsel, as the Judge was pleased to tell the Court. Now I do know,
that the Lawyers are the only proper Men to advise with in bringing an Appeal;
yet well knowing the great Good Will they have to one another, and their firm
Combination for the support of their ill practices; and consequently, if should
had advised with any one of them in this matter, I must had either bin deterred
by some strange Stories, or else be betrayed before had effected it. I have
therefore chosen to put my life in mine hand, without any Advice at all,
innocently to act mine own part in mine own concerns: And if by mine Ignorance
I have committed any Error for the want of due form: I humbly hope it may be
excused, because in my conscience I do think I ought not to omit any thing I
am by mine Oath obliged to do: And in this I could not expect any faithful
Advice from any Lawyer, because of my Complaint of them. And I do not doubt
but the Law-practicers will therefore seek many ways to bereave me of life, and
do me what mischief they can; but I know God governs the World, and their
Malice cannot do this -- much mischief to me more than his Providence will
permit: And, I say, God's Will be done. So I do my Duty, I hope I shall be
satisfied: For as I am but a Batchellor, and single Man, without Wife or Child
to want me, so I think it much better to die by a public Stroke of (I was
about to say) Justice, (but I know true Justice cannot hurt me, but must help
me,) rather than to linger and pine away for the want of Justice, by means of
the Villainy of the Law-practicers, that have done me so much wrong. And now W.
D. one of the said Law-practicers, has, on the 30th of June last, caused an
Execution to be served upon my Goods, breaking open my Counting House Door,
Trunk, and Cabinet-Locks, whiles I was Citing him before the Judge, to show
Cause for said Execution, he having received of me an Assignment of sundry
Bonds above a Year since, as a, satisfaction to prevent the Charge of
Execution, as I told him; and though he has evaded going before the Judge, and
his Client be paid all Dues, yet he keeps mine Assigned Bonds, and lets not his
Client acknowledge satisfaction upon Record at Westminster, and has taken out
the said Execution without a Scire facias; and told the Party that served him
with the Summons, to appear before the Judge, he would soon blow off the Matter
of fact with an Affidavit. Also sundry other Abuses I have met with both from
him and others the Lawyers and Attorneys, I have truly set forth, that so, if
a due consideration thereof be taken, 'twill be found, that as mine
Unparalleled Grievances are unpresidented, so, if they shall be made
Presidents for People so aggrieved, as I am to be without Remedy at Law, and by
the corrupt Practices used therein, the Peoples substance must be eaten up.
What must the Consequence be? For when People are made desperate, what is it
that they will not adventure to do? and Patience provoked, is not quickly
retrieved, or easily reconciled; and when their Passion and Rage is up, they will
regard a Man worth a Million, no more than a Man that has but a Mite. And
therefore I do think, with humble submission to the candid Government, 'twill
be no Imprudence to prevent Mischief by a timely Reformation of the manifold,
intolerable, vile Practices now used by the Law-practicers, (which do cause
so many and great Ruins and Oppressions upon the People, that they do most
lamentably complain of and groan under them in all Parts of England,) and by
that means there may be a due and an impartial Administration of Justice in all
Parts of the Land. It Is true, I am but one Man; but yet as a Man of honest
Parentage, and an honest Englishman freeborn, that has always lived in all
Obedience quietly abroad under many Governments, and paid all Dues to the King
and his Government here at home: And therefore as I need not fear, so I do
without fear of any Man living upon Earth, in the Name of God and the King,
demand my rightful Due and just Protection; and wherein I am wronged I may be
righted, according to the Laws of the Land, and not be any longer banter'd out
of my Right by the Impudence, Treachery and Insolence of the insatiable Lawyers
and Attorneys, who are ashamed of nothing; and when a Man is wronged, care not,
but will laugh at him, and tell him it is the Practice of the Court. I am the
more bold thus to demand, because Mr. Moyer's causeless Statute of Bankrupt
has bereft me of all my friends, that otherwise would or should appear for me,
who am a hearty Well wisher to all Mankind, but most heartily and especially to
those of mine own Country, the English Nation, that it may be delivered from
the Tyranny of Injustice; and that the Law-practicers may reform and become
just and good Men, honestly to deal by their Clients without Covetousness.

From Mark-Lane in London, 12th of April, 1697. Kept to the 12th of July, 1697.
Benjamin Albyn.

A True NARRATIVE of the Unparalleled Grievances, etc.
HAving lived to near the top of the Mount of Man's Age, in great trouble and
sorrow, I will now hope for a Year of Jubilee, before I begin to step down on
the other side of the Mount: And therefore having brought mine Appeal to His
most Gracious Majesty, I do now set forth my Grievances in the Narrative
following; that so it being duly considered, how much Evil Mr. Moyer's Malice
has brought upon me, some Recompense may be made, and I Relieved; and Justice
being done, I may most heartily pray God to forgive him and all my Enemies, and
the King's Throne may be established to him and his Posterity throughout all
Generations.

The Worshipful John Jollife, deceased, having bin Partner in Trade, and
Merchandising with my Father many years before I was born, and so continued
many years after; I was sent by them abroad into Turkey, which was in the Year
of Our Lord 1668, when my Father being much troubled with the Stone and Gravel
in his Kidneys, did very much desire to part their Stocks: To which
proposition, although for a long time the said Mr. Jollife was very much
averse, yet my Father alleging that his Body was infirm, and not likely to
continue long; and that I being grown up and gone abroad in the World, 'twould
save much trouble and imbroil with Executors: He was at last prevailed with to
part; and in April 1676, which was but the Month before he died, my Father did
write to me, that he had then just finished and balanced their Books, and
appropriated each Man's Right to his proper Account: But all the while, which
was some-time (near seven years) in doing, Mr. Jollife having married his
eldest Daughter to Mr. Samuel Moyer, was very peevish and contentious in his
Correspondency with me, insomuch that I often desired him to employ and send
his Business to some body else, but could not prevail with him until my Mother
did importune him, and then he did it with as much unkindness as possibly he
could, being after my Father's death most industriously incensed against me by
the said Mr. Samuel Moyer, who was very jealous and fearful of his
Father-in-Law's having too good an opinion of me; and this I have the more
reason to believe, because before that his Marriage I am very confident I never
had so much as one syllable of an unkind word from him, or an unkind look in
Twenty years; that I was in a manner almost daily with him, unless in the time
of my Nurture and School-education before I went abroad, but always very kind
in his Expressions toward me. But after my Father's decease, Mr. Jollife being
grown old and feeble, and decrepid, as I have been told, Mr. Moyer made use of
the opportunity to make him believe any thing, and did accordingly persuade him
that I had sent him home Grogoram-Yarn at four Dollars per Oak, not so good as
what himself had received from others at 2 Dollars per Oak, although by my
Letter of Advice, and the Invoice thereof, 'twas charged at no more than two
Dollars per Oak; so that he protested against me for so doing in Public
Notary, and would have charged it upon me at four Dollars per Oak, as Mr.
Jollife himself wrote me: Also he persuaded Mr. Jollife, that I had kept 13272
Dollars in mine hands from him, which being the Balance of an Account of the
Nett proceed of all his Goods consigned to me and Mr. (since Sir Philip) Gell,
who upon the death of his elder Brother, being by his Father called home, left
the Country before they were disposed of, and accordingly Embarked the 5th of
September. 1675, on the Ship Bristow Merchant for England, and left the Goods
with me in Ware house unsold, as was ordered. All which being afterward sold
by me, I did not delay, but invested his Moneys in the best Silk, and other
Goods, as opportunities did present most to Mr. Jollife's advantage, and did
lade and consign his said Goods, according to his Order, by all the first good
Conveyances, as they did present; which were as follow.

On the 20th of April, 1676, Five Bales Sherboffee Legee Silk, on Board a
French Ship called the Jerusalem, Captain Petro Audibert Commander for
Leghorne, and consigned them for the said Mr. Jollife's Account unto Mr.
Gilbert Serle, and his Nephew Mr. John Jolliffe, who were his Factors and
Correspondents in Leghorne, which amount to Lion Dollars 3899 39 26th of the
same April, Eleven Bales Sherboffee Legee Silk on the Turkey Company, General
Ships; viz. the Levant Merchant, Captain Nicholas Kerrington; and the Turkey
Merchant, Captain John Kempthorn Commander, and consigned them to Mr. Jollife's
own self, for his own proper account, amount in Money to the Sum of Lion
Dollars 8443 30 On the 27th of June, 1676, Two Bales Sherboffee Legee Silk on
the Ship Thomas and Francis, Captain Fastolfe Commander for Leghorne; amounting
to Lion Dollars 1829 28 And Five Bales Cordivants, amounting to Dollars 442 32
Which together make Lion Dollars 2271 60 2271 60 Were consigned for the said
Mr. Jollife's Account to his said Correspondents G. S. and J. J. at Leghorne.
28th of the same June, Seven Bales Sherboffe Legee Silk on the Ship Mary and
Martha, Captain Dyer Bates Commander for London, consigned to the said Mr.
Jollife for his own proper account in London, amounting to Money, Lion Dollars
6387 25- Which being added altogether, make the Sum of Lion Dollars 21001 74

Now all the Goods which Sir Philip Gell left with me, as aforesaid, being
sold, I did draw out Mr. Jollife's Account current upon the 10th of May 1676,
to the time of their disposal; the Balance whereof being then Lion Dollars
13272, and Aspers 70, were made good to him, as above; which with an Addition
of Dollars 7729, and Aspers 4, do make the Sum of Dollars 21001, Aspers 74;
all which went safe, and were actually received by Mr. Jollife and his Order,
in the Year 1676, which is apparently three years before the Complaint; yet Mr.
Moyer so far incensed him the said Mr. Jollife, that he not only stamped and
railed against me on the Exchange, saying, I was not worthy to live upon God's
Earth; but did also write complaining Letters to Sir John Finche, then
Ambassador at Constantinople, pretending that I kept the said Moneys from him,
and for that reason desired him to send me home in Chains, as I was told;
Whereupon the Ambassador did not only write unto me, but did enorder the
Honorable Mr. (afterward Sir Dudley) North, at his Return home for England,
to examine and settle the said Mr. Jollife's Accounts with me, who found, upon
due examination, and comparing accounts with me, that I had wronged my self and
made Mr. Jollife good Three hundred Dollars more than were due to him, and did
attest the same upon Oath in the Chancelliria, at Smyrna, before Consul Ray, as
may appear by the said Honorable Sir Dudley North's Deposition here following.

THE Worshipful John Jollife Esquire; of London, having several times wrote to me
in Constantinople, requesting me, that I would adjust with his Factor in
Smyrna, Mr. Benjamin Albyn, the several Drafts and Remisses made him by me for
his Account; whereof he wanted, as he wrote, due Credit to be given him in
Smyrna for several Particulars; and I having hereupon wrote many Letters,
notwithstanding which, by reason of the distance of place, not being able to
come to a due comparing of Books and Accounts, we could never come to a perfect
understanding of the Case: Whereupon the Alderman being much dissatisfied, made
Lament to his Excellency my Lord Ambassador, desiring that his Excellency, by
his Authority, would obtain from Mr. Albyn, that he would give him due Credit
for all the Sums he had received from Constantinople. It so happening that I,
in my Return for England, passed by Smyrna, his Excellency thought me the
fittest person to adjust all those Sums that we had remitted, and see that the
Alderman had due Credit with Mr. Albyn for the same; in order to which, his
Excellency gave me an open Letter to Mr. Albyn, to deliver and send home by me
all the Alderman's other depending Accounts. Hereupon coming to Smyrna, and
discoursing with Mr. Albyn, without ever calling him before the Worshipful the
Consul, as were my Instructions from his Excellency, if need should be thereof:
I found him most ready and willing to adjust and set to rights all those
several Sums by us charged* the Alderman with and after due examination of all
Accounts, as well those from Constantinople; of which, to this effect, I
brought the Copies with me; as also those of several Dates, sent from Smyrna by
Mr. Albyn and Company to England, showed to me in his copy-book of Accounts, as
well for the particular Account of Alderman Jollife as also for the joint
Account of Jollife and Albyn, from the Year 1669, to the Year 1673, which is
the time when these Differences verted. I do not find that any thing has been
wanting to the Credit of the aforesaid Accounts, save only the Product of
Thirty-six Bundles of Tin, sent up to Constantinople in the Year 1668,
Importing Nett, Lion Dollars 1547: 16; the which Sum, together with Lion
Dollars 317: 24 received then in Constantinople (for account of Mr. Carry) of
Gabbai a Jew, had been remitted to Foxley and Carry under the 10th of April
1669, in the Sum of Lion Dollars 1864: I say I found all other Remisses and
Drafts placed to the Credit either of the joint Account of Jollife and Albyn,
or the particular Account of Alderman Jollife, though something confused, and
in different Nominations than what they stood in our Accounts. And for the last
mentioned Sum, Mr. Albyn now showed me an Account he was preparing to send
home to the Worshipful John Jollife, wherein he had credited the Alderman for
two Thirds thereof, which he said was his proportion. I farther declare, That I
find in the particular Account of Alderman Jollife, sent him home under the
26th of April 1675, that he has given him Credit for 250 Dollars, drawn from
Constantinople A. D. 18th of June 1671, which is a plain Error in Mr. Albyn's
prejudice, we never having paid any such Sum, nor charged the Alderman with
it. Also I declare, That whereas Mr. Albyn drew on us the Sum of 400 Lion
Dollars, by his Bill dated the 12th of July 1672; for the which he gave the
particular Account of Alderman Jollife's Credit for 200 Dollars, under the 18th
of July 1672, and the joint Account of Jollife and Albyn under the same Date of
250 Dollars, which is an Error of 50 Dollars in his own prejudice, and is
purely an Error in transcribing; for in his Cash-book under the same Date it
appears to be but 200 Dollars, as it ought. This being the true State how I
find these Accounts, at the Request of Mr. Benjamin Albyn I make this
Deposition thereof before the Worshipful William Ray Esquire, Consul for His
Majesty of Great Britain in Smyrna, A. D. the 4th of February, 1679/80.

Dudley North.
Vera Copia

quod Attestor John Freeman, Cancel.




THese are to certify unto whomsoever it may concern, That on the other side
written John Freeman is Cancellier of the English Cancellaria of Smyrna (sworn
thereto) and is a person of good Credit and Reputation, to whose public
Writings and Instruments all Faith and Credence may be given.

Witness my Hand and Public Seal this 29th Day of April, A. D. 1680, in
Smyrna. Locus Sigilli. Wm Ray, Consul.


Thus Mr. Moyer in these and many other particulars, having incensed Mr.
Jollife against me in a most unreasonable manner, I could not imagine what
should be the reason of such unparalleled Malice: For, in reality, I was truly
faithful and much more diligent for Mr. Jollife's interest than mine own, or
than usually Factors are for their Principals; for I did not only disburse
oftentimes 4 or 5000 Dollars of my own Moneys to make him Returns by many
Conveyances, when his Goods lay in Warehouse, and could not be sold by reason
of their ill quality and excessive dearness, but also was forced to use all
possible means to get them off, or else they would never have been sold for
near what he rated them at in his Invoices: For I do believe, and I have heard,
that he was abominably cheated in the buying of his Cloth here in England of
Mr. Moyer's Cousen, one Henry Farmer, for I showed his Cloth to some Friends
abroad that had large Consignations of Cloth from their Friends here in
England, constantly by the same Ships; which, when they saw, did stand in
admiration, saying, If they had such Cloth, they should despair of ever selling
it; and upon comparing them, we found that they had better Cloth at Six pounds
per Cloth by their Invoice, than Mr. Jollife's was at Eleven pounds per Cloth
by his Invoice: And though I did write to him of it, and would have sent him
Musters or Patterns of his Cloth, thereby to find out the cheat, he would not
hear thereof, but did passionately affirm his Cloth was not over-rated, and no
Man bought his Cloth better or cheaper than his was bought. Now being thus
certified by him, I could do no less than maintain the Price according to
Invoice, and with much labor and industry many times for Six months together
on a bargain, I did at last prevail with some people to take off his Goods;
but, alas! the poor people were most of them ruined that took them; and one of
them an Armenian, whose Name was Karibogle, turned Turk, thinking thereby to
have the benefit of the Turkish Laws against me, for selling him the said
Jollife's Cloths; and I, to prevent farther mischief, was forced to give him
good Words, and present him with 180 Dollars he owed me on some Goods I had of
his in my possession, of treble value, which I was glad to let him take away
upon his giving me an Hogett, and acknowledging full Satisfaction before the
Caddee. Also I was forced to take of another Armenian (that bought his Cloth)
Grogoram Yarn, and other Goods, in the stead of 10000 Dollars I had paid for
his Account unto Silk-men for Silk, which I did with faithful diligence
hastily send to Mr. Jollife upon account of a Bargain with him for the said
Jollife's Cloth; he being also ruined, I lost above 4000 Dollars thereby, which
I did think was but reasonable to charge to Mr. Jollife's Account; but Mr.
Moyer bringing his Bill in Chancery, I was advised to drop it as a thing that
would not be allowed, neither was I allowed the 180 Dollars before mentioned,
nor 500 Dollars charges I was at in sending a Parcel of his Cloth to Brussia,
near Constantinople, to be sold there, or to be forwarded to Constantinople;
but his Correspondent Mr. North Writeing me, he could not receive them without
paying another Custom; I was forced to order them back again to me without
effecting the Sale of so much as one Inch of them, by reason they were so very
base and extreme dear Cloth. For me to enumerate the manisold Vexations,
Troubles and Losses sustained by Mr. Moyer's mis-management, and dissuading of
Mr. Jollife against me, would be both long and tedious. But I did never yet
hear of any Man that lived abroad as a Factor, was ever so ungratefully
requited, and basely used, as I have been since mine unhappy Return into
England: Yea, he endeavored oftentimes to set my own Mother against me, by
speaking to her sometimes, Pray be not too brag of your Son: and sometimes,
Pray have a care, and be not too confident of your Son: Then my Mother asking,
Why, do you know any harm by my Son? Then he would answer, No, not I; what I
say is only to give you a Caution to have a care: and many such ways he used,
amongst many other people, on purpose to cast Infamy upon me: I could not but
be very much troubled and grieved in my mind; and there happening a very great
Plague at Smyrna, so as to cause most of our Nation there to retire into the
Country, I did, to divert Melancholy, make a Journey from Smyrna to Jerusalem,
in which I spent about Nine months; and at my return to Smyrna, Mr. John
Freeman acquainting me of sundry of Mr. Jollife's malicious Practices against
me, which he had heard spoken of by several of our Nation in the Factory of
Smyrna, according to their Advices from England; I could not but take it very
kindly from him, and did thereupon look upon him as a particular Friend; and
indeed the more, because no other Man did do the like; and truly finding in my
self that my Passion was so raised, that I thought if I should see Mr. Jollife,
I should not be able to forbear beating of him; and considering that as he was
old and feeble, if I should strike him, and thereupon if he should die within a
year and a day, I should lie liable to the severity of the Law; I did resolve
to forbear coming to England whilst Mr. Jollife lived, as I do believe I told
Mr. Freeman: And thereupon walking one day in Mr. Freeman's Hall or Parlour,
where the Picture of Mr. Freeman's Daughter did hang, being drawn very Womanly;
Mr. Freeman and his Wife being both there, I did ask them, If their Daughter
were Marriageable? they said, Yes, they would warrant her Marriageable: Then,
said I, if you will send for her, I Will ask her the Question: Then they both
(laughing, and seeming to be very well pleased) replied, It should be done,
they would send for her. Next day I went to them again to see whether they were
in earnest or in jest; when finding that they were in earnest, we did then more
particularly discourse about the matter; and they did again warrant their
Daughter marriageable, being tall of her Age, and born in that Country, where
Women are very forward at Ten or Eleven years old; and many things to that
purpose: And being by their discourse fully satisfied, and put out of all doubt
of her being Marriageable, I did then again tell them, That if they wonld send
for her, so as to come out by the first Ship, I would certainly ask her the
Question; but they must be sure to carry it very privately and secretly, so as
to keep the matter from taking Air; for if it should come to my Mother's Ear,
so as that she should forbid me, that then all should be nothing; and for that
reason it was that I did desire she should come out by the first Ship; for as I
was I might Marry without my Mother's consent, (as I thought) but I could by no
means think of doing it against her consent or positive order to the contrary.
And after this manner we did discourse sundry Days until a Conveyance for
Christendom went and carried away their Letters: And then they told me what
care they had taken of the matter, how he had written to Mr. John Foley, and
remitted sixty Dollars to him to supply her Grandmother with Moneys to buy her
Clothes; and that his Wife had written to her Grandmother and Aunt to be very
careful and private in fitting her with good Clothes, and to send her out in a
good handsome Equipage by the first ship for Smyrna, which was the Ship called
the Smyrna Factor, Captain Mariner Commander; yet because the Companies
general Ships were in a short time after to come from England they thought it
more safe to send her out upon one of them, which was the Mary and Martha,
Capt. Dyer Bates Commander, who with the rest of the Ships arriving on Sunday
Evening the 2d Day of May, Anno 1680; her Father went on Board to fetch her on
Shore, and after having carried her to the Consul's House, he brought her home
about Nine or Ten at Night, when I went to bid her welcome to Smyrna, according
to the common Custom; and finding then only her Parents and her together, I sat
down and smoaked a Pipe of Tobacco with them, and placing my self by her, asked
of her welfare in her Voyage and Passage from England, etc. So having passed
about an Hour with them, I arose to go home, and at taking my leave I told her,
that I hoped she and I should be better acquainted; and so went home to my
Habitation in the Visier's Haune, with Intentions to see her no more until such
time as all the Factory had given their Visits as was usual to all Strangers at
their first arrival in that place; for I had told her Father before her
arrival, that I would not visit or make any Applications to her until that
Ceremony was over. And though I had thought it would have taken up near a Weeks
time at least, yet about two or three Days after, her Father came and told me,
That the Factory had been all at his House, and paid their Visits, and his
Daughter was ready whenever I would please to come. Then I told him what an
unhappy thing 'twas that she did not come out by the first Ship, and how by the
general Ships I had received a Letter from my Mother, cautioning me against the
thing; and showed it to him accordingly* at which he seemed somewhat disturbed;
but however I told him, I did desire to do all reasonable things that were just
and fair; and if he would bring Dr. Luke our Minister, I would show him the
Letter, and if he would say it did not amount unto a Prohibition, I would come
and make my Applications to her; but if by the Letter he should understand and
declare it a forbidding me the thing* I should then desire to be excused,
because, according to the Agreement, she came not out by the first Ship, and
therefore I was clear, and no farther obliged. Afterward Dr. Luke and he were
with me together in my Dining Room or Parlour, at the Visier's Haune, where we
had many long Discourses about the Affair, and then Mr. Freeman was so very
passionate, that he wetted a very large Cambrick Handkerchief with his Eyes and
his Nose, so that there did not seem to be a dry thread in it, and said, that
he knew Mr. Albyn to be a very just man, but he believed him to be a very cruel
man. Then said I, Let the Doctor read this Letter that I received from my
Mother, and then if he will say that I may marry your Daughter without sinning
against God, by offending my Mother, I Will go on to marry her without any more
ado. Then Dr. Luke having read the Letter, said, I am sorry you should put
this thing to me, Mr. Albyn; but since you have (said he) I had a Sister that
married without her Father and Mother's consent, and God Almighty never
prospered her, and therefore I Will never advise or give my consent for any
Children to marry without their Parents consent, and so good night to ye,
clapping the Palms of his Hands so very hard together as made a loud smack, and
flinging passionately out of the Room, came no more near us at that time: So
being left together, and Mr. Freeman continuing in a most grievous crying
humor, and no way to be pacified, I did, to satisfy him, say, That if he would
come to me next day, after his Passion was over, I would talk farther with him
about the matter; at which he seemed better satisfied by much, and went his
way. Now he being gone, I could not but be much concerned and troubled at what
had happened, and thought my self obliged to consider very well with my self,
what I had best to do in so weighty a concern: Then considering Mr. Freeman's
Humor, how Imperious and Insolent it was where he had power to domineer, I
thought I would propose in Writing to make such Articles with him that he would
never condescend or agree unto. So taking in hand a Pen, and Ink, and Paper, I
did directly write down what did then come to my Mind, a rough Draught, not in
the least thinking it in any due order, or expecting he would sign it, but only
to know if he would sign such Articles, and then I thought to have had them
drawn in due form, and so to have them fairly written out: But much contrary to
my Expectation, the next day when he came and had received and read over the
said rough Draught, he did without any stop or stay ask for a Pen and Ink, and
immediately adding a few Lines, set his Name thereto with his own hand, saying,
I am resolved nothing shall hinder. Now being thus surpised with this sudden
and unexpected Compliance, I thought all shifts to be at an end, and to stand
too much upon drawing and signing Articles in due form, would favor too much
of Niceness, and would breed but ill Blood, and that in Honor and Honesty I
could delay no longer; so promised to come to his House the next day; but
withal, did make him promise, as both he and his Wife had promised before her
arrival, not to direct or persuade her to do or say any thing, but purely to
leave her to her own Inclinations. Also I did desire of him, that when I came,
she might be no ways set out with any sort of Dress or fine Clothes, but to
appear only in her Night-cloaths and worst Apparel she had, and I would do the
like; for I would have no deceit, but that we might appear to one another the
worst at first.

A true Copy of the said Articles, Original or first and foul Draught as signed
by the said Mr. John Freeman, is as follows (though very improperly, as I do
think) viz.
IF I do Marry your Daughter, it is upon these Terms.

First, That the Honor of her Chastity be preserved pure and spotless, which I
cannot imagine will ever be in this Country, unless, according to the Custom
there of, she shall be contented to live wholly retired from Male conversation,
at least so much as never to come into the way of being either touched or kissed
by any Man, according to the Custom of England; which, though may be looked
upon an harmless piece of Respect used there, yet here it is highly scandalous;
and it is certain, that if Scandal be to be avoided any where, it is to be
avoided in the place of a Man's Residence or Dwelling.

2dly, Your way of living in this Country having been according to the Mode of
England, and now not to be altered, I cannot imagine it consistent for us to
live together as you sometimes have proposed.

3dly, In case we should live together, it must be in mine own House, and I
resolve to be sole Master, and my Wife sole Mistress of mine House, without any
manner of Control or Dispute; so that you can be only Boarders, paying for
your Diet, according to the Custom of the Place: For it is wholly Nonsense for
you to think I should spend one Asper upon you that gives no Portion with your
Daughter.

4thly. You are to keep your self in your own Station, using your utmost
diligence in your Calling, without expecting any manner of Homage from me after
I have married your Daughter, more than you received from me before any such
thing was thought of.

5thly, Your bare Promise to comply with these Particulars above mentioned I do
not look upon sufficient, because I do find you are apt to forget a Promise,
therefore I desire, that both you and your Wife should sign your firm Promise
to comply with the Premises.

To the Contents on the other side written, I do wholly consent to, reserving
that Liberty to my Wife and self, as to live where I please;

witness my Hand this 7th of May, Anno 1680. John Freeman.


On the next Day, being the 8th of May, 1680, about one Afternoon, Mr. Freeman
came to me, to put me in mind of my Promise. I told him, I should not fail to
perform; but be sure that your Daughter be not dressed otherwise than as I
desired, and you promised, in her plain Night-cloaths. At present I have some
Goods just landed, and lying at the Custom-house, and as soon as I have gotten
them home, and stowed them in my Warehouse I Will come. So telling me all should
be as I desired, and he would go home to expect me; then he being gone, I went
about my Business, and in few Hours after, having gotten my Goods stowed in my
Warehouse, according to promise, I dressed my self in my worst Garb and went
to his House, where I found him and his Wife sitting in their Hall expecting
me: So I sat down with them, and asked where their Daughter was, who being
called, came in unto us as I had desired; then I arose, and having saluted her,
I returned to my Seat at a distance from where she sat. Then after a little
general Discourse I began to apply my self to the Daughter as follows: Madam,
I do suppose your Parents have acquainted you with the occasion of my coming
here; now the great Question is, whether you can like me for an Husband? To
which words she did answer me, Yes, Then said I, This is Father and Mother's
Yes; but they all denied, saying, No indeed. Then said I, We are Husband and
Wife; and I arising off my Seat went to her, then she arose, and I sat me down
in her Chair, and took and sat her in my Lapp; and with very hearty and loving
Embraces did salute her, and on my Knees did dandle her; and then immediately
her Father filled a Glass with Wine, and as we were sitting he and her Mother
came close to us, and drank to us both, saying, God bless you both together:
Mr. Freeman drinking the first part to his Wife, and she drinking the second
part to me, and I drinking the third part to my Wife, as I thought, who
pledging me drank off the rest.

Then said I very merrily, Is the Bed ready? speaking (to her Mother) Ay, said
she, that will soon be gotten ready. Then said I, It Is hot weather, August, if
one wont another must. O, said she, that is a long time indeed. Then speaking
no more, I did arise off my Seat, and taking my Mistress in my Arms I carried
her about the Room until her Parents told me, 'twas enough, I must not be too
eager at first, a little at a time was best, hot Love is soon cold; and many
such like Expressions. So they parted us, and my Mistress went away for a
little time; then she came in again, and I repeated my Adresses and Respects
unto her with an hearty Affection and real Love: So passing that Evening with
them, I stayed till 'twas pretty far in the Night, and then taking my leave of
them I went home, being Saturdy Night, and promised to wait on her next Day to
Church. Next Day, being Sunday, I did according to my promise call upon them,
and going together, I led my Mistress to Church: After Sermon the whole
Congregation stayed as if they had expected to have seen a Marriage, whereupon
I hastened to my Mistresses Pew where she sat, and taking her by the Hand I did
lead her home with her Father and Mother, where keeping me to Dinner, I stayed
and led her to and from Church in the Afternoon. Next Day, being Monday the
10th of May, I went pretty early in the Morning to give my Mistress a Visit,
when she was scarcely stirring, so stayed till she had put on her Morning Gown
and dressed her Head, and then I went into her Chamber and saluted her, then
taking her in mine Arms, I asked her, where her Breasts were? but she very
modestly shrugging from me said very little, for indeed she had no more
appearance of Breasts than a Boy of her own Age, which was about twelve Years
and two Months, as I was informed, but in her Stature she was within two or
three Inches as tall as my self. I did not stay long, but taking leave I went
away, and came again at Eleven of the Clock, being Dinner time, and dined with
them as they had desired me. After Dinner I stayed and smoked a Pipe with
them, and then went home about my Business. About five of the Clock in the
Afternoon Mr. Freeman came to visit and sit and talk with me; and then speaking
of her Youth and unripeness for Marriage, I asked him, Whether it might not be
injurious to his Daughter to marry her so soon, for if I married her I would
bed her; but he not very readily answering me, at length said, She would soon
be fit: So I did suppose the Design was, that I should immediately marry her,
and afterward tarry until she were more mature; which, as I was told, might be
in a few Months, according to the Opinion of the Midwives. Whiles we were
talking one came to tell him, That the Consul with diverse of the Factory or
Merchants of our Nation were gone to visit and were at his House. So he
hastened to go home, and asked me to go with him; but I told him I would follow
him in half an Hours time having somewhat to do first. So he went his way, and
accordingly I followed him, and when I came I found the Consul sitting at the
upper end of the Hall, and Mr. Freeman and his Wife at the lower end of the
Hall, and about half a Dozen of the Factory on the one side, and my Mistress on
the other side of the Hall, whom I saluted, and sat me down next the Door: And
after I had stayed some time, I said, I would make a trip home, promising to
return again, which accordingly I did, when rising and going out of the Room my
Mistress followed me, which I did look upon as a token of her Affection, and
took very kindly; so as she went by me I saluted her and went my way.) About
Nine or Ten of the Clock, the Consul and the rest of the Factory that were
there went with him home, all but my my self; for after the Consul was gone
down I called to the Consul, and told him, That by his leave I would stay with
my Mistress, and wished him a good Night. So staying till her Father returned,
he came and sat him down in the Hall very melancholy, and after he had sat a
while his Wife told the Daughter, 'twas time for her to go to Bed: So she being
gone, I asked Mr. Freeman how he did, what ailed him to sigh so? Then with an
heavy sigh and groan he said, I do not know what aileth me, but my Mind gives
me that 'twill not be a Match for all this. Then said, I, Why so? Then said he,
I don't know, I do not like these delays. Then said I, What delays? would you
not have my House fitted up first, why should I be troubled with Workmen after
Marriage? I do not think it convenient; and therefore if you will please, with
your Wife and Daughter, to go to morrow morning and visit my House, and see
what Alterations for your Conveniences you shall think fit to be made, I will
come and call you to morrow morning. So agreeing upon that Proposal I thought
nothing could be more necessary than for me to get up early in the Morning, and
bespeak a small Banquet or Collation of Sweetmeats to entertain them with; for
I could not but think it ill Manners to entertain them with nothing but bare
Walls, for my House had been in a great measure plucked down, and but newly
rebuilt; and being but hardly finished, and Workmen at work, I did not doubt of
finding them there ready to receive their Instructions for whatever they should
think fit to order or to have altered. So being a pretty late Hour in the Night
I took leave and went home, not thinking any thing but of being with them about
Eight or Nine of the Clock next morning. Next morning I arose early, so that I
was at Monsieur Barragar's before Six, and there did bespeak a small Collation
of the very best and choicest Sweetmeats, to be sent home as soon as possible.
So after some time spent there I went thence upon my return home, and in my
way, finding Mr. Ashby's Street Door open, I went in, and so up Stairs and
knocked at Mr. Ashby's Chamber Door, who being in Bed arose and came out to me,
and after giving good morrow, having his Turkish Vest on, walked with me
several turns about his Hall, and after some other Discourse, he asked me, If I
had heard the News? I said, No not I! what News? Then said he, Mr. Freeman
says that Mr. Albyn had made him sign a company of foolish Articles to him,
but when he has married his Daughter he will not value them this -- flipping
his Finger and Thumb together. Say you so, said I, well, I thank you for that.
So I said no more, but took leave and went home, where I did muse and pause
very much at what he told me, and thought it by no means advisable for me to
go near them, so stayed at home very much troubled; and toward the Evening,
about Kindee, as the Turks call it, which is about two hours before Sunset
(the usual time for the Jew-brokers to go home) I sent one of my Jew-brokers
Chime Livee by name, to tell Mr. Freeman I had a desire to speak with him, and
accordingly he came: Now by that time, as near as I could guess, that my Broker
was gotten to Mr. Freeman's House, I did then order my Cook to carry away the
Sweetmeats to his House and deliver them to the Women, for whose Entertainment
they had been provided (not knowing better what to do with them) so by that
time or soon after my Cook was well gotten out of the Haune Mr. Freeman
appeared and knocked at my Appartment there, and having seen him coming I
opened the Door my self, and invited him in, and being in my Parlour I told
him, The reason why I sent for him was to acquaint him with some extraordinary
News I had met with this morning as I had been to provide for his
Entertainment, with his Wife and Daughter (and accordingly had provided) for,
said I, you know that late last Night we did appoint this day for the viewing
and ordering my House, with your Wife and Daughter, and accordingly I have been
to make provision for it; but as I came home a Friend told me that you had
said, that I had made you to sign a company of foolish Articles to me, but when
I have married your Daughter you will not value them this -- flipping my Finger
and Thumb together; and for that reason I do resolve not to marry your Daughter
in this Country. Then, said he, Except you will tell me who told you so, I Will say
it is false. Then, said I, That Is nothing but mere stuff which I regard not, you
know it is true; but thus fair I Will be with you, she shall be no farther charge
to you, I will take care of her, and send her home by the Ships to my Mother,
where she shall be as well entertained as one of my own Sisters; and if
possible, I will go along with her, and endeavor to marry her with my Mother's
consent; if not, I Will promise to marry none other until such time as she shall
be as well married as if married to me. Then said Mr. Freeman, If my own Father
should make me such a Proposition I would scorn it. Then, said I, More I cannot
do. After this he went his way and we had no more words, neither did I see him
any more until Monday Afternoon, the 17th of May, Anno 1680; for I did not
think it convenient to go near the House least I should be overcome with my
Affections, which I found very strongly bent toward his Daughter; and for that
reason, to avoid seeing her at Church on Sunday, I did on Saturday in the
Afternoon order my Sise Hamsa by name, to saddle a couple of Horses, and in the
Evening I rid to the Castle at S. Jaccamores-point, where leaving my Man and
Horses I made a sign, calling to the English Man of War there riding at an
Anchor, whereof Sir John Berry being Commander, he sent his Boat for me, which
carrying me on Board, I told Sir John Berry wherefore I came there at that
time; so he received me with all Kindness and Respect: I stayed with him all
that Night and all the next Day, being Sunday, where Mr. Vpman the Duke of
Grafton's Chaplain did officiate in Divine Service both Forenoon and Afternoon
before his Grace the Duke of Grafton and all the Ship's Company: So staying all
that Night also, I did next morning, being Monday, arise pretty early, and as
soon as I could speak with Sir John Berry, I gave him my Thanks for his kind
and generous Entertainment, and taking my leave, I was carried on Shore at the
Castle, where my Man being ready with mine Horses I mounted immediately for
Smyrna, where we arrived about Nine of the Clock, or soon after; and being at
home I delayed not to put off my Boots, and immediately went to Mr. Ashby's,
whom I found at home, and asked him, What News, and how it fared with my
Mistress, and whether she had been at Church, and whether he had seen Mr.
Freeman? He told me, Yes, and how Mr. Freeman had told him, that he and his
Family were under great Disorders, Troubles and Discontents; so that his Wife,
for about eight Days past, could neither Eat, Drink, nor Sleep; but did tear
the Hair off her Head; and had desired him to acquaint me, that if I would give
him a thousand Dollars, he would release me from all Pretensions about his
Daughter: To which I replied, With all my Heart (being much surpised at what
was told me) and desired him to bring him to my Habitation in the Afternoon, it
should be done. About two or three Afternoon they were with me in mine
Appartment in the Grand Visier's Haune, both Mr. Freeman, and Mr. Ashby, and
also Dr. Luke; so after I had bidden them welcome, I told Mr. Freeman, How very
sorry I was to hear of the great Grief, and Trouble, and Disorders his Family
was in, though he knew very well 'twas none of my fault; but since it is so, and
as Mr. Ashby has told me, that a thousand Dollars will content and please you,
I did desire him to bring you to me this Afternoon and you should have it: So
desiring them to sit down, I went immediately and fetched a Bag of one thousand
Dollars, and laid it upon the Table, saying, I would have you and yours well
satisfied, and therefore you may either take this, or if you will please to walk
along with me, I Will show you something else, and you shall have which you
please; so going down Stairs with me to my Warehouses, I showed him six Bales
containing thirty long broad Clothes, as they did lie piled up one upon another
without my Warehouse Doors, packed up in their Canvas, as they came from
England. Then, said I, You may now take your choice, either these six Bales or
else the thousand Dollars I offered you above: Then he laughed, and said, You
may be sure I Will take these. Then, said I, take them. Then he said, That at
present he had no Convenience to lay them, but in a Day or two's time he would
provide Convenience, but if I pleased he would go up and immediately give me a
Discharge; so we went up, and furnishing him with a Pen and Ink, and Paper, I
told him, That his Daughter must also discharge me, or else his Discharge could
signify nothing to me. Then, said he, If you will please to come and Dine at our
House to morrow my Daughter shall discharge you. Then said I, It Is very well.
Then taking the Pen and Ink in his Hand, he wrote with his own Hand the
Discharge, verbatim, without any Instruction or Direction of any one, but
purely by himself, as follows, viz.

WHereas upon sundry weighty Reasons communicated to Mr. John Freeman by
Benjamin Albyn, an instance of Marriage was made, and to that end, his Daughter
being deputed by her Parents to be Marriageable, 'twas agreed on by both
Parties, viz. her Parents and Benjamin Albyn, that she should be sent for to
come out by the first Ship, which though did not so exactly happen, yet 'twas
accomplished by the first general Ships, which arrived here the 2d Instant; and
according to promise, after sundry Visits made by Benjamin Albyn, he did on the
8th Instant ask her Consent, which she having given with the word Yes, both
Parties looked upon themselves to be Husband and Wife to each other, provided
the Mother of Benjamin Albyn should give her consent; for the obtaining which,
the said Benjamin Albyn had written two Letters effectually to his Mother under
the date of the 3d of April last, and 13th Instant: But as the business was
begun parely and solely upon Parole, without any manner of Script or Writing,
which now by no means seems any way satisfactory to the Parents of the Maid,
because not immediately married to Benjamin Albyn, who is resolved not to do it
in a clandestine manner, without his Mother's Knowledge or Consent, which
cannot probably be had without a long stay of six Months at soonest, and it
being uncertain whether she may give her Consent, so that my Wife and Child's
Expectation may be frustrated, I do hereby in the behalf of us all, exonerate
and discharge Benjamin Albyn from all pretensions of Marriage with my Daughter,
or any manner of Charges or Disbursements thereabout, from the beginning to the
end of the World, having received of him a full and valuable Consideration, for
not farther concerning himself with my Daughter directly or indirectly, but
both Parties to remain as Persons that never had any manner of concern
together, or that ever had heard the one of the other: Farthermore I do
declare, That my Daughter being so young, as that the Custom of Women had not
passed upon her, Benjamin Albyn did object, that immediate Marriage was
untimely, and such present Copulation with her might cause her to be
perpetually Barren.

In witness to all the Premises, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this 17th
Day of May, Anno 1680. John Freeman, Locus Sigilli.
Signed and Sealed in the presence of us,

John Luke, D. D. John Ashby.




True Copies of those Two Letters mentioned in Mr John Freeman's Discharge,
viz. the 3d of April and 13th of May, 1680, are as follows, viz.
Ever Honored Mother. Dear Madam, Smyrna, April 3. 1680.
THE above written 26th of March is a Copy of my last, since which none from
you, so shall be the more brief: these serve for good usance, and to advise
you, that the consideration of my Years now being the only Son of my Father,
deceased, together with the evil Designs and malicious Projects of Mr. Jollifse
for mine utter ruin and overthrow, which may be called Provocations to
Bloodshed, if ever I should have met with him in England; to avoid which, I
thought the only remedy was to stay here, and so to order mine Affairs
accordingly; the main particular whereof, if I now give you to understand, I
hope will be no trouble to you, but rather upon a deliberate consideration of
the Premises, together with the grand imbroyles now in England, you will be fully
satisfied, and think with me, that if it comes to pass that God Almighty has
ordered by his Providence all things for the best; and if in his Providence he
shall disappoint or hinder the matter I have so far engaged in, still it is for
the best: On him alone I rely to effect or disappoint my Marriage with a young
Maid upwards of 12, but not quite 13 Years old, expected to come out of England
upon the Ship Mary and Martha, one of the Companies general Ships, according to
the order of her Parents (residing here) at my request. I having promised that
at her arrival, in case she can like to love me and I her, I would marry her,
telling them also my Grievances with Mr. Jollife, and how I am unwilling to
lose more time. Now though Mr. Jollife be dead, as I hear, yet if she comes out
I cannot think of breaking my Word or doing any thing contrary to my Promise:
for I look upon such things to be Sacred, notwithstanding I have given neither
Bill nor Bond, nor any manner of Script for my compliance, it is probable that
she being so very young may be afrighted at my Mustaches, they being somewhat
large; and if it be so I Will promise you not to shave off one Hair of them. Also
I told her Parents that I would ask her the Question once, it may be twice; but
after once denial I would ask it no more, nor would I inveagle my self in Love,
or give any manner of Present before she become my Wife; because, that in case
she should not match or agree, that then no Monuments of mine Intentions should
remain in her Hands; so now how the Business may succeed God only knows. I pray
God direct all things for the best, and direct your Heart to put up such
Petitions for me, as may be most agreeable to his Will for my welfare, who begs
your Blessing and daily Prayers for me, who am,

Dear Mother, Your most Dutiful Son, Benjamin Albyn.


M. Dear and ever Honored Mother. Dear Madam, Smyrna, May 13. 1680.
IN my last, which was the 3d of April, I advised you in what manner I stood
near the point of Marriage; I come now to acquaint you, that though my Mistress
be arrived the 2d Instant, yet I am not married, neither do I intend it till I
have your Consent, though according to my promise before her arrival, I have
asked her the Question, and she has answered me Yes, and I have owned her
before the World to be mine, and that for my sake her Parents sent for her
over, so do now look upon my self obliged to marry her if you shall please to
give your consent, if not, to maintain her till she shall be as well provided
for; wherefore I desire you to consider of the point, for as I have sought not
to sin against God by offending you, so please not to make me sin against God
by offending her. Also I do intend to come home for England with her, and with
your leave to marry her in your presence: Her Parents are very urgent with me
to marry her here, but I tell them I cannot do it without your consent, in
regard now the state of things are altered by reason of Mr. Jollifse's death;
which if had not happened, I should not then have taken this Latitude of
deferring the Business, but rather should have relied on your Clemency for the
pardon of such an Action, because of the Exigency he put me on in his lifetime
by his unjust and unreasonable dealings. Here enclosed send you an Authentic
Copy of Mr. North's Declaration, how he found mine Accounts of Mr. Jollife's
Concerns in my Hands, which you may please to communicate to any Friends; which
being the needful, I humbly beg your Blessing and daily Prayers for me, who am,

Dear Mother, Your most Dutiful Son, Benjamin Albyn.


Which said Discharge, preceding the two Letters, being drawn and delivered
with Mr. Freeman's own Hand into mine own Hand as his Act and Deed, in the
presence of Dr. Luke and Mr. Ashby, he went his way very well pleased. The next
Day I sent him an Horse, which if he had been in England I do believe might
have yielded a brace of hundred pounds or more moneys; and to his Wife I sent a
piece of very fine watered Camblet, which I bought at Angora, in my return from
Jerusalem, as Presents; and to his Daughter I did give a good new pair of
fringed Gloves and a laced Neckcloth (which I received by the then general
Ships) for her to present her Father with, though I think I never had so much
as one word of Thanks for any one thing they had of me from any one of them.
The next day, according to promise, I went for my Discharge from his Daughter,
and dined with them: So after Dinner, sitting altogether, I spoke to the
Daughter, and said, Madam, you know there has been Overtures of Marriage
betwixt us, and our progress therein was more than a little one; but I do
suppose your Parents have told you the reason wherefore it cannot be: Then said
she, Whereas before, by my Father and Mother's advice, I said you Yea, so now I
say you Nay, wiping her Eyes with her Handkerchief (which indeed did so cut me
to the heart, that I do believe I should not have been able to have left her
so, in case Mr. Ashby had not been there, whom I took care to get go along with
me for fear mine Affections should betray me:) then rising off my Seat, I made
my conjey, and bowed, and so went away with the Noise of her Mother's heavy
Curse execrating of me; but what the Words were, I have utterly forgotten;
which I thought was monstrous strange, when the thing that was done was purely
and only their own seeking, according to their own desire: (but I was wholly
silent without making any reply:) but, it seems, it is the Sharpers way and
method, as I have been informed since.

Thus having finished all my proceedings about the Marriage with Mr. Freeman's
Daughter, I went no more to Mr. Freeman's house, nor did I see any of them any
more, unless on Sundays at Church, and sometimes meeting them accidentally in
the Street, or at the English Houses, where sometimes we did chance to eat
together; and my design being to leave the place for fear of being captivated
in mine Affections, which I found inclining toward her, I did, to my great
damage, leave much of my concerns at Smyrna, and imbark my self on the Ship
Smyrna Merchant, Captain Vdall Commander (one of the Fleet my Mistress came out
upon) on the 3d day of August Anno 1680, for Leghorne, in order to my return
for England, having the Evening before supt with Mr. Freeman, his Wife and
Daughter, at their House: And next morning having been at every English House,
I came at last to them to take my leave, and breakfasted with them; and at
taking my leave of their Daughter, I advised her to behave her self
circumspectly and virtuously, and I would still endeavor to get my Mothers
consent to marry her. So saluting her, and bidding her farewell, she gave me a
fine Cambrick Handkerchief, which I took and put up; then giving to her Maid
ten Dollars into her hand, I did give her Maid great Charge to take great care
of her Mistress and her Reputation: So taking my leave of all, I went down
their stairs, and walked to my own Scale; and embarked as aforesaid. After I
came to Leghorne, I wrote her a Letter, and sent her a small Present of a Roman
Fann, which she did receive, and kindly answer; so that I do believe there was
no want of true Love and very cordial Affection toward each other, and nothing
but purely the covetousness and the evil designs of her Parents to pretend by
signing Articles to draw us together in our Affections and Inclinations to each
other, and then to declare them foolish Articles, and they would not value
them, but fully intend to break them after Marriage, that so by baffling me
they might bereave me of what possibly they could get from me, and remain in
their luxurious way of life; without being beholding any longer to the Factory;
And also be enabled to pay some debts, that were very pressing upon them. Now
they having accomplished their design, Mr. Freeman being desirous to be
accounted wise and wary, so as to prevent all accidents in any business he
undertook, thought fit (knowing me to be a man that would not talk much of my
matters in all Companies) to report and give the World to understand, that
whatsoever I had given him, was but according to mine Obligation or Bond given
him for performance, before he would send for his Daughter; and though in his
conscience he knew the contrary, yet he making such report for many years
together without my contradiction or saying otherwise, or any thing to the
contrary, has (as I suppose) made himself believe it to be true, or else why
should he adventure to swear so diametrically contrary here in England, to what
in Smyrna was really acted; And he gave freely under his own Hand and Seal,
attested by two Witnesses, Dr. John Luke, D. D. and Mr. John Ashby; the words
of which are before mentioned in his Discharge; and the Words of his Oath are
as follows, viz. in his Answer to my Cross bill preferred against Richard
Blackam and John Freeman, filed in the Lord Mayor of London's Court of Equity,
4th of March 1695/6, as follows: viz.

Jurat XIII July, 1696. Cor Roberto Jeffyrle.
This Defendant absolutely denies that he ever had six Bales of Cloth of the
Complainant of the value of Three thousand Dollars, for which he was to give to
the Complainant any account whatsoever; but this Defendant says true it is,
that in and about the Year of Our Lord 1680, being at Smyrna, and the
Complainant having grossly and perfidiously broke his Word and Faith with this
Defendant, to the great damage of this Defendant; the said Complainant did
referr the said Difference to Arbitrators, who did adjust the said Difference
with this Defendant and the Complainant, and awarded the Complainant to pay
unto this Defendant the Sum of One thousand weighty Dollars to the best of
this Defendant's remembrance: But when this Defendant came to the Complainant
for his Money, the Complainant told this Defendant he would pay him this
Defendant in Money if he this Defendant insisted on it, but showed this
Defendant six Bales, which he said was Cloth; and told this Defendant, that he
believed that it would be as much for this Defendant's interest, as for the
Complainant's convenience, to accept of the six Bales of Cloth in lieu and
instead of the thousand Dollars, and showed this Defendant the Invoices of
them, that this Defendant might see they were rather better than the said
thousand weighty Dollars, and told this Defendant might thereby see that he the
said Complainant dealt friendly by this Defendant, and studied more this
Defendant's interest than his own; and thereupon this Defendant accepted of the
six Bales of Cloth, and in satisfaction of the said One thousand weighty
Dollars, and on no other account or condition whatsoever; and did then give the
Complainant an Acquittance for the same.


Now I do know that he did never see, nor did I ever show him the Invoice of
the Cloth; for my design in giving him the Cloth, was, that he should never be
able to say to what value I had given him; and though he swears that the thirty
Cloths he received of me were not worth Dollars three thousand, yet I am sure I
made more of Cloths inferior to them; and since that Clothes which cost here
in England two and three Pounds per Cloth less than they cost, have been sold
in Turkey for Dollars 110 and 120 per Cloth.

By his Discharge, signed and sealed with his own hand at Smyrna, dated the
17th of May, Anno Christi 1680, in the Presence of two Witnesses, viz. Dr. John
Luke and Mr. John Ashby, it is,

First, Apparent that he and his Wife did warrant their Daughter marriagable,
when she was not, which is a Fraud.

Secondly, It is apparent she did not come out by the first Ship, according to
the Agreement; and consequently I was free from any Obligation to ask her the
Question.

Thirdly, It is apparent that there was no manner of Script for the performance
of any Agreement, and consequently 'twas highly scandalous and injurious in him
to report that I had given him my Bond to pay him so much in case I did not
marry his Daughter.

Fourthly, It is apparent that I did, according to promise, ask his Daughter's
consent, and thereupon did endeavor honestly to marry her, both of us thinking
our selves obliged to be Husband and Wife to each other (her Father having tied
us with the Ceremony of a Glass of Wine.

Fifthly, It is apparent that there was a Proviso made for my mother to give
her Consent, and therefore 'twas highly scandalous and false for Mr. Freeman to
swear that I had grossly and perfidiously broke my Word and Faith with him to
his great damage.

Sixthly, It is apparent that for the obtaining my Mother's consent, I had
wrote two Letters effectually to my Mother under the 3d of April and 13th of
May 1680; and consequently as I ought to have stayed for an Answer, so he ought
not to have urged and pressed me to have married his Daughter before 'twas
possible an Answer could come.

Seventhly, It is apparent, that the business was begun purely and solely upon
parole, so I think in honor and honesty I ought to have gone on upon parole to
marry her with my Mothers consent, my parole being as good at last as at first.

Eighthly, It is apparent that it was by no means satisfactory to the Parents
for me to go on upon parole with my Mother's consent (though 'twas the
Agreement,) because I did not immediately marry her in a clandestine manner,
contrary to the Agreement; and consequently Mr. Freeman did basely,
treacherously, grossly and perfidiously break his Word and Faith with me, and
not as he has most falsely sworn I did so by him.

Ninthly, It is apparent that their pretended Discontents with me for going on
honestly according to agreement, was injurious and highly fallacious to demand
and take any thing of me for their Charges and Disbursements, and is plainly a
Cheat upon me for being honest, and keeping to my Word and Agreement.

Tenthly, It is apparent, upon the whole matter, that after Mr. Freeman had
given me his Daughter, so far as before God to be my Wife, he himself having
with the Ceremony of a Glass of Wine participated amongst us all four; viz.
himself, his Wife, my self and his Daughter, solemnized a strong Tie upon us
all, not to be broken: Yet notwithstanding all that, he broke the contracted
Covenant and took his Daughter from me; and by a pretended Grief and
unsupportable Discontents and Disorders in his Family bereaved me of very
considerable Substance to support them in their deplorable Condition, as 'twas
represented to me to obtain my compassion.

Eleventhly, It is apparent that he does declare and confess that his Daughter
was so young, that the Custom of Women had not passed upon her, and
consequently must not then be marriagable; and therefore according to the
Agreement ought and might have stayed for an Answer from my Mother.

Twelfthly, It is apparent that I did object that immediate Marriage was
untimely, and such present Copulation with her might cause her to be
perpetually Barren; and therefore he ought not so unjustly and unlawfully to
have pressed me to do that which upon all accounts whatsoever ought not to be
done, but according to agreement ought to have let me go on fairly and honestly
to do and perform, in its due time, what ought to have been done; and, in all
probability, by that time, his Daughter might have proved marriageable; and
then, as I had intended, nothing should have hindered for having passed the
Obligation of her Father's ceremonious Glass of Wine. I intended no farther
delay than the time of getting mine House ready and in order, as may appear by
the truth of the relation of the matter before set forth in this Narrative. In
his Answer to my Bill he seems extremely indifferent and careless, as though he
were not upon his Oath.

Also it is apparent (by the words his Daughter pronounced to me when she
discharged me, saying, Whereas by my Father's and Mother's advice I said you
Yea, so now I say you Nay) that they falsified their Word and broke their
Promise made unto me, not to persuade her to say or do any thing, but purely to
leave her to her own Inclinations.

Also he swears he gave me a Discharge for the six Bales of Cloth, and there is
not one word of Cloth mentioned in his Discharge; and I never had any other
Discharge from him.

Also, how is it possible for him to swear truly, and say, True it is, that in
the Year of Our Lord 1680, being at Smyrna, and the Complainant having grossly
and perfidiously broken his Word and Faith with this Defendant, to his great
damage; the Defendant did referr the said Difference to Arbitrators, who did
adjust the said Difference with this Defendant and Complainant to pay this
Defendant One thousand weighty Dollars, when by his Discharge, under his own
Hand and Seal, he does acknowledge the truth of the Matter of fact; and therein
declare, That, according to promise, Benjamin Albyn did, on the 8 th of May,
ask her Consent which she having given with the word Yes, both Parties looked
upon themselves as Husband and Wife to each other, provided the Mother of
Benjamin Albyn gave her Consent, for the obtaining of which, the said Benjamin
Albyn had wrote two Letters affectually to his Mother, under the Dates of 3 d
April and 13 th instant May: Which being matter of fact, how is it possible to
agree with what he has sworn? is it not quite contrary? In his Discharge he
does not make mention of any Reference, neither indeed was there any Reference,
or a word of a Reference, mentioned by any manner of person whatsoever, or
offered or spoken by him to me, or by me to him; neither was there any
opportunity for it; nor did I ever entertain any such thoughts, being under no
Obligation; for in his Discharge he says himself, That as the business was
begun purely and solely upon parole, and Benjamin Albyn was resolved to
accomplish the thing only upon parole, without any manner of script or writing.
And after I had told him of his unfair dealing and intentions, not to value the
Articles he had signed to me after I had married his Daughter, and how for that
reason I would not marry his Daughter in that Country, but would endeavor to
do it in England, and he had refused that Offer: He went his way, and I saw him
no more, nor heard a word from him, until from Mr. Ashby, who came with him to
me in the Visier's Haune, 17th May in the Afternoon, according to mine own
appointment for him, to receive and take that satisfaction he himself had
desired Mr. Ashby to propose to me in the Morning (as before is set forth;)
although, for mine own part, before Mr. Ashby spoke to me, I was so far from
any thoughts of a Reference, that I intended to go home with her and marry her
in my Mother's presence, as may appear by my Letter wrote to my Mother the 13th
of May, which was about two days after Mr. Freeman had bin gone from me, and
had seen no more till then with Mr. Ashby; for I did look upon her so much
mine, that in case her Parents had refused, I should have desired the Consul,
by his Authority, to Aid and Assist me to have taken her off the place, and
brought her home with me for England. So the pretended Reference is altogether
notorious, false, and plainly scandalous; and what I gave him, was by no manner
of compulsion or persuasion, but purely in generosity to his Daughter, and out
of pity and compassion to her distressed Parents, Father and Mother being in
such a lamentable condition, as for many days not to eat, drink or sleep, but
in great Agony, to tear the hair of her head, as I was told the Mother did;
Therefore Mr. Freeman is monstrous ungrateful and impudent in his Assertion
upon Oath.

Now although Mr. Freeman may think that the Estate that his Brother did get in
the East Indies; and dying there, did give, and carefully leave to be made home
to him here* and thereby he being possessed of a considerable Estate, which may
be sufficient to support him not only in his impudent insoleney, to tell me I
had eaten shame and drank after it, and would sit upon my Skirts, only for
sitting civilly, and friendly conversing with my old friends and acquaintance,
because he came by chance into the Room and found us so doing; (I think none
but a base born Beggar, raised to his Estate, would do the like;) but also in
his monstrous ingratitude for my Bounty to him in his extreme low condition;
and upon his Oath falsely to tax me with grossly and perfidiously breaking my
Word and Faith with him to his great damage, when by no manner of Obligation I
was by Word or Deed in any-wise indebted to him the value of one farthing, or
had broken any promise, but had performed my promise; and did voluntarily, at
his desire (by a friend made known to me) supply him so far, as not only to
enable him to pay his Debts, but also to live freely in the World, without
being beholden to others for his support, before he was possessed of his
Brother's Estate: I say, if all things (besides the Laws and good Manners
amongst Men) be duly considered, the Estate cannot reasonably support or excuse
so vile a humor and base inclination: For I do very well remember, that before
the East India Company did admit and send his Brother into the East Indies,
(where he did get the Estate,) his Father did obsequiously come with abundance
of cringing, and much more humility and humble entreaties than was expected or
desired for many days Morning and Evening unto my Father, being then a Member
of the East India Companies Committee, to entreat and importune him to use his
interest with the rest of the Committee, so as to prevail with them to send his
Son to East India in the Company's Service; which was not easy to obtain, by
reason of his deformity and infirmity of Lameness; for they do not use to send
such infirm persons in their Employment, having always their choice of complete
persons offered to them for their employment: And accordingly my Father did
prevail with them, so that he was sent as desired; and in case my Father had
not befriended him with diligent Endeavors, I question whether he would have
bin admitted by the East India Company. And therefore I do think that this his
dishonorable, unjust and scandalous dealing by me, as mentioned and expressed
herein, ought to be so far from being countenanced or endured, that he ought
not only to refund with interest what in honor I gave him for the honorable
maintenance of true love and friendship, and for the prevention of such
abominable Complaints, with which he has ever since, for so many years, laden
and scandalized me: I say, I think he ought to repair and give me satisfaction
for so base and vile an injury, besides for many other Grievances he has
multiplied upon me. Now in case he had not intended to had owned himself to be
really satisfied with what in his Discharge he owns to have received, and
therein calls it a full and valuable Consideration; why should he take from me
so much more than was due to him, and revile me for it ever since, and at the
last represent me to be guilty of his own manifest Abominations and Villainies?
And though I may or do think that his Estate is not sufficient to make me
recompense for the many Wrongs and Injuries he has done unto me, yet upon a
due and true Acknowledgment thereof, I may be content with such moderate
things, as to the just and reasonable may seem most meet and fitting. I do most
heartily desire to follow Peace with all Men; but I do experimentally find,
silently and quietly to be bereft of both Estate and Reputation, is not the way
thereunto: And for that reason it is that I do now come forth to seek
Restitution and Satisfaction by way of Justice, or else my Dissolution, by the
means of his and others unparalleled Malice. When I was a Schoolboy, *it was
then said, Quanto altior es tanto te geras submissius: And I have not since
heard of any Statute or Command that says, If thou art rich, thou shall be
proud and insolent.

Now this Affair of Matrimony troubling my Mind very much, I, to divert my
Melancholy, did make it, 27th of Febr. 1681/2, before I got to London, (though
I rid Post almost all the way from Leghorne) which was near 19 months from
Smyrna; though if I should recount how long I stayed in every place, there
would appear but a very little, if any time to move.

Now being come home, I expected to have received of Mr. Samuel Moyer, being
Mr. Jollife's Executor, the Balance of Mr. Jollife's Account due to me, being
Lion Dollars 8181 and 37 Aspers, but in the stead thereof, as I was told, that
by Mr. Moyer's means 'twas reported on the Exchange, that I owed to Mr.
Jollife's Estate 10000 pounds. So it seems Mr. Moyer's diligence against me was
not only to ruin my Credit abroad when abroad, but at home when at home: And
to make it more manifest, in November following preferred a Bill in Chancery
against me, wherein I was set forth as one of the vilest of Men; where after
about five years Dispute and great Charges, Mr. Moyer was decreed to pay unto
me the Sum of Six hundred forty eight pounds Sterling, and five pounds for
Costs only, being an Executor. Afterward, as I was advised, I did get my
Decree signed and enrolled, that so he might not trouble me any more: But
however, upon the Revolution of the Government, three of his Council being made
Lords Commissioners for the Custody of the Great or Broad-Seal, Mr. Moyer
brought his Bill of Review before them; then they (without giving any reason
that ever I heard of) reversed the Decree, set aside the Enrollment, and
ordered the Cause to be reheard ab origin, whiles I was about my Business at
Portsmouth; and though before I went, having had notice of their Design, I
fee'd my Counsel with sundry Guineas to each, yet because the Cause came not on
the first day 'twas appointed, it seems they expected (as they call it)
refreshing Fees, as my Solicitor told me; and because I omitted so to do,
little or no defense was made for me; my Opinion being, that 'twas an
unreasonable thing to give extravagant Fees for nothing, because the putting
off was not my fault, and I had not any Money but what with great care, hazard
and trouble I had obtained by the Sweat of my Brows in my way of Merchandise:
So the Cause coming to be heard accordingly, one of the Lords Commissioners of
the Great Seal, without hearing much of the matter, before the Cause was fully
opened, said, He would make short work, he knew the Cause very well, 'twas nine
Years and an half old, and 'twas time to make an end of it; and ordered and
decreed me to pay back the Money's with Interest which I had received of Mr.
Moyer, and 6977 Dollars besides; whereupon in my mind I did resolve to bring
mine Appeal to Parliament* and accordingly I did avoid being served with the
Decretal Order, because I would avoid running into the Contempts of the Court
of Chancery: So not finding to serve me with the Decretal Order, Mr. Moyer took
out a Statute of Bankrupt against me, thereby to execute the Decree, and
labored extremely to find out some body to join with him to make me a
Bankrupt, but could find none; the like was never known or done by any man to
any man, as I have been told by the most learned and knowing able Lawyers: So
this is apparently a Grievance without any President, and the ill Consequences
have been many and great upon me, and those that were my Friends are become
Strangers unto me, if not utter Enemies: And though he could not prove me a
Bankrupt, yet the Commissioners sat five times (as I have been told) to make me
so, and assigned my Goods of some thousands of pounds value upon the Turkey
Ships unto Mr. Moyer, and sent the Commission on Board the said Ships; soon
after they arrived in the River of Thames from Turkey, and there pretended me a
Bankrupt; whereupon I went upon the Exchange and arrested Mr. Moyer, and told
the Commanders of the Ships, That if they delivered any part of my Goods to Mr.
Moyer, I would arrest them. So with extravagant Charges and much ado I saved
them out of his Hands. Afterward I made my Appeal to Parliament, who did upon
hearing the Cause most honorably and justly reverse the Decree (of Reversal)
and so confirm my first Decree, for which their Justice I pray God reward them
Eternally; but leaving me to the Law for the Recovery of my Damages sustained
by the Statute of Bankrupt. I brought mine Action against Mr. Moyer for Twenty
thousand pounds, that being the Sum that some of them said they had heard
people say I was worth (in the Court when the Commissioners were sitting upon
the Statute;) and said moreover, Now we shall see whether he be worth it or no.
Now the Action being brought to a Trial before the Lord Chief Justice at Guld
hall, London, Anno 1691, having subpoena'd in about Twenty-six Witnesses; and
though all came, yet hardly four of them were called or examined. I did not
doubt, but being to answer upon their Oaths, they would speak the truth of what
they knew; but, contrary to expectation, one of them that had told my Mother,
that Mr. Moyer was resolved to use all the rigor that possibly he could
against me, did upon his Oath tell the Court, That he never heard Mr. Moyer to
speak against me, but did always speak with very great respect and kindly of
me, or to that effect. And another of my Witnesses (on purpose as it is
supposed) (which I thought had been my particular Friend (and had been very
kind unto me in the time the Commissioners sat upon the Statute to tear me into
pieces) I according to the utmost of my mean Ability did endeavor to requite
him, by taking all manner of occasions to do good for him and his; as for
instance, One Mr. Thomas Barnadiston being in Partnership with one John Barton
mine Apprentice, in the Office of Factor Marine at Scandaroon, being both dead,
he came to me and told me, That John Barton died indebted to Mr. Barnadiston
the Sum of one thousand Dollars, or thereabout; and upon his desire I did
promise him to use mine Endeavors to get it for him when John Barton's Effects
should be gotten home* Now I having made him this promise, and mine Intentions
being to go for Dublin in Ireland, and there to stay until near the time that
the Parliament were to sit in November following, when I did design to return
and bring mine Appeal, I thought it both just and kind to go and acquaint him
with it, which I did in the same words, and at the same time I did endorse and
deliver to him Bills of Lading for some of mine own proper Goods, both Silk and
Gauls, laden on the Turkey Ships then expected home from Turkey, that so out of
them he might be fully satisfied what was due for John Barton's Debt, which I
had promised to endeavor to get for him, which he seemed to be well pleased
and satisfied withal. Now John Barton, though he was mine Apprentice, and had
sundry Years to serve me, yet he needed not to have gone to that fatal place of
Scandaroon, had not some busy People persuaded him to it, by telling strange
Tales of great Preferment, which made him come and beg of me to let him embrace
the offer, and that I would not withstand his Preferment. So after I had given
him mine Opinion and Advice against it (having been there twice my self) and
had told him, I intended other things for him, I left him at his liberty; so he
went, although in the time he had lived with me at Smyrna, he had gained better
than 1200 pounds from little or nothing. For I was so far from lessening him
(by receiving and delivering Bags with Money under his Seal, to make good what
should be wanting, as I have been told has been the practice of one that
thinks himself a great Man here in England, whose Cash being always very
considerable, would make his Apprentice receive all his Moneys; and when he had
made up an even hundred pounds in a Bag, then he was to seal it up, and so
deliver it to his Master; and when 'twas to be paid out, the Apprentice was to
tell it, and whatsoever was wanting he made good, being under his own Seal,
although, it seems, his Master would rip up the Seams of the Baggs and take out
what Money he pleased, and then sew the Baggs up again. I say, I was so far
from such vile practices, that I did encourage and countenance him in all
honest ways of getting and improving, and was always well-pleased to see him do
well.

Also having showed him the very Individual Accounts relating to the Factor
Marine Duties due to Mr. T. Barnadiston and J. Barton, which I received from
Mr. Thomas Hatton dwelling then at Alleppo, that so a due allowance might be
made, he called them sham Accounts, and would by no means referr the
Consideration thereof to any Man, though I offered it with all the Mildness
that could be; true Copies whereof are here inserted.

Mr. Thomas Wilson Debtor L Dol. Asp. To Dol. 2500 per the Blossom 2 40 5
Busts Rhubarb per the Ponte de Oro 3 55 5 Bal. Filadoes Dol. 3 55 05 4 Tela L.
D. 2 64 per Aylsbury 6 39 20 Sa. Gauls per Mary Pink with Primage 13 74 9 Busts
Drug. L. D. 6 51 one Ba. Pint. L. D. 56 7 27 30 Sa. Cotton asp. 69 is l. d. 25
70 and 4 Ba. Tela l. d. 2. 64. 28 54 Capt* Ranson by your ord. for fresh
Provisions 15 Mr. N. Hill per your ord. 2 Sheep at d. 2 per S. 5 Capt. Phil.
Edwards by your ord. for fresh Prove. 10 36 Ba. Clo per the Chandois 20 56
Cotton To. 24 on 10 Ba. ld. 12 be at To. 30 asp. 3 d. imb. l. d. 1 20 14 30 Fr.
2 Canvasses from Marscillia 1 40 Cambio 114 Ba. at d. per P. and 4 per Cent. 2
22 131 37 Deducted for To. 24 Cons. l* d. 12 be at do. as* 72 overchar. having
then 8 Lab. and To. 6 Cot. 12 72 Memorandum, that Mr. Barton's half of this
Bill was received by Mr. Barnadiston. 118 45

Mr* Edmond Sayer Debtor L Dol. Asp. To 5 Ba. Tela per the Aylesbury at as. 46.
per Ba. 3 40 40 Sa. Ashes per the Mary Pink at asp. 10 per Sa* out the James 5
90 S. Ash per Bloss lad. on the Mary at 20 per S. 22 40 weighing 30 Sa* at asp.
3 per Sa. 1 10 48 Sa. Gauls on the Mary Pink at 49 as. per Sa. 51 36 7 Ba.
Filado's on do. Pink as* 49 per Ba. 4 23 Primage as. 130 Sa. Ashes and 48 Sa.
Gauls at 12 Sa to a l. d. 17 67 Primage 2 Ba. Tella 2 Sa* Cot. and 300 Ba* Fill.
4 20 Hoops, Nails, Cooper. etc. on your Sug. Cask 2 60 3 Ba. Goats-wool per
Pallestine. 2 17 open* drying, steev. and imb. as. 1 Ba. do. Go* w. 60 Dol 3600
per the Chandoise and a Chest 4 48 12 pieces of Canvas 4 To. packthread
delivered your Serve. Usuph. 15 27 2 Ba. Pistaches per Mercarius for Live. 1 38 2
Ba. Pistaches* per Capt. Odor for Mars. 1 38 Camb. on 136 pieces at dol. per p.
and 4 per cent. 2 58 Memorandum, that Mr. Sayer did make good to Mr.
Barnadiston this Account, as per Account current delivered Mr. Prescot, so you
must demand the half of said Sum as being due to Mr. Barton, of Mr. Arthur
Barnadiston in London, as being Executor to the deceased Thomas Barnadiston.
141 22 Written by T. H.

Mr. Edw. Dunch Debtor L. Dol. Asp. To 3 Ba. Cloth on the Blossom 1 58 Dol.
3600 on do. Ship and a Chest. 4 48 Imbals 3 Ba. Cloth into 7 Ba. at as. 10 per
Ba. 70 To. 14 of Cot. be at Canv. Packthr. d* 1 as. 45 10 75 61 Sa. Gauls per
do. Ship Blossom as. 49 Primage 12 Sa. to a Dol. 42 35 46 Ba. Filad per do.
Ship as. 49 per Ba. with Pr. 33 74 92 Ba. Clo. per Chandois as. 46 and 20 Bar.
tyn. as. 49 and Dol. 1500. 66 52 imb. tyn into 8 Ba. at th per Ba. 1 Canvas and
Packthread per Bale 2 Cambio on 222 ps. l. d. per p. and 4 per cent. 4 35 168
47

Mr. Thomas Pagett Debtor L. Dol. Asp. To 2 Bales Silk per the Aylesbury 1 38 4
Bales Silk per the James 2 76 2 Busts Rhuburb per the Pallastine 1 38 58 Bales
Cloth per the Chandois 33 28 In cottoning 28 Ba. do. at as. 10 Packthread as. 2
per Ba. 4 16 Beating To. 84 of Cotton at as. 3 per To. 3 12 Cambio on ps. 66 at
Dol. per ps. and 4 per cent. 1 25 47 73

Mr. Edward Fisher Debtor L. Dol. Asp. To Dol. 2000 per the Pallastine and 2
Chests 4 00 2 Bales Silk per the James 1 38 60 Bales Filado's per the Blossom
and 6 Bales Silk at asp. 59 48 54 39 Bales Tela per do. Ship at asp. 56 per
Bale 27 24 52 Sacks Gauls laden on the Archangel 36 15 8 Chests Galbanum per
do. Ship asp. 59 5 72 6 Bales Silk per the Aylesbury asp. 59. 4 34 opening,
drying, and re-imbaling 60 Bales of Filado's at dol. per Bale 45 00 50 Bales
Cloth per the Chandois 28 60 imbaling 3 Bales do. at th per Bale with Labetts,
Packthread asp. 2 00 36 Cambio on 225 pieces at dol. per piece and 4 per cent.
4 38 206 58

Also having seen an Account of some Moneys received and paid, which I gave to
one to be showed to any one to see if there were any Error in it, I would
rectify it; he, without demonstration of any Error, called it a Knavish
Account; a true Copy of the particular Sums is here inserted, that still, if
any one can assign, or show me any Error therein, I am still desirous it should
be rectified, but I know of none.

Cash is Debtor To Money Received foll. lb. s. d. Anno 1682, on the 20 May
received 200 1685/6, on the 9 Jan. 305 08 1686, on the 21 July 162 15 10 25
October 50 29 November. 50 1686/7, on the 25 Febr. 100 1688, on the 22 August 421
11 7 1689, on the 14 December. 14 11 6 1690, on the 4 November. 52 02 8 1356 09 7

Whereas by the particular Payments on the other side it may appear how
irregular and unduely Moneys at Interest of 5 per Cent. per Ann. were paid, I
being without due warning desired to pay whatsoever Sums, whenever demanded;
and being all along perplexed with the excessive trouble of Lawsuits, yet my
desire being, that right may be done without wronging any, I have made up this
Account according to the best of my Skill, and if any Error be found I desire
it may be rectified.

Cash is Creditor By Money paid particularly as foll. Anno lb. s. d. 1682 Aug.
20. 2 10 December. 4. 2 10 1683 May 25. 2 10 Aug. 17. 2 10 Sept. 19. 3 October. 12.
5 Jan. 4. 2 10 Jan. 28. 1 Febr. 4. 1 1684 April 19* 1 May 8. 1 June 3. 1 June
19. 2 June 28. 5 July 12. 7 Sept. 26. 10 October. 3. 1 October. 21. 2 10 Nov. 3. 2
Dec. 19. 1 Jan. 26. 10 Febr. 19. 2 Mar. 24. 10 1685 May 21. 6 1 6 May 29. 3 5
June 11. 1 July 3. 41 10 Aug. 5 1 Aug. 6. 7 Oct. 29. 13 3 Nov. 17. 50 1685/6
Jan. 9. 162 15 10 Jan. 19 37 Jan. 28. 10 Febr. 8. 5 Febr. 15. 70 Febr. 26. 6
more 10 1686 Mar. 25. 5 Mar. 30. 5 Car. to next 502 5 4 Anno lb. s. d. 1686
July 23. 62 15 10 Nov. 17. 50 Dec. 23. 2 1686/7 Jan. 18. 5 Jan. 19. 2 Febr. 25.
2 Mar. 23. 12 1687 Aug. 30. 5 1687/8 Mar. 22. 7 10 1688 Oct. 12. 7 10 Oct. 13.
70 10 6 Oct. 19. 2 Oct. 26. 115 more 26 4 Aug. 22. 216 13 4 Nov. 6. 12 2 Nov.
13. 3 5 Dec. 14. 1 5 1688/9 Febr. 28. 4 5 1690 June 14. 18 15 Aug. 6. 3 Sept.
1. 3 15 Dec. 16. 3 15 1690/1 Mar. 10. 3 15 1691 May 14. 3 15 May 18. 20 1692
Jan. 20 20 1693 May 12. 3 June 1. 10 June 23. 1 more 24 7 Sept. 15 1 10 Sept.
29. 1 13 1693/4 Jan. 11. 2 15 Febr. 1. 18 Mar. 12. 134 5 7 854 04 03 Brought
hith. 502 05 04 1356 09 07 Allowed and paid for Interest 111 16 09 Make in all
1468 06 04

But having brought him acquainted with Mr. (since Sir Richard) Blackam, who
has, it seems, both diligently and secretly spread and whispered about,
amongst People, as bad an Opinion of me as it is possible for one Man to have of
another, as I have been told (but what it is I cannot be informed.) This my
Friend became mine utter Enemy, insomuch that when I went to him for a Receipt
and Discharge for John Barton's Debt which he had received; as I was going out
of his House he laid his Hand on my Shoulder and pushed me out, claping the
Door of his House very hard upon me, having but just before in his House told
me, That if he had known so much of me before as he had since been informed, he
would never have had to do with me. Also) when he came to give his Evidence
upon Oath, he declared, That I came voluntarily to him with Bills of Lading, as
aforesaid, because I intended to go beyond Sea; whereupon I went to him in the
Court, and whispering in his Ear, I said, I do not remember that ever I snake
such a word to you: Then said he, did you not tell me, that you intended to go
to Dublin in Ireland: Then, said I, you should inform the Court so; but he
would not (though I never pronounced the words beyond Sea unto him, and for me
to speak my self, was to ruin my Cause, as I had been formerly told by the
Lawyers in another Case, when I spoke to the Judge, the Judge bid me speak to
my Counsel, for the Lawyers Maxim is, by no means to suffer a Clyent to speak
in his own Cause, for that they will tell him, will ruin his Cause.) So the
Judge and Jury finding by his Evidence, that I intended to go away beyond Sea,
so as that no body should know whither or where to find me, or hear of me, they
without stirring from their place, gave their Verdict against me, as it is
supposed; and though I would not, yet one of my Counsel that knew how to favor
Mr. Moyer, would and did appear to the Verdict whether I would or not, though I
would gladly have had a Trial at Bar, for they went not out of the Court: So in
the stead of recovering Damages, I was forced to pay Mr. Moyer's Attorney
thirteen Pounds and thirteen Shillings Costs; although the Lord Chief Justice
had declared, That all my Declaration was proved except the Malice, and that
the taking out the Statute was an undue way of proceeding, and 'twas the Act of
the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, and not Mr. Moyer 's, for, or
because, said he, what he did was by the Advice of his Counsel; yet my remedy
at Law did lie against the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal, and them only
(or to such like Purposes;) but would not the World think and say, I were Mad
if I should go to law with the Judges; and though I have received such a
Direction from a Judge, may, or ought not I without offense to consider the
Improbability of Success and the excessive Charge in the Attempt; or perhaps
the Judge knowing the unpracticableness thereof, spoke it on purpose to take me
off from all manner of thoughts for seeking any manner of Remedy; for I do
understand it is a most heinous Crime to make any Discovery or Complaint of any
of the undue Practices in the Law, if it be true as Mr. P. Brunskell has often
told me, That in King Charles the Second's time all the twelve Judges sat
together three times, to consult, how by Law they might take away his Life,
only for endeavoring to discover and get the Irregular Practices, Abuses and
Oppressions in the Practicers of the Law rectified and redressed; but he being
a Lawyer was so wise as not to be taken by any stratagem in Law: So afterward,
it seems, one was employed to assassinate him, who shooting at him missed him,
but cut the Hair of his Perriwig with the Shot. Now though I am no Lawyer, or
do dare to take any of their Counsel in this matter, yet I hope I may without
offense, make my Complaint out of the Grave Sir R. B. has cast me into, and
make manifest mine own sad Experience, and therefore cannot hope for any
success in suing Judges: For as far as I can perceive, a Man once in Law can
never get out, though he be never so innocent, for his Innocence is commonly
the cause of his Intanglement, and whiles he is worth a Groat the Practicers in
the Law will very hardly part with him, and then the worst of Characters shall
not be wanting to be put upon him, by even those that had bin his Counsel, and
helped to undo him. I do remember some years since, one Mr. Fowls recovered
from me at Common*Law the Sum of Two hundred and fifty pounds on a Bill of
Exchange, payable forty days after sight to one William Butler or Order; which
I had accepted, and delivered to Butler, who gave it to one Job Haddersich, (a
vile person, that had bin convicted for Forgery, and stood in the Pillory,) who
discounting the time with his old acquaintance Mr. Fowls, by virtue of
Butler's Name being endorsed on the backside of the Bill; which Butler denied,
and swore he never wrote with his own hand. Now the Common*Law, as I have bin
told, requires full and ample Proof by good Testimony; and in regard they had
no way to prove the Name was written by Butler's own hand, the Judge did cause
him to write his Name in the Court; so then comparing his Name then written
with that on the backside of the Bill, and observing that the Names were not
written straight* but both inclining alike upwards, the Judge directed the Jury
to find it; so the Jury, without stirring from their place, gave their Verdict
against me: It Is an old Observation of some, That it is natural for a Man that
sees but two persons together, to have an inclination toward the one more than
the other; and the Affections of a Man are not always ruled by Reason; and some
Men, that have bin but once concerned against a Man as Counsel in a Cause by
way of Pleading against him, will never be reconciled to him, though his own
Client were never so vile, and made appear so. As for Example; The Judge that
Tried this Cause had bin many years before a Counsel for Farmer (that had
counterfeited my Stamp or Mark, and changed my Cloth, as hereafter is showed)
against me that prosecuted him and convicted him in a most manifest manner; for
which Fact, as I suppose, he has looked upon me very severely ever since, and
upon all occasions, has showed himself inclined against me, as in this Case
and the Case of the Statute, when, though he did own that all my Declaration
was proved; but the Malice, (which though one would think was sufficiently made
manifest by the very Fact;) yet because I did not particularly prove it, mine
Adversary was cleared, and I left to pay him Costs; and for my Remedy at Law,
by his direction, must Sue the Lord Keepers of the Great Seal, whom he knew
very well were Men above my reach; although indeed the Statute was grounded
upon only a Debt made by their own Decree; and though almost every Week or
Month I was at the charge of making several Motions for the Superseding the
Statute, yet they would not grant a Supersedeas for near 12 Months, because
they did hope some one or other might come in and join to make me a Bankrupt;
which, I think, was so cruel and maliciously inhumane in them, that if the King
should think fit, undoubtedly they ought to be Fined what they are able to pay,
and made Exemplary to all Posterity by some shameful Punishment, besides for
their partiality, cruelty, and malice in Justice, when Judges sitting in the
Seat of Justice. Oh! to what an highth of Impiety is the World come to, that
under the pretense of being justified, a Man must be utterly ruined by the Law,
merely by wit and ingenuous contrivance! Or, perhaps all these things may be
caused by the Infamy cast upon me by Sir Richard Blackam: For indeed, if I am
so ill a Man as he represented me to the World by his private Whisperings, I do
think then that the Judges may very well suppose me to be a Man not worthy to
live, and consequently fit to be chastised on all occasions, when ever any
Cause of mine should come before them.

Now as I was informed at the time the Commissioners of the Statute of
Bankrupts sitting to tear me in pieces, a relation of Mr. Moyer's having ran
about the Exchange to make a most diligent Enquiry amongst all people with whom
I had had any manner of dealings, to find out a Man to join with them in the
Statute; and finding none, he did exceedingly importune Mr. (now Sir Richard)
Blackam to join with them, not knowing what Contracts were betwixt him and me,
did often, when he met him, shake his head, hold up his fist, and grin at him
for not joining with them; for he knew very well he was musled by my Contract
and Security given unto him, and could by no means join with them, though he
might have ever so much mind to it. But however, finding the mischief of a
Statute of Bankrupt lying upon me, he became very fearful and uneasy, and
studied all the ways he could to make himself safe, although I had made him so
before; and without any regard to his Contract, gave me much trouble with
Arrests, etc. as may appear by the Sequel: For he knowing very well, that since
my coming into England, I had received an abundance of rubbs by Arbitrations
and Cheats put upon me, was very fearful of me, as I suppose, lest the Statute
of Bankrupt should tear me into pieces, and rend the Security I had given him
out of his hands, and so he should become a loser by me, as I do suppose: For
when I came first into England, before I had bin many months in it, one Mr.
Carry came to me and demanded the Value of 1864 Dollars to be paid him by the
Order of his Father in the Country; which being a Sum of Money remitted from
Constantinople by the Honorable Dudley North, for the joint Account of Mr.
Jollife and my Father, unto his Son John Carry and myself (Mr. Foxley being gone
for England) at my first Arrival in Smyrna, in a Bill of Exchange for 3000
Dollars on a Jew Merchant in Smyrna, of which 1235 Dollars being for another's
account, he received the whole Sum of 3000 Dollars; and I being Casheir, or
Keeper of the Cash, he desired me to Enter the Money in my Cashbook for the
said Account, and he would pay it unto me; which I did, but he never paid me,
although I asked him so often for it, that he was angry, and asked me, If I
thought he would run away with it? So, not liking to be snarl'd at, and for
peace and quietness sake, I asked no more for it; but thinking he would pay it
me at one time or other, I quite forgot it for about seven years; and then
being by Orders from England to part and adjust all Accounts: For being quite
wearied out with his most unreasonable humor of receiving and concealing from
me many Sums of Money from those people of the Country that were our Debtors
for our Principal Goods sold them at time; and in his way of living to turn the
nights into days, and the days into nights. I thought when Mr. (now Sir Philip)
Gell came over, and had seen his ways, which he also could not bear with, 'twas
high time to acquaint my Father with the intollerableness thereof; and
accordingly we wrote joint Letters to separate us from him, which succeeded;
and accordingly having received his Procures upon him, we did with great
difficulty adjust Accounts before the Consul, and then I found he had received
and concealed from me above Twenty thousand Dollars, which probably I must have
lost, in case I had not all along kept mine Accounts exactly with the Debitors:
Yet 'twas not possible for me to know of all the Moneys he did receive for
Goods he sold unknown to me for Readymoneys, and gave me no account of, as I
have bin informed he did many times; and how much I am damnified, I know not;
for if at any time I spoke to him of any Matters he did not like should be
taken notice of, 'twas as much as my Peace was worth, and was exceeding
desirous to be accounted what he was not; neither did he ever discover to me
any Sum of Moneys I did not charge him with; and I think I have very good
reason to believe, that without all doubt I lost much by him in his seven years
unfair and vexatious dealings by me, and scandalizing of me.

Now to make manifest his Inclinations of concealing Moneys from me, I do here
show a true Copy of John Cary's Note given to save me harmless from joining
with him in discharging Mr. Foxley of the Balance of Mr. Jollife and my
Father's joint Account; and also a Copy of so much of their joint Letter to Mr.
Carry and me as relates thereunto.

A Copy of Mr. Cary's Note is as follows.
Smyrna* 8th of April 1669.
WHereas the Worshipful John Jollife and Benjamin Albyn have Ordered the
Assigning over all the Debts, Moneys and Goods formerly consigned to the Hands
of Thomas Foxley and John Carry upon the said Thomas Foxley's Return for
England, to be delivered to the said John Carry and Benjamin Albyn; of which
time at present, not admitting to take a particular Account, I the said John
Carry do hereby oblige my self to save harmless the said Benjamin Albyn from any
damage whatsoever that may happen from his giving a Discharge in joint with my
self to the said Thomas Foxley for the remaining Effects of the aforesaid
Worshipful John Jollife and Benjamin Albyn, till such time as all Accounts
shall be adjusted.

John Carry.


A Copy of a few Lines of Mr. Jollife, and my Fathers joint Letter follows: Viz.
Mr. John Carry and Mr. Benjamin Albyn.
London 9th of Aug. 1669. SIRS,
THE afore-written of the 11th of June is Copy of our last, since which We have
received yours of the 8th of April by the General Ships, and one of the 29th of
May, also yours, Mr. Carry and Mr. Foxley's of the 8th of April with Account of
Sale of 50 Sacks of Pepper and 40 Barrels of Tin, with our Account Current, the
Balance whereof being L. Dollars 8917: 14. We shall expect to be brought to
our Credit by your selves in our next Account, we rest

Your Assured loving Friends, John Jollife, Benjamin Albyn.


By which Letter I came to know the Balance of their Account left by Mr.
Foxley, else I believe 'twould have bin concealed from me to this day; though,
I think, it is plain that he well knew the Balance at the time he gave me the
Note above written, and and did utterly deny that he knew when I joined with
him in the Discharge given to Mr. Foxley; for before I did it, I was not a
little importunate with them both to know what 'twas; but Carry cowed Foxley so,
that he did not dare to displease him by telling me what 'twas.

And though I did faithfully, so far as I knew, help him to adjust his Accounts
(for he kept no Books, only some Memorandum's in small bits of loose Papers,)
yet he concealed from me the said 1864 Dollars; and after we had signed and
sealed Releases to each other before the Consul, he did confess to some of his
Friends and Confidents, that he did owe me Dollars 1200, or a larger Sum of
Money in Dollars which I had forgotten to charge him with, (which doubtless
must be another Sum I could not find, besides the 1864 Dollars;) but he
obliging them to Secrecy, I knew nothing of it till some time after his death;
and then, with much ado, the Honorable Mr. Dudley North did lay a
Sequestration upon his Estate then lying in Constantinople for the recovery
thereof, which continued until such time as his Father here in England did by
his Letter enorder his Correspondent to pay the 1864 Dollars: For indeed 'twas
no body but the Honorable Mr. (since Sir) D. North, that discovered to me
where that mistake did lie. So when I came home, Mr. Carry pretending great
Damages sustained by the Sequestration laid on his Son's Estate, did, by his
Son dwelling in London, propose to me a Reference, rather than a Law*suit: So
he proposing and nominating Mr. William Jollife, who I thought had been my very
good Friend; I did also referr it to him, without choosing or nominating any
other to stand against him, I being but a Stranger, newly come home, and knew
not whom to choose: But it seems I was mistaken; for in the stead of ordering
him to pay me the 1200 Dollars, that his Son John Carry had confessed was due
from him to me, he awarded me to pay him One hundred pounds; though he did not
think fit to make known to me any manner of reason for his Award, more than
that he did it to avoid a Lawsuit. So having promised to stand to his Award, I
paid the hundred pounds without any manner of a delay, immediately; though I
thought it was so very hard and unjust, I could not but advise his Son that
took it of me, not to let it go amongst his Father's Estate, least it should
prove a Moth in it; for I did well know I was much wronged to pay One hundred
pounds to him, of whom I ought to have received many hundred pounds at least.
After this I happened to deal with Mr. Moyer's Cousin Henry Farmer, a Packer,
for some hundreds of Cloths, which I bought of him, and stamped with mine own
Stamp or Mark; amongst them were some very fine Whites, or undyed Cloths, made
of the best Spanish Wool, and were reckoned to be of the finest sort of Cloth
made in England, so that they were reckoned really worth Twenty-three pounds
per Cloth as they were White; which being measured and stamped with mine own
Stamp, I ordered them to be sent away to the Dyers to be dyed into the proper
Colors for Turkey, such as I had appointed, so went my way; and as soon as I
was gone, he ordered his Men to carry them up into an upper Room, and there
took off my Seals; and putting other Cloths of about 15 pounds per Cloth in the
room thereof, stamped them with a counterfeit Seal or Stamp made in imitation
of mine: For which Fact, though he was convicted both at Common*Law and Equity,
yet I had no manner of Recompense; but in the stead thereof, though Sir Robert
Sawyer was my Counsel in the Cause; yet being Attorney*General, free to take
Fees, it is supposed that for Money being well Fee'd, he represented him to King
James as an Object of his Majesty's favor, whereby he obtained a Noli
prosequi. So that I had not so much as one penny either for my Damages, not
only of Eight pounds per Cloth, but likewise the defamation and discredit of
sending such an inferior sort of Cloth at the price of the best; nor had I any
thing allowed for my Charges in prosecuting so notorious a Cheat. After this,
one Mr. W. H. by some called Dr. W. H. that went out with and in the Service of
a Noble Peer of this Realm, some years before sent Ambassador to
Constantinople, whose favor and friendship I did ever highly esteem, since the
first time I had the honor of being acquainted with him; and by his discourse,
with great applause of his Lordship, that he was very much in his Lordship's
favor, I thought him a very honest Man, and after a little time of
acquaintance with me, did pretend a great kindness and respect for me; and to
manifest the same, would needs pretend to help me to a rich Wife, though I told
him 'twas a matter I sought not after, neither should I make any Smithfield
Bargain, neither would I give any account of mine Estate; and whosoever should
marry me, must take me for what I am, and not for what I have: I would only
deliver my self an honest Man, free from Women, and free from Debts, and, in
point of Marriage, I would not pretend to be worth a groat, neither would I
refuse a good offer; and whilst I was at Law, I did resolve not to seek, and
'twould be very difficult for him ever to bring such a business to pass: But
however, he ordered (as I suppose) his Wife to write to me, and in her Letter
did desire to let her speak with me; so going to her, she did recommend to me
one William Butler for a very honest Man, and a particular acquaintance of her
Husbands, the Doctor; who having two great Matches at his disposal, did appoint
me to meet her next day at the Fountain-Walk in the Temple, where I did meet
her accordingly, and she did immediately bring me where he was to talk with
him; who did upon the first sight propose to me the choice of two; the one a
Widow of about 22 years of age, worth about 4000 l. per Annum; and the other a
Maid about 18, worth 30000 l. and if I would, I might have which I pleased; but
he would have 1000 l. for himself: I told him I thought he would deserve it:
So, in a little time, I arose and went my way, not much believing him; but the
good Woman following me, told me how able and honest a Man he was, and not to
be slighted, for he could effect and accomplish any thing he undertook: So
telling her I should be glad to be better acquainted with him, he soon came to
me at my Lodging in Mark Lane; I think indeed the very next night; and so
continued importuning me for near a month together. I told him, that while I
were troubled at Law, I should not think of Marriage, and how that there was a
Statute of Bankrupt against me; and therefore 'twas impossible any such thing
could be; for I would not deceive or bring any Woman into trouble: then said he
to me, It Is no matter, the Maid is my Kinswoman, and so he could easily make
the Match, for she desired to marry a Merchant: then said I, A Woman of that
Fortune could not want much better proffers, and doubtless needs not your
assistance to help her to an Husband; so desired him not to trouble me with
such unpracticable things; for is it were true as he said, I should undo all
that he should do in the matter if ever I came to see her, for I should
certainly tell her of the Statute of Bankrupt, and no Woman would be so mad as
to marry a Man in such circumstances: Then he swore, that in case I would but
give him security for 1000 pounds to be paid him after my Marriage to her, he
would effect the Match, notwithanding all that I should say to her. And thus
having importuned me for about a month, and considering the great infamy and
base oppression I did lie under with the Statute of Bankrupt, I thought I ought
not to reject the proffer of so seasonable a Relief; and thereupon I offered to
give him my Bond; but that he refused, saying, That the condition of the Bond
would destroy it; but desired me to accept of four Bills of Exchange, payable
forty days after sight for two hundred and fifty pounds each; to which I
replied, That a Bill of Exchange accepted, would be stronger upon me than a
Bond; but I would consider of it: So I went to Counsel, and asked him if he
could draw out such a Defeazance as would save me harmless from a Bill of
Exchange accepted? he told me yes; so I gave him his Fee to do it forthwith
very well and secure; so after three day's time he gave me a rough draft,
leaving blanks for the Names. So the said Butler writing out a fair Copy
thereof, and putting in the Names, did sign it and seal it in the presence of
two Witnesses, and delivered it to me as his Act and Deed; and then showing me
the four Bills he had provided, he desired me to accept of one only, which I
did; for as he in a most insinuating manner pretended and said 'twas only to
satisfy the Lady's Steward, who was to have the one half of the Money, that so
he might not be in doubt; as for his own part, he desired no Security, he was
well satisfied, and doubted not of any thing but the Steward must be satisfied
before he could show me the Lady; and in a day or two after, according to his
desire, I did accept of another; and the other two Job Haddersich forged mine
acceptance unto; for the one whereof he was indicted and convicted at the
Old-Bailey, and accordingly stood in the Pillory at Charing Cross; and though
he has not paid his Fine of forty Mark to the King, according to the Sentence,
yet he has the liberty of going abroad in the best of Apparel, and cheated
many others since of very considerable Sums of Moneys and Goods; and I by no
means can obtain an Hearing at the Exchequer-Barr for the recovery of 250 l.
which he confessed he had received with rebate of one Mr. Fowls (his old
acquaintance) upon one of the Bills of Exchange that I had accepted, and still
cheats me of. And since the Cause has bin heard betwixt Mr. Fowls and me
(without Haddersich that could not be found to be served with a Subpoena ad
audiendum judicium, though a Prisoner in Execution for Debt;) upon opening the
Cause, one of the Barons was pleased to say, That here are two to be cheated;
and he had rather Albyn should be cheated than Fowls; and another Baron that
perused, corrected and signed my Bill against them both in the Exchequer,
whereby to be relieved against the Fraud, then said at the Hearing, I had no
Equity; though when I gave him his Counsel-Fee at signing, being above the rate
the Law allows, I had a great deal of Equity. Now by no means can I obtain an
Hearing of the Cause against Haddersich, who did fraudulently get and still
keeps my Right to the said 250 l. from me; so it seems a Counsel, whiles a
Counsel, to get a Fee, will tell his Client he has Equity in his Cause; but
when made a Baron, the Equity cease, though his Client be injured never so
apparently by a most notorious Cheat, who confesses to have the Money, and yet
goes free without being called to Judgment; and though my Bill be still
depending, he is protected, and I can by no means obtain Justice in so plain a
case; which is stupendous to think how in England a Court of Equity should
protect such a notorious Cheat; I do believe the like is not in any other part
of the World; which, doubtless, must be a great encouragement to Cheats, and
looks as if the Laws were made only for the Practisers therein to enrich and
raise themselves in the World, and not for Righting the People; and that such
Cheats were to be encouraged as persons that brought Grist to the Lawyer's
Mill. Now in Turkey, where any Difference does happen betwixt Man and Man, the
Man aggrieved may immediately call, and have him that offends before the Caddee
or Judge, and without any delay both Plaintiff and Defendant plead their Cause
themselves; and, according to their Laws, the Caddee passes Sentence, which is
immediately executed, and the Matter ended, both parties become friends; and no
provocations make the Turks live in Malice, as generally people do here in
England, who I do believe use it more than all the World besides; partly,
because here are so many whose business is to set people at variance, by
telling them what advantage one may have of the other by the force of Law;
partly, because generally the people do highly commend the envious and
malicious Spirit, and call it a great Spirit; though if duly considered, I
think nothing is more base, and less worthy of respect, and is indeed the
effect of Purse pride: For what is more common than for people that have more
Money than their Advesary to say as Mr. Moyer's Brother-in-Law did say after we
had spent some years and much Moneys in his Suit against me in Chancery, he
being to receive his share of what they hoped to get from me, said thus
(finding it a very chargeable Court) If One thousand pounds would not do,
another thousand should; and if that did not do another should; and so on, to I
know not how many thousand pounds, and he was resolved his Brother Moyer should
carry the Cause whatsoever it cost; so it seems he did not pretend to any Right
there was in the Cause on their side, but only to ruin me by the force of
Money, as I was told Mr. Moyer did threaten to do when I was in Turkey, if ever
I should come into England; which, to effect, I do think he has omitted no
means or endeavors; but what reason he had for it, I could never learn or find
out; for I never had to do with, or did ever see the Man in mine whole life,
that I know of, until I did arrive from Turkey back to England. Sometimes I
have thought, that because my Father sometimes would laugh and jest with his
Father, and salute him by the Title of Mr. Chairman; because that in the time
of Sequestring (as I suppose) the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry of
England, much about King Charles the First's time he was Chairman of that
Committee, as I have heard and have bin told; but I do remember the Old Man did
not much like it, for he would look very grum and sour upon it. Now though
such jesting might pass betwixt them, what was that to me? could I help it? Now
Mr. Moyer having (as it may be supposed) this innate principle of encroaching
upon and taking away the Rights and Estates of other Men, obtained an Order out
of Chancery to have my Books laid open unto him; and having before a Master
perused and examined my Books in all things he could desire, and not being able
to find out any thing therein for his purpose, or find any fault, became so
enraged at me, that he said, Mr. Albyn, you are a cheating Knave, and I Will prove
it: Then said I, Bear witness, Gentlemen: So the next day he came to me upon
the Exchange, and told me he was in a Passion, and began to beg my Pardon; but
all that I said unto him, was, Pray do not, let you and I talk; for I indeed
did then intend to bring mine Action against him for so notorious an Abuse: But
the Lawyers that were the Only Men then present, being unwilling to bear
Testimony, made me to forbear; so was forced to swallow that Injury likewise.

One instance more of Moneys, being the Rich man's Justice and Confidence in
his Cause, be it never so bad, black and foul, is what Mr. (now Sir Richard)
Blackam said to me in Serjeants-Inn, after we came out of Judge Dolbin's
Chamber, when we had bin both before him upon his Summons, to show Cause of
Action wherefore he had Arrested me? and upon hearing the whole Matter, the
Judge had told him there was no Cause of Action; and if he went on, he would be
Nonsuited: Sir Richard Blackam did then laugh at me, and told me that he had
yet Five hundred pounds to spend for all that; for so much or near that Sum he
would needs pretend to recover of me; for I believe he knows pretty well, that
whatever a Man recovers at Law, it must cost him as much at least. Now whereas
by the ingenuity of the Lawyers, Sir Richard Blackam is hindered from confessing
and plainly setting forth the truth and matter of fact set forth in my Bill; if
he were of himself only to make a full and true Answer, the Truth would soon
appear, and Justice would take its due place without any delay, trouble or
expense: But now there is no Remedy, because by the force of Money he sets the
Lawyers Wits on work to make it an endless Suit, by evading some part, and not
in any measure answering the other near 19/20th parts; only in general terms
says, My Bill is full of falsities: Which I do deny; and he knows, that if he
should be put to answer particular by particular, he must confess, and not deny
the particulars; and by such means the truth being concealed, I have no more
remedy than as if I should knock mine head against the Wall. Now though these
and the like, and many more instances, are too too frequent, yet it seems
rather impudence, and a bidding defiance to the Law and Justice of the Nation;
which indeed ought rather to be punished than countenanced, as being no less
than scandalizing the Government to the highest degree: For what is or can be
more abominable than Injustice obtained by Bribery and extravagant Fees in the
eyes both of God and Man; and whereas the Throne is established by
Righteousness and Justice, so the contrary must needs undermine and subvert it;
for the Law is impartial, and Justice can do no wrong, and, without doubt, was
designed for the Poor as well as the Rich, without any respect of persons.

I do remember one time, talking with Mr. (before he was Sir Richard) Blackam,
telling him freely and friendly what hard measure I met with in the World; (for
to my face I never had any unkind words, but very fair;) I did then tell him
how that some persons had told me they had heard I was too honest to live in
the World; he did then laugh at me, and reply, saying, That is not well, and
it is no Commendations: And since that I was informed by Mr. Freeman, that Mr.
Richard Nicholl had told him, that Mr. Blackam (now Sir Richard) had declared
to him as bad an Opinion of me as it is possible for one man to have of another;
but I could never be informed what that was, or why he should so
comprehensively blast my Reputation: I do not remember, that in all my dealings
with him, for near Ten years together, I had any manner of dispute with him, or
any unkindness from him, before the Statute of Bankrupt was taken out against
me: But how long he has bin whispering away and blasting my Reputation, I know
not; if he had killed me in the stead of so doing, I do think 'twould have bin
much less prejudice to me, and my troubles would have bin at an end; but now I
am as one buried alive, which is far worse than death: And indeed I cannot but
take it much worse from him than from another, thus to bury me alive; because
at my first coming over into England, he did with great obsequiousness and
pretensions of honesty and much diligence, kindness and fair promises, deal
justly and truly by me, as I thought, (though now must think I was mistaken
exceeding much,) and thereupon I did for about Ten years together duly and
truly pay him for his Goods and his Work, without making him any undue
Abatements by Arguments or Disputes. But now so it is, that Mr. Moyer, upon the
Revolution of Government, having brought his Bill of Review as aforesaid, and
thereupon mine intentions being to appear no more in Trade, and Sir Richard
Blackam coming to me to desire me to take off his hands One or two hundred of
his Clothes, telling me, 'Twould be a great kindness to him, and no prejudice,
but a benefit to me; because he having great quantities of Cloth lying upon his
hands, was forced to send seven or eight Hundred of them to Holland, and had
still remaining upon his hands 1300 Cloths; and the Ships for Turkey being near
full, he had but little hopes of putting them off by those Ships; then I told
him that I had no intention to be concerned that year in the Turkey Shipping;
but he not being content, or willing to be so answered, told me, That it would
be no prejudice to me, but a great benefit; for if I would but take them, I
should have them 20 s. per Cloth cheaper than those of the same Sorts he had
sold to other Men for Ready-money above a year before, and that I should pay
him for them at my convenience, by degrees, and he would never trouble me for
Moneys; but I desired to be excused, I was not willing to meddle: but however,
he would not rest so satisfied, and for many days did so importune me, that at
last, considering I had some Pipes of Canary-wine which lay on mine hands, and
some Jarrs of Oil which I had bought of him some years before with
Ready-moneys, and could by no means put off without great disadvantage;) I told
him I would take 100 or 150 of his Cloths on the terms he had proposed, if he
would take them: To which, though at first he seemed unwilling, yet soon after
he accepted thereof; and accordingly we came to a conclusion; and I desired to
have our agreement put into writing; but he objected, saying, The World would
wonder, because to sell Goods without a limitation of time for payment was not
usual: So afterward, as he pretended only for Mortality's sake, did desire in
writing it might be expressed for the first hundred Clothes I should pay him
One hundred pounds per Month after the Ships departure from England, and the
rest at the return of the Ships; and that was only for Executors to know how to
demand their Moneys if he should dye; but if he lived, the bargain should be as
was agreed, and that he would never trouble me for Money; and for the
confirmation of that agreement, and to oblige him to be so punctual as never to
trouble me for Money, I did voluntarily, of mine own accord, offer to allow him
Ten per Cent. on the prime Cost of the last 100 Cloths; which he accordingly
accepted of, and afterward charged to mine Account: So thinking him to be a
Man of his Word, I consented: And I measured his Cloths, and sent them to be
Dyed in great haste; for the Ships began to be falling down the River in order
to their Voyage, being near full; and as soon as the first part of them was
gotten ready, I was forced to hire an Hoy to carry them to the Downs where the
Ships were; and what was not then ready, I thought to had quitted, and not
meddled with; for so was mine agreement, that if I could not Ship them, I was
not to have them; but however, Sir Richard Blackam was so diligent as to get
the rest ready to be Shipped soon after my Return from the Downs; and then the
Ships being at Portsmouth, we fraighted an Hoy thither; and having laden the
rest on Board her, we took Post to Portsmouth, where we met the Hoy, and laded
them on Board the several Ships. So I having stayed there till the Ships sailed
thence, I then went to Southampton, where I took Post for London, where, when I
was come, Sir Richard Blackam came to me next morning, and told me my Decree in
Chancery against Mr. Moyer was Reversed. At which news, being very much
surprised, I went to make enquiry, and found it to be true, and the Effects
thereof very troublesome from Sir Richard Blackam; for he was not only
extremely diligent to get his 100 l. per Month with the Wine and the Oil, but
also did frequently pretend to have very urgent Occasions for Moneys; sometimes
for 250 l. or 300 l. and sometimes for 500 l. So many times at the Exchange,
when he met me, would in a fair plausible way come to me with fair words and
entreaties, telling me how extremely prejudicial the want of such Sums would
be unto him, in case he were not supplied, and how it could be no manner of
prejudice to me to give him a Note under mine hand for so much payable to him
or Order three months after date, he saving me harmless by giving me a Note
under his hand to take up the Note, and satisfy it himself, without troubling
me therewith; and with my Note he could go into Lombard Street, and discounting
the time, he could be immediately supplied with the Money. So considering with
myself, that I was more considerably indebted to him than any one of those
Sums, (as he was not wanting to put me in mind,) and I thinking it might be
great service to him, and no prejudice to me, I did readily and frequently
gratify his Desires, and give him such Notes, and taking his Receipts and
Acknowledgments as Securities to save me harmless, I did supply him to the
Value of I know not how many Thousand pounds.

A True Copy of One of his Receipts and Acknowledgment, is as follows:
WHereas I the underwritten Richard Blackam have, for my convenience, taken of
Benjamin Albyn sundry Notes, as one for Three hundred pounds, and other two for
Five hundred pounds, under his hand, made payable at sundry times: I do promise
hereby to take no advantage thereof, but to take them up and cancel them my
self, without troubling him therewith. Witness mine Hand this 20th Day of
November. 1690. The like I do promise for another Bill of Five hundred pounds,
payable Three Months hence.

Richard Blackam.


Thus I served his Occasions, perhaps much better than if he had taken up so
much Money at Interest, which would had required good Security besides his own;
which to do, would had called his Credit in question. Now these Services being
done only out of kindness and pure friendship, and not on account of debt, I
kept no account of them, thinking his Receipts a sufficient bar and
acknowledgment upon what account those Notes were given; and the Clothes I did
owe him for, being in all 220, were a sufficient security against any one of my
Notes given, in case he should offer to put it into practice the making me to
pay any one of them, as indeed he did begin to do, by sending Mr. Williams the
Goldsmith with one of my Notes for 300 l. to demand payment thereof; Whereupon
I told his Man that came with it to me, That I would come to his Master's house
and satisfy him about it: So I went to his house, and showed him Sir Richard
Blackam's Receipt and Acknowledgment upon what account it was given; when he
had read it, he said, That was nothing to him, he would have his Money, having
paid it to him the said Sir Richard Blackam, and did afterward Arrest me twice
upon it by the Order of Sir Richard Blackam, as Sir Richard Blackam has
confessed, and told me since; particularly one time upon the Exchange, when he
thought Mr. Freeman had adjusted and settled all Matters betwixt us as he would
have them; and nothing more remained to be done, but Signing and Sealing a
Writing to him; which he did not doubt to make me do by his wheedling Art of
persuasion, before he delivered up unto me that and the rest of the said Notes
upon Oath, according to the Award of Mr. John Freeman, to whom all our
Differences were referred on that condition; for unless he should deliver them
all up upon Oath, it is not possible for me to be safe or secure from the
wheedling humor of the said Sir Richard Blackam; for until Mr. Freeman had
promised me he should do that, I could by no means think of submitting to Mr.
Freeman's unreasonable Award, for me to pay to Sir Richard Blackam Three
hundred and eighty pounds, instead of receiving of him 1018 l. for so I call
it; because when I asked him the reason of it, he told me he could not tell;
but so it is, and he could do no otherwise. And afterward, to justify Sir
Richard Blackam's Arrests and ill Dealings by me, and his own Award, told me,
That if I were in Mr. Blackam's Clothes, I would do the same things that he
did. So it seems Sir Richard Blackam does wear Clothes to justify them both;
and not only to justify the Award, but also all his black Works and Deeds
whatsoever; insomuch, that although I had made choice of Mr. Freeman for my
Refferree against Mr. (since Sir Alexander) Rigbey, a Refferree for Sir Richard
Blackam, who went off without effecting any thing in the Matters, being by Sir
Richard held up so very thytly to his own Will; and then Sir Richard pretending
to leave all to Mr. Freeman singly and alone, he did so far insinuate himself
into Mr. Freeman, that Mr. Freeman regarded me not; insomuch that when I* spoke
to him any thing that made for me, and was highly material in my Case, he would
tell me, I do not mind that; and at other times, I do not regard that; and if
at any time I showed him in Writing any thing that made for me, as I thought,
he would tell me it made against me: As particularly one time meeting him upon
the Exchange, I desired him to look upon a Writing I had in my Pocket, which I
thought was materially for me: So he went with me, and sat down on the
North-west Corner of the Bench on the Exchange, and plucking my Jesdan or
Letter-case out of my Pocket, I took thence a Paper, where enclosed were sundry
Writings, particularly Sir Richard Blackam's Receipts for the several Notes for
the several Sums of Money as aforesaid, and some other Writings; and amongst
them, the Writing to be showed Mr. Freeman, which I took out and gave into the
hand of Mr. Freeman for his perusal, and laid the rest down upon the Bench in
the corner where we sat. When he had read it, he told me it made against me; at
which I was so stunned and grieved to see him so wholly bent against me, that
talking with him about it, we arose to walk there, and I quite forgot to take
up my Papers, but left them behind me, and could hear no more of them for about
two years time; and then being as it were upon a conclusion of all matters,
according to Sir Richard Blackam's mind, as he thought; for Mr. Freeman would
fain had be-fooled and persuaded me to take Sir Richard Blackam's Bond instead
of my Notes; but I told him his Bond could signify nothing without a Lawsuit;
and unless I could in all Points be cleared from Sir Richard Blackam, I would
not part with my Right which he had Awarded away from me to him; and I
insisting upon Sir Richard Blackam's delivering up all mine aforesaid Notes
upon Oath for the want of those his Receipts; then Sir Richard B. produced the
Man that found them, and took them up off the place where I left them, who by
his Order did bring them along with him, and so I did get them again; but
whether I have received all that I left behind me, I cannot possibly tell;
there may be many wanting, for all that I know; but I find Sir Richard
Blackam's Name torn out of several of them; so what he and the Broker that took
them up have done together, I know not; for the Broker never gave me any manner
of notice of them until the very moment he produced them by the Order of Sir
Richard Blackam, neither would Sir Richard suffer him to deliver them to me
before he had with Pen, Ink and Paper taken a particular account of all the
several Writings; which I thought was very odd and unreasonable (Mr. Freeman
the Referee being by) for him to take an account of my Papers. And though he
had and still has all the Notes aforesaid, to the import of I know not how
many Thousand pounds upon kindness only; yet to secure unto him what was due
from me, I did voluntarily deliver and endorse unto him Bills of Lading for as
much Silk and Grogoram* Yarn as would had produced full payment to him of what
I owed him, besides an overplus of 1018 pounds to be returned to me, in case he
had, according to our agreement, kept, and not sold them without my privity,
knowledge and consent; for by mine agreement with him, he was not to sell any
part of them without my privity, knowledge and consent, and on that condition
only 'twas that I did indorse and deliver to him the said Bills of Lading; and
in case he had kept my Goods but a few months, as I would have had them kept,
(he being by the said agreement to be allowed Interest for his Money from the
time that they were landed in his possession, till the time they were sold;)
but however, whether I would or no, he sold my Silk at 17 s. 6 d. per Pound,
which might have bin afterward sold for 40 s. per Pound; and my Grogoram-Yarn,
which he sold for 3 s. 6 d. per Pound, might havebin sold at 8 s. per Pound,
for so was the Price current of both Silk and Yarn of the like quality in few
months after: And then when I came to enquire for my Goods to be disposed of
and sold at the highth of the Market, behold my Goods were gone, and sold many
months before unknown to me. And then having demanded an Account thereof, he
drew out a most extravagant and exorbitant Account, wherein he brought me in
still his Debtor above 500, near 600 pounds; for which Moneys, after he had
Arrested and given me so much trouble, as to force me to a Reference, and
though I did submit to a most severe Award (which I could never yet be informed
any reason for,) and endeavored all I could to make an end with him; yea, I
ordered some Goods into Mr. Freeman the Referee's hands, that out of them he
might be secure and take his full satisfaction; yet he would not make an end,
but keeps all my Notes for the several Sums of Moneys, amounting to I know not
how many Thousand pounds, though one penny of that Money is not in any way due
from me: (Oh, let all Men beware of the Man that says his Name is black am.)
About twelve or fifteenth Months since, Mr. Freeman did most shamefully dunn
and importune me to make an end with Sir Richard Blackam, as he had Awarded,
though he very well knew that Sir Richard Blackam had refused to do his part of
the Award: At last I did freely tell Mr. Freeman, that he could not hurt me
beyond what the Providence of God will permit; he did thereupon laugh at me,
and reddening in his countenance, went his way, and, I suppose, advised Sir
Richard Blackam to prefer his Bill against me and himself in the Lord Mayor's
Court, to get my Goods now lying in his hands; for in three or four days after
I had notice sent me to answer Sir Richard Blackam's Bill; so as soon as I
could get a Copy thereof, I delayed not to draw out mine Answer; which being
ready to be carried in within the eight days time allowed by the Court, and
being advised to prefer a Cross-bill against him and Mr. Freeman, 'twas
thought most convenient for me to deferr putting in mine Answer till they had
answered my Bill; so though my Bill was filed 4th February 1695, yet could by
no means get one word of answer from either of them until the 13th of July
following; and then Mr. Freeman, after many Endeavors of the Officer for
carrying him to Prison, did put in an insufficient Answer; and then importuning
Sir Richard for his Answer, Sir Richard moved the Court that mine Answer might
be first put in, before his, because his Bill was first preferred: So, as soon
as I was informed the Court had ordered it should be so, I delayed not, but on
the 23d of July last did put it in accordingly; though Sir Richard delayed
putting in his till the 10th of September following; and then he put in such an
insufficient and evasive Answer, that so much as the 20th part of my Bill I
believe is not answered; and though Exceptionswere made to both their Answers,
yet mine Attorney would not File them: And because I have given a full Answer
to Sir R. B. his Bill, the Court, without hearing one word of my Case, upon the
Attorney's Report that mine Answer was too long, has Fined me 4 l. 10 s. 2 d.
And as soon as I was served with the Order of Court, I went and asked mine
Attorney why, and by what Law I was Fined, for I would obey the Laws? Then he
told me, If I would give him a Fee, he would give me his Advice; but he knew no
Statute for it: Then telling him, I would stand by every syllable of mine
Answer, I went my way. So next day an Attachment being taken out against me, I
was forced to pay the Officer above Five pounds. What Righteousness there is in
these practices, I know not! But doubtless the Gally-Slaves in Turkey are much
happier; and I think, if I were there, I would not come for England to be so
harrassed and abused as I have bin since my return into it.

Now for me to enumerate the manifold Grievances I have bin oppressed with, and
do still sustain by the means and excessive malice of these three Men, would be
too tedious and voluminous to set forth: Therefore mine humble Petition and
great Request is, That Right may be done as to what is herein set forth. And
that I may not be devoured by the taking the due Course of Law, which now is so
very expensive, that in my sixteen years little experience, I find, and must
needs say, That the most prudent and frugal part is to lose and be stripped of
all, rather than seek my Right by Law; for it is apparent that the tricks by
Delays, Motions, Hearings and Rehearings, Orders, Exceptions, examining
Witnesses, great Fees and refreshing Fees, and the payment o Solicitors and
Attorneys Bills have amounted to far more than what could thereby be recovered;
although I think I never retained more Counsel, or fee'd them with more or
greater Fees than what my Solicitor told me was necessary, and have sometimes
had the Attorneys Bills taxed according to Law, as was pretended; yet some
after the taxing have told me, that by the strict Rules of the Law, one tenth
part of what charged therein could not be due unto them; and for what really
laid out, I generally deposited in their hands; for the Practicers in the Law
are generally so wise, as not to trust their Clients, nor to go to Law one with
the other. I do not remember that in near sixteen years time that I have bin
harrassed and tormented at Law, that I did ever see or hear of two Lawyers
dispute their own Right at the Law, neither is there any reason to expect to
hear of such a thing; for doubtless the Laws are plain, and a Cause truly
stated must needs appear by the Law at the very first time, as well as at the
thousandth time to be either in the right or in the wrong: but the great-Virtue
of a good and able Lawyer is to make a bad Cause good, and a good Cause bad.
But is it not a mavelous thing to see how in other Countries, without
Lawyers, people can live and enjoy their own peaceably and quietly without
imbroils? And here in England, if a Man have any thing, that then he must
either undo others, or be undone himself by the Law; And that the Laws
designed for the good and welfare of the People, should be so managed, as to
become their utter ruin and destruction. "Now whereas in the time of the
Heathen Roman Empire, St. Paul had so much Justice, Favor and Reason used
toward him, as to be allowed the liberty of Speaking without hindrance, so as
to be heard in whatsoever he could say in making his own Defense for himself:
And now here in England, the Lawyers have a method of understanding one
another, for favoring a Cause on the one side, and baffling it on the other
side, by saying, This is not to the Point, and That is not to the Point; and
also, by calling it the Practice of the Court to Fine a Man for setting forth
the whole truth, although it be never so much to the purpose of clearing the
Case on both sides, which cannot rightly be understood without. And whereas a
Bill in Chancery, preferred by one Man against another, is no less than one
man's Accusation of another; who being to answer upon Oath, is therein to make
his Defense. I do most humbly pray, that all such unreasonable and lawless
Practices, being without Statutes, may be forborne; And that in this my Case,
mine Answer, filed in the Lord Mayor's Court, the 23d of July 1696, may stand
without a Fine; and upon hearing of the Cause, all parts thereof may be heard,
justly and duly weighed and considered." And that Sir Richard Blackam and Mr.
John Freeman may fully and truly answer upon their corporal Oaths every Word,
or at least each Paragraph in my Cross-bill preferred against them, without
Evasion or Equivocation, by the help of Lawyers, that so the truth of all
matters depending betwixt me and them may be made manifest; and the Right and
Truth being fully understood, Justice may be done accordingly. For though by
the Law I had undeniably a good Action for great Damages, yet by the force of
Mr. Moyer's Money the Law could not prevail: So it seems, the Law is so much to
be managed and biased by Money, that it can by no means Right any Man that
has it not, or at most but in proportion to the quantity he has to bestow.
For I do remember, the first time my Counsel moved the Lords Commissioners of
the Great Seal for a Supersedeas to set aside Mr. Moyer's Statute of Bankrupt,
most unjustly and unduely taken out against me, Mr. Moyer's Counsel did allege
that Mr. Moyer was worth the best part of One hundred thousand pounds; so they
ordered the Statute to go on, notwithstanding all the Allegations and the
undeniable Arguments my Counsel could use; whereupon my Counsel said at their
peril let them go on; upon which Caution, I think, they went on no farther,
although they would not grant a Supersedeas, but continued the Statute many
months after; and by their means Mr. Moyer did most wrongfully continue the
Statute upon me near twelve months. Doubtless God Almighty in his Law has
directed other things contrary, and in no case allows partiality; and has
given every Man his own tongue to speak for himself, though now the Lawyers
here in England have brought the People to that pass, that they by no means
must be allowed to speak for themselves, or can hardly say their Souls are
their own; nay, I know some of them will not allow that any Man but a Lawyer
can speak Reason or Sense, unless he be very rich, and then he is wise and
every thing else. So now, since nothing can resist the forceable Power of
Money, but the Personal Authority and Word of the King's most Excellent
Majesty, God's Vicegerent; I have therefore thought it highly necessary, and
the only expedient left me, to throw my self, Life, and mine All, at His
Majesty's Feet, whose Just Power and Prerogative alone can, and I doubt not but
will, do me Justice. And therefore, as I have presumed so far to assume the
Right of a Loyal Subject herein, to represent the Truth of mine Unparalleled
Grievances, by no means to be Redressed by Law or by Parliaments, though
endeavored for sundry years last past. I do adventure to mention one Grievance
more, because I do look upon it encouraged and caused merely by the want of
Redress in my former Grievances; for as yet not being gotten out of the Grave
of Infamy, dug so deep by Sir Richard Blackam, that cannot yet find its bottom.
One William Mann Esquire; the City of London's Swordbearer, does think fit to keep
that form me, which God in his Providence, by the Rules of the Law, has made
to be mine; for he knowing and finding, that by the Law I can have no Right
done for me, without an *expense of as much, or perhaps double the value of the
thing I should any time offer to Sue for, refuses to do only the common part
of an honest Man, which is only to deliver up unto me the Writings of a small
Estate that he himself told me I was Heir unto by Law, upon the Death of my
Sister, his fifth Wife; who did also leave me a Legacy of 200 l. to be paid me
within two years after her decease; but he will part with neither; because for
peace and quietness sake, and to avoid a Lawsuit, and to lay a foundation for
Friendship with him if possibly I could: I say, for the said Considerations, I
did, upon his importunity, rather than have words of difference with him, come
to an agreement with him for the whole; and upon a small consideration did make
him an abatement of 352 l. and accordingly I endeavored to make an end with
him; but he finding no Right to be had for me at Law in any case, has put a
stop to all; and says he will spend Fifteen hundred pounds, but he will have
what by Law is my Right from me, though the whole matter is worth but 862
pounds. So he having wheedled with, and given great Entertainments to the
Trustee and other Friends that I had desired to endeavor to persuade him to do
the reasonable and just Things according to agreement, did, on the contrary,
prevail with them to assist him to over*reach and circumvent me; and to tell
me, that I was without any remedy both in Law and Equity; and that he being the
Swordbearer, would, upon all occasions, find more favor in a Court of Justice
than I should. Can there be a greater aspersion upon the Government, than to
say their Courts of Justice do distribute Justice according to the respect they
have for persons in Office, or otherwise, more than others? (I am sorry to see
any one should have cause to think or speak such a word:) They also would needs
persuade me to leave it to them: Whereupon, being professed Friends in an
extraordinary manner, the one being my Brother-in*Law, and the other having all
along before that time pretended to tell me how unreasonable and unjust my
Brother Mann's dealings in the World both with me and others had bin; I did
tell them thus: Let the Case be truly stated and carried to two of the most
Eminent, learned and able Counsel for their Opinions both in Law and Equity,
and to have the Opinions clear, without interruption, by talking with them: I
did desire we might all meet together, and I would give to each of them a true
Copy of the Case verbatim, with the same Words, in two distinct Papers, and at
one and the same time to go from me separately, the one to the one Counsel, and
the other to the other; and without mentioning one word of the Case, deliver to
each Counsel the Case in the Paper, and not to meet one another until they did
come again to me, I would then (if Counsel should advise that I had no remedy,
as they had said) referr it to them; but in the stead of so doing, they did not
meet me together, or could I ever after see them together, since the time I
made my proposition of terms for the Reference they had desired of me to be
left unto them: but on the contrary, not finding them in some days, I did, to
lose no more time, send one with the Case that knew nothing of the matter to
Mr. Sergeant Levine, who gave his Opinion subscribed to the Case; and then Mr.
Brom (not knowing Advice had bin taken upon it) sent to me for a State of the
Case; so I sent him the Original Draft thereof, which he before had seen, and
said was so truly stated, that there was not a word to be added to, or be
taken from it: But Brother Noyes not being to be found, I sent him another
Copy, with Copy of the Sergeant Levine his Opinion; so the next day Mr. Brom
and he meeting together, consulted which way to make void Sergeant Levine his
Opinion; so went to Mr. Sergeant Pemberton, and representing to him different
things upon the Case; in their talk with him, did get him to subscribe an
Opinion seemingly different, but not contrary, as they fancied: And then they
went to Serieant Levine, and told him he was mistaken in his Opinion; and
thence went to Brother Mann's House, and to the Tavern, and drew up their Award
according to his mind, which they signed and left with him. Next day Mr. Brom
came and told me, how they had made an end, and had bin with two Counsel, and a
long Story how Sergeant Levine had owned himself mistaken, but showed me
nothing that had bin written by any of the Counsel; and Brother Noyes went away
that morning out of Town without seeing me, from the time they first proposed
to have the Reference, and thinks by that means to bind me with the Award,
notwithstanding he acted contrary towhat was proposed, and, as some that are
learned in the Law did say, was very knavish, and is of no force.

A True Copy of the State of the Case, with both the Serjeant's Opinions, and
the Award signed, is as follows.

The Case betwixt A. and B.
A. having a Widow Sister, who by surviving her first Husband, became seized in
the Fee*simple of the two Estates in Lands, Houses and Tenements, the one
Estate being valued at 250 l. per Ann. she did, according to Agreement, before
Marriage with her second Husband, settle upon him and his Heirs, for ever, all
the Estate of 250. l. per Ann. upon Condition, that he should pay off the Sum
of 2010 l. Debts due upon that Estate, and she have the liberty, after
Marriage, to give and bequeath the Sum of 2000 l. amongst her friends, to be
paid them within two Years after her decease, to be levied out of the said
Estate of 250 l. per Ann. as by the said Deed more particularly appears in the
Hands of the Trustee: the other Estate being but two Houses and a Stable, with
Ten Acres of Land, reckoned worth 31 l. per Ann. She also reserved to her self,
at her own disposal, without ever interesting or concerning her Husband
therein. About two Years and twenty-two Days since A. his said Sister died, and
by Deed, according to Marriage-Covenants, gave away but 1800 l. of the 2000 l.
by reason she had prevailed with her second Husband B. to put 200 l. for her
Life into the Million-Lottery. Now B. her second Husband having extremely
importuned her to make over to him the other Estate of 31 l. per Ann. had
gotten Writings drawn, and accordingly did, about Ten of the Clock at Night,
show them unto her; which did so much trouble her, that soon after she was in
Bed, it is supposed she died, because next Morning she was found dead, and her
Corpse almost quite cold; and indeed, was the occasion of once breaking off the
Match. But however B. the second Husband comes to A. the deceased's Brother,
and tells him that he is Heir at Law to the Estate of 31 l. per Ann. and if his
Sister had lived but two Days longer, she would had made them over to him, and
did not doubt but he would accomplish the thing his Sister had intended to do,
because he knew him to be a just Man; and withal told him, That if he would be
so kind, he would give him a hundred Guineys; but A. not complying, desired B.
to deliver unto him the Writings belonging to the said Estate; but B. replied,
He would not part with them; but having Possession, 'twas 11 Points of the Law,
and he had Children and Grand Children to provide for. Hereupon A. Files a Bill
against B. in the High Court of Chancery; then B. comes to A. knowing him to be
a Man that would suffer much, rather than be troubled with a Lawsuit, and
pretends what disreputation 'twould be unto him to part with the said Estate,
and would therefore give him rather more than the full value thereof in Money
for it: Hereupon A. enters into a Treaty with him about the Estate and the 200
l. Legacy, left him by his Sister; then B. pretending that the Estate was but
of small value, the Houses being old, must be plucked down and rebuilt; and the
Ten Acres of Land being let out upon Three Lives, could not be worth above 40
l. A. replied, That 500 l. had bin refused for the Houses, and the Land was
worth 100 l. more, as he had bin informed: Then B. replied, God forbid he
should do any wrong; and A. was misinformed, and what B. had said was very
true, and therefore A. must not expect such a Price for them: Then A. desired
to have his Writings, and to talk no more of it; but B. would not hear of that,
but with much peevishness said, He would this, and he would not do that
without any fair reasoning; and being very vexatious and troublesome to A. A.
did contrive an expedient, as he thought, to end all Matters without
Controversy; and at next meeting did propose to B. as follows: I said A. am
but a single Man, and you will put no more into the Pot or upon the Spit for me;
so if you will, you shall find me with Diet during my Life: Then said B. With
all mine heart; and clapping his hand into A. his hand, said, It shall be put
into the Writings: To which A. agreed, and then went on to make his
Proposition, and said, 200 l. was left as a Legacy, 500 l. had bin offered and
refused for the Houses, that was 700 l. and the Ten Acres of Land is worth 100
l. that made 800 l. and two Years Arrears of Rent was 62 l. altogether made 862
l. so if B. would pay him 600 l. A. would be conteut to let him keep all; but
B. was unwilling to give above 400 l. then came to 450 l. then 500 l. and at
last coming to 510 l. A. agreed with B. who having paid 5 l. on account of the
Bargain, A. wrote a Receipt as follows: Viz. Received this 20th of November.
95. of Brother B. the Sum of 5 l. in part of 510 l. I have this Day agreed
with him for the Houses and Lands at Bristow, that by Law I am Heir unto; as
also the Legacy of 200 l. left me, and all that I am Heir unto; the Wife of the
said B. he having promised to pay me the rest of the Moneys the next Week after
the following the Date hereof, and the free liberty of Diet at his Table during
life, provided that he continues in London. Memorandum, That the business of
Diet is not to be mentioned in the Agreement, unless Brother B. shall so please
B. A.

Witness W. Gee.


Now when A. had written the Receipt, and therein expressed the Diet for his
life, B. objected and said, He would not have the Diet expressed in Writing for
the value of the whole Estate, for it would be a disparagement unto him: Then
said A. Why do you go back from your Agreement? I do not care, said B. I will
not do it: Then A. looking upon that as a childish and foolish Humor, and
thinking that Law and Equity would compel him to do so reasonable a thing as
to give him Security for his Diet, apparently bought of him with 352 l. he did,
to please him, put in the Words as he desired, Provided that he continues in
London, Memorandum, that the business of Diet is not to be mentioned in the
Agreement unless Brother B. shall so please. Then B. went and prepared Writings
and Deeds for A. to sign and seal, and all of a sudden would fain had prevailed
with him at the Tavern, when he had but read them once over without any Advice
of Counsel, to accomplish his ends; but A. told B. that without Advice of
Counsel he did not dare to do it; so with much of do A. did get leave to take
and advise about them; and then A. was told they were unreasonable and unfit
for him to sign; but however A. did get and prepare others, with due
Amendments, to sign and seal, but B. rejected them; neither would he sign any
Writing for the securing the Diet of A. during his life: So though both Parties
met to make an end, yet they parted without effecting any thing. So then A.
went on in Chancery; and after B. had trifled from the beginning of November. to
the middle of May, in the stead of an Answer, put in a Plea, and therein
recited the one part of the Agreement, and left out the other; (which being
upon Oath, seems mavelous:) Then A. got leave to amend his Bill, and therein
set forth the whole Agreement; but B. denying it upon his Oath in his Answer,
A. wrote him sundry Letters to make an end, according to his Swearing; and
particularly the 24th of December. last sent him an open Letter by a friend; who,
after he had taken a Copy of it, delivered it to him, requiring his Answer; but
he would give none in Writing, but said, His Money was in the Bank, and he was
busy for all that Week; and when Mr. Brom came to Town, he would talk and do
no body knows what.

Now the great Question is, Whether ever the Receipt was in itself a good
Bargain in Law? and if it were, Whether it be not now void both in Law and
Equity? and how far in Law and Equity A. stands obliged to B. and B. stands
obliged to A. or whether A. must lose his Money and his Diet without any
Consideration, as B. would have it?

The Estate in the Lands and Houses remains in A. notwithstanding the
Acquittance, which yet imports an Agreement in Writing for the whole Matter to
be made good in Chancery; but A. may, notwithstanding that, bring an Ejectment
and recover the Houses and Land, as Heir to his Sister, and thereby put B. to
be Plaintiff in Equity, and have the Agreement performed, or A. may go on in
Equity if he thinks fit, and have the Agreement performed; and which soever of
them is Plaintiff, in Equity the Court will, before B. shall have the Land,
compel him to pay the 200 l. and also the 510 l. and secure the Diet, or else
will let A. keep the Houses and Land, and leave him to Sue B. and the Trustees
of the 250 l. per Ann. for the 200 l. Legacy.

Creswell Levine. 22 Feb. 96.
Upon Consideration of this Agreement made between A. and B. I am of Opinion,
That this is a good Agreement, and will be Binding to A. and the Chancery, I
conceive, will enforce A. to perform it in Specie, and to convey the Tenements
to B. upon performance of the Contract on his part; and, I conceive, the Letter
now showed me makes no Alteration of the Case.

Fr. Pemberton.


Feb. 26. 96. HAving heard the Opinion of Council upon the Matter to us
Referred, We are of Opinion, That the Agreement between Mr. Albyn and Mr. Mann
is in Force, and ought to take Effect: That as to any Charges in Law or Equity,
that have by Misapprehension bin Occasioned between them, each Party to bear
his own Charge; And that Mr. Albyn sign and duly execute, according to Law,
the Deeds of Conveyance of two Tenements, with their Appurtenances, in Bristol,
and Ten Acres of Lands in Somerset; As also a Release for a Legacy of Two
hundred pounds, left him by his Sister, upon the payment of Five hundred and
five pounds by William Mann Esquire; according to the Agreement between the said
Parties; the Estate in the said Houses to be cleared of all Encumbrances by Mr.
Albyn, as Council shall advise.

Witness, John Ward. Peter Noyes. John Brom.



London, 24o December. 1696. Brother Mann,
ARE you so only by Name, and not by Nature? I dare be confident my Sister took
you for one when she married you: If you are a Man, answer me like a Man, and
tell me what you would be at: Did I not write you before you put in your
Answer, under the 9th of September? I say, did I not then write you? If you
should think fit speedily to give me the said Deeds and Writings belonging to
the Houses and Lands at Bristow, and pay all those Moneys left and ordered by
my Sister to be paid, according to her Marriage-Covenants with you, and all the
Arrears of Rent due since her death and decease; and also all my Law Charges
you have forced me to be at, without any farther delay; I do hereby declare,
That I am content, for peace and quietness sake, to wipe off all your scandal,
and renew all true friendship and hearty kindness, and without any more words,
to release you from all other my just Pretenses. And on the 21st of November,
did I not write you? That having seen your Answer, wherein I find you do deny
the great Point I thought you could not avoid confessing: For if you do believe
there is a God, you must needs know and believe that he knows, that when I did
propose to you the matter of Diet for my life, as an expedient to accommodate
your earnest desire, as you were sitting and leaning on the Table at the
Tavern, you put forth your hand to mine, and holding your hand in mine, and
mine in yours, you did of your own accord say it should be put into the
Writings: so no more was said of the matter at our other Meetings, until I had
written the Receipt for the Five pounds on account of the whole Agreement; and
then you objected. Then, said I, why do you go back from your first Agreement?
And though I can disprove a great part of your Answer by sundry substantial
Witnesses; yet, contrary to all Advice, I do choose rather to referr all
Matters to the Almighty's disposal, than to give any farther trouble: So if
your Money be ready, I am ready to bring your Deeds to execute them, as you
have sworn I promised to do; for I do think that an Oath ought to decide and
end all controversy betwixt Man and Man, although the Lawyers would encourage
me to do otherwise; but that God that gave me my Being, can repair my Losses,
and Right my Wrongs, and requite mine Injuries; to Him I referr all. And in the
Postscript I desired you not to delay; but you have not thought fit to give me
one syllable of an Answer, which, I must tell you, is a breach of Common
civility, and CUSTARD cannot excuse it. Last night indeed I was informed that
you were for a new Bargain; but it cannot be, because my maxim in the World is,
not to deal with a Man twice, that has deceived me by denying his Word once:
So if you shall please, without any more of do, or longer delay, to make an
end of the Bargain, as you have sworn it to be, I am ready; or if you have not
the Moneys ready, I le stay for it till Monday next; if not, I would gladly be
gone out of Town this day, before to morrow. Please to send me your Answer by
the Bearer; if not, pray let him bring these back again to me, who am,

Your True, Plain-dealing Brother, Benjamin Albyn.


Mr. Brom tells me that you have offered for the Payment of 450 l. for the
Houses, Stable and Land I am Heir unto, within 12 Month's time after we have
concluded the former Bargain, as you have sworn it to be; That you will make
them all good to me, with the Arrears of Rent that are and shall be then due:
Your Proposition I do accept of, and do expect your Performance, that so I may
see whether there be any stability in you. Idem B. A.

Another mischief, caused by the scandal and infamy cast upon my Reputation, I
do think is not amiss here to mention, because it is fallen upon others as well
as myself: which is as follows. His Majesty having in the Year 1690, thought
fit to send mine Uncle Sclater to reside as Governor of New York, it pleased
God in less than four Months after his Arrival there, to take him off by sudden
Death; and though the Government there received him with great satisfaction,
and had made him the usual Presents, yet he did not get near the Expense of his
Equipment out; and after his Death the Government endeavored to take the most
part of it again from his Widow, as she mine Aunt wrote me; and desired me to
apply my self in her behalf to the King and Council: which being to be done by
Counsel, who are not to be employed without Money, and I being greatly in
disburse for mine Uncle before he went; on the account of which he gave me a
Statute-Staple for Two thousand pounds (without defeazance) upon his Lands,
only desiring me not to execute it unless he died; for he designed to pay me
that and more Moneys by Effects from New York, if it had pleased God he should
have lived but one year longer; and though it be so many years since, yet I
have not offered to put it in execution; partly by reason of mine Aunt's
Jointure upon the Land, and partly by reason of the excessive Charges of the
Law, which hitherto I have always found amount unto more than the Sum sued
for. So not having yet gotten one penny of the said Moneys, so long since due,
I did not think it in any wise a reasonable thing to disburse more: And knowing
that her Brother had some Hundreds of pounds due to her, lying in his hands, I
went to him, and showing her Letter and Papers sent unto me, I did fully
acquaint him with the Case; and after I had for many days importuned him in her
behalf, he told me he would not concern himself; and therefore desired me never
to speak to him one word more about it: Thereupon I wrote to her, and
acquainted her with what had passed, and gave her the necessary and best Advice
I could find: But she not sending a Letter of Attorney, did only write a Letter
to her Brother to supply me with whatsoever Moneys her Occasions should
require; which coming in her Packet to me sealed up, I delayed not to deliver
it to him as soon as I could find him; which I do believe was within less than
two hours after I received it. As soon as I had given it into his hand, he
opened and read it; and then I showed him my Letter she had wrote me, (though
he did not think fit to show me hers wrote to him*) then I asked him for
Moneys, and urged what he had plainly seen she had wrote to me; but he answered
me, That he was just going into the Country, (as I believe he was, because his
Chariot was waiting at his door for him,) and he would be in Town again within
a fortnight; and if I would please to lay out a Guiney or two, he would repay
me: At which I was so netled, that I could not but tell him what he said was
all stuff, for there were then some Ships that were just upon departure, and in
few days would be gone for New York, and the loss of a day was more than a
month at another time; and desired him to make the Case his own, and 'twould be
well if 100 Guineys would do: But however, if he would pay me but 100 Pounds,
I would do the best I could for her; and in case 50 would do the business, I
would invest or lay out the other 50, so as to put 100 l. into her Pocket
there; but all signified nothing; for he immediately went his way into the
Country, and came no more to Town till January following; the August he went
away into the Country with her Letter I then delivered to him. So hearing
nothing of him, I did write him sundry Letters, but had not one word of Answer
from him; so at Christmas I went down, and stayed at his House about fifteen
days, hoping he would consider and do something for Shame, if not for Justice
or Goodnature: So when ten of the fifteen days were past, I gave him a
Memorial, desiring him to consider of it, finding him altogether unwilling to
talk in any measure about her; and though I thought 'twould had forced him to
speak or do something, yet could not have so much as one word from him in the
other five days, though in that time I did offer many occasions, until I was
in his Coach coming for London; and putting the matter home unto him, he did
then tell me that the Letter was neither with her Name nor her own
Handwriting: So asking him why he did not show it me, or say so sooner, I went
my way; and since that being very angry with me, has reported very false
things of me: but however, the Searcher of hearts knows all things. And I do
believe his Hope is, That the Government of New York will break her heart; and
then she being his Sister, and Childless, he knows he is her Heir at Law. So it
seems not only natural Affection, but all honor and honesty is gone and
banished from among some sorts of people, that forget to be either charitable
or just, but indulge themselves in Covetousness, because they know that all
Complaints at Law, and their Issues, are not only doubtful, but also
chargeable and troublesome above measure. For according to mine own little
experience and observation among the Lawyers, I find that now the Attorneys are
grown so very exceeding expert in turning, twisting, and managing the Law, that
it is an approved Opinion among the Lawyers, that the best way to make a good
and able Lawyer, is to breed a young Man, by binding him Apprentice to an
Attorney first, for it is not studying the Law and the Statutes so much as the
Tricks and Practice of Courts, according to the Rules of the Courts of Justice,
that makes a good Lawyer. Now what those Rules and Practices of Courts are, is
the great Mystery, and would be worth the while for a Parliament to consider:
For if they do any thing, and you ask by what Law it is done, they will tell you
they know not by what Law it is done, but it is the Practice of the Court. So I
perceive it is no matter for Law, because Book-Cases and Reports are among them
much more studied than the Statutes. Now why should not a Judge declare in all
Cases, upon what Statute he delivers his Opinion, and passes his Judgment, as
well as a Divine must prove by a Text in the Holy Scripture the Ground of his
Doctrine when he Preaches? But what I chiefly observe, is,

First, In their Pleadings they will not be wanting, not only to ridicule and
banter, but also to assert falsities, calumnies and reproaches; which doubtless
ought not to be allowed before a Judge, where the Truth only ought to appear.

2 dly, When they have a design to favor a Cause on the one side, and to
baffle it on the other, they will tell you, This is not to the point, nor That is
not to the point; although the Case, in all its circumstances, cannot be
rightly understood without, and the omission of those Points, which they will call
needless, quite alters the Cause; and Truth being hid, Justice cannot be done.

3 dly, I find that matters of Accounts are mere Paradoxes to them; yet they will
pretend to understand them beyond any body, and persuade a Man he is mistaken;
and if he does not come over to what by their mistaken apprehension they do
think, they will tell him he will lose his Cause, and by that means confound his
Cause. As for example: If you talk with a Lawyer of so much per Cent. be it 2,
10, 20, or 50 per Cent. which are but certain Quantities upon an Hundred of
Goods or Moneys of a Foreign Coin; as Dollars, etc. yet if you do not allow
him to put the word Pounds to the 2, 10, 20, or 50 per Cent. he can by no means
understand what you mean; though at the same time he puts the word Pounds, it is
mere nonsense, and abominably impertinent: But however, you must let him alone.
And with this sort of Understanding he takes upon him to Plead a Cause betwixt
Merchant and Merchant; whereas if Merchants were left to themselves, and had a
Power to be Judges in their own Matters among themselves, there would be more
Justice, and less Wrong done by the impertinency of the devouring, insatiable
Lawyers.

4 thly, Let a man's Cause be right or wrong, they will not be wanting, for the
benefit of a Fee, to tell him he is in the right, and he must carry it without
all doubt, and the Cause cannot go against him. And if a cunning Knave, in
private Contract, by fair Promises, have over-reached, and by his
nonperformance cheats you, and there being no Witness, you prefer a Bill in
Equity against him, to discover and make him confess the Truth, Why then you
shall have no Remedy: For his Counsel shall direct him to Plead and Demurr to
what he cannot answer, without Confession. And I have heard a Lord Keeper on
the Bench (in a Cause I had before him in K. Charles the Second's time)
declare, Mine Adversary that cheated me, ought not to be compelled to answer my
Bill, because 'twas customary for Shopkeepers in Cheapside to tell Lies; and
(if you go from one End to the other to buy a pair of Stockins) they would tell
you they lost, though they got never so much by them: So, it seems, Wickedness
is defended by Wickedness, and there is no Remedy.

5 thly, Their great Master piece, and what the most ingenious, as they account
themselves, do profess, is to cut a man's Throat with a Feather.

6 thly, The great care of a Counsel and an Attorney is to manage a Cause with
that method, as may draw the most Money from their Client, and that they call
doing for the good of the Law.

7 thly, They are very forward to multiply Motions, and for every Motion the
Attorney or Solicitor must be paid for new Briefs, though the old ones do
serve; and every Counsel you have had to do with must be Fee'd for the Motion,
and must have his Brief of the whole Cause, though perhaps two or three Lines
for one Counsel be enough, and there is no occasion for the rest to speak one
word.

8 thly, They must all be Fee'd also, and have new Briefs for the Defense
against every Motion made by the Adversary, upon due notice given to the Client.

9 thly, The Attorney commonly directs the Client what he must give to Counsel,
and commonly once in three Months he gives his Client a Bill, amounting to as
much Money as has bin given in that time to Counsel; and if the Client offer to
abate him Three-half-pence of his Bill, he will take it amiss and in great dudgen,
although the Client perhaps has spent upon him and the Counsel many a Pound at
the Tavern.

10 thly, If your Counsel have undertaken (by the force of Money from your
Adversary) to betray you, and favor his Cause, he shall, under pretense of
zeal for your Cause, bawl most filthily, and calling your own Witnesses to give
their Testimony, he will either bawl and make such a noise as to affright them, or
else confound them with cramp Questions: And when all is done, you must believe
he has labored most vehemently, and taken an abundance of pains for you.

11 thly, The Solicitor or Counsel can neither of them tell you how long
'twill be before the Cause be ended, or how many Years it is like to continue,
especially in Chancery, for I did never yet hear of a Cause begun and ended
there in so little as one Year's time; and most Causes are held out according
to the length of the Clients Purses.

12 thly, For the benefit of a Fee, there is hardly any Case but they will
pretend, if you desire to be secured legally by a Writing under a Counsel's
hand as Law, they will not disappoint or displease you by telling you according to
Law it cannot be, though to be safe according to Law only, it is you do come to
desire Advice and a legal Instrument to be drawn, whether it be a Defeazance or
Conveyance, etc. yet right or wrong he will pretend to draw it out legal, and
firm, and safe; and afterward, if it prove insignificant or scandalous in the
Law, he, to excuse himself, shall call the Client Rogue and Knave, etc. for
asking of him his said Advice, and taking the Writing of him; which he parted
not with, unless he had received the Payment of perhaps more than his*full Fees
twice told at least.

Suppose a Man be wronged and cheated of ever so much; as suppose it be to the
value of a Million, which to me seems a very considerable Sum, and he himself
could make it appear undeniably by good and sufficient proof, if had the
liberty to speak himself, (for it is impossible any Man can know the truth of
his Case better than himself;) yet if he have not Ten shillings to give a
Lawyer to speak for him, he must lose all, and be without remedy; and if he
cannot borrow, beg or steal so much, he must go to Prison, and there rot and be
quite undone; for the Lawyers never trust a Client. So it is plain, that without
Money no Justice must be had; and whether it be according to the Law of the
Land, I know not; but I dare be so confident as to say, it is not according to
the Law of God, who has given every Man a Tongue to speak for himself.

Also I have found a sort of a Lawyer of 20 or 30 Years study and reading the
Law, that is neither Counsel nor Attorney, but pretending to great Knowledge in
the Law, and great Commiseration and Pity toward me, to see me so much
harrassed and abused, would also pretend friendly and faithfully to advise and
help me, and accordingly did advise me by no means to be served with a Decretal
Order; and meeting with one of mine Adversary's Counsel, threatening to take out
a Statute of Bankrupt against me if I would not be served with the Decretal
Order, he bids him kiss -- at which he pretending to be enraged, effectually
does the thing. And afterward finding that by Law I was Heir to what Brother
Mann has and does keep from me, bids me not trouble my self, he would
undertake to get for me my Right, without my disbursing one penny of Money till
'twas fully recovered: For which kind proffer, as I did accept of, so I gave
him my many and most hearty Thanks; and accordingly he undertakes it, and in
the stead of taking the right and short way, by serving the Tenants with
Ejectments, as I desired, and he promised me to do, he, it seems, thought fit
to employ the great Mr. E. of Bristow, as he called him; who being the richest
Attorney in Bristow, must needs be both the most extremely honest and able; so
upon his discoursing with him, they did resolve and contrive betwixt them how
to make a beneficial Suit of it. So concluding together to File a Bill in
Chancery to get the Writings, they accordingly prefer a Bill; and after a few
days were past, my learned Lawyer comes and tells me what was done, and how
that without the Writings 'twas* impossible to serve Ejectments; so I
acquiesc'd with whatsoever his great Friendship and Learning did suggest; *and
about three Months after tells me, that the great Mr. E. had done the business,
and I need not trouble my self, he would take care, though they had neither
gotten an Answer to the Bill, nor the Writings for the Estate: So waiting some
months longer, and no Answer appearing, I went to the Clerk in Chancery that
they had employed to know the reason of the delay, and told him I would be
baffled no longer; so with much ado Brother Mann did put in a Plea, setting
forth that part of my Bargain as was for his turn, but left the other part out;
which being upon Oath, seems to me a very strange liberty for him to take. But
Lawyers, for Money, can enable Clients to do their pleasure: Thereupon I did
get leave to amend the Bill, and with much ado did get his Answer, denying the
matter of fact. So thinking that an Oath ought to deside all Controversy
betwixt Man and Man, I, to avoid farther trouble and charge, offered to make an
end with him according as he had sworn, but he refused. Now my learned and
friendly Lawyer being somewhat disgruntled at these my Proceedings, appoints
the great Attorney E. to send his Bill of Charges to be paid by me, which
amounted in Money to 4 l. 10 s. 6 d. So after I had received it, I went to him,
and asked him what he had done? Why truly he had not served Ejectments, and
until his Bill was paid he would do nothing; so I told him, If he would serve
Ejectments, and get me into Possession, I would pay his Bill, but I was very
unwilling to pay Money for nothing; and as I had never seen him before, and had
never employed him, so I had nothing to do with him; and doubtless he that had
employed him, must pay him; and there was no reason for me to pay Money twice
for one thing; for I was accountable to my friend, who knew best how to reckon
with him. So he told me, if I would not pay him, he would make me pay him:
(Behold an Attorney*) that contrary to all Right, Reason, and Sense, can by his
management of Law make a Man pay his demands that never employed him, although
he had not effected any thing for him. In March last I went down to Bristow my
self to get Ejectments served, so went to the great E. his House to desire him
to do it, and then I would pay his Bill; but being very stately and full of
business, as he pretended, delayed me for about a week, and did nothing, and
told me he would do nothing, unless I would give under mine Hand and Seal to
pay him what Moneys he pleased; and afterward sent me his Billby one of his
Men, *amounting to 4 l. 10 s. 6 d. as follows: Viz.

Mich. 1695. l. s. d Albyn adv. Mann. 2 Subpoena's serving and partage. -- 0 11
0 Affidavit Jur' and partage of serving Mr Doleman -- 0 04 6 Ingr Bill and Duty
-- 0 11 0 File and Rule -- 0 04 0 Soll. -- 0 06 8 Hill. 1695. Six Clerks Fee --
0 03 4 Affidav. of serving Mann -- 2 s. 6 d. 0 09 6 Fill. and Cop' both
Affidavits 7 s. -- Atc' adv. Mann* -- 0 03 10 Cop' Resp' Dollman 11 -- 0 08 4
Rule adv. Mann to Answer and Duty -- 0 01 2 Soll. -- 0 06 8 Easter-Term -- 99.
Six Clerks Fee -- 0 03 4 Cop' Plaint and Resp' fo. 14. -- 0 10 6 Soll. -- 0 06
8 4 10 6

J. F. for Mr. T. E.

And then I enquired for another Attorney; so being directed to one Mr. Richard
Knight a Quaker, much commended for his Honesty; I went to him, and asked if he
would serve Ejectments? he told me yes: Then taking the Names of the Persons
and Places, he ordered his Clerk immediately to draw out Copies to be served in
and about the City of Bristow; but what was in the Country some Miles off, he
desired time for, as he found most convenient. So leaving him, I went my way;
but bethinking my self, and not knowing what the Charge might be, I went back
immediately to ask how much 'twould amount unto? but when I came back, Mr.
Knight was gone out; but meeting with his Clerk, who told me he had served his
Master about four years, and in that time had served many hundred Ejectments: I
asked him how much the Charge would be? because I told him if 'twere much, it
must be paid in London, for I had brought but little Money more than to bear my
Charges out and home; so he told me the Charges would not be much, Ten
shillings would be the uttermost penny: Then said I, If that be all, I shall
pay you that. So at night he brought me Copy of the Ejectments, with his
Affidavit of Service annexed and affixed to it: so, without making words, I
paid him Ten shillings for his Master, and gave him a shilling more for
himself. As soon as he had received his Money, he shows me a Note, which he
said his Master had drawn out, amounting to 19 s. 2 d. Then said I, How comes
this! did not you tell me Ten shillings would be the utmost penny for all
Charges? Yes, said he, but I was mistaken, my Master has made another Account,
and I must have the rest of the Money. Then said I, Let me speak with your
Master; where is he, and I Will go to him, and know the reason why your Agreement
with me should not stand good? and if there be any mistake, I do not desire to
take any advantage of it: But he told me his Master was gone out of Town, and
he knew not when he would come again, and he was accountable to his Master for
so much Money: Then I said, I shall part with no more Money till I speak with
your Master; I have paid you to the full of mine Agreement, and have given you
a Shilling over; I have nothing more to do with you, my business is with your
Master; and until I speak with him, I do not know but the Note may be a trick
of yours: but however I will stay, although it be these five days, to speak
with your Master. So he went his way, and next morning came to me again, and
told me, If I would not pay the rest of the Bill, he would enter an Action
against me: I told him, I should pay no more Money till I had seen his Master.
So as he said, he went and entered an Action against me for 39 s. though his
demand was but for 8 s. and bringing an Officer with him, takes me out of my
Lodging at Gilders-Inn, where I lay; and I being but a mere Stranger in
Bristow, made my Case known to an ancient Citizen and Shopkeeper in
Broadstreet; who never having heard of the like trick, immediately offered
himself to be my Bail, and went with me to the Tolesey, and meeting one of his
acquaintance, desired him to join with him, because the Law requires two for
Bail; but when came to the Tolesey, the Officers there refused to take Bail: So
then the Officer carried me to another place, where I was told, If I would not
pay down all the Money, and the Charges of the Action, and the Officers Fees, I
must be put in Prison without any farther delay; and though I did desire to be
carried before the Mayor, they denied me, saying, He had nothing to do with
it. So I paid down the uttermost penny they thought fit to demand, and took the
Clerk's Receipt: A True Copy of which, is as follows:

For Drawing the Ejectments and Advice 3 s. 4 d. For Writing four Copies 10 s.
For Service 3 s. 4 d. For Drawing the Affidavit, King's Stamp and Swearing 2 s*
6 d. For Action 1s. For Arrest 2s. 6d. make 22 s. 8d. 24th of March 1696.
Received the Contents of the above for the Use of my Master Richard Knight, per
me Jos. Tapley.

Then being let go, I walked to the Tolesey, where I was informed the Young
man's Master, Richard Knight, had bin seen just before; so went to his House,
where finding him in his Office, I told him what Usage I had received from his
Young Man; but all that I could have from him was, That truly he was very
sorry for the Action, and it was done without his Knowledge; and if I would, he
would beat his Clerk for it if that would do me any good, and he could do no
more, for he said his Clerk had no Money, and was not worth one farthing.
Afterward I went to Mr. Mayor of Bristow, and acquainted him with what had
passed; but he told me 'twas not in his Power to help me; and if he should go
about to endeavor it, he feared he should but only expose both himself and me,
and did therefore think it best to let it alone; and withal did tell me, with
great lamentation, of the great abuses and ill practices of the Attorneys in
and about that City: But in Matters that came before him he would not suffer
any of them to speak so much as one word, though they were generally so very
forward, that he had much to do, and 'twas with a great deal of trouble he
made them to forbear: For, said he, I have always found that they make a good
Cause bad, and it is my business to do Right and Justice to every Man that
comes before me. Now if an High-way-Man had taken so much from me, I think
'twould had bin much more tolerable and fair, because I might then have had
the liberty of fighting and defending my self: But it seems the Attorneys (that
have an especial Protection in the Law from being called Knaves) can make the
Law to serve them to all intents and purposes, whether it be down right Robbery
or Cheating by extravagant Bills, charging 10 or 20 times more than what is
lawfully and justly due; or by Arresting Men for Debt before ever it be
demanded of them; and taking out Execution first on the Principal; and when
satisfied there, then on his Bail, and in two or three Years time can run up a
Debt from 45 l. 4 s. 6 d. and make it amount to 200 l. Doubtless these Men are
choice, and ought to be nourished and cherished as Procurers of the Nation's
happiness, for they are in themselves most absolute, having the Law at their
command, each Man is Judge, Jury, and Executioner, and all within his own Will
and Pleasure. I thank God I have traveled some part of the World, and in it a
good part of Turkey and Christendom, but I never met with or heard of the like
usage and practices used here in England. I do not remember to have seen or
heard that the Locust or Catterpillers, or any sort of Vermin, have so very
much increased in the time, as that sort of Men called Attorneys have
increased, within these few years about Bristow. I remember an ancient
Inhabitant of that place told me in March last, that of his certain knowledge,
about 30 years since, there were belonging to Bristow no more than six
Attorneys, and the one half of them died in Goal for want of Business, and the
others could hardly live by their Employment; and now there are not less than
Six*score; nay, he believed they were more numerous than the Porters about that
City, and every one of them lives like a Gentleman of a great or plentiful
Estate: And now one of them, that was but a poor Clerk about 26 years since,
keeps in his Stable 10 or 12 Horses constantly; and when he comes up to London,
he commonly has 6 or 8 Horsemen to attend him. Now how comes this great
Mystery to pass, if it be true as have bin told, that an Attorney cannot
honestly get by his Practice above 40 pounds per Ann. I think it may well be
supposed, and there is no great doubt but they have the Art of sinking,
devouring, and swallowing Estates, as is too too apparent by multitudes of
ruined Families. Now if a Man of any other profession charges in his Account
more than what is due, he is accounted and called Knave; and if a Coachman,
Carr-man or Water-man, demand more than his Fare, for which there are set
Rates, the Magistrate can and will punish him or them for such Extortion, and
make them be content with their just Dues. Or if an High-way-Man or Pick-pocket
shall take from a Man the value of Five shillings, or less, he must by the Laws
of the Land be hanged for Theft. But Lawyers and Attorneys do not only bereave
Men of their Estates and Reputations, whilst they live, but even their
Posterities must grieve and groan under their most monstrous evil Practices:
And although our Laws are undoubtedly the very best and wholsomest of any, yet
these Men by their evil practices do render them the most grievous and the
most burdensome in the whole World; and I do believe the whole World does not
afford the like Hell upon Earth for Men to be devoured by Fraud and Deceit,
under the color and pretense of Law and Justice. I have bin told, that at
Doctors-Commons there is now depending a Suit for the Value of Eighteen pence,
no more, which cannot be yet ended, although the Parties concerned have spent
at least Three hundred pounds on either side. I cannot conceive how it is
possible for a Poor Man, or a Man of a mean Estate, to get his Right by Law of
a Man that is vastly Rich, who with his Money strikes a Cause through and
through, i. e. on both sides: For though the Man of mean Estate may make shift
to provide and give the due Fees according to Law; yet if the Rich Man shall
not only Fee his own Counsel much higher, and by cunning ways do the like to
the mean Man's Counsel, (which is no new practice,) must not the mean Man needs
lose his Cause and his Right in it without remedy? For I have heard of a Story
of one that very lately was the ancientest and ablest Lawyer and Counsel in
England, that in his time received a Present of Pippins with some Broad Pieces
of Gold stuck in, into every Pippin one; but how many Hundred of them there
was, I have forgotten: But however, the adverse Party receiving intelligence
thereof, resolved to out do him; and accordingly sent him a Present of a Pig,
stufft in the Belly with Guineys of a greater Value; so he took care to manage
the Cause accordingly; and afterward, without making any manner of
restitution, or satisfaction, or shame, made a jest of it; and laughing at his
own Client, said, The Pig had eaten up the Pippins. Now if every Man had the
liberty to speak for himself, in his own Cause, the Truth would more naturally
be found out by an understanding Judge, and such corrupt Doings would be
unpracticable; I do believe 'twould be very good husbandry, and a good way for
administering Justice impartially. If the Nation would give the King a Million,
or two Millions every year for Justice to be administered without Fees, and none
but the Sons of the Nobility and Gentry of good Estates should be permitted to
practice the Law, (though I do not say but all Men ought to study to know the
Law;) and when made Judges, to have such liberal Salleries, as to be above
Bribery; and if found to be tardy, to have such severe and ignominious
Punishment, as may make them so abominable to Mankind, as to account it a
favor to die, rather than to live. At present, any poor Man, that can but
scrape together as much as will bind his Son Apprentice to an Attorney, is very
ambitious to effect it: So his Son, being placed with an Attorney, knowing his
low Extraction, becomes very diligent and expert, and most sharp in the ways of
his Master; and getting a Reputation, becomes (when his Time is out) ambitious
above measure, and cares not what he does, so he can be but Great. As for
Example: Many passages were very observable in one lately in joint Commistion
for the Custody of the Great Seal, who came up to London a poor Boy in a
Leathern Doublet and Breeches, who thought himself highly preferred when he
could earn Eight-pence in a Day by writing Hackney at a Penny per Sheet; though
there were other two in Commission, yet he would talk ten times more than both
the other two that had bin better born and bread. As for mine own part, I have
so much and so long suffered by their evil practices, and thereby am made so
very sensible of the intolerable pain and trouble thereof, that if it shall so
please the King and Parliament, I do hereby offer my self solemnly to covenant
with them, That in case the Nation may be redressed and fully freed from their
usurped Power, most impudent and diabolical Practices, I say I will freely lay
down my Neck for mine Head to be severed from my Shoulders, if nothing else
will enduce them to retrieve this Land. However, I think it not amiss to put
them in mind, that though the Lawyers may by their Arrogance and Innuendo's
call themselves the Government, and consequently I ought to die for making such
complaints of them, for they are not to be silenced, as I do remember Mr.
Brunskell told me, that one of them being a Judge, sitting in Council, told
King Charles the Second, when by undeniable argument he had put them to a
nonplus before him. May it please your Majesty, said he, We are your Majesty's
Judges of the Law, and therefore desire not to be put to give an Answer to him,
being but a private Man: Which is a fine way of arguing; and I do believe,
there is but as little Mercy in a Lawyer as in an Executioner, if not less;
because for the sake of a Fee he thinks himself obliged to do all the wrong he
can to his Client's Adversary, and I doubt not but the Lawyers by their
Innuendo's will be as violent against me, as the Ephesians were against those
that spoke against their Diana: But let them remember and know, that their Rage
can run no farther than God in his wise Providence will permit, whose Justice
will undoubtedly over-take them, and their Atheism cannot save them. As yet
they keep the People in such Awe from complaining against them, that they tell
them 'twill be Doomsday in the Afternoon to complain of a Lawyer. Now though I
am not a Great Man, and hope never shall be (my Prayers being for neither
Poverty nor Riches, but only for Food convenient for me,) yet mine heart wishes
GREATLY for my Country's welfare both in this World and that which is to come,
when this must have an end. I do believe 'twould be no misspent time for the
Nobility and Gentry of the Land, to whom the Government is by the King
entrusted, to consider how that every one of them in particular is but a Man,
and but a Man that is mortal; and how that after every Man's particular Death
comes his particular Judgment; and that how great soever his Place, Profession
or Possession be in this World, when the breath is out of his body, all these
things cannot signify this -- to him, and nothing but his just Actions can
avail him any thing, and that even the pomps and vanities so much desired and
sought after in this World, are but troublesome, and do perish and pass away
with the little time they seem only to enjoy them; and the time of the longest
liver will not amount to one minute of Eternity, whither all must go and are
going, without any stopping, not so much as 1 th / 1000 part of one minute. As
for mine own part, I covet nothing more than with an accompitency of food and
raiment, honestly to pass in peace and quietness off this stage, though such is
my misery, the more I seek, the less I find them; and therefore I must seek one
thing more, and that is PATIENCE, which I pray God to grant me, and then
nothing can hurt me; for indeed it is the want of that, together with the unruly
passions of my frail, corrupt human Nature that make my Grievances (though
unparalleled) to be Grievances intolerable to me: And therefore as God has
commanded us to preserve every man his own life, and the life of his Neighbor;
I have made this mine Appeal, that so by longer continuance in silence, I may
not be a Murderer. And now God's Will be done; I pray God direct both King and
Parliament to redress this Land from Bribery, Injustice and Extortion, so
excessively practiced and administered by the means of the Lawyers and
Attorneys, who are grown so very supernumerous in the House of Commons, that
the doors are kept shut against all Appeals that complain of their evil
practices, the grand Cause almost of all weighty Grievances whatsoever: For if
by Law a Man may not be righted, what must he do? And if by Law he were
righted, or could be righted, what occasion could there be of complaint? I do
think, and humbly suppose it may be very well worth the while for the King and
Parliament to take into their Consideration that Attorney's Oath (though I
never have seen it I must confess) which Mr. P. Brunskell told me of, and every
Attorney is obliged to take before he can practice; and is, it seems, of that
force, if observed, that it ties them up from all those outrageous practices
now in use among them; and if every one of them were Fined for Breach thereof,
at a certain rate for every year's practice, every one according to his time, I
do believe 'twould raise the King a brave Revenue, perhaps some millions of
Money for the time past; and for the future to inflict such punishment as the
Law directs in the Case of Perjury, would be a matter of no bad consequence:
For I do remember Mr. P. Brunskell told me, that he served an Apprentiship
with one Mr. Coats an Attorney, and in that time taking notice of the
Attorney's Oath, did resolve, if possible, to avoid taking it; and when out of
his time, went into the Country and practiced there in his Master's Name, for
some years, without taking the Oath; where, falling into much practice, was
envied by other Attorneys that complained of him for so doing; and being sent
for up to London by the Lord Chief Justice Hales, he did urge and require him
to take it sundry times, but he begged to be excused, saying, If he took it, he
would keep it. But at length the Judge being unwilling to excuse him any
longer, made him take it, and then at night he went to the Judge and showed him
the contents of the Oath and wherein it was generally broken; which when the
Judge did see, and was made sensible of, he became so much troubled in his
conscience, that he appointed him to come to him early next morning; so he
went, and the Judges Coach being ready when he came, he took him along with him
in his Coach to White Hall, where King Charles the Second was; and being there
before his Levy, waited for his rising; when, while he was waiting, the King
being told that Judge Hales was waiting without, the King came out to him; and
as soon as he did see the King, he fell down upon his Knees, and begged his
Majesty's Pardon for the many great Offenses he had bin guilty of; but the King
wondering at him, told him, he knew no offense, and asked him what he meant;
then telling him, there was his Accuser, pointed unto Mr. Brunskell, then
hardly 22 years old, gave his Majesty fully to understand the matter; and
thereupon the King wondering at the forwardness of the Young man, asked him
many Questions, and appointed him to make such discovery and prosecutions of
the corrupt practices used in the Law, as might tend to the regulation and
reformation thereof in Westminster Hall, and all other his Majesty's Courts of
Justice whatsoever; and his Majesty having then promised to stand by him, he
did industriously use his Endeavors accordingly, and, as he has told me,
spent near 10000 l. if not 20000 l. in the attempt and proceedings therein, and
is now indebted many thousands pounds more than he is able to pay, even to the
utter ruin of himself and Family. And though whilst the King, according to his
promise, stood by him, he made a great progress therein; yet when the King did
leave him, and a contribution of 100000 Guineys was raised amongst the Lawyers,
and applied skilfully by them that understood Bribery, and the right way of
managing thereof, did put a full stop to his proceedings; and being thereby
utterly ruined, dares scarcely stir abroad for fear of being Arrested now; and
how in King Charles the Second's time all the twelve Judges did sit together
three times to consider how to take away his Life by Law; and finding they
could not do it by Law, some body was employed to assassinate him, is formerly
related, so need not here to be repeated again. Many other things he told me,
which would be too long and tedious to be here incerted; but believing them to
be true, I could not but look upon him as a right honest Man, of great
integrity, and I could not but have a great kindness and respect for him;
insomuch that being Arrested, and put into the Gatehouse at Westminster for a
Debt of 45 l. 4 s. 6 d. and there being like to rot, and never to get thence,
as he told me when I came to him; for he sent earnestly for me to come unto
him; and then telling me what great Promises he had from the Court, and how for
the want of his Liberty he should lose his Preferment to a Place of 4 or 500 l.
per Annum; and if he were out, he should be able soon to pay a much greater
Sum than he was imprisoned for. I did, in compassion to him, become his joint
Bonds-man to his Creditor for his principal Debt and Charges amounting unto, as
the Sum was then made up in the Prison, I think 80 l. on condition he would
give him a year's time to pay it in; for believing what he said, I did not
doubt but he would pay it without suffering me to be troubled therewith, as he
promised; but when the time expired, he was as unable to pay as at the first;
but still in expectation of the performance of some great Promise at Court. So
he having desired and required of me to pay the Bond, I did desire him the said
Mr. Brunskell to give me a Bond and Judgment, entered up for the same, promising
unto him that I would never trouble or ask him for it, unless he should be able
to pay: and so to give it under mine hand; and I desired the thing only,
because, as I told him, I would not be troubled with a Lawsuit for its
recovery, but he refused. So, whereas I had provided the Money to satisfy the
debt, I thought it not reasonable to part with it for a Man that refused to
give me that reasonable satisfaction that lay in his power; and to me seemed a
plain demonstration, that his intent was never to pay me: And he being an
Attorney, well acquainted with the many tricks and wiles of the Law-practice, I
knew 'twas a vain thing for me to think of recovering it from him by Law, if
ever he should be able; and therefore I did resolve not to lay down the Money:
Whereupon Mr. Dawes his Adversary's Attorney sent an Officer, and Arrested me
upon the Bond, before ever he, or any for him, demanded the Money of me, and
forcing me to put in Bail, sued the Bond to an Execution: Thereupon I went to
him, and told him I did surrender and offer my Person as his Prisoner, to be
committed when he pleased to the Fleet, or any other Prison; or if he would
accept of them, I had brought with me, and would deliver to him. four Bonds for
several Sums of Moneys due to me many years before, whose Principal and
Interest amounted unto much more than the Debt and Charges, which he took and
examined by reading them over, and I promising him 20 per Cent. for the
recovery thereof, when he should have fully paid his Client, and brought me the
overplus. He accepted the same, and gave me a Receipt for them. A true Copy of
which Receipt, is as follows:

10th of June 1696.
REceived then of Mr. Benjamin Albyn the four Bonds under-named, viz. One Bond,
wherein Mr. Peele and Mr. Dixton stand bound to him the said Mr. Albyn in 50 l.
for the payment of 25 l. One other Bond, wherein the same Parties stand bound
to him in the same Sum of 50 l. for payment of 25 l. One other Bond, wherein
Madam Gloxin and Others stand bound to him in 80 l. for payment of 41 l. 4 s.
And also a Covenant from Capt. Cuttance, to pay 20 l. Witness my Hand the Day
and Year abovenamed.

Warner Dawes.


So I went my way, thinking to had bin quiet; but, contrary to all Reason and
Justice, being an Attorney that can manage the Law to all his intents and
purposes, finds out a way, in few days after, to trouble my Bail, and, as I was
told by them, takes Execution out against them for the same Debt that I thought
I had in some measure satisfied; and since the 10th of June 1696, has run up
the debt, which was then but 85 pounds with charges, now on the 23d of March
1696, unto 160 l. and 40 l. more for Charges, besides 20 in 30 l. more my Bail
have spent of my money for their defense; and now the said Dawes pretends to
lay a Sequestration on some Lands and Houses I have a Right unto, and keeps my
Bonds before mentioned from me. Now being, in mine apprehension, thus unjustly
dealt with, and used by the Attorneys, I would gladly be informed whether it be
reasonable and according to our Law, for Attorneys to munkeyfie, metamorphize
and abuse Men after such a rate? and if they shall be encouraged and suffered
to go on in these their practices, who shall live free from the plague of their
devices? Another experiment I have had of Lawyers and Gentlemen of the Long
Robe and Quill, is, That having fee'd two of them with five Guineys to each for
to plead my Cause the next day in the morning; which being then called
according to appointment and expectation, and the one of them being then in
waiting and expectation of a Cause to be called at the Exchequer Bar when my
Cause was called; and although I went and called him my self, yet not being
able to come back in time, my Cause was put off to another day; so, according
to their unconscionable practice and expectation, I was forced to give them
both their refreshing Fees; and then upon hearing my Cause, it appearing very
fair for me, 'twas again put off for the Accommodation of mine Adversaries,
(not being in all points ready) for some days longer, so was forced to Fee them
again; and by that time my Cause came on again to be heard, mine Adversary did
gain such an interest in my Counsel, that the Elder of them labored
industriously to betray and deliver me up to mine Adversary, had not the
Minutes of his first Pleadings bin taken, and then considered; and to the
Younger of them I gave at the Evening before two Guineys to make up his Fee
fifteen Guineys; he told me I was very slender in my Fees, and, I think, did
not speak one word more for me. I confess if I had found, or could at any time
find my Moneys in the streets, I might then had afforded to fill his Pocket
with Guineys: But in regard it is not so, and what Fees I gave them, were none
other, but out of such Moneys that as a Merchant by the sweat of my brows I did
difficultly gain with much labor, toil and hazard both of my Person and mine
Estate; and the Law has appointed a Counsels Fee to be but Ten shillings. Is
it not great Impudence in a Lawyer to pretend himself not duly paid, when,
according to the set Rate in the Law, he is Fee'd not only with Ten shillings,
but more than Ten times over so much: Nay, I have heard of one, that being
offered sixty Guineys for a Fee, did refuse and say he would not take 90, and
under 100 Guineys he would not appear. Is it not a stupendous thing, and a
burning shame? And if duly considered, what must the end of these things be,
when a Lawyer, that knows the Law, shall, contrary to Law, exact extravigant
Fees to falsify all Causes they are not for, but retained against? How is it
possible that Truth and Justice should abound, whilst such vast Numbers are
permitted and employed to confound the Rights of the People. I have bin told,
that according to the strict Rules of the Law, less than Five pounds will pay
all Expenses for a Law Suit; as for Counsel and Attorneys Fees, for Writings
and Briefs, with all other Charges whatsoever of a Law Suit, cannot cost above
Five pounds; and now it is not Five hundred or Five thousand pounds can end some
Lawsuits; and doubtless it is not Money that before God can make a Cause better
or worse, or that which is right to be wrong, or that which is false to be
true, or that true which is false; and whilst the People are thus oppressed by
the Lawyers covetous and undue practices, how is it possible for Peace and
Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety to be established amongst us,
according to the Prayers of our Church; which must not, and, when it considers,
dares not seem to mock God in its Prayers. But that I, with most humble
submission, leave to the Consideration of the great Wisdom of the King and his
great Council the Parliament, whose business it is; for doubtless a Reformation
is not only a great Duty, but would be a great Blessing to this Nation.

In Turkey, in any Case, if a Man go to the Muftee, who though is the Head or
Chief of their Church, yet he is commonly so learned and well read in the
Turkish Laws, that when he gives his Fetfa; that is, a short Declaration in
Writing under his Hand, what is Law in the Case you go to him about; it is so
true, firm, and sure, that the Caddee, or Judge, cannot go against it when he
gives his Judgment on the Case.

And if we had Lawyers that would study the Laws of this Land, so as to be able
to do the like, I do think they would be highly worthy of great Honor and
Esteem, and great Rewards both from the King and People; for then every Man
might, upon good ground, plead his own Cause, if he be in the right; or if in
the wrong, then might desist, and of himself fairly and honestly adjust and
agree with his Adversary. And this I do humbly conceive would be a very good
means to prevent and save people from those long, tedious, expensive and
vexatious Lawsuits, that waste Estates, and make Envy and Malice so much to
abound in this Nation; and, on the contrary, will cause Unity, Peace and
Concord to be much more esteemed and practiced amongst us.

FINIS.

