All is not Gold that glisters: OR, A WARNING-PIECE TO ENGLAND, BEING A
Prophecy, written by that famous and learned Knight Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH, the
day before he was beheaded on Tower Hill, in the Reign of our late Sovereign
Lord KING JAMES. Foretelling the great and wonderful things that will befall
the King of Scots, the People of this Nation, the change of Religion and Law,
and how long the Government shall continue without a King, or House of Lords.
Also, the landing of an English Army in France this Summer, the taking of the
City of Rome, and the beheading of the Pope, and seven of his Cardinals. With
other remarkable Passages and Presidents.

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1651.

All is not Gold that glisters.
AS for the present estate and condition of the Commonwealth of England, it is
affirmed by famous Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his Prophecy, written by his own
hand, the day before he was executed at Tower hill, in the days of King James,
That it should remain without a Kingly Head for the space of 13 years; and that
before, and at the expiration thereof great troubles should arise; much
striving for the Government and Crown, but to little purpose; For be assured
(says he) O ye people of England, that the days will come, When diligent
inquisition shall be made for innocent blood, both from Kings, Parliaments,
Commonwealths, and States; and that great will be the fall of Tyrants and
Usurpers; yet nevertheless (after a short time) the people shall be governed by
a Head, a mutual enjoyment of peace, will attend the English Nation; and all
the Saints and Inhabitants thereof shall sing Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Blessed
be the Name of the Lord, for this great Work of Reformation, and restoring of
us to our former pristine condition.

This Government shall refrain firm and unmovable, and all the Princes of the
Earth shall adhere thereunto.

It is likewise prophesied, That in the year, 1652. the English shall become
Masters of France; And in the year, 1653 the Germans and Danes shall submit.
Lastly, That in 1654, the Lord General Cromwell shall enter Italy with an Army,
and in 1655. the City of Rome shall be taken by his Excellency, and the Pope
and seven Cardinals shall fall under the fatal blow of the Ax, and be headless.

On the 14 instant, came an Express from France, signifying, That all the
troubles in Bordeaux are appeased; the Nobility and Citizens of the Town of
Guienne declare for the Prince of Conde, which draws a conjunction of all
Bordeaux to his Highness, whose Army and provisions increased daily.

Genesis Harcourt has writ to the Queen, That his Officers have prot^sted against
the Cardinal, and have deserted his Majesty's service, by reason that he is
made Generalissimo of the Kings Army. This Cardinal is both a great politici^n,
a gallant Soldier, and a learned Scholar. The Parl. of Paris sent two of
their Members to the Court to the King and Queen, to inhibite the coming in of
the said Cardinal, which two Members were taken prisoners; but this breach does
exceedingly exasperate the spirits of the Parl. Insomuch, that they immediately
sent a Declaration to the King, Wherein they declared, That if his Majesty
would not vouchsafe to hearken to the advice of his Parliament, and to leave
his evil Council, and return to Paris within the space of ten days, that then
they would depose him, sequester all his Lands and Revenues, degrade Him of his
Crown, Honors, and Dignities, and fight against Him and the Kingdoms Enemies.

The Duke of Guise is come into Province with 6000 soldiers from the King of
Spain to assist the Prince of Conde. The Duke of Longueville sent a Message to
his Highness, assuring his Excellency that he has 2000 Horse, and 2000 Foot
for his service. The Lord Chancellor of France, and diverse other Dukes,
Marquesses, and Noblemen, offer great sums of money out of their own Estates to
maintain him. Whereupon the Duke of Orleans (at a full Assembly in Paris)
declared, That he was resolved (with God assistance) to expose life, fortune,
and estate, for the preservation of the Kingdoms Rights and Interests,
protesting his integrity to be true and faithful therein, in the preservation
and maintenance of so great and good a Cause.

The Senate of Bordeaux (since the Cardinals coming in) sent to the King to
take off the Declaration against the Prince of Conde. But instead thereof, the
King sent a Proclamation to his Attorney General, by which the Parliament,
Jurats, and all their Officers there, are discharged of their Offices, which so
inflamed them, that they took the Letters from the Attorney General, and sent
them to the Prince, resolving to adhere to the Prince upon that account.

His Highness the Duke of Orleans forces are marched toward Zayr, to hinder
the Cardinal from joining, or getting to the King at Poictiers. Col. Hollac (a
German) is come in to the Duke of Orleans with 500 gallant Horse, and were
honorably entertained. Diverse other eminent Commanders belonging to Gen, d'
Aumont have likewise tendered their service, which was received with great
applause, and triumph.

From Scotland they write, That the last week there was a general meeting of
the Ministers and Laymen in Edinburgh; their debates are very high, crying
out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; Great is the Scots Presb^tery. On the
next Sabbath they intend a Fast. Well may they fast and pray, if it he but to
learn humility.

From Genoa thus: That since the coming of Don John into the Leaguer before
Barcelona, that the French are with 3000 Foot, and 1000 Horse recruited, that
they approach the City daily, and never leave off to vex them, by day with
Canon, and by night with Grenades: 500 sheep going before the Town are taken.
At the Seacoast it was besieged with 30 ships, and 16 Galleys, so that it was
impossible to bring there any thing more in; and they have taken the two
Barques with corn that intended to have come in. The Catalonians began to
strengthen the Forts (on the place formerly where the Jews use to bury their
dead) to entertain correspondence with the City, but the Spanish are about to
hinder them. The Earl Iglia was come from France to Matara with 400 Horse, and
2000 Foot, intending to get into Barcelona; but hearing by the way of more
difficulty than he expected, went no farther, tarrying for Col. Haudencourt.

At Genoa are arrived the Galleys from Spain with a million of money. A great
Fleet is setting forth for the safety of that Republic.

In the next place, take a review (I beseech you) of certain remarkable
presidents, worthy of observation.

Agrippa the elder being in Cesaraea, and clothed with sumptuous apparel, and
sitting in a high and regal seat, began to make a speech to the people; but
some of his people cried out, that it was the voice of some God, and not of
man; which words being grateful unto him, (who could be willing to assume
divine honor to himself) he was suddenly stricken with an Angel, and so his
flesh and bowels putrefying, he was consumed with lice.

The Syrians being overcome in War by the Israelites in certain mountainous
places, ascribed their overthrow to the Gods of the Mountains, who (they said)
did favor the Israelite; therefore they would fight with the Israelites in the
valleys, where they thought the God of Israel was not interessed; upon which
cause, God by his Prophet thus spoke to the King of Israel; Quia dixerunt Syri,
etc. Because the Syrians said, the Lord is God of the Mountains, and not of the
valies, I will give all this great multitude in to thy hand, and you shall
know, that I am the Lord. And thereupon both their Armies joining battle after,
the Israelites (though but few in number) killed in one day a hundred thousand
footmen: And there remained in a near place twenty seven thousand Syrians, who
flying into the City, were killed with the fall of the City walls: doubtlesly
this was a manifest revenge and punishment of the former blasphemy.

Nicanor being leader of the Army of Demetrius the King, and intending to
invade the Jews upon the Sabbath, was admonished that in honor and reverence
to God (who sees all things) he should forbear that sacred day: to the which
advise he thus answered: Estne potens quispiam in caelo etc. Is there a Lord in
heaven, that commands the Sabbath Day to be kept? to whom when it was answered.
Est dominus vivus etc. There is a living Lord, which rules in Heaven, who
commands the seventh day to be kept: he replied; Et ego potens etc. And I am
migh^y upon Earth to command them, for to arm themselves, and to perform the
Kings business. Upon which occasion the day of War being begun, though Nicanor
had a most powerful Army, furnished with all kind of Munition and Armor; yet
was he overthrown by a very few, with the loss of 35000 men. His blasphemous
tongue was likewise cut off.

At what time Achior commended the power of the God of heaven, and averred,
that the Jews were secure and safe, in that they worshipped God religiously,
at which words Holofernes in great indignation thus answered. Quoniam
prophetasti, etc. Because thou have prophesied among us to day, that the people
of Israel is defended by their God, I will show thee, that there is no other
God, but Nabuchodonosor, etc. For which blasphemy he paid dear, for his own
head was cut off by the hand of a Woman, and his Army being driven to flight, a
great part thereof was put to the sword by the Jews.

Antiochus for his pride and blasphemy, was stricken from God with an invisible
and incurable disease; for first, suddenly a violent pain of his Bowels invaded
him; and then quickly after he fell out of his chariot, wounding himself
dangerously: lastly his body putrefying with a filthy consumption, and
breathing out a most loathsome smell, was consumed alive with worms.

Balthazar (King of the Chaldeans) when he commanded the holy Vessels to be
brought to him (which were taken out of the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem)
and did drink in them with his Noble men, and his Concubines; for such his
prof^ning of them did presently feel Gods just revenge; for in the midst of
the banquet and jollity with his guests, it is said, Appa uerunt digiti, etc.
There appeared fingers of man's hand, which wrote over he candl-stick upon the
plaster of the wall of the Kings palace. And this appeared in the ^ight of all
men, and with great consternation of mind and fear to the King himself.

Nabuchadonosor (King of Chaldea) when in his fury he cast the three children
into the fiery furnace, for that they refused to adore a Statue erected by him,
and further blasphemed against God, in prefer^ing his own power before the
power of God, in these words: Quis est De us? Who is God that can take you out
of my hands? Did immediately after acknowledge the contrary, and confessed a
Deity, through the sight of that stupendous miracle, by the which the children
being in the midst of the flames, remained unhurt and not burned. But after
when he had forgot the same, and bear himself with his former elation and pride
of mind, maintaining, that his power and glory stood obnoxious or subject to
none, he was suddenly punished by God; a voice from Heaven rushing upon him,
and speaking thus: Tibi di^itur Nabuchodonosor Rex, etc. O King Nabuchodonosor,
to thee be it spoken: thy Kingdom shall depart from thee. And they shall drive
thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the field; They
shall make thee to eat grass as the Oxen; and seven times shall pass over
thee, till thou know, that the most high bears rule over the Sons of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will. Which voice being ended, he was presently
deprived of reason and grew mad. Whereupon being driven from all men's society,
he begun to live in the Woods among Beasts, and during seven years lived after
the manner of beasts. Which period of time being ended, he was restored to his
wits and senses, and preently thereupon most excellently confessed a divine
power. That this was to happen unto him, God foreshewed it a year before in a
vision which he had, while he dreamed; which vision Daniel did interpret.

From Constantinople they write, That the Emperor of Turkey has positively
declared against all the Kings, Princes, States, and Commonwealths in
Christendom, and has imprisoned about 4000 Christians; amongst the rest, many
eminent Gentlemen: some whereof, are men of quality, belonging to the English
Nation; who were Agents and Factors at Ska^o^n, Smirna, and other places; yet
notwithstanding the Janisaries are not a little obstructive to his proceedings;
which in time may cause a glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, over those dark
Atheistical and Methometan Corners; But as ancient Pithogoras said, That he was
assured the Air was full of Spiri^s; so am I confident (as yet) that Turkey is
full of Devils.

But the Venetians are preparing a great Summer Fleet, to go out against the
Turks, under the command of the Lord High Admiral Foscolo, who has already
took 4 stately Galleys; and has made himself Master of the strong Castle of
Nedron, wherein he found 30 brass pieces, 500 barrels of powder, and great
store of Ammunition. The Emperor of Germany is likewise raising 40000 men, to
retard the Turks Design against Christendom.

FINIS.

