THE SPEECH Of this Present POPE,
IN Presence of the Cardinals and Foreign Ambassadors, in his Second Conclave
after his Election to the Papacy: Concerning the Divisions amongst the
Catholic Princes, and the Advantages the Heretics propose to themselves from
it: Of the continuance or discontinuance of the War with the Turks. Of the War
between His Imperial Majesty, His Catholic Majesty, and the Most Christian
King: Of the Differences betwixt the Holy See and the Most Christian King. Of
the Misfortunes of King James, and the assisting Him. Done from the Italian.

Licensed

December. 17. 1689. J. F.



My Brethren in Christ Jesus, Holy Character I now bear, to express my hearty
and unfeigned Thanks for your great and unmerited Kindness to me, in Elevating
me to that High Office in the Church of God, which the sense of my own
unworthiness and unfitness for so great a Burden, did hinder me from aspiring
to. And as I told you at that time, so I must please my self in telling you it
again, I shall endeavor to behave my self in this most Holy Station, as none
of you shall have reason to repent your Choice.

My Brethren, Unity was always the Characteristick mark, as well as the Bulwark
of the True Catholic and Apostolic Church, and discord upon the other hand
was always the constant attendant, as well as the bane of the False one. But it
seems God for our punishment of late, has divided the Princes and States of the
Catholic Church, and united those that have abandoned the true sheepfold of
Christ in the strictest bonds of Friendship. Hence flow our Tears, and here is
a Subject that draws the deepest sighs from the bottom of our Hearts. Since
then the Divine Providence has Elevated me, tho unworthy, to the Chair of St.
Peter, I think it incumbent on me to use all possible means to Reconcile all
the Members of the Holy Church committed to my Apostolic Care. The Heretics
do look upon these sad Divisions which we so justly regrete, as the happiest
opportunity they can wish for, to propagate their Heresies, and to incroach
upon not only the Religion, but the Civil Interests of the Catholics, knowing
that the surest way of doing it, is to divide us one from another.

In order to sow up these unhappy Breaches, I must commit to your serious and
utmost Consideration, as being Members of the Holy Apostolic College, and the
Council I shall always have recourse to in matters of difficulty, these four
Heads, which I desire you may impartially weigh in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, laying aside all particular Interests whatever.

The First Head is the present War with the Turks, in which His Imperial
Majesty, and the Most Sercne State of Venice, with their Allies, are Engaged.
In this we are to consider, whether it be more conduceable to the benefit of
Christendom, and of the Catholic Church, to continue this War, or to make up a
Peace with these Enemies of our Religion, as being content of the Advantages we
have already obtained over them. If the first be thought fitting, I here
promise on my part to give all the Concurrence to it that lies in my power. And
is the second be found more reasonable, then conjoint Measures must be taken
among the Allies, that none of them may for their own private advantage, pack
up a separate Peace with the Ottomans.

The Second Head which lies under your Consideration* Is the present War
betwixt His Imperial Majesty, His Catholic Majesty, and the Most Christian
King. I hope there are none in this Assembly, but finds it necessary for the
good of the Church, that these Princes, who are all of them the great
Supporters of Religion, and true Sons of the Apostolic Church, should be
reconciled one to another. I confess to do this will require the greatest
vigor of mind, and the nearest application possible; and yet there appears no
impossibility to effect it. If (...)e these Princes can be brought to Treat
upon terms of Accommodation; and some Neutral State, such as the Serene State
of Venice, or the Great Duke become Mediators for it* and if you who are
Protectors of these Crowns, concur heartily in the work, I may say there is
just ground to expect a good issue.

His Imperial Majesty has always manifested a love to Peace, and to the Repose
of Christendom, and at this time, his Interest obliges him to continue these
thoughts; considering he is in War with an Enemy upon the other side, of whom
he can gain more, than by a War with France. What this Prince gains of the
Turks, is properly his own, and is immediately joined to the rest of his
Hereditary Countries: But what he should acquire upon the French side, cannot
be his, but would accrue to other Princes of the Empire, that lie upon the
Rhine. The Catholic King has no other Quarrel against France, but that of the
Emperor's, and to retain his own. And the Most Christian King himself, if he
were well managed, I doubt not but would yield to reasonable Proposals, for
setting things upon the same bottom as they were on, by the Twenty years Truce.
And if there be any stop from the affair of the Election of Cologn, there may
be some Methods fallen upon to accommodate that business, to the just
satisfaction of all parties.

There is a Third Thing which requires your prudent Consideration, and that is
the Differences betwixt the Holy See, and the Most Christian King, which has
been managed with too much heat already: I have reason to hope that King will
give all reasonable deference to what we shall represent to him as necessary to
be done, in the Affairs in debate about the Franchises, and the Restitution of
Avignion, especially that we have here his Extraordinary Ambassador, whom we
all know to be a ^^^son of great Devotion to the Holy See, and ready to take
such Measures as may put an end to their debates.

The last thing which at this time I must recommend to your serious
Consideration, and which calls for a zealous concern from all of us, is the
Affair of His Majesty of Great Britain. How far the Differences betwixt
Catholic Princes has occasioned that Kings Misfortunes, I need not acquaint
you. He is a Prince of our Communion, and devoted to the Holy Chair of St.
Peter, and We as the Common Father of the Universal Church, are obliged to see
none of our Sons perish for want of assistance.

My Brethren in Christ,

The History of the Late Revolution in England, with the Causes and Means by
which-it was Accomplished. Together with the Settlement thereof under Their
Most Serene Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in this present Parliament.

Of the French Monarchy, and Absolute Power. And also a Treatise of the Three
States, and their Power. Deduced from the most Authentic Histories, for above
1200 years. Both Printed for Tho. Salisbury, at the Sign of the Temple near
Temple-Barr in Fleet Street.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Salisbury, at the Sign of the Temple near Temple-Barr
in Fleet Street, 1689.


