A SHORT ACCOUNT, OF THE Nature and Use OF MAPS. AS ALSO Some short Discourses
of the Properties of the Earth, and of the several Inhabitants thereof.

To which is Subjoined, A Catalogue of the Factories and places now in
possession of the English, French, Dutch, Spaniards, Portegueze and Danes, both
in the East and West Indies.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Mr. Mount, at the Postern on
Tower Hill; Mr. Lea at the Atlas and Hercules in Cheapside; Mr. Worgan
Mathematical Instrument maker under St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet street; and
William Alingham, Mathematick-Teacher, in (...)nel-Row, Westminster, School.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE design of the Ensuing Treatise, is a short Account of the Nature and Use
of Maps; a knowledge of great advantage to several sorts of People; and the
principal branch of that noble Science of Geography, which informs you in the
Nature, Property and Magnitude, not only of the whole Earth, but also of each
distinct and particular part thereof.

For by this Science the Divine, Merchant, Soldier and Traveller, may (without
danger of those apparent hazards they are like to fall under) take a particular
View of those vast and pleasant Countries, they have occasion to visit or
mention in their several Vocations. Such, with many other, are the advantages
of this Excellent Science. But leaving this, I shall give you a short account
of the ensuing Treatise, which as the Title informs you, is the Nature and use
of Maps, in which I have incerted such Discourses as is requisite to give you a
clear understanding of the Nature and Reason of their projection: Next I
proceed to their Use, in knowing how to find out any place, by the most
practical and Common Methods yet known; and also how to Measure the Distance
betwixt two places when found in any Map; with other pleasant Accounts of the
Distinction and Division of the Earth into Zones, Climates and Parallels.

Lastly, I have added a Catalogue of the Places and Factories now in posession
of the English, French, Dutch Spanniards, Portugueze and Danes, both in the
East and West Indies, as they were Collected by an Ingenious Author; all which
is humbly presented to those, whose Genious leads them to the consideration of
such Excellent Inquiries.

A NEW MAPP OF ALL THE EARTH.



OF THE EARTH.
THE Earth was in the Beginning, by Command of the Most High, created out of a
Chaos, or a confused Heap, which before had no Form, and was made a Habitation
for Man to dwell upon, that, for a time, he might Contemplate upon the
inferior Works of his Creator. The Description of this Earth is termed
Geography, and the Figure that the Earth and Water do together Constitute, is,
by many Observations and Experiments proved to be round, or in form of a Globe,
hanging by nothing in the Air, and by the most Accurate Observations its
Circumference, is found near 24971 English Miles, and consequently its Diameter
7291 of the said Miles, as has been found by the late Experiments of several
Nations. The greatest part of this Globe is covered with Water, for ought we
yet know, which at the Creation, by the Almighty Decree, was gathered into one
place, called the Sea: This Ball, or Globe, of Earth and Water, is covered with
a thin subtle matter, called Air, by which it is rendered Habitable, in the
Center of this Globe, is an Actractive Power, by virtue whereof all heavy
Bodies, though loosed from it, will again return and cling to it, by which
faculty it is defended from Dissolution, in not permiting the least part thereof
to be separated from it.

This Globe by its (or the Suns) twofold motion, enjoys the grateful
Vicissitudes of Day and Night, Winter and Summer; the first, by turning upon
its own Axis once in 24 Hours, and the second, by having the said Axis carried
about the Sun in the space of one Year, by some unknown principle of Nature,
during the time of its other Revolution; and this Axis not being perpendicular
to the plain, in which the said Annual Motion is performed, causes one
Hemisphere to have more of the Sun's Light for one half Year, and the other
Hemisphere for the other.

Arguments for proving the Spherick, or Globular form of the Earth.
A Globe, or Sphere, is a perfect round solid Body, contained under one
Surface, in the midst of which is a point called the Center, from whence all
Lines drawn to the outside are equal; these Lines are termed Semidiameters.

Of this Form and Figure is the whole Earth and Sea, as we have reason to
conclude, from several undoubted Observations and Experiments, the principal of
which follows.

First, Eclipses of the Moon which are caused by the Earths coming betwixt the
Sun and Her; for the Moon having no light, but what she receives from the Sun,
is hindered of it by the Opaque Body of the Earth, who interposing betwixt the
Sun and Moon, casts her shadow upon the Moon, which to us appears Circular
thereon; and therefore, according to Optic Principles, the Earth from whence
it proceeds, is a Spherick, or Globular Body.

Secondly, Eclipses of the Sun, which are caused by the Moon's passing betwixt
him and those places where he appears Eclipsed; for unless the Earth were
Globular, as Astronomers have assumed it, the time when, and place where, Solar
Eclipses should happen, could not be determined; but seeing both time and place
is nicely limited, their supposition of the Earth's roundess must needs be true.

Thirdly, Because all the Phenomenae do Rise, Culminate, and Set, sooner to the
Eastern then to Western Inhabitants, as has been observed by those who have
carried correct Time-keepers to Sea, and this proportionally according to the
roundness of the Earth.

Fourthly, Viewing from the shore a Ship a good distance from you, at first you
shall only perceive her Topsails, but as she approaches nearer, you shall see
her Lower-sails, and at last her Hull, which I think is an Evident Proof of the
Earth's Sphericity; for did not the Globosity of the Water interpose betwixt
our sight and the Ship, we might more easily see her Hull than her Topsails at
first.

Fifthly, Our Modern Navigators, in their Voyages, especially, those that have
been made round the World by Drake and Cavendish, make it very apparent; for
sailing Eastward, they have, without turning back, arived to the place from
whence they first set Sail, only they came short home by one Day and Night,
that is, they were absent 24 Hours more by their own reckoning, than by the
account of them kept at Home, which thing further Confirms the Earth's
Sphericity.

Sixthly, It is found by daily Practice, that the Degrees of every parallel
upon Earth, have the same proportion to the Degrees of the Equinoctial, as the
Degrees of the like parallel of an Artificial Globe, has to a Degree of the
Equinoctial thereon described.

Seventhly and Lastly, Common Experience shows us, That sailing, or going
toward the North, we raise the North Pole, and Northern Stars, and on the
contrary, do depress the South-Pole and Southern Stars, the North Elevation
increasing equally with the South Depression, and both proportional according
to the distance sailed, the like happens in sailing Southwards; besides, the
Oblique Ascension, Descentions, Amplitude of riseing and seting of the Sun,
Moon and Stars, would be the same in all places, were not the Earth Globular.

And it may further be observable, that was not the Earth Globular, but a long
Round-flat, as some have foolishly imagined, then these absurdities would
follow, viz.

The Elevation of the Pole, and Height of the Stars, would be the same in all
places.

The same appearance of the Heavens would be to all Inhabitants.

The Sun, Moon and Stars would Rise, Culminate, and Set, to all places at the
same time.

Eclipses would appear to all People at the same time.

The Days and Nights would be of the same length to all parts, neither would
there be Day in one place, when there is Night in another.

Shadows would be alike in all places, that is, all of them would be one way,
neither would one Country be Hotter or Colder than another.

But though we thus endeavor to prove the Earth round, yet it must not
strickly be taken, as if there were no inequalities of its Surface; for the
Mountains, Hills and Valleys, which are so common in most parts of it, cause
some Irregularities and Cragginess in the Surface; yet because the greatness of
these inequalities have scarce any sensible proportion to the whole, the height
of the highest Mountain being not 1/6000 part of its Diameter, which is
inconsiderable; and therefore notwithstanding these small Irregularities, we
may affirm the Earth to be round, or in form of a Globe, or Sphere.

Of the Measure of the Earth.
THE Earth and Water being of this Form, we shall in the next place enquire
into its Extent, for the effecting of which, several Essays have been made, to
find either its Circumference or Diameter; for when one of them is gotten, the
other is easily known, and by having them both, its Surface and Solidity may be
nicely Discovered.

Now, as their Conclusions has been different, so has the ways by which they
have endeavored to attain them. Eratosthenes's way was by the Sunbeams, and
Shade of a Style, vid. Deschale's use of 29. 1 Euc. Maurolycus Abbot of
Messuva, his way was by finding the Quantity of the Angle, made by two lines
drawn from the Surface of the Earth, to the top of any high Hill, vid.
Deschale's use of the 6. 2. Euc. A third way was by Eclipses, which is very
uncertain, for a small mistake in the times of Observation at one or both of
the places, will cause a very great and sensible Error, in the distances of the
said places.

A Fourth and surest way which has been tried by most Nations, is, that of
measuring North and South under one Meridian, some good large Distance, viz.
one or two Hundred Miles; for in those Observations of small Distances, there
can be no certain Conclusion. The method of doing this, is either with an
Instrument and Chain, or else with a Perambulator, or measuring Wheel, which
after it is actually taken, must with great care be plotted down upon Paper, but
not without allowing for the Variation of the Needle, and all notable Ascents
and Descents with other turnings and windings, that will of necessity be met
with in the way, and so by this means we shall come to know how many Miles on
the Earth will answer to a Degree in the Heavens, provided an exact Observation
by a large Quadrant, or other Instrument, be made to find the Latitude of the
place we begin to measure from, and the Latitude of the place we measure to.

According to this Method, did Mr. Richard Norwood, a good Mathematician, and
an able Seaman, in the Year 1635. make an Experiment in measuring the Distance
betwixt London and York, by which he found one Degree upon Earth, that is, the
1/360 part of the Circumference of the Earth to contain 69 4/11 English Miles
(each English Mile containing 5280 Feet) and consequently the whole
Circumference of the Earth 24971 English Miles, and its Diameter 7291 of the
same. From these Dimensions will the Area of the Surface of the whole Globe of
Earth and Water be found to be 197795291 square English Miles, and its solid
Content 261089784120 Cubical English Miles, which account does likewise nearly
agree with the Dutch and French.

Definitions.
THE Earth being in the Form before Described, Astronomers have formed an
Artificial one in representation thereof, on which they have Pictured both Sea
and Land in all their parts, and according to their Situation so far as is
known, a type of which is here delineated, where the straight Line 90. 90. 90
in one Hemisphere is the Axis of the World, the Arches 80. 80; 70. 70; etc.
increasing in bigness are parallels of Latitude, and the Arches 90. 80. 90; 90.
70. 90, etc. are hour Circles, or Meridians; among which is one that is the
outermost which is as it were the Landmark of the whole Sphere, being the
bounds from whence the Longitude of any particular place is accounted qu^^^
round the Globe.

Now this Meridian from whence we begin to reckon the Longitude, has been
differently assigned by several Nations, for the Arabian and Nubian
Geographers, place it at the utmost Extremity of the Western shore.

Ortelius, in his Sheet-Map of Europe, makes London to lie in 28 Degrees, but
in his Sheet-Map of France and Belgia, it lies but in 21 Degrees of Longitude;
so that where he begins his Longitude, is not exactly known.

The Spaniards, since the West Indies Conquest, begins at Toledo, and contrary
to all other Accounts, reckon their Longitude is from East to West.

Blaew, the Dutch Geographer, begins his at Teneriff, the most Noted of the
Canary Islands, though on his large Map of the World, he makes it pass through
Tercera, one of the Azores.

Sansoon, the French Geographer, begins his at Ferro, one of the Canaries: Our
late Geographers, especially the English, place it in the Azores, some
beginning at Tercera, others at Corvo, a third at Gratiosia; though upon our
new sort of Globes, and some late Maps, it is made to pass through the
Westermost part of St. Michaels.

So that Longitude is the distance of a place reckoned in the Equator, from the
Meridian, which passes through that place you begin your Longitude from.

Latitude is the nearest distance of a place from the Equator, or the height of
Pole above the Horizon.

Continent, is a great part of the Habitable Earth that lies together, not
being divided by the Sea; such is the whole Continent of Europe, Asia and
Africa, as likewise America.

Island, is a piece of Land Environed quite round with Water, as Great Britain,
Ireland, etc.

An Isthmus, is that little Neck of Land that joins a piece of Land to the
Continent; such is that of Sues, which ties Asia to Africa, and that of
Corinth, which ties Morea to Greece.

Peninsula, is almost an Island, being that which is so tied to the Continent
by an Isthmus; such is Africa and Morea.

A Promontory, or Cape, is a high Land bending or running out into the Sea;
such is the Cape of St. Vincent's, Cape of Good Hope, etc.

Mountain, is a part of the Earth higher than the rest; such is the Alps, the
Cheviat Hills.

Of the Water.
THE Ocean, or Main Sea, is that vast body of the Water, that environs, or
surrounds, the Continent.

Gulf, is an Arm of the Ocean, running in between Lands; such is the Gulf of
Persia, Arabia, etc.

Straight, is a narrow Channel that joins one Sea to another, or Gulf to the
Ocean; such is that of Gibralter, which joins the Mediteranean to the Western
Ocean.

Lake, is that which continually keeps standing Water in it; such is that of
Nicaragua in America, and Zair in Africa.

River, is a fresh running Water, that looses its Streams in the Sea; such is
Thames, Severn, etc.

Port, or Harbor, is a small portion of the Sea of such Depth, and so hemn'd
in by the Land, that Ships may there Ride in Safety.

Bay, is likewise an Arm of the Ocean, but the Entrance thereof is much wider
than that of a Gulf.

Shelf, is either a heap of Sand, or else a Rock that lies near the Surface of
the Water.

Archipelago, is a Sea where many Islands are.

A short Description of the making and projecting of Circular Maps.
MAPS are only the Pictures, or Representations of any part, or parts, of the
Globe in Plano, that is, they are a Perspective Draught either of the whole, or
else some particular place, or part of the Earth: For suppose the Earth was
Transparent, and the Eye to be placed some where in the Equator, and that at
Right Angles, to the Line passing from the Eye to the opposite part of the
Earth, a Plain be conceived to be placed cuting the Earth into two equal Parts,
that is passing through the Earth's Center; then I say, if from the Eye Rays be
imagined to pass through the said Plain, to every Physical Point in the obverse
Hemisphere of the Earth, these Lines shall project Points upon the said Plain,
which, if joined, will give the true Picture of one half of the places on the
Earth's Surface. And because, but one half of a Globe is to be seen at one
time, therefore if you desire a Representation of the whole Terraqueous Globe,
it must be done in two Hemispheres.

According to this Representation, there is Geometrick Rules laid down, for
Projecting and Delineating the Circles and Lines as they thus appear to the
Eye, whether it is upon the plain of a Meridian, which makes the common
Hemispheres, or else upon the Equator, which is that we call the Polar
Projection, because the Eye is supposed in the Pole? And this Projection is
almost as frequent as the other.

As for the Geometrick Directions, for teaching how to draw these Circles and
Lines, as they thus appear to the Eye, either upon the plain of the Meridian,
or Equator, I shall not here show, because it properly belongs to the
Projection of the Sphere.

How to lay down places upon the Hemispheres.
BUT supposing it done, I shall direct you how to lay down places upon the
Hemispheres, having therefore completed a Projection of the Imaginary Circles,
viz. Equator, Meridian, Parrallels, etc. as in the annexed Map of the World may
be seen; consider that the Longitude and Latitude of any place is determined by
the Meridian, and Parallel of that place, so that having the Longitude and
Latitude of any place, we may incert it in the Map thus: Count from the
Meridian, or outermost Circle on the Equator, the Longitude of the place you
desire to Express, so shall you thereby find the Meridian of that place; Then
among the Parallels find the Latitude of that place, and in the point where the
Meridian and Parallel intersect, is the place to be put in the Hemisphere

By this Artifice, may the one half of the Earth's Surface, by taking several
points, be delineated in Plano, just as it appears to the Eye in the aforesaid
Position, and after the like manner is the other Hemisphere to be projected.

If you would make a Map, but of some large part of the Earth, such as Europe,
Asia, Germany, Spain, France, etc. the method and manner of doing it, is the
same with the preceding, only in this case, the projection is made much larger,
and then cut off in a square form to such Latitude and Longitude, as will
contain the extreme Latitudes and Longitudes of that portion of the Earth you
design a Map off. After the same manner may you divide it, if it be a Map of
Europe, Asia, etc. into its Empires, Kingdoms and Provinces, by laying down the
Latitudes and Longitudes thereof.

Of the making of right lined Maps.
MAPS that are Projected after this way, ought to be but of small places, that
is, such which have scarce a sensible proportion to the whole Surface of the
Earth, else they will be very Erroneous, because the least portion of the
Earth's Surface is Spherical, which, if we consider, and take for plain, as we
do in this Case, must needs be false; but for small places lying either upon
the Equator, or within few Degrees of it, they may without much Error be thus
Represented, their Surface being very little differing from a true Plain.

In order therefore to make a Map of some such place, consider both the
difference of Longitude and Latitude of the extreme parts thereof; As suppose I
would make a Map of a place, whose difference of Longitude is 4 Degrees, and
the difference of Latitudes, if they were both North or South (else the sum of
them) 6 Degrees; draw a blind Line, then take any length for a Degree, which
let be as large as you please, for the larger the better: This length prick off
4 times on the said Line, for your Degrees of Longitude, after which raise a
Perpendicular, and take the same distance as before, and run off 6 times upon
it, this done, complete the Parallelogram, whose sides in this Case, will be as
6 to 4, that is, the Latitude is 6 Degrees, and the Longitude 4* and this
finishes the Limits of your Map.

It will be necessary also to subdivide each Degree into 6. 10. or more equal
parts, as the largeness of the Degree will permit; after which, prefix both to
Top, Bottom, and each side the Numbers, Corresponding to the Latitudes and
Longitudes.

How to lay down Places on this Plan.
THE Plan being thus prepared, and a Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes, of
all the boundary parts of the place you would make a Map off, if laid down
before you, which Latitudes are actually and nicely found by some large
Quadrant or other Instrument, and the Longitudes calculated from the bearings
of Places, observed by the Needle, Distances measured, etc. Proceed as follows.

Suppose one point of the place you design a Map off, is in the Latitude of 2
Degrees, 20 Minutes, and Longitude of 14 Degrees, 40 Minutes: Here I begin and
count from the Bottom of the Map, upwards on each side, 2 Degrees 20 Minutes,
and from those two points draw a blin'd line through the Map, this done, I
count from the left hand side of the Map toward the right, both at Top and
Bottom, 14 Degrees 40 Minutes, and from these two Points, draw an obscure Line
also quite through the Map; the point where these two lines cross each other,
is the true point, where such place ought to be set; after the same manner,
proceed to incert all the boundaries, and principle places within the Map, by
having their Longitudes and Latitudes; And here Note, That the more Latitudes
and Longitudes of the Boundaries you take, the more exact and true will your
Map be limited.

As for places that lie in great North Latitude, suppose betwixt 50 and 60 degrees.
there you must consider the Proportion, that is, betwixt one Degree in the
Parallel of 55 Degrees of Latitude, and a Degree of the Equator, and by so much
as the later exceeds the former, by so much must a Degree of Latitude exceed
that of Longitude.

The Proportion for finding the Quantity of a Degree, in any Parallel, is this:
As the Diameter of the Equator, is to its Circumference, so is the Diameter of
the Parallel of 55 Degrees, to its Circumference; divide the Circumference of
the Equator by 360. as also the Circumference of the Parallel of 55 Degrees;
the first Quote is, the length of a Degree of Longitude in the Equator; the
second, the length of a Degree of Longitude in the Parallel of 55 Degrees of
Latitude, and therefore by so much as the first of these Quotes exceeds the
second, by so much must a Degree in Latitude, exceed that of Longitude, in the
making of such a Map. This brief Account, will I hope, give some light into the
Method of making and projecting of Maps, in the prosecution of which, I might
have been more Copious, by adding of Cuts, and making a Table of the Longitudes
and Latitudes of the Boundaries of some places, and so actually transfering
them into the Plan or Scheme; but when I considered my design was more to show
their use, than the method of making them, I purposely omitted it. If a Map was
to be made of any small County, Hundred, Lordship, etc. of about 20 or 30 Miles
round, it is not so exactly Determined by Longitudes and Latitudes, but by an
actual survey of the same with some Instrument, as Semicircle, Theodelite, etc.

General Notes for using of Maps.
IN most of the Circular Maps, observe, That having found the Name, you are not
to take that part of the Map, possessed by such Name, for the true position of
the place; but you are to seek either over, under, or on one side of such Name
for this Mark (o) and where that stand there is the true point of that place.

In Right Lined Maps, Towns and Places are generally represented by the shape
of a little House, Cities with the like Mark, but something bigger.

When any Map is placed right before you, then take Notice, That the bottom
part, or part next to you, generally is the Southern part, the top, or part
farthest from you, the North part; that next your left Hand, the West part, and
the other opposite, or next the right Hand, the East; which Quarters or Parts,
are commonly Denoted, either by the Words, North, South, West and East, writ at
Top or Bottom, and on each side, or else by a Compass, which is round like a
Wheel, having 32 points issuing from the Center, which represents the 32 points
of the Compass; at the end of one of them is the Picture of a Flower-de-luce,
which always points exactly to the North.

Hence it is Evident, That you must always seek for the Latitude on the sides of
the Map, and the Longitude at Top and Bottom* which sometimes is differently
Numbered, by reason that at the top of the Map, the Longitude may be reckoned
from one place, and at the bottom from another.

Observe also in Maps of Empires and Kingdoms, the Divisions of it, in
Principalities, Provinces or Counties, is generally performed by a small pricked
irregular line.

Rivers, is commonly Denoted by a full Black Line, and sometimes by a Double
Line.

Roads, are variously Pictured, viz. in some Maps, by small Black Lines, in
others, by double Pricked Lines, and sometimes by single Pricked Lines.

Mountains, are represented by a Black Clouded Figure, in shape like a Bell.

The Sea is frequently in all colored Maps painted Green, if the Maps are not
colored, the space Denoting the Sea is left White.

The Land is bounded from the Sea by an Irregular Dark clouded Line, which if
the Map be Painted, is generally Colored.

But in Maps, there is generally an Explanation of the Marks and Characters
there used, as how they Note Boundaries, Roads and Rivers; also which mark
signifies Cities, which Market Towns, which Villages, etc.

Take Notice likewise, that to several Maps, there are three sorts of Scales,
to which are prefixed the names Magna, Medieria and Parba, the meaning of which
is this, that you should measure the great Miles upon the Magna scale, The Mean
Miles upon the Mediocria Scale; And the Small Miles upon the Parva Scale; For
not only other Country Miles differ from ours, but even we among our selves;
the Miles in Yorkshire and several other places being much larger than those
about London.

How to find out places upon any sort of Maps.
THere is but two Methods of finding out places in any Map, the one is by
Longitude and Latitude, and the other by Bearing and Distance, the former of
which is most peculiar to circular Maps, the later to right lined Maps; though
either of the said methods may be used, for the finding of places in both kinds
of Maps.

As to the first of these, there is one grand difficulty in it, which is upon
account of beginning the Longitude, because as I have already observed, in one
Map, the Longitude begins from Gratiosa, another from St. Michael, a third from
Teneriff, and a fourth from some other place; so that unless you know, from
what place they reckon the Longitude of any Map, you can never know, by this
method, how to find out any place in such Map, though the Longitude and
Latitude of the place be given, which indeed is a very great misfortune; For
was all the Geographers but unanimously agreed from whence to begin it, that
is, would they but all agree to fix it at any on particular place, it would
make the Science of Geography very Easy and Pleasant.

But however, because it is otherwise at present; I shall incert a Table,
showing the difference of Longitude betwixt Pico Teneriff, and most of the
principal places from whence they have begun to reckon, and then proceed to the
method of doing it.

Betwixt Pico Teneriff, and d. m. Toledo 15. 53. Gratiosa 10. 25. Tercera 9.
00. Palma or Ferro 2. 50. Corvo 13. 25. St. Michaels 8. 5.

Suppose in the Sheet-map of the World, that is, in the small Hemisphers, I
would find out Jerusalem, which is in the Longitude of 66. d. 00. m. counted
from St. Michaels, and Latitude of 33. d. 10. m. North. Here I begin at the
outer Circle, which is the first Meridian, from whence the Longitude is
reckoned, and counted upon the Equator 66. d. its Longitude; then I reckon from
the Equator, on the first Meridian upward toward the North Pole 32. d. 10. m.
the Latitude, and so tracing that Parallel till I come right against the
Longitude I find this mark (o) and the word Jerusalem writ close by it, whence
I Conclude, that is the true position of Jerusalem.

And here, Note, That if in your Hemisphere, the Longitude is not reckoned from
St. Michaels, but some other place, then you must consider whether such place
lies East or West of St. Michaels, and how many Degrees; and accordingly
substract, or add, such difference from or to the given Longitude of any place,
to get the Longitude of such place in that Map.

As for Example; Suppose I look in a Map for London, whose Longitude from St.
Michaels is about 27 d. 30 m. Now perhaps this Map begins the Longitude from
the Westermost part of Spain, which is 16 Degrees East of St. Michaels; here I
must Substract 16 from 27. 30. the Remainder 11. 30. is the Longitude of London
in such Map. If the Map had begun his Longitude from any place that lies West
of St. Michaels, as from the Isle Corvo, which is near 5 d. 20 m. West of St.
Michaels, then to 27. 30. I must have added 5 Degree 20. m. and it will give 32
d. 20 m. the Longitude of London in that Map, which reckons his Longitude from
Corvo.

The second way how places may be found, is thus: Suppose I would find
Bourdeaux in France, whose bearing is very near full South from London, and
distance therefrom about 200 Miles; here I trace the Meridian that passes
through London, which may nearly be done by the Eye or a Rule (if none be
actually drawn) 200 Miles, and there about you shall find the said place.

There is another way for finding out places upon Maps, but it is peculiar, and
serves only some sort or kind, the method of it is thus: The Maps are (by lines
drawn Parallel to the sides thereof) divided into certain long Slips, or
Spaces, about an Inch broad; which spaces is again sub-divided into small
Squares, by other lines drawn Parallel to the top and bottom near the same
distance of the former.

On both sides of the Map, against each Space, is set Letters, as a, b, c, d,
etc. There is also both at top and bottom of the Map, other Letters set
differing from the former; by help of these Letters a Table is constructed,
having in it the Names of all the places, and against each Name two Letters, as
( ah) or ( bm) etc. by which Letters I can find out any place in the Map. Thus,
Suppose I seek for Babylon, in such a sort of Map, against which I find ( c s)
then I seek on the side of the Map for c, and at the top for s, and at the
Angle of meeting, that is in the little Square, right against both these
Letters, is Babylon, the place sought.

But in most of these sort of Maps, there generally is Directions for the using
of them, Printed in some vacant place of it.

Of measuring Distances on Circular Maps.
FIrst, If the two places, whose Distance you seek, lie on the Equator, then
the Degrees upon the Equator, contained betwixt them, multiplied by 70, gives
the Miles they are distant from one another.

Secondly, If the two places have the same Longitude, and both North or South
Latitude, then the difference of their Latitudes multiplied by 70, gives their
distance in Miles.

Thirdly, If the two places have the same Longitude, but different Latitudes,
i. e. one North, and the other South, then the sum of their Latitudes
multiplied by 70, will give their distance in Miles.

Fourthly, If the two places have both North or South Latitude, but 180 Degrees
difference of Longitude, then the sum of the complements of their Latitudes
multiplied by 70, gives their distance in English Miles.

Fifthly, If the two places have different Latitudes, i. e. one North, and the
other South, and 180 Degrees difference of Longitude, then the difference of
their Latitudes taken from 180 Degrees, and the remainder multiplied by 70,
gives their distance in Miles.

If the places be not in any of the Positions aforesaid, but differ both in
Longitude and Latitude, then having their Latitude and difference of Longitude
with a Scale of versed Lines, to find their distance, proceed thus:

Suppose the distance was required betwixt London, whose Latitude is 51 d. 30
m. N. and Babylon in Caldea, whose Latitude is 35. 00 N. their difference of
Longitude being 47 d. 30 m.

First, draw a line at pleasure, and with the versed Sine of 90 Degrees,
describe the Semicircle a f h; this done, find the sum and difference of both
Latitudes, take the sum 86. 30. from 180 Degrees, the remainder 93 d. 30 m.
take from the Scale of versed Sines, and set from a to b on the Diameter a h;
take also 16 d. 30 m. the difference of Latitudes from the said Scale of versed
Sines, and lay from a to c. In like manner, set upon the said Diameter the
difference of Longitude 47. 30. taken as before from a to d; Then take the
distance b c, and set from h to f upon the Arch, and draw the line a f, which
done, with your Compasses take the nearest distance betwixt d, and the line a
f, and lay from c to g; the distance a g taken off and applied to the Scale of
versed Sines, will give near 37 d. 30 m. which multiplied by 70 gives 2625,
their nearest distance in English Miles.

There is another way which is sometimes used for measuring Distances upon
these general Projections. But it is not so exact the former, and therefore not
to be used where nicety is required. The method of performance is thus.



Take the Distances of the places (as they lie in the Map) betwixt your
Compasses; this Extent apply either to the East or West side, as right against
the two places as you can, and it will give you the Degrees they are distant,
which if multiplied by 70, gives their Distance in English Miles.

And here Note, That the farther distant places are, the greater is the Error,
and contrary, etc.

This method is to be used only upon Maps of the Quarters, and great Empires or
Kingdoms; such as, Tartary, Germany, Egypt, and the like, and not upthe
Hemispheres.

Other ways there are for finding the distance of places, both as they lie in
the Hemispheres, or by having their Latitudes and difference of Longitudes, but
they being something foreign to the present Design, because not practicable
without the knowledge of the nature of Projection and Calculation, I purposely
neglect them.

How to measure Distances on right lined Maps.
DIstances are easily Measured on these sort of Maps; for having found the two
places on the Map, whose Distance you require, set one foot of the Compasses in
one place, and extend the other foot to the other; this Extent applied, either
to Bottom, Top, or Sides of the Map, shows you how many Degrees they are
distant, which multiplied by 70, gives their distance in English Miles, if
there be any odd Minuits above the degrees for every 6 of them, allow 7 Miles.

But generally to these kind of Maps, there is annexed a Scale of Miles, so
that having the distance betwixt any two places, it is but applying it to this
Scale, and you have the Miles they are distant by inspection.

Of the Zones.
A Zone signifies a Belt or Girdle, but here is to be understood a certain
quaintity of Land, included by (one or) two Parallels. Now the Number of Zones,
Geographers have divided the Globe into, are Five: Of which there are two
Temperate, two Frigid or Frozen, and one Torrid.

The Torrid Zone is that space of Earth, contained betwixt the two Tropicks,
viz. Cancer and Capricorn being in Breadth to 47 Degrees, which is 3290 English
Miles; upon this Zone or Tract of Earth, lies most part of Africa, a great part
of South America, also several Islands, as Java, Sumatra, St. Thomas, etc. The
Ancients, both Philosophers, Divines and Poets, counted this Zone altogether
inhabitable, by reason of the extreme Heat, and therefore termed it
intemperate, but later Discoveries have proved to the contrary. The Inhabitants
of this Zone are called Amphiscians, because they have their shadows both ways
at Noon, that is, one part of the Year it is toward the North, the other part
toward the South.

The Temperate Zones are those spaces of Earth, included betwixt the Tropicks
and Polar Circles, the North temperate Zone being that portion of Earth
contained betwixt the Tropic of Cancer and Artick Circle; the South Temperate
Zone, is that part or portion of Earth, bounded by the Tropic of Capricorn and
Antarctick Circle; each of these Zones are in breadth 43 Degrees, that is, 3010
Miles; in the Northern Temperate Zone, lies almost all Europe and the North
part of Africa, as also a considerable part of Asia and America; the Southern
Temperate Zone is not so well known to us, it being far distant from our
Habitation. These Zones are termed Temperate, because the Sunbeams being cast
Obliquely, cannot create that excessive heat, as they do where they fall
Perpendicular. They in some measure partake of the Extremities of Heat and
Cold, proceeding from the Torrid and Frigid Zones; those that inhabit in these
Zones are called Heteroscians, because their shadows is but one way.

The Frigid, or Frozen Zones, are those two tracts of Earth environed by the
two Polar Circles; that Enclosed by the Artick Circle, is called the Northern
Frigid Zone; the other Encompassed, is the Southern Frigid Zone, their Diameter
is 47 Degrees, which is 3290 English Miles. Under the Northern Frigid Zone lies
Greenland, Lapland, Nova Zembla, and part of the Tartarian Ocean, whether there
is any Land in the Southern Frigid Zone, is not known to us that inhabit this
part of the Earth. The Coldness of these Zones, is caused from the very
Oblique, falling of the Sun's Rays upon the Earth's Surface, from which his
Action is so small, that the heat proceeding from him in the warmest day they
there have, is scarce sufficient to melt the Congealed Rocks of Ice and Snow.
Those that inhabit these parts of the Earth, are called Periscians, because
their shadows are thrown quite round them, they are under great
inconveniences; First, by reason of the extreme Cold they suffer, and
secondly, because their whole year is but one Day and Night; for when the Sun
is once risen, he sets not again for half a Year together, and when he sets,
rises not again for as long a time.

Of the Climates.
THe Climates are certain spaces of Earth, limited by two Parallels, distant
from the Equinoctial toward each Pole; the difference betwixt the Zones and
Climates, is this: The principal Office of the Zones is to distinguish the
quality of the Air, in respect of Heat and Cold, and the alteration of Shadows:
But the office of the Climates is to show the greatest difference in the length
of the Days and Nights, as also the Variation in the rising and seting of the
Stars.

Those that live under the Equator, have their Day and Night equal, but those
places that recede so far from the Equator, as to make the difference of the
longest artificial Day, half an hour longer than it is, where the longest day
is 12 hours and a half, there ends the first Climate, and there the second
begins; if therefore according to the increase of days the Climates be
reckoned, there will be 24 in each Hemisphere, that is in all 48, counting no
farther than the Polar Circles; for the places in that parallel of Latitude,
conciding with either Polar Circle, have their longest day above 24 hours long.
Now Geographers have given Names only to 9 of those in the Northern Hemisphere,
and these Names are taken from the most famous places, through which the
Parallel Circles pass that bound them. As,

Dia-Meroes. Dia-Syenes. Dia-Alexandrias. Dia-Rhodu. Dia-Rhomes. Dia-Pontu.
Dia-Boristhenes. Dia-Britanias. Dia-Tanaidos.
The Southern Climates are distinguished by the Word Ante, as Ante Dia Meroes,
Ate Dia Synenes, etc.

Of the properties of the several Inhabitants of the Earth.
THose People living put under the Equator, have great Heat, having two
Summers, one when he passes the first of Aries, the other when he passes the
first point of Libra, and has also two Winters, which are when he passes the
first points of Cancer and Capricorn, for then the Sun is farthest remote from
those People, (though not so remote, but that their Winters are much hotter
than our Summers;) whence it is evident, their two Summers are our Spring and
Autumn, and our Winter and Summer their two Winters; their Noon-Shades are
thrown both to the North and South, and sometimes directly under them, that is,
they have none at all. Their Artificial Day is always just 12 Hours long, they
see the whole Phaenomenae of the Heavens, for all the Planets and Stars to
those Inhabitants, do Arise, Culminate, and Set once in 24 Hours.

Secondly, For those who inhabit betwixt the Equinoctial and Topic of Cancer,
they have some Seasons as the former, viz. two Summers and two Winters; for the
Sun twice a Year passes there Zenith, their Noon-shadows are likewise thrown
both to the North and South part of Heaven, and sometimes directly under them,
their longest day is something longer then 12 Hours.

Thirdly, The Inhabitants under the Tropic of Cancer, that is, such People
that have their Zenith in the said Tropic, have the Sun but once a year in
their Zenith, and that is when he is in the first point of Cancer, they have
but one Summer and one Winter; their Noonshadow is always toward the North,
except when he is just in the Tropic, and then there is none at all, their
longest day is 13 h. 36 m. long.

Fourthly, The People that Inhabit betwixt the Tropic of Cancer, and the
Circle Artick, have the Sun never Vertical; their shadows are always thrown
toward the North, and their Artifical Days is of all lengths, viz. from 13 h.
36 m. to 24 Hours.

Fifthly, Those that have their Zenith in the Artick Circle, that is, such who
live just upon that Circle, have the Pole of the Ecliptic just in their
Zenith, and consequently the Ecliptic coinciding with their Horizon, and
therefore the Tropic of Cancer must be all above the Horison, and the Tropic
of Capricorn quite under the Horizon, so that the Sun being in the first point
of Cancer, their artificial Day is just 24 hours long, and their Night but a
Moment, their shadow is cast quite round them.

Sixthly, The People inhabiting betwixt the North Pole, and Artick Circle, have
their Horizon cutting the Ecliptic in two points, and a certain portion of it
equally distant from the first point of Cancer that never sets, but remains
always above the Horizon; whence it comes to pass, that all the time the Sun
is passing this portion of the Ecliptic, they have continual Day and no Night,
the length of which is more or less, according to the portion of the Ecliptic
that never sets, being about one Month long when the said portion is 30
Degrees, two Months when the said portion is 60 Degrees, or two Signs, and so
on: That is, the farther North, the longer day, till at last you come just
under the Pole it self, where the whole Year is but one Day and Night, each
being half a Year: In this Position also, there is a certain portion of the
Ecliptic, equidistant from the first point of Capricorn, that never Rises or
comes above the Horizon, so that during the time the Sun is passing the said
Portion, there is perpetual Night to these Inhabitants, their shadows are also
projected quite round them.

Seventhly, As for those people (if any be) inhabiting just under the Pole,
they have the Equinoctial coinciding with their Horizon, and have always but
the Northern half of the Ecliptic above the Horizon, so that their Year is but
one natural Day as before was hinted; for when the Sun passes the first point
of Aries, then to those People he arises, and sets not again till he passes the
first point of Libra, which is half a Year after, they never see no more then
half the Heavens at once, all the Southern Hemisphere being totally obscured
from their sight; their shadow is likewise cast clear round them, the end of it
projecting a Concentrick Circle.

Of the Perieci, Antieci and Antipodes.
THE Inhabitants of the Earth compared with one another in respect of their
Situation, are Perieci and Antieci, Antipodes.

The Perieci, are those People that dwell in opposite points of the same
Parallel, that is, they have the same Latitude with us, but 180 Degrees
difference of Longitude, and therefore their Days and Nights are equal to ours,
only they are contrary; that is, our Noon is their Midnight, and our Evening
their Morning, etc. their Seasons are at the same time with ours.

Anticeci, are those People that dwell over against each other, they have the
same Meridian, and are equally distant from the Equator, one having as much
South Latitude, as the other has North Latitude; they have the same Hours with
us, that is, our Noon and their Noon, is at the same instant of time: But the
Seasons are different, for when it is Summer with us, it is Winter with them, and
contrary.

The Antipodes (as the word imports) are such as dwell feet to feet, that is,
they are such People that inhabit just under us, having as much South Latitude
as we have North, and 180 Degrees difference of Longitude; their nearest
distance is 180 Degrees, or 12600 Miles, which is half the circumference of the
Earth; their Hour-Seasons and all other Accidents are quite contrary, for our
Noon is their Midnight, our Summer their Winter, and our Autumn their Spring,
we can see no more of their Stars, than they do of ours, and the Stars that
never rise to them, never set to us, and contrary.

A Catalogue of some of the chiefest Places in the World, with their Latitudes
and Longitudes from London; Extracted from the best Tables now Extant.
Places Names. Lat. Long. ABerdeen in Scotland. 58 04 358 15 Alexandria. 30 58
35 00 Amsterdam. 52 25 5 00 Antwerp. 51 12 4 15 Aracta in Syria. 36 00 50 00
Athens in Greece. 37 42 28 30 Babylon in Caldea. 35 00 47 30 Berwick in
England. 55 50 358 30 Bethlehem in Judea. 31 50 42 00 Bononia in Italy. 43 49
11 15 Bristol in Italy. 51 28 257 00 Breme in Saxony. 53 10 9 30 Calicut in
East India. 11 30 88 00 Canterbury in England. 51 25 01 00 Comportella in
Spain. 43 00 351 00 Conimbria in Lusitania. 40 15 351 45 Cambridge. 52 17 0 30
Constantinople in Thrace. 43 00 34 30 Damascus in Syria. 34 0 45 30 Darby in
England. 53 3 358 30 Dantzick in Pursia. 54 23 18 30 Dublin in Ireland. 53 11
353 15 Durham in England. 54 17 358 30 Edinburgh in Scotland. 57 06 357 30
Exter in England. 50 53 356 30 Frankford Odar. 52 20 15 00 Frankford Mane. 50 2
8 45 Gloucester in England. 51 58 357 45 Ter Goose in Zeland. 51 30 4 15 Gaunt
in Flanders. 51 04 4 30 Goa in Judia. 16 00 87 30 Grats in Styria. 47 02 14 00
Haffina in Denmark. 55 43 13 00 Hartford in England. 51 55 359 45 Huntington in
England. 52 24 359 45 Jerusalem. 32 10 45 30 Leyden in Holland. 52 07 5 15
Lisbon in Portugal. 38 45 351 30 Leverpool in England. 53 22 357 30 London. 51
30 00 00 Lions. 45 16 5 00 Madrid. 40 45 257 45 Mount in Cornwall. 50 39 354 45
Mentz in Germany. 51 31 11 15 Munster in Westphalia. 51 54 7 00 Naples. 40 42
15 00 Norimberg. 52 40 12 00 Norwich. 52 44 1 00 Niniveh. 35 50 54 30 Orleans
in France. 48 08 00 00 Oxford. 51 40 358 45 Prague. 56 00 14 30 Paris. 48 5 2
30 Quinzay in China. 40 0 12 00 Rome. 42 2 12 45 Roterdam. 51 55 3 45 Roan in
Normandy. 49 30 1 30 Rochel. 45 49 359 00 Smyrna. 38 50 33 30 Stockholm. 48 50
15 45 Syracuse. 36 50 16 15 Thessalonica. 41 32 26 45 Toledo. 40 10 354 00
Valence in Spain. 39 45 358 15 Venice. 45 15 12 30 Vienna. 48 22 17 00
Uranilerg. 55 55 13 00 Warwick. 52 25 358 30 Wittenberg. 51 52 13 30
Winchester. 51 13 358 00 Worms Germany. 50 25 7 45 Yarmouth. 52 45 1 30 York.
54 00 359 00

An Account of the Factories and Places now in Possession of the English,
French, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese and Danes, both in the East and West Indies.
To the English belong in Asia.
Fort S. George [aliter Madrassipatan] on Coast Cormandel* Bombay Castle and
Island on the West Coast of Decan. In the East of Bisnagar. Pettipole
Massulipatan Madapollam Viceagaparam
In Bengal. Hughly Ballesore Cassum bezar Maulda Daca Tutta Nutta Pattana
In the Moguls Empire. Agra Cambaya Surrat Amadarad Baroch
On the Coast of Malabar. D^bul in Decan. Callicut Carnar
In Persia. Ispahan Gombroone Bussora
In Arabia. Mascat Mocha
In the Island Sumatra. Smirna in Natolia. Achem Indrapora Bengalis Jambee.
Bantam in Java, till expelled by the Dutch, 1682. Macassar in the Isle
Celebes, but now expelled. Camboida in the K. of Siam. In China. Tonquen Canton

In Africa.
Tangier, in the Coast of Barbary, near the Straights, but now demolished. On
the Coast of the Jalofes. Fort S. Andrew Fort S. Philip
The mouth of the River Sierra Leona, in the West of Guinea. The Island of S.
Helens West of Ethiopia, S. Lat. 16 degrees. Benin in the East part of Guinea. On
the South Coast of Guinea. Calabar Tagrin Madrebomba Taxorari Cape Corso Emacham

In America.
New England New York Pensilvania New Jersey East West
Maryland Virginia Carolina As also they possess Port Nelson in Hudsons Bay.
Newfoundland in part. Jamaica one of the greater Antilles. Bermudus lying E. of
Florida. New Providence one of the Lucajos. Long Island lying S. of New York. 6
of the Caribee Islands. Anguilla Berbuda St. Christopher Nevis Antego
Montserrat Dominica St. Vincent Barbados

To the Spaniards belong in Asia.
6 of the Philippin, and most of the rest. Luconia Tandaya Mindano S. Juan
Mindore Panay

In Africa.
The Trade on the West Coast of Africa. The Canary Islands.
In America.
New Spain, whose Parliaments are Mexico. Guadalajara. Guatimala.
A considerable part of New Mexico. in Florida. S. Augustins S. Matthews
Terra Firma, whose Parliaments are Panama. Granada.
Peru, who Parliaments are Quito. Lima. De la Plata.
Chili. A great part of Paraguay. Several Islands, particularly those of Cuba.
Hispaniola. Port-Rico.

To the Portuguese belong in Asia.
Several Factories in Persia. upon the Ganes. Asterim Ougelli
in Decan. Chaul a considerable Town. Massagan a little Village Morro Caranga
Goa with her Fortresses and adjacent Islands Coran. Divar.
Macao upon the Coast of China. The Fort Larentoque in the Island Solor E. of
Flores. in Peninsula Indiae extra Gangem. Aracan Pegu Tanacerin Ligor Cambodia
Already mentioned. Golcond Agra Amadabat Cambaia Surat Baroch Bengala

In Africa.
Mazagan in the Kingdom of Morocco. Some Forts on the River S. Domingo in the
County of (...) Jalofes. Some Forts on the Coasts of Guinea. Congo. Angola.
A great part of The Coasts of Cafres, and Zanguebar.
The Trade of the E. Coast from the Cape Good Hope, to the R. Sea. Several
Islands, especially those of the Azores* Isles of Cape Verde. Madera.

In America.
All the Coast of Brasil divided into many Captainships. Toward the mouth of
the River Amazon. Estero Conduba Cogemine

To the French belong in Asia.
in the Moguls Empire. Bereaux New Surrat
The Island S. Maria lying South West of Goa. Some Forts in The Kingdom of
Siam. The Island of Java.

In Africa.
Fort Dauphin in Madagascar. A Fort on the River Senega. The Trade of Africa
upon the River Senega. Gambia.
Rufisque near Cape Verde. in Guinea. Great Sestre And Ardra

In America.
in Canada. Montreal The three Rivers Quebeck
Tadonsack, and some other places on the River St. Laurence. A great part of
Nova Scotia. in New Foundland. Bay Plasensa Bay Blacco
Port S. Louis in the Island Cayene lying E. of Guyana. Some of the Antilles.
S. Bartholomew. Sancta Cruz. S. Martins. Guadaloupe. La Desiree. Maria Galants.
Les Saints. Martinico. S. Aloisia. Granada. Domingo in part. Grenadins. La
Tortue.

To the Dutch belong in Asia.
on the Coast Cormandel. Tuticorin Negapatam Karkall Fort Gelders Pallecate
Malacca. Ceylon. Java,
And most of the Moluccoes, though of right they belong to the English. Are
several Factories. Persia. The Moguls Empire. Cormandel. Malabar. Siam.
Malacca. Smmatra. China. Java. Celebes. Borneo. Arabia.

In Africa,
near Cape Verde. Arguin Gora
Many Forts in Congo. Some near the Cape of Good Hope. S. Maurice in
Madagascar. In Guinea. Factories Forts

In America.
The City Coro in the North of Terra Firma. The Island Curacco, one of the
Sotovanto. Some Forts on the Coast of Guyana.
To the Danes belong in Asia.
on the Coast of Cormandel. Frankebar Dansburge

In Africa.
in Guinea. Fort Frederickburgh nigh Cape Corso The Castle of Christianburg
In America is New Denmark in the North part thereof.
These are the Principal European Plantations, both in the East and Well-Indies.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
ALL sorts of Spheres, Globes, Maps, Chards, Mathematical Books, and other
Instruments, are Sold by Philip Lea, at the Atlas and Hercules in Cheapside.

ALL sorts of Mathematical Instruments both for Sea and Land, are most
Correctly Made, and Sold, by John Worgan, under St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street.


