Centrum Naturae Concentratum: OR THE Salt of Nature Regenerated.

For the most part improperly called THE Philosopher's Stone.

Written in Arabic by Alipili a Mauritanian, born of Asiatick Parents;
Published in Low Dutch, 1694. and now done into English, 1696. By a Lover of
the Hermetick Science.

That which has been is named already, and it is known that it is Man. Eccles.
6. 10.

LONDON, Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain. 1696.

Price One Shilling.

The English Translator TO THE READER.
I Cannot but recommend this little Book, of high worth and value to the
serious consideration of all Men; and heartily desire they may seek and find
that inestimable treasure, that deeply lies hidden in themselves, which this
small Tract with great clearness demonstrates and lays before them: The highest
wisdom consists in this, for Man to know himself, because in him God has
placed his Eternal Word, by which all things were made and are upheld, to be
his light and life, by which he is capacitated to know all things both in Time
and Eternity: This is that precious thing which Adam and Eve brought out of
Paradise with them for their consolation and refreshment, and left it through
their Offspring to posterity. For it was given them after their lamentable
fall, as the highest pledge of the grace and favor of God, and inbreathed into
them as a new center of their light and life, to comfort them in their
banishment; for this alone, having all power and virtue in it self, and being
the central virtue and power in all things, or uniting it self with them in an
indissolable band of love and union, was able to comfort them in their toil and
misery, to take away all their spots and desilements contracted by the fall,
and at last through death bring them into Paradise again, and make them
partakers of a greater glory than they had before, which was performed in the
person of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God and Man. This as it is the
highest treasure, so it comprehends and contains in it all other inseriour
blessings, for so the Holy Scripture tells us, in him is hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge. Therefore let the high inquirers and searchers into
the deep Mysteries of Nature learn first to know what they have in themselves,
before they seek into forinsick matters without them; and by the divine power
within them, let them first heal themselves and transmute their own Souls, then
may they go on prosperously, and seek with good success the mysteries and
wonders of God in all natural things; let them retire into the inmost center of
their own hearts, and with their whole desire, as with the magnet of their
Souls, attract and imbibe the Divine Spirit there, which will readily enter,
and intimately mix it self with the Soul, and radically and sweetly dissolve
it, and turn all its harsh, fierce, corrosive, rough and bitter essences, into
a most pleasant, sweet, meek and friendly gentle frame and temper, and of all
the adverse contrary properties, will make one harmonious quintessential
heavenly nature; and thus will they be inseparably united, and the divine beams
of light and love from the center of the Soul, as the Sun in the Firmameut,
will thoroughly penetrate and illuminate the whole Microcosm; and the blessings
from above and beneath, the upper and the uether springs will be his portion.
But I would not detain the Reader any longer, I shall only add, that our Author
being on Addept, and having obtained his skill by the alone Grace of God, and
not by Man, may well be allowed his liberty of speech, and his sharp reproofs
may be the better received, and though he seems to gainsay most of the
Philosophers as to his matter, yet he tells us it is his own experience, which
he has wrought with his own hands, and is to this day a possessor of the great
Mystery. Providence brought the Copy into my hands, which having seen I thought
it might be an acceptable piece of service to get it published in our modern
tongue; and though some may slight and reject it, yet others I hope will value it
and find benefit from it, for whose sake and for which end I undertook this
labor, and commit it, my self and them to the blessing and protection of
Almighty God, in his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, in whom I subscribe my self a
friend and lover of all men,

E. Brice.

TO THE READER.
THose hungry and thirsty Souls after Gold, courteous Reader, are deservedly to
be driven hence in the first Entrance; for he shall not find what he seeks, who
is incited thereunto by the pleasing allurements of covetous desires: let him
who appears before the Lord with his Prayers and Desire consider his own Heart,
whether it be pure and alienated from wicked desires; if not, he will receive
his answer from that principle which moves him to ask, and will have his desire
according to the impurity of his heart; but that the heart be pure and right,
there is required much light, and much purifying fire to go before, and much
constant humility; for subtle fraudulency is hateful to the holy Deity, and he
that with it comes before the face of God, will be detected, and shall receive
such help as he deserves* In short, instead of the pure spirit, an impure and
fraudulent spirit will meet him, armed with greater deceit, hypocrisy and
appearance of light than he himself is; that Oracle will give to him an answer
in his prayer, and by occult inspirations will lead him into the labyrinths of
a thousand fantasies, and seduce him. Like seeks its like, and to what a man
in his own nature does most nearly approach, that seems best and divine unto
him, that also does most nearly approach to man, and scts it self in the place
of God, and will give counsel to him that asks.

For as every one is, such a God will he have, and such a word; in the very
Sons and Daughters of God, according to the maturity of the spirit, more or
less was the word more or less covered and veiled with an aenigmatical and
typical speech, the internal genuine sense whereof none can well understand,
but those to whom the veil of the Mosaical law and figures is revealed. The
Israelites received the divine word under the voice of a Trumpet, and beholding
God, by Moses seen in clarity, veiled under the coverings of thick darkness and
thundrings were afraid; who if they had with Moses been tincted with the virtue
of the sweet light, verily they had not seen the darkness, but the glory and
majesty, which in a manner appeared to Peter in Mount Thabor, whence it is that
they which speak from aeternity, for the most part are liars in time, because
of the too great distance between them, when Man takes that in a human manner,
which ought to be understood in a divine.

What therefore is to be done? First to seek the renewing of his wretched heart
in God in true and essential humility, to will to be without desire, without
will, without the knowledge of any thing, and to cast away himself as an
unprofitable piece of wood in the presence of the Lord, that he may make of it
an Ark, or Chest, wherein he may work, wherein he may not find resistance from
Ihood, from a strange fire, in strange motions, which may hinder the purity of
the divine motions. This is necessary: For blessed at length are those dead,
who cease from their own works, and so in God lose their own life, and part
with all their own delights. Thou who stirrest up thy self to begin this work,
art thou certain this spirit that moves thee is pure? certainly if there be the
least impetuosity, it is not the spirit of God that moves thee, for he is far
off from any impetuous desire. And truly this is the best Examen, that such a
spirit that compells with force is far off from the spirit of divine truth,
because we know that God inhabits not in the fire, nor in the earthquake, but
in the still small voice.

Plainly another, in this way, ought to be a guide and author to thee: That
will not presently succeed according to thy desire, which thy fantasy
suggests unto thee: If thou art called to this work, he that is to show thee
the way, without which it is impossible to attain the end, will make himself
known to thee by word of mouth, and will lay such strict bands upon thee, that
presently in that very moment thou shall cease to be Master of thy self or of
thy work: for why does wretched Man attempt without the spirit of God to
intermeddle with this work; or does he think he shall effect any thing in this
matter, without an internal word speaking inwardly, or an expert Master.

Verily he deserves to be counted a Fool, who thinks divine treasures are not
kept in stronger holds. But if any one thinks he will with feigned words
deceive God, and with an impetuous desire is instigated, and will conceive hope
where there is none, and as the Poet says, flectere si nequeo superos,
Acharonta movebo; let him look well to himself, and hearken to this admonition,
lest he invites such guests from which it is very difficult, yea impossible to
be free again. For God is a pure spirit, far distant from all terrestreity. Let
the tincture be as wholly as may be, yet the curse and anger of God is in all
terrestreity and corporeity, which is a truth we certainly affirm. In that
accursed part the Devil finds an open entrance, through the impetuous desire of
Man, and in various ways deludes those whom he finds in his Kingdom, of which
thing it would be very irksome to bring examples: But God is a Spirit, and will
be worshipped in spirit and truth; and whosoever is one spirit with him, will
see that his spirit has the rule and dominion in and over all things, yea in
and over Hell and the Devil, and will admire, and yet he will not touch the
forbidden tree. Therefore where there is any covetous desire, it were better
for them to leave the work.

For seeing terrene things belong to the Devil, the Prince of this World, and
this work is partly celestial and partly terrestrial, let every one know that
is covetous of this Art, that the Devil has an entrance in his covetousness,
for it is his own proper habitation: For the corrupt nature of Man, and the
malignant spirits by Man, do easily mix together; and what they are not capable
to do of themselves, they are made capable of by Man, and they teach him the
Science to use their power, and mingle their malignity together with it. But he
that is ruled by the Spirit of God, will always behave himself in a passive
manner, and if Heaven were opened to him, he would not enter in, unless he were
sweetly introduced by a divine power, holy, pure, quiet, friendly, lucid and
serene, beyond his own will and expectation. Nothing can remain in the divine
fire, which Jesus Christ has not wrought in the Soul, in the light of his
Conscience, by which every one may be saved without an historical faith,
whether he be Christian, Turk, Jew or Gentile. He that is faithful to that
light in the smallest things, shall receive a greater light in greater things.
The word which was with God from eternity shines in the darkness, as John
writes, enkindleth this light in its beginning, and more and more enkindles it
as man is faithful, as in its own propriety, in eternity, and what is there
wrought is a new birth, plainly another thing from the Natural man, and it
works all those things which the Natural man cannot work; as the Imitation of
Christ in meekness, and patience, and self-denial; and it seeks, and with
ardor desires to perform those things which are written from the Lord, Matthew.
3. 4, 5, 6. He that has built his house on this foundation, that in all fights
against natural motions, he first seeks the renewing of his heart, his
structure will not easily be overturned by the storms, but will stand against
the swelling waves of the Sea: it will swim above them as in an Ark, by the
power of a well exercised spirit. He will know the Devil and the Dragon sitting
on the waters, and will overcome him. But he that, as Solomon, by a large
effusion of gifts (without essential regeneration) founded on death and
desertion of the spirit of grace, thinks he can stand, will be much deceived,
and in the end will see the slippery firmness of his foundation. Whoever had
greater knowledge than Lucifer? who greater riches than he? was he not the
greatest of all the Angels? could all those gifts help him, who had not yet
sufficiently learned to bridle his own motions? therefore there is need of the
opposer and slayer of this diabolical poison sown in us. What is without us can
help us nothing; but it must be born, wax strong, and exercise its power over
us; our Esauitish birth must be opposed and overcome by the Jacobean birth
Jesus Christ, in the womb of this principle by the power of love and patience.
All knowledge and riches cannot save us from the judgments of the Father,
nothing is admitted to his purity but what is from the spiritual seed of his
Son.

He therefore that in all things acknowledges justice, and in justice, mercy,
and well understands, that where sin is, it is his own fault, and of those good
things which he has received and does daily receive judges himself unworthy,
yea unsufficient for any thing, who after that he has been according to the
flesh and spirit judged, he will in humility of heart remain safe from all
flatteries, and poisoned darts of the enemy. But they who like thieves come and
arrogate that to themselves which belongs to God, and attribute that to God
which is their own, shall one day hear that voice, Friend how came thou in
hither, not having on a wedding garment?

Truly none ought to be ignorant of this, that myriads of spirits are gone
forth to deprive men of that nuptial garment, through a too great desire after
knowledge and miraculous gifts. And these truly are natural spirits; but the
Devil, who envies man that glorious vestment, mingles himself with them, and by
all means studies to deprive man of his rightful inheritance, which he
receives in the diligent imitation of his Savior. Therefore it behooves the
searcher of the Art to be wary and vigilant. For there be many who are
destitute of true Regeneration, yet have great Gifts, and acquiesce in them,
not remembering the deluge will come and try the soundation of their house. But
when they are tried it will be sufficiently manifest that they have lived in
their own desires, error, or conceit of themselves, and have not yet the
patience and continency of the lamb. There is no necessity why we should strive
so much about the process of the outward stone, the inward is far more
excellent and more noble.

Neither do I deny that I have known men unlearned and ignorant of Nature
rather Servants to Covetousness than Priests of Nature, yet such to know the
Art, who unless they had been governed, yea overruled by a higher spirit, in
their rustic simplicity had fallen into the greatest perils. The things I
speak are strange, yet most true. I have known one, who had the Art, and was a
Magus, and yet scarce had the reason of a Man, who without the spirit leading
him in every thing could scarce live a day. I speak this therefore, that those
who promise so many divine mysteries of the Art, do not believe it is not in
the Art, but in a natural ingeny of rightly using the Art, which has need of a
divine light and illumination of grace. The Art of it self makes no man wise,
neither that an incurable Disease has been cured by the tincture, I know it;
neither have I been made more wise by it than before, and I know that others
have not gotten divine Wisdom by it* From whence it appears that it is natural;
therefore if there be any made more wise by it, they attribute that rightly to
the divine Light enlightening the Mind, and causing Tranquillity there, and all
Virtues which every one by this Art cannot get: Many without this Art possess
more than the very Possessors of it. There be many that think the Possessors of
the Art to be rich: But what does it profit a Man to be rich, and not to be
able to make use of his Riches* but at the Will of another? That is good indeed
to a Man, to have his Will one with the divine Will, who has Tranquillity of
Mind, and is free from all Desire. But this is indeed a Tantalizing pain, to
see beautiful Apples, and not dare to taste them; and in the midst of Plenty
to be poor almost to the lowest. I speak not this of those who in the Cross
seek for Roses, to whom the Cross is a delight, who have devoted themselves to
the Cross, but of those who have gotten the Art, before they have been
internally renovated, which brings with it a desire and longing after the
Cross. Let every one therefore know, that the Possessors of the Art are Magi,
and have Spirits assisting them, whether they possess it in the Love or Anger
of God; Therefore they deservedly are laughed at, who think they can deceive
them. Of this there is no time now to dispute, how many ways the Art may be
had: But this I know, all do not possess it in Purity; yea, there are very few
that possess it so, that they contract not Loss to their Souls thereby. But
they who possess it by the Love of God, will appear in their time, when a
better order of things from on high shall be born; and now they are prepared
for that time: But let none seek them for the Art, for they know to whom they
ought to come, and will answer him, though he does not ask; and their number
will be greater, when the Adamantine hearts of Men are cloven, and made more
fit to receive the divine Graft; for this cause the rumors of these things
will more increase, that Mortals may know upon what a slippery foundation their
Riches stand; for this Art, in its time, will be helpful in the destruction
and overthrow of the Antichristian Kingdom, together with other means from
God. What the Author writes of the Books laid up among the Sophy of the New
World, without doubt is true; those Writings are reserved for the New World,
which from that Orb have come to my understanding: There have plainly been
singular things which the wickedness of the world hinders a freer discourse of
them. But this thing only I would have none to be ignorant of, that whatsoever
comes to the hands of any one under this name, ought with great diligence and
circumspection to be examined. One may easily be deceived with writings having
Solomon's name in a detestable manner prefixed to them. Also to such men whose
minds are upon the earth, such terrene plutonick spirits, in good figures are
wont to appear, deluding covetous men diverse ways, and teaching them diverse
arts under the name of Solomon's wisdom. It were good for these (...) to
inhabit only in the earth. But alas now above the earth every where they assume
bodies to themselves: But I will no longer now insist on Alchymy. I only say
this, there is open to the infernal spirit a great ingress in those spirits,
who are in conjunction with the nature of Man, and so being taught to join
Agents with Patients, they perpetrate all evil by that more powerful spirit,
and bring the simple into snares, promising many things, and in the end perform
nothing, but destroy Man and lay him naked; therefore it is our duty that every
one should learn to beware of these, whether they be under the forms of Men, or
forms of Spirits, lest he come to a too late and inglorious repentance.
Farewell Reader, and another time expect more of this matter, from thine,

H. C. K.

THE PREFACE OF THE Belgic Interpreter.
Vino vendibili non opus est suspensa haedera.

THIS Treatise without many Elogies will commend it self. The Author, as I have
been informed, both from the relation of those that were familiarly conversant
with, as also from his own Writings, was an Asiatick Mauritanian, his name
Alipili, who having abdicated Mahometism, and embraced the Christian Faith, set
forth diverse Treatises, of which only this, as I am certainly informed, is in
Europe, and is come to my hands: As to the honesty of the Man, his virtues and
liberality to the Poor, all say of him that he privately possesses hidden
treasures unknown to all men: But all that know him account him the true
possessor of the Universal Tincture; I my self am certainly informed by those
that have been eyewitnesses, that he with a small quantity of his Regenerated
Salt, has diverse times transmuted a great quantity of base Metal into good
Silver and Gold: It is also well known to many, that an eminent person, with a
little quantity of this Regenerated Salt, communicated to him by Alipili
himself, had transmuted six thousand parts of common Lead into the best and
purest Gold in the presence of many, beholding it with admiration. This Salt is
the Subject here treated of.

Centrum Naturae Concentratum: OR THE Salt of Nature Regenerated.
THere is no Subject I believe to be found in the World, which has so much
exercised the Pens of so many Men, for which so much labor is lost, which by
so many ways is sought after, as that which they improperly call the
Philosophers Stone. Many have found deficiency of Wit, and want of Money, but
the wished for end very few attain unto: Because those who have sought this
Art, being swayed by a greater desire after Riches than Wisdom, it is but just
they should see the perverse fruits of their vain desires. For seeing the root
of all evil is the lust after Honor and Money, it is necessary that unlucky
and unhappy effects should spring from thence.

O ye vainly laboring Alchymists! how well had it been for you to have known
your own peace and spend your time in better speculations and operations!
Desist from such a labor, and take care for that which is incumbent on you, to
supply your Wife and Family with necessaries for the Body. You are not called
to the Priesthood of Nature, you have not received the talent that is necessary
for this Office, you ought to be content with food and raiment; you brought
nothing into the world, you will carry nothing out; naked came you in, naked
will you go out, and in nakedness expect your reward.

What do you think the Lord will say to that Servant, to whom with others he
committed the care of his Household, and culture of his Land* that he should
gather in the Fruits of the Field, and take care to lay them up in his
Storehouses: If he forgetting his Office, will with the other Servants take
upon him the care of the Sheep, do not you think he shall receive of his Lord
stripes for a reward? O unfaithful and wicked negligence of his
family-business!

Whosoever thou art, Prince, Lord, Priest, Lawyer, Physician, Tradesman,
Labourer, Citizen, Ploughman, will it not be truly said, thou have not
performed thy Office, if omitting of it, thou betake thy self to another
business, by which thou think thou can do greater service to God and thy
Neighbor, and forgettest thy own business, by spending thy time and labor in
vain chemical operations? Do thou think it a sufficient excuse of thy
perverse labor, if thou say the Subjects of thy Kingdom are too heavily
oppressed with taxes, that many Countries lie wasle? we must connive at much
knavery, that the Revenues in our Exchequer be great enough to support the
magnisicence and state of the Court. Yea, they say, if we learn the Gold-making
Art, all things will be free, all things trim and fair. Love and Righteousness
will rule. The Priest promises, if he knew this Art, to perform Religious
worship without hire: The Lawyer will no more foment brawling contention, but
seek peace and justice gratis: The Physician will cure the sick without Money:
The Tradesman, Labourer and Ploughman will live at ease, and labor no more
having found this treasure, nor will they be any more sollicitous in the
outward care of their domestic affairs; but, as they say, will begin to serve
God with a peaceful mind.

But this I would not have you ignorant of, that every Order of the State is
appointed by God. The Prince to rule his Subjects, and if he be a Christian
indeed, whose Name he professes, only to do the will of his Heavenly King, his
Subjects will follow him in the fear of God in Humility, Love, Obedience, and
Righteousness will reign. The blessing of the Lord will be upon those that
inhabit the City, and on those that dwell in the Country: Blessed shall they
be coming in, blessed going out. The Lord will be an enemy to their enemies,
and will overthrow those that rise up against them. Fountains shall be in the
Fields, and new Wine and Corn shall not fail. Their Heaven shall distill down
the dew, and the Mountains shall afford abundance of Air and there will be no
need to seek after the Gold-making Stone of the Sophy; but superfluous and
useless are so great costs, calamities and sollicitudes, mixed and aggrevated
with the tediousness of so great labor. The Food and Raiment which the
Preachers of the Word require, let them expect it from their hearers. None will
deny to the Lawyer his due reward, if with sincerity he perform his Office. For
Tradesmen, Citizens, and Ploughmen, it is better to work than be idle, from
whence if it should so come to pass, doubtless the Commonwealth would receive
the greatest detriment, as also the things belonging to the ground.

The Lord has instructed Man to seek his Bread in his sweat, and during the
time of his life, to till the Ground, till we return to the Earth from whence
we were extracted. Paul served both God and fervently in preaching the Gospel,
yet nevertheless he wrought with his hands to get his Bread.

Idleness is the Mother and source of all vice; to put a Sickle to another
man*s Corn is contrary to equity and the divine precept.

If thou had the possession of the Stone of the Wise men, it is to be feared
thou would be too fat and luxurious. Thou mavest easily forget thy Creator,
and lightly esteem the Rock of thy Salvation. Therefore it is better to abide
at home, and in simplicity to maintain thy selt, to sear God, and obey his
Commands. Be thou rich or poor that will not help thee. To the good all things
shall work together for good; mind thy duty faithfully with servent desire, and
learn by the example of other men, who having been busied in strange
occupations, have yielded their name and substance to lamentable tragedies.

Every one may live of his own Revenue. If he desire to serve God, his
Neighbor and himself, he will find work enough, and will have no leisure for
vain chemical labors, if he diligently study to observe these three duties,
with his whole heart, soul, and all his might, and valiantly and strenuously to
fight with the Flesh, the Devil and the World. Make trial of this for once in
divine power, with thy whole heart earnestly incline to piety, and whatsoever
thou would be done unto, do thou to others; love those that hate thee, bless
those that curse thee, and do good to those that seek thy life; hate thy flesh,
and all those things thy flesh delights in; bridle the unruly motions of thy
mind, forcibly compel and gather them together, from the tumultuous and wide
spreading inquietude of the circumference into the quiet and calm center of thy
mind, then shall thou hear in thy soul a sweet tranquillity and pleasant
whispering, which will not permit thee any more to precipitate into that acute
and sinful fire, from the holy and pleasing light. It will forbid and drive
thee from pride, self-love, and desire of Gold, and will command thee always to
be content in humility* After this change thou will be plainly another Man, and
nothing will grieve thee more, than the time thou have spent in ambition,
covetousness of Gold, and voluptuousness. Then the wonderful works of God, and
the creatures always before thine Eyes will be admired, and thou will say, O
Lord, I rejoice in the works of thy hands; in thee I very well see Omnipotence,
and Divine Wisdom, neither is there any need to the understanding of these
incomprehensible things, to desire to know and search out the great mystery of
the Philosophers.

Mind what I now propound to you: Which is most difficult to apprehend? either
this, that of the base Metals, Lead, Tin, Copper, Iron, Argent Vive, may be
made a Metal more excellent than Gold? or this, that of one Grass, or Herb, or
Fruit, may be made Milk, Blood, Flesh, Bones, Hides, Skin, Hair, Bristles,
Salt, Oil, Sour, Sweet, Resin, Dung, Wine, Sand and Gravel, Bladder and Reins,
with so many Juices and Moistures; I say, whether this is not a more excellent
miracle of Nature, that of this Herb and Grass may be made an Animal Seed, out
of which a Man, or other Brute, without addition of any other thing at length
proceeds, than that of the base Metals, Gold is generated. That I say much
more deserves admiration than this: Because the transmutation of the base
Metals into better, abides and has its procession in one and the same scale
of Nature, in the same Metalline Kingdom. But Bread, and Grass, on which the
Animal Creatures feed, is by the Salt of Nature transmuted into very many and
various sorts of materials in them.

Here is a great and hidden mystery of Nature, which whosoever understands,
does penetrate into the most intimate center of Nature, without impediment, and
may, by the divine assistance, have and enjoy it.

But because the growth of Animals, increase of weight, and transmutation of
Grass, and Bread into an Animal is a vulgar rustic Science, and perspicuous to
all men, the more learned mind it not, but seek novelties, though of less value
and unworthy of their consideration.

If thou can, my Friend, make that spirit familiar to thee, which by its
energy in the Animal Creatures makes all things that enter into them to live
an animal life; what and how great an effect, do thou think, that spirit will
produce if thou join it for the Agent to a metalline nature? There have been
many industrious searchers of Nature who have attempted this, but have not
found the end they longed for.

Therefore my Friends, first learn those things that are obvious to your eyes,
before you set your mind to find the causes of things remote, immerst in
profound darkness, and hid in the depth of the earth. It is sufficient for you
to know God and your selves, seek with joy true sincere and holy love: It is
enough, if by this means you have gained for your selves treasures in Heaven,
which neither moth nor rust can consume, and in which there is no fear of
thieves.

Leave off from vain chemical labors, and bridle your excessive desire after
the Philosophers Stone: your labor and cost will daily increase, your hopes
will decrease: of a thousand seekers there will be hardly one Adept. Thou
Reader, whether thou will be one of these, a possessor of so great a good, wilt
very much doubt, if right reason bear any great sway in thee. The most wise and
subtle in this way have failed, and with all their wisdom have not obtained
their end.

Therefore spend thy time after the eternal blessed life, because thou art not
certain whether this day thy soul shall not be taken from thee. Look whether
thou can give a good account of thy life here. Consider whether thy soul has
acted well in the house of thy body? whether it has not too often provoked it
by inordinate motion? whether it does not yet burn, and is inflamed in the
fire; void of peace, wherein is trembling, fear and horror; darkness, cold and
misery; stirred up by the fierce inordinate motions of the mind? whether the
Salt of thy Soul has not lost its savor, be not made acid and corrosive by
such an impetuous heat? what kind of savor will those exhalations, and bitter
exits of thy heart yield to the blessed and sweet palate of God Almighty? will
not the Holy God spue such a soul out of his mouth?

O my Friends, you have not one moment of your life secure from death; labor
ye and find your selves, and transmute your own souls, which have attracted the
hardness, coldness and impurity of Lead, the austerity, bitterness and ardent
nature of Copper, and inconstancy of Argent Vive, and by the Divine Spirit
render them peaceful and better: Because this Spirit, like the Spirit of the
Air before your mouth, is always hovering before your souls, and continually
moving it self, which with a gentle and pleasant whispering greatly desires to
be attracted by your will.

O Man draw in this Spirit; for this will warm thee, yea even melt thee by its
holy motions, and as in an open melting fire, will tinge thy soul with love and
wisdom, to make it perfect and more excellent than any Gold, that the
corrosive Devil can no more corrode, disturb or bring any change into it.

But if these my friendly exhortations, which God forbid, find no place in you,
I will set before you honor that is good; a good Name, your own Repute, and
Money, for the sake of which in a thing uncertain there is so great waste of
treasure, such sottish dilapidations. If thou desire to be a Politician, wise
and prudent, thou very well know that a little in the purse is better and
more certain, than that which by a vain and uncertain hope may be expected. You
have known that those, who with great labor seek the Art of making Gold, are
the common talk of all men; and when they have found nothing, are mocked and
ridiculed of every body; every one calls them fools (and that not without
reason) because they suffer themselves to be deluded by those, who put to sale
lying processes, and proclaim through the world their Arcana's. For by these
they give their money for smoke, and when they have been sufficiently
disquieted and vexed by them, and have lost their time and health, and the Gold
they sought for, being ignorant also what Gold is, whence it is, and what kind
of matter, at length they come to a too late, inglorious, yea infamous
repentance. Therefore I exhort those that would avoid this precipice, to remain
in the beaten and common road, which is plain and leads not astray.

But I do not dehort those from any further search into the wonders of God, who
have been called by a divine spirit to a divine light, who being drawn by true
humility search into the wonders of nature, and desire to communicate and make
them known to their Neighbor, who being filled with unfeigned and sincere
love, in the poverty of their knowledge, and that little of the gifts of God
granted to them, are found faithful in the least things: but rather I exhort
them to it, and stir them up to go forward servently, and in simplicity of
heart follow that light, which in this darksome way Ikindle in this little
Book. But they ought thoroughly to examine themselves, without any flattery or
self-love, whether they are ordained for this Art. Whether above all things he
love God, and his Neighbor as himself; and whether he will freely help the
poor, because a drop of water and one mite seasonably given in ones poverty,
and from a true love to our Neighbor, is as great in the sight of God, and
will have as great a reward as a large quantity of wine and money given by the
rich* If their life agrees with this rule, they may go on to the full knowledge
of nature and obtain their desired end.

They lose their labor and cost, who with great carefulness rise early and sit
up late, and eat their bread in anxiety: For the Lord bestows it on them that
love him while they sleep, who seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness:
that is, he who patiently endures divine judgments, and in all judgments,
though he be judged, and his soul is grieved, and even against nature is forced
to endure; yet always he acknowledges and understands that God is just, good
and merciful, and does acquiesce in his justice, and desires not to enter into
the Kingdom, but by the fiery trial, purification and obedience to the word,
his reason being made silent, the passions of his mind tamed and subdued by a
power supernatural, to him all other things shall be added.

But I shall here speak no more of the holy silence, nor use many words of the
nature of this Mystery, but will set upon the thing it self, with the help of
God. And because I am certain that the wise will observe their duty, but the
foolish shall get nothing, I will begin after the finishing of this Prayer.

O God our Father, thou Lord of every good thing; thou who would make all
things by thy word, who have formed Man by thy wisdom, that he should rule
over every Creature, which thou have made: give me wisdom, which is always
round about thy throne; neither drive us back from thy face, for we are thy
Servants and the Sons of thine Handmaid; weak and infirm, and of few days, full
of error and unconstant; neither are we fit or able without thy help, to
render unto thee in this our office that talent which of thy bounty thou have
committed to us, with that increase we ought. All perfection is from thee and
thy wisdom, but there is no capacity or worth in us; send unto us and
enlighten us with thy wisdom which comes from above, send her with a ray from
thy holy Heaven, from the Throne of thy Glory, send her that she may be with
and labor with us, that we may know thy will; grant that she may lead us by
her glory, that the works of our hands may be accepted with thee; for nothing
can be accepted by thee, that is not wrought by her in us; and so it will come
to pass, that we shall see thy truth in thy creatures to be admired. O Lord,
our Cogitations are full of error and doubts, and darkness environs our
judgment. Send thy holy spirit from on high, and enlighten us, that we may
always go in the right way, that we may perform thy will, to the honor of thy
holy Name, and prosit of our Neighbor, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

WHen that matter, wherein Lucifer held his Reign and Center, had with him and
his Angels, or out-going Powers, put on the nature of burning and corroding
fire, by a too great and inordinate motion (whereby he desited to exalt his
light, and render it equal with the Deity) and from the nature of light was
turned into obscure darkness. There was progenerated from the light, in the
first place Air, then from the Air a Mist, and last of all from the Mist a
Viscous Water. And here doubtless this Water, through the bitter, vehement and
stinging cold, the light being taken from it, (and further and further would
have departed) had suffered the force and power of an horrible Coagulation,
unless God had anew sent in a ray of his divine light for a new Center, and
conveyed it through the whole matter, (for the Devil shall no more be the
Center of this World) the agonizing matter perceiving the splendour and
sweetness of this light began to awake. The bitterness of the corrosive, greedy
and austere power, moving thus strongly, decreased; and the stupefied matter,
as it were in a fright began to conside in the form of a glutinous Water.

God would not that the whole Heaven, Mansion and Kingdom, or Matter, wherein
Lucifer reigned, should be utterly destroyed, which before the Fall had its
word, light and motion from him as from the Center. For this Matter was not
made such by its own will, but by constraint, in the ardent imagination of the
overruling spirit or intelligence: For this spirit did with force exercise his
rule and magical power in the Matter. From thence the sweetness of the light
departing to its original, left the corrosive darkness to the burning desire of
the spirit, and the most kind motion of the heat, was changed by the horrible
attraction and vehement compaction of the Cold. The serene face of Heaven did
put on the sorrowful countenance of the terrestrial Water, and Waterish Earth.

But God, willing to bring the Idea of the world, which from eternity he had a
knowledge of in his mind into figures, began to make something new, in which he
could set forth the manifestation of himself, and have complacency in it.
Therefore he began a new Creation, and by his spirit with his word expanded the
Matter, and divided it into three, which working together in one harmony, an
effluvium from one to one, by one thing, should be the beginning of all things,
yet so that one of those three cannot consist without the other two; so there
is made out of this one Chaos, or viscous Water, a fixed, fluid and volatile,
Body, Spirit and Soul, Earth, Water and Air. The fluid spirit is too
unconstant, the volatile soul too subtle, the fixed body too gross to receive
that infused power of the light to its motion. But when from this threefold
union a fourth generation arises, there is the seed of love, and the center of
virtues and powers; a center that cannot properly be named Water, for it is a
viscous Earth, in which is the Water of Nature, and yet it is not Earth,
because it flows and makes moist, neither is it Air, because it may be
handled and rests in stillness; and yet it is Air, Earth and Water together,
the birth of a triple union of Air, Earth and Water. The various Creatures
arise from heat, moving it self in the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral Kingdom,
which thus from unity return again to triplicity, and appear under the figure
of Air, Water and Earth.

Infinite is this process of Nature, there is not a Materia whether Vegetable
or Mineral can propagate and multiply its self, unless its Seed be first made a
viscous Water, or is already such; all the Animals are progenerated and
procreated by such a Water; in all vegetable Seeds, that viscous whiteness
appears before any thing can grow from it. The very Minerals and Metals proceed
from such a viscous Water, and must of necessity return to it. Thus without any
addition in themselves, they ought by the Artist to put on a better nature. If
any Animal, Mineral or Vegetable arrive to a radical solution, instantly will
apppear either a viscous Water or Earth. Therefore the ends of things do
excellently agree with their beginnings.

But now in every viscous Water, there lies hid intimately in the Center, a
hidden Center concentrated, which I call by the name of the Salt of Nature.
This Salt is the Light of the World. Every where where it fixes its seat it
drives its circumferences to motion; it does illuminate, strengthen and uphold
them in their motions. But this very Salt without the Divine Spirit of Nature
does adhere and is annexed to the invisible speaking of the Divine word, and by
this light is nourished and moved.

This is that Salt, which Christ among all created things only caled good: And
it is that Spirit which ascends up into the Airy Heaven, and which again
descends, which restrains the Winds, and holds them in the Fists of its power,
which gathers together the Waters into their places. This Spirit of Salt is the
medium of all things, by which the highest are knit with the lowest, and keep
in harmony. From both the Natures, both superior and inferior, it has
nutriment in abundance; and in like manner does give and divide its plenty to
all things. By it and through its virtue Vegetables and Minerals do grow, and
by it the divine Power does perform whatsoever he will, in the Firmament, in
the Air, the Earth, the Sea and all in deeps. By this he commands the Clouds to
appear from the ends of the Earth. This Spirit is the cause and beginning of
the Lightning and the Clouds; he commands the Winds to come from hidden places.
This Spirit is the Instrument by which God wills that terrible thundrings be
heard from the Clouds. For this cause the satness of the Earth is in it, and
wonderful plenitude of benediction. Without this nothing in nature can
subsist. It is found every where; the poorest as well as the King seeks his
nourishment from it, and conservation of his vital Spirit. O Lord, how great
and wonderful and how many are the works of thy hands? Thou have ordained all
things wisely. The Earth declares thy goodness and fullness, who sillest all
things. Praise ye the Lord. Hallelujah.

From this Salt, if it be regenerated by an Artist, a wonderful and noble
thing proceeds; which makes every corrosive thing sweet, every weak and
infirm thing sound and strong. This thing gives both Riches and Health; and in
this life it deserves the name of a most precious Treasure. Neither is there a
greater thing amongst visible things which exist in this time than this, which
sometimes the Lord bestows upon some men for a special cause. It is a Type and
Image of the Resurrection and Immortality; and our Heavenly Father, by the
operations and existence of this Essence, has in great perspicuity made plain
unto us the understanding of the highest Mysteries. I have seen by this thing
as through a Glass, the Image of the Creation, and the distribution and
ordination of that Mass, which they call the Chaos, the amicable Seed or
Effluvium of the 3 Principles, the separation of that Seen into various forms:
I have also seen by this thing, how the Eternal Word was made Flesh; I have
seen the internal splendor of his glorious light, and the veil of the Humane
Flesh, by which as by a Cloud that glory was covered; how he walked among the
Pharisees, doing many Miracles; and because his appearance was in so mean a
figure, they inflicted on him the highest contempts and torments; and last of
all undergoing death, he entered into the Sepulcher, and with a glorious and
clarified Body ascended up into Heaven, and from thence how by his Spirit he
freed his Brethren and Sisters from infirmities; and how even to this day by
the holy Effluvium of his light and tincture he flows into prepared and
faithful Souls, and there makes all holy things holier and better, and at
length perfects them until the day of the universal and last Judgment, and the
time of the new World. Great are the works of God; he that sets his mind upon
them, will find his delight in them. He has left the monument of his wonders
with us, he who is for ever merciful and kind. Hallelujah.

But although this Salt as has bin said is every where and in all places
according to number, weight and measure, every where the matter of every thing,
yet it cannot so easily be sound, neither is it out of all things fit to all
things.

He that desires to make Gold, he ought to be careful to go about it by Gold,
or the nearest matter to Gold, say the more wise; and it is their opinion, that
the change of any one thing into a better, cannot proceed unless it be in its
own species, kind and likeness; and so they have believed that Animai,
Vegetable and sharp powers, avail nothing to the perfection of Metals, but are
altogether unprofitable: but they affirm, that every of the three Kingdoms (as
they call them) is in its own nature separated and divided from the other.

This is a perverse opinion in him, who desires to show the way in which I will
not go. But I say this, that all things come, grow and proceed from one root;
but the only diversity of the matter and motion causes the diversity of the
subjects. One virtue and power fills the universal orb of the Earth and
Heavens, and brings it self into forms and figures, gross and subtle, sweet
and sour, hard and soft, Animal, Vegetable and Mineral.

But I cannot at this time pass over this in silence; that that Spirit and
Universal Salt of Nature, though it be nearest to the breath of the divine
speaking, and ministers to all things its increated power: yet it can produce
nothing new; but is only made use of by the word of God, sustaining and
upholding all things for the sustentation, conservation and motion of those
works, which sometime began to have their being by the alone word of God
creating them.

Here those Doctors are to be reproved, who make that noted difference between
the nature of Animals, Vegetables and Minerals, and feign as it were three
Kingdoms of the things of Nature, altogether unknown and never seen by her
Priests, and they daily cantradict themselves, and the thing it self, and
evident experience, speaks against them: for they administer infinite mineral
and metalline Medicines to an Animal, or sick Man; and themselves confess and
say (when these Medicines are prepared without fire or corrosive liquors) that
the sick much better and sooner recover their health from these than the
others: For healing is nothing else but the correction of the acid and
degenerate spirit; and because that which is corrupted cannot be corrected,
unless the corrector from its first essence radically enter into that which is
corrected, and inseparably unite it self with it, all must of necessity grant
unto me, that the essence of Minerals and Metals may very well unite with an
Animal nature: and if they may in their first nature be united and be of the
same essence, it is necessary that the diversity and dissimilitude be only
contingent. Neither do all Metallicks nor Calx Vive produce so sudden and good
an alteration to the spirit of Vitriol, or Emetick Salt, as Crab's-eyes, Shells,
and Bodies of that kind taken from the nature of Animals.

Aqua fortis will not touch on Gold unless Sal-armoniac or Salt of Urine be
added to it. The fat of Ears will augment the weight of Duccats, if they have
not the due and desired pondus: others make use of new Horsedung to increase
their weight, or put them for some time under the soles of their Feet, that
their strong sweat might penetrate or tinge their substance.

Those of the East Countries have known how to make Gold colored or flexible,
and to give to Copper the most elegant and durable color of Gold, by a certain
animal fat: and whoever will make trial with Man's dung, or the dung of little
Children in a due manner, may in Silver in its separation from the Gold gain
some grains of Gold, if he proceed rightly. Wheat bruised into most fine parts,
and stratified with finest lamens of copellated Silver, put into the Fire in a
cementary vessel, exactly closed, and made red hot and combust, in the examen
of Aqua fortis, Gold will be left from the Silver. New and fresh Butter, by a
simple manual is apt to extract the tincture of Corals from the stony nature.
That unconquered Talk mocking the vexations of the Alchymists, and all Fire,
suffers it self to be dissolved into an oily substance by nothing so well as
Vegetables, but chiefly by Animals, as I very well know. The Oils and vo'atile
Salts of Herbs extract the tincture of Sulphur. Neither is it needful here
that I make a long Discourse of the virtues of Spirit of Salt, and Oil of
Tartar, for their radical operations on Metals and Minerals is more or less
sufficiently known to any one skilled in the Chemical Art. But I think without
Wine and Man, can never any make a true, perfect and genuine tincture.

How Grass, Herbs and Bread gives food to the Creatures, conserves them and
makes them better, and in them is changed into various matters, is above spoken
of.

It is a thing well known to Countrymen, that Vegetables are made better and
fatter by the dung and urine of their Beasts that seed on Vegetables.

Man himself to his own cost feels the vegetable and mineral virtues in his own
Body, and apparent dolours compel him oft-times even against his will to
confess it. The sand and gravel in the Reins, must it not be confessed it is of
a mineral nature; or have they any other original, than of the juices of
Animals and Vegetables, which Man feeds on? Is it not certain that Gold has
grown between the teeth of a man's Skull?

I my felt by the Grace of God prepare a matter out of Animals, which in
preparing it in a singular way for what I use it, affords unto me, one way
Animals, another way Vegetables; again another way, often using the same thing,
Minerals and Metals, Argent Vive, true Copper, Vitriol, Crystal Glass of
Saturn, Lead, and the viscous and glutinous first substance of Minerals: All
which this only one matter affords, without the addition of any peregrine
thing, of it self, and of its own only proper substance; but I am too open, and
transgress the prescribed limits. He that desires to know more, let him in
simplicity follow the simplicity of Nature. I only propounded this to my self,
to show in short, that Animals, Vegetables and Minerals are one and the same in
their essence, and that they differ in themselves, and are distinct
accidentally only, in respect of a greater or less perfection, and in their
soun ain and root there is no difference: But that the Salt of Nature is every
where, and in all things to be found, according to the Nature of every thing,
in due weight, number and measure; but it is not alike easy to educe it out of
every subject, neither is it apt or sit enough for all things out of every
matter, especially for that which they call the Philosopher's Art, or has it a
virtue desired and sufficient for so great a work. Therefore the best in all
nature ought to be chosen, unless the industrious searcher propound to himself
to lose his labor and cost, and would gain his desired end. Hic labor hoc opus
est.

But now to search out and find the Universal Center of all Creatures seems to
be a matter of no small difficulty, and verily it is sought of many, but found
of very sew. When yet the thing is not so difficult, if with a perspicacious
and due attention we consider the holy Scripture, and reading it thoroughly mind
the genuine sense of the words.

Man therefore (without any dark cloud or veil, or any aenigmatical
hieroglyphical manner of speaking usual to all other Philosophers) I now say is
that Universal Center of the Earth, Air and Water.

Out of a spiritual incorporated desire of the love of whole Nature, God, on
the sixth day, out of a spiritual incorporated desire of loves, would have him
to be as it were a concentrated Body and Compendium of the whole Universe. In
this sixth light, all the harmonies of all the properties, by a divine moving
within themselves, gave their consent and harmonious accord, to produce one
Center, and one Light out of their sweet concord and friendly wedlock, and with
an unanimous counsel, as I may so say, decreed, constituted and confirmed this
Center, their King, sustainer and conserver, and gave him full power and an
eternal empire* But the Divine Power, above the ordained laws of Nature,
plainly by a new manner, or as it were by a new ordination or creation, made
this Center corporeal in his own Image, according to his own Form and
Similitude, as it were, God of God, to his own glory: That Man for whose sake
all things were created, that in five days saw the light, might be the God and
Lord of all elementary and created things, only God alone should be his Lord.

Thus God placed Man in the middle, between that which is superior, and that
which is inferior; and did inspire into him (by the word Ruach Elohim noted in
the Hebrew Book) through the two nostrils the breath of a twofold life, one
whereof was the breath of the eternal word of God, or of the eternal life: the
other was the elementary and astral airy breath, or spirit and word of time.

Both these infused powers of life in Man divided themselves so, that each
formed and possessed its own Center to it self, which was the continual will
and desire of each of them after its first original or primordial nature. Both
of them desired its Mother from whence they proceeded, and each desired for her
self to be nourished by her essence. So the Will as the Father did generate in
the Life's Center for himself, the Appetite or Desire as his Son and Offspring;
from both which the Will and Desire did proceed the Spirit as the power of
living, by the attracting and breathing nature from God and the Airy world.

But the Body of the Element did also produce out of their properties, the
Center, the Will, the Desire, and Power of attracting out of its Mother (the
Earth and Water) and out of it desired to quench its thirst, and suck her
Breasts; he eat therefore and fill*d himself with her, containing in himself a
tripl triunity in one body of Man, and living in this manner, that Man might be
an Image of God after his likeness.

But yet the Center of the Body, Spirit and Soul were not compelled by any
necessity, to sill and satiate themselves from the Water, Air and Earth; but
the highest liberty of Will was left unto them after the likeness of the
Free Will of God. It was free to the good, lucid, pleasant, sweet will, which
took its beginning from the pleasant meekness to contract it self, and diffuse
it self, in and through all circumferences, over which, as their Center and
Ruler, she held her Empire: Yea it was lawful and free to him to divide
himself more or less, as it pleased him.

He could also without any thing opposing him, by a too ardent, strong and
vehement motion of his Seed, and out-going powers from himself, produce in
himself another sharp pestilent appetite, and malignant desire after a sharp,
austere, and venomous food.

He could also shut his mouth and appetite, by not attracting that aliment
which was necessary for him.

But it would be too long and large here to tell, what was the nature and
condition of that food; and how at that time Adam and Eve, by a power and
hurtful pleasure did eat together, and dyed that death, which in heavenly
natures happens in a heavenly and spiritual manner.

It is also not our business here to relate, how they fell in their Will, and
kept as it were imprisoned the Appetite and Power of the good, which they
received from the highest good and made it unfruitful, and how they closed,
obdurated the mouth of their soul, and choked the very good, exerting it self
in them, because the lamentable condition of them both, O! alas! makes it
sufficiently known.

But not only the Soul in Adam and Eve did undergo the deplored condition of
death; but seeing all were knit together in one Body, the burning fire of the
Soul kindled also the Spirit and Body, the Spirit and Body did infect the Air,
Water and Earth, and compelled them to consent, and precipitated them into that
miserable condition with themselves; because the Body and Spirit were the
Center and Universal Heart, and held the potency of their Imagination in their
Mother, the Air, Water, and Earth, it was of necessity it should so come to
pass.

Like as in this time, when the Heart in the Body is sick the whole Body is
sick and suffers pain. When self-desires go forth from the Heart (according to
the word of God) all things pertaining to that Man contract thence some
impurity. Yea sometimes for the Offenses of the Heart all the other Members
shall be afflicted, although they have done nothing but a forced duty, and by a
necessary obedience. After the same manner the Earth ought and yet must bear,
for Adam's sake, the horror of the curse. But let us not expatiate too much in
the Field of Theology. We must return to Natural Philosophy.

I have affirmed that Man is the Center and Compendium of all created things;
to him before the Fall all things in this World were obedient, through the
force and power of his Imagination, which he exercised from the Center into all
his Circumferences. But as the Devil, through the malignant force of his
Imagination, lost the right and power of the good Imagination in his first
Kingdom (this our World) so Adam who was constituted by God in the place of the
lapsed Angel, which then assumed a grosser substance through the fall of
Lucifer, who rendered that place of a grosser substance, by the like false and
malign Imagination, destroyed and lost the first or ancient power of the good,
and the right of the Divine Nature.

His imagination in this time and station is odious to nature and abominable,
neither has it any ingress, so nothing is left remaining to Man but a
miserable Body, which with its Spirit is heavily, or with grief sustained by
nature. He has but a weak and slender power even to this day given to him,
through his judgment, reason, and labor of the body to bring some things in
nature from worse into better, and from better into worse, and by this means to
make some particular and gross mutations.

The Natural man therefore does draw the Vital Spirit from the Air, Water and
Earth in a twosold manner, from beneath and from above. From above by the
attraction of the Air, or his respiration, he enjoys the spirit, power and
breath of the out-flowing and out-going word; to wit, the gale or out-flowing
spirit of the Air, and turns it into his nourishment; but from beneath he
partakes of the Flesh and Blood of the World. The Flesh of the World, Animals,
Vegetables and Minerals afford; the Blood the Water affords; the quintessence
and spirit or most subtle breath and highest outgoing power of this Flesh and
Blood Man enjoys. That Spirit with its spiritual Salt does not only refresh
and nourish the Spirits of Men, but from it also the Alchahistical dissolving
power of the ferment in the Stomach derives its original: the other parts of
the Body do also take their ferment from thence; so the Flesh and Blood of all
the Macrocosm, receiving a kind dissolution in the Humane Body, by separating
and preparing, do afford and yield his Salt, to the preparation of the Flesh
and Blood of the Microcosm; so that the thirsty and hungry particles of the
Microcosm do eagerly desire and imbibe it; but the excrementitious outsides do
find their egress through the emunctories of the Head, the pores, parts, and
clandestine exits beneath and above.

Here if thou can from the inferior parts of the World draw out the inward
Center, or Salt of Nature; or from the superior, the Heart or Center most of
all hidden, thou shall be to me Magnus Apollo: But greater yet will I admire
thee, if thou can find out the Astral and Central Salt of Nature in abundance
and great plenty united in one thing as in Man. If thou know this, I will
confess that thou possessest natural wisdom; and I promise thee, that with
this light thou can unlock the most hidden and recluse mysteries of Nature,
and make samiliar to thee hidden treasures.

He that has the knowledge of the Microcosm cannot long be ignorant of the
knowledge of the Macrocosm. This is that which the Egyptian industrious
searchers of Nature so often said, and loudly proclaimed, that every one should
know himself. This speech their dull Disciples took in a moral sense, and out
of ignorance assixt it in their Temples. But I admonish thee whosoever thou art
that desire to dive into the inmost parts of nature, if that which thou
seek thou find not within thee, thou will never find it without thee. If
thou know not the excellency of thine own house, for what do thou seek
and search after the excellency of other things? The universal Orb of the Earth
contains not so great mysteries and excellencies as a little Man, formed by God
to his Image. And he that desires the primacy amongst the studiers of Nature,
will no where find a greater and better reserve to obtain his desire, than in
himself.

Therefore I will here follow the example of the Egyptians, and from my whole
heart and certain true experience proved by me, speak to my Neighbor in the
Egyptians words, and with a loud voice now proclaim. O Man know thy self; in
thee is hid the treasure of treasures: Thine it is, by the external breath in
the Air, to enjoy that breath of the Firmament, which the wonderful Astrum
attracting from the supercoelestial Waters has breathed into the middle region
of the Air, where it by the motion of the Air, suffers it self in the Air to be
coagulated and incorporated with the Air.

Thou, O Man, art he who through the Air enjoyest the breath and power of the
Water and Earth, and in thy self enjoyest both the Elements and maked them one;
and thy self not knowing what a treasure thou have hidden in thee, from the
coagulation and consent of these powers, producest an essence, called by us the
expert, the great and miraculous mystery of the World, that is the true fiery
Water Eschva-mayim, Hascha-mayim; yea it surmounts in its power the Fire, Air,
Earth, and Water; for it dissolves and radically incrudates the mature,
constant, and very fixed fire, abiding mass and matter of Gold, and reduces it
into a fat and black Earth like to thick Spittle, wherein we find a Water and
the true Salt, destitute of all ardor, vehemence, and corrosive nature of the
Fire. There is nothing in the whole world to be found which can do this;
nothing is shut to it; and though it is a precious thing, more precious than
every thing, yet the poor as well as the rich has it in the same and equal
plenty. The Wise men have sought this thing, the Wise men have found it: Hermes
of this thing composed his twenty and eight Books, and these Books I have seen
with these Eyes, and the Wise men of the new World have them, and keep them in
their own hands without any mixture of falsehood. And you my Friends seek this
in diverse things, but perhaps none of you have known its secret recesses where
it is hid, or have found its ways, and can tell what shape it shall be of, if
at any time he chance to see it.

But it is (I tell you the simple and plain truth) the Spiritual Water, and
Watery Spirit, the Water of Life, which Adam and Eve brought out of Paradise
with them for their consolation, and which by their Offspring they left to
posterity. O noble Water! lucid and sweet: O despised Water! obscure and
bitter: O Water comforting us till death. This is that Cornerstone, which the
wise builders, the great Philosophers, and expert Masters of Alchymie, and of
Israel, from unskilful ignorance neglecting rejected even to this day.

Sometimes at length open your Eyes O mortal Men, with your whole heart love
God and your Neighbor; pray in Humility and Meekness, that the Lord would be
gracious to you, and turn the darkness of your Mind into Light. In these words
I have openly showed the way; and to these I will add over and above this
further Explication.

The World, in which the matter of the Sophy is nighest and best to be found,
is Man; the highest Artifice is in him, his metalline Mine is to be opened the
tenth time, the Brass which there is dug is the best and worst in Nature, the
Water most precious and most vile, the Water Earth together, and always in
themselves joined with another thing; the Son, Birth and Seed of the most pure
Bodies is born in Man for his profit and necessity, its name is Tessa.

If by your industry you have found your matter, separate the pure from the
impure, without fire or admixtion of any other thing; prepare a Virgin-earth,
which ought to be without Odor, without Taste, without Color, separate from
that the Central Salt, the Microcosmick Vitriol, the Philosophic Venus, the
Mercury of the Microcosm, the Philosophic Luna; purify and produce out of it
a Son more noble than his Parents.

Then thou will see the causes and reasons that impressed the Egyptians, that
they gave the Signature of Luna and Venus to Argent Vive, why they put beneath
the sign of Copper, the character of Luna above.

The uppermost or Astral Salt is most volatile, sweet, and shines and glisters
like pure Silver, and its nothing else than the Silver of the Sophy, and the
Mercurial Saline Spirit. But the central Salt is a Vitriol of infinite,
wonderful and ineffable Virtue, which coagulates the Argent Vive, and changes
it into pure Silver. But Venus is enclosed in Saturn's Vestment, from which she
must be freed, that she may appear Naked in her Beauty to the Eyes of the
Artist.

From these two kinds of Salt all the Metals are generated, and there is the
same reason of the Microcosm, as of the Macrocosm.

So I have shown you the Metalliue Mine in your own Body, and have demonstrated
to you how out of it, with the addition of no other thing, you may prepare
Gold, Argent Vive, Copper, Lead, etc. I show you the way which I my self have
gone; for I have seen with a moderate and due fire produced out of this matter,
the medicine of the (...) Minerals and Animals, concerning which so many Books
have been dispersed about.

Whether the ancient or modern Philosophers have gone in this way, it is not my
business now to dispute. I seek no ones testimony, no ones refutation; It
suffices me as a possessor of the Art to need neither the living nor the dead.
Experience it self has made me a Master, and has made a certain thing more
certain than was needful for a Master, to have brought to light the truth of
Nature.

Verily I should rejoice, if they had obtained their end by another matter; for
so I should believe the divine grace, through my Prayers and Industry of
seeking, had opened to me a new and heretosore unknown Miracle of Nature. For
my Salt of Nature by artifice regenerated out of my matter, has performed the
same things, which the Arcanum of the Ancients is believed at any time to have
performed. Therefore he that will follow me, must beware of Costs and great
Labor: If he find the tenth opening, and the matter, Nature it self without
manual operation will help him, and make him possessor of the wonderful earth;
only let him follow Nature, and consider its operations, all things are little,
easy, and of no Cost.

But how to go forward after the possession of the true Philosophic Mercury,
in the knowledge of which many are deceived, thinking the Mercury of the
Philosophers to be the Salt of Nature regenerated, is not my work now to write,
because I write to Philosophers, not lovers of Gold.

Therefore in the first place learn the wisdom of the Soul; which if you find,
all will succeed prosperously, and according to your wish, and your hope will
not be frustrated. From her comes every good thing, and infinite riches are in
her hand. If thou find the true Center of Man, other things of their own
accord will slow in.

Whosoever thou art take in good part this my admonition and follow my
experience, unless thou will be a fool with the common multitude: follow others
if thou will, and read their obscure style and veiled speeches. Not one of them
all has used that fidelity toward their Neighbor as I have. Never any, in
such perspicuous words, has made the derfull matter to be drawn out of Man so
manifest. They may compare their Writings with their Books, whoever will may
bend their words to his own meaning. But yet whosoever will write better and
clearer things, I will be thankful to him. I have received the truth freely
from God. In communicating of it I fear not the curses of the Philosophers, for
I have learned nothing out of their Writings. I commit this little Book more
clear than the Sun to the Divine most wise Providence* For he only gives
wisdom to the wise, and understanding to the prudent. Things occult and deeply
hidden he reveals. He searches the profound abyss of darkness by his Spirit in
us, from which light alone all is derived.

I give thee thanks O God my Father, who have bestowed on me wisdom, and have
revealed that thing to me, for which I prayed to thee. Illuminate the eyes of
all men, who love thee with a pure heart, that they may glorify thy Name.

To the Tri-une God, the great merciful Father, the Son and Spirit, from whom
alone flows all truth, light and wisdom, be honor and praise for ever and
ever.

Help O Lord thy Servant by Jesus Christ. Amen.

Let things transitory give place to eternal. Here we see in a glass, and know
through a cloud, but then we shall see him as he is.

O how vain are things which affect the Senses, compared with those which make
the Soul happy, that he may live for ever with his Savior!

FINIS.
Books Printed for J. Harris at the Harrow in Little Britain.
MEdicina Practica: or, Practical Physic. Showing the Method of Curing the
most usual Diseases happening to Humane Bodies. With the Preparation of the
Praecipiolum, or Universal Medicine of Paracelsus. To which are added the
Philosophical Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Kalid Persicus, Geber Arabs,
Artefius Longaevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon, and Geo. Ripley. Together
with a singular Comment upon the First Book of Hermes, the most ancient of
Philosophers. The whole Completed in Three Books. By William Salmon, M. D.
Price 5 s.

The Treasury of Drugs unlockt: or, a full and true Description of all sorts of
Drugs and Chemical Preparations sold by Druggists. Whereby you may know the
place of their Growth, and how to distinguish the Good from the Bad. The whole
Alphabetically digested. By Jo. Jacob Berlu, of London, Merchant in Drugs.
Price 1 s.

Mathematical Divinity: or, a plain Demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the Times of this World were fore-appointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham: and determined to be according to the Measure of the Age and Fullness
of Christ. Kept secret since the World began, but is now made plain upon XII
Tables, in a Solar Calendar, as familiar to the Understanding as any common
Almanac. With full Proof, that this is the last Generation, which shall not
pass away till all things be fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be
opened. Being the Result of many years study. By Elias Palmer.

A Pleasant and Compendious History of the first Inventers and Instituters of
the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole World.
Together with many other Rarities and Remarkable* things rarely known, and
never before made public. To which is added, several Curious Inventions,
peculiarly attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole Work Alphabetically
digested, and very helpful to the Readers of History. Price bound 1 s.

A necessary Family-Book, both for the City and Country, in two Parts.
Containing Exact* Plain and Short Directions for Taking and Killing all manner
of Vermin on Land and in Water: As, Part I. by Land, the Fox, Polcat, Buzzard,
Kite, Weasle, Adden, Snake, Caterpillar, Frog, Mole, Pismire, Fly, Bug, Rats
and Mice, Fleas and Lice. Part II. by Water, the Hern, Dob-Chick, Coot, or
Moor-Hen, Cormorant, Sea-Pye, Kings-Fisher, Otter, Water-Rat, and Ospray, all
great destroyers of Fish. Price 6 d.

The Rational Sceptick. By a Person of Honor. Price 3 d.

The End.

