ALLEGIANCE VINDICATED: OR, The TAKERS OF THE New OATH of ALLEGIANCE TO K.
William and Q. Mary JUSTIFIED: AND THE Lawfulness of taking it Asserted, in its
Consistency with our former Oaths; and also with the Doctrine of the Reformed
Church of England, CONCERNING NON-RESISTANCE and PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1690.

The Takers of the new Oath of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary
vindicated: and the Lawfulness of taking it asserted, in its consistency with
our former Oaths; and also with the Doctrine of the Reformed Church of England
concerning Non-resistance and Passive Obedience.
IT appears sufficiently by this Time, (I suppose,) upon Record, that the
generality of the Reverend, Learned, and Pious Clergy of this Church have
actually taken the Oath in Dispute: and their Books every where extant declare,
that diverse of them have written Learnedly in Defense of themselves and their
Brethren so doing: and have not been wanting in their utmost endeavors to
satisfy those of them who yet refuse, by offering them all the Arguments they
could think of, for it; and turning every Stone under which they could imagine
any considerable objection against it to lie concealed, in order to the giving
it a satisfactory Solution.

They have, to this purpose, unravelled all the Principles of Government, and
searched into the Reason of them all, even from Adam, downwards; they have,
particularly, with great industry, sifted the Legal Constitution of the English
Monarchy, and the History of all its Monarchs, to evidence the Original
Contract, upon which it is asserted, that our Government is founded; they have
endeavored to evince the late King to have been a kind of Felo de se, (as to
his Title thereunto,) by voluntary Abdicating the Throne; to which diverse
Authors also have added his Legal Forfeiture, (as they suppose,) by breaking
the Original Contract beforementioned: they have fortified the Claim and Title
of our present Sovereigns, by justifying the late Dutch Invasion, together with
the rising of the English Nobility, and their adherents, in the circumstances
wherein we then were, to assist it; they have pleaded the Right of Conquest
consequent thereupon, if their Present Majesty's had thought fit to fix their
Throne on that foundation; and (that being waved by them, who have rather
chosen to adventure themselves upon the favor of the Nation Assembled in
Parliament,) they have asserted the Legality of the present Parliament, for
substance, although wanting the usual circumstances of Summons, etc. (which in
the present conjuncture could not be had,) to constitute them in all points
formally such; and (by Consequence) have inferred the validity of those Acts
for the settlement of the Throne, which they have made; and thereby, not only
justified the matter of this Oath, but also, the Authority by which it is
imposed: and lastly, they have (by strong Evidence to that Point, at least, if
all other grounds should fail,) made out the lawfulness (if not necessary Duty)
of paying our Actual Obedience to their Majesty's, as actually possessed of the
Government.

And yet (notwithstanding all these Endeavors of theirs,) it appears also,
that diverse of the Sacred Function (and some of them of the highest Character,
and Station in this Church,) have, rather than to comply with the rest in
taking this Oath, already incurred the Penalty of Suspension from, and seem
inclined yet farther to hazard the being totally deprived (which is the Penalty
to which Refusers are shortly endangered) of their Places and Employments:
which evidently declares, that all that has been said upon that subject yet,
has not been prevalent enough for their plenary satisfaction.

The consideration whereof, I must confess, may very well discourage any Person
who has but modesty enough to take a just measure of himself (in comparison
with those who have Written before so accurately on this Argument, as to leave
little for any that comes after them to add thereunto) from attempting any
thing farther of that kind; and had certainly had that effect upon my self, had
I not found it necessary, in a sort, (upon the account of the uncharitable
carriage of diverse Persons, who, though it may be, they have not so much as
looked into any of the Books beforementioned to understand the Reasons moving
us thereto, have made it much of their business to censure and condemn both my
self, and so many of my Reverend Fathers and Brethren as have taken the said
Oath,) to write a few Lines in Justification, (at least) of that which we have
done: if not, also, to the conviction of others, who still stand out in their
refusal, and the inducing of them to do the same yet, before the approaching
expiration of the Term by the Act allowed, and the securing themselves in those
Stations, wherein they may still continue serviceable to this Church; to which
diverse of them, (as all must acknowledge) have hitherto been, both a Defense by
their learned Pens, and an ornament by their personal Qualifications.

I am sensible (I musts needs say) by Experience, that with the Assertors of
some rigorous Principles of Loyalty, all the Arguments urged from the Topics
beforementioned, except those of the last sort, are of no consideration at
all: and that even those, (although they find from them some fairer Quarter
then the rest, in Thesi, or in general, yet) in the present Case, are judged
insufficient and unconcluding. And this, because they are strongly possessed
with a persuasion, that their former Allegiance is a thing of an everlasting
permanent Obligation, and in no sort or degree, upon any emergency, to be
transferred from a Prince however dispossessed, (as one, who has a Title,
neither forfeitable by any miscarriage, nor voidable by any cession or
departure) unto any other, so long as he lives, and is not pleased expressly to
release it: and adhere to the Doctrines of Non-resistance and Passive
Obedience, (as they judge them taught by the Church of England) to such a
Degree, as to pronounce them utterly inconsistent with the Allegiance in this
Oath required. So that, when we have to do with Men of that strain, it is
necessary that we wave all those former Heads of Arguments abovementioned; and
cast the whole stress of this Dispute upon the last, in the Issue of this
single Question, viz.

[Whether, (with the saving of those Principles of theirs, be they sound or
not) a Man that professes Loyalty in its utmost rigours, may not yet be at
liberty, in the present circumstances, to take the Oath required to K. W. and
Q. M. as actual Possessors of the Throne?]

To this, therefore, I resolve in this Discourse, to confine my self;
endeavoring to prove the Affirmative, and answer all visible Objections to the
contrary, in the making good the Propositions following. The first whereof, is
this,

I. [That in all Places, every one that is by Law in the condition of a Subject
owes a Legal Obedience (which I take to be no other then Allegiance) to some
supreme Powers; and to some Person or Persons by whom it is exercised.]
Subjection, from Subjects, is always due somewhere, under what Form of
Government soever Men be, by the Law of Nature, (according to the Reverend Dr.
Sanderson:) Sanderson's Case of the Engagement
and that, (primarily) to every Man's Country, and consequently, to the
Sovereign Power thereof. For the denial of this, does evidently involve a
contradiction; as that which supposes the same Person, at the same time, a
Subject, and yet no Subject: a Subject, as being under the Laws; and yet no
Subject, as being discharged from that Duty which those Laws enjoin. Yea, more,
it vertually dissolves (while it is denied) that Society (in the tendency
thereof) which is established upon, and maintained by those Laws. For the
Obligation of the Law at any time dissolved, leaves every Man (so long as
things continue in that posture) sui juris, in the equality of Nature; so that
he may challenge, without restraint, the liberty of doing what is good in his
own Eyes.

II That this Legal Obedience, or Allegiance, cannot in the present juncture,
be actually paid to King James, and therefore the Obligation of it so far
cease, as to its actual performance to him, as he is in an actual incapacity
to demand, or we to give it; how due soever (according to the Principles
mentioned) it may be thought to be. This Notion here asserted, of the Cessation
of actual Obedience, (though promised by an Oath) I take to be (as to its
possibility) agreeable to the Determination of the learned Dr. Sanderson, in
his famous Book, De Obligatione Juramenti; who therein pronounces a promissory
Oath (as to its Obligation to Performance) to cease, per cessationem materiae,
when the matter of it cease. Now, the matter of an Oath Promissory then
cease, when that which is promised, is not payable; which may happen, either
by its becoming either naturally or morally impossible.

As for instance, when the Person to whom the Promise is made, cease to be in
a capacity to demand or receive what was so promised. This (I suppose) may fall
out; either totally, as (in one of the Doctors own Instances) it does, when the
General of an Army, to whom a Soldier is obliged by a Military Oath is dead.
Then, it is cassated, or made totally void. Or, partially, as (to keep to the
former instance) when the General so sworn to, though he be yet alive, is
notwithstanding in such circumstances as render him, for the time, as dead;
which may happen, by his being taken Prisoner, and shut up so close, as that
the Soldier can receive no certain Commands from him. I could here also (if I
may without offense) add another Case (which, whether it dissolve such an
Obligation totally, or partially only, let who will determine) to wit, When
such a General voluntarily deserts his Army; and especially if he do so, to
join himself with their Enemies; so that he cannot in those circumstances be
obeyed by the Party he has deserted, without the Breach of an higher
Obligation to him, or them, from, or for whom he received his Commission. Now I
am very much mistaken if one of these Cases run not parallel with ours, in the
Allegiance promised to King James. For, plain it is, de facto, that we can, in
his present circumstances, have no Communication with him, nor receive any
certain Commands from him, how willing soever we might be to serve him; being
(whether by choice or necessity, I determine not here) wholly in the power of
our Nations and Religions professed Enemies; without maintaining that dangerous
Intelligence which he himself cannot in reason require; and which, I hope, our
most dissatisfied Brethren do not think that Allegiance obliges us at this
time, to keep with him. And I could wish that the later Case propounded, did
not also run too parallel with ours, i. e. That he had not embodied himself
with the sworn Adversaries of our Religion (as to his Communion) as he has
long since; and yet, notwithstanding that, we paid him our true Allegiance
always whiles he stayed among us, which he himself has more than once
acknowledged. And much more, that he had not now at last also, not only
deserted us, but likewise armed against us those of that Party who most thirst
after our Blood; and thereby rendered it farther impossible for any Englishmen
(especially Protestants) to pay him that further Duty which the Oath of
Allegiance expresses by Assistance and Defense; which they cannot do
(according to the preceding Hypothesis) without breaking their greater
antecedent Oligations to God, their Native Country, themselves and their
Posterity; in consistence wherewith, all subsequent Obligations must be
interpreted, to render them lawful: For, otherwise, the Rule is Prior obligatio
praejudicat posteriori.

To clear up this Proposition the more fully; let us spend a little time in
enquiring particularly into those Acts of Allegiance, which may by any one be
supposed to be due to King James in his present circumstances; and see, whether
any of them be rationally performable to him, by the English Clergy
particularly, to whose Case this Discourse is chiefly aecommodated.

The main Duty of our former Allegiance is contained in the Words of
Assistance, and Defense, as was before said. This is done, either by Arms; or
otherwise; to wit, by actions more proper to our Function. As to the former; I
suppose no Man of that Calling will think himself obliged personally to bear
Arms for him. For an entire freedom herein was always allowed us by the Law,
which excuses all Persons in Holy Orders from being required to do so in any
case. So that whatever is at any time done, of that nature, by any of them,
must needs be, in this case, not a matter of Duty, but a mere Supererogation of
Loyalty, a perfectly voluntary and free will Offering. It would be no other,
even to a Prince that had most highly deserved of us; and one, whom (in the
prospect of the Success of his Arms) we could cordially trust with all our
dearest Interests. And therefore it is not to be supposed that any considering
Person of that Order (how militarily disposed soever he may be otherwise) will
think fit personally to give one, who surely has not so obliged us, and the
Success of whose Arms at present we cannot safely Trust, this sort of
Assistance or Defense, though he should call for it; and much less to offer it
when unasked. For what were this indeed (as things now stand) but, out of an
over-eager desire of showing an extravagant piece of Passive Obedience to
out-act the Circumcellions themselves; and assist barbarous Irish Tories, and
French Dragoons, so as to enable them in the issue, to advance us to the too
fondly affected Crown of an unwarrantable Martyrdom?

Is it (in the next place) supposed by any, that [Preaching and Praying for
King James] are Duties indispensably incumbent upon them, by virtue of their
Allegiance? If so, I desire them to consider, that, supposing them such, yet
they can be no otherwise such, than as all others are, that are so, by virtue
of an Affirmative Precept, and so can be no otherwise obliging, (at least, as
to the circumstances of their Actual Exercise) than as all things so commanded,
are; and therefore do not bind us ad semper, (as the Schools speak) That is,
they are not necessarily to be done at all Times, whatever the consequences of
them may be; but the actual performance of them thus and thus, and at this or
that season, is to be governed by circumstances; and where those are such, that
the mischief that will probably be done, is greater than the good that is
likely to be consequent on so doing; it is then unlawful to do them, because
unseasonable. This in general. But let us further view them particularly.

1. As to [Preaching for K. J.] If Preaching up his present Cause, be meant
thereby; and declaring all those that are in Arms against him for their own
Defense in Ireland, together with the English Forces sent hence to assist them,
Rebels, and incurring the penalty of Damnation for such Resistance; it is to
make our selves Judges of a War, which we can never hope convincingly to prove
unlawful, except upon the supposition of an unlimited Right in the Prince to
dispose universally of his Subjects, as to Religion, Laws, Liberties and Lives,
as he pleases; and the Duty of all that are within his Dominions tamely to
suffer them all to be taken from them, upon the Obligation of the Doctrine of
Non-resistance. And what can we hope for upon the preaching of this Doctrine
(be it never so true) at this time of Day, under such universal Prejudice
against it, that can rationally make amends for the Inconveniences necessarily
attendant upon it; not only to our Persons, from the Laws in being which (under
the highest Penalties) forbid us so to do; but also, to the whole Nation, if
our Doctrine should (contrary to all rational probability) be entertained by
any considerable numbers. For what could the Issue then be, but the raising of
a bloody Civil War, in the bowels of it; and that War, (if it should end in a
Conquest on the side which by such Preaching we assist,) consequentially
destructive to all those dear Enjoyments, which, as we are Christians and
Englishmen, are now secured to us under the Protection of the present
Constitution, and the Forces raised by it? Besides, that it would be a very
difficult thing for us, upon clear grounds, to determine the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of a War, the Justice whereof depends on so many Intrigues of
Circumstances, in the first Original of it (whence our measures must be taken)
which Men of our Profession cannot be thoroughly acquainted with the Truth or
Falsehood of. For which of us can demonstratively make out, against all
contradiction, the Legitimacy of the P. of W. (though any of us in our own
Judgments possibly might incline to that opinion, as I believe most of us once
did, when he was so declared by the public Authority then in being, and
therefore, according to the direction of the Law in that case, we inserted his
Name, or Title at least, in the public Liturgy: (which yet we must be able to
do, if we will undertake to condemn the invasion of his now-Majesty (then,
Prince of Orange) to preserve the Right his Princess had to the succession, who
(if the Child were Illegitimate, or Supposititious) was the next in the Royal
Line to whom it did belong) as unlawful? I speak this, only to show, how unmeet
it is for us, in the Pulpit, to ground Doctrines of such great importance to
Salvation or Damnation to our People, upon supposal of such things which we
cannot Infallibly know to be true; or such, which (as to matter of Fact) our
People (not one it may be, to a thousand, dissenting) will tell us to our
teeth, as soon as we come out of the Pulpit, they never did, nor can believe.
And undoubtedly our caution, in things of this nature, is not disallowed, but
rather encouraged, and directed by our Saviors Example; who, himself, in
deciding a Question of Conscience in a Case that concerned Caesar, (by the very
manner of delivering his Judgment therein) declared himself studiously cautious
of giving offense on both sides: And though he determined it for the Emperor;
yet, had we not an Instance of his own practice, to warrant the interpreting
him that way, we could hardly gather it convincingly from his words alone. But,
I suppose, I need not very earnestly press this Point upon our Brethren, who by
their practice generally have shown their Caution therein: and seem thereby to
grant my Assertion, [That preaching for K. J. in the present Circumstances is a
piece of Allegiance, the obligation whereunto cease, quoth e. d.

2. Next, as to [Praying for him] if it be a Duty, it is to be performed either
in private, or public, or both. And in both these, (supposing still, that [for
him] imports [for the success of his present Arms] I doubt not, but to show the
cessation of this piece of Allegiance unto him too. For to do this in public;
it lies too much under the same inconveniences and disadvantages, (and much
more so,) with the former [of preaching for him,] for any of us to look upon
our selves, as obliged by Allegiance so to do. And, as to our private
Devotions, although any of us should think it our Duty to pray for him in his
personal circumstances, to wit, for Gods sanctifying his afflictions to him;
his Conversion to the true Religion, and preservation of him from evil
accidents; nay, suppose some one think it his Duty, to go farther, and pray for
his Restitution it self: it contributes not much to the stating the Question in
hand, whether such private sentiments (as to the former sorts) be determined to
be branches of the cessant Duty to K. J. or no. But as to the last, (his
Restitution) it will certainly deserve any Protestants serious consideration,
whether in Conscience, he can satisfy himself, even in his privatest
Devotions, to make his applications to Heaven, for the assisting a Person to
return to his former Estate, whose Interest, and Inclinations too (except one
could be certainly assured that he is become a true Convert, and so has
disclaimed them) are directly contrary to the true Interest of that Religion,
which (of all in the World,) he is persuaded, that God whom he makes his
Applications to, most approves and owns; and has made it appear that he does
so, most remarkably of late, by so strange a concatenation of Providential
Intrigues throughout all Europe, for the securing it, as hardly any Age can
show the like.

Wherefore, for any Christians of the Protestant Profession, (and especially of
this Nation) to endeavor, though but by a secret wish, to obstruct the
progress of those great Affairs, (which in the Prospect of their probable
Issue, promise the whole Protestant Cause, and chiefly in these Parts, so fair)
were in all such, in my Judgment, an high indication of a too stupid
insensibleness of their dearest concerns: but in any of us a too visible
implication besides, of (that which is much worse) an ungrateful longing to
return back again to that Egyptian bondage, from which the Lord by so many
miracles of mercy has so lately delivered us. At least, it can certainly, be
no part of our Duty, to deprecate the continuation of that actual security from
Romish Persecution, which (whiles we our selves were bound up (by the influence
of the Doctrines of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience upon our Consciences,)
from giving the least assistance thereto) God alone by his mighty Hand and
outstretched Arm has wrought for us.

And now, I hope, I may take it for granted, that I have satisfactorily
established the verity of my second Proposition; both in the general, and also
in all the particulars included in it: and therefore may proceed to the next.

III. The third Proposition, (which I think none will put me to prove, however,
for the perfecting the train of consequences in this Discourse, it needs to be
mentioned,) is this, [This cessant Allegiance to the former King, there is none
else that visibly claims, but K. W. and Q. M.] They are K. and Q. de facto, and
exercise all Acts of Supremacy without any visible opposition throughout this
Nation. The Forts and the Forces, and the Royal Revenues of the whole Nation
are wholly in their Hands. There is not, (in the Proverbial Phrase of
Scripture) a Dog that opens his Mouth against them. The Protection we have, in
our Lives, Laws, Properties, Religious and Civil Liberties, we receive from the
Influences of their Government: And therefore (as a farther branch of this
Proposition) it follows, [that we are to pay it to them.] For, surely, if
[Protectio trahit Allegiantiam,] (the Maxim of the Lawyers) be true in any
case, it must needs be so in this; whiles, especially, our Allegiance is at
liberty (as to him, who only can have any Pretension to it else) by the force
of the first Proposition.

IV. The fourth Proposition is this. [The Allegiance which I may, (and much
more, which I must) pay those to whom it is proved due by the preceding
Propositions, they may oblige me to promise: and what I may be obliged to
promise, I cannot rationally refuse to secure to them, if they demand it, by an
Oath.] This Proposition also, I think fit to mention, for (the Reason
beforementioned) the continuation of the thread of the Argument; but, I
suppose, it likewise needs no Proof: it being a thing allowed in all humane
conversation, as equitable to give such security as our word, at least, for all
Debts; and that of an Oath, particularly, to those (Superiors especially) that
will not take our bare word: and an Oath for confirmation, even the Scripture
asserts to be the way to put an end to all strifes, which in cases of that
nature may arise.

And now I have done with the astructive part of this Discourse, and affirmed
both the Justice of the Claim of King William and Queen Mary, to our
Allegiance, and our Oath to give them Assurance of it, in the present
Circumstances: There remains therefore now, no more to be done, but the
purfuance of the destructive part, or Demolishing the Strengths of our supposed
Antagonists, by answering the Objections they do, or it may be conceived might
make against my former Assertions. And this I shall endeavor by making good
the Six Propositions following.

V. [That whatever Right, according to their Principles, whom we have here to
deal with, may yet remain to K. J. as to their Allegiance, is not by the Oath
now required of them, disclaimed; nor that of their present Majesty's
asserted.] Sure I am, it is not expressly, as appears by the words of it; there
being nothing of Title or Right, the one, or the other way, mentioned therein.
For the naming the Persons to whom it is Sworn, King and Queen, asserts only,
the Factum, that they are actually so; affirming nothing of the Title, by which
they are so. The Omission whereof, (it being so expressly and largely set forth
in the former Oath of Allegiance) in this, is certainly a great Instance of the
tenderness which the Composers thereof had for the known Principles of our
Reverend Fathers and Brethren; and designed (probably) for the preventing of
this very Objection, which they foresaw would with greatest Difficulty be
removed out of the way of those Persons, whom they so much desired not to lay
aside out of the public Settlement, which their seasonable standing in the
Breach which our common Adversaries had made in the Bulwarks of our Religion,
Liberties and Properties, with their own great hazard, had given so great an
Assistance to. But this Caution of theirs (as it unhappily falls out) has not
done what it was intended for. For it is still objected, That the same is done
implicitly, by the very Nature of the thing required, which was, by the
forbearing those explicit words, designed to be avoided. For the Swearing
Allegiance to One, denies it (in their Judgment) to all Others; and, by
consequence, this Oath implies the Renunciation of the former Oath, wherein the
Right of K. J. was asserted. To which I answer, that does not necessarily
follow, if my former Hypothesis be true; [That a mere actual Allegiance to
another (which is all that this Oath obliges us to) does not involve a
Negation of the Person's Right who formerly had it; but only the Cessation of
the Obligation thence arising, in the present Circumstances, to act on his
behalf.]

I shall close this Paragraph, with a Note, or two, out of the Reverend Dr.
Sanderson, who in his Book relating to the Case of the Engagement, declares it
as his Judgment, [That where the words of a Promise may in fair Construction be
capable of a double meaning, so as to be taken in one sense, they shall bind to
more, and in another, to less; the Promiser may make his just advantage of the
Ambiguity, and take it in the same sense which shall bind to the less. Because
the Faith to be given, is intended to the behoof of him to whom it is given;
and therefore it concerns him to take care that his meaning be expressed in
such words, as will sufficiently manifest the Sense to the Understanding of a
reasonable Man. Which if he neglect to do, no Law of Equity, or Prudence,
binds the Promiser, by an over-scrupulous Diligence, to lay a greater
Obligation upon himself, than he needed to do.] Wherefore, if Allegiance, in
this Oath, may fairly signify either rightful Allegiance, or actual Allegiance
only; if the words, King and Queen, may be interpreted in the same Latitude;
though it should be supposed, that the Imposers intended to stretch them to the
more; nothing hinders the Swearer from interpreting them to the less rigorous
Sense. And so, this Objection, by his Judgment, will fall to the ground of it
self; and need give our Brethren no trouble.

VI. [That the Acts of Allegiance required by K. W. and Q. M. (of the Clergy at
least, in particular) contain in them nothing but what they may lawfully do,
during the ceasing Obligation of Obedience to K. J.] For those Acts (according
to the former Distribution) must be, either, Bearing of Arms at their Command,
or assisting the Forces they raise, by sending in Militia Soldiers, or Payment
of Taxes imposed by them in the legal Methods, or Preaching or Praying for
them. Now, the first of these, [bearing Arms in Person] no Clergyman (as was
before said) can by Law be required to do; and therefore, they may be assured,
that will not by their Majesty's (who are engaged to govern by Law) be demanded
of them. And, as to the [furnishing out such of the standing Militia appointed
by Law, as their Ecclesiastical or Temporal Revenues render them liable unto]
as the Law it self justifies him that, by Command, does it; so does it by
Penalties enforce those that refuse so to do. And so, that Assistance, will
come under the Consideration of the third Particular, [the Payment of Taxes in
form of Law imposed.] And the Payment of such, may by the plenary Possessor of
the Throne, be exacted from all Subjects, with all the Penalties incurred by
refusing, in case any one deny them. So that, (besides the Liberty left any one
to deny them, if he will run the hazard;) the quiet Payment of them amounts,
indeed, to no more (in a conscientious, as well as prudent Consideration) than
the purchasing our own ease, and compounding for a less Sum out of our Estates,
with those who may, upon refusal, enforce from us a far greater. And we had,
somewhat above Forty years since, a Case of the same nature, (though with far
less color of Law than this at present) wherein the doing of this, was
universally allowed by the severest Assertors of Allegiance to K. C. I. and II.
and therefore thence (in Reason, I think) be now less disputable, (as to its
lawfulness) to those, who have received the strictest Principles they argue
from in the present Circumstances, from them; as will appear anon more largely
in the handling of the Ninth Proposition.

And yet, withal, I conceive there is more to be said, for such Payments now,
then at that Time there was; Partly, upon a Military Account; because the end
for which the Soldiery are to be maintained (though it be true, that in that
War, a dispossessed King was kept out of his Throne, as in this,) is far more
justisiable now, than at that time it was. For those Arms were taken against a
Protestant Prince, and upon false Imputations of his Inclinations to Popery
only; whereas, in this case those Fears are really made good, both as to the
Person and his Designs: And those great Concerns of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, were only then concluded to be in danger, from remote Consequences
of some suspicious Acts; which are now bare-facedly undermined. And partly,
upon a Civil Account. The Laws have now their Free Course; whereas, then, all
Law was trampled on by the conquering Party, either by Military Force, or by
Arbitrary Courts. Whence, it is but meet, that that Law, and the Administrators
of it, should be maintained by all those who receive the Benefit and Advantage
thereof. Nor is it, certainly, more inconsistent with the Obligations of any
former Allegiance to pay for the Support of that Power that maintains me in my
Right, than to appeal to its Courts of Justice for legal Relief against any
that would deprive me thereof.

The next Particular, [Preaching for them,] as the Persons actually invested
with Supreme Authority; can, (as required of us,) import no more than that
which is our Duty at all Times by the Apostles Rule, Tit. 3. 1. The putting our
People in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey
Magistrates: That is, actively, or passively, to obey those Laws, with the
actual Administration whereof they are entrusted by the actual Possession of
that Supremacy whence they are derived. For as to the Title by which they hold
that Supremacy, as they will not allow us to maintain that of the dispossessed
Prince in the Pulpit: So neither do they there require us to maintain their
own. And it is well, this is not imposed upon us, for if it were, we might have
some color to reluct; seeing it is justly disputable, whether it were ever any
part of our work, to dispute the Titles of Princes in the Pulpit, or (by
asserting of them, in divided Congregations,) to occasion them to be disputed
by others; whatever our private Judgment may be concerning them. For, if it
were so, it is beyond all doubt to me, that our Savior and his Apostles (or
some one of them) would have left us such certain Measures, as might have
governed our own, and enabled us to satisfy all other Men's Judgments, in the
Resolution of such various Cases of Conscience, as on that account, must, in
all Nations, be supposed ever and anon to be started, from the different
Pretensions of Competitors.

Nor was it indeed, expedient, that our Lord should clog that Religion, which
he was first to recommend to the World (universally prejudiced against it at
that time upon other accounts) with such a Doctrine, as would have been more
obnoxious to prejudice, than any of the rest: Such, indeed, as would (probably)
have rendered all Princes jealous of the Progress of it; seeing it would have
endangered the exposing all their Titles to the Disputes of its Professors, and
rendered them determinable, according to the Issue of them. A Prejudice which he
has wisely prevented, by leaving his Followers some general Rules only, for
their Deportment under such Princes and Governors as they found in present
Possession; (who are the (...), Romans 13. 2.) and thereby reconciled his
Doctrine to the Interests of all actual Superiors, by what Title soever they
hold their Authority.

Lastly, As to [Praying for them] it seems but reasonable, that seeing we
cannot expect to lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty,
while they that are possessed of Authority over us, lead unquiet and
unpeaceable ones; therefore, (that being the means by God directed, as most
proper and effectual to that end,) I cannot see, how it can be rationally
doubted, whether we may, (nay rather, it follows, in my Judgment, that we must)
make Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, for Kings,
and all that are in Authority, (and so, for their Majesty's, at present) which
may, through Divine Grace, enable them to promote that end. And accordingly the
People of God anciently, made no scruple to pray even for the Kings of Babylon,
who, by no other Claim then the Success of their Arms, could pretend to
Jurisdiction over them, Ezra 6. 12. Jer. 29. 7. And the Primitive Christians,
(as Tertullian, who also gives us the heads of the Petitions they offered on
their behalf, abundantly testifies,) for these Roman Emperors whose Title was
never a jot better; as will anon be more fully made to appear.

But I suppose, praying for the King and Queen in being, will, in general, be
allowed by those with whom we have to deal; so long as the Petitions to be
offered on their behalf, do not involve a sense prejudicial to the right or
safety of the Prince dispossessed. But seeing the Clergy of England, in the
public Offices of Liturgy according to the Forms established, are obliged to
pray expressly for the present King and Queen, that God will give them Victory
over all their Enemies] and that God will [strengthen them, that they may
vanquish and overcome all their Enemies,] etc. which they suppose must
necessarily involve an Imprecation against the Prince attempting to recover his
Throne by War: it therefore appears to them, to be inconsistent with the
Allegiance they have sworn to him to offer up these Requests (at least) for the
Princes Regnant, who keep him out of Possession.

This, I confess, seems the most difficult Objection to be answered (supposing
the Principles of our Brethren beforementioned to be allowed them,) in this
whole Dispute. Yet, it is not, in my opinion, incapable of a fair solution,
from the very design and proper Genius of all enjoined Forms of public
Devotion. For all such, are not necessarily to be so worded, as to suit the
private notions and sentiments of every person who is to officiate or join in
them, for this were impossible ever to be attained: but only to express the
sense of the Church or any other Authority imposing them; under whom the
public Administrator, in the use of them, only lends a mouth, to assist the
stated Devotion of the Congregation, wherein he ossiciates, according to their
appointed measures. So, when in the Form for the Burial of the Dead, we seem to
speak with confidence of Gods taking to himself the Soul of such an one our
Brother, and profess our certain hope of the Resurrection to Eternal Life, with
implication of the parties share therein, concerning whose eternal Estate it
may be we are not personally satisfied: I take it to be a fair answer to the
objection thence raised; That we only utter the sense of the Church on whose
behalf we therein officiate; which, so long as the Person deceased at any Time
dies in her Communion, does by us, dismiss him out of the World, with this fair
Testimony of her universal charity to such as are members thereof. And it
deserves upon this account, in my poor Judgment, to be enquired, whether such a
Form, be not more expedient to be continued, notwithstanding that supposed
inconvenience; than to expose all Ministers to a greater, by leaving them a
liberty to make what distinctions they judge fit, betwixt neighbor and
neighbor, according to their apprehensions concerning their Eternal Estate, by
particular distinct forms accommodated to them. But this by the by. The
Prejudice of some Persons also, who are disaffected to our Litany, against the
expressions, wherein we pray for [all that travel by Land or by Water] and for
[all Women laboring with Child,] and for [all Prisoners and Captives,]
because, (as they weakly argue,) in these general words are comprehended evil
Spirits, that compass the Earth; and Pirates from Tunis or Algier that infest
the Seas, and Women pregnant by Whoredom; and Felons, and Traitors laid up in
Goal for their Crimes, etc. This prejudice, I say, must be taken off by no
other Answer than such as this, That these particulars, do not fall within the
design of public Devotions, according whereto general expressions must be
understood, as they are intended, with relation only to such Persons as are
supposed rationally to be included in the charity of the Church composing and
enjoining those Forms: in which charity, it is very uncharitably imagined, that
Devils, and Turklsh Pirates, and Harlots, and Rogues, and Traitors, are
intentionally interested.

And by the same Hypothesis, proportionably must those Prayers for Princes, be
interpreted. Certainly, when our Reformers at the first, composed those Prayers
for the use of this Church; they never intended to suit them exactly to all the
Circumstances emerging in all the uncertain Accidents of Government: against
which, because they could not certainly be foreseen, no humane Wisdom could
certainly provide. But they had in prospect only, the successive continuation
of actual Governors entrusted for the peace and safety of the Nation: for the
preservation whereof, it is necessary to desire of God, that the Forces by
which they must secure to us these great Blessings may be actually Victorious
against all such as are real Enemies to that community; and therefore in
general Terms they direct us so to pray. Now, to include a particular Person
disputing the Right of the Crown, in this general Petition; must suppose him to
be an actual Enemy to this Nation either by a wrong Title, or an evil Design,
or both: and whoever is really so, though he should be included, has no wrong;
and if he be not so, it is inconsistent with the opinion we ought to have of
the charity of our Church, to imagine him to be therein included.

It is, herein, farther observable, that these clauses are such, as has been
intimated before, as were not put in now first, in particular favor to their
present Majesty's: but are part of the same Form which has been used for all
their Predecessors, since the Reformation. Nor is there any Petition peculiar
to them, required of us to offer to God, which all Princes that shall sway this
Scepter to all succeeding Generations are not alike entitled to: Now would our
dissatisfied Brethren, think it fit to have a Precedent made for succeeding
Ages, by the permitting such an omission in the public Liturgy in favor to
the pretensions of K. J. now? For may not such an Example be urged, or is it
not liable to be urged in some future competition after K. J. his death, (and
who knows, what may be hereafter?) upon the Protestant Clergy; supposing any
future Prince Regnant shall fall out to be of the Romish Persuasion, and
engaged by arms to maintain his Possession, and keep out a more rightful
Protestant Competitor? Supposing then, the same Petitions still by Law to be
continued in our public Liturgy, under such Circumstances: can we think, it
would look well, for the credit or safety of our Religion, if any considerable
Part of our Protestant Clergy should make it a scruple of Conscience to use
them in their public Devotions out of favor to Him whose Title they judged
the better? Nay, let us bring the Prospect of such an Event in our thoughts a
little nearer. Suppose (which was not impossible to have so fallen out) that K.
J. had made the Throne vacant by Death, before his Present Majesty (then only
P. of Orange) landed, and another Popish Successor, (by Conquest, or some other
disputable way,) had filled it, before he could appear upon English Ground with
his Army; and had been as clearly and as long possessed of it, as his Majesty
now has been; I ask, would it have passed for a fair Plea, for the denial of
Allegiance to such a possessed Prince, that we could not in Conscience give it,
because we should be obliged in our Liturgy to pray for Victory against the
excluded Prince, and his Army, then ready to invade us, for the Defense of his
own, and the Princesses Title? Let us but soberly think, what would have been
the Consequence of such a Principle in those Circumstances, and apply it to the
present Case.

But to show, farther, the fairness of my Interpretation of the said Petitions;
I will try, next, whether I cannot conclude the probability of it, from the
very practice of those Reverend Persons themselves, with whom our present
dispute lies. It is not long since, that the whole Clergy of this Land made
their Prayers, in the same Terms for K. J. Now, it is hardly to be imagined,
that any Minister, yea, or understanding Member of this Church, could offer up
these Requests mentioned for him, without great reluctance in himself
(especially in his later Days) but with some such, (and probably, in most of
them the same) restriction or limitation supposed. For else, all that joined in
it, must be concluded, to have prayed against all the Protestants Interest in
the World, (who, it is evident, were enemies against K. J. and his Religion,)
if they should at any Time, in never so just a War, defend themselves against
him by Arms. Such Clergymen therefore (who were generally, all those of this
Church) who then used this General Form, cannot fairly come off, from the
suspicious implication thereof; but upon an Hypothesis of this nature, that
those Petitions in that Juncture intended no more, then the subduing such
Enemies of his, as together with the destruction of his Person, should at any
Time design the subversion of his Government as legally established, or the
ruin of this Nation, or some other of a like import. Let then, our Reverend
Brethren allow the like supposal of suitable restrictions and limitations in the
present case, to these general expressions; and they will not find it so
difficult a matter, to reconcile themselves to the use of them on the behalf of
their present Majesty's, which they (with others) used so long without scruple
for their Predecessor.

Lastly, To give a full confirmation to my aforesaid supposition, I think that
clause in the last Act of Uniformity [That in all those Prayers, Litanies and
Collects, which do any way relate to the King, Queen or Royal Progeny, their
Names be altered and changed from time to time, and fitted to the present
occasion, (undoubtedly, they that made this Proviso, mean the circumstances of
the King or Queen Regnant, after any change,) according to the direction of
lawful Authority;] does much conduce thereunto. It appears, that the same Form
is to be used, by this clause still, whatever occasion requires the alteration
of the Names: for the Proviso is only made for the alteration of these. Suppose
then the Throne at any time vacant by death; and a competition arise concerning
the Succession, where, during this Composition, is this lawful Authority, but
in the actual Successor, who enters upon the void Throne, and is so far
possessed of it, as to send forth his Mandates all through the Nation, to
insert such Names as suit his circumstances? Whence, I further demand, Whether
the Clergy may not, yea, whether they must not take such a Mandate as
sufficient warrant, to use this Form, in the very passages under Dispute, with
such alterations? And if so, then though the Person excluded in the
Competition, should chance to have the best Title of the two; yet the present
Possessors command is valid against him; and the point in Dispute is evidently
gained, That the Clergy are (according to the Law it self) to be governed by
the Prince Regnant, in the particularities of these Petitions: and we may, and
ought to offer them up for Him, and whom he Names, by Name, when required. But,
(to put an end at last, to this long Section) and proceed. I say, Seventhly,

VII. [That the Principles of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, so far as
(for ought I can see) they are owned by the Church of England, oblige us not,
in our present circumstances, to deny the giving, or swearing Allegiance to K.
W. and Q. M.]

That they do not, may be fairly argued, from the want of sufficient proof,
from those that say they do, taken out of any public Monuments or Records
extant, which legally include the whole Body of this Church, to that purpose.
And by such indeed, and such only must all things, which are alleged to be the
Doctrines of this Church, be proved to be so. For, if we admit any other
Evidence in this matter; we shall have much ado to vindicate our Church, in
many great Points in Controversy betwixt us and the Papists, together with our
other Adversaries; who, from the writings of particular Doctors in it, charge
it with many absurd and false Assertions. And therefore, it has been always in
such cases, the approved course of her learned Champions, to put the
Adversaries upon proof, that those Doctrines which they charge on her, are her
own, from her Articles, Homilies, Liturgy, etc. Let therefore, any of those
that endeavor to fasten upon the Church of England, as her Doctrines, any of
those high Notions concerning Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, which they
pretend to have learned from her; first, State the Questions relating to them,
according to their own Judgments: and then produce such Proofs of the full
concurrence of this Church with them, out of those Books, or any other
evidences of like nature; which must first be done, before they can rationally
argue thence, the inconsistence of this Oath of Allegiance with them as such.
And let none, (as some confident Authors of late have done) call the wild and
extravagant Opinions of some singular designing and interested Divines, like
themselves, accommodated to the gust of a Court-Faction, the Doctrines of this
Church. A thing, wherein they have done their Mother very ill service, whiles
(laboring to qualify her pretended Principles to the humor of the disposers
of those Preferments they sought for) they were not only themselves made mere
Instruments and Tools of a Jesuitical Faction; but endangered also the the
whole Church and Nation, by raising Prerogative so high, that when it fell into
ill hands to manage it, they took encouragement thence to trample down our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties; as supposing us all, a company of tame Animals,
made only to bear whatever burdens they laid on us, and withal the occasion too
insolently to reproach us with our supposed Principles of Passivity, whiles
they gave us so many occasions to practice them: as Julian once made use of our
Saviors true Doctrine of not resisting evil, in the very Instances whereby he
explains it, in a proud Scoff to those whom he maliciously persecuted.

It is true, indeed, that in the Declaration, which the Parliament (at the
Return of K. Charles II.) after their having been so long exasperated with the
consequents of the War made with his Father, under color of a Parliamentary
right in the Militia of this Kingdom; (and pleaded for by those that defended
their cause that opposed him, with an unusual novel Distinction, of taking Arms
by his Authority against his Person, and those that were commissioned by him;)
required all the Clergy of England, and all in public Trust (for the greater
security of the restored King, whom they thought then they could never do too
much for) to condemn that Position as it had been taught, as Traitorous and
abominable: and to profess for themselves that they held it unlawful upon any
Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King and those that are
Commissioned by him: and therein, (as also in another Act concerning the
Militia) declared their own Judgments in those Points more fully than had ever,
by so public a Body, been done before. But whether Acts of Parliament may be
taken for sufficient Expositions of the Doctrine of this Church, all those who
are unsatisfied in the matter of that Declaration, may possibly call in
Question, and (for the most part) resolve it in the Negative. For my Part, I
will do neither: but take it for what probably it was, the Doctrine of so many
of the Church then represented in Convocation as were consulted in the drawing
up that Form: and because the whole Convocation subscribed it, (at least, after
the Law passed) as did also the generality of the Clergy after them, allow it
to have been the Judgment of the Church, at that Time, in the sense wherein
they that imposed it, understood it. But surely, neither the Parliament nor the
Clergy in Convocation, ever intended thereby to give any King of England so
uncontrollable a Power of breaking down all banks of Law, as to make the whole
Church and Nation mere Tenants at Will to Him for their Religion, Property,
Liberties, yea, and their very Lives themselves, and leave the Subject no legal
Remedy against the most illegal Violences. They did therefore, undoubtedly mean
by [those that are Commissioned by the King] those only that are Commissioned
as our Laws allow, and to such intents and purposes as may consist with them.
We cannot surely, imagine them to be so besotted, as to resign all those dear
Interests at once into the Hands of a Popish Army raised on purpose to destroy
and root them out altogether: which appears by what followed afterward, in a
subsequent Parliament, where in the whole Estates there assembled perceiving
that some ill-designing Persons took occasion from that Declaration to mount
the Points of Non-resistance, and Passive Obedience to an extravagant height,
(to which at last according to their Project, they arrived;) in hope, by a
Popish Successor to bring about those evil ends: took a wise course to prevent
the mischief by imposing such a Test upon all Commissioned Officers, as
excluded all Papists from being in Commission; and if they should at any Time
be so, declared their Commissions void, and all they did in pursuance of them
null. That former Parliamentary Doctrine, (therefore) is expounded by this
after commentary upon it, from the same Authority which first expressly taught
it.

But as to the proper Judgment of the Church of England, declared by themselves
in any Act or Record extant, it is vain to seek for any resolution in this
matter. They no where, (that I can learn) give us any Determination of theirs,
concerning the Titles to Crowns, the extent of Prerogative in the Prince, the
measures of that Subjection which Allegiance includes, nor concerning the
extent of its obligation, or the change, which upon the various Turns of
Providence, may, or may not, be made therein. Only, as to Kings and Queens
actually in Being, they deny it at any time lawful to Rebel against them,
whatever they personally are, or what Religion soever they are of, and by force
of Arms to endeavor to dispossess and destroy them. Of such Doctrines as these
all the Homilies of Obedience, and against wilful Rebellion, are full. And by
these Doctrines, all Princes actually possessed of the Throne are alike secure,
as to any danger, from the Church of England. So that as to the Questions and
Cases of Conscience, which relate to our present Circumstances, it will prove
an undertaking too hard, I suppose, for any Person to make the Doctrines of
this Church concerning Non-resistance, to comply with that tame submission to
an unbounded Prerogative, trampling, by unpresidented Dispensations all Laws
underfoot, which some Men (as I before intimated) have of late vented under her
Name. And I suppose also, that the most Reverend, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the right Reverend Bishops, with others of the Reverend Clergy, and the worthy
President and Fellows of Magdalen College, were not wanting to their Duty of
Non-resistance, nor misunderstood the Doctrine of th is Church, when they so
notably pleaded their Right in Law, against the Usurpations of Prorogation to
the utmost, and thereby, and by their Sufferings for it, stopped the career
thereof from its triumphant Progress throughout the Nation, and as to what
other Resistance has since been made by a too unreasonably provoked Nation,
together with the Consequents of it: How far, the natural Duty of
Self-preservation, even by Arms against outrageous illegal Violence, and the
Reason of Government, and Subjection in all Political Societies governed by
Laws, together with the fundamental Constitution of this Monarchy, etc. pleaded
on their behalf, will justify those that have had an hand in it, in such a
case of extreme necessity: I cannot find determinable from any public Records
of this Church. To be sure, it much concerns not our dissatisfied Brethrens
Case; that it should be determined, seeing none of them have any way
contributed to any such Resistance hitherto; and are not (as I think I have
sufficiently evidenced above) endangered for the future, by any thing which
this Oath obliges them unto, to lose the Honor and Comfort of keeping the
Doctrine of Non-resistance inviolate, to the utmost extent of it, as stated by
themselves.

And, as to that of Passive Obedience; it can surely be no farther a Duty in
this Case, than Non-resistance is: for this is the necessary consequent of
that: whom I must in no sort resist, I must, consequently, submit to suffer
under, in whatsoever he lays upon me: and on the other side, so far as I may
lawfully resist, I am not bound to suffer. As in the Case of the Great and
Reverend Persons but now mentioned; who took shelter in the Law so far as it
would be allowed them, and then only suffered, when it would stand them in no
farther stead. For otherwise, it seems too high a strain of Passive Obedience,
and more than Religion or Reason requires, for any one patiently to quit the
Defense which God and Law allow him, yea, and the very Laws themselves which
allow them to him; that he may gain an Opportunity to exercise his Patience
under illegal Violence: and to seek an occasion of undergoing those Sufferings
a Man's self, which our Savior himself allows him, if there be no other way
open, at least, by flight, to escape.

Nay, I will go yet one step farther in this case; and allow the Parties, that
under shelter of a Royal Commission, seek a Man's Destruction, to have, in some
Juncture, all the strength of Law on their side; and withal, suppose him that
is so endangered, to be, by Providence, placed in these Circumstances, wherein
he is for the present (though by an unjust and illegal Force) preserved from
persecuting Hands. Let, therefore, Famous Londonderry be the designed Scene of
a Popish Persecution; where a Protestant, by his Habitation, and the Obligation
of his other Circumstances, resides: And is, by the making the City a Garrison
(without his contributing thereunto in the least, that we may lay the case as
wholly and entirely Passive as may be) safe, while he remains there. This Man
is so far possessed with a Conscientious Principle of Passive Obedience, that
(even in these Circumstances) he dares not take up Arms with the Garrison when
Beleagured (as lately) to maintain the Walls, and therein, his own House, etc.
against K. J. and his French and Irish Army, as thinking the Defendants Rebels,
and the Law entirely on the Besiegers side. I would fain learn, now, whether in
this Case, it be not lawful, (even for a Man so Principled) to accept of the
Protection, which (without his seeking) his Habitation gives him; be the Hands
which defend it what they will, even whatever K. J. himself would call them,
may he not, for the present, exercise the more Beneficial sort of Patience, by
suffering himself, though sore against his Inclination, to be protected (againg
suffering more grievously by the Popish Besiegers, if they could get him into
their hands) by the supposed Rebel-Governour, and his Garrison? If not, what is
he obliged to do? Is there any, who will judge it to be his Duty, by the
obligation of his Principle of Passive Obedience, to endeavor to raise a
Tumult within against the Governor, or to betray that Power that illegally
protects him, by entertaining Spies from the Besiegers, or sending them
Intelligence? You will say (it may be) this is more than Passive Obedience,
this is Action rather. But still, this is in order to the Passivity he thinks
he owes the Law. Or is he (to take a shorter course to it) to withdraw himself
out of his Protection, and deliver himself into the hands of the Loyal
Besiegers? I confess, I should think (to the contrary) that he should rather
thank God, and even Rebels, for his Protection, lie quiet under his shelter
whilst he may; and content himself with his dispositive Preparation to undergo
whatever may befall him with others, in case the Garrison come at last to be
taken; and so expect the reward of his Patience from that God, whose call of
unavoidable Providence, and no Procurement of his own, exposes him to it.

But suppose, (after all this is said to weaken it) that our highest Brethrens
Notion, concerning Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, should stand firm, in
reference to K. J. and those Commissioned by him: yet am I still at a loss, how
(according to a Paper lately Printed, containing the Dying Declaration of the
Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Chichester) even that can rationally be
improved, to the rendering the present Oath of Allegiance to K. W. and Q. M.
unlawful. Seeing, upon the Hypothesis I have before laid, do, and I hope,
sufficiently proved the Allegiance promised by it, includes nothing which
(according to it) a Man, even of those Principles, may not lawfully pay: and
binds him not to contribute more, to the hinderance of that Power from being
Paramount, under which he thinks himself rather obliged to suffer than to obey
this that protects him, then what may by legal Process be forced from him: And
what Force in such Circumstances causes, it does withal excuse; as you will
see more anon, when I have dispatched one Proposition more, which is this:

VIII. That the Law of the Land, justifies the Subject in the Payment of his
actual Allegiance to the actual Possessor of the Throne, though wrongfully,
whilst he continues to be so possessed,. though at the same time there be
another rightful K. out of Possession.] This, I confess, is not within my
Province to prove so strongly and convincingly, as some learned Men of the long
Robe have undertaken to do, and (most think) have done beyond Contradiction.
Nor will I enlarge this Discourse to such a Bulk, as the Transcription of what
has been said by them to that purpose would swell it to: But I shall content
my self with the bare mention of one Famous Statute (that of 11. Hen. 7.) which
highly Indemnifies all Persons that assist the King in being (even with Arms)
against him that is King de Jure. The reason whereof must needs be, that the
Makers of that Statute looked on such Persons, either as Innocent, supposing
them under a Force; or as doing their Duty, if voluntarily complying with the
Divine Providence placing him on the Throne, while he sits there. This, in the
next Proposition, I shall farther evince from Practice.

IX. [That the stoutest Assertors of the Principles of indispensable
Allegiance, Non-resistance, and Passive Obedience, formerly have so far
complied with the Supreme Powers in actual Possession, as this Paper pleads for
now; and been justified in so doing, by the most learned and judicious Casuists
then living.] For, as to the Payment of Military Taxes to the Long Parliament,
and the several Models of Government that succeeded or interloped with them in
K. C. I. and K. C. II's time; appearing at their Bars on their Summons,
compounding for their Estates at the Rates they imposed, Suing and being Sued
in their Courts; Addressing to them, upon occasion, in the Terms they directed,
and by the Titles they assumed; yea, and (more than all this) subscribing an
Engagement, to be true and Faithful to them, that is, to pay them all that
which we call Allegiance: Who is there that lived in those Times, who knows
not, that the generality both of the Clergy and Laity, who went under the Name
of Cavaliers, and high Royalists, did comply with the prevalent Faction (by
whatever Name they exercised the Sovereign Authority) some more, and some less,
as their Circumstances obliged them, through all the Varieties of that
Government? All which Acts are judged to be, in themselves, and in ordinary
Cases, Treasonable Acts; and (by consequence) high Breaches of Allegiance; and
were no way justifiable, but by the Words, or Reason (at least) of the Statute
before mentioned. And yet he is a great Stranger in our Israel, who knows not
also, that they were justified in so doing, by the Determinations of the ablest
Lawyers and the most eminent Casuists; and especially (of the later sort) by
the Writings of that incomparable Master in Theology, Dr. Sanderson, afterward
(for his Loyal Service in those times to his Majesty, K. C. II.) advanced to
the Bishopric of Lincoln. Now, these things they could not have done,
(especially with the allowance of such Spiritual Guides,) had the Principles of
the Church of England been then understood to be so rigorous in. Matters of
this Nature, as those of our present dissatisfied Brethren, in their
Casuistical Divinity, are. The very Engagement, but now mentioned, which was
then generally swallowed by those that would have taken it very ill to have
been thought no true Sons of the Chureh of England, (and diverse of whom, were
notwithstanding, even when rigorous Conformity was at the highest, after the
Return of K. C. II. thought worthy to be advanced to some of the most eminent
Bishoprics, and other Dignities of the Church of England;) was thought then
(by those that by it lost their Places, out of Conscience of their Duty to the
King) to be unlawful, as being a new Promise of Allegiance to Usurpers: and if
it were so, (as they apprehended) was certainly such an one, with a witness,
(as we use to speak) in comparison of that which the present Oath requires. For
the Obedience by this Oath required, is expressed by its proper Name, the
Notation whereof imports a limited legal Obedience only; whereas the words
[True and Faithful] in the Engagement, ran so large, as not to insinuate the
least Intimation of any legal Bounds to the Duty promised. This is, to a K. and
Q. that, to a Commonwealth; this, can only (at the worst) be supposed to be
Injurious to the Right of one King by transferring it to another: Whereas that,
overthrew the Throne it self; and destroyed the Right of all future Kings, yea,
and Parliaments too, by excluding out of the Government them, and the whole
House of Lords. And, by consequence, it is probable, in an high Degree, that
those who allowed and defended the taking of that Engagement, in the
Circumstances of those Times, as not inconsistent with the Principles of this
Church, would, if they were now alive, do no less, in favor of the taking this
Oath; especially, by such as are of our Brethrens Principles, and so cannot be
supposed to take it in the more rigorous, when the words will fairly bear a
milder and more moderate Sense; which the said Dr. Sanderson allows to the
takers of the Engagement, even though the Imposers intended it, (so long as
they declared not that they did so) in another of a more disputable nature, and
higher Obligation. And now, having dispatched this Proposition also, I proceed
to the Tenth and last, which is,

X. [That the Primitive Christians, not only in our Saviors, and his Apostles
days, (as had been made evident by many learned Pens;) but also, for several
Ages after them, have governed themselves, in point of actual Allegiance, by
these Measures.

That our Savior and his Apostles did so; even when the Titles both of the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors Bishop of Sarum his Pastoral Letter.
were either notoriously Faulty, or (at best) suspicious enough; is abundantly
proved by the learned Pen of a reverend Bishop of this Church lately. And for
the Christians of subsequent Ages, if what Tertullian says of them be true,
[That throughout the Empire, the Christians were so numerous, that they filled
the Cities, Isles, Castles, Camp, Senate, etc. to that Degree, that (as he
tells the Persecutors) the very Secession or Departure of so many Persons from
the Societies to which they belonged, into any place out of the Roman
Territories (though they did nothing else to their prejudice) would have made a
vast Solitude, such as would have endangered the Roman Empire.] Supposing (I
say) this to be true; it is a great Evidence to me, that in all the Contests
which then fell out (sometimes every other, or, at least, every third or fourth
year, betwixt several Pretenders to the Imperial Throne, so that diverse times
the several Armies in several Provinces, set up Two or Three at once) the
Christians, who inhabited those Provinces, did take the Military Oath, and pay
their Allegiance, each of them to that Person who was invested with the
Imperial Robes in the Parts where they severally lived, when once he assumed
that Dignity; and did not trouble themselves to enquire whether any that was
set up in any other Province, had a better Title, than their own Emperor had.
Which is that (as I conceive) which Tertullian elsewhere means, when he tells
Scapula (the Lieutenant of the Emperor) who then lived in Africa, that none of
the Christians were ever convicted to have been Albinians, or Nigrians, or
Cassians; in all those Turns which fell out under those Competitors for the
Crown, from whom their Partisans were so named. He means not, certainly, that
none of them were in the Garrisons or Armies of Claudius Albinus, or Pescennius
Niger, who strugled with the Emperor Severus; or of Avidius Cassius, who
contested with the Emperor Verus; (for this had been contrary to what he
asserted elsewhere, that they filled their Garrisons and Armies, as before;)
but only, that they were none of the Contrivers or Plotters of those Wars which
were by those Competitors set on foot; nor active Sticklers for the Parties
then made; for those (says he) that were upon that account called Albinians and
Nigrians, etc. were the Men of their own Heathenish Religion, that Swore by the
Genius of their Emperors, which Christians refused to do. And when any of the
several Competitors conquered, (though possibly, his Right were more disputable
then that of the Pretender who was overcome; yet) they adhered even to him,
when once settled upon the Throne. And for this, I think, I have evident proof,
from the view of the Emperors, whose Cause Tertullian owns in that Defense of
his but now quoted: especially one of them, (Severus) who raised the Sixth
Persecution against the Christians. It is evident that Tertullian commends the
carriage of the Christians in their Obedience to Severus, because he mentions
Pescennius Niger, and Claudius Albinus, as the Heads of those Factions, which
for opposing him were then odious to Severus; and denies the Christians to have
been their Partisans against him. Whence it is plain, that they acquiesced in
Severus his Title; although it be evident, that his Title, (till Conquest
confirmed it) was the worst of two of his Competitors. For Herodian tells us,
that immediately upon the Death of Pertinax, Julian First, and then, Pescennius
Niger, were chosen Emperors, and set in the Throne by their Soldiers, before
Severus his Title was set on foot by his Troops. So that Severus himself was,
while the Contest lasted, more truly a Rebel against Niger, then Niger against
him. But whilst Niger delays and revels at Antioch, Severus coming to, and
mastering Rome, the Senate confirmed him Emperor, and then all the Christians
acquiesced in him, and became peaceably his good and loyal Subjects. Whence it
appears plain, that the Principle of the Christians then was, That they were
obliged to be Subjects to whatever Prince God by his Providence had actually at
any time placed on the Throne, though his Title were none of the best: At
least, they made it not a Concern of theirs, whether it were so good as it
should be.

And indeed, (to draw to an end of this Discourse) what should a Christian do,
in dubious Circumstances, but determine his Actual Allegiance, by the Issues of
Divine Providence? For, does the great Governor of the World take it for his
sole Prerogative, to rule in the Kingdom of Men, and give it to whomsoever he
will? to change times and Seasons, to remove Kings and set up Kings (in the
places of those he removes) as in Daniel he affirms; and shall we Worms, say to
him, what do thou? Or, is it requisite, that he should be obliged to comply
with our various Opinions, in making such Changes? or to tie himself to such
limited Methods in the ways of bringing them about, as best suit our Models or
supposed legal Constitutions? Where were then this his Super-Sovereign
Prerogative, if so submitted for its Regulation to this or that Party of
Christians, and not to be put in Execution, but where and when they please?

But, you will say, Is Christianity then so flexible a Religion, as to be able
to accommodate it self to all Turns and Changes? This looks like a safe
Principle, taken up rather from the Writings and Practices of some worldly
Politicians, then from the inflexible Rules of Divine Verity.

It were, indeed, so, if Christianity had given us any such inflexible Rule in
such Matters: or (seeing it has not, as before you are told) taught us to
change Designs, and Interests, and Parties, as often as we see God by his
Providence making way for the change of Persons; and in order thereto, as
Politicians do, to forecast by Humane Conjectures, which is likely to be the
strongest side, and then (without respect to Honor, Honesty, or Conscience) to
accommodate our Sails beforehand to every Wind which our Political Almanac
tells us is likely to blow; that we may, by our forward appearing, merit the
more from those whom we oblige by our assistance in their Settlement. That
Compliance, therefore, which I plead for, as Christian, is not of that Nature:
It suffers Gods Providence, first, to determine, and then follows it: it is not
forward in making, or assisting Changes, but only submits to them, or rather to
God in them, when made to its hand. Nor is it hasty to strike in with the first
(like those that strove to get in before others to the Pool of Bethesda) when
those changes are made, as if it feared to lose the Opportunity of a Market for
its advantage: but allows it self convenient time for due Consideration,
wherein, and to what Degree, the present Circumstances may be complied with, in
consistence with the just Measures of Religion, the Rules of Decency, and the
Security of a good Conscience toward God and toward Man. And then (so far as
it may, with safety to all these, and not a jot farther) accommodates it self
to the present State of Affairs; quietly acquiescing in the Events wherein God
declares his Providential Will, though never so much against the Grain of a
Man's own Inclinations or Interests. There is, indeed, a superior Degree of
Non-resistance and Passive Obedience due to the Almighty, beyond all that can
be challenged by any Mortal from us; and we must sit down under the shadow
which he has spread over us for our Protection; with great care, that no
Discontent at personal Losses or Disappointments, or any other unquiet Passion,
hurry us into any Designs or Actions, which may involve us in the Guilt of
fighting against God, by striving to build up again, what he has pulled down,
or to pull down what he has built.

And, in this case, when God providentially rejects a Saul; though personal
Affection, and the Hand he himself formerly had, under God, in raising him to
the Throne, and supporting him in it, may excuse an Holy Samuel, in the
condoling Resentment he showed at the Change, and the compassionate Mourning
which he inwardly put on for the unhappy Prince: Yet, even He, must thenceforth
look upon himself, as discharged from any farther (at least public) owning his
Inclinations toward him. And it is evident, he did so. For, otherwise, so
great a Courtier as Samuel had been, through all Readiness former Reign, could
hardly have dispensed with himself for the seeming Incivility of not so much as
giving him one Visit from the Time when he received the notice of his Rejection
from God, and (by his command) delivered the unwelcome Tidings thereof to him,
till the day of his death. And even that Humane Resentment, which for a season
is excusable in such a case, yet must be managed with great Moderation, and not
lodge too long in his Bosom. For God himself takes him off from it at last,
when he saw it excessive, with a Reprimand. How long (says he) will thou mourn
for Saul, seeing I have rejected him? Now, if the bare antecedent notice from
God to his Prophet, that he had sententially rejected Saul from the Kingdom
whilst yet he continued in the Land, and actually exercised his Regality still,
and for some years after) might lawfully so far lessen the Obligation of
Samuel's Allegiance, as to warrant his absenting himself so long from Court,
(which very withdrawing of his, could not, in so eminent and conspicuous a
Person as he was, but argue a great Dislike, and therefore, in the Judgment of
the common People, have a very ill Aspect upon the Kings Affairs;) it is not
difficult to imagine how much farther he might have concluded himself
discharged from it, in case Saul had, upon his Denunciation of his Rejection
from God, and the change in the Countenances, and suspicious carriage of the
chief of the People (plainly intimated, 1 Samuel 15. 30.) actually withdrawn
himself out of his Kingdom; and from his native Subjects of Israel, retired to
Nations in Enmity with them; (especially, if he had applied himself to the
Egyptians their old Masters, and to the Philistines, their most spightful
Borderers, and therefore the most dreaded Adversaries they had,) and moreover
solicited their Assistance, to restore and resettle him in his Dominions by
Conquest.

I am not ignorant, that some Learned Men (and among the rest, Peter Martyr,
particularly,) in this Case of Saul, conjecture that Samuel, went somewhat
farther yet, in showing his Duty to the rejected King, during this his
retirement from Court, by his continuing to pray for him still. This is begged,
I must needs say (with the leave of those learned Authors,) for it cannot be
proved. But however, if granted, we must suppose it only done where he mourned
for him, that is, in private. And for the matter of his Prayers; it could not
be, That God would restore him absolutely, but only, conditionally, upon his
Repentance: and so, as no considerable damage might accrue to Gods Church and
People thereby. And, in such secret Devotions, and so cautioned, there is none,
who will (I suppose) forbid any one, even now, to exercise the Remains of his
former Loyalty, who thinks himself obliged so to do.

And, as far, to the utmost, as Samuels Loyalty is supposed by any one to have
gone in Saul's Case: I doubt not, but diverse (at least) of the Reverend Persons
this Paper was in a great measure meant for, have followed his Example, in this
present Juncture. They have, as long as K. J. was on the Throne, and exercised
his Regality, born with diverse harsh and uneasy encroachments of
Prerogative-Power; and some in an eminent and exemplary degree, practiced the
Passive Obedience they taught, to the no small credit of our Church and its
Loyal Principles; (and I am assured, upon my own knowledge, that not a few of
their Brethren, both of the Episcopal Character, and of the Inferior Clergy,
(who in the present Case, differ from them) were ready, if like occasion had
been offered, to have followed them in the same steps, wherein they led them by
so good an Example: they have also (as most of the sacred Function have
likewise done) kept themselves within the bounds of Non-resistance, that is,
free from contributing toward the effecting of that great change which God by
unusual methods of astonishing Providence has made: they have, (those of them,
at least, whose high Stations gave them a considerable Influence upon public
Affairs,) conscientiously endeavored, by their Counsels to hinder things from
arriving to that Extremity to which they are now reduced: and since, (for it is
no news, nor, I think, will they themselves think it a disparagement or
disservice to them to have it here published) they have sat down under them,
not only, with a Samuel-like condolency with the dispossessed King, but also,
with some uneasiness to their own circumstances, under some public Acts
wherein they are dissatisfied: they have also shown their dissatisfactions, by
their slowness to comply with the present Establishment; even to the suffering
a suspension from the Execution of their Ecclesiastical employments: and it may
be, they do secretly pray for (what they wish, if it might be) the retrieving
of things into a state more suitable to their own Principles; whiles God, by
his Providence seems still to say nay, to all such Desires, and attempts;
except we will be content to purchase them (as matters now stand) upon such
Terms, as (in all humane Reason) must be destructive to all that is dear to us
and them too, both in our Civil and Ecclesiastical Capacities.

Now therefore, seeing (as I have already shown) there can be no more lawfully
done for him, whom Gods Providence has thus excluded: I cannot imagine, what
should farther influence our Reverend Fathers, and worthily esteemed Brethren,
to adventure the exposing themselves to the extremities of the Law: and not
rather exercise their Passive Principles (at least) under the present Authority
(for surely, there is a kind of Passivity in it, when one submits to what he is
not pleased with) which the Primitive Christians, and the most Eminent Divines
of our Church too, in the days of K. Chapter I. and K. Chapter II. (by our preceding
measures taken of them,) would certainly not have stuck at, in our case; by
transferring that Actual Allegiance which they cannot pay elsewhere, to those
to whom Divine Providence has transferred the Crown.

I shall not here (as I told you at the beginning) to add farther strength to
my Cause, urge the Arguments which many other Writers have chiefly insisted
upon, (to reconcile our Brethrens Judgment thereto) from the rationality and
legality of the Circumstances relating to the production of this great change.
And yet I find my self strongly inclined (in the close of this Discourse) to
offer one (to debate at least) from one of the often-mentioned Dr. Sandersons
Principles: which if it prove sound, (and I have not yet met with any one that
has attempted to overthrow it,) will, (for ought I can yet see to the
contrary) do much, toward the clearing them in both respects. It is (in a word)
this, Among the other Cases, wherein the Reverend Doctor tells us, the
obligation of a Promissory Oath cease; he makes this one. [When the state of
things is so altered betwixt the Time of a Man's taking such an Oath, Sanderson
De Juramenti obligatione.
and that, wherein the performance is expected; that if such a change could
have been foreseen by the swearer, he would have forborne to take it:] to which
I would add, [or would, at least, (if he could have apprehended it but
possible, and much more, if likely to fall out, beforehand) have made the
falling out of what he so apprehended, an express exception to the obligation
thereof.]

I must ingenuously confess, (with all due deference to the Judgment of so
profound a Casuist) I think my self not necessarily obliged to assert the
verity of this Hypothesis, universally, in all Cases that might be put of this
nature. And yet, I am apt to think, the special Instance which he there gives,
has more in it, then will easily be disproved, in any Case parallel to it. The
Case he puts is this. [A Father swears to his Son, that having by his avowed
Will and Testament, bequeathed all his Estate when he dies, to him: he will
never revoke that Deed. But in some Time after, he finds by undoubted Evidence
that this Son of his has attempted by Poison to destroy him.] In this Case,
(says the Reverend Doctor) He may, (notwithstanding his former Oath to the
contrary,) rescind that Will, and by a consequent one, is at liberty to make a
new and different disposal of that Estate.] The Reason of which Determination,
suits his preceding Thesis: to wit, because the case is now so altered to the
Father, that if he could have foreseen it, he would never have taken that Oath.
For the Father swore it to a Son, a Son, then supposed to be dutiful, and one
from whom he expected the continuance of his filial Duty (especially he knowing
himself to be so highly obliged to continue so by so late a Demonstration of
his Fatherly kindness,) until the day of his natural Death. And little could he
imagine, (much less foreknow, that his Son would so far deceive his
expectation, as to become in stead of a Son, an Enemy; in stead of a dutiful
Son, a mortal Enemy to such a Father: in stead of one that would patiently
expect his natural Death, had endeavored to hasten it, by Violence.

Now, if the Doctors resolution in this Case, be good, and solid: it seems to
be, no less, in the Reverse of it; that is, supposing the Son by a like Oath
also obliged to the Father. Lay we the Case thus, with the due variation of
circumstances. [The Son mentioned, upon his Fathers Oath so passed, not only to
maintain him as his Son, whiles he lives; but also to leave him at his death, a
fair Estate derived to him from his Ancestors, and entailed to him as his next
Heir: and whatsoever of his own he has by his industrious improvements added
to it likewise: does reciprocally engage (by Oath also) to his Father, to
remain under his Government, and in his Family, and assist him in the
preservation and utmost improvement of that Estate, while he lives: and in a
word, to be deficient in no Duty, incumbent on him by virtue of that ne'ar
relation, and obliging kindness. But the Father, after these mutual Engagements
thus passed, (not provoked by any undutiful Demeanor of his Son, but out of an
irregular affection unto some stranger, who has insinuated himself into his
favor by sordid slattery and false suggestions,) does not only carry himself
toward his Son, in a strange unfatherly and unnatural way of rigor, and uses
him more like a slave, then a child; but also, (even openly, and barefacedly)
attempts to disinherit him at his death, by cutting off the legal entail of
those ancient Lands from him; and (to make the injury more remediless)
endeavors in his own life time, to possess that Person whom he has
entertained this new kindness for, of the whole Estate, by surrendering all his
Deeds and Evidences relating to it, together with his own Person also, into his
hands and absolute Power. So that now, the Son can no longer either perform the
matter of his Oath to him, or, indeed, come at him, in the circumstances
wherein he is, without inevitable danger of his own life, from the malicious
attempts of his competitor, (too much encouraged in them also by his Father)
whose Interest it is to destroy him, as the only Person from whom he expects,
at the Fathers death, to be disturbed in his ill-gotten and unjust
Possessions.] Now here, I would fain know, why (upon the Doctors Grounds) the
Son, notwithstanding the obligation of natural Duty, though confirmed also by
an Oath, may not think himself at liberty, (under such unexpected and
surprising disappointments from his Fathers alteration toward him to such an
high degree of unnatural and unjust dealing, which he no way foresaw, nor could
foresee, when he made that Oath to him) and why he may not accept of the
tendered Protection and assistance of some other near Relation, (or any one,
indeed, who has so great a kindness as to afford it him, and is able probably,
to support him against such an outrageous Injury) both (as to the safety of his
Person,) by removing into his Family, and also, (as to the Estate,) by
strengthening him so far as lawfully he may, by all the assistance he can give,
for the securing, (at least) of that Inheritance, (which is rightfully his in
the Reversion, and cannot legally be alienated from him,) even while his
unnatural Father is yet living. Yea, why he may not, if demanded, (for the
security of him, who adventures so far on his behalf, to create himself so
great Enmities) also, give his generous Protector and Guardian the utmost
assurance that he can require, (even that of an Oath, like that which he gave
his Father himself,) concerning the performance of all that Duty, (whiles he
thus continues under his Roof, and enjoyes the benefit of his Guardianship,
which had continued due to his Father, if he had continued a Father to him, to
his dying day.

The Case, if I am not much mistaken, seems thus far, very fair on the Sons
side: especially, if (in the mean while of the necessary cessation of his
actual Duty to his Father,) he perform no positive Act of undutifulness to him
who has so disobliged him, by way of retaliation: and be dispositively ready
to return to all that duty again, which he formerly paid him, in case he change
his mind toward him, restore him to his former Circumstances, and give him
that rational security that in such a case is requisite; to assure him against
any future relaps into the like unnatural designs and attempts against him.

Let now, this Case be seriously considered by those who are most dissatisfied,
(provided, they be not over-byassed by contrary Interests,) as it makes too
unhappy a Parallel to our late and present Circumstances: and I am in great
hope, that they will (at least) see cause to judge tenderly concerning some
ambiguous actions of those, who have by extraordinary methods (even against
their Inclinations) hitherto sacred to them (yea to all of us, and our
Posterity after us too) those dear Enjoyments and Reversions, which were lately
even upon the Point of being lost for ever: if not also, farther, to thank that
great Deliverer, whom God has graciously by extraordinary Providence, sent
them and us: and last of all, to give him all that legal security, which he
has reason to expect; that whiles they sit safe under his shadow, they will
not undermine the Tree from which it comes; but demean themselves with that
fidelity to him which so great a favor deserves.

The obtaining of which fair and reasonable things (as till I am otherwise
convinced I must judge them to be,) at the hands of our yet unsatisfied
Brethren, is that which I have all along endeavored in this discourse; which
now I think it time to end, being afraid, that I have too long exercised my
Readers Patience with its prolixity. But I must not dismiss it, without sending
this short Prayer along with it. That God will vouchsafe to speed it with a
success answerable to the sincerity of my Intentions therein; for the
satisfaction of all those for whom it was designed, (whether exceptious
Friends, or serupulous Brethren, or prejudicated Enemies to the Cause I plead:)
and make us all, either cordially unanimous in it; or (whiles we cannot be so)
more charitable each to other, in our differences of Opinion, then (according
to the unhappy Fate which amongst us in England, too commonly attends all
Controversies) we are wont to be: That our common Enemies may not have the
pleasure of seeing us do that by our own imprudent, unseasonable, and
unchristian Divisions, which, without them, all the Intrigues of Hell it self,
in conjunction with the Designs and Arms of France, and its Adherents, (I hope
in God) shall never he able to do.

Amen, and Amen.
FINIS.

