A SHORT TESTIMONY Concerning that Faithful Servant of the Lord Thomas Aldam OF
WARNSWORTH in the County of YORK; WHO In Patience and Tribulation was a
Follower of the Lamb, finished his Course in the Truth, and departed this Life
in the Fourth Month in the Year 1660.

Something also concerning Mary his Wife; and also concerning Margaret Kellam,
and Joan Kellam, his two Sisters.

With a few Words in Exhortation to such as are the Children of believing
Parents, or are more lately com'd to be convinced of the Truth.

Given forth in the Sense of the great Love of God, which has visited his
People, in this our Age and Day.

By Thomas Aldam Son to the abovesaid Thomas Aldam.

Say ye to the Righteous, that it shall be well with him, for they shall eat
the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with them; for
the reward of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3.10, 11.

The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove.
10.7.

LONDON, (...)

G. F's Testimony concerning Tho. Aldam.
NOW concerning this Friend and Brother in Christ Jesus, Thomas Aldam, which
his Son, a hopeful Young Man has given a short Breviat of his Sufferings,
Imprisonments, and Spoiling of Goods, and Beatings. Indeed his Sufferings were
very many; for he often jeopardiz'd his Life with me, for the Name of Christ
and his precious Truths sake; and underwent a great deal of Sufferings and
Imprisonments by the Covetous Hireling Priests, who are out of the Doctrine and
Command of Christ, who says, freely you have received, freely give, which he
was moved to declare against: But while he put in the Priests mouth of his own
Parish, he preached Peace to him, but when he could not, he prepared War against
him; as you may see in his Sons Relation, as also did the Impropriator. And
when the Lord moved him to reprove Sin in the Gates, and in the Markets, Fairs,
and Steeple Houses, then he was made a prey upon; then he found the best of the
outward Professors as a Bryer, and the most upright of them sharper than a
Thorny Hedge; but their Visitation came upon them, and their Perplexity was
fulfilled upon them from the Lord, which they were warned of beforehand; and
greatly was he Exercised with the Justices at the Sessions, and Judges at the
Assizes; and Oliver Cromwell, warning them all that they might do Justice, and
of the great day of the Lord that was coming upon them, and not to Imprison,
Persecute, and spoil the Goods of Gods People, but to set them at Liberty; but
many were hardened and would not, till K. Charles the II. came in, and then
many o^ them were turned out of their places, Priests and Justices. It Is almost
hard to be uttered what Sufferings of all sorts by Professors, Priest and
Profane, this Servant of the Lord went through for the Name of Christ; but the
Lord with his Eternal Arm and Power upheld him over all, and carried him
through all, so that he died in the Lord, and Blessed are all they that die in
the Lord, for they cease from their Labors, and their Works follow them; and he
that Believes, though he was Dead yet shall he Live, and he that Lives and
Believes shall not Die. And several Years did this Tho. Aldam labor in the
Gospel of Christ and Preached it freely, and called others both small and great
to come and taste how good Gods word was, and take of the Waters of Life freely,
without Money and without Price; and strove and labored to keep the Everlasting
Gospel of Christ without charge; and that was it that made the Covetous
Hireling Priests, and them that held them up, in such a rage against this
Servant of Christ, who said, freely ye have received, freely give; and Christ's
Servants did not Imprison nor Spoil the Goods of any, but such kept and keep
the Testimony of Jesus, that he sends to declare his free Grace and Gospel, and
Love him and keep his Commandments.

G. F


And as I said before, my Father was much Exercised in going to bear Testimony
to the Truth, and against such as Preached for Hire; so I shall here give some
account of several Steeple Houses which he was at, to bear Testimony to the
Truth, after he was set at liberty from his Imprisonment.

Upon the first day in the Assize time, he went into York-minster, and standing
near unto the Priest, with his Face toward him; there was he they called Lord
Mayor, Judge Parker, Judge Newdigate, and many Country Justices all placed in
Seats, before whom he stood as a wonder to many; during the time of the Priests
Preaching and Praying, there was one rude man that pressed to have pulled his
Hat off his Head, another who was Noting down the Sermon, nipt him by the Arms
and puncht him with his Feet, whilst he wept to see the great Superstition and
Abomination brought forth in that place, which he stood a Witness against,
whose Spirit was grieved; and after the Priest had done, he spoke to some of
the Heady and High-minded ones, as also to others of the under sort, who had in
times past smitten him in that place, and then he passed away through the
Streets with the Judges, to the place were they ought to do Justice, and was
preserved from the rude multitude.

Another time for Speaking in the Steeple-house of Warnsworth, he was haled out
by the Constable and him called Church warden.

Another time he went into the Steeple-house at Hatfield, and there spoke of
the things of God, but the rude multitude haled him forth and smote him.

He also went to the Steeple Houses at Wickersley and Edlington, and for
declaring the Truth there, was by the rude People scoffed, mocked, and
reproached; but there were some sober minded People, in whom much moderation
did appear.

Another time he went into Tickhill Steeple-house, and spoke of the things of
God, but the Priests Flock put him forth and smote him, and spit in his Face:
Mark well what Spirit they were of, that thus entreated the Servant of the Lord.

Another time he went into the Steeple-house at Bawtry and Speaking in that
place (after the Priest had done his Sermon) of the things of God revealed unto
him, he was by some of the rude multitude smitten with their Fists and punched
with their Feet.

Another time he going into Doncaster Steeple-house, and declaring the Truth,
he was haled forth by the rude People, and not suffered to stay within that
place, although those called Churchwardens of that place had Three several
times distrained his Goods, for upholding that House* Oh what Injustice!

Another time he going into Thorn Steeple-house, stood before the Priest (Jo.
Haworth) who commanded the Constable to take out that rude uncivil fellow,
which came so uncivilly in and made a disturbance; the Constable being of a
noble Spirit, answered he disturbeth no man nor does any man harm; so when the
Priest had done his Sermon, he Spoke and bore Testimony of the things God
revealed unto him; wherefore some of the rude sort smote him with their
Tongues, as their Priest had done, as also with their Fists, and punched him
with their Feet, and spit upon him and put him forth of the place called their
Church; these things did they, upon that day they call their Sabbath Day.

He went also into the Steeple-house at Hansworth, and there stood and kept
silence, until the Priest (Carr) had ended his Service, as its called;
afterward he spoke in that place, (his Wife my Mother being then there also,
who had before in that place declared the Truth) and he seeing the rude
multitude arising in a tumultuous manner, cried aloud, do Justice and see the
peace be kept; which after he had spoken, a rude young Man put his Hat off his
Head, and pulled him by the Hair of his Head; another smote him with his Fist;
others spit in his Face, and haled him out of that place unto the Town-Clerks
house, where the Constable kept him and his Wife Prisoners for a certain time.

Another time he went into the said Steeple-house at Hansworth and spoke of the
things of God revealed unto him, bearing witness that he owned what was of God,
and that he was not one which what was not of God; for which words speaking, he
was laid hands on by the Neck and Throat, Shaken and held by the Hair of the
Head by a rude man, who said he would lose his Life rather than that fellow
should Speak in the Church; also other some of the rude sort, smote him with
their Fists and Feet, and as they haled him out of the Steeple-house, some of
them smote his Legs from under him so that he fell to the Ground, and they trod
upon his Back and Legs with their Feet; he was much bruised and had his Clothes
rent: The Priest went away, leaving the Sufferer amongst the rude Multitude,
who was in danger of his Life to be destroyed amongst them. Oh! mark the
fruits, surely they betoken not right Christianity: No, no, its Antichristian,
yea of and from the wicked one, who was a Murderer like Cane.

The same day in the Afternoon he went into the Steeple-house at Rosington, and
there Spoke to the People; then one Hen. Barton, called a Churchwarden, there
with his Fist smote him upon the Cheek, who turned to him the other; but some
of the sober minded People seeing his rudeness, laid hands on the said Henry,
and held him that he might smite no more.

Another time, going to the Steeple-house at Pontefract, about when the
Sessions was to be held in the Town, in which were at that time many called
Justices, to whom the Priest made a Sermon, and after he had done, my Father
began to Speak of the things of God, but the rude multitude would not suffer
him, but haled him away and smote him.

Another time, going into the Steeple-house of Warnsworth, upon a First day;
after the Priest Thomas Rookby had done his Service, as he called it, he read a
Bill of Declaration, which that Priest had put into Court against him for not
paying Tyths, in which Bill was many lies; the Priest coming by him, said
Sirrah, Sirrah, you have broken the Law, then commanded the Constable to take
him away; and the rude sort kicked him with their Feet, and smote him with
their Fists, and endeavored to have rent the Bill in which was written, that
Thomas Aldam had led away Thirty one Loads of Oats, which was of the Priest
Tyths, whereas there was not Three; that was one of the said Priests lies, in
his Bill of Declaration, besides many more.

Another time he went into the said Steeple-house at Warnsworth, and bore
Testimony to the Truth, for which the said Thomas Rookby got a Warrant against
him, from some called Justices, and he was had before them; but the Witnesses
which were against him, they were so confounded in their Testimonies, that he
was deliver-out of the Snare which was laid for him, the Priest using his
endeavors to have had him sent to Prison, but the Lord preserved him out of
his hands.

These are some of the Sufferings and Exercises which my Father met withal in
bearing Testimony to the Truth, and against such as ran when the Lord did not
send them, and therefore did not profit the People at all.

And further, he being called at an Assizes at York (in the Year 1655.) to the
Bar, before Judge Windham, one Philip Prince a Lawyer, took his Hat from off
his Head, and kept it contrary to Justice; afterward he did appeal to the
Judge for Justice in the Case, which thing he did consent to in private, but at
the end of the Assizes, he requiring Justice, that Philip Prince might be
brought to the Bar, who had taken his Hat and kept it; then Judge Windham
broke forth into much passion, and said, Sirrah, Sirrah, you may have your Hat
again; to whom he Answered* ^ otherwise I cannot receive it; Judge Windham
would have had the Hat restored, but would not have had Philip Prince condemned
or reproved for an evil doer in that matter; so the Sufferer lost his Hat, for
want of Justice to be had upon the Transgresser; and the said Thomas Aldam (my
Father) went Seven Months without a Hat, in obedience to the Command of God,
with his Head uncovered, who was a wonder and a sign to all who were covered,
and not with Justice; whose Service to God was accepted, which the Proud,
Lofty, High-minded professing Persecutors, and Oppressers could not see.

Another time he being at Doncaster-Market, and there declaring the Truth, he
was sore abused, and had his Head broken by a rude man. These and many other
hardships and beatings he suffered of his own Countrymen, for seeking the
honor of God and his Truth, and the peace, happiness and well being of their
immortal Souls; because of which the Devil, that wicked one raged, and poured
forth floods of violence and cruelty, to destroy the Birth brought forth by the
Lord in him: But the Lord being his refuge and hiding place, he dwelt in
safety, where his Enemies could not prevail against him, for though he was
persecuted and smitten of Men, yet was he owned and beloved of the Lord, which
made his Soul to rejoice, that his lot was fallen in this good Land, and that
he was not only called to Believe, but counted worthy to Suffer for Christ's
sake, knowing that all such as will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
Persecution; his reproaches being unto them great Riches.

And further, as he was freely given up in Life, Body and Estate, to suffer for
the most precious Truth of Christ, so also was he much concerned in his day,
with such as were the then Rulers of the Nations; he being often moved of the
Lord to lay before them, the Sufferings of Gods innocent People, by reason of
which, and for the spreading of the Truth, many were the trials which he
underwent, going often times to Oliver Cromwell, and such as were in Power with
him, whom he many times warned as from the Lord, to harken to the cry of his
poor Oppressed People, and under the heavy Burdens under which they lay; or
otherwise if they would not, he signified unto them the Lord would cut them
off, and that speedily. And at one time he was moved to take his Cap from off
his Head, and to rent it in pieces before Oliver Cromwell, as a Sign to him,
that the Government should be rent from him; and such as were not covered with
the spirit of the Lord which things he saw fulfilled before he Depart^^

He was also moved of the Lord to Travel into Scotland and Ireland, and went to
the chief Rulers there upon the account aforesaid.

Another time he went to all or most of the Prisons in England, where there was
any of the people of God called Quakers in Prison, to take a perfect account of
the number of them, that so being an eye Witness of their Sufferings, he might
be more capable of laying their Cases before the then Rulers; yea, he was
freely given up to spend and be spent upon the Truths account, being always
willing at the Assizes, Sessions or elsewhere to appear to plead the cause and
help to bear the burden of Gods Suffering people, it being unto him as his Meat
and Drink to be found in Truths service, doing the same cheerfully and of a
ready mind, being one to whom the Commandments of Christ Jesus were not
grievous but joyous.

He was always one that had a tender regard to Unity amongst Friends, and never
known to join with any which deviated from Truths Testimony, ever bearing a
good esteem in his mind for such as Labored and Traveled in the Gospel, and
especially for him whom the Lord raised at first to be an Instrument, to beget
him (with many others) to the Lord; so that in reading, though it had been but
Two or Three lines, which had been sent him from him, his Heart would have been
broken. And when I do remember the fervency of Spirit which did attend him, and
how when he had been to take any Journey upon Truths account, he would have
called his Wife and Children, in great tenderness and humility, have bowed his
Knees before the Lord, and poured out his supplications unto him (before his
departure from us) desiring earnestly that the Lord might go with him, and
committing us into his keeping; and what brokenness of Heart was amongst us at
such times, and how the love of God did abound; then can my Soul say, those
were precious Seasons, and are not to be forgotten by us, but to be recorded to
posterity, that we may tell our Children, and they also may declare it when we
are gone, how good the Lord has been unto his People, and what great cause
they have to love him, and put their trust in him, that so his name may be
renowed amongst our Families, so long as they shall have a being.

And now after these his Exercises, the time of his departure drawing near, he
was visited with Sickness, in which time he set his House in order, and in the
time of his Weakness the Lord was good unto him, and eminently appeared with
him; so that one time he did say to his Sister (though near his latter end)
walking up and down in the House, that he found his Strength so renewed, that
he believed he could go to London, if the Lord required it, but answered again,
I am clear of the Blood of all men: I find nothing to this Man, meaning King
Charles the II. he was very sensible to his latter end, and the day he died
called for us his Children, and advised us to live in the fear of God, and to
Love and Obey our Mother; and so being freely resigned into the hands of his
Creator he departed this Life.

And about Three Months after, Mary his Wife (my Mother) departed this Life,
who was a Woman that truly feared God, and served him in her Day and
Generation; and in all the Exercises which my Father passed through in those
early days, I never heard she once grudged or repined, being of a very meek and
quiet Spirit, given up in all things to Gods disposing; her remembrance is
sweet, and her name to be recorded amongst the Faithful of Gods People: She was
convinced of the Everlasting Truth, at the same time my Father was convinced,
and through the Same Instrument; and bore Testimony to the same, according to
her measure.

My Father had also Two Sisters, the one called Margaret Kellam, the other Joan
Kellam, who were also convinced at the same time by G. F. and were Two Faithful
Women in their day; the said Margaret traveled much in Truths service, in the
breaking forth of the same, and many were convinced by her: She suffered
Imprisonment in several places, as at Exeter in Devonshire, where she was fully
Accused, and the envy of some such against her, as they sought her Life, out
the Lord delivered her; she was also Prisoner at Barbary, and in York-Castle,
for declaring the Truth; yea, great was the boldness that did attend her, in
sounding forth the Truth in the Streets, Steeple Houses and Marketplaces, and
to the Heads and Rulers of the People, and the Lord was with her. She finished
her course in Faith, signifying (to a near Relation) before her departure, the
great peace she enjoyed with the Lord, and the clearness of Conscience she had
before him; she laid down the Body in the ^

Joan Kellum was also a Woman that truly feared the Lord, a good Example and
Pattern where God had placed her; one of a sound Judgment, and well Experienced
in the Work of the Lord, Zealous for his Honor, and Faithful to Truths
Testimonies, ready to encourage and stir up to Diligence and Stedfastness, ever
watching over those that were Young, and endavouring to instruct them in the
right way of the Lord; she was one that could speak a word in due season to an
afflicted Soul, having past through many depths, and seen the wonders and
goodness of the Lord therein; she was even as a Mother in Israel, and would
sympathize with the least of Gods suffering Children; in the remembrance of
her, and of the sweet Communion which my Soul many times has had with her,
when in openness of Heart we have Declared one to another, what the Lord had
done for us, I have cause to bless the Lord; and though these our Friends and
near Relations be outwardly removed from us, yet their Spirits live with us,
even amongst such as are comed to have Unity with the Spirits of just men made
perfect, and these can say, their Memorial is Blessed, and their Names to be
recorded amongst the Righteous, for they died in the Lord, and are at rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them. In the time of her Sickness she
was very well disposed, and gave good advice to them which were left behind
her, that in Faithfulness they might persevere to the finishing of that Work
which the Lord had for them to do. She departed this Life in the Year 1681.

And now in the remembrance of these, and many other Faithful Servants of the
Lord, who have obtained a good report through that precious Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints, for which they in their day earnestly contended
and suffered many and great hardships in the openings of Life. I find at this
time a few Words springing up in my Heart by way of Exhortation, to such as are
the Children of Believing Parents, or are more lately com'd to be convinced of
the Truth, that they may all prize the Day of their Visitation and make a good
use of the Mercies which the Lord has bestowed upon them, that they may keep
the Footsteps of the Flock of God, and take such for Examples, as walk in that
pure and strait way, into which the Lord at the first brought these and many
other of his People, and that none may slight, undervalue or let fall, the
Testimonies of Truth, which have been born by such as God at first visited
amongst us, considering what great hardships and sufferings they passed through,
who bore the heat of the Day through these things; many of them hazarding their
Lives, Liberties and Estates, in bearing Testimony to the day of the Lord, and
the coming of his Christ, against such as would have kept the People of God in
Bondage, and not have suffered them to have gone free to serve him, but as the
Lord in those days did appear wonderfully with his People, in giving them
Dominion and Victory over their Adversaries (through patient Suffering.) Now
let it be the care of us, who are a Succeeding Generation to them (and comes to
enter to the fruits of their Labors, Exercises and Travels,) that we may ever
in Humility dwell before the Lord, and keep that which is committed to our
trust, standing fast to that Liberty wherewithal Christ has made his followers
free; and beware of being entangled any more with the Yoke of Bondage, keeping
out of the Spirit of this World, and the Customs and Fashions therein, with the
Friendship thereof, which is enmity with God; which whilst some have looked at
and gone after, they have lost the right way of the Lord. and have let fall the
Testimonies which their Fathers and near Friends have passed through such great
things for, and as much as in them lies, would make their Sufferings and
Travels of no effect. When I take a view of the sad estate of such, my Soul
cannot but mourn over them, desiring that all such to whom there is yet a day
of Visitation continued, may speedily return to the Lord, (that if happily they
may find Mercy with him) and again put their hands to Gods Plow, taking Christ's
Yoke upon them which is easy and his burden which is light, and learn of him
who is meek and low in Spirit, that they may find rest to their Souls; but if
they will not turn at his reproof, but still revolt more and more, going on in
their backsliding ways; this let them know, that the Day of the Lord will
overtake them, in which he will require his own from them, and it will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for them.

But all you whose Faces are still Sion ward, and it is in your Hearts to keep
the word of Gods Patience, and the Testimonies of Jesus, be ye comforted in the
Lord, and let your Souls with mine Bless and Magnify his Name, that he was
pleased in his unspeakable Love, to visit our Families and Fathers Houses, in
that great and notable Day of the breaking forth of his Glory, and thereby has
stained and removed from amongst the remnant of his People, the Beauty and
Glory of this World; so that now to them there is nothing to be compared with
his Love, which is not enjoyed but as we keep his Commandments. Oh now let us
prive our time, and make our calling and election sure, and wait to know an
increase in the increase of God, for this is a day wherein the Lord is looking
for Fruits, and every Tree which does not bring forth good Fruit, shall be hewn
down and cast into the Fire; and therefore all keep to the pure Spirit of God
in your own Hearts, which is that Teacher that cannot be removed into a corner;
and as you are here found waiting, you will be made wise to Salvation, and the
Lord will seal up his Laws, and bind up his Testimonies yet more and more unto
your Souls, and you will be kept and preserved in a due regard to his Honor,
following the Footsteps of Christ's Flock, and so you will come to know the
Shepherds Tents, where you may all sit under your own Vine, and under your own
Fig Tree, where none can make you afraid; your Bread will be sure, and your
Water will not fail; the munition of Rocks will be your Defense, and the Lord
God Omnipotent coming to take the Dominion in your Hearts to himself, you will
feel that joy, which is unspeakable and full of Glory, and this is the Lord
making his Babes and little ones, in a measure witnesses of, so that they can
say, their lot is fallen in a good Land, and their beloved is the chiefest of
ten thousands; their redeemer is the holy one of Israel, their God is the God
of the whole Earth, Blessed and Magnified be his Name for ever and evermore: He
it is that has set bounds to the Sea, that the swelling Waves thereof should
not surmount their Banks, and a Hair of the Heads of his Servants shall not
fall to the Ground, without his Divine Providence; and therefore let us all be
encouraged to be steadfast in the Faith, and never to be moved from the hope of
the Gospel, keeping up our Testimonies in our several places, to the Truth as
it is in Jesus; then will the Lord our God still take pleasure in us, and
honor us with his loving Presence, making us instruments in his hand for the
showing forth of his Praises: And that thus it may please the Lord to pour yet
more abundantly of the Spirit of Wisdom and Holy Understanding upon his Sons
and Daughters, his Handmaids and Servants, that hereby they may be preserved as
lights in their several stations where God has placed them, with well doing;
putting to silence the ignorance of foolish men, is the desire of him who is as
one of the least amongst Gods People, yet in some measure has obtained Favor
and Mercy from the Lord, to bear Testimony of his goodness and to his
unchangeable Truth, for which my Soul is truly Thankful and ascribed unto him
the Glory, who over all is worthy of the same for ever and for evermore.

Written the 20th. of the 9th. Month, 1689. Thomas Aldam.

FINIS.

