REMAINS OF That Excellent Minister Of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. Joseph Alleine.

BEING A Collection of Sundry Directions, Sermons, Sacrament-Speeches, and
Letters, not heretofore Published.

All tending to promote Real Piety.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Parker, at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, over against
the Royal Exchange, 1674.

The Epistle.
READER.
THere needs no more to commend this Book ( Remains of Mr. Joseph Alleine) to
thee, but to assure thee that it is his own, and though a Posthumous, yet no
spurious birth. Though some parcels come to thee with this disadvantage, only
as they were taken from his mouth as he preached, yet much of it was written
with his own hand. If thou have tasted that divine and warm spirit, which run
through his other Writings already published, it will sure set thee a thirsting
after what else has dropped from the same holy lips or hands. The labors of a
man of God, so mighty in the Sriptures, and in the power of God, will not be
either unuseful, or unacceptable: though what thou have here, be but fragments,
yet thou will find them to be of the same bread, with those loves which have
been already dealt out to thee, by the same hand The Publisher has gathered up
these fragments, it being pity they should be lost. For my part, I have not had
the time to read through the whole Book since it came to my hands, but have so
far looked into it, that I Judge it to be singularly useful, for the engaging
thee in, and directing and quickening thee to that even, spiritual, active life,
which will be both thy beauty and thy comfort.

That the spirit of the living God, which so eminently furnished the head,
fired the heart, and filled up the life of this holy man, may so animate these
holy lines, that they may become effectual to the forming their very Image upon
thy soul and life, is the prayer of,

Thy Friend in Christ, Richard Alleine.
June 11th. 1674.
A Table of the several Treatises contained in this Book.
I. The Art of dying well, Grounded on Luke 19. 20. with 15 several directions
thereunto II. A discourse about self-Examination, on Psalm. 4. 4. page 1 III. A
Sermon on Deuteronomy 32. 46. p. 29 IV. A serious call to Christians to win
Souls to Christ, with helps there unto, on Proverb. 11. 30 p. 47 V. A Sermon on
Revel. 3. 1. with ten parting Counsels p. 61 VI. A Sermon on Psalm. 74. p. 83
VII. A discourse made by Mr. Joseph Alleine, unto his people at Taunton, the
night before his departure from them. p. 99 VIII. A Sermon preached in order to
the Sacrament on a Sacramental day, on Luke 2. 10, 11. p. 119 IX. A
thanksgiving Sermon preached July 1665, at Mr. R. Ms, on Psalm. 147. 20 p. 137
X. A Sacramental Speech grounded on Psalm. 40. 7. p. 167 XI. Another Sacramental
speech on Isa. 9. 6. p. 185 XII. Another Sacramental speech, on Ephesians. 3. 19. p.
195 XIII. Another Sacramental speech, on Ephesians. 5. 2. p. 201 XIV. Another
Sacramental speech, on Mat. 15. 28. p. 215 XV. Another Sacramental speech on
Mark 1. 15. p. 227 XVI. Four several Letters to his most beloved people in
Taunton p. 237 XVII. A Practical Case on Phil. 3. 13. 14. p. 263 XVIII. A
discourse on Psalm. 144. 3. p. 279 XIX. Heavens joy and triumph on Luke 15. 23,
24. p. 297 XX A Letter sent by him to an intimate friend p. 310
The Art of Dying well.
Luke 12. 19, 20. Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years -- But God
said, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be required of thee.
Qu. SInce no man has one days certainty of his life, what may we do to be
secured from being surprised by death?

1. Sit loose from the world, that you may be able to packup and be gone upon
sudden warning. Here was the folly and misery of this rich man, that he had set
his heart upon the world, his mind did run upon his Barns, and upon his Belly;
his Goods, were his Gods, he wi^hes no other felicity, than to eat and be
merry: If you would be sit for your great Journey to your long home, you must
lay aside every weight, and in special, the incumbring and intangling, and
insnaring clog and burden of worldly affections; you must take heed to your
selves, least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and
drunkenness, and the cares of this life; if you would not have that day come
upon you unawares. It is said, there is a (...) whose heart is in his Belly;
would there were no such Monsters among men. Certainly, that man whose heart is
in his Belly, or on his Cosfer, that Idolizes his friends, or his reputation;
is no more fit for the assaults of Death, than the unhappy Trojans buried in
Sleep and Wine, for the Invasion of the well-appointed Greeks: or the secure
Laish for the subtle Danites: or the Shechamites when sore and unwieldy, for
the Sons of violence, and Instruments of cruelty. Study to be Crucified to the
world, to use all earthly comforts in a mortifyed manner, as those that are
taking their long leave, and let Death find you dead besorehand; and then let
it come when it will, and do its worst.

2. Entrench not on Gods Prerogative, in carving out the future time. Reckon
not upon hereafter; this was the unhappiness of this rich fool, he counts upon
many years; God had given him much goods, and now he is so bold, as to cast
upon many merry days to spend them; but God is angry at his usur pation, and
since he would presume to be his own carver, God rebukes his boldness, and will
show his Prerogative, and will cut him short enough, this night shall thy soul
be required. Remember your times are in Gods hands, improve with all possible
diligence your present allowance; he gives you wealth to lay up for hereafter,
but he keeps your time in his own hands; so that you shall not know one day
whether you shall ever have another, or be allowed to live till the n^xt; cast
not upon to morrow. Live this day well. When shall we learn to practice the
received Lesson, to live every day as if it were our last? Blessed men that we
should be, if we would but live up to this short rule. Christians, why are our
lives so far wide of our rules, and principles? Does Conscience witness that
you live up to this? If the rule be good, why do you not da^ly study to consorm
to it? is it not a shame, that a heathen should teach you? think, says he,
every morning when thou risest, I may never lie down again; and every night
thou lie down, it may be I may never rise again; when thou go out, I may
never return; when thou come in, I may never more go out. Christian, let it
be thy serious thought every morning, I will spend this day for eternity.

3. Store up in Heaven ^pace, and see that you be rich toward God. It was the
want of this, that made this rich worldling to be branded for a fool. Give Alms
plentifully, and provide for your selves Bags, that wax not old; be sparing as
to your selves, but lay out, and spare not upon the Service of God. Give your
selves unto prayer, let reading the Word, Meditation^, Self-examination, be
your daily exercises, do good to all men, serve your generation with diligence,
study to be useful, sill up your relations with duties, and when you have done
all, go out of your selves, look wholly unto Jesus, and live by faith, this do,
and you shall have treasure in Heaven; and let death come, when it will, it
will but set you in possession of glory. But woe to them that have laid up
nothing on the other side the Grave; Death will break them for ever, and will
prove their eternal undoing.

4. Be the death of your sins, that they may not fasten like Hell Hounds upon
you, when you are most helpless. Mortify your corruptions, and then the
bitterness of Death is past. Sin is the sting of Death, that makes it dreadful,
that makes it hurtful; O do not arm your enemy against you, death cannot hurt
you, but by the weapons that you put into its hands by your sins; if Sin be
dead, death is conquered. This is the top of misery, when sin and death shall
sly upon a poor creature together, when death, as the unclean Spirit, taking
with him seven other Spirits worse than himself, shall set a man's Sins all
upon him, and besides the terror of its own apaling looks, shall show him the
more ghastly, and affrighting faces of those Fiends and Furies, his unpardoned
sins; this is the sting of death, and makes that the King of terrors.

5. Observe the approaches of your enemy daily, and remember that you are for
ought you know, more than half dead already. Let not gray hairs be here and
there upon you, and you know it not; observe all the warnings of death, and
consider in all your pains and insirmities, that these are but twitches, and
items from death. How often is death knocking at your doors? Death has a
great part of you already in possession; whatsoever is past, is death's; and
how little, how very little is to come, God knows; sure I am, nothing is yours
but the present time. Christians, shall Death get ground upon you every day,
and be marching up toward you, and will not you provide accordingly, and make
preparations for it every day? as Death comes daily toward you, do you labor
to make it good against Death. Let your fortifications go on daily, let some
breach be made up; let somewhat be mended every day, forget not that holy
Counsel to meditate every evening, that seeing thy days are numbered, there is
one more of thy number spent, and thou art now nearer to thy end by a day.

6. Dare not to live in such a case or course, that you would not dare to dye
in. How know you but your next step may be into the grave? and would you be
found in your sins? how do you know, but death may meet you at the next
turning? and O how unwelcome a meeting will it be, if you be found by it laden
with the gains of unrighteousness, or with lusts, and pleasures! would you have
Death to find you out of your harnesses? would you meet your enemy, without a
weapon? or be found by him in a careless, secure, and sleeping posture? If not,
how dare you live at such a rate? are you at an agreement with Death.

7. Be always in your Fathers business, that Death may not be able to find you
doing evil, or doing nothing; the holy Calvin would not sorhear his labors in
his dying Sickness; but, when persuaded to give over, replied, what shall my
Lord come and find me idle? it was said of the laborious Willet, who was
always very early at his work, that he was half way on his journey before
others did set out. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes, shall
find so doing. Remember in what you undertake, that Death may overtakq you
before you have ended: therefore see that you do noth^ng without Gods warrant,
carry this with you, and you need not fear Death's surprisal. Woe unto you if
Death find you, with your work to do. How holily, how happily, ended that
Blessed Saint Mr. Lovo, who could dare to say in his last Prayer, Father, I
have glorisied the^ on Earth, I have sinished the work which thou gave st^ma
to do, and now, O Father glorify me withthy own self? Surely the end of that
man was peace. The last words that ever he spoke, were Blessed be God for Jesus
Christ. Blessed be God for peace of Conscience. He lived a life of exemplary
diligence, and the comfort of his death, answered the holy painfulness of his
life. This was Paul's joy, I have fought a good sight, I have sinished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of life.

8. Get Conscience to be your friend, least that should set Death upon you, to
worry you, when you come to dye. Beware you mistake not the slumber of
Conscience, for a settled peace; the Serpent may be but frozen in your bosoms,
when you think him dead. Death will rouse the sleeping Lion, and then Oh
fearful work that he will make! his roaring will shake the heart of Rock, and
apale the countenance of Kings, and loose their joints, and break all their
bones. If you be wise, get and keep a good Conscience; carry it to the fountain
opened for sin, and for uncleanness, get it sprinkled with the blood of Christ.
Exercise your selves to keep a Conscience void of osfence toward Go^ (...)
toward all men. In all your undertakings, let Conscience have the casting
voice, ask counsel of it diligently, hear its rebukes patiently, thankfully, as
a precious balm that will not break your heads; make it to give in its judgment
about your Estates: If it be confident, be sure it be upon Scripture evidence;
if it be doubtful, get it well settled in time; if it condemn you, away with
speed to your Redeemer; sue out your pardon, get it purified, and pacified.
Follow after peace and holiness, but accept of no peace but of God's speaking.
Please Conscience, rather than all the world; keep her, and she shall keep you;
they that are careless of defending Conscience, are preparing for their own
torment at death.

9. Remember your Sickbed resolutions, and set a mark upon those things that
did make death look most ghastly. Woe to you if Sickness find you again in the
same sins which formerly stung you. what will you say to Conscience, or how
will you look Death in the face, if you be found at last to have been false to
your Sickbed vows? Alphonsus King of Aragon, sent to the Bishop, to know how
he should do to become a good man; he answered, he should be the man he
promised to be, when last sick of the Gout.

10. Keep no long Reckonings, but let Conscience bring you in the accounts
every day before you sleep. Keep a Day book in your own hearts, speedily make
up any controversies that may fall out between God and your Souls, 'twil be sad
to find old things to reckon for, when you come to dye: you cannot imagine the
torment that one sin unrepented of, or unhumbled for, may cost you; study to
keep all clear, and even daily within: This made dying Oecolampadias clap his
hand upon his Breast, saying, hic sat est Lucis, it is all light within; daily
selfexamination will make you to live holily, and dye comfortably; but if you
let things run long, you will be all at a loss.

11. Set your houses in order that you may not have your estates in the world
to settle, when God requires your Souls: Make your wills in your health and
vigor, and therein be sure so to settle your estates, as that God and good
uses be not shut out, nor forgotten. Wretched men that have so many hundreds to
settle upon their Children, can scarce find in their hearts to settle one in
the hundred upon Gods special Service.

12. Look often into your Coffins, and behold your bones and dust, as shortly
others shall, when turned out of your Graves: Be not strangers to the thoughts
of death; expect it, wait all the days of your appointed time when your change
shall come; familiarize the thoughts of Death to your selves, that you may be
always safe, you must never be secure; you must pray, and set a watch, and be
always upon your guard; walk every day some serious turns with Death, let it
never come unlooked for; God forbid Death should come upon you, and you say, I
did not think of it: You must daily think of it, and look for it. How holy and
happy a man was he, that could say, I have not known what to morrow meant this
twenty years? Consider your latter end, learn to number your days: God does
number them, why should not you? if the man of the house had known what hour of
the night the Thief would have come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his House to be broken up; but it is too late to think of it, when the
House is risled: Be not of them that put far off the evil day; he that
remembers not his end, remembers nothing as he should: It is the remembrance of
Death puts life into our Prayers, into our Graces, and all our motions. He that
puts off the thoughts of Death, gives his enemy unspeakable advantages: Death
comes upon the sleeping and secure sinner, as Jael upon Sisera, and strikes the
fatal nail through his temples, and fastens him to the earth: or as David upon
the Amalckites, when he and his mighty men came upon them, chafed in their
minds, as a Bear robbed of her Whelps, when they found them spread abroad upon
the earth, eating, drinking, dancing, and smote them from the twilight to the
evening of the day.

13. Above all speed to the City of refuge.

First, Get into it, close soundly with Jesus Christ. O dreadful work that
Death makes with those, that are not found in him; it tears the body and soul
asunder, it drags the soul to Hell, and locks up the dust in Prison, till the
terrible Judgment, it puts an eternal end to all comforts, and enters the
sinner upon unchangeable misery, and delivers over the Prisoners to the
tormentors; but if you give up your selves entirely, beforehand, and accept
Christ by believing, on his own terms; this will secure you in him, then the
danger of this is over. Look to this, whatsoever you neglect, once in Christ,
and you have the victory; you may send a challenge to Death, and with Paul
triumph before the Battle, and make the Bonfires, and ring out the Bells, as
sure of the conquest, and go with shouts of joy, and palms of victory, and
garments of salvation to encounter with, or rather to make spoil upon your
already conquered enemy. 2. Keep you in it, when you have received Christ Jesus
the Lord, you must walk in him; wander from him, and you betray your safety; O
look to it that death find you not venturing out of your refuge, by loose
walking. God bespeaks you here as Solomon did Shimei, 1 Kings 2. 36, 37. And
the King sent for Shimei, and said unto him, build thee an house in Jerusalem,
and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither, for on the day thou go
out thou shall know for certain thou shall surely dye.
14. Lay in a stock of promises now in time against the assaults of Death; that
come when it will, thou may have a Cordial ready, and be provided with an
Antidote. Delight thy soul in meditating on the 6th of John, and 1 Cor. Chap.
15. and the fifth Chapter of the second Epistle of the Corinthians.

15. My last, but not my least advice is, that you suffer not the state of your
immortal souls to lie any longer at uncertainties. Put to it with all your
might for assurance, try an hundred times, and make diligent search into the
state of your hearts. What blessed helps have you in Mr. Baxter's Works, Mr.
Richard Alleines, and others, to put all out of doubt? there you have sure
marks, ply your hearts with them, be diligent observers of the workings of your
souls; lie at God's door night and day, and put your selves on Gods trial; if
all this will not do it, apply your selves to some faithful and experienced
Minister, and above all close with Christ anew, solemnly engage your selves in
Covenant with him, according to the Directions in Mr. Richard Alleine's Book
Vindication of Godliness, to this purpose; how can you live one day, or dye
without some evidence that it shall be well with you for ever? Ah the woeful
case that the poor trembling Soul must needs be in, when it thrusts out into
the Ocean of Eternity, not knowing whither it is going, whether it shall be
landed in the Region on of eternal darkness, or the Land of light, when it must
go forth it knows not whether into the Arms of Angels, or the teeth and talons
of cursed Fiends and Harpies; my soul has often relented at the thoughts of
that pathetick moan of dying Adrian, who thus bespeaks his anxious soul, when
ready to be delivered up (I cannot but spoil it by Englishing it) ah my poor,
little, trembling, wandering Soul, whether art thou going, into I know not what
rough and horrid places? and it is a heart piercing complaint of poor
Beringarius, who was one of the first lights in the time of the thickest
AntiChristian darkness; who having often dallyed with Conscience, recanting
over and over to avoid Death (though he did afterward still return to the
Preaching, Pro^ssion, and Practice of the truth, has bemoaned himself on his
death bed: Now I am going to appear before my Judge, not knowing whether I
shall be saved, as I hope; or damned, as I fear. Brethren, if you would not be
surprised by Death, with these uncertainties put all out of question now,
without delay in your health and strength.

PSALM. 4. 4. Commune with your own heart upon your Bed.
Doct THat it is the great duty of every man, to be often conferring with, and
taking an account of his own heart, 2 Cor. 13. 5, Examine your selves, prove
your selves; know you not your own selves? It is the duty of a man not to take
the Report of his heart, but he must search his heart, he must be often putting
questions to his heart. The heart cannot be easily found out. The Reasons of
the point are these two.

First, Reas. 1. Is taken from the dissiculty of coming to know our own hearts.
Therefore it is a necessary duty, because it is so hard to know our own hearts.
Now this appears,

First, Because men are so generally mistaken in their own hearts: and that
both bad men, and good men. Bad men, how osten do they boast of their good
hearts? And though our Savior tells us that out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, etc. yet all this while they think their hearts are good, they see
nothing of these things in their hearts.

When Hazael heard of his heart, he w^ dred that he should have such a heart.
(...) would not believe that there was such (...) nature in his heart. He
thought it w^ (...) Dogs, and Tigers to do this: and yet a^ wards he did all
this. And so for Good m^; how did Peter fail in this, that he would (...) for
him? And Christ could scarce put him out of this conceit. And it is like that
he did intend what he spoke, yea, he did try sarther than the rest did, sor he
only did draw his sword. And who would have thought that there was that
swearing, and cursing in his heart as there was? And so of David's Adultery, 2 Samuel 12.

Secondly, It appears in that it has cos^ men so dear to know their h^ts. (1)
It has cost them sharp trials. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. God led thee these forty years in
the Wilderness, to know what was in thine heart. That is, to make you to know,
One would have thought that they had never been guilty of such horrid unbelief
to distrust God, when they did feed upon, and weared miracles. (2) It has cost
them many sad falls to know them. 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. Hezekiah nor no body else
would have thought that there could have been that in his heart, after God had
wrought a miracle for him; And yet God left him that he might try what was in
his heart. Brethren take heed that you be not too sure of your own hearts, be
often fearful of your own hearts. (3) It has cost them many tears and Prayers
to know them. Though some of God^ people have been Students of their own hearts
twenty or forty years, yet after all this, they do find, sometimes, their
hearts be too hard for them.

Thirdly, The difficulty of this appears, Because the Saints have called in the
special help of God, without which they could not come to know it. So did David
Psalm. 139. 23. Search me O God, etc. Our own hearts are too hard for us unless
we take God' s special assistance with us. Our hearts will deal with us,
without this, as a bad neighbor will do when we come to search for our Goods,
they will not let you in, except you come with the Kings Officer. Now the
difficulty of this lies (1) In that the heart of man is so deep, Eccl. 7. 24.
That which is exceeding deep who can find it out? Now so is the heart of man;
for so Psalm. 64. 6. And the heart is deep. The heart of man is deep as earth,
yea, as Hell. ^m. 3. that is, the hell that is in the heart. ^2) The heart is
very dark. Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, etc. There ^ou have
two parts of the misery of man in his natural estate. 1. He is a stranger to
God; 2. To Himself. He cannot see a jot into his own heart, till the Lord do
spring into the soul with a new light; as he did into the Prison, they cannot
see what there is in the heart. And we need not any further evidence for this,
than that common good opinion that men have of their hearts. Though their
hearts are full of odious poison, and the like, yet they cannot see it till God
open their eyes by conversion; and then they can see it: But yet it is but
candlelight that the best of us have here of our hearts. (3.) Because the
heart is very deceitful, above all things. There have been great deceits in
the world; yet put all together, none in the world is so cunning as the heart,
there is no comparison. You would think if a man were told beforehand, there
is a known Cheater come to deal with him therefore he should take heed of
dealing wit^ him, such a man would think sure that h^ should not be too hard
for him; but yet the Saints have known this, that the heart is so de ceitful;
and they have been twenty or fort^ years learning it; yet their hearts are too
har^ for them.

Reas. 2. Secondly, Because the knowledge of the heart is so exceeding
necessary. If a man turn over all the Books in the world, and b^ not learned in
his own heart, it is nothing.

Use. The use is to stir us up to know o^ own ^rts. I beseech you what ever you
n^ lect, neglect not this duty.

Now there be sundry ways of Communing with our own hearts. Sometimes by way of
Consolation. Return to thy Rest O my Soul, etc. Psalm. 116. 7. Sometimes by way
of expostulation. Why art thou cast down O my soul, etc. Ps. 42. Sometimes by
way of Exhortation, to quicken and excite our hearts. Psalm. 62. 5. My soul wait
thou only upon God. Here he stirs up his heart in believing in God. So awake,
up my Glory. that is, my heart or soul. The soul of man, that is his honor,
Genesis 49. 6. And see how David does exhort his soul: up my heart, my Glory. He
found his heart, it may be, somewhat dead and dull, and therefore he stirs it
up, sometimes by way of Instruction, Psalm. 16. 2. 7.

But sometimes by way of Examination and Inquiry, that is the principal on
which all the rest do depend, and therefore I intend to insist on that; and I
beseech you to stir up your selves to this duty. My Brethren, you should be
often questioning with your own hearts; It is sad to think how Papists, yea
Pagans do outpass us in this, and what a shame is it that we should be such
strangers to this duty? After we have been told of it, and have confessed that
it is a duty!

Now you must know there is a double Communication. Ordinary, and
Extraordinary. Ordinary, and that is either Transient, or more solemn. The
first we should be in continually, every hour in the day. The want of this is
the reason that we are such strangers to our own hearts, Christian, Remember
this and step in often into thy own heart and thoughts, the heart of man is
always talking to it self; and you should often step in and see what it is that
they are talking of, see if they are well employed; and if they be not, set
them a Task, especially before, in, and after duties; especially after duties
to search what evil we have committed in the duty, or else we shall not find
matter for examination of our hearts in the evening; we should take notes of
our hearts all the day, and read them over in the evening. And then besides
this, there must be a solemn Examination. And here I should beseech you
Christians, every evening to spend some time for this work; a quarter, or half
an hour. I speak of the Evening because the Scripture speaks so much of this
time; and the practice of good men have been in this time: A very Heathen could
do this, and you shall find this was David's practice. Psalm. 16. 7. My Reins
instruct me in the Night-season. Well then, I would advise thee Christian, to
take this advice.

Every Evening before you sleep, set some time apart, more or less, from the
world, and set thy heart as in the presence of God, and charge it before God,
to answer to these interrogatories.

First. With reference to your Duties.

First. Did not God find me on my bed when he looked for me on my knees? This
question might be a shaming question, and I cannot without indignation speak of
this, that many (...) us should be so willing to please our selves (...) a
little case, when we should enjoy those pleasant hours with God! How do you
think that God will take this at your hands? there be many persons that do
spend many hours in their beds, that they might enjoy Communion with God in,
and then they are fain to (...) up their duties in a co^ner, I beseech you that
this may be left off. It may be, many of you have not so much to do in the
world as others, they have not the business that others have, and therefore
they need not rise so soon, but lie longer than others. Ah Christian! do not
make that use of it, thou have no more time for sloth than others. I tell thee
from God, he has not given thee any time to be idle in. I am afraid that many
of you do not know what it is to sleep by Rule If thou do not, this is a
shame to thee, a Christian should do nothing but by Rule. It may be some will
say, what Rule must we use? Ans. We must have respect to our Bodies, what may
be for one man, may not be for another; but for healthy bodies six or seven
h^urs is enough in conscience; let every man give his body no more than his
body will require. And remember this general Rule, to be sure that you do use
some Self-denial about your sleep: That general Rule should be observed, though
the particular Rule cannot be given. That excellent servant of God, Mr. Jordan,
that kept assurance of Gods love thirty years, did up at three or four a clock
every morning, and if he did not, he did bewail it; O that it were thus with
you!

Secondly. Have I not prayed to no purpose, or let Roving thoughts eat out my
Duty? Take an account every Evening what you have gained by that days Prayers,
if we did so, this would be brave; then we should grow apace. But this is our
great loss, that we content our selves with the duty done, and do not look to
the manner of performance, or the doing of the Duty; therefore if thou would
gain by thy duties, see HOW as well as WHAT thou did pray. How did I pray!
was my heart lively or dull? Let it not be enough that your hearts do acquit
you in this, that you have not neglected duty, but whether you have not been
slack in the duty. And because vain thoughts are our great enemies here, look
that these do not eat up thy Sacrifice; we have been often complaining of
these, but we are not eased of them: And what is the reason? because we do not
take our hearts to Task about it, for our vain thoughts in duty every day; if
we did but ask our hearts this every Evening, our hearts would be ashamed to be
found guilty every day.

Thirdly. Have I not neglected, or been very overly in the Reading of Gods holy
Word? I am afraid that many of us do neglect this duty, does not there pass
over our heads many a day wherein we Read not a Chapter? And yet I fear more of
the manner how you Read. Did you begin with Prayer, and observe what promises,
or Commands, or Threatenings, or Examples were there for you to Imitate, or to
fear and avoid? And did you turn it into Prayer afterward? That I would advise
you to, to turn some of the Chapter into prayer afterward. O that we should
slight the word, that the Saints of God have set such a price upon! The word!
why it is the word of God, and when we see the hand of God to it, this should
affect us.

Fourthly. Have I digested the Sermon I heard last? Have I prayed it over, and
Repeated it over? Brethren, would you know why we are such Dwarfs in
Christianity, why we grow so little? Here is one grand Reason, we take in much
and digest but little; it may be thou art greedy of taking opportunities, there
cannot be a Sermon but thou must be at it, or else it is not well; but do
thou Pray it over, and Repeat it over again? The want of this is the reason
that we grow no better, therefore content not thy self that thou have heard
such a Sermon; it is never well till God hear of it, in Confession, Prayer, and
praise for such mercies as were discovered to thee. This is the way to thrive,
and you will never Thrive till you come to this. The Reason why there have been
so much sowing and so little fruit, is because the seed has not been covered
by Meditation, and watered by prayer, the Devil or evil thoughts come and steal
away the seed.

Fifthly, Was there not more of custom and Fashion in my Family Duties, than
of Conscience? Brethren, if my observation fail not, Christians are more apt to
be formal in these Duties than in others. Now this should be a cause of shame
to us, this is a very great evil, we are very formal in such duties as do come
ordinarily, especially if we are not the Speaker, but do join with others:
whereas, if thou did but make this use of it, thankfully to prize, and gladly
improve such opportunities, thou would thrive more abundanly. Say with thy
self, now I have an opportunity to worship God in the Family. You that are
Heads of Families it is a great mercy that you have, that you can lead your
Families into the presence of God: and you that are members of the Family, have
a great mercy that you live in a Family where you can come twice a day, at
least, to God beyond many others, and do you labor to improve it.

Sixthly, Wherein have I denied my self to day for God? Brethren, you have not
lived like Christians this day, if so be you have not used some self-denial to
day; If thou have not denied thy flesh, but have given it so much case as it
would have: and thy Appetite, but have let it have so much as it would, and thy
tongue, but let it go out whither it would; thou have not lived as a Christian.

Seventhly. Have I redeemed my time from too long and needless visits, Idle
imaginations fruitless Discourses, unnnecessary Sleep, morethan needs of the
world? It is a duty incum bent upon every Christian to redeem his time, this
has sat heavy upon the best of Gods servants, that they have no more redeemed
time; now if you would redeem your time, there be these time-Robbers and
devourers that must be watched.

First. Too long and needless visits. Many men are so LONG in their visits,
that they loose much time of their own, and others too; whom they go to visit.
Ask thy heart have not I been too long in such a visit, and so steal away
others time as well as my own? And so for NEEDLESS visits, when there is no
need; be sparing and short in your visits or else you will loose your time, and
make others to loose their time also.

Secondly. Idle imaginations. These steal away our time, and we think not of
it; If this were looked to how might we grow in grace? When a man is on his
Journey, how might he have good thoughts, whereas our hearts are talking of
vanity; and so in our Shops.

Thirdly. Fruitless Discourse. Ask thy heart whether thou have not failed in
this duty? what a shame is this that many Christians do come together and
scarce any thing of God in their mouths while they be together!

Fourthly. Unnecessary Sleep. There is much evil in this, when persons do take
up so much time in their sleep, that there is scarce time left for Religious
Duties.

Fifthly. More than needs of the World. Men must be very watchful of this or
else the world will Rob them of their time, if a man will not use some
self-denial about his worldly occasions, but serve God no more than the world
will give him leave, he shall serve God but little.

Eighthly. Have I done any thing more than ordinary, for the Church of God, in
a time extraordinary? Brethren, we shall never be able to stand before our own
Consciences in the evil day, if our hearts cannot acquit us in this, that we
have put our selves to it more than ordinary for the Church of God. You know
the troubles of the Church at this day, and we should every one of us run with
his Bucket, and put out this fire. God is crying to us, as Moses to Aaron, Number.
16. 46. Take a Censer -- and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an
atonement for them; for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the Plague is
begun. O let us run for the Tokens of his displeasure are in the land! (...)
your tears that must quench these flames that the Bush, the Church is burning
in. How is it that we do not weep over the Church? we sit here at ease through
Gods blessing, but how is it with the Church of God abroad in the land? How far
are our hearts from the temper of Gods worthies heretofore? It was said of One,
that when there was any ^ad news, concerning the Church, they were fain to
conceal it from her, least her heart should be overwhelmed with the news of it.

If we had some certain news that our Estates were at undoing, how would we
break our sleep? and yet how is it that we are so careless of the Church of
God! How is it that others are so wounded and sick, and ready to die with
grief, and yet we take so little notice of it? It was the saying of One to me,
I wonder how any can laugh ( said she) when Gods Church is in such distress. I
beseech you take some more time with God than you were wont to heretofore, for
the Church of God. What if thou did pray twice a day heretofore, and now thou
do pray three times a day, once a day the more though but a quarter of an
hour. to seek to God for the Church, and sometimes a whole day; it will come in
upon thy account, when the troubles come upon the Church, that thou did
labor with thy Bucket, if it were possible, to put out the fire.

Ninthly. Have I took care of my Company? Many times many of us are very great
Loosers by this, by vain company; to be sure if they do us no other harm, they
Rob us of our Time, and that is no small hurt; and therefore fly from their
Company as from a Plague-fore. Or if sometimes thy Calling do call thee to
them, yet do not go among them, before thou have Prayed to be delivered from
the evil of their Company.

Tenthly. Have not I neglected some Relative Duty to day, as of Husband, Wife,
Pa rent, Child, Master, Servant.

Secondly, for your sins.

First. Does not Sin sit light? This is (...) cause of no small mischief to our
souls, this is the cause why Christ is no more (...), and the promises no more
sweet; (...) sits so light: why we can hear the (...) a common lovely thing,
and be but (...) fected with it? If thou could but (...) a (...) sense of sin
upon thy spirit, this would be a speedy course of preventing sin; this is a
cutting down of a great limb of sin. When a man cuts down a Limb of the Tree, a
great deal of brush will come down with it; and so if thou do but cut down
this Limb, let sin sit heavy, down comes self, and pride, and many sins will
come down with it. How is it that Paul could say, O wretched man that I am etc.
and we are no more distressed with the sense of sin?

Secondly. Am I a Mourner for the sins of the Land? My Brethren, we have great
reason, I doubt, to check our selves sharply here, that when God has made it
so plainly a duty to us, and yet we are so little affected with the sins of the
Land, when God does set a mark upon them (only) for preservation, that Cry for
all the abominations that are done in the midst of the Land; yet we remain
insensible! Can our hearts acquit us now in this thing? O let us never leave
our hearts, but be checking of them for this. If thy name were but wounded, it
would break thy heart almost; and yet how is it that we can hear of Gods name
to be dishonored and yet not break for it! Can our hearts witness for us that
we do never hear of the blasphemy that is in the land, and of the Superstition
and Idolatry of the land, but God does hear of it again by us, before we sleep,
by Prayer? This should be for a lamentation to us, that the wounds that are
given to God are no more upon our hearts. We may say of the glory of God as
they of David. 2 Samuel 18. 3. It Is worth ten thousand of us. Our estates, and
names, and all that is dear to us, yea, our very souls are not so much worth as
the honor of God. And how is it then that we can see God dishonored, and we
cannot mourn sor it? Gods glory is his Crown that is upon his head; and shall
we see his Crown trodden, down in the dirt and not be affected with it? we are
far from the disposition of Gods Saints and servants heretofore. When Moses saw
the Idolatry of the people, he was so zealous, that he overturned the Tables
that God wrote with his own finger. And Ezra when the people had taken strange
wives he sat down and (...) his clothes. Ezr. 9. Brethren how may we blush to
hear and read this, and to think how far our hearts are from this frame! It may
be you do think it enough that you did cry out upon it when you hear^ the
Blasphemy, so that you are free from (...) your selves, but this is your sin,
if you do no^ mourn over it. (1 Cor. 5. 2. 7. No doubt the godly Corinthians
did detest this sin, but the Apostle tells them that is not enough, while they
did not mourn over it:) When wic^ness does reign, as if it were the time of
(...) Devils incarnation; as if Hell it self were ^ken loose upon us to Act its
part (...) ground, and we not mourning ov^r it

Thirdly. Do not I live in (...) that I know or fear to be a Sin? If I do thus,
there is no peace with God or Con^ to be h^ sor you. Psalm. 66. 18. If I (...)
in my heart, God will not hear my Prayers. It is a sign that God does not
regard thee, if thou art one that do live in the practice or allowance of any
sin; and he will not own thee for this. Romans 6. 16. If thou do yield up thy
self to any sin willingly, that is a manifest sign that thou art none of Gods.

Thirdly, For your hearts. Ask several questions.

First. Have I been much in holy ejaculation? Thus we ought to Pray
continually; not only at our set and solemn times, but upon all occasions, to
step aside and speak a word or two with God; in our Journeys, and Occupations,
this is walking with God indeed; when we do not only take a turn or two with
him in the morning, and so in the evening, but all the day long. It is said of
Mr. Dod, that he never got up his Horse, but he prayed before he came off. Thus
did Nehemiah, while the King was talking with him, he was praying to God.
Nehem. 2. 4. So I prayed to the God of Heaven, this was a Heavenly ejaculation;
this would keep your hearts a praying all the day long. When the hearts of men
do naturally bend to God, as the sparks fly upward this is a good thing indeed;
when we cannot go by the door, but we must step in and have a turn with God;
you will take it as a great kindness for a man not only to come on set times
to visit you, but when he comes in every time he comes by the door to see you;
And when thy heart is thus wont to turn into God, this will be an (...) to thee
that thy heart is used to converse with God.

Secondly. Has not God been out of mind, Heaven out of sight? put that
question to thy heart. My Brethren, this is our great sin, and should be our
great shame, that the thoughts of God are such strangers to our souls; that we
are so little in heaven in the day, as we are. O what a loser is God by this in
his glory! what losers are we by this in our graces and comforts! O were our
hearts on all occasions thus thinking of God how holy a frame should we quickly
grow into? Why should not our hearts be as much with God, as the hearts of the
Worldlings be with the Creature? Does not God deserve it as much as the
Creature? His heart is always talking with the World: If he come to hear, his
heart is talking with the world. If he come to pray, his heart is always with
the World. Why should not our hearts be talking with God while our hands are
employed about this world? It was a Heavenly breathing of a gracious spirit, a
confounding passage, that I met with; Lord as formerly I lived without thee in
the world, so now let me (...) without the world in thee. If we did but love
God as well as a worldly man does love his wealth and riches, we should be so
taken up with the love of God as quite to forget the world. For the world makes
them forget God, that he is not always in their thoughts. Yea, says he, we
should be taken up always with God.

My Brethren, what shall we say for this! How shall we excuse this, that we
should be so unmindfull of God, while the Worldling is so mindful of the world?
O what a shame is this! For shame, be ashamed at your selves before we go away
hence. I profess Christians, I have wondered (...) God will throw away his
kingdom upon some that do care so little for it as we do. O shame thy self out
of this evil frame! Brethren, why do not we carry it toward the world, as the
world does toward us? The world does carry it toward us as (...); and we know
not what it will do to us. Why should not we carry it more strangely toward
it? O never leave, till the thoughts of Heaven be thy natural thoughts, O check
thy heart ronndly in the Evening for this sin, if (...) find thy heart faulty
here; and never leave till thou ha^ brought it into a right frame.

Thirdly. Have I been often looking into my (...), and made conscience even of
vian thoughts? you know your Rule, Keep thy heart with all (...), (...) of it
are the Issues of life. Now have thou been keeping thy heart with all
diligence? Brethren, you may be sure your work will go but badly on, unless you
look to your hearts, and keep your hearts. Examine then in the Evening, how
has my heart been employed to day, has it not been a thorow-fare of vain
thoughts? of evil imaginations? I fear that many of us do make little con^ of
this. It may be thou do make conscience of vain thoughts in duty: but I fear
that few (...) do make conscience of vain thoughts at other times. Ah Brethren,
you (...) not known what it is to live the life of Christianity, if you do not
look to this. This must be mended. Brethren, what a blessed thing would this
be, if we had but once attained this frame! If our hearts did but naturally run
in a hollow Channel? This is attainable, and many of the Christians have
attained to it. And if it be attainable, (...) we should never be quiet till we
have attained it. Why, Christian, take this Rule, force thy heart a while to
it; keep thy heart for a while in this Tract, set it some holy Subject, some
good Task, and make it to ply its work; and when thou have got to this, then by
degrees it will be sweet to thee. It is not enough to say, what hurt is there
in such vain thoughts? It is enough that there is no good in them, that there
is no profit in them; yea, there is a great deal of hurt in letting thy
thoughts to run abroad. My Brethren, you do, I believe, every one of you that
are Christians indeed, complain of the burden of your vain thoughts. I
believe, that this is the greatest trouble of many Christians here, for the
vanity of their thoughts in holy duties. And what is the reason of this?
Because they do let out their hearts at other times; this is the reason that we
have no more command of our hearts in holy duties, because we do not keep them
in at other times. God complains of Jerusalem, Jer. 4. 14. (and may he not
complain so of us?) O Jerusalem, how long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee? Have not we, many of us, been complaining these seven or twice seven
years of vain thoughts, and yet they are lodging in us? And if you take this
course with your hearts, you will find more benefit in it, than ever you did in
any thing that you have tried hitherto.

But I know what the flesh will say here, what to be always taken up with holy
things? this will be an intolerable burden. O but do not hearken to the evil
report, that the flesh will bring upon the ways of God. Indeed I confess it
will bring some dissiculty, yet I trust, you will be willing to be at some pain
for so great a good as this is, but after a little while you will find it
easy. There is nothing that is easy to a Learner, but if it be a Trade or
such a Tongue (...) a little while that he is used to it, it is his d^light.
And so will this be the sweetest thing in the world to thee, if thou do but
keep thy heart to it a while. And therefore never leave watching and praying,
till thou have got thy heart into this frame.

Fourthly. Have not I given way to the working of pride or passion to day? My
Brethren, the Spirit of God is a holy Dove that will not rest in an unquiet and
froward heart. It was a passage os a very Holy man, Whatsoever you do, take
(...) of passion. 2 King. 3. 15. Elijah was sain to call for a Minstrel before
he could allay his passion; I beseech you to watch your hearts when there is a
temptation to pride, and a provocation to passion before you, or else you will
grieve the good spirit of God, and make him to withdraw himself from you. It is
a saying of Mr. Baxter, when there is a temptation to pride before me, I am
fain to watch my heart as narrowly as I would do the Thatch of my house, when
fire is put to it; and presently to throw on it the water of ^testation,
Resolution, and recourse to God. And so must you do if ever you mean to attain
to a heavenly heart. I remember it is written in the Life of a Holy man, that
he did fear and tremble more when he did hear his commendation, than when it
never so dreadfully thundered; and this frame should be in thee. O fear
temptations to pride, I beseech you tak^ heed of pride, that your hearts do not
grow haughty. If you do not take good heed, you are like to fall, That Servant
is never like to do much for God that is puffed up with pride, If thou have got
down thy self, and trod upon the neck of pride, then thou art become a great
Victor indeed. This is the reason why God does not employ us in his service
more, because he sees that there is such an evil heart in (...), that we would
make his mercies fuel for our pride and Lust. Let it be your daily practice to
get the victory over this enemy, the pride of your heart. It was a very
exemplary pattern that is set before us in that holy man; Says he, concerning
himself, Methinks I am broken all in pieces before God when I speak to him, as
when I tread upon an Egg and trample it all to pieces. It was a passage in one
of his Letters writing to comfort another, I pray God make use of me a poor
Rush, to do you some good. Let us lay this pattern before us. But more
especially, look to our holy and humble Jesus; and you shall find rest to your
souls. Follow your pride and passion thus with observation and detestation
every day, and this will weary it out at last.

Fourthly, For your tongues. Ask these questions.

First, Have I bridled my tongue, and forced it in? This is a very necessary
question that must be enquired into. I tell thee if thou have no measure to
bridle thy tongue, thou art no Christian. Jam. 1. 26. On the other side if thou
have once got this skill to govern thy tongue, thou art a grown Christian, Jam.
3. 2. He that can govern his tongue, has attained to some good growth and good
perfection in grace. Ah Brethren, you had need to set up David's resolution
daily, Psalm. 39. 1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with
my tongue, Psalm. 17. 3. I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. And
distrusting his own strength you may see how he runs to God for strength, Psalm.
14. 1. 3. Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: keep the door of my lips.

Secondly, Have I spoke evil of no man? This is an express charge of the
Apostle, Tit. 3. 1, 2. Put them in mind to speak evil of no man. And the
Apostle Peter charge us that if we will grow in grace, to put away the evil
of evil speaking. This is a great and universal sin among us; that we are apt
to speak evil of others. When we do hear of any thing that is evil in any one,
how do we speak of it to our friends? See that you have good ends and a lawful
call to tell, before you tell of another evil. Brethren, this cannot be
sussiciently bewailed, that there should be so great an evil among us, that we
should be so backward to speak of our brothers evil to himself, and so prone to
publish it to those that we should not.

Thirdly, Has the law of God been in my mouth, as I sat in my house, went by
the way, lying down, rising up? How great is the charge of God given us! And
how great is our negligence in this work! Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thou (...) teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou (...) up. Christian can thy heart acquit thee here now? Can thy family
acquit thee; that this is thy work when thou art sitting by the fire with them?
Can thy yoke fellow witness for thee, that the word of God is in thy mouth when
thou lie down, and risest up? Can thy fellow-traveller say that these are thy
talks when tho^ walk? Deuteronomy. 11. 8. What benefit would this be to others, if
thou did but do this? When will thou come to the full resolution of them?
Well, set this resolution with thy self, that thou will not let thy Conscience
alone till thou do come to this.

Fourthly, Have I come into no Company but I have dropped something of God
there, and left some good savor behind? O what a shame is it that Christians
should be so unlike themselves! that when they come into company, it cannot be
seen who is the Christian, and who is not! O how should we be ashamed of this,
that we should be ashamed of our God! O That thou would make conscience of
this, not to come unto any company, but to drop something of God there.

Fifthly, For your Tables.

First, Did not I sit down with no higher end than a beast, merely to please my
appetite? Did I eat, and drink for the glory of God? you cannot know what it is
to be a Christian, till you come to do all things by Rule. Make conscience of
this, to set your ends right when you sit down to your Tables.

Is it not a shame, that a Christian, should sit down with no higher end than a
beast to his meat? Beasts do eat and drink to satisfy their hunger. Remember
that thou sit down with an eye upon God. This will make thy table to be
sanctified to thee.

Secondly, Did I not rise from my table without dropping something of God
there? Christian, how often do thou contradict the example of thy Savior? You
shall find his discourse when he sat at the table still that he was always
speaking of God. And is it not a shame that thou should st imitate thy Savior
no better?

Thirdly, Was not my appetite too hard for me? Brethren, I doubt many of us are
little skilled in the duty of temperance. It may be many of us do think, we may
eat as long as it is pleasing to our appetites. This is a great, though I fear
a common evil: that as Juae says they feast without fear. Here, observe this
general rule, never to sit down to your tables but to use some Self-denia. And
for an exact rule; we cannot give an exact rule to every one; but this, for
healthy bodies to eat so at one meal, that we may be hungry at the next I am
verily afraid that this sin of gluttony is a very common sin: Therefore
Christian set a special watch upon thy appetite.

There are two sorts of intemperance that we should beware of; either with
respect to the Quantity, or to the Quallity of what we eat. We offend in the
first when we eat more than we can digest. In the other, when a man gives
himself to eat that which the Physician tells him is not fit for him. And what a
shame is this that neither reason nor grace, should keep a person from breaking
out into intemperance.

Fourthly, Did I not mock with God when I pretended to crave a blessing and
return thanks? If I may judge by my own experience, I think that we are more
formal in this than in any other thing. Well let this be amended by us, It is a
sad thing that we should mock God when we pretend to serve him.

Sixthly, For your callings. Four questions here.

First, Have I been diligent in the duties of my Calling?

Secondly, Have I defrauded no man? Have I observed that golden rule of justice
in my dealings this day, that I have done no otherwise to any man than I would
be done unto? When I have considered it, I find that there is more of
Christianity in our moral duties than we are aware of. This is not to be a
Christian, to be so only in prayer, and hearing, etc. but to be a Christian in
your Shops, and fields, etc. If thou art no second table-man thou art no
Christian. Remember that, this is to be a reproach to Religion.

Thirdly, Have I dropped never a lie in my shop or trade? You that have
dealings in the world you had need to look to this every hour. I beseech you
Christians look to this: this is a fearful sin, and it is a sign that there is
nothing of Christianity in thee if this prevail. Therefore set a guard upon thy
mouth; and beg of God to keep thy mouth, that there may nothing but truth come
from it. And in the evening examine how thou have kept thy charge in this
respect.

Fourthly, Did not I rashly make or safly break some promise? There is a great
and reigning evil in this respect among those that trade in the world. Be very
wary and very sparing in making a promise; and when thou have made it, be sure
to perform it. I wonder how you can read that Scripture, Psalm. 15. Of those
that shall enter into the holy hill of the Lord, That he swears to his own
hurt and performs it.

And thus I have given you materials for the examining of your own hearts. Now
my further business to you is to know how you resolve to perform this? will you
not content your selves with the approving of these rules only? But will you
set it forth in practice? I beseech you do not (...) in ba^e resolution and
intention, but resolve that never a day shall pass before these things be done
by you.

To stir you up hereunto let me give you these three motives.

First, Consider, that there will be no such means in the world for you to get
a sound and through conquest over your corruptions. You have been striving a
great while with your corruptions: some with vain thoughts, some with pride,
some with passion, and it may be you have got but little victory: And what is
the reason? Because you have not followed it with constancy. If thou did but
take thy heart to task every day about it thou would surely get the victory
over it. As a holy man much experienced in this did use that comparison: Thou
must watch thy corruptions (says he) as a cat does her prey; either it must
keep in, or else she has it. If thou did thus, thou would quickly find the
theif, and so would bring it to the bar before hand, and have execution done
upon it. We must be daily in the pursuit of our corruptions, we must never give
it over, not in one prayer or one day, and then we are like to get the victory
over it.

Secondly, Consider this is a ready way to Assurance, Brethren, the great
reason why Christians are without assurance, is for want of self-examination:
for want of pain and diligence in observing their own heart. But now if you set
upon this duty you will be skilled in your own hearts. I doubt this work of
self-examination is seldom done by many Christians, except it be upon some
special occasion.

Thirdly, Consider hereby you shall come to a through acquaintance with your own
hearts, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove your selves, and then follows, know you your
selves? he that proves himself often, shall know himself at length.

DEUTERONOMY 32. 46. And he said unto them, set your hearts unto all the words
which I testisie among you this day.
THe words foregoing my Text are called the Song of Moses, what is storied of
the Swan is made good in the Saints; they sing sweetest when they are about to
die. It is said of Christ, that never man spoke like to him, and he never spoke
more like himself than a little before his passion. What tender words, what
yearning, melting bowels, what endearedness of affection does he express to his
poor sorrowful Disciples in the 15, 16, 17. Chapters of John? There is (says
One of the Ancients) more worth in these three Chapters than in all the Books
in the world. Moses, that famous servant of God, Isreal's guide, Prophet,
Governor, Father, Husband, being about to take his leave of that perverse,
stiff-necked people, begins to sing of Mercy and Judgment. And he sings sweetly
in the ears of God, but dolefully, I doubt in the ears of Israel. Having ended
his Song, he does enforce both it and the Counsels given in the foregoing
Chapter with this vehement exhortation in the words of my Text. Set your hearts
etc.

By [ All these words] we are to understand not only the mercies and judgments
spoken of in this Chapter, but the precepts laid down in the foregoing Chapter,
and therefore he adds in the next words after my text, [ which you shall
command your Children to observe to do, all the words of this law,] I shall not
stand any longer upon the words but presently give you this Doctrine.

Doct. That when God hath-discovered any duty to his people, he looks that they
should set their hearts to it.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine I shall speak to these three things.
(First) show you what it is to set your heart to any duty, and shall speak
particularly to that duty that God has lately laid open to us, from those
words. Commune with your own hearts. (Secondly,) I shall propound some motives
to stir up those to it that have not yet begun, and to stir up those that have
begun to go on in it. (Thirdly,) I shall prescribe some directions for the
conscionable, constant, easy performance of the duty.

First, What it is to set the heart to any duty. This carries in it. First,
Remembrance. Secondly, Serious consideration. Thirdly, Resolution. Fourthly,
Love. Fifthly, Life. Sixthly, Labor. Seventhly, Care. Eighthly, Constancy.

First, Remembrance, or a minding of our duty. Heb. 2. 1. Give the more earnest
heed to the things that you have heard, lest at any time you let them slip. The
memory of man is a leaking vessel, apt to let out as fast as God poures in. It
is like a grate in the watercourse; still the trash does stick by us; but the
pure water, the things of God and of another world are soon out and gone.
Beloved, it is very strange, and yet very true, those things that we are most
affected with, which are most fresh in our minds, that our thoughts do most
naturally run upon, in a few weeks or months, the savor of them dye, and the
things are buried in oblivion: and perhaps scarce ever come to mind again.
Concerning this excellent course that we have been directed to, I pray God that
I may never live to see it dead and buried: and thus I pray for you all. I
confess, I am afraid of myself, lest time should wearout the sense or
remembrance of so great a duty: but the Lord be better to me than my fears, and
to all others whose fear this is. Neither is it employed only that we should
never forget this duty, or think upon it only nowand then, but that our
thoughts should run upon it. That which a man sets his heart upon, he will
often mind. The voluptuous man sets his heart upon his pleasure, and therefore
will mind his pleasure. The Covetous man sets his heart upon his riches, and
therefore minds his riches. Their thoughts are so taken up with those things
that they scarce think upon any thing else. So it should be with us. When we
are sitting at our tables, lying down, rising up, alone, in company, going to
any duty, inour shops, about our callings, we should remember this course. We
should be as well able to forget to eat as to forget the rule by which we
should eat. We should be as well able to forget to sleep and speak, and follow
our callings, as to forget the rule by which we should do it. I shall shut up
this particular with the prayer of David, so full to this purpose, 1 Chronicles. 29.
18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our fathers, keep this for ever in
the imagnations of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their
heart unto thee.

Secondly, Serious Consideration, or a pondering of the duty in our heart; as
the expression in Luke is, chap. 2. 19. Now there are these three things that
we are to consider when God does discover any duty to us. (First,) What have I
done? Has not this command of God been neglected by me? Have not I been a mere
stranger to the duty now laid open? or, is not this the duty, that the minister
and my conscience has pressed upon me from time to time, and yet I have
neglected it. (Secondly,) What must I do? Is not this the command of God? And
dare I do otherwise than obey it! Is it not the God of heaven that speaks unto
me? examine thy self; commune with thy own heart. Is this God to be slighted?
His authority to be despised? dare thou, O my Soul, to say the God of heaven
nay! (Thirdly,) What shall I do? What will become of me in the day of
visitation, and in the day of judgem^nt, if I daily neglect this known duty,
this weighty duty, this necessary duty? When trobles shall come slowing in
upon me like the waves of the Sea, one upon the neck of another how shall I be
able to stand under them? If I think to go to God for refuge, Conscience will
fly in my face, and tell me this is the God, that thou have despised, whose
voice thou have not hearkened to. How shall I stand in the day of judgment. and
look God in the face, if I am contentious and will not obey the truth? What can
I expectbut tribulation, and anguish, and wrath, Romans 2. 8, 9. A Scripture
which me thinks may be as a thunderbolt in the hearts of any that has a
secret purpose in himself to neglect this duty. If we are careless in this
duty, what can we expect but tribulation, and anguish, and wrath?

Thirdly, Resolution, A settled, fixed purpose of heart to do what God commands.
When God tells us this is my command, thus and thus you must do; our hearts
should answer the will of God we will obey: thus and thus we will do. Thus did
David, The Lord said seek my face; and my heart answered, thy face Lordwill I
seek. Beloved, we hear our duties, and read our duties many a time; and we are
apt to acknowledge that this should be done, and to pray too, that it might be
done; but for want of adding of resolution, many a time our convictions and
prayers come to nothing. Concerning this duty let us not dispute but determine:
let us not stand reasoning shall I, shall I, but resolve upon it.

Fourthly, Love to the duty, Christians should not only receive the truths of
God, but receive them in love. The commands of God, like meat that pleases the
pallat, must go down sweetly, duties must not be so much our task as our
choice: that which we would rather do than neglect, were we left to our
liberty. Beloved, let us not only take up this course as necessary only, but
let us love it as an excellent course. Let us not go to this work as a sick man
goes to take down a loathsome potion, but as a sound healthy man goes to his
ordinary meal.

Fisthly, Life, That which a man sets his heart upon he will be lively in, and
do it to purpose. Romans 12. 11. Not slothful in business; but fervent in spirit
serving the Lord. Standing water is not wholesome; and wine that has lost its
spirit, is not pleasant. God is a spirit, and they that worship him; must
worship him in spirit. He is a most pure act: and he will be served with
activity. God would not accept a blind, torn, lame sacrifice under the law; and
will he accept of a dead sacrifice under the Gospel? He would not have, the
Ass offered to him, because it was a dull sluggish creature. Nor the Snail,
because a slow lingering creature. We must not come to duties with dead hearts:
with dull, drowsy, sleepy souls. When we are going to our work of communing
with our hearts, we should stir up our hearts, call in our thoughts, compose
our affections, rub our memories and consciences, till we have fetched life
into them. Every faculty of the soul should act its part in this work: And here
let me tell you that it is no fit time to set about this work, when we are
between sleeping and waking: when the spirits are so far spent, and the senses
tired, that we can scare, see the question, or to hear the answer that
conscience gives. It will be good for every one to observe the temper of his
body for this work, that so drowsiness may not detain him from it, or make him
slight and over^ly in it.

Sixthly, Labor, we must take pains in duty, Eccl. 9. 10. What soever thy hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might. There must be labor before the duty,
to break thorough difficulties and to bring the heart to it. There must be
labor in the duty to keep the heart close to it. The heart will be unwilling to
come to it, and therefore must be compelled. It is apt to wander, and therefore
must be restrained and held in. We must not only do well, but be patient in
well-doing. The flesh must be crossed: carnal ease and contentment must be
denied, when they stand in the way of our duty, or would steal away the heart
from God. God required that the Male should be offered up to him in sacrifice,
because that was stronger than the other: to signify to us that we must take
pains and lay out our strength in duty. Beloved, wheresoever you are when you
should se^ about this work, say to your souls as Christ to the disciples,
Arise, let us go hence. If the heart be backward, lay the cord of Gods command
upon it; and by this cord hale it to the duty. Tell it, that the work must be
done and shall be done. When thou art come to the work, bind thy heart to the
good behavior. When thou art in it, often call upon thy heart to mind the work
that it is about. When it would give thee the slip, hold it fast. When it would
run from any question before it has given any determination to it, pull it
back: adjure it before the living God, in whose presence thou art, and whose
honor is concerned in it, to speak out the truth concerning this matter:
whether thou art guilty or not guilty.

Seventhly, Care, That duty is well done, that is carefully done.

Eighthly, Constancy, That which a man's heart is set upon, he will be hardly
taken off from it. We must be constant in duties as well as fervent in them,
Rev. 2. 3. Beloved, the work that I am now pressing you to, is not to be done
once a week, or a month, or every other day; but every day. Every evening,
conscience being mounted upon its tribunal, you are to give account of all the
things that have passed that day. And remember this, that you never take any
excuse for the omitting of this duty, at any time, but what you dare plead
before God in the great day of account. It is to be performed every day: as
sure as the night follows the day. Neither is this the work of a week, or a
month, or a year, or of an evil time only, while the rod of God is upon your
backs; no, it is the work of your life: it is a duty that you must live and dye
in.

We should not take up this course, as the traveller takes up his cloak, which
he wears in a storm, but throws off when the Sun shines. This is a duty as well
in prosperity, as in adversity. It is Summer-fruit as well as winter-fruit. And
I pray God, that neither summers heat, may be able to blast, nor winters cold
be able to kill those good beginnings os reformation, that are now, to be found
among us. I am afraid, that when God has broken off one yoke from our necks,
we shall cast away another. When God shall break off the cords of the wicked
from us, we shall cast away the cord of duty from us. I pray God, that when we
come into Canaan, we may not forget nor cast osf what we promised in the
wilderness. Remember it is for your life. I shall press this upon you in the
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, etc.

Objection. It is a hard work, a painful duty; a heavy yoke. Now there are
several things that I shall speak, to answer this very briefly.

First, This complaint does argue a very careless, loose heart. Ah Christian,
did thou keep a strict hand over thy self in the day, thou would not find
thy evening work so difficult. And have thou a careless spirit? the more need
there is that thou should set upon this work, that thou might bring it
into a better government.

Secondly, Would thou neglect this duty because it is painful? upon the same
account thou may cast of other duties. Thou cannot not pray, nor hear, as thou
should without pain.

Give way to this objection, and for ought I know, in a little time, thou may
bid farwell to all thy Religion: thou may cast off every duty. Thou can not
imagine what a plague it may be to thee, if thou should give way to this
objection. Give Satan an inch and he will take an ell: forbear one duty because
of difficulty, and he will easily persuade men to forbear others.

Thirdly, Consider who it is that buzzes this in thine ear. Certainly it is the
devil, the grand enemy of thy soul. God says, Commune with thy own heart: Satan
says, no, it is too painful. Why, who will thou be ruled by, God or Satan? thy
best friend, or thy worst enemy? Christian, in these outward concernments, thou will not advise with thy mortal enemy in things that concern thy life: And why
will thou be such a fool in the matters of thy soul?

Fourthly, What do thou cry out of pain? It is thy very calling and
profession to t^ke pain. What mean those expressions in Scripture else whereby
the life of a Christian is set forth by striving, wrestling, fighting, pressing
toward the mark? To take pain is essential to Christianity, and without this
thou can not be a Christian. To leave any duty because it is painful is a
contradiction to thy profession thou do herein deny thy self to be a
Christian.

^ifthly, The more difficult the work is, the more profitable thou will find
it. That duty that cost's us nothing, will yield us nothing: and that duty that
cost's us much pain, will yield us much peace and comfort.

Sixthly, Consider, is not grace worth the taking pains for? What will thou
take pain for, if not for grace? Look about in the world: see how the men of
the world run and ride, sweat and tire themselves for toys and trisles. What
pains then should thou take for grace, one dram of which is more worth than a
world. By this means, thou may grow in grace more in one month than in some
years before.

And let me tell thee I have not Charity enough to think thee a Christian
indeed, if thou do not think grace worth any labor or pain that thou can
possible be at in the getting of it.

Seventhly, Consider Christian, what pain Christ did take, and what misery he
did undergo for thee. Thy soul was dearer to him than his own glory: and thy
salvation, than his own life and blood. And shall not his glory, his commands
be dearer to thee, Christian, than a little carnal ease? Think upon it, if thou
have any spark of ingenuity this consideration will prevail upon thee to set
about this work.

I come now to propound some motives to stir up those that have not begun this
work, to set about it. And those that have begun, to go on in this work.

First, Consider it is the command of God. It is not the voice of man, but of
God. It is God that speaks to thee, Commune with thy own hearts: Examine thy
self. Christian, I urge the command of God upon thy Conscience, will thou obey
or w^lt thou not? dare thou to set thy self against God! and set thy will
above the will of God! O think upon it.

Secondly, Consider the time when, and the manner how you consented to set to
the performance of this duty. It was in a time of love; at a feast of love; and
after a Song of love. Consider what a rich mercy God has bestowed upon you, in
giving you liberty to draw nigh to him in such an ordinance as you lately sat
under. It was but a little while ago, beloved, that you thought that you should
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, till you drank it in your fathers
kingdom. And behold contrary to your expectations, the King has sent to you,
saying, come and sup with me: come and sit at my table.

Has God dealt so with any people? He has feasted you in a time of famine:
and spread a table for you in a howling wild^rness. Does not this extraordinary
providence think you, call upon you for some extraordinary duty? And do not you
think in your consciences that it is this duty? Why else has God propounded it
to you, and urged it upon you, in such a time as this is? If you neglect it, it
may cause God to take away the Cor^ and wine from you; and to break the stasf
of (...).

Thirdly, What do you know but God put it into the heart of his servant, to
press this duty at that time, to try whether you were real in that love and
loyalty which you did then prosess to him? I suppose you all understand the
transactions that passed there between God and you: that God did put his seal
to the Covenant, that he would make good all the mercy promised: and that you
did put your seal, thereby binding your selves to the performance of all the
duties required.

Fourthly, Consider when another such opportunity is offered to you how will
you be able to look God in the face? Methinks that man should not dare to come
to the Sacrament, and again put his seal to the Covenant, that has knowingly
and willingly broken his last engagement.

Fifthly, Does not your own looseness, and the enemies profaneness, and the
present dispensations that you are under, call upon you for more than ordinary
strictness in your lives and conversations? The Lord have mercy upon us, what
prejudice have we brought to the Gospel by our carnal, careless conversations!
What pitch of profaneness are the enemies of God risen to! They are not afraid
to bid him defiance at his face! In what a doleful case are many of our
brethren abroad in the world, and how sad is it like to be with us? The glory
of God is gone from the public to your houses, and are you not afraid? I am
sure there is reason enough to think, that it will take its flight from thence
too. And does not all this call upon us aloud in the language of the prophet,
Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord. If we look
behind us, and see what we have been: If about us, and see how devilish men
are: And above us, to see the black clouds that hang over our heads; we cannot
but see that it is time to take another course, to live more like Christians,
And what course so likely to effect this, as daily self-examination? serious
consideration is the best way to sound and thorough reformation.

Sixthly, Consider the excellent advantages that will come to thee by taking
this course. Christian, would thou have peace of conscience? The sense of
Gods love shed abroad upon thy heart! would thou live in heaven? would thou
walk in the light of Gods countenance, grow in grace, have thy corruptions
overcome and subdued? Behold a most excellent receipt: the best that ever was
prescribed.

Seventhly, Consider with what face will thou be able to go to God and beg of
him to subdue thy corruptions, and to strengthen thy graces when thou will not
use the means? Think upon it with what face will thou be able to look up to God
and put up such a petition?

Eighthly, How will thou be able to excuse thy self from hypocrisy, if thou
neglect this duty? When thou do hear it laid down as a Character of
sincerity, not to live in the neglect of any known duty.

Ninthly, Consider what base ingratitude you will be guilty of, both to God in
sending his servant among you: and to his servant for all the care and pains
that he has taken for your souls?

Tenthly, Consider what answer will you be able to make to God, or how you will
be able to look his servant in the face another day; when he and you must stand
together and give up your account: he of his doctrine, and you of your
obedience to it.

Eleventhly, Consider how conscience will sting thee for this neglect when thou
come to dye. Ah Christian, when thou shall be ready to leap into eternity,
and shall want assurance, not knowing whether thy lot shall fall either in
heaven or hell. And conscience shall tell thee if thou had taken such a
course thou might have had assurance: when thou shall with grief of soul
remember this and the other miscarriage, and that if thou had taken this
course, thou might have prevented this trouble; O how will this add to thy
sorrow and break thy heart!

I come now to give some directions for the constant, conscionable, easy
performance of this duty

First. Set about this course speedily. The longer thou do delay the work,
the more difficult thou will find it. What is said of repentance is true here,
he that is not fit to day will be less fit to morrow.

Secondly. Be deeply humbled that thou have neglected such a duty so long. Has
it been out of ignorance? bewail thy ignorance. Has it been out of laziness?
bewail that when men would make the building strong, they will lay the
foundation low. It is a good way to be constant and successful in any duty, to
begin with sorrow and humiliation.

Thirdly, Do it out of a principle of conscience in obedience to Gods command:
because it is thy duty, and God commands it.

Fourthly. Bless God for making known this duty, and prescribing to thee so
easy away for the performing of it. Bless God for making known the duty, and
God will bless thee in the doing of it.

Fisthly. When you come together let this duty be the matter of your
conference; or at least, be osten speaking one to another of it. Doubtless, it
will be good for the carrying on of this work to choose out a Christian friend,
and for these to agree together, and unbosome themselves each to other, what
does hinder the work; and what benefit they find etc. and engage one another to
take up this course, and be constant in it whatsoever times may come.

Sixthly, Take heed of formality, or keeping on a round in the duty without a
due regard of the end of the duty. Take some time once in a week, or fortnight,
and call thy heart to an account how thou have sped, what thou have got.

Seventhly, Take heed of resting in the duty. If thou do (...) make an Idol of
the duty God will make nothing of it: God will curse the work and blast thy
design.

Eighthly, Be careful to live up to those Rules by which thou have engaged to
examine thy self? As he said of prayer, If thy praying do not make thee leave
off sinning, thy sinning will make thee leave off praying. So here, if thy
examining thy self, do not make thee to leave off thy remissness; thy
remissness will certainly make thee leave off thy self-examination. When a
man has been careless in the day, and come to read over these questions, and
conscience shall answer guilty in most of these things, this will make the work
so tedious, that thou will never long bear the trouble of it. Unless thou art
able to live up to these rules, thou will never be able to hold on in it long.
And therefore remember this, if at any time you find that you have been
careless ^n the day foregoing, be sure in the next morning to set up a new
resolution to stick close to these rules. Undo all that you have done before,
as it were, and begin again. Try in the strength of God what you can do this
day; how exact you can be this day.

Ninthly, Let us set about the work with some shore ejaculation to God for his
Assistance in it, and his blessing upon it.

Tenthly, Solemnly engage to God that you will take up this course and be
constant in it, and never lay it down what ever times may come, and temptations
may assault you. When God does enjoin any duty, he requires all the means that
tend to the performing of that duty. Now this is the best means that can be
thought upon for every one to engage to God, that he will set upon it and be
constant in it. I know that the deceitful heart will be very backward, they are
very shy of such engagements. But if they are, remember this, that there is
something in the bottom which you will do well to look out: And when you have
found it out, to cast it forth with indignation. Why should we be backward to
do that between God and our selves, which we have done publicly before many
witnesses, and I believe shall be called to do again. To set about this work is
no more than you have done already, when you sat under that great ordinance
and set your seals that you would perform all the duties of the new Covenant.
And did you except this? You will find this engagement a great help to the
work. Let us this night before we sleep put this direction in practice; engage
your selves to God in some such words as these,

O eternal God, thou that searchest the heart, and wilt not hold them guiltless
that take thy name in vain, especially in solemn Covenants made with thy self,
I do here solemnly promise, that I will set upon this duty of daily
self-examination, and in this practice to live and dye. Such engagements God is
well pleased with, Jerem. 30. 21, Who is this that engages his heart to draw
nigh to me? As if the Lord had said, come thou art welcome, I take this kindly
from thee.

A serious call to Christians, to win Souls to Christ with helps thereunto.
Prove. 11. 30. And he that wins Souls is wise.
IN this verse we have set forth unto us the excellency of a Righteous man: and
that in two things. First, He is more useful than others. Secondly, He is more
skilful than others.

First. He is more useful than others. The fruit of the Righteous is a tree of
life. The Righteous is not a barren tree; but he is a fruitful bough, as Joseph
was. And he does not bring forth his fruit unto himself. His fruit is a tree of
life. As the tree of life would give life to them that should eat thereof: so
the fruit of the Righteous is such, that those that will hearken to his
Counsel, shall partake with him of eternal life. When others are as thorns and
brambles, fruitless, unuseful, of no value in Gods world? the Righteous is a
fruitful tree, and as a tree of life in the midst of the world.

Secondly, He is more skilful and ^wise than others; And would you know wherein
his wisdom lies? It is in winning of Souls.

Doct. That it is a chief part of a Believers, duty, and the chief point of a
Believers wisdom to gain Souls unto God.

First, It Is the [duty] of a Believer to gain Souls. Though he must begin at
home, with his own soul, yet he must not Terminate there; but he must look
abroad after others Souls. He must not be as a tree that brings forth fruit
to himself alone: but he must be a tree of life, that whosoever plucketh of his
fruit, to make use thereof, shall live.

And then Secondly, it is his [ wisdom.] As in the text, so Daniel. 12. 3. And
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. They be the wisemen
that turn others to Righteousness.

Here I shall show you. (First,) That it is (...) chief part of his duty.
(Secondly,) That (...) a chief point of his wisdom to gain Souls.

Firstly, That it is a chief part of his duty and this appears,

First, Because this is one chief point of (...) love to Jesus Christ. Wherein
did Paul discover his love to Jesus Christ in any thing, as (...) this, in his
zeal and industry to save Souls? Romans 9. 1, 2, 3. And thus does Moses evidence
his love. Exo. 32. 31, 32. If you would show your Love to Jesus Christ, this is
the best way in all the world to evidence it. Math. 25. You may see how
carefully Christ takes notice of any kindness done to the bodies of his elect:
but O how much more will he take notice of the love to the Souls of his Elect?

(Secondly,) Because this is the chief point of our love to our Brethren. You
know that Christ tells us that all the Law and the ^phets hang upon this, thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. And thy Neighbor as thy
self. If the Law does bind thee to preserve the Chastity and estate of thy
Neighbor, how much more does God require of thee that thou preserve the Soul of
thy Neighbor? This is the principal point of love. Jam. 5. 20. He that
converteth a sinner from the error of his ways shall save a Soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins, If God requires that thou help thy
Neighbors Ox and his Ass, how much more must thou help thy Neighbors Soul from
hell?

(Thirdly,) Because this is the principal means of bringing glory to Christ.
Every soul that is brought in to Christ is a Jewel put into the Crown of
Christ. And would thou not be ambitious of such a service as this? Every
soul thou bring into Christ is an eternal Monument, set up by thee to the
name of Jesus Christ. Would thou have much service done for Jesus Christ? O
then labor to bring in Souls to him, that may do his work here in the world.
Would thou have much praise to the name of Christ? O then labor to bring in
Souls to Jesus Christ. Every Soul brought in to Jesus Christ is a Trumpet of
his praise. The glory of a King is in the multitude of his subjects. And so
it is of Christ. This is the great way wherein we are capable to further the
glory of Christ in the world, to bring in many Souls to Jesus Christ.

(Fourthly,) Because this is a principal subject of our prayers. This is one
grand petition. Thy Kingdom come. In which petition we pray, that the Kingdom
of grace may be advanced, our selves and others brought into it, and kept in
it. Now it is a great part of a Christians business to live suitable to his
prayers.

Secondly, That it is the chief point of a Christians wisdom to gain Souls unto
Christ. This appears,

(First,) Because Souls are the goodly pearls that are of great price with
Christ. O there is no Merchandise like to that of Souls. No gain like to the
gain of Souls. One Soul is of more worth than all the world. You may see of how
great price Souls are with Jesus Christ, by the great price that he laid down
for Souls. Did Christ spend, his blood for Souls; and will thou not spend thy
breath for Souls? This is a principal part of wisdom, to deal like wise
Merchants, in goodly pearls. A wise man will not spend his time for trifles,
that is Childish; but his wisdom does appear in the weight of those things
that he lays out his time and pains upon. Oh if you would appear to be wise,
lay out your time and strength for Souls! If thou could gain but one Soul,
what a happy gain would that be?

(Secondly,) Because Souls will be the most glorious Crown in the day of
Christ. No Crown like to this, the Crown of Souls. The time is coming, when a
Crown of Soul^ will be found to be of another manner of value than a Crown of
gold. What was the Crown that Paul wishes for? It was for the Souls that he had
converted. 1 These. 1. 19. What is our hope, or joy, or Crown of rejoicing! are
not even ye in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? Why were
these Paul's Crown? because he had converted them by his Ministry, upon the same
account he calls the Phillipians ( Phil. 4. 1.) My joy and Crown of rejoicing.

Thirdly. Because we shall most effectually promote the good of our own Souls
by endeavoring to gain others Souls. By teaching of others thou shall teach thy
self. By exhorting others, thou shall excite and stir up thy self. And nothing
will redound to thy advantage so much as thy laboring to gain Souls; though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorified.

(Fourthly,) Because this will be an evidence of our own sound conversion, if
we lay out our strength and time to convert others. In John 1. 41. We shall see
those young converts, when they were but touched, they labor to bring in others
presently. So that if thou would evidence thine own sincerity to thy Soul,
thou should lay out thy endeavor for the good of others Souls.

First Use, Is it so that it is a chief part of a Christians duty, anda chief
point of a Christians Wisdom, to gain Souls to Christ? Then here is matter of
Reproof; to reprove those that profess the name of Christ; that lay out their
zeal no more this way. That lay not out their strength to gain Souls. Yea that
do not long for, nor endeavor after the conversion of Souls. Surely, this
speaks sadly to those that wholly neglect this duty. But how exceedingly are
many of the people of God themselves to be blamed for their Negligence in this?
does not thy heart know that there is a brother of thine does live in such a
sin; and yet thou never tell him of it? What a great evil is this! and unsuitable
to the pattern of the Lord Jesus Christ? How did he go up and down doing good?
and so taken up with Souls, that he could scarce spare time to eat his bread:
insomuch that his carnal friends began to take hold of him, and thought that he
had been beside himself. O how far art thou from this, that thy friends may
live in their sins, and dye in their sins, before thou will labor to save their
Souls? The devil he laboreth to destroy Souls; and how few be there that do
labor to save Souls? He may carry away the poor soul, and none labors to take
the soul from him. We should be watchful and vigilant for souls; for our own
souls. and others souls: because this enemy is always taking opportunities to
destroy souls. Sure it argues that you have very little Lov^ to Jesus Christ,
that you do no more for souls. That you have little zeal for Jesus Christ, and
that you have little Love for your Brethren, that you take no more care for
their souls. It may be you are careful for the bodies of those that are under
your charge; but how little do you for their souls? How many live without the
worshi of God in their Families? Without Catechizing their Children or
instructing them? And think they have done well if they provide for their
bodies. Oh, but man God will find out thy neglects: it was their souls that was
thy charge also. If you look only after their bodies, this you will do for
your swine. And will you do no more for your Childrens souls than for your
swine? many are ready to say as Cain, am I my Brothers keeper? If this be not
the language of thy tongue, is not this the language of thy Life? What do
thou do for thy brother to save his soul from death?

Second Use, is of exhortation. To stir you up to perform this duty to labor to
be skilful in this duty, to win souls to Christ. Brethren, if you would be wise
indeed, and if you will gain indeed, labor to gain souls. Oh look upon the
woeful condition of perishing souls! How few of thy friends and acquaintance
have thou good grounds to think they have a share in Jesus Christ? What will thou have no compassion of thy Brothers soul? Thou would have compassion on
the body of thy Neighbor: If thou saw the house on fire about them, and they
asleep, would thou not be stirred up, and with zeal forget thy self, and
labor to call upon them and awake them? O how many of our carnal friends do
remain in a carnal state, and we sit stilland let them alone! I beseech you
stir up your souls to relieve the souls of others. This is the best Charity and
best pleasing to Christ.

It may be many of you have not wherewith to show your Charity to the bodies of
your brethren: but this way thou may show it, in showing kindness to their
souls. Exhort them, and strengthen them in their duty: comfort them, support
them. If thou can not give them an alms, give them an exhortation.

But you will say what should we do, or what means must we make use of to do
good to to souls?

I answer, you must do it.

First, By Scripture demonstration. When thou go to deal with souls, be sure
to make use of Gods weapons. Bring the word of God with thee. Go forth in the
name of God. Pour out thy supplication to God to prosper the work. And then
show thy brother the Scripture, to convince him out of the Scripture, as
Apollos did. Thou can never throw down the devils strong holds, but by the
use of Gods own weapons. No Cannon but this will batter down the strong holds
of sin and Satan. Therefore bring the Scripture with thee to him.

Secondly, By earnest supplication. This was Paul's course who did so earnestly
thirst for the salvation of his brethren. He strove mightily with God in prayer
for them. Romans 10. 1. My hearts desire and prayer is, that Israel may be saved.
Carry thy friends to God, and go to God by prayer, and weep over their carnal
and unsanctified state. Bring thy dead Husband and child etc. to God, and put
up thy Request to God for them, as Abraham did Ishmael. O That they might live
before thee! How did the prophet prevail l y his prayers for the restoring the
dead child? As the prophet did pray in life into the dead child, so thou
should strive with God in prayer for dead souls. If thou did but wrestle
with God for thy dead wife, or child, or neighbor What do thou know what God
might do for them? What know thou O man, but thou may save thy Wife? etc.
Thus we are taught by our Lord in that great petition Thy Kingdom come. Thus if
thou strive by the word of God and prayer, then thou may be like to prevail
mightily for the good of souls, thou do converse with.

3. By kind Obligation. This is another way by which thou should labor to
gain souls. Observe that great rule of the Apostle be pitiful, be courteous,
it is the Rule that he gives. Labor by kindness and courtesy to gain upon all
thou do converse with, that thou may get within him, that thou may be in
a capacity to do good to his soul. Sh^wing all meekness to all men. And when
thou art thu^ kind to all men, this will be a means to do good to them by what
thou do. If they be such as stand in need of thy Charity, open thy hand to
relieve their necessity, and that will be a way to open their hearts to thee to
receive in thy counsel.

Fourthly, By faithful reprehensions. Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not
suffer sin to rest upon him. Observe that it is; quite contrary to Christian
Lovo to suffer sin to lie upon him: for it is c^lled hating of him. Oh Brethren,
show your Love to the souls that you are among by this, by the faithful
rebuking of their sins that they fall into. Manifest it not as a token of your
displeasure, but as an ordinance of God. Deal with him in all gentleness and
meekness. Not gentle with their sins; you must be plain and saithful with their
souls. You must show them the danger of such a way: but you must do it with
such tenderness to them as may make this bitter pill to go down. How do many
souls miscarry to all eternity for want of professors faithful dealing with
them? Oh is it not enough that we have the guilt of our own sins upon us, but
must we needs have the guilt of our Neighbors sin upon us too? Ah Brethren,
this is enough to convince us that we have little Love to our Brethrens souls,
in that we have so little care to reprove their sins.

Fifthly, By your convincing conversations. Live before all thou do converse
with, in the convincing power of a holy Life. This is the way to convince them,
1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. Likewise you wives be in subjection to your own husband, that
if any obey not the word, they also may without the word, be won by the
conversations of the wives: while thy behold your chaste conversation coupled
with fear.

Observe here. (First,) That even those that be weakest, and seemingly out of a
capacity to win souls, may by their Godly conversations win souls. Women, who
more weak than they? Do not you think that this belongs only to Ministers to
win souls: this belongs to all.

(Secondly,) Observe that a careful and tender walking in the duties of our
Relations toward men, with a conjunction with the duties of piety toward God,
is a most powerful means to convert souls. When wives shall be strict in their
profession, and yet not be in subjection to their husbands, this will offend
the men, and not work upon them. Your profession and practice must one answer
the other: and then you are like to gain others, I beseech you take this course
to gain souls to Christ, let there be a suteableness in all the parts of your
conversation, be the same at home that you are abroad: and bring forth your
Religion into your Shops, and Trades, and Fields: That whosoever converse with
you may see the power of Godliness in you.

Sixthly. By your frequent exhortations. Hebrews. 3. 13. But exhort one another
daily, while it is called to day, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin. Observe it, it is not the duty of Ministers only to abound in
exhortations, but it is the work of you all. Every one must look to his
Neighbors Soul: and that daily. There must be instancy and frequency in this
work: and the reason, is, lest he be hardened. Do thou see such a Neighbor
fall into sin? go to him. It may be thou will do it hereafter: why it may be
the man may be hardened. It may be the man may dye: or thou may not have the
opportunity: or you may be removed from one another; and the work may be for
ever cut off, if thou Neglect it.

Seventhly. By your careful observation, of all those advantages that God has
put into your hands for the dealing with your Brothers Soul. Consider and study
with thy self, what advantages thou have upon him.

(First,) Take the advantage of affliction. It may be he is taken down by
affliction Now go and warn him of his sin. It may be now he will hearken to
thee. Job 36. 8. 9. 10.

(Secondly,) Make use of thy Relation. It may be thou art some near Relation in
the flesh to him: take that advantage to be dealing with him, for his eternal
good.

(Thirdly,) Make use of his dependence upon thee. It may be he is such a one as
is concerned in thy good will to him: it may be he works for thee, or depends
upon thy Charity for his livelihood: take this advantage upon him: it may be he
will hearken to thee.

(Fourthly,) Make use of thy interest in him. It may be he has some affection
for thee: make use of it for God. And this may be a means to win him to Christ.

Rev. 3. 1. I know thy works, that thou have a name, that thou live and art
dead.
THese words are part of Christ's Epistle from heaven to the Church of Sardis,
wherein he shrewdly checks her hypocrisy and formality, and throughout gives
counsels and directions, for her recovery out of that sad estate; from the
words we have given you this observation.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ, does take special notice of, and makes
strict observation upon the works and ways of his professed people. He takes
notice of their works! for the matter of them, for the quantity, for the
quality of them; as has been showed.

We gave you the Reasons for confirmation, and made entrance into the
Application, and have applied it as to the two first branches; to wit, the
matter, and the quantity of our works. To come now to the Application of the
third thing, namely, the quality of them.

Use. Is it so that the Lord Jesus Christ does take such notice of our works
for the quality of them? then this may be useful by way of Reprehension and
Exhortation.

First. For Reprehension, this reproves us that we rest so much in the work
done, and do so little enquire into the quality of our works as to the
sincerity and soundness of them. O my Brethren! how often do we pray, and never
examine how we have prayed? and hear, and never enquire, how we have carried
it, while we have been hearing? O how many a man's bosom am I now in? Brethren,
this is a great evil among men. Yea, I fear among Gods own people, that there
is not that care to look into their duties, how they are performed. Brethren,
if the Lord Jesus Christ did as you, look no farther than the outside of your
duties, and the work done, then you may rest in that; O but Jesus Christ he
looks into the inside of them, and he labors to see what there is of soundness
and sincerity in them: And seeing the Lord Jesus Christ looks so narrowly into
them, should not you? This is the cause of many sins and mischiefs among
Prosessors.

First. This is the cause of much undoing Self-deceit, when persons rest in the
work done, and do not carefully examine, what principles they did act by, and
ends they did act for; this does cause many souls to be undone to their
destruction. This was the reason why Sardis was so miserably out, and Laodicea,
that she was so much mistaken, they kept on the trade of Religious duties, and
because the thing was done, and the duty performed with con^tancy, they thought
they were in a good state. You know the speech of that Church, I am rich etc.
you are to understand it of spiritual Riches, she thought her self upon the
growing hand. O but when Jesus Christ comes and sees how little sincerity there
was in them, he disrellisheth them, and shows them that their works were not
perfect before him. And thus it is with many Professors in these days, that
because they keep on in Familyprayer and good duties, they think all is well,
and for want of looking into the Spring of their duties, and their ends in
them, they are undone by them. O what a miserable deceit is this! when a poor
creature shall reckon that he has so much gold, so much treasure laid up in
heaven, and when it comes to be tried, all his Gold shall prove but Counters! O
consider what a miserable estate that will be, when you shall come with them,
Lord, Lord, we have been a praying people, and have owned and followed thee;
and he shall say, away you Hypocrites, you shall have the reward of Hypocrites,
there was not the soundness of Religion in you; O what a miserable
disappointment will this be! Jam. 1. 26. He speaks there of some, that did but
[ seem] to be religious, and deceive their own souls. There be some men, their
Religion will serve for no other end but to deceive their own souls; to undo
them, because they are unsound in their Religion. There are many Professors,
that when they come to receive the reward of their du^ies they will receive
another manner of reward than they thought of; they think to receive the reward
of their prayers, and keeping the Sabbath and the like; but he that takes
notice of the heart, knows their prayers were, but a taking of his name in
vain. When they think to have eternal life for their reward, God will say, I
will give you the reward of your works. I sound your works to be but
hypocrisy, and you shall have the reward of Hypocrites. O Brethren, I beseech
you consider it! It is an awakening truth, but deserves your consideration;
there are many that will not only be undone by their swearing, and deceiving,
and the like; but many will be undone by their praying and hearing, I mean they
will be undone by them, by making them the matter of their righteousness before
God; and by their confidence and trust, and leaning to their duties. There be
many persons, whose prayers and good duties will serve for no other end, but to
blind them, and harden them to their own destruction. If you perform religious
duties, and do not look into the manner of performing them, and take care that
you be upright, you may come to blind, and harden your selves by them. O there
are multitudes of Professors in Hell this day for wanting care to enquire into
this, what ingredients there were in their duties; whether they sprang from
principles of grace, or, but from common convictions; whether they were done
for, and from themselves, more than from and for God, This made Luther say that
he was afraid more of his good works, than of his sins, for his good works were
apt to lift him up, but his sins did keep him humble. O Brethren! you had need
to look about you, Satan can make a snare of your good duties, to catch your
souls by. There are two ways whereby men may be undone by their duties, (1)
when they make them as a supposed righteousness, when men do perform Religious
duties, and expect that these should obtain the favor of God, and remission of
sins, or, at least, should help with the merits of Jesus, to make up a
righteousness for them, on which they may climb up to heaven, and stand before
God. Thus those carnal Jews, though they were zealous of their duties required
by the Law, yet they were lost by going about to establish those as a
righteousness of their own. Romans 10. 3 (2) when they make them as a mistaken
evidence. There are many persons (I conceive) that are so far convinced of the
sinfulness of their duties, that they do not lean to these as their
Righteousness before God, that those should obtain Gods favor, and their
pardon; yet they do conclude that this is an evidence that they have an
interest in Christ; and hereby they deceive their own souls-

Object. But you will say, are not our good duties signs of our right to
Christ? does not the Scripture say, [ he that does Righteousness is righteous?]
I answer, good works are indeed a good sign of faith: but then you must look to
this, that they be sincerely good. But ^ow many do conclude, because the work
is done, that therefore they are in Christ, when as they do not look into the
bottom of their duties, whether they be done in sincerity or hypocrisy, and so
do but deceive their own souls by trusting to them; because their duties are
not sincere. O my Brethren, how effectually are many Professors undone by
this! That are so hardened in their estate, that it is more hard to bring them
into Jesus Christ, than those that are openly profane. Thus it was observed in
our Saviors ministry, that it was more hard to bring in the Self-justisying
Pharisees, than the Self-condemning Publicans.

Secondly, Another mischief of this, is, this is the cause of so much pride and
self-considence in duty. Had Laodicea but made a due search into her duties,
you should have heard another manner of speech from her. O my poverty!
Hypocrisy! Deadness! Formality! Lord pity my woeful state! this would have
been the language you would have heard from her: but now because she did not
search into the bottom, this did lift her up; and made her think so well of her
case. The reason why we are so well persuaded of our selves, is, because we do
not see into our selves. Did we but thoroughly reflect upon, and search into our
duties, when they are performed, we should run to God for pardoning grace. As
Neh. last 22. Remember me O my God, for good. He did thus after his great zeal
for God, and work of Reformation. He slies to God to pardon the sins of his
duties, O Christian! if thou did look into thy duties, thou would see
enough to make thee ashamed of them, thou would be ready to cross what thou
have written, and to cut out thy work, and pick it out stitch by stitch. But
now persons not searching into their duties, this makes them stick, and be
confident in them.

Thirdly. This is the cause of so much barrenness and in prosiciency in the
ways of God, did the Christian but duly examine his own duties and espy the
defects of the present duty, and be sure to amend that the next time, that was
am^ss now, this would make him, in a little time, come to a wonderful
prosiciency in godliness. But when men go on in a customary course, and do not
find out their errors, it is no wonder they go on in their errors, in one
tract, duty after duty, yea one year after another: A Christian that is
careless in the examining of his duties, that does not observe the failings of
his duties, to amend at one time what was amiss before, he will be but a
Bungler in Religion all his days. But he that is careful to examine it. that
he may amend what was amiss, this man will soon come to be his Crafts-master in
his Trade.

Fourthly, This is the cause of so much ignorance of our own estate; It is no
wonder that so many Professors are at a loss about their condition; it is for
want of looking into their Religion. They do not know whether they be sound or
unsound, whether they be going forward, or going backward, all this is from
want of care, to examine and enquire into their duties.

For want of this men do not know whether they be sound or unsound, for how
does a man know the tree but by the fruit? When all is done, it is men's actual
obedience that is the great evidence, that their estates must be tried by.
Whatsoever seeming principles of grace and life, and love, may seem to be
within, and good resolutions, yet if all this, be not strong enough to bring
forth the fruits of obedience, in a holy, self-denying, and flesh displeasing
godliness, all is unsound. But then we m^ not look only to the outside of our
obedience, we must not take the Carcass without the soul. Now when persons do
not look into their duties, but rest in the work done, how can they make any
judgment into their estate by them.

So many that are sound Christians, do not know whether they are decaying or
increasing for want of this, because they do not look into their duties how
they perform them. Christians, how do you perform your duties? Do you more look
into them, how sweet they are to you? whether it is better than it was?
Christians, you must look to this, are you more extensive. and intensive in
your duties? Are you more extensive? Heretofore you looked only at home, to do
your selves good; do you do good now to others? Heretofore, Religion was
consined to your knees, but now do you bring it forth into your Shops, and
Callings? Here^osore, you were for personal godliness, but are you now for
Relative godliness? Heretofore, you were for duties of the first Table only,
but now do you put both Tables together? this would be a good sign, but for
want of men's searching into this, they are at a loss; they do not know whether
they are better or worse, declining or increasing.

Fifthly. This is the cause of so much (...) in duty. When a (...) know that
there will be a strict (...) into him, his preparation will be (...): but when
he fears not that, he (...) the more remiss. So it is here, If we (...) a
strict examination into our hearts, then they will be the more careful to ply
the work the more, when they know they shall be looked after. But when they
know they shall not be looked into, they will do the work thereafter. Beloved,
if we would do the work of Religion to purpose, we must deal by our hearts, as
we would by trewantly servants, if you would have any thing done, you must keep
your eye upon them, If you keep your selves to this course constantly, to
enquire into your duties, how they were done, then your hearts will be careful
to make thorough work of it. And indeed this enquiring into your duties, is not
only a means to make your hearts sincere in duty, but it is a great part of
sincerity. That man that makes no enquiry into his heart, that man is an
hypoerite, there is no soundness in that man. And the less care thou have in
looking into thy heart, the less there is of Christianity in thee.

Sixthly. This is that, that puts Christ so much out of use. O Brethren! would
you know the Reason, why Christ is so little set by? Why, it is because we are
not thoroughly acquainted with our defects. Were we much searching into our
duties, then we should fly to our Advocate, and make use of him. And after the
performing of our duties, fly to him for a covering of our nakedness and shame.

Second Use of exhortation. Let us do likewise, if Christ take such notice of
our duties, O be much in observing your own duties. How your hearts carry it in
your duties. If I could but persuade my self and my hearers to the observing of
these two Directions, we should make another manner of progress in Religion. O
That you would be but persuaded!

First, In the entrance of your duties, set before you your rule for that duty;
as. the Scholar does his copy, and do your work by rule You know the Mason
will lay the line before he will lay the stone in the foundation, or else he
may commit many errors, and the building may come to nothing. So when you come
to perform your duties, set your rule before you. Suppose you come to pray,
have some thoughts of it, what be the rules you are to pray by. Consider you
are not to come in your own names but in Christ's. Take heed that you come not
in your own Rignteousness, but Christ's. And go out to Christ for strength.
Remember that God calls for faith and life induty. And so when you come to
hear, consider what rules have I to hear by. And so in giving your Alms. And
then your work is like to be done to purpose.

Secondly, Reflect upon your rule in the close of your duty, and examine
whether your work has been done by rule or no. Observe what graces have been
acting in your duty, and thankfully take notice of the influences of your
graces. Take notice what corruptions have been working in your duty, and take
the shame of it before God that you should thus miscar^y. If these two rules
were but observed by us, we should come to another manner of proficiency in
Religion than we do. But more particularly let me give you three directions for
your duties.

First, Take special notice of the ends of your duties. O How many do miscarry
for want of a Right understanding in this? Come see my zeal for the Lord of
hosts, said John. And all this while he was ^t Acting for himself. And because
he did Gods work for such carnal ends, God accounts the blood that he had shed
to be so much murder and requires it afterward at his hands, Hos. 1. 4. The
Pharisees were a very strict generation in the performance of their duties.
Much in Alms, and much and long in prayer, and yet all rejected, because they
did it for carnal ends, Math. 23. 5. Therefore I beseech you as you Love your
souls, look to your ends in praying. When you come to prayer Consider what end
do I propound in this duty? Is not this done out of custom, because it is the
custom of my family to pray morning and evening? When you go to visit the
sick, is it only a civil custom that I am going about? or am I going to visit
Jesus Christ in a sick servant of his? And so of our Alms. If a man set out
with never so much diligence in the morning, and it be to a wrong point, he is
all the while out of his way. Although a man cannot in every motion of the day
mind his end, yet in every solemn action (as I have showed you formerly) with
care and pains taking with your hearts, you may come to mind your end, and the
rule for that particular action. As for example, When you go to your callings,
or to pray, or to eat, and the like; in these solemn actions of the day you may
come particularly to renew your intentions in your work. And this will manifest
your sincerity, and you will come to have the comfort and Joy of your work. And
if this be not well looked to, all your duties may serve at last for nothing,
but to harden, and blind, and deceive you, rather than to save you.

Secondly, Look well to your principles in duty, What principles you acted by
and from. There may be many good things that may be done, that may be good for
the matter, but yet because they do not act from a principle of Grace, God will
reject them. There is no external duty of Religion, but an hypocrite, an
unsound professor may do it (for ought I know) as well as a Godly man; only
they differ in their principles and ends. Therefore consider that thy duties
come from a renewed heart. Examine, art thou acquainted with the new birth?
Have thou been acquainted with Gods converting grace? renewing thy heart! If it
be not thus, all thy duties without this will do thee no good.

Thirdly, Look to what affections are stirring in your duties. O how was Christ
out with Laodicea for this! That because, though much were done, yet there was
not much warmth in duty; there was no Life in them. It is observed that the
artisicial breath is a cold breath but a living breath is a warm breath. As
ever you would have the comfort of your duties, you must look to the warmth of
your duties. My soul follows hard after thee, said the Psalmist Psalm. 63. 8.
and thy right hand upholdeth me.

Ten parting Counsels.
First, COunsel. Observe the degrees of Gods departing, and mourning after a
departing God. The Lord, seems to me, to take his leave of us by degrees. And
because it is by such insensible degrees, I am afraid we are apt to take the
less notice of it. God has not thought good to take his farewell of us all at
once. We thought, God had intended to take all from us at first. You know
ministers were excluded from their public labors, and then God lengthned out
their liberty in private. And since an Act has passed against our private
meetings, so that we have had our liberties with the more difficulty. And now
an Act has passed whereby your Ministers are to be removed farther from you.
However the Ministers of Christ are sinful poor men of themselves as others:
but yet considering the capacity of their office, they are the great
representatives of Jesus Christ. And when the Ministry is removed, this is a
degree, and a great degree of Gods removal. You see God has removed Ministers
by degrees, farther and farther; and what will be the next remove! Me thinks
the glory seems to be departing by degrees from the nation, as it was in the
time of the prophet Ezekiel in the 10, 11, 12 chap. If we are left without the
powerful preaching of the gospel, and the likely means of conversion, what will
it signify though God should give this nation never so much outward plenty? If
God should make this nation to wash their steps in butter, and fill our bellies
with his hid Treasures, what will all this be, if our generations should go
down to the pit of destruction by the thousands? If there be preaching, yet if
there be not a powerful preaching, that will save souls, what will it be? And
this great mercy God has deprived us of by degrees. Oh mourn after a departing
God! Take heed that you be affected with this providence of God. How will God
take it of you, if you do not stir up your selves to take hold of God, now he
is departing? Woe to them when I shall depart from them: Woe to this nation, and
this place when God departs.

Second Counsel. Take heed that when the public bellows are broken, the fire
of Religion go not out. The Ministers of Christ are as the common bellows to
blow up this sacred fire. And now God seems to have broken these bellows; Oh
take heed lest now Religion should dye away! and the heat and warmth thereof
should decay, and by insensible degrees should go out. Wear too too much like
green wood, the fire keeps no longer in, than while we are blowing the bellows
I fear lest you shall see professors too too much like Christ's disciples, who
when Christ was taken went every one to his home: so weak their faith, and
prevalent their infidelity, that they went their way, as if their work had been
done. Take heed lest the like Apostasy creep in among you, that when these
helps do fail, you go back again and remit your zeal. Oh Brethren! what ever
you let go, be sure you do not let go your hold in Christ; do not let go your
hold in Religion. Do but keep your ground there, and no matter what becomes of
any other interest.

Third Counsel. When God takes down the common sun, take the more earnest heed
to the light that he sets up within. The ministry of the Gospel, and preaching
of the word is like the public light of the common Sun. And this light seems
much to fail, and the shaddows of the evening are stretched out: and the Sun is
like to set upon the Churches. Well then if it be so take the more earnest heed
to the directions of Conscience. You know when the Sun is down every man
kindles his candle, and takes heed to that. The spirit of man is the candle of
the Lord. Conscience, is the light in every m^ns boso^e. Not that the light
within, (as some do talk of) is sufficient without the direction of Gods word,
to guide a man into the ways of Life: But yet a well informed Conscience,
instructed in the Scriptures, and well studied in the mind of God, and
acquainted with the nature and principles of Religion, may be a great help to a
Christian to guide him in his common course. My Brethren, if God deprive you of
the preacher in the Palpit take the more earnest heed to the preacher in your
bosom. Set Conscience faithfully on work. This is the preacher in the bosom
that tells every man of his duty and of his sins. Hearken now to the
instructions of Conscience, to the reproofs and rebukes of Conscience. See and
hear what Conscience will speak and direct. What that will touch on, why God
has brought on us these judgments. Oh, take heed! that what ever preacher be
silenced; that this preacher be not silenced. Oh! take heed, how you stop the
mouth of Conscience. How you desile and harden your Conscience. If Conscience
be faithful and free, and you take earnest heed unto him, it may be a standing
blessing to you, when the preachers in the Pulpit are removed from you.

Fourth Counsel. Be sure that none of those extraordinary providence do drive
you from God, but that they drive you to God. I fear le^t this may be the issue
of these providence to many, that they may be driven off from God, that they
will give over their diligence and zeal; and give up all for lost and gone. O
this will be sad indeed! If these providence drive you from God, this will be
a sad sign of reprobation; take heed that these drive you nearer to God. Be
sure that the more frowning the providence of God are to you, the more do you
cleave to him, the more tenderly do you walk before him. It Is a fearful sign of
an unsound heart, never savoured, and seasoned with true grace, when afflicting
providence do drive men farther and farther off from God. God does intend by
his Rod to whip his children home to him, to make them walk more tenderly; to
caution them against sin, that he corrects them for. But now if any of you
should make this use of his providence, that after all, you should go farther
from God, oh how sad would this be! This is to be like King Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.
22. O let these Chastisements from God, drive you every one the nearer to God.
And cause you every one to enquire into his way, and the iniquity that is in
his hand, that he may reform.

Fifth Counsel. Let your own eyes be your Overseers, when God deprives you of
your public Overseers. The Ministers of Christ, they are termed Seers, and
Overseers; Now God is like to deprive you of these, oh take the more careful
Oversight every one of your selves; be the more strict in your inspection into
your own ways, in the examining of, and inquiring into your own hearts.
Beloved it is a duty that I have some time since pressed upon you, and I hope
you do yet make conscience of it, daily to examine your hearts and ways by
those questions; which we gave you sor this end, as a great help to this duty:
I beseech you whatever you intermit, constantly to keep up, and maintain that
duty. And now especially when God deprives you of your public Overseers, you
should take care of your selves. I have never any hopes that you will come to
any proficiency in the ways of God, unless you come up to the strict
observation of these Rules, that so you may become sensible of your errors,
that one days humiliation, may be the matter of the next days Reformation.

Sixth Counsel. Whatever become of your other Trade, be sure that you keep up
the Trade of Religion. Beloved, though God see it good to impo^erish you and
undo you in this world yet it is all well; if you keep on in Religion. That is a
happy man that has a thriving and flourishing soul, though he is declining in
his estate; but if you go back in grace, though you should get all the world,
you are miserable losers. Therefore be sure of this, how ever God do frown upon
you in the world, that you do not go behind in grace. Oh, you may sadly fall
and go behind hand, before you think of it, if you do not take heed to it;
though there be no total falling away from grace for a Believer, yet there may
be sad degrees of falling, and God may let you fall so, that you may besadly
wounded and you may break all your bones; and be a common scandal to Religion
all your days Therefore look to this, that however God deal with you in other
things, account it happy with you if your souls be thriving: and whatever
prosperity God gives you, yet if these do not thrive, let none of these things
content you. Many persons while they are blessing themselves in their outward
increase, are declining in grace. Oh poor Soul! I should pity thy gain, that
addest to thy gain in the world, the loss of thy soul to all eternity.

Seventh Counsel. Take heed whom and what you hear. I fear lest after the
departure of Ministers, wolves should enter not sparing the s^ock. And I am
afraid least any should be found among you of itching ears, harkening after
novelties, and heap up Teachers to your selves. Labor to know what Doctrine
they bring you before you hear them. Take heed lest men of corrupt principles
and dangerous doctrines should make a harvest of you, and draw Disciples after
them; and overthrow the faith of some. And I cannot be faithful to you without
warning you of this miserable danger; you are to take heed to the Call of God.
Beware whom and what you hear, hearken to those that are the sent Ministers of
Christ. It is like enough that Seducers may take the advantage of the present
time, that under pretense of further courage and boldness than Ministers have,
may seem to alienate the people from their Ministers, as flying from their
flocks as hirelings.

Eighth Counsel. Maintain with constancy and frequency the Communion of Saints.
Now is the time my Brethren for those that fear the Lord, to speak often one to
another. Now you are deprived of your public Overseers, take the more careful
oversight one over another, rebuke one another, admonishone another, provoke
one another to love and to good works, now if ever, there will be special need
of this. If you forsake the Assembling of your selves together, we shall see
Religion dying as the coal that is put in the middle of the Room by it self.

Ninth Counsel. Walk together in the order and unity of the Gospel. Take heed
of any dividing principles, mark them that cause Divisions, and avoid them.
Those that are not for peace be not you for them, what ever pretense they may
have to purity attend them not, unless they are men that are for peace. If once
the ranks be broken, the Army is quickly routed, and if once the unity of
Christians be broken, then Satan has got his advantage; and is like to have
his will. O take heed that you keep together in the unity and peace of the
Gospel, that your Ministers and that Jesus Christ may rejoice to behold your
order and your stedfastness in Christ.

Tenth Counsel. Keep up the Life and power of Religion. Be so much the more
vigorous in your Families, by how much the more you are deprived of your
public helps. Christians, be advised by me, and let Satan be disappointed in
this design. He thinks to break the Churches of Christ: Oh but now let every
Family be a Church, and let every Master be a Priest and Prophet to teach their
Family. Praise and pray for them, and do so much the more in your Families, by
how much the more God has deprived you of your Preachers.

Brethren, so it is that the preaching of the Gospel is like to be scarce, and
the means of Conversion is like to be at a stand; and what shall be done for
the Conversion of souls? Oh be dealing with them, and never leave them, till
you see they mind their souls and Religion. Put them upon secret prayer, and
the Catechism, and Repeating the Principles of Religion, oh that I may prevail
with you to set up this duty of Catechizing in your Families in this evil time!
And if so be you would but try the use of that help, that I have caused to be
printed on purpose for that end, I do not doubt but you would find it a happy
means, for the letting in the light into their souls.

Psalm. 74. 1. O God why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger
smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
THis Psalm, and particularly these words, do contain the Churches sad
lamentation over her deep affliction; together with her earnest expostulation
with God about the cause. Two things there are, that the Church in these words
does plead with God. First, The greatness of her Affliction. Secondly, The
nearness of her Relation.

First, The greatness of her Affliction. And there were three things in her
asfliction that did make it lie very heavy upon her. First, The root of this
affliction, and that was Gods [ anger] why does thine ANGER smoke? etc.
(Secondly,) The height of this affliction. God was not only angry, but he did [
smoak] in his anger. (Thirdly,) The length of this affliction. It was so long
that God did seem to cast them off for [ ever.]

Secondly, The ne^rness of her Relation. Against [ the sheep of thy pasture] as
if they should have said, Lord, if thou had done this against thine enemies
it had been no wonder. If thou had poured out thy wrath, against the vessels
of wrath, it had not been so much. But what, will thou draw out thy sword
against the sheep of thy pasture! It were no wonder that thou should take the
fat and the strong, and pour out thy judgments upon them; but will thou do it
to thy sheep! There be several doctrines that I may raise from the words, as

First Doct. That Gods people are his sheep.

Second Doct. That God may be sorely angry with his own people. With his own
sheep.

Third Doct. That when God is angry with his people, it becomes them carefully
to enquire into the Cause.

Fourth Doct. That when Gods people are under affliction, they ought to take
notice of, and be much affected with his anger from which they do proceed.

Fifth Doct. That Gods people under affliction, are, or should be more affected
with his anger, than with their smart. This is that the Church does complain
of: Not that the Church did so smart, but that God was so displeased and angry.
That did most affect her.

Six Doct. That Gods people are apt to have misgiving thoughts of God, when
they are under sore afflictions. God was angry with his people, and their
hearts did misgive them, as if God did cast of his people.

Seventh Doct. That God may be angry with with his people so sore, and so long,
that in the judgment of sense, it may seem, that they are for ever cast off.

Eight Doct. That though the people of God may not murmr against his
proceedings; yet they may humbly expostulate with him about the cause. Why does
thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture? I have spoken heretofore to
the first of these doctrines, I shall speak now to the second. To wit.

Doct. That God may be angry, and sorely angry with his own people. I have
already in the audience of some proved this point. And answered several
questions. As (first) How anger may be ascribed to God? (secondly) How far he
may be angry with his own people. (Thirdly,) What is the difference between
Gods being Angry with his own people, and with the wicked I shall not respeak
any thing of what I have spoken, but proceed to a fourthquestion.

Fourth Question. By what signs and evidences may we come to know whether God
be angry? and here I shall first premise four Propositions: and then answer the
question in six Conclusions. First, I shall premise these 4 propositions.

First Proposition. That a person or people may verily think themselves to be
in Gods favor, when they are indeed under his anger and displeasure.

Second Prop. That neither Gods favor, nor his anger can be known [meerly] by
his outward dispensations.

Third Prop. That Gods anger or favor must be judged of, rather by our carriage
toward him, than by his carriage toward us.

Fourth Prop. That for the discovering of Gods favor or anger, we must consult
rather the book of Conscience, and of Scripture, than the book of providence.

First Proposition. That a person or people may verily think themselves to be
in Gods favor when they are indeed under his anger and displeasure. This is an
awakening consideration, and therefore should be duly laid to heart. A Church
may think her self in a very good and safe condition, and yet Jesus Christ may
loath it, and be ready to spue her out of his mouth. As of the Church of the
Laodiceans. Men may cry to themselves peace and safety, when sudden destruction
may come upon them. And may say, Is not the Lord among us? No evil can come
unto us; and yet be upon the very brink of destruction. Men may have great
hopes of the presence of God with them, and yet evidences of Gods departing
from them. And may cry the temple of the Lord, when God is even casting them
out of his sight. We read of some that had a great deal of confidence of Gods
favor; they would still lean on the Lord, and were consident that he had favor
for them; and yet the Lord was ready to break out upon them to their
destruction, Micah 3. 11, 12. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with
iniquity etc. Yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among
us? None evil can come upon us. Therefore shall Zion for your sakes be ploughed
as a field. They may think that because the ordinances of God are among them,
that God is among them; when God may be turning them up as a field that is
ploughed. This ought to startle and awaken men. Sirs, it is not your
Confidence, but your evidence that will carry it. Many times there are none so
confident of Gods favor, as those that are marked out for the objects of his
eternal wrath and displeasure. The carnal Jews, they would not be beaten out of
their carnal confidence. And though the prophet told them of the wrath of God
that was coming against them, yet they would not hear him, till wrath came upon
them, and there was no remedy.

Second Prop. That neither Gods favor nor his anger can be known, [ meerly] by
his outward dispensations. No man knows either Love or hatred by the things
that are before him. Men have very shrewdly erred by judging of Gods favor, or
wrath by his outward dispensations. When the Psalmist took his mark by this,
how sorely was his faith shaken, and his feet almost gone? When he beheld the
Godly in affliction and under suppression; and the wicked prospering in their
wickedness. The 73 Psalm gives you a true account, what a sad bout he had by
this. He observed they had no bonds in their death, and they were not plagued
like other men. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart
could wish. They were very wicked and yet very prosperous. Full of sin, and yet
full of pleasure, and riches and all outward accommodation. Whereas on the
other side, he observed that he was ^fflicted, and other of the Godly with him.
And was tempted from this, that God did regard the wicked so much, or more than
he did the Godly. And therefore it is a very dangerous mistake among the
multitude. Many think on the one side, that because God does prosper them, and
bless them as he does, that therefore they are in the favor of God: for if they
were not, he would never deliver them, and carry them through so many troubles
as he does, if he did not love them. This is a dangerous mistake. And so some
on the other hand, because God does afflict them here, that therefore he has
mercy for them hereafter. They have their hell here, and therefore they shall
not go to hell hereafter. Alas man! thou may have thy hell begun here, and
lengthened out hereafter to all eternity. Thou can not say from this, that
thou shall escape the torments of hell: but notwithstanding all this, thou
may hear God say to thee at last as to Dives, Son remember that thou in thy
Lifetime receivedst thy good things: but now thou art tormented.

Third Prop. Gods favor or anger must be judged of rather from our carriage
toward him, than from his carriage toward us. If our walk be according to
Gods rule, we may be sure that peace shall be upon us. Gal. 6. 16. If we are
such as fear God and work Righteousness, then we may be certain that we are
accepted with God. Acts. 10. 35. If we do well, we shall be accepted. They that
by patient contim^nce in well-doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality,
shall have eternal life. They are under promise Romans 2. 6, 7. But on the
contrary, tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does evil. Those that
walk disorderly, and in disobedience to the will of God, however God may
prosper them in their ways, as they may seem, yet they must know that Gods
anger is against them. They may know that his anger is against them, because
they walk against him: against the flat command of his word. For these things
comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. The wrath
of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness, and unright cousness
of men, Romans 1. 18. So they that walk in ways of unrighteousness, and
ungodliness, they may know by this that they are under the wrath of God;
however God may seem to carry it toward them. Men may not conclude that
because God does not presently smite, that therefore he is not angry with them.
God may speak never a word, neither strike a blow; and yet may treasure up
wrath against them at the last, and they never think of it. Many a poor wretch
thinks, that God, because he is silent that he approves of them, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things have thou done and I kept silence. Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee and set them in
order before thine eyes. God would make them know, that though for the present
he spoke nothing, and did not show his anger; yet he would make it known
against them. If our carriage be dutiful, and humble toward God, what ever his
carriage be toward us, we may be sure that his love is toward us. God does
many times carry it as if he were angry, for the trial of his people, to see
whether they will trust him, and walk by faith and not by sense. Whether they
will believe though it be against their own feeling. He will many times put his
Children upon this exercise, not in anger, but in Love. As the tender Nurse
does the Child. So on the other hand, God may let men alone, and let them
prosper in the world, though he be dreadfully angry with them.

Fourth Prop, That the favor or anger of God, is rather to be gathered from the
book of Scripture, and of conscience, than from the book of providence. Many
times the book of providence is very dark, and seems to speak that God favors
those men; whereas if we look into the Scripture, we shall see that they are
the vessels of his wrath. And the book of providence may seem to tell us, that
such a people are the objects of his wrath, which if we look into Scripture we
shall find, that they are the people of his love. Therefore the Psalmist, when
he could not know by the book of providence, he went to the Scripture, to the
Sanctuary, to the oracles, and had those things opened there. This book was a
key to open those riddles that he could not understand before. He sees that
those men that did prosper thus, were the objects of his wrath. And on the
other hand, that the poor and afflicted were the only beloved of God. Though
this was against his mind before, Psalm. 77. 13. Thy way O God is in the
Sanctuary. That is, in the place where thy word is preached, and explained,
there is thy way, the meaning and sense of thy providence is discovered. Those
that have the Scripture against them, these are they that bear the marks of
Gods anger upon them. And those that have the Scripture for them, what ever
others judgments be, these be the men of his delight. Therefore let the word
of God be your judge. And with the book of Scripture, compare the book of
Conscience. For, says the Apostle if our hearts condemn us not, than have we
confidence toward God. But if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our
hearts and knows all things Let conscience be consulted with, when thou art
trying thy case, whether thou art in the favor or under the anger of God. And
that will be able, comparing thy state with the Scripture to give a great guess
to this, whether God have favor for thee or be against thee.

Now I must add six Conclusions, in which the question shall be resolved. How
it may be known that God is angry with any people.

First Conclusion. The Reign and dominion of sin is a most certain evidence,
that any person or people, are under Gods anger. Where sin is reigning, and
abounding, gross and heinous sins abounding in any nation or place, you need
not any other evidence that God is angry with that people. Especially, when
those Iniquities are tolerated by Magistrates, or found in persons that are in
a public place, then they are fearful signs of Gods anger: then you may know
there is great misery for such people, though he may seem at present to prosper
them. And so for any particular person, whether the sin be gross or close, if
thou art under the power of any one unmortified sin, thou may be sure thou
art under the anger and wrath of God, Ephesians. 6. 5. For these things comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. Romans 2. 8, 9. But to them that
are contentious, and obey not the truth indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish unto every soul that does evil. Art thou yet in thy Natural unconverted
state, unrenewed? thou may go away with sadness; thou go up and down with
Cain, with certain marks of Gods displeasure upon thee; for we are by Nature
Children of wrath. If thou art in the estate thou were in by Nature, thou art
surely under the wrath of God. If thou remainest in thy old unbeleef, thou
need no more dispute about this matter, the wrath of God abides on thee:
The whole book of God, and the threatenings of God, do rise up with open mouth
to condemn thee that live in any unmortified sin. Now sin is unmortified,
when persons go on in a purpose of sinning, and in a willingness to practice
sin. Romans 6. 16. Know ye not, that to whom you yield your selves servants to
obey, his servants you are to whom you obey? whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto Righteousness. To whom you [ yield] your selves servants to
obey. The servant of God is taken [ captive] by his sin under a temptation; but
if you yield your selves servants to them, you are the servants of sin. Yield
your selves servants to [ obey] whom do you ordinarily [ obey]? If the devil
can do more with you to draw you from God, than God can to keep you to him; if
he can do more with you to make you neglect prayer, than God can to keep you to
it; or if he can prevail with you to commit any sin, more then God can to keep
you from it, you are under the wrath of God. There is a two fold anger, a
stated anger, and occasional anger or temporal anger. Occasional and temporal
anger, and so the Children of God may fall under his anger: but by their
application to him in Christ that anger may be taken off again. But there is a
^ate of anger, and that is with the wicked. And this thou art under, who do
live in unmortified sin. Thou art in a state of anger, in a state of wrath.

Second Con When the threats and menaces of Gods Word are against men, this is
a sure evidence of his anger. You know we may discern the anger of men by their
Rebukes, and threats, and the like. If the word of God be against thee, be sure
the anger of God is against thee. Therefore consult the Scripture. If the
Scripture do speak sadly of thy state, that is an undeniable evidence of Gods
anger, Zeph. 2. 5. Woe to the inhabitants of the Sea coast, the word of the Lord
is against you. O woe to them that the word of the Lord is against! There is
wrath from the Lord against that man. Therefore if the Lord do speak against
thee, Make thy peace with speed. Do as Haman, when he saw the King rise up in
have: he stood up to make request for his life to the Queen. Est. 7, 7, So if
thou do find that there is evil intended against thee by thy sins, O fall
down upon thy knees and make up thy peace.

Third Con. Public calamities, except when they come upon a people for
Righteousness sake, are the evident tokens of Gods anger. When God does strike
a nation or a people with war, or with pestilence, or with famine, or the like
this is a manifest token of Gods anger with such a nation or people. This you
may see throughout the book of Judges. Still it was when the people had sinned,
and God was angry, that these public calamities were brought upon them, Judge.
2. 13, 14, 19, 20, 21. and 3. 7, 8. and 10. 6. There you may see that public
calamities did proceed from the sins that were among them. And if sin be a sign
of Gods anger, you may easily make application. Should not we fear and tremble?
should not we humble our selves in the dust, and cloth our selves with
sackcloth? God has sent all his three greatplagues togetherupon our nation,
Famine, Sword, and War. O apply this, and see that you be sadly affected with
Gods displeasure against our Nation.

But here I put in an exception [ When they come upon a people for
Righteousness sake] then though the calamities be common and public. Yet it is
not a sign of Gods anger. In the primitive times, the Christians were fearfully
persecuted every where, and were killed by the thousands, and therefore this
was rather Martyrdom, then signs of Gods anger.

Here two things must be considered: whether these afflictions did find them
cleaving to the Lord in their duty: Or, going off from him, and declining their
duty. Now if they do find them decaying and remitting their zeal and diligence,
then those evils, though they do come upon them for Righteousness sake, yet
they come for Gods anger too. And so though they should rejoice in them as
coming from wicked men, yet they should be humbled, and take notice too of the
hand of Godagainst them in correcting their vices.

Fourth Con. When God does suffer men to prosper in an evil way, this is a
fearful sign of Gods anger. Prosperity is so far from being a sign of Gods
favor, that when prosperity does attend men, and follow them in an evil way, it
is one of the most dreadfullest marks in the world against a person or people.
Whom the Lord loves he rebukes, and chastens, that is, if they wander and go
out of his way. And we are judged of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world, Cor. 11. 32. So when the Lord lets men go on in their evil ways
unpunished, it is a sign he intends they shall be condemned with the world.
Brethren, be jealous of your selves, if God let a person go on in a way of
wickedness, it is a fearful sign. Hos. 4. 14. I will not punish your daughters
when they commit whordome etc. Therefore the people that does not understand
shall fall. It is a sign that he intends higher displeasure against a person,
when he lets them go on in a way of sin, and will not stop them, but let them
take their swinge in sin. Those whom he intends love to, shall be corrected
here, and stopped: but others shall have the gibbet kept for them at last.

Fifth Con. Spiritual judgments are ever to be taken as sore evidence of Gods
anger. Many times God does inflict temporal judgments with an intention to
reform them, and amend a people: but when he gives up a person or people to
Spiritual judgments, this is a token of his highest displeasure. God does
threaten as one of the sorest evidences of his displeasure [ a Famine of the
word] So Psalm. 78. 59, 60. When God heard this he was wrath, and greatly
abhorred Israel: so that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh the tent which he
had placed among men. When God forsook the tabernacle, and deprived them of the
former tokens of his presence in their ordinances, this was a sign that he
abhorred Israel. So our Savior as his tokens of his displeasure against the
Church threatens that he would remove his Candlestick. He would unchurch them
as one of his most fearful threatenings, Rev. 2. 5. Romans 1. 23, 24, 28. The
Apostle speaks of some that were under the fearful token of Gods wrath in this.
This was a fearful token of Gods wrath against them indeed, when God should
give them up to such spiritual judgments. Psalm. 81. 10, 11. My people would not
hearken to my voice: so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts. O this was
dreadful indeed! This was the sorest expression of Gods anger that could be
against that people, so 2 These. 2. 11, 12. God shall send them strong
delusions, etc. Romans 11. 7. 8. The elect has obtained it; but the rest were
blinded, etc. O do you see any such souls thus delivered up? O let your hearts
tremble for such persons This is a shrewd evidence, that they are persons given
up to great judgments.

Six Con. Temporal afflictions, when they find the people of God straying, and
wandering, and declining from him, are evident tokens of Gods anger. They are
not always tokens of his anger. When they find us keeping close to God, they
are for trial, and not signs of Gods displeasure? Job was highly commended by
the Lord when the affliction was upon him. Therefore we must consult conscience
whether it was not for such a sin that God is now afflicting thee. And if thou
do find it was for sin, thou had need run quickly and make the atonement.
But if otherwise, you may conclude it is but for proof and trial and exercising
those graces that God has given you.

A Discourse made by Mr. Joseph Alleine on a night of solemn Thanksgiving,
which he held with his people in Taunton, some days before the five-mile-Act
came in force, by virtue of which he was then to leave them.
MOst dearly beloved Brethren, with no little Joy and Thankfulness have I
thought of this time, when I should once more see your faces together: and be
so truly glad, with so heart contenting a mercy, as to rejoice with the Joy of
Gods people and to glory with his inheritance.

It is a time, that to some, may seem unseasonable to set up Thanksgivings when
our calamities are so near approaching. But surely, if I had never hopes to
enjoy one day with you more, the last day should be a day of praise. And if I
were sure that we were now to take our farewell of Christians and Ministers, and
of all our former liberties, I should exhort you that we might join once more
in lifting up hearts and hands in bl^ssing God for all the mercies that we have
met with together. Your Condition is never such but your mercies are infinitely
greater, and more then your afflictions. Neither may the sense of misery at any
time surprise you, so as to drown the Thankful acknowledgement of Gods mercies.
God that has been always good to you, has never been better then since you
have had affliction. Elijah was never so happily fed at a full Table as when it
was a time of great Famine: when God sent him every bit of bread and flesh by
the mouth of a Raven. Oh how sweetly do you think that every bit of this bread
did relish with the man of God? when he saw that he received it imediately out
of Gods own hand?

Brethren, though it has been a time of great calamity, yet God has herein
heightened his mercy to you; you have seen the Bush of God burning and yet not
consumed. The portion of Gods Children has been taken away, and yet our cheeks
have been fat. We have been cast with Daniel into the Lions den: but God has
sent his angel and shut the Lions mouth, and we have not been destroyed but are
here together to praise the Lord.

Methinks there are several periods of time, ^ine the time of our calamities,
wherein God has appeared to us, when we thought all had bin gone. One period
was when your Ministers were shut out of public by the Act of Uniformity.
Another when we were cast out of our private Meetings, by the Act made against
^ditious Conventicles. So called by the iniquity of the times. Another by this
Act that does now cast Ministers out of their Habitations. And me thinks every
period should end with praise. We read, that when they removed the Ark, that
when they had passed such a number of paces then they slew a sacrifice: so me
thinks as we pass thief periods of time, at the end of every period we should
offer pr^ise. What though God has separated your preachers from you, ye as he
said, if the Soldier dies fighting, and the preacher preaching, and the swan
singing, then the Saints should part praising. Oh Christians this is the spirit
that should be in you, that what ever God does with you for the time to come,
you should resolve to end in his praise for the mercies past. If it were the
last day we should have together, surely methinks we should end in praise. And
since the Alarm has been sounded, by the late unhappy Act, that saying of
Sampson has run often in my mind, let me dye with the Philistines: so methinks
I would say, let me dye with praise. And now O God, let my hands and heart be
lifted up with thy praise: that I may touch their hearts; that every heart of
theirs, may sound forth thy heavenly praise. But it is easy to be lost in
praise, the mercies of God are a deep that cannot be fathomed. Where shall I
begin or end? How shall I reach to the top? or when shall I come to the bottom?
however I will not say nothing, because I cannot say all. Let me touch a little
of the mercies of God: a little this Evening to show the mercy of God to you.
And let it live upon your hearts as long as you live. Consider now what great
things God has done for you, whether you are the people of God in general; or
people of Taunton in particular. How great are the mercies of God to you!

First, As you are the people of God in general. This is the top of all your
mercies. In this says our Savior rejoice, not that the spirits are made
subject to you: but in this that your names are written in heaven. Brethren we
have many mercies to praise the Lord for: but this is that should most affect
us, Gods peculiar mercy to us, as we are his chosen generation, and peculiar
people. Consider now what the Lord has done for you. Let me open it to you in
six or seven particulars.

(First.) You are the Election of Grace. (Secondly,) You are the first born of
God. (Thirdly,) You are the first fruits of the Creation. (Fourthly,) You are
the Remnant of escape. (Fifly,) You are the Burgesses of heaven. (Sixthly,) You
are the Members of Christ. (Seventhly,) You are the living stones of the
Temple. Blessed is the man, you will say, whose happiness this is. But this
damps my Joy and comfort, lest I should not be the man. Now lest this should
damp thy Joy, let me give thee two Characters, by which thou may come to know
whether this be thy case. Thou may know it by the Transactions that have
passed between Christ and thy Soul: and by the Treasure that has been made
choice of by thee.

First, By the Transactions that have passed between Christ and thee. Have thou
passed under the Bond of his Covenant? as Christ has offered himself to thee,
have thou again delivered up thy self to him? have thou renounced all thy known
sins? And took the Lord Jesus Christ for ^hy Head and Husband, to love, honor,
obey him above all? have thou considered the conditions of Christ, and accepted
of them all? and say as my Lord says, so I will do. Does thy heart close
with the selfdenying laws of Christ, and art resolved not to allow thy self in
any known sin; but to rise again by repentance? If so, thou art the man I am
speaking of.

Secondly, Thou may know it by the Treasure that has been made choice of by
thee. Every man is known by what he pitcheth his heart upon for his Treasure.
What is it, man, that carries thy heart? The things seen, or the things
unseen? Who has most of thy heart, God or the world? Which way stands the bent
of thy heart? a godly manmust not judge of himself by what he is at worst, under
a prevalent Temptation: Nor others by what they are at best in a fit: but where
is thy constant bent? What is thy chiefest care and delight? Is it to converse
with God? And be like to God? What does please thee best, when thou art
contriving thy happiness? Does this, that God is thine? Or is it something here
below? What is thy care? Is it to please God? If it be thus, thou art the man
that I am speaking to. And now you that are thus, that have passed under the
bond of Gods Covenant; and have made choice of him for your happiness, know and
understand.

First, That you are the election of Grace. The election h^th obtained it,
says the Apostle, but the rest were blinded. You are the handful that God has
taken out but the heap are left. Oh Christians, the great Transaction of God
from all eternity has been about you. And the great transactions of God in
time have been about you. The Lord did from all eternity enter into a league
with his Son for you: and did give him to you. God was laying the foundation of
your happiness before he laid the foundation of the world. God was making
provision for you from all eternity. Our Savior is often speaking of this gift
in John 17. so John 10. 29. My father which gave them me is greater then all,
John. 6. 39. And this is the Fathers will that of all that he has given me I
should loose nothing. And so, All that the Father has given me shall come unto
me. Oh Christian, does not this assect thy heart? that the eternal Counsel of
the great God should be taken up about thee? that God should be bargaining and
agreeing with his Son about thee! that thou should be mentioned by name from
all eternity? Christ knows his sheep by name. And he bids such rejoice, because
their names are written in heaven. O man, did God design thee from all eternity
by name! How should this affect thy heart? what did God build all this world
for? It was that Christ might have a seed. And why do he continue the world?
it is because Christ might have the elect sinished, when the elect are numbered
the Trumpet shall sound, and away he comes togather his elect. Christ's coming,
what was it for? that he might ransom his sheep. And his second coming, what
is it sor, but that he might receive his elect? John 14. 3. I will come again
and receive you to my self, that where I am ye may be also, Math. 24, 31. He
shall send his angels, with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the
other. What was the end of Christ's low Humiliation, even to death, but to save
his people from their sins? Math. 1. 21. And what is the end of Christ's
glorious exaltation, to all power and greatness? it was all for the elect, John
17. 2. Christ has all power in heaven and earth delivered to him for your
sakes; for the elect. That he might give eternal life to the elect. Oh man,
what a heart have thou, if all this cannot move thee! if thou had stood by,
when he laid the foundation of the fabric of this world, would thou not have
said surely it is for some great end? if thou had stood by when Christ was
Crucisied, and known the mystery, would thou not have said, surely this is
for some great end? why all this was for thee.

Secondly, You are the first born of God, Heb. 12. 23. you are come to the
general Assembly, the Church of the first born which are written in heaven, The
Apostle speaks of our privileges as if we were come to heaven already. You [
are] come etc. you are Gods Israel; and beside, you areadmitted to have fellow
ship with Jesus Christ, and by faith are made one with him. Now Christ is Gods
first born, and we being joined to him are made one with him. We are joint
heirs with Christ. Now the first born had many privileges, As.

(First,) The sirst-born had the dearest affestion, Zach. 12. 10. They shall be
in bitterness as one for his sirst- born. There is the great sorrow, because
there run out the great stream of affection, in this respect you are the
firstborn of God: you are they that have his dearaffection, Ephesians. 5. 1. You are
called the dear children of God. O the dear expressions, that he uses to you,
and the dear affections that he has for you! you are called the dearly beloved
of his soul. O what drops of love does God drop in these sacred leaves of this
book? how full is the book of the Canticles? My love, My dove, My undesiled.
God does out bid the love of all the parents in the world. Can a woman forget
her sucking child? sho may; but I will not forget thee, says the Lord. The
dearest mother when she lets her child out of her hands may forget it, but you
are never out of my hands: you are engraven there. O what rouling bowels are
there in those words, Jer. 31. 20. Is Ephraim my Son? is he a pleasant child?
For since I spoke against him I do earnestly remember him still: therefore My
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him says the Lord.
Oh man do thou consider that all this is spoken to thee? All this love, God
has in his heart for thee; yea beyond all expression dear art thou to God.

(Secondly,) The firstborn do carry the inheritance. This is your case, the
inheritance is for you. Though a man have many Sons, yet not many heirs: it is
his firstborn is his heir, though a King has many Sons, yet but one King:
it is the firstborn that is King after him. In this refpect Gods children are
the firstborn: for they are all heirs, you are all Kings, you that are
begotten again, you are begotten to an inheritance, to a heavenly, that fades
no^ away.

(Thirdly,) The firstborn had a special blessing. Genesis 27. 19. I am Esau thy
firstborn. And you know when Esau knew that Jacob had got the blessing of the
firstborn, he accounted himself undone: and he lifted up his voice and wept.
Brethren, you have the blessing. Let others glory in their wealth and riches;
who ever have these benefits it is you have the blessing. Beloved, you are the
Jacobs, when others are the Esaus: you carry the blessing of the firstborn.
Nay and God ratisies the blessing on you as that upon Jacob. I have blessed him
and he shall be blessed. Balaam was sensible of this; He has blessed and I
cannot reverse it. You that are Gods firstborn, God has made you unchangeably
happy, you are unalterably blessed, God has blessed you and it cannot be
reversed.

(Fourthly,) The firstborn did carry the honor, and were accounted the
excellency and strength of the f^ily. Genesis 49. 3. Reuben, thou art firstborn,
my might and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power. And God says of his first born as Jacob of his. Thou art
the excellency of dignity. So God says of you: I will make of you an eternal
excellency. You know if a Knight have many Sons, there is but one Knight. And
so of a Lord it is the firstborn is Lord after him: he carries the honor of the
family. So you my Brethren, you carry the honor: you are the only honorable
persons in Gods account. Since thou have been precious in my sight thou have
been honorable. And, those that honor me I will honor. Brethren, put this
together, and see if there be not reason to lift up the praise of God on high:
and to say Now I will let up thine horn on high. Surely God has listed up your
horn on high.

Thirdly, You are the first sruits of the Creation. Jam. 1. 18. Of his own will
beg at he us with his word of truth that we should be a kind of first fruits of
his Creatures. Now there were several things observable in the first fruits, As.

(First,) The first fruits, they were the choice of the fruits. And therefore
God, that did ever require them to bring the best, would require them to bring
the fir^t-fruites of the Creatures. Beleivers are the first fruits of Gods
works. And God sets more value upon this workmanship then upon any thing else
beside. Other things they show some footsteps of God: but the new cre^ture that
has the very Image of God, and so is the first fruit of all. The first fruits
are of a more higher price and esteem than any other. So are you: you are those
that he calls his excellent ones. Those whom he binds up amongst ^s Jewels. The
Saints are the desire of his eyes, and the joy of his heart. Christians, I
speak this to you and you must apply it. You are the desire of Christ Psalm. 4.
5. 11. He asks no other portion but you, Psalm. 2. 8. And you are his delight as
well as his desire. Prove. 8. The wisdom of the Father from all eternity, had
his delight in the habitable part of the earth. Isaiah 53. He shall see his
seed, and he shall see of the Travail of his soul and be satisfied. You are his
seed, you are the Travail of his soul. Christ is content and satisfied to have
this portion. And as the woman forgets her sorrow when she sees her seed, that
a man child is born: so Christ forgets all his pain and trouble, when he sees
his seed the travail of his soul.

(Secondly,) The first fruits were but few in number, in comparison of the full
number and harvest. So it is here, the Saints are but few Thou art the fewest in
number of all people, says Moses to Israel: so may I say to you, you are as
two or three Olives upon the uppermost boughs, or four or five upon the outmost
branches. Gods first fruits are but few. Ah Christian, stand still and admire
free grace, that thou should be one of this few. Christ does manifest himself
to you, and not to the world. He prays for you, and not for the world, you are
a peculiar people to him. O what a little flock of kids has Christ, in
comparison of the herds and droves, and swarms that Satan drives before him to
destruction! and art thou one of that number that stand with the lamb upon
mount Sion? O how should thou cause the praises of the Lord to be heard? they
are but few of the number of mankind that are admitted into this grace wherein
you stand. Therefore as you have special favor from God, engage in the praise
of God.

(Thirdly,) The first fruits were holy to the Lord. These God did reserve for
himself, as it were, for his own eating. As you know, the first fruits are
preserved for to be presented to Kings at their table for their eating. So are
you. Thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, Psalm. 4, (...). Know ye that
the man that is Godly, God has set apart for himself. God says as it were,
set this man by for me. God says of his sirst fruits, these shall be set aside
for me. These shall be mine, Mal. 3. 17. As God would put a special honor upon
the Sabbath day above all other days, because upon this day he rested from his
Labor: so you are the honor of all the Creation: because you are a people that
God has set apart for himself. Ah Brethren, here is your dignity and
privilege above all people, that you are separate to the Lord: that you have
special relation to him. This makes you to be above all other people, because
the Sun of Gods favor shines peculiarly upon you.

(Fourthly,) The first fruits were to be gathered into the Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 26.
God had in his Temple, the Chambers into which was to be gathered the first
fruits, as peculiarly dedicated unto God. So we read, in Neh. 12. 44. Thus you
are Gods first fruits. And God will gather his first fruits into his Chambers,
into his glory shortly. He shall gather his wheat into his garner, Math. 3. 12.
Math. 13. 30. The husbandman there, (who is no other than God himself) he
speaks to his servants, that they should let alone the tares for a season, and
in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, gather you together first the
Tares, and bind them in bundles, and burn them but gather the wheat into my
Barn. This harvest is the end of the world: and the angels are the reapers; and
heaven is the barn; and you are the fruits, and God will send shortly, and
gather you into his barn; when the wicked shall be turned into hell in bundles,
they shall be cast into Tophet; but you shall be gathered into Gods barn; into
his glory. God do but stay awhile till the fruits be ripe and ready, and then
you shall be all brought safe into his Treasury.

(Fifthly,) The first fruits were to be set before the Lord as a monument of
his faithfulness, Deuteronomy. 26. 1. etc. Where you may observe these particulars.
First, The first fruits, they were to be presented before the Lord as a
thank-offering, so you. Secondly, The first fruits were to be brought to the
priest, though you are the first fruits, yet you can expect nothing of God but
at the hands of the priest, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, They were to be
offered up with a thankful acknowledgement of Gods mercy, and their former
misery, the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down
before the altar of the Lord thy God; and thou shall speak and say, A Syrian
ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt and sojourned there
with a few, and became there a Nation great, mighty, and populous. Fourthly,
They were to be set before the Lord as a monument of his faithfulness: thus
beleivers, my Brethren, they shall be taken by Christ, and presented by him
unto God as a monument of his faithfulness. And thou shall profess before the
Lord thy God, I am indeed come unto the Country concerning which the Lord swear
unto me: surely the Lord is faithful in all that he has promised: and there
has not one word failed of all that he has said by the mouth of all his
prophets.

Fourthly, You are the remnant of escape, it is Ezrahs phrase. Brethren, you
know that all mankind was interested in Adam: all in one common bottom. Adam
miscarryed and so all mankind is shipwracked at once. And O how few are the
number of those that escape! and art thou one of them? O how should you bless
the Lord! methinks, you that God has taken out of all the kindreds of the
earth, you should run to God, as the several messengers to Job, Thy Sons and
thy Daughters were eating and drinking wine, and the house fell upon them, and
they are dead; and I only am escaped to tell thee. So should you say, oh so
many of the Tribes of the earth are famished, and I am lest alone to tell thee:
to praise thee. O methinks so should the redeemed of the Lord compass him
about. O methinks I should see you in the posture of those redeemed, lifting up
your voices together as the voice of many waters. Oh Christians, look back to
your former bondage. Do not forget the Egypt that you were in bondage in: and
the bonds of your lu^s, that you were held Captive in. O look back to the house
of bondage and to the Iron furnace, the cruelty and tyranny from whence y^ have
made your escape, and now lift up the praise of your Redeemer. How should you
stand upon the brink and look down into the horrible pit from which God has
plucked you! Brethren, you all suffered in that common shipwreck; yet, as in
the voyage of Paul, they all escaped safe to land, so God has ordered you,
that all that were with Jesus Christ are escaped. O methinks you are like the
world full of corn, and in comes Satan, and mows down whole swarfs, and you are
left as a single ear here and there upon a ridge. O remember ^ire and brimstone
is coming down upon the world, and God has laid his hand upyou and made you
escape, and provided a Zoar for you. O while you see the Egyptians drowned upon
the shore and you escaped, how should you be much in praising the Lord? the
deluge is coming down upon the world, and but one Ark of men shall be saved.
And are you the men that God has purposed to save? are you the men that God
has put forth his hand and took in? O ^less the Lord for this mercy.

Fifthly, You are the Burgesses of heaven. Heb. 12. 23. To the general assembly
and Church of the first born, which are written in heaven. We read of a City
that has foundations; whose builder and maker is God, of that City art thou a
Denizen. Thou art no more a stranger and forreigner but a fellow Citizen, and
of the household of God: though heaven and earth are so distant in place, yet
there is a real communion the Saints here are free burgesses of heaven.
Christian, thou art the man, that art made free of heaven: and who art born
free.

Sixthly, You are the members of Christ, we are members of his body; of his
slesh and bone. Consider Christian, beleivest thou this? if thou do, thou
need not be called upon to praise. O what to be a real member of Christ's
living body! yet so it is. If thou be touched it is Christ suffers wrong. Saul,
Saul, why (...) thou me? He is as tender of you as of a member of his own body:
and as dear does he love you. And as sure as he carried the members of his body
into heaven, so sure will he carry thee. And as sure as the members of his
natural body are glorified in heaven, so surely will he glorisie thee.

Seventhly, You are the living stones of the Temple, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Thou art cut
out of the common quarry with others, as rugged a stone as the rest: but thee
has God pitched upon and chosen to be a polished stone for his own building.
When God has left others he has pitched on thee. Christian, it little mat^rs
though thou art undervalued of men; yet herein God has honored thee, those
that men rejected God has made the chief of the building.

Now put all this together and see whether God has not done much for you, you
are the election of grace, the first born of God, the first fruits of the
Creation, the remnant of escape, the Burgesses of heaven, the members of
Christ, the living stones of the Temple. O whence should God have praise if not
from you? who should lift up his name if not you? but,

Secondly, Consider what God has done for you as you are the inhabitants of
Taunton in p^rticular. Though the former should ever ring loudest and carry the
principal part in your praise; yet the other may not be forgot^n.

Now will I sing a song to my welbeloved, touching his vineyard, Isa. 5. 1. The
vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the Town of Tau^ton, and the inhabitants
thereof his pleasant plant. And now I will tell you what God has done sor his
vineyard. He has plucked up the fence thereof, and yet it is not eaten up. Her
hedges are broken down; yet they that pass by the way do not pluck her, nor
the wild Boars of the sorrest eat her: nor the beasts of the sield devour her.
She is burnt with fire; and yet is not burnt up. O what has God done for his
vineyard here? O remember now, O people what the enemy consulted, and what the
Lord answered; they said come let us curse Taunton and let us defy the people
of God: But who shall curse whom the Lord has not cursed? And (...) whom the
Lord has not defied? God has blessed, and who shall reverse it? happy art
thou O people: who is like thee O Taunton, saved by the Lord the shield of thy
power, the sword of this excellency? The archers have shot at thee, yet they
have not hurt thee.

Shall I particularize the mercies of God to Taunton? why, consider he has
been a Savior to you: a shepherd to you: a keeper to you.

1. He has been a Savior to you. He has saved your throats from the sword,
your habitations from the flames, your lives from the plague your persons from
the prison. (1.) He has saved your Throat from the sword, have you forgotten
that you were a people devoted to destruction, by the sons of violence? but God
disappointed them and gave you your lives for a prey.

(2.) Your habitations from the flames. The flames have been set in Ambush
against you, and yet your habitations are not burnt down to this day.

(3.) Your lives from the plague. It has been devoured by the plague
heretofore, and yet it has not devoured you. How eminently has God preserved
you in this place in the time of common calamity that has been among others. O
think not that it was because those were greater sinners than are in Taunton:
No, but because God has a peculiar intention of saving you. Yet I say to you
as Christ ^o them, think not that those upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell,
were greater sinners than any in Jerusalem. I tell you nay, but except you
repent ye shall all likewise perish. We have had the same sins, and yet God
has preserved us.

(4.) Your persons from the prison. How often has God preserved you? he has
been like the cloud upon Israel: and upon all the glory there has been a
defense. Once indeed some of you have tasted of a prison: but what a mercy was
it, that it was but once? I might tell you what a mercy it is to you, that you
have not been troubled with the prelates Courts. but,

Secondly, God has been a shepherd to you. Therefore you have not wanted.
Who is it that drives you by the still waters, though you are as a lamb in a
large place, it is because God is your shepherd Whence is it that you lie down
in green pastures? it is because God is your shepherd. How has God provided
for you formerly and of late?

Thirdly, God has been a keeper to you. When you were sent to prison God did
keep you. O do not forget the mercies of a prison. I believe, that of all the
passages of our lives, many of us have no such experience of Gods mercy as in a
prison. O the provision that God did make for us there! O the constant meals,
the sweet meals that God did make for us there.

Brethren now let us thankfully commemorate all these mercies. Let me call upon
you as the Psalmist, rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and again rejoice O ye
people, let your voice be heard on high. Let us worship and fall down before
the Lord our maker. Let it be said, praise waits for thee a God in Taunton.
Well might praise wait for God in Taunton, for God has waited to be gracious
to us. There was the place that he chose to put his name there. There break
(...) the Arrows and the spear. Who is like our God who rides on the Heaven
for our help, and on the sky for our aid? Blessed is the people that hears
the joyful sound, they shall rejoice in thee O Lord. The Lord is our
deliverance, and the holy one of Israel is our King. Shout therefore, O
inhabitants of Taunton, for great is the work of the Lord with you. And now, O
Lord, Bless them, and accept the work of their hands, and lift them up: and let
them lift thee up for ever.

A Sermon preached in order to the Sacrament, on a Sacramental day.
Luke. 2. 10, 11. And the angel said unto them, ^ear not: for behold, I bring
you good tidings, of great joy, which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ
the Lord.


MY Brethren, good tidings, I know must needs be welcome to you at such a time
as this. Now God has sent me to you with the most blessed news that ever came
to man: that is, that to you is born a Savior.

You have here the History of our Saviors birth. The shepherds, they were
abroad in the fields watching over their flocks by night, v. 8. and while they
were thus diligent in attending their slocks, then the angel brought this news
to them. From whence observe by the way, how good it is to be following our
lawful callings. The fruits of these tidings was great fear, that fell upon the
shepherds when they saw the angel. And against this fear, the angel bid them
be of good comfort. Then you have here, the news, behold I bring you good
tidings etc. where you have observable. First, Th^e ^senger; the Angel.
Secondly, The fruits of it; great joy to all people. Thirdly, The matter of
this news; That to them was born a Savior. From the words observe this Doctrine.

Doct. That it is the blessedest news that ever came to the ears of man, news
worthy of angels from God to be the Messengers of it, that unto us is come a
Savior.

Brethren, I must needs commend the Grace of God to me this day, in making me
the messenger of such news to you as this is. I am unworthy to bring you this
news, it is for angels to bring this news, they were sent with this message, as
you see; yet God has been pleased to send me as a Messenger with these tidings
to you. Now I shall show you that this is the best news that ever came to the
ears of man, and that.

First, If you consider the deplorable condition that he found man in.

Secondly, If you consider what a great salvation he has wrought for man.

First, If you consider the deplorable condition that he found us in, we were
all gone out of the way: we had fallen among thieves; and between sin and Satan,
we were robbed and wounded: and this Samaritan found us, and he cured us, and
it cost him no less than his own blood. So desperate a disease is sin, that
nothing will cure us, but the death of Christ. He found us shut up in sin, and
were not able to get out; and then he rolled away the stone for us, and knocked
off our fetters, and wrought deliverance for us. This was the misery of man's
condition, that he was in a helpless condition, Romans 5. 6. There was no
possibility for us ever to recover our selves. Neither was there help in any
other, beside Christ, Act. 4. 12. Heaven nor earth could not find out a way to
deliver man, till God found out a way. And because heaven and earth could not
find out a way, God and man must come together; and as he was God he must
satisfy; and as he was man he must suffer; and so we must come out. He found
us stinking in our grave as he did Lazarus. The stinking carrion does not stink
more than we did when Christ found us.

Secondly, If you consider what a great salvation he has wrought for us. This
will appear, if you consider from what he has saved us; and how he has saved
us.

First, From what he has saved us.

First, From the Roaring-Lion.

Secondly, From our raging-lusts.

Thirdly, From the ^ming furnace.

Fourthly, From the King of terrors.

First, From the roaring Lion. So is our adversary, the Devil called, 1 Pet. 5.
8. This is he that Christ has delivered us from. We were all in the Paw of
this lion, and Christ came and delivered us from him. This is the D^vid that
slew the lion, and the bear, and saved us, when we were like to be destroyed.
When Satan did think to triumph over Christ, then did Christ triumph over him.
Col. 2. 15. All the powers of hell did combine together, and labored to give
Christ the overthrow; they had brought him to the cross, and there triumph over
him, and thought that then they had done all; and yet then did he overthrow
them. Oh! what a mercy is this, to be delivered (not only from the bondage of
Egypt, but) from the spiritual Egypt! Col. 1. 13. Who has deliveed us from the
power of darkness etc. My Brethren, we were fast shut up in prison, in the
prison of which Satan was the Jailer: and there was no possibility of getting
loose from him. We were laid up as slaves under him, and were led captive by
him at his will. Now what praise do we owe to him, that has delivered us from
such a Tyrant as this! this is our deliverance, ( Act. 26. 18.) to be turned
from the power of Satan unto God. This has Christ done for us: he has
delivered us from the power of Satan. We were once in his family, and did his
work, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Ephesians. 6. 12. They are called the rulers of the darkness of
this world. That is, poor ignorant souls, that were lying in our ignorance. And
that not some of us only, but all of us.

Secondly, From our raging lusts. As from the slavery of Satan, so from the
dominion of sin. Romans 6. 14. By Christ we are freed from the dominion of sin.
My brethren, Christ does not only free us from the damnation, but from the,
dominion of sin. To be the servant of sin, is a most miserable slavery. What a
mercy is it to be delivered from a master, whose work is drudgery; and whose
wages is destruction! such a one is Satan. Would it not have pitied us to have
seen the poor man in the Gospel, going up and down among the tombs, and doing
nothing but cutting and wounding himself? such a one is every unsanctified
person: they go up and down wounding of themselves. And though they feel not
their wounds that sin gives them, yet there is a day coming, when (conscience
being awakened) they will seel it. Do you know, my brethren, what the work is
that sin sets us upon? it is to destroy our selves, John 8. the Jews, they
plead that they were free; and what did our Savior tell them of making them
sree? Oh! but they were servants to their lusts, which was the greatest
slavery, my brethren, to be under the power of a man's lusts, is a most perfect
slavery. Do but look upon a sinner that has an enlightened conscience, and see
how he rends and tears, and is in a worse condition than the most woofull
galley-slave that is in the world. And then he vows and covenants against his
sin, and then his sin eggs him on again, and then to his conscience falls upon
him. Oh, this is a sad condition! now this Christ has delivered us from. Sin
will be in us, but Christ has promised that it shall not reign in us. And this
is the blessed deliverance he has wrought in us; and this he will perfect at
the last day. And by the way, you may see and try whether you have any part in
Christ or no. Why how may we know it? are you delivered from your sins? though
sin be in you, is it there against your consent? if so, you are they whom
Christ dyed for. But if it be in you in its dominion, you have no part nor
portion in this matter. A man were better be the most perfect galleyslave in
the world, than to be under the power of sin. Now this Christ has delivered
you from.

Thirdly, From the slaming furnace. This is another thing that Christ has
delivered you from. If the furnace heated to show the terribleness of
Nebuchadnezzars rage was so hot, that it burnt up those that cast in the three
children; how hot is the surnace of the Almighty God, that is kindled by him,
great rivers of brimstone running out into it, and the breath of the Lord does
kindle it? Oh, you know not what it is to be damned! you may know what it is to
be sick or the like; but you know not what this word DAMNATION means. 2 These.
1. 8, 9. In (...) fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, etc. Who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power. When we see wicked men under the Terrors of
conscience, how do they wish for death, that they might know what their torment
is? as Spira, and William Rogers. Oh, can you tell what this terrible furnace
is? this is that which Christ, has delivered us from. When I consider what
this gul^ is, I c^not but wonder at my own and others stupidity, that we are
not ever! ever, praising the Lord! if the terror of the Lord be so great, that
when he does let out but a drop of it upon a poor creature, how terrible is all
that wrath, the treasure of that wrath that is laid up for the ungodly! Romans 2.
5. 8. 9. Jam. 5. 3. Those wicked rich men, there, they had, as they thought,
heaped up treasures of riches by oppressing the poor: but the Apostle tells them
they heaped up treasures of wrath. And this we were all born to, had not Christ
cut off the entail. O man, woman, can think of burning for ever in the fire
of the Lords wrath, and not be praising the Lord that thou art yet out of hell?
O bless the Lord, that delivered thee from so great a death: and has endured
such torments that thou may be set free. He did bear the rod of Gods wrath
that thou may be saved to all eternity. If Christ had not been, where had we
been! as the Son of God, coming among the three children, saved them from
burning; so it is here: it is Christ's coming has said us from burning in this
(...) surnace. How terrible this furnace is, you may see, Rev. 14. 10. The same
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without
mixture into the cup of h^ indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb:
and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. And they have no
rest day nor night. O methinks the very sight of this surnace at a distance
should startle our Souls, and make us list up our hands, and eyes, and souls
and praise the Lord. O methinks we that are the redeemed of the Lord, we should
stand together about the pit, and look down, and list up our hearts and praise
the Lord.

Fourthly, From the King of terrors. He has saved you, as from the Devil, so
from Death. You know death is the mortal enemy of man, it is his great and last
enemy: and now this enemy has Christ destroyed, and delivered us from. And
that both from the sting and victory of it.

(First,) From the sting of death. He has not delivered us from the stroke of
death, but he has from the sting of death. When the sting is out, the serpent
may hiss, but he cannot sting. Death will put you into the possession of that
which Christ has provided for you: so that death now is become desirable, now
there is beauty in it. There is no friend can do that for you, that death can
do. It will at once deliver you from sin and Satan, and give you a possession
in heaven. The Apostle, looking upon death through Christ, longs for death:
having a desire to depart etc. Phil. 1. 23. This great robber, through Christ
is become our greatest gain. That which would have marred us for ever, will now
make us for ever. O that this King of terrors should become desirable, what a
mercy is this! O my beloved, did you know what the terrors of death be to an
enlightened sinner, you would account it a great privilege to be sree from the
sting of death. When all his comforts are taking their everlasting farewell of
him, you would account it a great salvation then. When he shall feel death
putting in his cold hands, and pulling out his heart, when he s^ail see his
house of his body falling down about his ears, and he cannot stay there any
longer: and he sees the hell hounds stand about him and waiting upon him to
carry him to Hell, O what horror does this work upon his heart! this has
Christ delivered us from. Death has lest its sting in Christ, it can hurt us
no longer.

(Secondly,) From the victory of death. It is true we must lie in the grave for
some time; yet Christ will fetch us thence, in John. 6. He promises no less
than four times, I will raise them up at the last day. And this is the fruit of
his purchase, 1 These. 4. 14. Christ's resurrection is a certain pledge of ours,
so 1 Cor. 15. Therefore let us not fear death, but embrace it with comfort: for
death cannot touch our souls: it cannot deliver us over into the second death.
He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death. Therefore let us not
fear death, but let our slesh rest in hope. When we dye, we may commit our
bodies to the dust with comfort: it cannot hurt our souls; and it shall keep
our bodies but a little while neither. God will receive our souls immediately;
and our bodies after a little while. How does Job comfort himself in this? I
know that my redeemer lives; and though after my skin worms destroy this body,
yet in my slesh shall I see God, etc. Thus may we triumph over death, that in
this flesh we shall see God. And though death for the present do make such work
upon us, and cast us into the grave, yet the earth will be but the mould
wherein we shall receive a glorious body, so that death shall conduce to our
great advantage. This is no little victory, to be able to triumph with the
Apostle. O death, where is thy victory? This is no small privilege. Bless your
redeemer for this privilege. What a privilege well this be, when all the
Sons and daughters of God shall be brought sorth and made to stand up before
him? then it shall appear that the grave was not able to hold them. Then will
they triumph, and sing songs of salvation, when they shall set their feet upon
their last enemy, death.

Secondly, It will appear what blessed news this is, if you consider, how he
has saved you. He has saved you two ways, by might, and by merit.

first, By merit, Brethren, your salvation cost your redeemer dear, no less a
price than his own invaluable blood. O believer, look upon thy self, art not
thou a worthless thing to be redeemed with the price of Christ's blood? O how
should we admire the goodness of Christ here? we are not worthy that Christ
(...) s^end one of his thoughts upon us, much less that he should spend his
blood for us.

Seconly, By might, my brethren, it was absolutely requisite for our salvation,
that our redeemer. as he should be of infinite merit, so of infinite might. If
he had not been of infinite merit, he could never have been purchaser of heaven
for us. The soul of one man is more worth than a whole world: and then what
worth or value must that be of, that is able to buy a world of souls? and yet
this purchaser must be able to buy heaven too: and this has Christ done for
us. Could heaven and earth have done this? no, no, it would have broken them
all if they had done it. But now Christ has done all for us: and therefore he
must be of insinite merit. And not infinite in merit only but might too: for
he was to bear all the wrath of God, and to bring us off with victory. If the
wrath of Gods finger be so intolerable, that it makes poor creatures to cry out
under it, what is the wrath of his loins? and if the wrath of God against one
man is so great, what is his wrath against so many men?

When the price was laid down, the devil would not yield up his hold, till
Christ must come and cast him down, and pluck us from him. And therefore it was
necessary that our redeemer should be of infinite power. He has destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is the devil. Ah brethren, we may behold the
Lord Jesus Christ upon the cross, bowing himself as Sampson did, and pulling
down the house about his enemies, and carrying away the posts and all, and
setting us free. This is our Sampson that has carried all away, and destroyed
our enemies for us. The price was sufficient to satisfy the justice of God for
us: but when the price was paid, and paid to God; then Satan would not let us
go: and therefore he must be overcome too.

First Use, Is it such blessed news that to us is born a Savior? then my
brethren, let this stir you up to Joy and thankfulness for this salvation. O
let me hear you say with Mary, my soul does magnify the Lord, my Spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior, Luke 1. 46. Brethren, methinks you should now meet
your redeemer with songs of salvation. Methinks you should come forth to meet
him, as they did Saul and David, when they returned from their victory, the
women came out, singing and dancing etc. and they answered one another as they
played, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
Thus should you meet your Redeemer. You should go forth to meet him as Miriam
and the women with her with timbrels and with dancings, and sing unto the Lord,
Exodus 15. 20. 21. Oh brethren, with what joyful heart should you welcome Jesus
Christ your Savior! this is glad ^idings to all them that are saved by him.
Blessed be God that gives us cause to triumph in him. It Is true, in many other
things it goes sad with us: but here is cause always for us to ^o triumph in
Christ, for the Spiritual deliverance that he has wrought for you; which is a
sure pledge that Christ will deliver you in outward respects. How blessed a
time was the year of Jubilee to the slaves that were in bondage how did they
reckon every day and week till it came? how glad was that sound that sounded
their deliverance? methinks I see the prison doors open, and the prisoners
running out and crying, salvation to our God. O methinks nothing but the songs
of salvation should be heard in your tabernacles. O let not complaining be
heard for outward calamities. What are those outward flea-bitings to that
which our Savior has delivered us from? go home and bless the Lord: and what
ever ill news you hear, let this comfort your heart that Christ has made such
a deliverance for you.

Second Use, Is it such blessed news etc. then this reproves our unthankfulness
for Christ, and the news of Christ in the Gospel. Oh brethren, how is it that
the praise of our redeemer is no more in our hearts, and no more heard in our
mouths? how is it that we can be so unmindful of, and ^thankful for this
Savior? has God sent us^ Savior, and shall not we be thankful for him? It is
a great sin to be unthankful for his creatures; but how much more to be
unthankful for his Christ? he has given you Christ, and what can he give you
more? how is it that you are so seldom in blessing the Lord for this mercy?
bless the Lord, O my soul, (says David) and forget not all his benefits: that
is, none of his benefits. If God had given you all this worlds goods, and had
not given you Christ, what would it have done for you? what had it been, but a
smooth and pleasant way to hell? what if the Lord had given you honor, and made
your brethrens sheaf to bow before yours, and had not given you Christ; what
good would it have done you? if a man were condemned at London, to be hanged
drawn and quartered, and were to be brought down into the Country to be
executed, and all his way should be strowed with rushes, and he attended with
Musicians, what would all this have done him? O what should we have done, if
Christ had had not stepped in and s^ved us! none could have redeemed man but
Christ. Heaven and Hell, and the Earth and the Sea would have said it is not in
me: all the things in the world could never have satisfied for our sins. Will thou look to thy brethren? will thou look to the angels; they could not do it.
The Spirits of just men made perfect could not save themselves: none could do
it but Christ: and can you be unmindful of this? the Heavens and the Earth will
be astonished at this, if you are not thankful for it.

There are two things that will heighten this ^in.

First, Because Christ has given you so many helps to it.

Secondly, Because thankfulness is all that he expects from us.

First, Because he has given us so many helps. All the calls and invitations
of the Gospel are as so many helps to this duty. But more than these, he has
appointed a special day, and a special ordinance.

First, A special day. The Sabbath day. Wherefore was this day changed? but
that you may be mindful of this mercy?

(Secondly,) A special Ordinance. The Sa^ of the Supper is appointed upon this
account that we might remember this mercy to our souls.

Secondly, It is much aggravated by this, because this is all that he expects
from you, for all that he has suffered for you. Christ has done and suffered
beyond all you can conceive, or I can express to you: and what Homage does he
now expect from you? nothing but that you should be thankful to him. And will
you be unthankful now for this mercy? This is that he expects by way of
requital and return, that you be thankful, Had the Lord required some great
thing of you, or some hard condition, if he would have dyed for you and
redeemed you, would you not have done it? and how much more, now he has done
it, and and requires no more but this, that you be thankful? had you lain but
one million of years in hell, with what gladness would you have heard that
sound, that he would have redeemed you? would you have stood upon the terms?
no, no, any terms then should have served.

Third Use, Then prepare to receive your Savior. Oh if he be come, take heed
that you receive him in. Let him not complain of you as he did of his native
Countrymen the Jews, that he came unto his own, and his own received him not.
When this news come, that there was a Savior born, one would have thought that
all the world should have received him with triumph: but there was no room for
him in all the world, but he was thrust out in the m^nger. Let it not be so
with you.

Question, But how shall we receive him? I shall show you whither and how.

First. Whither you shall receive him. receive him into your hearts; not in
your stal, as he was at first, but into your parlour, into your hearts. Your
parlour, is but a stable. Thou may wonder that Christ will accept of thy
heart, send the key of your hearts to Christ, let him take his choice where to
lie: give him the upper room in your hearts.

Secondly, How, or after what manner you should receive him.

(First,) As the Centurion did, humbly. I am not worthy that thou should
come under my roof. So should you receive him, with a deep sense of your
everlasting unworthiness. Receive him with a lively sense of your sins, that
you have wronged him. This is a right receiving of Christ, when he is received
penitently. Thus did that woman entertain him: and Christ liked better of this,
than of the Pharisce. Luke 7. She received Christ in her heart. This is the
entertainment, that he is well pleased with: receive him thus, and this will be
acceptable to him. Though thou have nothing at all in thee, but the sense of
thy nothingness, Christ will be sure to accept of this.

(Secondly,) Receive him, as ^cheus did, Joyfully, When Christ called him down
from the tree, and told him that salvation was come to his house, how glad was
the man's heart? Luke 19. O methinks I see with what unspeakable joy he received
him. He thought not of Christ's coming to his house: his highest ambition was
that he might have a sight of Christ: and Christ sees and takes notice of it,
and tells him that Salvation was come to his house. O methinks, I should see
thee looking as he did, when Christ will come this way where thou art. Why, now
he is come in his ordinances, now receive him joyfully, take him into thy
heart. Let thy joy break out, as the waters of Jordan did; or as when the Lord
broke up the fountain of the great deep. Brethren, one would think, that one
should need no arguments to persuade miserable captives to receive a Savior. O
how welcome would such offers be to them that are in captivity? Brethren, if
ever you have seen your lost condition without Christ, you cannot but receive
him when he is offered to you. O methinks this Name of JESUS should be marrow
to your bones, and wine to your hearts, and Music to your ears. Oh as God
has, so do you. give him a name above every name. This blessed name, the name
of Jesus, methinks it should be as oynment poured forth upon you, giving a
sweet smell.

Thirdly. Receive him as old Simeon did, believingly. You must clasp the arms
of your faith about him. O how sweetly did old Simeon clasp him in his arms?
but you must think that he did clasp him more gladly in his heart. If you will
but entertain him, Christ and Salvation come to every one in this house.

Fourthly, Take him submissively. So as to be subject to him. He has wrought
out Salvation for you; therefore let him rule over you.

A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached on the 10th. of July, 1665. at Mr. R. M's by
Mr. Joseph Alleine, etc.
Psalm 147. 20. He has not dealt so with any Nation -- praise ye the Lord.
THe sweet Psalmist of Israel, a man skilful in praises, does begin and end
this Psalm with Allelujah. In the body of the psalm he does set forth the mercy
of God, both toward all creatures in general in his common providence; and
toward his Church in particular. So in this close of the psalm: He shows his
word unto Jacob, and his statutes to Israel He has not dealt so with any
nation. In the original, it is he has not dealt so with every nation. That is,
with (...) nation.

In the Text you may observe a position, and a conclusion. A position. And that
is, that God deals in a singular way of mercy with his people above all other
people. And then the Conclusion, praise ye the Lord.

Doct. That God deals in a singular way of mercy with his people, and therefore
expects singular praises from his people.

God expects of his people, return of praise according to the mercy that they
have received. (...), was a man not altogether forgetful of the mercy of God;
yet he rendered not according to the benefit he had received from God. Christ
expects that ( Math. 5. 47.) his disciples should do more than others: that
seeing they do receive more from him in a way of mercy they should return him
the more praise and glory.

The Application ( my Brethren) is unto you. If God do expect that his people
should do more than others, see that you do accordingly. Let this be a
provocation to you, my Brethren, to lift up your hearts and voices in the
praises of the Lord. What people does the Lord expect such returns from, as
from this people? he has not dealt so with any people, therefore he expects
praises from you more than from any other people. Therefore consider with me
what the Lord has done for you more than for any others. If we look upon our
selves as common members of the nation, and so God has done more for us than
for any others. Or if we look upon our selves with reference to the particular
place to which we belong, and so God has done more for us than he has done
sor others, or, if we look upon our selves as to our particular persons, God
has dealt with us so, as he has not dealt with any other people.

First, Let us look upon the mercies of God to us and the nation in common.
Surely we may say with the Psalmist, he has not dealt so with any nation. This
is a land which he has set his heart upon, and watche^ over it from one end of
the year to the other. I will not speak of the outward mercies of this nation,
though we have a Land slowing with milk and (...). I will speak to spiritual
blessings. Oh, let it be remembered by us what spiritual mercies we have had!
how soon did the Lord plant the Gospel with us? and how long has it continued
to us? what would the world have been without the Gospel? what is the world
without the Sun, but the beginning of Hell as it were? I may say of you blessed
are your eyes, for they see: and blessed are your ears, for they hear. Psa. 89.
15. Blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound, they shall walk in the
light of his countenance, and in his name shall they rejoice. None can tell
what a blessing the Gospel is. Blessed be God who has brought to light
immortality through the Gospel. Oh! think upon our fathers who went into the
land of forgetfulness by thousand's and had none to teach them. And how long
has the Gospel continned here? we have it from good History, that in the
primitive times the Gospel was planted here. And when the Gospel was again
clouded by the invasion of the bloody Saxons, that were heathens, God was pl^
to send Ministers again to propagate the Gospel, which was about 600 years
after Christ, when Austin was sent over from Rome. (...) after, God raised up
famous preachers of the Gospel.

And though God was pleased to suffer another cloud to cover the Gospel, when
Antichrist prevailed; God raised up from one time to another, some to testify
against him, and to seal it with their blood.

But I (...) more particularly speak of these (...) mercies of God to our
nation. God has made this nation signal in mercy. First, In the multitude of
her converts. Secondly, In the honor of her (...). Thirdly, In the Crown of
(...). Fourthly, The glory of her Ministers. Fifthly, Her singular and choice
deliverances.

(...), In the (...) of her converts. Herein God has blessed this n^tion above
other n^tions, an^ herein we have cause to bless the Lord. There is but little
of the profession of Godliness in other nations, to what there is in this
n^tion, (...) a great glory to any place or people to have a multitude of
converts born to God out of it. This was the commendation of those places, that
this, and that man was born there, Ps^lm 87. 4, 5, 6. This is cause of singular
joy and praise which they were wont to sing to the Lord in those days with
instruments of Music.

Secondly, In the honor of her Sabbaths. This is that, my Brethren, where in
the Lord has vouchsafed singular favor to this nation Oh, bless God for
honoring this nation with his Sabbaths as he has done: that they should be so
sa^ctisied as they be. Nehemiah reckons this as a singular mercy of God to
them. So Isaiah 58. 13. Thou shall call the Sabbath a delight, and shall honor
it. If you honor them, they will be an honor and blessing to you.

Thirdly, In the Crown of her Martyrs. Ah Brethren, this is the Crown of glory
upon the head of England, that God should raise up so many Martyrs in this
kingdom, of our flesh, and kindred: that there should be so many caught up
like Elijah in siery Chariots to heaven. Who can tell of what effect their
prayers and blood has been for our good? so that according to that holy
prophesic of Latimer, when going to the stake, God has lighted up such a light
by this as shall never be put out.

Fourthly, In the glory of her ministers. Brethren, I confess my self not
worthy to speak to you of the worth of this mercy. However vain men have
accounted them the offscouring of the world, etc. yet you whose hearts are
touched with the sense of spiritual blessings, you must needs know and
understand, the Ministers of Christ not only to be the glory of the nation,
but are so far honored as to be said to be the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23.
Oh, bless the Lord this day, that he has blessed this nation with such an
unspea^ bl^ssing. Do not undervalue such a mercy. It Is a Cov^ant-gift of Christ
to his Church. He gave some Apostles some Pastors and Teachers. And it is part
of the grand Legacy that Christ has bequeathed to believers in the Gospel;
(...) Paul or Apollo all are yours. And though God has now observed this mercy
ye we may not forget former mercies. Neither has God let them unuseful, you
know, neither to your nor others souls. In this respect I may boldly say, God
has not dealt so with any (...). Those that have had experience intravelling
other Countries have sadly bewailed this, how little heat and vigor there is in
the labor of the Ministers abroad, in other nations for the most part.

Fifthly, In her singular and choice deliverances. Herein has God dealt with
us signally. I would that all those mercies might be remembered by us this day
to our forefathers: for they were our mercies though not in our days. Oh, what
a mercy was it that God did deliver us from the Spanish invasion; This mercy
was our mercy and therefore we may not forget it. And then when they thought to
do that by plot, what they could not do by force in the powder plot, when they
were like to cut o^ the (...) of our nation at one blow. God was pleased you
know to prevent it just at the nick of time, and bring it upon their own heads
Oh, what cause have we to bless the Lord, who saved us from so cruel a bondage,
as neither we nor our fathers were able to bear? Oh forget not such a mercy
wherein God has broken the yoke and brought in that light that h^ has
commanded into the nation.

Secondly, If we com nearer, and look upon the Place of our desires, you shall
find that he has not dealt so with any other place. If you consider it, in the
long (...) of your Ministry. The powerful success of the Gospel. In the peace
and unity of its professors. In the plenty and variety of its provision. In the
strange preservation of your liberty. In s^ving you by your enemies Counsel. In
emin^nt and gracious returns of your prayers. in keeping you from the
Ecclesiastical Courts. In your glorious Salvations and deliverances. Put these
nine things together, and tell me whether God (...) dealt so with any place as
with this place.

First, In the long continuance (...) your Ministry. Forty years was God
striving with Isracl, but many more years has God been striving with Taunton
i^ the powerful preaching of the Gospel. We read of Gods coming the first and
second year, and (...) no f^uit, would have cut it down the third, had not
(...) dressor prayed sor it. But it is not three years, but threescore years
that God has come waiting on Taunton, notwithstanding all their praying, and
their great unprositableness for the greatest part of them. I beseech you think
of it. Is it a little mercy? there are many of you that have been born and bred
under the powerful preaching of the Gospel. Look upon many other places, and
how many may you see left to blind guides? Oh, bless God that you have not been
bred up under such Ministers, and in such places. It was the lot of many, and
it might have been your lot to have been brought up there.

How many places may you look upon again, where there have been excellent
Ministers, and they have been flocked to from all about: but God has put out
those lights, and now if you come there, you shall scarce find the very foot
steps of Religion. And God might have done so to you, but God has sent you one
Minister after another, one out of one Country, another out of another for you.
Oh bless the Lord for it.

Secondly, In the powerful success of the Gospel. True it is, and sadly to be
bewailed, the Gospel has not had so desired an efficacy: but however, we must
not forget Gods signal and singular mercy to this place, in that he has
brought so many to the profession of his Gospel. Oh, how many Parishes are
there where professors are so thin, that they are for signs and wonders, to be
pointed at? Oh bless the Lord that he has cast your lines in that place, where
there are so many to strengthen your hands. How does David bemoan himself in
the want of this mercy, that he dwelt in the tents of Kedar! you might have
lived out in those places and Parishes where you might have had none to help
you.

Thirdly, In the peace and unity of its professors. Here in God has been
singular in his mercy. This is a mercy not slightly to be valued. Do but look
abroad into other Cities and Towns, and see what work there has been by the
breaches that have been made one upon another. Oh, do but consider the mischief
of strife and contention, and you will be raised to praise, Jam. 3. 16. Where
envying and strife is, there is every evil work. Oh bless the Lord that the
hearts of believers have been made one in this place, Psalm. 133. 1. How good
and beautiful is it to see Brethren dwell together in unity? bless the Lord
you his people, because the Lord has blessed his people with peace.

Fourthly, In the plenty and variety of its provision. Oh remember this this
day, and forget not how God has provided for you all along: and that at that
day, when you did account that all was cut off. How little did we dream of such
a mercy? had any told us then of these things, we should have replied as that
Lord did, behold if the Lord would make windows in heaven might this thing be?
Ah Brethren, should it have been told you beforehand that for so many years
after that fatal day you should spend so many Sabbaths in the worship of God,
and so many Sermons in one Sabbath and so many Ministers sent to you, and so
many Sacraments to feed you as you have had, you would have been ready to say,
if the Lord should open windows in heaven could this thing be? and yet all this
God has done for you. Oh bless the Lord for this mercy.

Fifthly, In the strange preservation of your Liberty. Herein has God been
singular in his mercy to you; has not Christ fulfilled his word to you, he
that loses his life for my sake, (so he that loses his liberty for my sake)
shall (...) it? you have hazarded your liberties and have ^ept them. Many have
declined their duty to preserve their liberty: but blessed be God that you have
adventured your liberty and God has kept you in safety. Indeed, I can give you
no time of your liberty: but I can assure you that if you lose it sor him, you
shall (...) by your loss. Methinks Christ says to us as to his disciples, wh^
I s^nt you sorth without shoes or scrip, (...) ye any thing? and they said,
nothing: so here, when you have gone sorth adventuring your liberties for
Christ, have you lost them? you (...) say, no.

Sixthly, I^ s^rving you by your (...) Counsel. ^ow visibly has God turned
what the enemy intended sor ^vil, to be good to us? so we may say as Joseph to
his Br^thren, as for you you th^ght ^vil to me, but God meant it for good. You
know how they have despightfully removed the Magistracy of the place, but
behold how much the Lord has turned it for your good! had they set up a
Magistracy, it had been the loss of your liberty. They had a spightful eye
upon you; and it was thought that (...) long agone would have been too hot for
her inhabitants; and yet behold what freedom and liberty we have lived in!
behold, men curse, but God has blessed us the more. Oh, how strange a thing is
this that you should eat and drink in peace! and go forth and come in in peace!
that you should attend the ordinances in peace.

Seventhly, In eminent and gracious returns to your prayers. Brethren, this is
not to be forgotten this day. Returns of prayer, do certainly call for great
returns of praise. It has been observed by those that have bin longer with
you, than I, that they never remember that God was earnestly sought unto sor
any particular mercy in this place but he did s^d a visible return; except
once, when if God had sent you an answer according to your prayer, it had been
the hazzarding of the people of God in this place. So that I may say to you,
what people is like to you, who have God so near unto you in all that you have
(...) upon him sor?

Eighthly, In keeping you ^om the ^astical Courts. This is a mercy that we
should be mindful os. Indeed all along the Churchmalignant, have been one os
the persecuting enemies of the Church o^ God. Witness the Scribes and Pharisees.
Witness the (...), who were all a long the stirrers up os men against the
Church. And so in diverse (...) men of late. Nay, and at this day, through the
rigor of these Courts, especially in other Counties, many stand
excommunicated: many are threatened with Writs, and some taken and cast into
prison for term life, unless God raise some unexpected means. Now of all places
one would have thought that we should have been dragged to prison by them. And
yet you see how God has preserved us.

Ninthly, In your glorious Salvations and d^liverances. Oh, my Brethren
remember and forget not the dealings of God with this place. Let God hear of it
throughout your praises now ^his day, what he has done for you, in saving
youwith such wonderful Salvation. The Sword, and Famine, and Plague, and Fire
have been upon you to consume you; and yet you are here to bless the Lord at
this day, methinks the Lord calls upon you as in Micah. 6. 5. O my people,
remember now what Balaak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son of
Beor answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal, that you might know the
rightcousness of the Lord. Such is the Language of the Lord to you. Remember
now what thine enemies consulted against thee: howthey had gathered themselves
against thee and besieged thee, and did resolve to devour thee with thy
children, and not to leave thee one stone upon another. O remember my people
when your houses were on fire, and the Plague in the street, and the widows
crying, and the children fatherless crying. Ah! pitiful condition. O remember
now how I have helped thee, that thou might know that I am the Lord thy
Savior.

Thirdly, If we come yet nearer, and look upon our selves with reference to our
particular persons, as we are Christians, and so God has done more for us than
he has don for any others beside, therefore praise you the Lord.

And here I am in such a field that I know not the way out, you are the members
of Christ, the children of your father which is in heaven: what has God done
for you! O you that fear the Lord, praise the Lord. You may stand amazed to see
what the Lord has wrought ^or your souls. This is the Life of all, when you
can remember the everlasting loving kindness of God to you. O friends consider
now, you that are the Lords peculiar people; consider what God has done for
you above all other people.

Consider he has made you, the people of his choice. The pillars of his name.
The vessels of his glory. The Temples of his presence. The Trumpets of his
praise. The men of his Counsel. The Jewels of his Crown. The Inheritors of his
Kingdom. Herein God has done more for you then for others: and should not you
do more than others? look upon these things, and see then whether you should
not do more for God than others.

First, You are the people of his choice, when others are but the refuge. You
are the pillars of his name, when others are but broken and useless
pot-sheards. You are the vessels of his glory, when others are the vessels of
his wrath. You are the Temples of his presence, when others are the styes of
uncleanness. You are the Trumpets of his praise, when others are the
instruments of unrighteousness. You are the men of his Counsel, when others are
strangers and Aliens. You are the Jewels of his Crown, when others are but the
dross and lumber. You are the Inheritors of his Kingdom, when others are the
Sons of perdition. Look over these things, and see what God has done for you
more than he has done for others.

But methinks, I see something that will spoil and damp all. Oh, says the poor
soul, I am afraid that this is not my right. I should bless ^he Lord indeed
were I sure that all this were mine. How shall I know that this is my condition?

Now lest unbeleif and distrust should damp your Joy, and spoil your work of
praise, let me show you to whom I speak: and let you know, how you may know
that you are those that I speak to. Let me show you in two marks, whereby you
may come certainly to know it: you may know it by your Car^, and by your
Comforts. What is your chief care and your chief comfort? look upon your selves
and judge of your selves by these two marks.

First, By your Cares. Brethren, what is the chief care of your heart? what is
it that lies with most weight upon your heart? or that you do prosecute with
most care in your life? you are the people of God if this be your great care,
to please God, eschew sin, and save your selves. If this be your great care,
then you are the men. Methinks this should not be so hard to be discerned. Do
thou not know what is the main scope and drift of thy life?

First, To please God. If this be your great endeavor whether you are present
or absent, alone or in company, that you may please God, this is the true
disposition of Gods servants. Do you study to watch over your hearts as in Gods
sight? and carry it in your lives as of sincerity and in the sight of God? 2
Cor. 1. 12. and 2. 17. Is your labor of love, and work of says (that is,
working faith) and your patience of hope (in bearing the Cross) not in
vainglory but in sincerity? do you study so to walk as to approve your hearts
to God, that you endeavor to please him? that you might do those things that
are pleasing in his sight? then know and be assured that you are the people to
whom this does belong. If God say well done, you have your hearts desire, let
the world say what they will to you.

Secondly, To ^chew sin. This was Jobs character, that he was a man fearing God
and ^chewing sin, Job 1. 8. This was David's mark, that he did not regard
iniquity in his heart Psalm 66. 8. This was that did comfort Paul, as the sure
evidence of his sincerity, though he did evil many times, being overtaken with
temptation, yet he allowed it not, Romans 7. 18. Brethren, what is your greatest
fear? do you study duty more than safty? do you fear sin more than danger? do
you keep up a constant watch against sin, all sin, little sins, secret sins,
heart sins, especially are you afraid of your constitution-sin, your sweet sin?
And do you prosecute against this with double diligence?

Thirdly, To save your souls. This was Paul's care, 1 Cor. 9. latter end. I
therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that be^eth the
Air: but I keep under my body and bring it into subjection lest that by any
means when I have preached to others I my self should be a cast away. He was
one that was in good carnest he did run as one in a race: and fight as one for
his life: and all lest he should come short of that salvation, that he had
preached to others. So Phil. 3. 13, 14. One thing I do -- I press toward the
mark for the price of the high-calling. His eye was upon the Crown of Life. And
this is so far from sinful mercenariness, that it is made the condition of
eternal Life: that they are such who by patient continuance in well doing, seek
for glory honor, immortality; eternal Life, Romans 2. 7. Now Brethren, what say
you to this? what is your great care, and what is your great enquiry that you
enquire after? Is it what shall I do to be rich or great? Is it with the carnal
company, who will show us any good? any outward good, a good bargain or the
like, or with him, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. And
with the convert in the Acts, Sir, what must I do to be saved? howshall I
secure my soul? what can you say to this! Do you first and above all seek the
Kingdom of God?

Secondly, As you may know it by your cares. so by your comforts. Is it the
great comfort of your lives to converse with God? and is he your portion and
treasure? a man's treasure may be known by his heart. Is it that that does yield
the sweetest comfort and content to your hearts? are your sweetest hours, the
hours that you spend with God? do you never more enjoy your selves, than when
you most enjoy God. And is this your ordinary frame, except in a time of
temptation, or under desertion? and when it is otherwise are you out of your
center, and cannot be quiet till you be otherwise? Is God your refuge and
riches, your portion, your principal choice, your Treasure? and do you bless
your selves in him? can you say there is more gladness in your hearts, in the
favor and enjoyment of God, than when the Corn and Wine and Oil increases? do
you indeed prefer a day in his Courts, before a thousand in the pleasures of
the wicked, and tents of wickedness? If it be thus with you habitually, then
you bear upon you the certain characters of Gods people. And rejoice you with
joy unspeakeable and full of glory, and boast your selves in him: for all the
things that I shall speak of, belong to you. And now if you find it thus with
you, then apply to your selves these following comforts. And bless your selves
in your God, he has done more for you, than for any others.

First, You are the people of his choice, when others are but the refuse. O my
Brethren, I may say to you, as God said to Israel by Moses, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. For
thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy God has chosen thee
to be a special people to himself, above all people of the earth. This is your
case, I beseech you Christians, erect you faith, and let not your consideration
be idle. Hear him speaking thus to you, as in Exodus 19. 5. You shall be a
peculiar treasure unto me above all people, for all the earth is mine. Ah,
beloved I must call upon you to rejoice in the Lord: and again must I call upon
you to rejoice: and lift up your heads before the Lord; you are the chosen
vessels of the Lord. What! will you hear these things with low Affections and
common hearts. Do you believe or do you not? If you do not, why are you called
Christians? If you do, Oh what an ecstasy of Joy should your hearts be raised
too? Oh look upon the miserable condition of the perishing world, the reprobate
world! look down, and see what burnings do betide them! better for them that
they had never been born. And shall it but a little affect you that God has
separated you from them all? I may say of you, as the Apostle does with
thankfulness of his Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. We are bound to give thanks
to God for you Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the
beginning chosen you to Salvation. Oh how should you bless the Lord for his
eternal purpose, which he purposed toward you, Ephesians. 1. 4. O let sree grace now
be exalted, has God made you. (I mean believers) to be the choice of his
heart, and will you hear this with little and low affections, as if it did but
little concern you, when you are the people of Gods choice? Oh how did Christ
bless the Lord for you! and should not you for your s^lves? he was transported
with Joy for this, ^ke. 10. 21. He rejoiced in spirit and said Father I thank
thee that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent and h^st made
them known to babes. And he calls upon his Disciples to rejoice in this:
rejoice not in this that the devils are made subject to you: but rejoice in
that your names are written in heaven. Your names are written in the lambs book
of life, while others are written in the ^rth. What! are there, but few chosen
in the world, and are you some of those few? and will you not rejoice in this?
Oh rejoice in this. God speaks of your privileges as if they were already
come, Heb. 12. 22. But you are come to (...) Sion, to the Church of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an (...) company of (...), to the general
assembly, and Church of the (...)-(...), which (...) written in heaven, and to
God the judge of (...), and to the spirits of just ^en ^ade perfect, and to
Jesus the mediator of the New Cove^.

Secondly, You are the pill^rs of his name, when others are but broken, useless
pot sheards. My brethren, God has raised you up for quite another end, than he
has others. You know what the Lord speak of Pharaoh, Exodus 9. 16. And in every
deed for this cause have I raised thee up, to show in thee my power, that my
name may be declared throughout all the earth. That God might show in him the
power of his wrath and severity. But now beloved, you are raised up for another
end, that you may bear up the name of God, and be the instruments of the glory
of God before all men. God has no active glory from the rest of the world. But
you are the people whom God has raised up on purpose for his name and for his
glory, ^ S^. 18. 18. Absalom, we read had taken and reared a pillar for
himself: and he called the pillar after his own name. Thus has the Lord God
erected you as pillars to keep up (...) name in remembrance. For the
unreasonable Creatures they cannot, but by dumb and silent (...) to man, praise
their Creator. For the ungodly, they do the contrary, they dishonor his name.
And were it not for you, the name of God would not be kept up in the world. God
would be cast out, and the very remembrance of him out of his own world. Oh my
brethren, I may say of you, of every one of you that are believers, as God
speak concerning Paul, Act. 9. 15. You are chosen vessels to bear Gods name
before the world. Alas! for others! of how little use are they in the world?
this is a miserable case to be of no use; better to have no being than to be of
no use. How contemptible does the Lord speak of that wicked King Coniah? he
calls him a despised broken Idol. Such a kind of one is every unsanctified
person, they are but as broken useless pot-sheards: let them be so great as
they will, yea they are worse than for no purpose, they are for bad purposes.
Oh, what cause have you then to bless the Lord, that you are the people that
must bear up his name?

Thirdly, You are the vessels of his glory, when others are the vessels of his
wrath, you are not as others, vessels of wood and stone; but you are all
vessels of gold and silver: vessels not to dishonor, but to honor. Vessels
sanctified, and made meet for the Masters use, and prepared for every good
work, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. Ah brethren, read (and rejoice with trembling) what is
written, Romans 9. 18. onward, where the Apostle lively sets forth this great
distinction. H^ has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. Has not the potter power over the clay to make one vessel to honor
and another to dishonor? What if God willing to show his wrath and to make his
power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath sitted to
destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the
vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory? Ah brethren, when
others are vessels of wrath sitted to destruction, you are vessels of mercy,
vessels of glory made for this blessed use and service that you may be the
instruments of Gods glory and mercy before the world: that God may take you and
single you out at the great day, when you shall be severed as a man severeth
the sheep from the goats. God shall take you and single you out before the
world, and tell the world, what a God can do for a poor creature: to make you
the monuments of his magnificence and bounty, to show how he could exalt the
dust of the earth. This is the use you serve for in the world. Do not live as
if you were made for little things, and for little use: you are made for this
use, that you should be vessels prepared to have the infinite fullness of God
pouring into you, as vessels standing by for the same purpose, and running over
to all eternity. When you shall be ever full and running over with the glory of
God. When the Al-sufficiency of God shall be for ever emptying it self into
you. How is it that God hears no more of you? has he done so for any other?
no, he has prepared them for vessels of wrath on whom he will be pouring out
his wrath to a^l eternity. Both of these vessels were made of one sort of clay;
and yet see what difference here is that free grace has made.

Fourthly, You are the Temples of his presence, when others are the styes of
uncleanness, God does live in you, and walk in you: this is the honor that God
does put upon you. The Apostle tells you, that you are Gods hou^e, Heb. 3. And
God says of you his spiritual house, as he did of the Typical house, (for the
sense belongs more to the thing typified, then to the house,) 1 Kings 9. 3. God
says of every believer as of that house, I have hallowed this house to put my
name there for ever. And mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
Thus does God for th^e believer, that art his house. Or as it is in, 2 Kings
21. 7. In this house and in Jerusalem which I have chosen out of all the Tribes
of Israel will I put my name for ever. That was but a typical Temple, you are
the real Temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. What, know you not that your
body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and
ye are not your own? every believer, is a real Temple wherein God is especially
present, so 1 Cor. 3. 16. Know you not that you are the Temple of God? and that
the spirit of God dwells in you? Brethren, if you indeed believe, methinks
this privilege should be matter of unspeakable Joy to you. What! art thou of
no meaner use then this to be a habitation of God through the spirit? What! art
thou a Temple for God to dwell in? will God make of this Soul a Temple, where
all manner of lusts have dwelt? and say of thy soul, here will I dwell for
ever, this is my rest for I have desired it? Oh, adore the riches of Gods
condescending grace! others are the vessels of uncleanness, the coffins of
rottenness, in whom Satan has set up his throne, it is true of every wicked
man, what God says of Coniah, Jer. 22. 28. He is a vessel wherein is no
pleasure, He is a vessel of the most noisome filthyness in the world.

Fifthly, You are the trumpets of his praise, when others are the instruments
of unrighteousness. O what base use are the others put too, in their bonds of
wickedness? to the worst of drudgery. They are the vessels of sin, and slaves
of Satan, Romans 6. 16. a miserable service! this is a miserable Master indeed!
none have such miserable lives as those who have the work of sin to do^ Why,
would it not pity ones heart to see a company of poor Creatures laboring and
toyling for their own ruin? to see them tugging and sweating hard at, it were
to carry together faggots for their own burning. This is that the wicked are
doing, they are but treasuring up the wrath of God against themselves at the
last day, they are but carrying together faggots and fuel for their own
burning.

They labor and sweat all their days to pile up faggots and fuel, pile upon
pile, to fill Tophet for their own burning. But you are not of this use, you
are to be the Trumpets of Gods praise. Oh blessed employment! your work is the
work of Angels, whiles others are doing the work of Devils. Isaiah 61. 3. That
they might be called trees of renown, the planting of the Lord, that he might
be glorified. And so in another place, this people have I formed for myself,
that they may be for my praise. Isa. 43. 7. I have created him for my glory, I
have formed him, yea I have made him. When others shall be venting their malice
and blasphemy against God, you shall be the silver Trumpets that shall be ever
sounding forth the praises of the Lord.

Sixthly, You are the men of his Counsel, when others are strangers and aliens.
You are no more foreigners and strangers, but fellow Citizens and of the
household of God. You are the attendants of his person, you are of his privy
Counsel. You are the friends of God. This was Abraham's privilege, Jam. 2. That
he was called the friend of God. Brethren, all the long and magnificent titles
of all the Monarchs of the Earth do not signify half so much as this that I am
speaking to you. Now this is your prerogative. Henceforth I call you not
servants but friends: and why so? because you are the men of his Counsel. The
servant knows not what his Lord does, but whatsoever I have heard of the
Father that have I declared unto you. Herein Christ has put a mavelous
distinction between you and the men of the world, I may say of you as Christ of
them, blessed are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. So Psa. 147. He shows his word
unto Jacob, and his statutes unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any Nation.

Seventhly, You are the Jewels of his Crown, when others are but the dross and
lumber. And they shall be mine says the Lord of hosts in the day when I make
up my Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Beloved, you that are beleivers, you are the very
glory of Christ. Every believer is as a pearl put into the Crown of Jesus
Christ. The Apostle speaks of believers, of his converts, that they were a
great Crown to him. He calls them his Joy and Crown of rejoicing, Phil. 4. 1.
But this is but little that you should be your Ministers Crown: I tell you, you
are Christ's Crown and glory, Isa. 62. 3. Thou shall also be a Crown of glory,
in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

Eighthly, You are the inheritors of the Kingdom, when others are the sons of
perdition, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom, So come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. Who can utter the sweetness of that promise? it is our Saviors
parting promise to his disciples at his last supper, Luke 22. 28. 29, 30. You
are they which have continued with me in my Temptations and I appoint unto you
a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that you may eat and drink at
my Table in my Kingdom, and sit upon thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel. Oh how sweet are these words. Lay the mouth of Faith at these promises,
and suck the sweetness of them. Look upon it as a reality, that God prepared
for you a Kingdom, it is so, why should God go to deceive you? and you may lay
your claim to it boldly: God delights to see your humble boldness. The spirit
bears witness with our spirits that we are the sons of God, and if Sons, then
heirs; joint heirs with Christ: Heirs of his Kingdom.

Fourthly, If you look upon your selves as prisoners, and so God has done more
for you then he has for others. Ah Christians, this is the meaning of this day
that you might celebrate the kindness of God to you in prison. O remember and
forget not how signally God has owned you. Brethren, it is your privilege and
mercy that God has given you hearts to own him in times of danger. And blessed
be God he is not behind hand with you; he that owned you in your prison state.
Brethren how has God owned you in clearing your cause for which you are
suffering here? If the Kingdom of heaven be promised to them that suffer for
righteousness sake, then sure it is promised to you: for you are suffering here
upon that account. And then for your call: how sweetly and joyfully did we come
hither? though God knows we had not enquired into what we intended, as to our
subsistence here; yet God sent us all hither joyfully together; and I hope God
will send us home as joyfully again.

But let me show you, in some particulars wherein God has done more for you
then for others, as you are prisoners.

First, You are better fed then others. Who do live upon the bounty of Gods
extraordinary providence like you? may not God almighty speak to you, as the
Apostie to them, 1 Cor. 9, 7. Who of you goes a warfare at his own charges?
When our Savior sent forth his disciples without scrip or shoes, says he,
lacked ye any thing? they answered, nothing. May not we say so? if he say to
us, lacked you any thing? we must say no, he has poured out his kindness upon
us. O how sweetly did the holy prophet, think you, relish every bit of meat
when God provided every bit so extraordinarily for him, 1 Kings. 17. 6. And the
Ravon brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the
evening, God does not send it to us by a Raven; but by friends: but all he
sends: bread and flesh in the morning and bread and flesh in the evening
without our care. And is not God to be observed in this? you know there is a
kind of a Famine abroad, but God will not have it a Famine here. Who ever
wants, God will be sure that his prisoners shall not want. As the King took
care of Jeremiah, Jer. 37. 21. Then Zedekiah the King commanded, that they
should commit Jeremiah to the Court of the prison, and that they should give
him daily a piece of bread out of the Bakers-street until all the bread in the
City was spent. When Jeremiah was in prison, God would be sure that he should
not want as long as there was any bread to be had in the City. So God commands
concerning his prisoners; though there be a kind of Famine abroad, God will not
suffer his prisoners to want.

Secondly, You are better taught than others. Who is like to you O people,
about whose tents the Mannah raineth, not every morning only, but morning and
evening: week days, and Sabbath days, God does open his door to you, and make
every day as a Sabbath to you.

Thirdly, You have more promises than others. Now there are come in to us a
whole shoal of of promises, that we would not not so properly claim before, 1
Pet. 2. 20. If when you do well and suffer for it, you take it patiently, this
is acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 14. Rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be glad also with exceeding Joy. If you be reproached for the name of Christ,
happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, Jam. 1. 12.
Blessed is the man that endures Temptation; for when he is tried he shall
receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
If you suffer with him you shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. Blessed are
they that suffer for righteousness sake: for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are you when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my name sake, rejoice and be exceeding
glad for great is your reward in heaven, Math. 5. 10, 11, 12. Time would fail
me to go over all those promises that are come in now upon us all at once. Oh
we are an unthankful people, if all these promises do not raise our faith and
joy. Is it a light thing my brethren, that you should be heirs of the promises?

Fourthly, God has has honored you more than others. To others with you it is
given to believe; but to you it is given to suffer for his sake; which the
Apostle reckons up as a step higher than others attain to, Philip. 1. 29.

Fifthly, God has entrusted you with his honor more than others. God has put
more into your hands, than into the hands of any other. Gods glory is trusted
morewith the sufferers of Christ than with any others. O be infinitely tender
of Gods honor! O see that you love him more than others: praise him more than
others.

A Sacramental speech grounded on
Psalm. 40. 7. Lo I come.
IT is my purpose to speak to you of the coming of the Son, Lo I come.

Now concerning this coming, I shall show you. First, Who it is that is come.
Secondly, How he is come. Thirdly, Whence he is come. Fourthly, Why he is come.

First, Who it is that is come. This is the first thing that I shall desire you
to consider with reference to the coming of Christ.

(First,) The bridegroom is come. God sends his Ministers to you with that cry
Math. 25. 6. Behold the bridegroom comes. O with what joy does the Bride
receive her Bridgegroom? so should believers receive Christ. Arise you Virgins
then and come away. Awake you virgins this is the call of your Bridegroom,
Cant. 2. 8. The voice of my beloved! behold he comes, etc. And what was this
voice of her beloved, that does so ravish her heart? see verse 10. arise my
love; my fair one, and come away, and so ver. 13. Christ calls again and again;
and you should come away.

(Secondly,) Your King is come. God sends his Ministers to you with that glad
news, that he put in the Prophets mouth, Zach. 9. 9. rejoice greatly O
daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes. Brethren, this is that which should
cause you to rejoice and shout for joy, that your King is come. And great
reason have: for he is a great King and has salvation with him, Luke 19. 9.
This day is salvation come to this house.

(Thirdly,) The deliver is come, Romans 11. 26. Brethren, I know good news must
needs be welcome to you at such a time as this: why hear you then the blesseds
news that ever came to the ears of man, Luke 2. 10. Behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people for unto you is born -- a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Ah Brethren! that the Savior is come, the
deliverer is come this is the blessedst news that ever man heard. Hear what the
Lord says with reference to this, in that of the Prophet, Isa. 62. 10. 11. He
calls upon his people to cast up and prepare the way, etc. say ye to the
daughter of Zion, behold thy salvation comes, etc. Ah brethren, this is good
news for Zion, and this is the news God has sent me with: behold the
deliverer, the Savior is come. O with what a welcome should such as this be
received when he comes? how welcome was the news to the captives, that brought
the news of their liberty? why, such should be the welcome, that you should
give to the news the Gospel brings you of a deliverer. Now is your Jubilee,
blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound Psa. 89. 15. He alludes to
the sound of the Trumpets, in the time of the Jubilee: but it is to be
understood of the joyful sound of the Gospel. It is blessed news that Christ
the deliver is come.

Secondly, I am to show you, how he is come, There is a two fold coming of
Christ: his gracious, and his glorious coming. His glorious coming is not till
hereafter, at the last day. This is the coming that he speaks of, Rev. 1. 7. He
speaks of it as if it were present: because it is as certain as if it were
present. Every eye shall see him. But then there is his gracious coming, and
that is two fold corporal, or spiritual. His corporal coming, in his admirable
Incarnation: his spiritual coming in the Gospel Invitation.

(First,) His corporal coming in his admirable incarnation. And this is blessed
news to the world, at this his coming there were a quire of angels to celebrate
his praise, Luke 2. 13, 14. And suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude
of the heavenly host; praising God and saying, glory to Godin the highest, and
on Earth peace, good will toward men. We read that the great and glorious
works of God, they are celebrated by the angels. And there are these four great
works celebrated by them.

First, The work of Creation. So that (...) Job. 38. 7. When the morning stars
sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for Joy. It is spoken with
reference to the Creation, the angels did list up their voices, and sang the
praise of their Creator.

Secondly, The work, of conversion, Luke 15. 10. There is joy in the presence
of the angels of God over one sinner that repents. The work of conversion is
a great and admirable work: and therefore celebrated by angels.

Thirdly, At Christ's incarnation, so Luke 2. 10, 11.

Fourthly, At the resurrection. Then all the angels of God shall appear, then
shall be a most glorious and general appearance of the angels to celebrate that
work, heaven shall empty it self of all its glorious inhabitants.

(Secondly,) There is the spiritual coming of Christ: and this is in his
Ordinances. This is his Chariot wherein he rides on conquering, Psa. 45. 3, 4.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, and in thy Majesty ride prosperously. This is to
be understood of Christ's going forth in the sound of the Gospel, which is his
sword, whereby he rides on to conquer the world. Now in this respect Christ is
come, exhibiting himself in the voice of the Gospel: there Christ does show
himself, and impart himself to his people.

Thirdly. I am to show you whence he is come. He is come from the throne of his
glory. From the court of his Angels. From the hosome of his Father.

(First,) From the Throne of his glory. O what a wonderful descent was this!
that he should come from the Throne of his glory, to the manger among the
beasts? from the company of the angels, to be crucified among the thieves! he
came among the beasts; the world would not receive him, but he was thrust out
among the beasts. Man by his Apostasy had brought himself among the beasts; and
hither did Christ come to find him. But he was humbled more yet; from the
throne to the cross. From the height of his glory, to the extremity of shame. O
how should we think of the strange abasure of Christ, that he that was heir to
the Crown of glory, should become man, and viler then any of the Sons of men,
in some respect! this should have your great admiration.

(Secondly,) From the Court of his angels. The Lord Jesus Christ, he was the
brightness of his Fathers glory, the express image of his person, that made his
angels spirits and his Ministers a flaming fire. All the angels you must know
were his Messengers. And what abasure was here, that he should come from the
company of angels to be contemned by the basest of men!

(Thirdly,) From the bosom of his Father. The Lord Jesus Christ, he was the
Son of Gods delight: his darling; the beloved object of his soul, Math. 11. 27.
Christ is he that lies in the bosom of the Father; and he alone is able to
reveal the secrets of the Lord to the world, so John 1. 18. Now that the Lord
Jesus Christ should come from the bosom of God, to the belly of hell, that he
should leave the glory of heaven, for the torments of hell, and all for our
sakes; what a strange wonder of Love was this! hence was it that Christ came
for us. This is the bread that came down from heaven, that a man may eat of and
not dye.

Fourthly, I shall show you why he is come. And that is To seek and to Save.

(First,) To seek. That is one end of his coming, so Luke 19. 10. And who do
you think that he is come to seek? It is us that were lost. All we like sheep
have gone astray, now Christ is that great and good sheapherd that came to seek
and to save that which was lost, in Luke 15 you read of the lost groat, the
lost sheep, and the lost Son: and who do you think this was; this was the lost
sinner, ver. 32. who was it, think you, that sought us, and found us when we
were lost? It was Jesus Christ: it was he that sought us. We had never found
him, had not he sought us. I am found of them that sought me not, (...). 65. 1.
If Christ had stayed for us till we sought him, our salvation had never been
wrought. The Lord Jesus Christ he sought us not, and laid hold on us. He took
not hold of angels, but of the seed of Abraham. In effectual calling, there he
takes hold of the sinner, he is fain to run after them and stop them, or else
they would run into perdition.

(Secondly,) He is come to save, so the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 15. This is
a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance that Christ came into the world
to save sinners, of whom I am chief. He puts in for one. Oh brethren, this is
that should make the coming of Christ welcome to you, he came to seek and save
you. O therefore welcome him at his coming.

Use. Is it so, that Christ is come? then go you forth to meet him. Math. 25.
6. That was the cry there, this is that which God sends his Messengers to call
upon you for, that you may go forth to meet him.

But how should you go forth to meet him? First, as a Bride does her
bridegroom. Secondly, as redeemed Captives do their deliverer. Thirdly, as
dutiful subjects do their King.

First, As a Bride does her Bridegroom. This I shall open to you in three
particulars. First, Put off the raiment of your captivity. Secondly, put on the
wedding Garment. Thirdly, trim up all your Lamps.

First, Put off the raiment of your Captivity. If the poor Captive woman were
to shave her head, and pair ber nails, and put off the raiment of her
captivity, etc. ( Deuteronomy. 21. 13.) before she was to be married to any one of the
Tribes of Israel: how much more should you put off the old man and your sinful
deeds, that are to be married to Christ? If so be the Children of Israel were
to wash and sanctify themselves, and wash their clothes, when the Lord was to
come down upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. how much more should you, when the Lord
(...) comes down to you? you know that Children may not come at their fathers
Table with unwashed hands: neither must you to eat of the dainties spread in
the Gospel.

(Secondly,) You must put on the wedding garment. You will say, what is this?
it is a conjugal love to Jesus Christ. And this is compared to a garment: for
we are bid to put on charity, or love. And its set forth as the best part of
the Christian raiment: and above all things put on Charity; for what more fits
a marriage than a conjugal affection? you should bring forth your most strong
and ardent affections and love to him, you should meet him with songs, and what
songs? such as the Psalmist does Ps. 45. title. A song of Loves, let your eyes
be fixed upon Christ in the Gospel, till your eyes affect your heart: and while
your heart is musing, the fire will be kindling; where will you bestow your
love, but where the bridgroom is so lovely?

(Thirdly,) You should trim up all your Lamps, you should snu^f all your
lights, and trim up all your lamps, to go forth to meet him, And receive him
and feed upon him when he is offered: he is held out to you on purpose, in the
Gospel, for you to take and receive him. Gal. 3. 1. Foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been ardently set forth crucified among you. But you will say was
Christ (...) in Galatia? he was in the preaching of the word: he was crucified
among them.

Secondly, You must meet him as redeemed captives do their deliverer, would you
know how this is? it is with palms of victory in your hands with garments of
salvation; with songs of deliverance. These are the three things wherein this
stands. you have all together, in Rev. 7, 9, 10. They were in white robes, the
garments of Salvation: and palms of victory, and they had the songs of
salvation too, ver. 10. Oh Brethren, if you have any sense of your spiritual
bondage and captivity, to be the servants of sin, under the fear of death,
under the King of terrors; then be glad in your redeemer meet him with songs of
praise. O how should the high praises of God be heard in your mouths? you
should meet him as the virgins did David at his return from his victory, 1 Samuel
18. 6. with singing and dancing -- with joy, etc. Thus should you meet your
deliverer, you should compass him with songs of praise. O my Brethren, you that
are the redeemed of the Lord, look down into the horrible pit, and then look up
and sing songs to the Lord. O it is a glorious salvation that Christ has
wrought for us. How welcome was he to good old Simeon? how sweetly does he hug
Christ in his arms? (and much more, you must think in his heart) now let
thou thy servant depart in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. This
we have seen, we have seen Christ coming to us in the Gospel. We have seen him
like Sampson, pulling down the house about our enemies, and carrying away the
posts, and setting them up as Trophies of his victory. It was he that was
condemned, that you might be freed. O let your lips praise him, and the souls
which he has redeemed, let me call upon with the Psalmist, Psalm 98. A psalm
on purpose to Jews and Gentiles to sing to the Lord for their deliverance,
vers^ 3. He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: all
the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. And what use does the
Psalmist make of this? verse. 4. make a joyful noise unto the Lord all the
earth, etc. He goes on calling upon all the Creatures to praise God for this.
If the Sea must roar, and the floods clap their ^nds, how much more should you
do it, that are the redeemed of the Lord.

Thirdly, Meet him as dutiful subjects do their King. This is the news sent to
Zion, behold thy King comes. Then meet him as a King, receive him with
acclamation and praise, as they did when Solomon was proclaimed King, 1 Kings
1. 39, 40. They blew the Trumpet, and all the p^oplt said God save the King.
And the people piped with pipes and returned with great joy, so that the earth
rent with the sound of them. O if they met King Solomon with such joy, how
should you meet Christ? It is another manner of King that comes to you than
Solomon was, you should say to Christ as they did to Gideon, Judge 8. 22. Rule
thou over us: for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian. Thus should
you say to Christ, rule thou over us: for he has delivered you, not from the
hand of Midian, but from Satan. But how should we meet our King? prepare the
way, bow the knee.

(First,) Prepare the way, Math. 3. 3. Christ had his forerunner going before
him, that was John, saying, prepare you the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight. How must the way of the Lord be prepared? every Mountain must be
brought low etc. every Mountain of pride and opposition that are in our hearts
must be laid low. O if there be such preparing for the King, where he is to
lodge and go, how much more should you for the King of glory where he is to
lodge!

(Secondly,) Bow the knee, we read of Joseph, (and you know he was a type of
Christ.) that when Pharaoh had exalted him from the prison to such dignity, he
prepares some to go before him, and cry, bow the knee. So God has set up
Christ and exalted him, and given him a name above every name; now let me call
upon you (and my self with you) that you bow the knee to him. I speak not of
the bodily knee: it is more than your cap and knee that he requires. He will
have you to bow before him. O then see that you bow before him, see that you do
him homage. Now your King is set up in another manner than he was upon the
Cross, behold your King. That is the duty that I would persuade you to now:
behold your King and look that you bow to him. Let your souls and all that is
within you bow to him. Let your understandings bow to him, by a right
apprehension of him, by a right conceiving of him, as worthy to be loved and
feared. Let your wills bow, by an utter rejection of your sins: and a most
ardent desire to receive Christ. Let all your affections come in and bow, and
not dare to stir more than his commands give you leave. In a word let all that
is within you bow before him, and give place to Jesus Christ. Now down with the
world, out with your lusts, and make ready for Christ. Let all your worldly
business bow before him, and give place to Jesus Christ, away with this foolish
deceitful world; let all be at the seet of Christ: and let all your souls be in
subjection to him. This will be an acceptable meeting with him, if you so meet
him.

A SACRAMENTAL Speech grounded on,
Isaiah. 9. 6. And his name shall be called wonderful.
Quest. WHy is it that Christ has given to him this name of wonderful.

Answ. There are so many wonders that meet together in Christ, that it is no
wonder at all, that he should have this name, wonderful. Christ was every way
wonderful. He was wonderful in his Person; wonderful in his Passion. Wonderful
in his Conception, being conceived by the power of the holy Ghost: wonderful in
his Birth, being born of a pure virgin: wonderful in his Life; wonderful in his
death, and the effects of it: wonderful in his Resurrection, that a dead person
should be raised and that by his own power: wonderful in his Ascension. In a
word he was every way wonderful: wonderful in his Humiliation and Exaltation.

Ah Christians if you would see a wonder, look upon Christ, and here see a
wonder, here is a wonder, above all that the world can show. There are two
sorts of wonders that God has to show, the wonder of his power; and the wonder
of his grace.

First, The wonder of his Power. What a wonder is it, to see such a fabric as
heaven and earth, all come out of nothing by the power of God. Christians it is
a great evil in us that we do no more wonder at this great power. What a wonder
is the Sun, in its bigness and brightness, flying many Millions of miles in a
minute of an hour!

Secondly, But all these wonders are nothing to what his wonder of grace is. In
Christ you may see all these wonders swallowed up. Let me show you a little of
this wonder. In Christ are to be seen these following wonders. 1. God manifest
in the slesh. 2, God suffering in the slesh. 3. Justice and mercy sweetly
r^conciled. 4. The greatest good coming out of the womb of the greatest evil.
5. Perfect justice raging against perfect innocence. 6 Infinite wisdom at cost
upon me^r worthlessness. 7. The Son of the blessing made to be a curse. 8. The
Father of mercy forgetting his bowels to his own Son.

first, God manifest in the flesh, John 1. 14. And the word was made flesh and
dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, etc. O brethren, this is a wonder
indeed. The Apostle tells you, that without controversy this is a great
Mystery, that God should be manifest in the flesh. Here we may cry out
deservedly, with wonder and astonishment, God is come down to us in the
likeness of man. God manifest in the flesh! why, what is flesh? all flesh is
grass, that is, fading, withering, dying. What! the word made flesh! shall the
immortal put on mortality? and incorruption, put on corruption? O what a wonder
is this! O behold and wonder; see if Christ do not deserve the name of
wonderful. Holy Abraham, was ashamed of his meaness in this respect, when he
came before God, because he was but dust and ashes. Behold, I have taken upon
me to speak to the great God, who am but dust and ashes. O then how is it to
see God clothed with the flesh of man? This was the wonder of angels. O how did
they wonder to see their maker clothed with flesh! O come to the cross of
Christ, to the cratch of Christ, and there bow and worship. Let not the Humble
abasure of Christ, hinder you from adoring him in his greatness. The wisemen
found Christ in poverty and meanness; yet they knew what glory was veiled under
this meannesse: and fell down and offered gold, frankincense, myrrh, etc. go
ye and do likewise.

Secondly, God suffering in the flesh, well may he have his name wonderful upon
this account. it is said that the Philosopher, observing the unnatural cclipse
of the Sun at the suffering of Christ, cried out, either the God of nature is
suffering, or the world is at an end. When Christ was suffering, it was God
that suffered, though he did not suffer in the Godhead, but in the Manhood.
Beloved, if you should have seen the judgment, that befell, Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, would you not have been astonished at such a sight as this was? much
more if hell should have opened, and you have seen the torments of the damned,
would you not have been astonished, and wonder at this? but in this that God
should suffer, is more then if all the men in the world should have suffered to
all eternity. O how did the angels stand by the Cross, wondering, to see him
whom they adored and worshipped, to be mocked and Crucified.

Thirdly, Justice and mercy sweetly reconciled. The Justice and mercy of God,
seemed to be, as it were, at a controversy about fallen man.

Darius, you know, had made a decree, that he that did offer any petition to
any God or man, except to himself, within such a time, should be cast into the
den of Lions. Daniel comes within the danger of this decree: and what must be
done now? either Daniel must be spared; and then, what would become of the Laws
of the Medes and Persians? or, else Daniel must be devoured; and then the King
would have been cruel to himself. Yet providence did so order it, that the Law
was executed and Daniel spared.

So here, man had sinned; and God said that he should dye, and now either man
must dye, or God must be false of his word. Now what shall be done? The wisdom
of God steps in, and finds out a person that should dye, and so Gods truth be
saved, and his mercy magnified. But where shall this person be found? the
Angels could not do it: nor man could not do it. But God would take the humane
nature upon him, and that should suffer, that God and man might be reconciled.
Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

Mercy and truth are met together, how can this be? it seems they were at a
great distance, and could not be brought together. Truth said, that man should
dye: and mercy said that man should be saved. Truth said, if he dye not, I am a
liar; and where then is the honor of my truth? but mercy pleaded, if he dye,
where is the honor of my Grace and mercy? Why now, wisdom puts in a surety,
and that ^oes for the principal.

Righteousness and peace have kissed each other. How can this be? Gods justice
and righteousness did require that man should give satisfaction: but this is
all reconciled in Christ, he reconciled God and man together.

Fourthly, The greatest good coming out of the womb of the greatest evil. Sin,
is the mother of all evil. You will say, can any good come out of such a womb
as this? It is true, it cannot naturally come; but God did so order it, that it
should be the occasion of it. Were it not a wonder, to see grapes come of
thorns? and Olives of thistles? such a wonder you may see in Christ. You may
see, out of the sin of man, comes great glory to God, and good to man.

First, Great glory to God: for had not man sinned, neither Gods justice nor
mercy had been so magnified. His justice had not been seen at all, in a manner,
in punishing the offenders; but it is eminently seen in punishing of Christ, who
dyed for sinners. This is a louder demon. stration of the Justice of God, than
if God had turned all heaven and earth into confusion upon the sin of man.

Again, hereby is way made for magnifying Gods mercy. The sin of man, as God
has ordered it, has given way to God in the demonstration of his mercy in
forgiving, and his justice in punishing It could not have bin thought, that God
had been of so gracious a nature, able to put up such great affronts as man had
given him, had not sin given him occasion to magni^ his mercy.

Secondly, Again, as the sin of man has given occasion to the advancing of
Gods glory, so for the promoting of man's good. By this man is raised to a
higher state of happiness and felicity than ever he should have been. Now there
is a nearer conjunction between God and man, than ever was before the fall, or
ever should have been had it not been for the sin and fall of man. Before it
was said, that man was made a little lower than the angels: but now it may be
truly said, that he is so much higher than the Angels: more nearly joined to
God. Had man continued in innocence, he had had only a lengthening out of his
temporal life in paradise but now by his sin Christ has opened the door of
heaven to him. O then wonder at the power of Christ!

Fifthly, Perfect justice, raging against perfect innocence. You know that God
is perfect in his Righteousness and justice. A God of truth and without
iniquity, just and right is he. And yet notwithstanding, his perfect Justice
was set against his own son, in whom there was nothing but perfect innocence.
He was the Lamb of God: a lamb without spot and blemish; full of grace and
truth. No guile was sound in his mouth; and yet you know how the wrath of God
brake out upon him. It brake out upon him to the very uttermost: that if he
would but put himself into the room of man, he must dye for it, tho Justice it
self said I find no fault in him, yet he must die: all could not save him: but
if he will stand between God and offending man, and take our sins upon himself,
though he had none of his own, yet justice takes hold of him. Let me say as the
Apostle behold the goodness and severity of God. Goodness to thee, but severity
unto Christ. O what had come upon you, if you had been to bear the blow! you
see how Justice runs upon the Son of God, and falls upon him, and tears him to
the ground, and lets out his blood, and would not spare him, though he were the
only belovedSon of God. O consider, how fearful a thing it is to fall into the
hands of the living God!

You read, how when Daniels enemies were cast into the Lions den, that they
brake all their bones before they came to the bottom of the den. O how would
thou have been torn, had the Justice of God taken hold of thee!

Sixthly, Insinite wisdom at cost upon mere worthlessenesse. God expects the
blood of his own Son, which was of insinite value, to redeem worthless man.
Would you not wonder to see a wise man to be changing Pearls for pebbles? yet
here it is a greater wonder: the wise God, redeeming by the death of his own
Son, sinful man out of the hands of his own justice. Why what is man? are not
all the nations of the world as nothing before him? and yet upon this nothing,
this vanity, is Gods insinite wisdom at this cost, that he might save us from
eternal death.

Seventhly, The Son of the Blessing made to be a curse, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. Observe it,
it is not said he was ACCURSED for us, but a CURSE for us. Christ has delivered
us from the curse: but how? by taking the curse upon himself. You know the
curses of the Law that were denounced against sinners: all these curses met
together upon one Jesus Christ. How is the book of Gods word full from one end
to the other with Curses against sinners! what a load then was there upon the
back of Christ, when all these curses met together upon him? what a wonder is
it that God should be cursing of his own Son! to hear God say, all my curses
shall meet upon thee: cursed shall thou be in thy body; and cursed shall thou
be in thy soul. To hear the great God speaking thus to his own Son, go thou
Cursed, I will engage my Justice and wrath against thee, to torment thee and
put thee to death. O what a sight was this! yet thus it was with Jesus Christ.
He had as many torments as members: and all the torments that he endured had
the curse of God in them.

Eighthly, The Father of mercy forgetting his Bowels to his own Son. We read
of a very strange thing that was done by the King of Moab, 2 Kings 3. 27. When
he saw that the Battle was too sore for him, etc. he took his own Son that
should have reigned in his stead, and osfered him for a burnt offering, what a
strange sight was this? yet there is a greater wonder than this to be seen in
Christ: to see God sacrificing his own Son, and offering him up for a
burnt-offering, to appease his wrath against sinful man: O shall not your
hearts stand a wondering at this! to see, he that was a God of mercy to have no
mercy for his own son? he that had bowels of pity for you, to have no pity for
his Son; O behold and wonder. By this time I hope you are convinced that Christ
is wonderful.

A SACRAMENTAL Speech grounded on
Ephesians. 3. 19. And to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.
Quest. WHerein does the Love of Christ appear to be a surpassing love? This
appears in his putting himself into our Nature. His putting himself into our
room. Putting our lives into his purchase, putting his name into our bond.
Putting our names into his will. Putting his spirit into our hearts. Putting
his glory into our hands.

First, It appears in putting himself into our nature. What admirable love and
condescension was this? as we were Creatures there was an infinite distance
between us and Christ: much more as we are sinners, but this infinite
condescension was nothing to the love of Christ. He stepped from the Court of his
angels, to the reproaches of men at one step. O what a step was this! for
Christ to take our nature upon him, is more than for an Emperor to become a
beggar. Yea there is no comparison that can express it. This was love indeed;
surpassing love, that the Lord Jesus Christ should have such a love to man:
that he should become of (...) to sinners: flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bone; here is matchless unparalled love.

Secondly, It appears in putting himself in our room. Christ did not only
become man with us, he does not only take the rags of our Nature upon him, but
our condition upon him, the pain, shame, curse that was due to us upon him. He
was content to be in our stead: to su^er, die for us: herein is love, Christ
knew, before hand, what it would cost him if he would become surety for us: he
knew the death we had deserved, the wrath that was our portion; and yet he was
content to put himself into our room, that we might be exempted and excused,
Christ has put in himself for us, not to be bound for us for a time: but did
engage himself, resolving to pay for us that we might be excused. It was much
that Christ did become man for us: but now that he should not only take our
nature upon him, but our curse upon him too, and become sin for us, and a curse
sor us, this makes it more wonderful. It is strange that Christ should take our
nature upon him; but if you consider the end why he did it, this would be more
wonderful: it was that he might be miserable, and become capable to be accursed
for us! that he might be cursed and killed by the wrath of God! He had not
become man, had it not been for this end. Now that he should become man for
this end, how great was this? and yet this was his end. When Justice must have
blood, that he would take his blood and give it for us: and that he might, he
would take himself a humane body and soul.

Thirdly, It appears in putting our lives into his purchase. This is another
strange expression of the love of Christ. O if Christ had dyed for others and
not for us: if he had put in others names and not ours, then we might have
passed our days with sorrow: and gone into the Mountains, and pined away in
sadness. But now that he should leave out any others names and put in ours, O
here is distinguishing love! did you ever hear of a man that took in a beggar
from the door to be his heir? but suppose such a thing might be done: did you
ever hear of a man that took in his enemy to be his heir, and made over all
that he has to him? thus has Christ done for us. Ah Brethren, how may we
stand astonished at this love, and say, as he, John 14. Lord whence is it that
thou do manifest thy self to us and not to the world? That thou have put in
our names and not others? surely here is great grace. O the free grace of God
to us! though Christ has dyed, yet you know the greatest part of the world
shall be never the better for his death. Though he has dyed for man, yet the
most of men, through the obstinacy and hardness of their hearts do resist him:
but he has overcom the obstinacy of our hearts and has made us partakers of
his death.

Fourthly, It appears in putting his name into our bonds. Herein is the love of
Christ manifested, in that he should become surety and bound for us. You know
that the surety is to set his name to the bond. Now a man will be very wary sor
whom he is bound; the man is not a man that is insufficient. Did you ever hear
of a man that bound himself for one, that he knew that he should pay it
himself? thus has Christ done for us: he knew that all our debts would come
upon him; and yet notwithstanding he did engage himself for us. Beloved, the
debt of sin is a very formidable debt: it is such a debt as if so be, the debt
of the least sin had been laid upon all the Saints and Angels in glory to give
satisfaction for it, they had bin drowned in everlasting perdition. But now
Christ undertook to pay for all out of his own stock, though he knew what it
would cost him, if he did become bound for us, O what love is (...)!

Fifthly, It appears in putting our names into his will. Brethren, herein is
the love of Christ seen toward his people, in that he has distinguished
between them and others. When he made his last Will and Testament, he put in
believers names and left out the rest, Rev. 21. 27. There shall in no wise
enter any thing that (...), etc. But they which are written in the ^mbs book of
Life. This is a privilege indeed to have your names written in his book, upon
his will. Our Savior bid his disclples rejoice in this that their names were
written in heaven, in Christ's book, and upon his will: this is matter of joy.
But how shall we know whether our names are written in heaven? who shall ascend
up into heaven to fetch it down from thence? I answer; we have the copy of his
will here upon earth: This word is the copy of his will that is in heaven. If
our names be in this book, our names are in his heart. Now let us go to the Law
and Testimony, what says that? that says, if thou believe thou shall be
saved. If thou repent and be converted, thy sins shall be blotted out Act. 3. 19

Sixthly, It appears in putting his spirit into our hearts, Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I
will put my spirit within you. Brethren, herein is the infinite goodness and
love of Christ seen, that he should bestow so great a gift upon so unworthy a
receiver. O what love is this, that those hearts that have been the stables of
unclean (...), that Christ should take up his abode there! here is strange love
indeed. Is it true indeed, will God dwell on earth, 1 Kings 8. 27. And if it
were matter of wonder to Solomon, that God should show some Token of his
presence in so excellent a fabric as that was; what matter of wonder is it
that he should come, and make show of his presence in our hearts!

Seventhly, In putting his glory into our hands. This is the greatest trust
that can possibly be (...) into our hands, this is more worth than all the
world: for all the world was made for this end, to promote Gods glory. Yea, it
is better than the blood of Christ: for the end is better than the means. Now
the blood of Christ was shed to this end, for the glory of God. Now then what a
great trust is this, that is entrusted with you in your hands? surely he loves
you well, that trusts his glory with you. Your unworthy walking will more
dishonor Christ, than any thing in the world beside. None can honor Christ as
you; and none can dishonor him as you: let me put in that by the way. They that
have such a Jewel put into their hands, had need be careful. I hope by this
time you are fully convinced that the love of Christ is a surpassing love.

Use, There are two things that I shall hence press you to. 1. To Remember. 2.
Answer and imitate this love of Christ.

First, To Remember this Love. O Christians, be sure that you never forget such
love as this, Cant. 1. 4. We will remember thy love more than Wine: this is the
duty that I am pressing you to, thus to remember Christ's love. Brethren,
methinks it should be impossible for you to forget such love as this. Methinks
it should be needless to bid you remember this love. Let my right hand forget
her cunning rather than I should forget the love of Christ. Let my tongue
forget to speak, rather than not to speak of this love. We should sooner forget
to eat than for get Christ. And yet how apt are we notwithstanding, though we
have to^ much reason to remember him, to have the memory of Christ and his love
out of our minds! the memory of Christ should be written upon us in Marble and
Brass, never to be blotted out. Consider this love is a mindful, and a
memorable love.

First, A mindful love. Never had persons so mindful a friend a^ we have in
Christ: our names are ever before him, they are engraven upon the palms of his
hands. He can as soon forget himself as forget us: he can as soon forget his
heart as forget us. Exodus 28. 29. And Aaron shall bear the names of the
Children in the breast-place of Judgment, upon his heart, when he goes in
unto the holy place for a memorial before the Lord continually. Here you may
see what a mindful friend Christ is, for these things were typical of Christ.
Observe^, (1.) The place where the names were to be written; upon the
breast-place of judgment upon his heart. (2.) The (...) why they were written
there: For a memorial before the Lord. He has your names there that he might
never forget you. (3.) Observe the ^petuity of this; for a memorial before the
Lord continually. And observe, these were to be carried by the high priest
before God when he went into the high place. Christ has not forgotten our
names, now he is gone into the high place. You know how it was with the Butler
when he was gone into Pharoahs presence, he forgot Joseph and all his
afflictions. But Christ, he remembers Joseph and his afflictions all the while,
though he be in heaven.

(Secondly,) It is a memorable Love. As Moses spoke of the night of Isreal's
deliverance, it is a night much to be remembered: so say I of this love of
Christ; it is a love never to be forgotten. If Christ do bear your names upon
his heart, methinks that you should ever bear his name upon you hearts. The
love of Christ is worthy to be for a perpetual memorial upon our hearts. And
therefore I may say to you of Christ, as they of him, he is worthy for whom
thou should do this.

Quest. But what kind of remembrance should we have of this love?

Answ. It must be a feeling, and a lasting remembrance.

First, A feeling remembrance, it should not be a bare Historical remembrance
of Christ, but all your affections should be drawn out after Christ. He did not
only remember you, his remembrance of you was an affectionate remembrance; he
has made it to appear with a witness. Such should our remembrance of Christ
be.

(Secondly,) A lasting remembrance, it should not be at the quickening of a
Sermon or the like, but an abiding remembrance of him. Brethren, our
remembrance of Christ should be a living remembrance. It should be with us as
with a loving husband that has lost his wife; it seems that where ever he is,
she should be with him: thus it should be with us, we should have Christ ever
with us. What Solomon speaks of the Law of Christ we should say of the
remembrance of Christ. When we go it should lead us, when we awake it should
talk with us, Prove. 26. 22. So Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of Myrrh is my
well-beloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. That is, say
the Dutch Divines, the love of my beloved, especially of his death and
sufferings, shall continucially be upon my heart; and I will keep it close with
me, to be my Nose-gay: and the like. He shall lie between my breasts; that is,
I will keep the remembrance of his love upon my heart to comfort me.

Secondly, As you should remember, so you should be careful to imitate and
answer his love. Beloved, as the Apostle says of Gods love to you; what manner
of love is this, etc. So it should be said of your love to Christ, what manner
of love is this that you bear to Christ? It should be such a love, as that
people may be forced to say, what manner of love is this that they bear to
Christ? Labor to have such a love to Christ, so great a love, as that all other
things may be nothing to you in comparison of the love of Christ. And when you
have loved Christ as much as you can, weep that you can love him no more.

A SACRAMENTAL Speech, grounded on
Ephesians. V. 2. But walk in love as Christ also has loved us, and given himself
for us, an offering and a sacrifice unto God.
MY beloved, this subject, of the love of Christ to sinners, is indeed an
inconceivable Subject. I have been backward to meddle with it, for how shall I
speak of that which I do not know? For the love of Christ passes all
knowledge. Yet I shall a little open it to you, and shall make it appear that
the love of Christ is great to his people: though I cannot comprehend it in the
length and breadth, and height and depth of it, yet this we may know, that he
has a very tender love to us, Rev. 1. 5. To him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood. Christ has loved us: and would you have a
proof of his love to us? he has loved us and washed us. He found us in our
sins as swine in the mire; and yet he loved us and washed us, when he was fain
to stop his breath as it were and hold his nostrils, yet he would come and wash
us: yea he would make a bath of his own blood. Christ commended Mary, that she
washed his feet with her tears: but how is the love of Christ commended in that
he has washed us in his blood? Christ has our names down upon his book, Rev.
21. 27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that desileth, etc. But
they that are written in the book of life. Mark, Christ keeps his book for you,
lest you should be forgotten, or there should be any mistake. It is a metaphor
taken from men that keep their books, because they will not let any thing be
mistaken or forgotten. Yea, but books may be mislaid: therefore Christ has
your names written on his breast. The High priest was to have the names of the
twelve Tribes upon his breast. So does Christ, he has you, for remembrance
sake, engraven upon his hands, Isaiah 4. 9. 15. Can a woman sorget her sucking
child, etc. She may forget: but I have engraven thee upon my hands: yea he has
you upon his heart. He challenges all the world for his love to you. He tells
you that a woman may forget her child, but he will not forget you. A woman
cannot choose, but have a very tender respect for her child: for this child
(says she) have I born many a bitter throw and pain: now, for you did Christ
travail, Isaiah 53. 11. And so the Apostle Peter, speaking of the Resurrection
of Christ ( Acts 2.) he tells us, that he being freed from the pains of death,
it being impossible he should be holden of them. The word in the Greek
signifies birth-pains. Believers, they did as it were, come forth of the womb
of his love. There is the very picture of a believer upon the heart of Christ.
So that he cannot look upon his hands or his heart but he must be put in mind
of us: so dear was was his love to us. What characters of love be there that
cannot be found in Christ? Love covers a multitude of faults. And O how may
this be seen in Christ? we have may sins; and yet Christ passes by them all.
Thou art all fair, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 7. Again Love is strong
as death. And so it was in Christ, his love was stronger than death: he under
went death it self for us. He was not afraid to pass under the pangs of death
that he might redeem us. Again, love fills the heart with love to the person
beloved what a dear respect has Christ for his spouse! every thing of theirs
is sweet to him. Come my Love that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the
secrets places of the stairs, let me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy
voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely, Cant. 2. 14. The
Church says she is black but Christ says she is comely. But more particularly,
I shall show you some evidences of the greatness of Christ's love. His letters,
are letters of Love. His lips, they are lips of Love. His Tokens, are the
tokens of Love. His Test^ment, is the evidence of Love. His Blood is a stream
of Love.

1. His letters are the letters of Love, the Gospel, is the book sent down from
heaven, wherein every chapter is a letter of love. Thou art ready to faint
sometimes, Christian, and unbelief is ready to prevail: here thou may read
the promises under Christ's own hand, sent down srom heaven to thee. Here thou
may read how love did care sor thee, when thou wast in thy blood; he said
Live. Here thou may read what expressions of love there was between Christ
and thee, when he was wooing of thee: here are the letters of his love. Here
thou may read those loving, melting passages of his, whereby he woo^d thee
and prevailed with thee. Here he shows, though he be absent for a while, yet he
will come again. Here he has set the time and the day when thou shall be
married to him: even when the body of Christ is complete. O how can thou hear
these letters of love, and not be in love with Christ again?

Secondly, His lips are lips of love, the kisses of his mouth are sweeter than
wine; the words of his mouth are better than life. His lips drop as the
Honeycomb. Never man spoke like this man: all that heard him bare him
witness, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth.
Well did Mary choose to sit at the seet of Christ, rather than at the feast: she
found more sweet in the Honeycomb of Christ's lips, than at the feast. Let us
but look over the last sermon of Christ, and the last prayer of Christ, and how
may this set us a loving of Christ.

Look over his last sermon, John 14. 15 and 16. chapters, how lovingly does he
dispute down the unbelieving fears of our hearts? Let not your heart be
troubled. And he propounds loving arguments: though he be gone, he will send us
the comforter: and he will not be long from us neither, and then we shall be in
no worse a case or place than he himself. And in the mean time, his going from
us is out of love to us: not because he wanted love for us, but because he went
to prepare a place for us.

Look into his last prayer, and how lovingly does he carry us in his arms to
his Father, when he was going out of the world, begging his Fathat he would
sancti^ie us, and keep us from the evil of the world, and that he would at
length bring us to enjoy his glory.

Thirdly, His tokens are tokens of love. As a woman will be often looking over
her tokens, because in these she sees the heart of her beloved; so if you would
be in love with Christ be often looking over the love tokens of Christ. Thou
can not turn thy eye but thou must see his tokens. But there are three or
four tokens especially that you should be looking into.

(First,) He has sent thee a pardon for thy sins. O what a blessed token is
this? Psa. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is the man whose sin is for given, etc. He is
blessed and blessed again: over and over blessed; he is a thrice happy man that
has got his pardon, why, this is the token that Christ has sent thee that art
a believer. O look after thy pardon, and thou shall find that thy pardon is
written in the blood of Christ: for it was his blood that made satisfaction. He
loved thee, and therefore washed thee from thy sins in his blood. O with what
joy and sweetness should thou look over thy pardon, Christian! it is that
which must carry thee through all thy dissiculties. Does the Devil assault
thee? do but show thy pardon and this will worst him. Does the Lord frown upon
thee? show him thy pardon, this will silence him. Does thy Conscience accuse
thee? show it thy pardon, and that will quiet it.

(Secondly,) He has sent thee a Patent for heaven, this has Christ given you
that are believers: he has made over to you in his Gospel a sirm conveyance of
heaven. So that I may say a believer has as true a right to heaven as Christ
can make him; yea as Christ has himself. You are they that have endured in my
temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed me,
etc. Now believers, can you tell the worth of this token? can you cast up the
worth of endless glory? can you tell what God and heaven is worth? then you
may tell me what this token is worth; never was there such a token sent as this
is?

(Thirdly,) He has sent thee the golden chain of the Jewels and bracelets of
thy graces. As when the servant of Abraham, went to take Rebeckah for wife to
Isaac he gave her bracelets, etc. So has Christ to you: he has given you the
chain of all the graces. These are the Jewels he has adorned you with. Do
thou find any faith, love, etc. in thee? though it be like a grain of
Mustard Seed, and like a spark on the hearth? O bless the Lord Christ upon the
bended knees of thy soul, that he has given thee this. He has done more for
thee in this, than he has done for all the world beside. O how thankful should
you be, that have received such a token from him? Christian, when ever thou
do feel the operation of the spirit of Christ within thee, let this mind thee
of the love of him that has sent thee all this.

(Fourthly,) He has sent thee the seal and testimony of his spirit. Have thou
received the spirit of adoption teaching thee to cry Abba Father? It was he
that sent it. Have thou so sure a guide, as the sweet compassionate spirit? so
loving a Counselor as the spirit of Christ in thee? O take notice of the love
of Christ's in sending him to thee.

Fourthly, His testament is the evidence of love, beloved, it is impossible for
me to utter, or you to conceive the riches of Christ's love expressed to you in
his testament, his Covenant: herein, Christian, thou might read the strange
love of Christ to thee, in that he has given thee his testament, and delivered
it to thee as his act and deed, sealed with his own blood. O how much did David
make of this? It was the last words of that sweet singer of Israel. Although my
house be not so with God, yet be has made with me an everlasting Covenant,
ordered in all things and sure and this is all my sa'vation and all my desire,
2 Samuel 23. He had all that heart could wish sor in this Covenant. O Christian,
has Christ given thee his covenant? O make much of this covenant, it is a sweet
token indeed. O the great privileges and sweet immunities that are conveyed to
believers here! freedom from sin; from the guilt and power of sin. Freedom
from misery; from the wrath of God, the curse of the law, from the sting of
death, from the evil of the world, from the danger of hell. And beside all
this, what legacies has he given thee in the covenant? God for thy Father,
himself for thy Savior, his spirit for thy comforter and sanctifier, his
Ministers for thy teachers, his ordinances for thy furtherance in grace: there
he has given thee thy adoption and assurance for heaven. Do but look over
this, and say if thou can, that Christ has not loved thee.

Fifthly, His Blood is a stream of love, do thou doubt of the love of Christ?
do but look upon him on his cross, how his feet and hands and heart are
pierced: thou may see the love of Christ flowing out of every part.

Use, Now since Christ has so loved you, you that are his people do you love
him again O where should you bestow your love, place your affections, fix your
hearts but here? I shall give you two motives. He desires your love: and he
deserves your love.

First, Consider he desires your love. You have seen a little how Christ does
love you; and what does he expect, but that you should love him again? and can
there be any thing less that he could require! O methinks thou should give
up thy heart to Christ. This is all that he expects for this love, that you
should love him again. This Christ will accept, and nothing short of this will
he accept. Love cannot be satisfied, but by love again. It must be paid in its
own coin, Cant. 8. 7. If a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, it would be utterly contemned. As no Treasure in the world can buy love,
purchase love; so no sufficiency in the world will be sufficient for love,
unless, you give love your love again, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Now Christian, be
persuaded then to give away thy heart out of hand to Christ. O bestow thy love
upon him, wherehast thou such a thing in thee, but that thou should love
Christ? does any man plant a vineyard, and not expect to eat of the fruit of
it? has he put love into thee, and does not he expect that thou should love
him?

Secondly, He deserves your love. I may say of him as they of the Centurion: he
is worthy thou should do this thing for him; for he loves our nation. Worthy
is the lamb that was slain to receive honor and strength, etc. He is worthy to
receive all, that you can give unto him. If there were any thing else that were
worthy of your love, there might be some excuse that you did not bestow it upon
Christ. But alas there is nothing here that does deserve your love. As Paul
said, was Paul Crucified for you, etc. so may I say were these things crucified
for you? but Christ was crucified for you: he has deserved your love. This is
he that came in to the world to seek and to save. That came and found you naked
and dead and wounded: and then let out his blood and cured you. This is he that
when he came, you spit upon him, and refused him; yet he would not be put off
from you so, but he would do you good. How often has he come and refreshed you
with the refreshings of his love? how often has he taken you into his
galleries and filled you with his secrets? you that are believers may remember
the places where he has given you visits, and made you taste of the powers of
the world to come.

A SACRAMENTAL Speech, grounded on
Math. 15. 28. O woman, great is thy faith.
WE have read many noted and remarkable stories of sundry great exploits, that
have been done by the renowned worthies of the world: but there are no exploits
nor achievements, so renowned as those that been done by faith.

The Scripture give us many instances of this kind; and shows us how greatly
the Lord Jesus Christ was pleased with the lively actings of his peoples faith.
Faith is of great price with, and shall obtain great praise from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

In this chapter, you have a most notable victory that was obtained by a poor
woman, by the power and strength of her faith, Here a poor weak woman by the
strength of her faith wrestling with Jesus Christ, obtains the victory; that he
could no longer hold but grants her request. Her faith did notably discover it
self in putting her upon saing to Christ. Nature will send men in their
distresses to natural helps; but faith will send them to Christ, to seek their
help in him. And then her faith discovers it self in putting her upon pursuing
of Christ. Christ seems to give a repulse to her faith, he answers her not a
word; he was resolved to put her faith to it: that he might exercise her faith.
Yea when the Disciples came to speak for her; he answered, I am not sent but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But she makes another onset upon Christ.
Then came she, and worshipped, saying, Lord help me. Well, but he gives her
another repulse, he seems to put her off with a check; it is not meet to give
the Childrens bread to dogs. But behold the importunity of faith; she pursues
the victory still, she confesses that she was but a dog, but she pleads that
she might have the privilege of a dog: even the dogs have the crumbs that fall
from their masters table, and though I be a dog, yet let me have the crumbs.
Well now, he could no longer hold, but, as Joseph he breaks out in the praise
of this woman's faith. O woman great is thy faith.

In Luke 5. you have the sick of the Palsy suing to Christ for cure and
observe how earnest he is, when they could not find which way to come to
Christ, they went to the house top and let him down in the midst before Jesus.
Here was a lively faith indeed, it could by no means be kept off from Christ,
and how greatly was Christ pleased with this? Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee. O this was the voice that faith would have had: this was the
word that faith looked for. As Christ is pleased with faith, so he gratifies
it, and gives it the answer that it would have, what word can be so sweet to
faith, as Son thy sins are forgiven thee?

Quest. But why is Christ so greatly pleased with his peoples faith.

Answ. First, Because this is the great thing commanded by him. Christ lays
more stresse upon this command than upon all the rest: to wit the command of
believing, John 6. 29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent. This is THE work of God. THE work with an emphasis, none to this;
This is the great command, 1 John 3. 23. This is his command, that we should
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ. There are many other commands, but
this is the great command of all. And therefore it is that Christ does so
generally please himself in, his peoples faith: becauses this is the great
thing that he requires of us.

Secondly, Because this is that which does set so great esteem upon him. Christ
prizes faith, for faith above all things prizes Christ, and gives glory to
Christ. Christ is not magnified and glorified in any thing so much, as by his
peoples faith. Faith empties us of our selves, and gives all the glory to
Jesus: makes us vile in our own eyes, and magnifies Christ in our eyes, 1 Pet.
2. 7. Unto you therefore that believe he is precious. Faith and Christ they are
mutually precious one to another. O the sweet embraces there are between these
two friends when they meet! O precious faith, faith Christ, 2. P^t. (...).
(...). And O precious Christ, says faith. O precious Savior, says faith, and
O precious servant, says Christ. ^aith says, none but Christ; and Christ
says, none but faith: only believe. Since therefore Christ is so precious unto
faith, no wonder that faith is so precious unto Christ.

Now then beloved, stir up your faith; abound in the lively exercise of your
faith: and thereby you may be very pleasing to Jesus Christ nothing will please
him like this. If thou art a believer, I know it is in thine heart to please
thy Lord. If thou knew what would please him, woulst thou not do it? How is
the church pleased, to think how she would please Jesus Christ? Cant. 1. 12.
While the King fitteth at his Table, my (...) sends forth the smell thereof.
It gave her great content, to think how she would please Jesus Christ. Would
you know how to please Jesus Christ? here you are directed: be much in
believing, learn the skill of believing; be much in the exercise of your faith.
As David danced before the Ark with all his might, so put forth your faith with
vigor and activity. In this above all things you will be pleasing to Jesus
Christ. We read how H^rod was pleased with Herodias daughter when she danced
before him, Mar. 6. 22. insomuch that he swear to her, to give her what she
should ask, even to the half of his Kingdom. Thus do thou put forth thy faith
in a lively activity, and he will be pleased infinitely with this, that he will
swear to thee thou shall have thy asking. Now for a lively faith, to lay hold
of Christ. Where is thy faith, Christian, try now what thy faith can do.

Quest. But wherein should your faith act so vigorously, that you may please
Jesus Christ?

Answ. First, In a way of Anmhilation. Or emptying your selves of your selves.
This was the way, the Centurious faith did please Christ so much, making him so
little in his own eyes. And this was the way the woman of Canaan did please
Christ with her faith. Faith is a grace that will exceedingly little us, and
abase us, it will make thee that art as big as a Camel, to be little enough to
go through an eye of a needle. It will make thee seem less and worse then
nothing. It will make thee not only to cease admiring thy self, but to abhor
thy self, and repent in dust and ashes. It will show thee what Christ is; and
seeing him by thee, thou shall disappear, and see nothing in thy self but
unworthiness. The glowworm shines in the night; but when the day Springs it
cannot so much as be seen. When this Orient Sun Christ arises, to the eye of
faith, then self will not be seen, it will not appear. Faith will lay thee
where thou should be, in the dust And then Christ will be where he should be,
in the Throne. When man stands for a Cipher th^n Christ signifies somewhat
indeed. When man sets down himself for a Bankrupt, then he s^es out for the
unsearchable riches of Christ. O be much in exercising thy faith, and that will
empty thee to purpose. This is the language of faith, Lord I am undone, do thou
set me up, I am a Bankrupt, do thou pay my debt. Lord, my rig^ousness is but
rags: my beau^y, is but rottenness: my pedigree, is but baseness: my portion,
mere poverty: my power, mere infirmity: Lord, here is work for thee: help Lord!
This is the language of faith: and therefore it is, that Christ and faith do
fit so well together. Faith has need of every thing that Christ has, and
Christ has a supply for every want that Faith has. As for unbelievers, they
make light of Christ, they are rich, and need not his gold: they are well, and
have no need of his salve. But now faith, that empties and humbles the man, and
makes him to sue out to Christ: faith will fetch out all that is in Christ.
Lord, here is a beggar for thy bounty Here is a Lazarus, for thy cure. Here is
a palsy hand, a blind eye, here is a wound for thy salve. Christ, he comes as
an open fountain, and faith brings an empty vessel. Christ comes with a full
purse, and faith with an empty hand. Christ comes with an open hand, and faith
with an open mou^. Christ comes giving, and faith comes gaping. Faith comes,
Lord, here is a belly for thee to fill: here is a back for thee to cover. I am
poor and am robbed of all, I have not a penny left, and none can help me but
thee, I starve unless thou help. Thus faith comes as a hungry child fixes his
ey upon the eye of his Father, earnestly looking upon him, when some relief
will come to him: so does faith upon Christ, looking when somewhat will come to
him.

Secondly, By way of acceptance, receiving of Christ, To as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons ^od even to them that believe on
his name, John 1. 12. Faith sits like the cripple at the beautiful gate of the
Temple to receive an alms. Beloved, the Gospel is the great Mart, and your
Souls are the ship, and faith is the receiver, to take in the lading. O let
your faith be active, that you may go away greatly laden. As Christ said,
receive you the holy Ghost, so do you receive Christ: accept of Christ, while
he tenders himself to you. While he is tendering himself to you, let your Souls
answer, Lord, with my whole heart do I accept thee, I take thee at thy word to
all intents and purposes. I take thee not only to receive thy pay, but to
fight under thy banner: not only to be justified by thy righteousness, but to
be governed by thy laws. This is the great and vital act of faith, that is of
absolute necessity to salvation. The Lord Jesus Christ is offered to you. In
the name of the eternal God I offer him to you all; see that you take him by
faith. O says faith Lord I accept thee, you will all say we will have Christ,
we must perish else: but consider it, be not rash, know the manner of your
husband: if you will have Christ, you must not live as you list: you must be
under government, and strict government, you must not have him and the world
too; you must cast your worldly hopes over board. You must take him upon his
own conditions. His condition is very low sometimes in the world, sometimes he
has a bed, and sometimes he has none: you must run all hazards with him; you
must suffer with him if you (...) reign with him. Now what says your faith to
this? O says faith, I will take him with all my heart. Faith says as Ruth to
Naomi, Ruth 1. 16. whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I
will lodge, thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God

But how must your faith accept of Christ?

(First,) Accept the person of Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ is offered in a
marriage covenant to you in the Gospel: and a marriage, is not between a person
and patrimony; but person and person: true faith is not only for the benefits
of Christ but the person of Christ. There is great difference between the sick
man, and the sick spouses taking the physician: the sick man takes him for his
skill, but the spouse for his person. The sick man taks him till the cure be
done, and than values not the physician: but the spouse for hers in all
conditions for ever; she takes his person. Thus must your faith do; you must
choose the Lord Jesus Christ, not for the salvation only that he brings, but
the excellency that is in him. As Christ will not be contented with any thing
of yours, but you: so should you do, be contented with nothing of Christ, but
himself.

Secondly, You must accept the pardon of Christ. Christ, with his person does
offer you all his (...). And as it is in marriage that then, and then only, and
not otherwise shall the wife have the State. So take Christ and you have all
the benefits that come by him. He comes with his pardon in his hand, and if you
will accept him, you shall have his pardon by him.

(Thirdly,) The promises of Christ. All the promises are in him yea, and in him
Amen. Take Christ and you may lay hold of all the promises as yours.

(Fourthly,) The purchase of Christ. it is a Kingdom that is offered to you
all, in the Gospel: take Christ, and you shall be heirs of a Kingdom. Lay hold
of Christ, and you do at the same time lay hold of ettrnal life.

Thirdly, By way of exultation, rejoicing in Christ, triumphing in Christ, 2
Cor. 2. 14. Thanks be to God, that gives us always cause to triumph in Christ.
Your faith should be triumphing, you should triumph in the victory, mercy,
merit, promises, riches, kingdom of Christ. O you that are believers, you have
cause indeed always to triumph in Christ. what! have you received the Lord
Jesus Christ? are you married to such a Husband? O how should you boast of him,
O how should you please him? how should you glory in the booty that you have
got? you have got a prize indeed. Thou that have got Christ, have a husband
indeed: let your hearts rejoice in him Thou art a believer, thou are really
espoused to Jesus Christ: thou may make as real a claim to the Lord Jesus
Christ, as a wife to her Husband. And thou may make as real a claim to the
purchase of Jesus Christ, as a wife to the state and goods of her Husband.
These are not vain and empty words: no, no, there is the greatest reallity in
the world in this; it is as true as any thing in the world can be true. Thou
have a real interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, and may boldly make thy claim
to him as thine own Husband: do I speak any thing but what the Lord has
spoken? you are married unto Christ that was raised from the dead, that you
might bring fruit unto God, Romans 7. 4. mark, it is not my word, it is Gods word.
Take heed thou do not blaspheme: do thou think that God does go to deceive
thee? far be it from thy thoughts. Believer, it is so: of a truth Christ is
thine; thy husband, and thou may boldly lay claim to him. Consider what a
husband Christ is: is not he the King of the Kings of the earth? This is he
unto whom Angels, and authorities and powers are made subject: This is he whom
all the Angels of God do worship: Heaven and earth are at his beck: he is
exalted above all heavens, and has a name above every name that is named: this
is thy beloved and friend. O should not thy faith triumph in him?

Fourthly, By way of resignation, in giving up your selves to Jesus Christ.
Faith, as it takes Christ, so it delivers up the soul to Christ. Faith makes a
happy exchange for us, giving away the man to Christ, and receiving Christ for
us. Thus, between Christ and a believer, there is a mutual delivery of
themselves over to one another. As faith receives Christ, so it gives up the
soul to Christ, and all that it has; Lord, says faith, I here resign to thee:
I quit all claim to my self, I am not my own: and will own it henceforth, that
I have no right to my self. I give up soul and body to thee: I will hold back
no part of the price. And as faith takes first the person of Christ, and then
the benefits of Christ: so it gives away the person of the man to Christ, and
then with the person it gives all the rest; the estate, interest, and all to
Jesus Christ, thus you should be exercising your faith.

Fifthly, By way of Adoration, thus says should put forth its self upon
Christ: casting our Crowns before him: setting up the Lord Jesus Christ in the
throne of his own excellency, and we should admire nothing but him, breaking in
pieces all our Idols, and pulling them down, that Christ alone may be exalted.

Sixthly, By way of Appreciation, prizing and esteeming of Christ, debasing
self and all other excellencies in comparison of Christ: accounting all things
but dung for Christ, such was Paul's faith.

Seventhly, By way of Appropriation, so your faith should put forth it self. It
should not only put forth it self in a way of Affiance only, leaning upon
Christ: but in a way of assurance. You should labor to come up to this, not
only to believe that Christ dyed for his people in general; but to believe his
death was intended for you in particular to appropriate him to your self. Thus
faith acts upon Christ. This was Thomas, his faith when once it was stirred up.
My Lord, and my God. Applying Christ to himself as his. Lord, says faith, I am
weak, but thou art my strength. I am a sinner, but thou art my righteousness,
I am unclean, but thou art my sanctisication. I am miserable, but thou art my
redemption.

A SACRAMENTAL Speech grounded on,
Mark 1. 15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel.
MY dearly beloved brethren, you have often heard our Savior preaching to you
by his Ambassadors: but now he is come to preach to you, as it were, in his own
person. What was said of Abel is true of Christ, he being dead yet speaks.
Christ being dead yet preaches to you.

But what does Christ preach to you, now he is dead?

Why, he preaches no other thing to you, now he is dead, than he did in his
life: Repent, and believe the Gospel. That, Christ preaches to you, faith and
repentance, repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

First, Repentance toward God, see here Christian what thy sins has done. Now
is a time to have your hearts filled with sorrow, and your faces with shame, to
see what you ^ave brought upon Jesus Christ. Look upon him, every wound in his
body, and thorn in his head, calls upon the to repent. The wounds in his side,
and the blood that flowed from thence, calls upon thee to repent. Now let thy
repentance by stirring, seeing he calls thee to repentance, what shall stir
thee up to repent, if this shall not? here you may see the Lords severe wrath
against sin. See it here in the beloved Son of God, who is slain before your
eyes for your sins. Ah, Christian, if thou had stood with Abraham, and seen
the fire of Sodom. Or with Adam, and seen God commanding, and then thrusting
them out of the garden. If thou had been in heaven, and seen what the wrath
of God did there, what work it made when the Angels sinned. Or if thou had
been in hell, and seen and heard the damned there, how would thou look upon
thy sin? O see here, more than all this; Gods wrath burning against his own
Son, for thy sin.

O see here the love of Christ! in vain were all thy tears and sorrow, had not
Christ made way for thee. O see him, and hear him speaking from the cross, my
wounds shall heal thy soul, if thou will but repent. These hands shall work out
thy salvation, if thou will but return and repent. Ah sinner! what is not thy
soul melted yet? methinks I should hear thee making thy submission, and return
to the Lord, as one that melts at the word of his Lord. Lord is thy mind
thus? shall I have all this if I will but repent? behold, I cover my head with
sackcloth. I am the offender, as for this lamb what has he done? O Lord it
repents me of my rebellions: I lay down my w pons: I swear, I will be a
resolved enemy against sin, as long as I live.

Secondly, Another thing that Christ in his costly death preaches to you, is
faith. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, he calls upon you to believe now he is
upon his cross. Methin (...) hear him calling upon you from the cross.
Believe the reality and greatness of my love. Believe the infiniteness of my
power. The full expiation of all thy sins. The truth of all Gods threatenings.
The certainty of all my promises. Thy unquestionable right and title to the
Kingdom of glory.

First, Believe the reality and greatness of my love. Methinks he speaks thus
to thee, O man, what should I have done more to testisic my love to thee than I
have done? read all the Antiquities, and see whether there was any love like
mine! thou can not believe, but that thy parents love thee, when they take
ear of thee: but whose love is like mine? did these ever suffer for thee or do
for thee what I have done? what are all these sufferings that I have suffered
for thee? did I despise my fathers glory, and leave it for the, and did not
love (...)? O slow of heart to believe all that I have done and suffered for
thee! if I did not love thee, what should move me to dye for thee? did any
thing in thee? no, did any profit from thee move me? no, I knew that man is not
profitable to God. Was it any returns from thee? no, I knew how thou would
be: how unkind thou would be to me. O Christian, doubt not of my love to
thee. Doubt not of my help, do thou think that I would give my self for thee,
and will not give my hand for thee? do not doubt that I will cast thee off,
do thou think that I have su^ered all this for thee, and that I will cast
thee off at last? no, no.

Secondly, Believe the infiniteness of my power. This is the language of Christ
from his cross, believe the exceeding greatness of my power. He speaks thus:
O man, what if thou should have no friend but I, cannot I uphold thee? These
shoulders, that did bear up under all that Hell could invent against me, shall
not they uphold thee? fear not to commit thy self with considence to me. See, I
am able to keep what thou committest to my trust.

Thirdly, Believe the full expiation of all thy sins. I am here a satisfaction
for thy sin. Fear not, I am thy atonement, thy peace, thy propitiation of thy
sins, what though thou art empty? behold the fullness of my satisfaction, what
am I here for? I am cut off, but not for my self, it is for thee. This is my
meaning in my death: this is the end why I am upon the cross, to make
expiation for sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness. All you like sheep
are gon^ astray, and God has laid on me the iniquities os you all. Believe it,
God will not require the debt of the principal and surety too Does (...)
trouble thee at any time? sprink^ it but with this blood, and it will be at
peace. Art thou afraid to come into the pre^ of God? do but carry me with thee,
and thou shall be safe.

Fourthly, Believe the truth of all Gods threatenings: here thou see all the
threatenings of God executed upon me. See here, and believe what God will do to
those that go on in their trespasses. If he laid so much on me, what will he do
to them? believe also his threatenings of correcting you, (...) you sin: for he
will punish your sins with rods, and your iniquities with chastisements.

Fifthly, Believe the certainty os all my promises, this is another word that
Christ's cross and death speaks to you, what (...) the meaning of this death of
mine, and of this blood and satisfaction of mine, but that the covenant might
be ratified, and all the promises sealed, and nothing diminished, but all my
Testament and covenant might he ratified for ever? Behold, this blood that
flows from my wounds is sprinkled upon the people for the purifying of them.
All is as sure as my death and blood can make them. Here thou see all
ratisied in my blood. Man, think thou that I would dye with a lie in my
mouth? do thou think that I would suffer all this for thee, is I meant not to
do thee good?

Sixthly, Believe thy unquestionable right and title to the Kingdom of glory.
Why here thou do see the price and ransom, the money paid down: and what
means all this think thou, but to buy in thy name into the inheritance?

Now Christians, where is your faith? O methinks your sails should be up.
Methinks you should be triumphing, though you are here in the world. As Paul,
Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died. Why? what objections can be
made? what can unbelief say, that cannot be answered here in the death of
Christ? shall I muster up all its force, and tell you what the death of Christ
does speak to it? give me leave to touch upon some of them.

First, methinks I hear unbelief objecting from the terribleness of Gods
threatenings. O says the soul, my heart melts within me, while I hear the
wrath of God threatened against sin, methinks I come lately from Mount Sinai,
where I heard the Law given withthe Trumpet, and a shout, and a curse pronounced
upon all that kept not the words of this Law. O how can my soul bear up against
all these curses?

But now how sweetly does the cross of Christ, and death of Christ answer thy
fears? Hear thy Saviors language.

O soul be not afraid, do not thou fear and flag: all these threatenings were
intended against me; all were fulsilled upon me. Justice has nothing to say to
thee: all the curses are met together upon me. That is the meaning of it: that
thou may be free, though I take in the wrath of the Lord into my own body.
Oh! behold me, behold me: see how full I am of the wrath of God in body and
soul: my soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.

Methinks I should hear thee say, now Lord, I see my liberty, in thy bonds. My
salvation, in thy torment and pain. I have seen thy sorrow and outcry, and
understood the meaning and intent of all: that it was to remove the curse from
me. Now arise O my soul and inherit the blessing. Therefore was Christ made a
curse that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles. What was the
blessing of Abraham? I will bless thee, and make thee a blessing. I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. And again, I establish my
Covenant between me and thee. Rejoice, O my soul rejoice, and let my soul
rejoice in God my Savior. O my soul, God has blessed thee, and shall bless
thee. Fe^r not, now the mouth of the Law is for ever stopped thou shall never
hear one curse more of the flaming mouth of the Law. O soul, what can thou
wish for that is not laid up in the everlasting covenant? he has said, he will
be a God to thee. Can thou be able to know the immensity of his covenant? all
is made over to thee.

Second, Object. But sin begins to rise up. The soul begins to cry out of his
sins: O the multitude, multitude of my sins! they are gone over my head, and I
am sore afraid, I have nothing to pay my debt.

But hear now what Christ speaks to thee. This is the language of his death and
wounds, fear not sin. Have I been so long with thee and do thou not know me,
Philip? so says he to thy soul, what! been here so long with me, and conversed
with me so long, and do thou not know me yet? are thy sins infinite, and are
not my merci^s infinite? are thy sins great, and am not I God above all, equal
with the father? O look unto me, and rest in the fullness of my satisfaction: I
am thy surety. All thy debts be upon me: all thy wants are upon me, what if
thou have nothing to pay? I have enough for me and thee. I am the Scapegoat
that have carried away thy sin into a land of forgetfulness, I have slain the
enmity of sin upon the cross, and have reconciled you to my Father. Here is
redemption, full redemption, plentiful redemption, behold, my blood speaks
peace to you. Will thou not believe the voice of my death and blood to thee?
thus Christ's death can speak sufficiently to all that thy sins can say'
against thee.

Now does not thy faith stand upright yet, Christian? methinks I should hear
thee say, Lord it is enough, thou have laid down thy life for a ransom: I see
my cure in thy wounds. I doubt not butthy blood is sufficient to cleanse me
from all my sins.

And who now shall appear-against me? Ah Justice, once a terrible word, now I
can see thy face with comfort. Once Justice was so terrible, as never was the
face of a judge more terrible to the prisoner at the bar, than that to me, but
now it is pleasing to me. Once, I had rather have fallen into the lions mouth,
than to come to it. O how did my soul grow pale, and my heart ready to dye like
Nabals within me, when I saw the balance held up in one hand, and the sword in
the other! but now, I see, that the death of Christ and his blood shall be put
into the balance with me, I am not afraid. Here now see a great wonder: the
pure holiness of God taking pleasure in a sinner: and the strictest justice
shaking hands with the off^nder, now the justice of God is become my friend.

Third, Object. O but unbelief seems yet to object from the multitude, and
strength, and policy of the enemy. Methinks I see the trembling soul in the
posture of the prophets man, who beheld the mountain beset with Charriots and
Horses, and crying out O Master! what shall we do? If it were but flesh and
blood it were not altogether so much: but it is principalities, and powers; who
can break through the host of these Philistines? But Christian, look to this
cross: look to a dying Christ, look what his death speaks to thee, wherefore
art thou ready to fall with these fears, and ready to sink under them?
methinks, I see him taking thee by the hand as he did Peter, O thou of little
faith, why did thou doubt? look here by my cross, and see all thine enemies
lie slain by my death: and what will thou be afraid, that thy slain-enemies
will rise again, and pursue thee? methinks, soul, I should hear thee triumphing
and crying out, what can you do, O my enemies? I have seen captivity led
Captive: and for whom did he overcome but for me? as for me, now I will throw
out the gantlet, and bid defiance to my enemies. Who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that dyed, who shall separate us from the love (or death) of Christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, etc. Nay in all these things we are more than
conquerors etc. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc. shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. I
see now all overcome in the death of Christ. Devils, I fear you not; I behold
all your legions in chains, and made captives by Christ. Death, I fear thee
not; for I know that thou art slain, by him that had the power of death and
devils. I know that thy commission is altered, and thou come, not with
authority to arrest me; but with an invitation, to invite me to feast with the
Lord. And thanks be to God who has given us the victory.

To the most beloved people the flock of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.
Loving and most dearly beloved,
I have lately received your affectionate letter; and though I never question
your affections to me, and need no verbal testimony; yet I cannot but take it
thankfully, and read it delightfully, when I see it attested under your own
hands. And I cannot but tell you, you are the people of my cares, the desire of
my eyes, the people of my delights, and of my prayers. My labors with you for
many years, though some time attended with difficulty, and danger, yet were not
tedious; but my time passed like Jacobs, when he served for Rachel and my
sufferings for you are not irksome, through grace, because I trust they are for
your edisication, and are a seal of my love to you, and more especially of the
doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, which I have long preached among you. The
Lord God teach me, with humility, and thankfulness to bear such honor, that I
should be set for the defense, and consirmation of the Gospel. And now, my
dearly beloved, (though you should not be insensible of Gods great visitation
upon you, yet) I would not have you inordinately disquieted, that I am removed
from you to a prison for a season; but rather imitate the Heroic virtue of
that most gracious mother, in the Martyrologie; who, when the Son of her bowels
came, not to a prison, but to a stake to be sacrificed in the flames for
Christ, fell down on her knees, and blessed the Lord, that ever she should be
so happy, as to have a Son to suffer for Jesus Christ. Ah my dear flock! how
glad should (...) be, if God would send me forthwith among you again, to feed
you as in the days of old, and to go in and out before you, that you might
find pasture? yet be not dismayed, fear not little flock; though you are
little, and despised, and hated of all men for Christ's name sake; Christ's
relation to you, and tenderness of you is such, that you cannot miscarry. He
lives, and his care lives. The Godly wife of that worthy Cornish Divine Mr.
Vincent, being left in great want, with many little Children, would often
answer them, when t^y came crying about her for bread, and she had none to
give, with this gracious expression, be quiet, children, our God (...). And
surely, that, my brethren, may be a quieting, comforting consideration, both
for you and me, though the bread do (...) fail. But at length this gracious
wo^, being left quite destitute, and her children calling upon her, when she
had neither bread nor money, breaks out into a bitter weeping, which one of the
littleones observing, he comes, and pulls his mother by the Apron, saying,
Mother why do you weep thus? Is God dead now? such a rebuke did the Lord send
her, by the mouth of a poor babe. Brethren be not dismayed, Christ lives, and
therefore let your hopes live, let your courage live, let your faith live also.
Christ lives ever, therefore let your hearts live for ever, Psalm. 22. 26. He
lives to make intercession sor you, and from his living, you may be assured of
life, John 14. 19. of your Jastification, Romans 8. 34. Of your Salvation, Romans
5. 10.

Beloved, do but seriously think of Christ's relation to you, and you cannot
want comfort. Why, he is not ashamed to call you Brethren. Even when he was
entered upon his state of exaltation, risen from the dead, far above the state
of mortals, he owned poor weak believers for his brethren, John 20. 17. Go to
my Brethren. Math. 28. 10. Go tell my Brethren. Yea when he comes with all his
holy Angels with him, and sits upon the throne of his glory, he will own the
very least, and lowest among poor believers, before all the world, for his
Brethren, Math. 25. 31. with ver. 40. keep this, my beloved, as a Cordial at
your heart, that Christ stands related to you as your Brother. Ah what
consolation is here for a considering Christian! for, First, This may give you
boldness with him, and that, both in your coming to him. and at his coming to
you. I say in your coming to him. It may make you come with boldness to the
throne of grace, that you have such a friend in court, that can have what he
will, that is indeed all and in all in heaven: that you have a kinsman, a
Brother there, a man like unto your selves, of the same race, and nature, and
so sensible of humane infirmity, Heb. 4. 15, 16. Christ's humane nature, by
which he is a Brother to us, may make us come boldly and with full assurance,
Heb. 10. 19, 20, 22. We might tremble to approach Gods terrible Majesty, to
come near the consuming fire, but that we have a brother like unto us, a
daies-man, a Mediator, the man Christ Jesus, between God and us. Again, it may
give us boldness at his coming to us. Let not the Terror he will com with
affright us Christians; for he is our brother, flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone. Had even Dives himself a regard of his Brethren, that they might not
come into that place of torment? and shall we think, Christ will send his
brethren thither? How secure would he be whose life or estate were in
controversy; if the matter were put into the hand of his own brother?
Secondly, Then you may presume upon your interest in him. You may have boldness
to speak and confidence to speed. You may make use of him, on all occasions,
for your selves, and for your friends. You cannot stretch your interest. He
upbraideth not that you make too bold, or come too often, or ask too much.
Thirdly, Then you may d^d upon it that he will help in extremity. (...) friend
loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity, Pro. 17. 17. He is not
such a brother as David's were Psa. 69. 8. Or as Jobs were, Job 6. 14, 15, 16,
17. He will own and delight in his, in their afflictions, Canticles 2. 14. 4.
you may not question his affection. Love is the Natural duty, between Brethren,
1 Pet. 3. 8. Christ has not only the name but the heart of a brother. He is
not such a brother as Cain, that said, am I my brothers keeper, that hated his
brother in his heart. Nor as Jacob, that took his brother by the heel, a
supplanter, that deceived him of the birthright. But such a brother as Joseph
was, who was all along his eminent type. 1. Josep^ Received great unkindnesses,
and wretched usage from his Brethren. They conspired against his life, they
sold him and pitied him not, when they saw the anguish of his soul. And is not
the blood of Christ to be found upon the skirts of his Brethren? Touch him, and
the body will bleed upon you. Look upon his mangled body: why, these are the
wounds that he has received in the house of his friends, by the hands of his
brethren: I mean by their sins. Isa. 53. 5. 2dly. He showed melting affections
to his brethren after their unkindness to him. He weeped aloud over them, Genesis
45. 1, 2. to wit with tears of love, and joy. His bowels yearned over his
brother, and he seeks where to weep, Genesis 43. 30. But there are no bowels to
Christ's. No yearnings like to his. How unkindly had his brethren dealt with
him? One sold him, another denied him, all forsook him. Yet when one would have
expected a Message of d^iance he sends them a message of peace. The sweetest
tidings that ever were sent; John 20. 17. Thirdly, Joseph was sent before to
provide for his brethren, Genesis 45. 5. So is Christ. It is his business in
heaven to prepare, and provide for his brethren. The provision you have for
soul and body is from him: but all this is but as the corn to keep you alive
upon the way. What is the store, that Joseph has laid up in Egypt? the
preparations that Christ has made in heaven! Fourthly, Joseph saved the lives
of his brethren, that sought his, Genesis 45. 7. And has not Christ saved them
that had their hands in his death? Fifthly, Joseph when he frowned with
greatest severity, had his heart full of yearnings, and tenderness to his
brethren. He spoke roughly but could not forbear to turn about, and weep. Genesis
42. 24. So it is with Christ. He seems to repulse the woman of Canaan, and to
put her off: but you know what was all the while in his heart. When he speaks
hard sayings, and writes bitter things, and uses us roughly, his thoughts are
thoughts of peace, and not of evil; peace is in his heart; He does it but for
your trial. When he seems to have forsaken you, he is but a withdrawing behind
the curtain. He seems to have exposed you to perish, as Moses among the flags;
but you see not how he stands like Moses his Sister behind the bush, wistly
looking, what was done with her brother, the chil^. Sixthly, God so over ruled
the wickedness of Joseph his brethren, that it tends greatly, to their good and
his preferment. So that God made, that horrid sin in slaying Christ to be for
our salvation, and his exaltation, Phil. 2. (...), 9, 10. And the Lord has
preferred him as Pharaoh did Joseph, Genesis 41. 41, 42, 43, 44. Seventhly, Joseph
provided for his brethren the fat, and the best of all the land. Genesis 47. 11.
He bid, ^y, and make ready when his brethren were to be with him. Genesis 43. 16.
And does not Christ mingle hiswine, and kill his Oxen, and his (...), and think
nothing is to good? Prove. 9. Math. 22. He calls for the best robe, and fatted
calf, Luke 15. He prepares for you a Goshen, the good land, the inheritance of
the Saints in light. Luke 22. 28, 29, 30. Eighthly, Joseph was never satisfied,
though he had all the glory of Egypt, till he had his brethren down to him. As
Haman, in another case; boasted of the glory of his riches, and all the things
wherein the King had promoted him, above the Princes and servants of the King;
and ^t, says he, all this avails me nothing, etc. so all the glory to which
Christ is exalted, far above all principalities, and powers, will not content
him till he has his brethren with him; in no worse a place, and no worse a
case then himself. John 17. 24. Ninethly, Joseph presents his brethren unto
Ph^oh, and leads them into his presence Genesis 47. 2. so does Christ for
believers. He leads them to the father, John 14. 6. Joseph's brethren, who would
otherwise have been an abomination (being herdsmen) yet were treated kindly for
Joseph's sake, Genesis 47. And so does God to us for our brothers sake. To
conclude, what affliction is there, wherein Christ's relation to you will not
yield abundant consolation? But I have exceeded, pardon me: it is for two
weeks: having been necessarily diverted from writing to you the week foregoing.
The Lord teach you to live upon these cordials, in these sorrowful days. Fare
you well, dear brethren: farewell in the Lord.

I am yours in the bonds of the Lord Jesus Christ.

To the much beloved, the flock of Christ in Taunton;grace, and peace.
Most Loving, and beloved.
YOur prisoner in the Lord has sent these lines to salute you, and to call
upon you, or rather to beseech you, to walk worthy of the high calling in which
you, re called in Jesus Christ. Beloved, our word with you has not been yea,
and nay, uncertain and unstedfast. The prison sounds sorth to you the same
doctrine, that the pulpit ever did: the Lord give you to hear; and recieve from
the prisoner, that which was not so thoroughly embraced from the preacher. But
what does the prison preach? it preaches repentance to you. God has called to
you from the pulpit often, and now he sends to you from the prison, that you
should repent. Who is so deaf, as not to hear the louds calls of the living God
to England, that they should repent? you have long had Moses and the Prophets;
but now the Lord has sent you; as it were, what Dives asked; that one should
come to you from the dead and testify to you that you should repent. From the
dead, I say for you know, that in the sense of the Law, your Ministers are
dead. But being dead we yet speak; yea our death; our removal, our silence does
speak; and all speaks the same thing, that you should repent. O that I could
lift up my voice to you; that your streets, your houses, your ears, your hearts
might be filled with this cry, repent O Taunton; repent and turn. Repent O
profane, or else your iniquities will be your ruin. Repent O professors or
else the Lord will not repent of the evil that he is about to bring upon us.
The Lord now ringeth that thundering peal in your ears: Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, purify your hearts ye double-minded, Draw nigh unto God and he will
draw nigh unto you. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Humble your selves in the
sight os the Lord, and he shall list you up. O hear the voice of the Lord. He
that has an ear to hear let him hear. Repent, O back sliding Children, or else
the Lord will fill you with your own ways. Speedily make up the breach, and
endeavor to repair your decays, to regain your ground, and recover your first
love. O at last bethink your selves, from whence you are fallen, and repent,
and do your first works. Repent O sluggard; when will thou awake out of thy
sleep? what has God kindled a fire in his Church, ready to devour us all, and
will thou sleep with the house on fire about thine ears? What? will thou not
ply thy bucket, and settle to thy work to purpose? will thou lie still and see
the Tide coming in upon the? what^ot pluck thy handout of thy Bosom, nor rise
out of thy bed-sloth, when the Almighty thunders from heaven, and scaters his
lightning, and and sends abroad the tokens of his displeasure? repent O
Laodicean. The Lord calls to thee to be zealous and repent. Away with this
lukewarm profession. Away with this heartlesse, listlesse, livelesse Religion.
The Lord hates this halting and halving in Religion. As good not at all, as not
to purpose. Never dream that lazy wishes and idle complaints, and key cold
prayers, will carry it.

Judge in your own selves; is this the seeking, knocking, striving, fighting,
running, wrestling, that the Scripture every where requires, as necessary to
all that would be saved: but especially necessary at such a day of rebuke as
this is? O quicken your selves, call up all your powers, and put you every man
his strength to the rope. Cry mightily as Nineveh did. Humble your selves
greatly before the Lord as Manasseh did. Let prayer be made without ceasing
night and day, if ever you mean to pray open the prisons, and recover your
spiritual privileges. Repent O thou of Sardis, that have a name to live but
ar^ dead. The name may serve to deceive thy self, and to deceive others, but
God will not be (...) ed: he searches the heart. O prepare for ^is search and
for his scrutiny. Woe unto the, is he pronounce of thee, and write against thee
as against ^elshazzar; thou art weighed in the balance and sound wanting. Hear
the voice of the living God; hear and live. Remember what you have received,
and heard, and hold fast, and repent: and be watchful, and strengthen the
things that remain and are ready to dye, lest the Lord come upon you as an
enemy at unawares. Repent O worldly professor, that have Christ in thy mouth
and Mammon in thy heart. Ah what a Demas will thou quickly show thy self,
except thou repent! howsadly will the fears of loosing thy estate betray thee!
How surely will the cares of this world choke thee! how surely will the
prevailing love of earthly things undo thee! except thou repent, O study the
vanity and vexation of the Creatures; the emptiness, insufficiency,
transitorinesse of present enjoyments; the superlative excellency of Jesus
Christ, and his exceeding great reward, till thy very heart do breath with the
Martyr; none but Christ; and with Paul, doubtless I account all things but
loss, etc. O sinner pray over, and study over these things, till thy heart be
brought to a low esteem of perishing things. Walk so osten with death, till
thou art dead to the world, and can look upon it, as a man would, that should
peep out of his grave. Repent, O sleeper, that live in carnal security, and
layest not to heart the asflictions of Joseph. Does the whole world ring of
Gods Judgments upon England, and do not thou awake yet, and call upon thy
God? is the Church afflicted, and tossed with tempests, and not comforted, and
yet art not thou rouzed up? is the ship even filled with water, and the
disciples crying; Master save us, we perish, and all in jeopardy, and yet art
thou unasfected? is our Lord ready to be betrayed into the hands of Sinners,
and will thou sleep on now? art thou not yet come to thy senses? Alas, that
there should be such a disease as security going now, at such a time as this!
now methinks the dumb should speak, and the dead should wake. Was the tongue
of King Craesus his son, dumb from his birth, loosed when he saw his Father
about to be murdered? and shall the Children of Zion see the knife even at the
throat or heart of their mother; and yet be silent and unmoved? but what do I
dwell on particulars? the Lord calls on all men every where to repent.
Repent, O ossicers, that you have not been so vigilant in the ossices which you
have born, and in fulfilling the oaths that you have taken, in repressing of
abounding sins as you should have been. This guilt will lie heavy at many
doors, without repentance. Repent, O Masters, of your unnecessary hardness,
and rigor to the bodies; but especially of your cruelty to the souls of your
servants. Have you been as careful to train them up in the knowledge of their
C^eator, as in the knowledge of your trades? have you taught them how to pray,
as well as how to work? and instructed them in the mystery of their salvation,
as much as in the mystery of their callings? have you looked for as good an
account of the principles of Religion, or or of the Sermon of them, as of the
task you have set them? and the work in which you have employed them? O that
you had! repent, O you ^usbands, of your harshness, bitterness, not dwelling
with your wives as men of knowledge. Repent, you Parents, of your fond
indulgence to Children, sparing their sins, neglecting their souls. Repent you
wives, of your wilfulness, and frowardness, and disrespectfulnesse to them,
toward whom the Almighty calls sor your reverence and obedience. Repent, O
Children of your fearful ingratitude, in slighting and disobeying your Parents,
a sin under which the earth do groan. Repent you Servants, of your
slothsulness, wastfulnesse, unfaithfulneesse, and eye-service, and
disobedience, that all families almost are filled with the complaint of. O that
there might be some way to recover the credit of Religion from the wounds, that
it has received, by the neglect of relative duties: well let every man resolve
to mend one. O see what has been amiss in your hearts, and in your houses,
and set upon repenting, and reforming. Without this our prayers will return
upon our own heads without an Answer. Never think the storm will cease, till
the Jonas be thrown over. Beloved, this is that, that God does wait for. Throw
over the head of Sheba and the (...) will be soon broken up.

I am apt to transgress. I shall conclude my Counsels, with my prayers, that a
spirit of Repentance and Reformation may be poured out upon you, and so rest,

yours in all manner of obligations to serve you and to suffer for you. Joseph
Alleine.

To the dearly beloved the flock of Christ in Taunton, Salvation.
Most loving and dearly beloved,
THE care of you is continually upon me. I desire no other felicity than to
serve the glory of Christ in you: and to enjoy him with you. And blessed be his
hame he is no stranger, neither to us, nor you. Let all his prisoners praise
him: let all his people praise him. Now is the sweetness, beauty, excellency
of Christ to be seen. Now may we learn the suavity of his communion, the worth
of his promises, the all sufficiency of his fullness. Now taste and see. Sit
you down under the safest, sweetest shadow of his protection, and eat of his
fruit. The tree is good for food, and pleasant to the eyes, (except fully
blind) And a tree to be desired to make one wise. Take of the fruit thereof and
eat, not as Jonathan, who tasted but a little of the honey upon the top of his
rod, but eat abundantly. This is no forbidden fruit. Here is no surfeting. You
must live upon him every day, and in every duty. May every one of you be able
to say as Paul, to me to live is Christ: then you live like Christians when
Christ is the staff of your life. When Christ is both its Spring and its end.
When you take root in him, and grow up into him. May every one of you be a tree
of Righteousness, whose roots may spread into him, whose aspiring top may be
still shooting upward, reaching out toward him: live as those that have no life
but in him. And study to be able to say as Paul, that it is not you that live,
but Christ living in you. You live in vain while you live not for him: without
Christ you are dead while you live. You are of him, and through him, and for
him. From whom shall he have glory, if not from you? the inanim^te and
unreasonable Creatures, cannot praise him, unless in a dumb and silent manner,
as they are the occasion and incentives of our praising him. The devils and
ungodly will not praise him. The silver Trumpet of his praise is found only in
the hands of a few poor believers. Ah! sound you forth his praise in the world;
let your lips sing, let your light shine. Let your lives be at last as a can^le
wasted and burnt out in holding forth the light. Now beloved, study that you
may go out with comfort, that you may have your hearts as full as they can
hold, with joy; to think when you are ready to breath forth your last, well my
days are run out for Christ, and my strength is exhausted in the service of
Christ. My time is gone, and my labor done, but my Oil is wasted in the work of
God. I have spent my Fathers allowance in my Fathers business. This will make
you to arise and say, I will go to my Father, with boldness and confidence: and
not as the Prodigal, (when he had spent the portion of goods which his Father
had allotted him) with diffidence, and fears of his being rejected. You know my
business is but to bespeak you for Christ. I have four requests to present you
for him. Thus are my requests, but his Commands.

First, Let the balance be turned by Christ. Let Christ and his interest turn
the scale against all the world. Let him be the Pearl, and the world the dung.
Let Jesus be King, and Mammon as a despised broken Idol, or as the stamped
Calf. Let Christ be the prize, and the rest but loss. Let gain give way to
godliness. Let credit crack rather than Conscience stretch, be no body with the
world rather than dishonor Christ, to keep up your reputation with men. Let all
the flowers of pleasures wither, the paint fall off this harlots face, when set
by Christ. Let the silver shrines and great Diana be as Nehushtan. 2. Kings 18.
4. And the crown fall from the head of honor, and the great Idol to come down
into the dust before Jesus Christ, and lie like Dagon before the Ark, with head
and hands broken off upon the threshold. Keep the world at your feet as a
servant, or rather under foot as an enemy. But if it has the heart you are
undone. Where Christ has not the swaying-interest all is rotten at the bottom.

Secondly, Let the Bias of your wills be set toward Christ. The needle of the
will was at first touched with a magnetic verttue, which turned it toward
God, as the needle is turned toward the pole: but now by the fall it has
quite lost its virtue: and will stand any where, but where it should. But God
by fanctifying grace does new-touch this needle. and though it may (by an
accidental violence) be too too easily shakenyet it will never rest at a wrong
point, but be unquiet and in continual restlessness and agitation till it stand
direct toward Christ. If any thing but Christ would content you, you are none
of his. Can you acquiesse no where but in him? do your wills cleave to him? is
he your settled, resolved choice against all competitors? if so, doubtless it
is well between you and him. Thus it must be, Christ must have your assent and
consent. The judgment must prize him and the will must choose him as the chief
good.

Thirdly, Let the bent of your affections be to Jesus Christ. Look upon the
height of his stature, and the goodlinesse of his countenance, and you will say
surely he is worthy. Surely this is the Lords anointed. Frequently, and
thoroughly view his excellencies, till your eye affect your heart. Let me set
him among the other objects, like Saul among the people. and I must say to you
as Samuel, see you him whom the Lord has c^osen. There is none like him. O let
all your affections, be moved at the sight of him, and shout with the joyful
people, let the King live, let Christ have all. Let Sorrow sit with the melting
penitent, weeping at her Saviors feet. Let your strongest ^urning love be
kindled, when you do but think of Christ, and fire your hearts, and so bring
them forth as a flaming sacrifice to welcome him. Let fear make her obeisance,
and with humble reverence and lowliest veneration bow the knee of the soul to
Zions King. Let Joy be triumphant when you meditate on Christ. And call upon
the daughters of Music to praise and celebrate his excellency. Let desire be
upon the wing, and spread the hands, and open the mouth wide, and pant for him.
Let the most lively and pregnant hope sit by the way and look for him, and wait
for his coming. And get up in every Ordinance like Zacheus on the Sycamore-tree
that he might see Jesus as he passes by; and big with earnest expectation of
enjoying him. In a word, you must see to it that Christ be chief in your
affections; That he be your chief desire; Your chief joy: And this will
evidence you to be his: and without this all is unsound.

Fourthly, Let the Butt of all your Actions be no other but Christ. Whatsoever
you do, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Here take your aim. Here
let all your designs meet. Hither let all your motions tend. That Christ may be
magnified in you, Phil. 1. 20. This is a mark undeniable. But he that has more
eye to the pleasing of men, his own advantage, or any worldly good, than to the
pleasing and honoring of Christ, is no better than a Hypocrite.

I must do as much as I can in a little time, it is time now to close. I have
given you together in these four heads the highest duties and surest characters
of every true believer. I must add nothing farther, but only to send my
prayers after my papers, and to let you know the Lords prison is not without
his presence, and most refreshing influence. And that your prisoner is yours

in all Bonds Joseph Alleine.

To the most endearing and beloved people, the servants of Christ in
Taunton,Salvation.
Most loving and best beloved,
YOur late most affectionate lines are now in my hands, your hearts cannot but
be a most grateful and welcome present to me, I return you mine, not willingly,
but thankfully, rejoicing to be yours; while the Lord will your preacher; and
while the Lord will your prisoner; still yours. I acknowledge I am not my own.
If I have any interest in heaven, it is yours, to be improved for you. If I
have any talents of goods they are consessedly yours, your claim, your stock.
By the grace of God I am what I am. I have nothing, but what I have received
from above; and I have received for your use. I love to think how much I am
yours. Make your claim with freedom; nothing can please me m^re. My ^rength is
yours; my labor, my liberty, my losses yours: Ultimately Christ's, but nextly
yours. I accept with all thankfullness your manifold respects. May whatever
honor you put on me re^lect upon Christ, whose I am, and whom I serve. He is
all, and therefore I must needs be nothing. Let no man set me above my place. I
am too to sel^ish (to my shame and grief I acknowledge it; may your prayers be
the cure of it) yet surely, I should choose to be lower, so Christ might sit the
higher in all your hearts, I am only the friend of the Bridegroom. My soul
rejoices to hear how fast you stand, how close you cleave to him; my Joy is
now fullfilled. What greater joy to the friend of the Bridegroom, than to hear
the Bridegrooms voice, how sweetly he converses with his Bride, and she with
him, and to see the sweet passages of love between them, when he has been a
means to bring them together? This is my joy, it refreshes me; I am full of
consolation, to hear how tender he is of you; to see him spreading the skirts
of his love, the wing of his power and care over you. Happy thou! Who is like
unto thee O people? A people saved of the Lord, the shield of thy strength, the
sword of thine excellency. My dearly beloved, let the name of Jesus be more
sweet and precious than ever to you. Verily, I am but his spokesman. Forget me,
neglect me, any thing if you will but love him, and adore him, and admire him
the more. I rejoice, as to hear the sweet voice of the Bridegroom to you, so to
hear of your love and (...) to him. Surely, the Lord has a singular blessing
for you. A^ poor and despised d^spised, the Butt of humane malice, the eye-sor^
of thy potent enemies! The Archers have shot sorely at thee, the Hunters have
made thee the dear of the Chase, singled from the rest of the (...), and
designed for the Game, for the prey of the ^ungry pursuers, quick upon the
scent, following upon the scent, with full cry; and yet the beloved of the Lord
(...) in sasety by him, (...), (...) cov^reth thee all the day long: thou
dwell between his shoulders. O people of desires, hear the ^rauld of God:
(glorious office! Lord how unworthy am I of this strange grace, who am not
worthy to stoop down and unloose the latchet of thy shoes!) yet here me as an
(...) of God; unto you O people, it is commanded that you kiss the Son. That
you sall down and worship, not the humane Idol, but him whom Jehovah has set
up, and sworn that every k^e shall bow, and every tongue confess to him, or be
cast into the burning siery surnace os his tormenting wrath, seventimes hotter,
yea seventy times seven than (...) was. Unto you it is commanded that you
receive his mark in your foreheads, by open and bold profession; in your hands,
your right hands by suitable works, in a holy diligent, active conversation;
above all in your hearts, there he must be set as a seal (as well as write upon
the palms of ^our (...)) by most vehement servent affection. Let every one of
your hearts be all on fire with strongest burning love to the name of Jesus,
and offered as a flaming sacri^ to him.

Beloved, I am afraid almost to tell you what Christ looks for from you. I
think of his mercies to you with fear and great joy. Know my beloved, and
remember, that he Looks for great things from you; you have received much, and
God will (...) much. I beseech you be not as other people. My mouth is open to
you, my heart is enlarged, but my time is very straight. Sleep has departed
from my eyes to write a few lines unto you: but I am upon your service when you
know it not; yet I cannot end, without telling you that you had need look to
it, that you be in all things more than ordinary, because the Lord looks for
extraordinary prosiciency from you.

Brethren let your hearts be entire with God; be abundant in secret Duties,
Prayer, Meditation, Self-examination, Watchfullness, Self-denial. Let none of
you be another thing in your Families or Closets, from what he is in the
Assembly, and the open profession that he makes. Look to the heartwork, See
that you be truly, thoroughly and unreservedly the Lords. Beware lest with any of
you a secret root of Hypocrisy, should spoil a forward and goodly profession.
Care above all things in the world, to approve your hearts to the piercing eye
of the ^lous God. Let your good works shine besore men, but reckon your selves
to be no more, than what you are in secret. Maintain a holy jealousy of your
selves, till upon much prayer, and trial, and self-observation, you have found
out by Scripture-marks the certainty of your state. But I entrench on other
things to wade thus far. To my keeper I commend you, and with dearest loves to
you all in the Bowels of our Lord, I remain

Your Ambassador in Bonds. Joseph Alleine.
My dear father and brother Norman remembers you tenderly, desiring you to hold
fast what you have received and heard, and that you be holy, harmless,
exemplary, and without offense in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation.



A Practical CASE on
Phil. 3. 13, 14. This ONE thing I do, I press toward the Mark.
Q. HOw may we come to make Religion our business?

Rule. 1. You must thoroughly acquaint your selves with the rule and the compass
that Religion steers by. Unless the Mariner know every point of his Compass, he
is like to make but foul work of it. The word is a believers Compass, Gal. 6.
16. As many as walk according to This rule, etc. A believer walks by Rule, and
by this Rule, the Rule of the word; you can never manage the business of
Religion, except you do thoroughly know, and often eye your Rule, and put the
rule to your work. How can you trade religiously unless you know the Rules you
are to deal by? Or pray rightly, if ignorant of the Rules you are to pray by?
Beloved, the commandment is exceeding broad, and prescribes you Rules for your
whole Man, and sor the right behaving of your selves in every part of your
conversation; Oh hide the word in your hearts! lay up the Rules you are to work
by; and the Rules that you are to give by; the Rules that you are to speak by;
and the Rules that you are to hear by; and the Rules that you are to examine
your selves by: Be sure there be no part of your conversation, but that you
have some Rules that you do set to your selves about it.

How can you carry your selves Religiously in your Relations, unless you do
conscienciously observe the Rules that you are to carry your selves by? If
wives do not know their Rules, and husbands their Rules, and servants their
Rules, and children their Rules, how can you bring your profession to any
thing? beloved as ever you would make any thing of Religion, know the Rules of
your places, set it down with your selves, you husbands, you wives, you
children, you servants; these be the Rules that I will walk by, and wherein I
sail of these Rules I will see my error, and study to come up to what is
lacking.

Resp. 2. You must have the whole lump of the heart leavened and seasoned with
Religion, Matthew. 13. 33. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto leaven which a
woman hid, etc. The word is this leaven, The heart is this lump in which this
leaven is hid: now when the whole lump is thoroughly seasoned, then their will
be such a suitableness between the heart and the work, that Religion will
become a pleasure. A true Christian has the law of the Spirit of Life within
him, he has a transcript of the word in his soul. Now where the law of
Religion is in the heart, there will be a love of, delight in, and propensity
to the work of Religion, Romans 8. 2. Heb. 8. 10. I delight to do thy will, thy
law is within my heart, Psalm. 40. 8. who naturally cares for your state, Phil.
2. 20. where Religion has taken deep root in the heart, the concerns of Christ
will become its natural care. Now that which is natural is delightful, and when
a man loves his work, he will be much in it. Again, that which is natural is
constant, so that when the heart is naturalized and habituated to Religion, the
man will constantly follow it. To a heart thoroughly sanctified, Religion is the
very Element it lives in, whereas a carnal heart in holy exercises is like a
fish out of the water, it cannot away with the strictness of a holy
self-denying life, when the heart is renewed, and made spiritual, twill
naturally mind the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5. Joh. 3. 6.

Rule. 3. You must have these six Principles inwrought and deeply engraven into
your souls.

Prin. 1. That Religion is the very end of your being, that you were made and
maintained for. This is the end and use of all your powers and faculties, That
you may serve and glorisie the God that made you, He made you for himself,
Prove. 16. 4. For his pleasure you are and were created, Rev. 4. 11. Oh man look
upon thy self; think whence thou art, and for what a little while since thou
wast not, how came thou to be? has not the hand of God framed thee? Think
with thy self, wherefore serve all these powers and faculties? To what end were
they given me? what to eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport? If I had been a
brute, I could have done this, why should it repent the Lord that he has made
me a man, that he has given me an understanding soul? wherefore have I reason
above the rest of the Creatures? but that I should understand the Law of my
Creation, and the end of my being, and know my makers ends, and do his
pleasure? Better I had never been born, than not to answer my end. Better I had
been a Brute, than a Man, unless I glorify God with my understanding and
employ my powers and faculties in his service.

Oh let these thoughts live daily upon your hearts, fix it upon your selves
that you are of no use nor worth in the world, except you serve your makers
ends: that he is the Potter, and you the Clay; and that you are good for
nothing, except you are for the use of him that formed you: think with your
selves; Is it not pity so excellent a piece of Gods workmanship, as man is,
should be all in vain? That God should lay out so much of his power and wisdom,
and grace upon thee, and loose his end at last? That he should furnish Man
completely for the end he was made for, and send him into the world to dispatch
his business, and Man should forget his errand, and neglect the very end of his
being?

Beloved, the reason why men do mind Religion no more, is beause they do
mistake their business. And is it not pity, that when Man only of all the
vissible Creatures has an understanding to know his end, he only should
mistake and miss his end?

Prin. 2. That look as you do manage the business of Religion, so are you made
or marred to all Eternity, settle it upon your hearts, that if this business
does miscarry, you are undone for evermore; you may miscarry in any other
business, and yet do well enough at last; your goods may be wrecked, your
friends disingaged, your times spilt, and yet you may be happy; but if you do
not go through with the business of Religion you are undone men. This made Paul
to ply the Oars, and follow it with such diligence, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. So run
I, so fight I, etc. This made him engage with might and main, and put forth
every limb in the race, because his Eternal undoing lay upon it: He runs
through fire and water, he does not beat the Air, and brandish his sword like a
vapouring coward; he is not like the Fencers that strike as if they could kill
each other at every blow, but mean one another no hurt: no, he is earnest, he
fights as for the precious Life, least otherwise after all his Preaching and
pains he should prove a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Sirs, you had need look how
you do carry it now, Immortallity, Eternity hangs upon it, your patient
continuance in well doing, will bring forth Eternal life; but you miss all, if
you do not keep doing, and doing well, and patiently continue so doing; If you
come short of this, your portion is indignation and wrath.

Sirs, consider where you are, and look about you. Oh you careless sinners, you
remiss and Lukewarm Christians, consider what is before you. The furnace is
ready heat for you, if you go not through with your work. The Crown is ready
prepared, if you hold out in your race; you are speeding on to Eternity, as
fast as the wings of time can carry you; and that is more swiftly, than the
Eagle flying in the Air.

Believe it, Religion is no trisling matterIf thou be careless and idle, and
remiss here, thou art a damned Man. If a Man be upon trial for his Life, I
warrant you will find him serious here. If a man have a business that will
prove his utter ruin, if it miscarry, depending; be sure he will stretch his
wits, and engage his interest, and turn every stone. Beloved the reason why
Religion is minded with so little care, is because Men do not consider the
consequence of Religion. Sirs, can you dye, can you burn? If not, take heed of
trisling in Religion, and selling Heaven for want of a little Pains-taking. Oh
where ever you be unserious, be sure you be serious and in earnest in the
business of Religion, and that you may be so, let this ever dwell upon your
hearts, that halving and trisling will undo all.

Prin. 3. That nothing is well done except it be Religiously done. Do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus. Whatever you do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Col. 3. 17. Remember, that the rules of Religion do not only reach
your praying, hearing, almesgiving, etc. but your eating, drinking, trading,
marrying. You must not think to put off God with an hour in the morning, and an
hour in the evening; you must be serving him throughout the day, managing your
callings, visits, discourses, according to his rules. Count that arrow lost,
that is not levelled at some Religious end; that hour lost that is not spent
Religiously, that visit lost, in which you have not promoted the ends of
Religion in your selves and friends. Count that you eat amiss, unless you eat
Religiously. So much of Religion as there is in your actions, so much there is
of true gold, so much as there is of self and carnal ends, so much embasing
mettle is mingled therewith; your lying down, and rising up must be managed
Religiously, or else they are not well managed; and you must impose it upon
your selves, to be serving God not only on your knees, but in your shops, at
your Tables, in your journeys, that God may be glori^ied by you in all things.

Prin. 4. That the Trade of Religion of all others, yields the sweetest
pleasure, and surest gain. A true Christian is a Merchant Man that deals in
no small matters, but for goodly Pearls, Mat. 13. 45. A holy Life is a
spiritual trading, Mat. 25. 16. Now there is no Trade to this. A Believer
Trades for Grace and Glory: Oh how glorious is the prize, and how excellent and
unvalluable is the income of Religion! Wisdom is more precious than Rubies, all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her, Read Prove. 8. 11.
and Prove. 3. to the 19. They that come from the Indies laden with Gold and
Spices, with Pearls and Diamonds, have but a poor Trade in comparison of a
Christian: follow the work of Religion to purpose, and you will find the true
Riches flowing in upon you; your faith will grow exceedingly, and your love
will abound, and as riches increase, your hearts will be set upon them, and
your gains will increase your diligence. Every man will be dealing in that
commodity, that yields great profit. The reason why Men have so little heart
for Religion is because they have secretly an oppinion that there is little to
be got by it. They reckon an hour spent in Religion, to be an hour lost. They
say in their hearts. It is in v^in to serve God, Mal. 3. 14. And what profit
should we have if we pray to him? Job 21. 15. But when a man tastes the
pleasure, and sin^s the gain of Religion, then he will set to it to purpose,
and like the wise Merchant employ all his stock here, Mat. 13. 44, 46.

Beloved, as ever you would go through with the work of Religion, you must have
your hearts thoroughly possessed with the advantage and profit that comes in by
Religion. when a man does think he can benefit himself more other where, he
will have little heart to follow after Christ, but when he knows not where to
be better, then he will stick resolvedly to him, Ioh. 6. 66, 67, 68. There are
two great Pillars upon which Religion stands; The one is a belief that God is,
and the other that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.
6. Well let this dwell upon you then, that you cannot better your state, nor
promote your happiness any way in all the world, so much as by Religion. No
pleasure, nor profit to that of Religion, Riches and honor are with her, all
her ways are pleasantness, she is a tree of Life to them that lay hold upon
her, and happy is he that retains her, Prove. 3. 17, 18. Here is true delight,
Psalm. 40. 8. Romans 7. 22. Here is meat and drink, John 4. 34. work and wages,
Psalm. 19. 11.

Pr. 5. That your time is short, and your work great, and must be done now or
never. Our Savior made Religion his business, Luke 2. 49. And Oh how busy was
he! He went up and down doing good; and so much was he taken up with his work,
that he had not time to take his bread; yea his carnal friends, seeing how
earnest he was, said he was besides himself, and began to lay hold on him, Act.
10. 38. Mark 3. 20, 21. And what did put him upon this earnest diligence? The
sense of the shortness of his time, Ioh. 9. 4. Oh Sirs remember with him, that
now you have a day to work in, and you have but a day, and the night is hasting
upon you, when there is no work to be done: no more praying, no more hearing,
no more exhorting, nor admonishing. Now serve your generation, now exhort one
another daily; do good with your Estates; call upon your friends daily, for it
must be now or never, let it ever dwell upon you, That there is no work, nor
device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the gr^ve whither thou art going, and that
will put you upon doing the work of Religion with all your might. Be convinced
of the weight of your work, and that will make you answer intervening
disturbance that would take you off, as Nehemiah did, Chap. 6. 3. Then remember
of what dreadful consequence it is, your salvation is at stake, and therefore
you must work it out with fear and trembling.

Prin. 6. That except you make it your business, all your Religion is in vain.
While you halt and halve it in Religion, you come but half way to heaven.
Settle it upon your hearts, that except you are throughout Religious, you are
Religious to no purpose. Be sure you shall never come to heaven except you seek
it in Gods order, Mat. 6. 33. First seek, etc. It were not suitable to the
wisdom of God, so to undervalue his Christ and glory, as to throw them away on
those that account other matters better worth their pains and care.

Rule. 4. You must have the love of God and Religion, lying next your hearts;
Love is a busy Grace, 1 These. 1. 3. Your labor of Love. We may say of Love,
as Solomon of the virtuous woman, she lays her hands to the spindle, and her
hands hold the distaff, she eats not the bread of idleness, she works
willingly with her hands, Prove. 31. Love will constrain you, and put you upon a
willing and dilligent keeping Gods commandments, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
Get your hearts in love with the Laws and Ways of God: who more busy than
David? Morning, evening, and noon, he was praying and praising, yea talking and
thinking of God and his ways, all the day, and all from his love to them, Psalm.
55. 17. and 119. 147. and 118. and 71. 24. Oh how I love thy Law! Psalm. 119.
97. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house, Psalm. 26. 8.

You must beware of taking too much of the world into your hands. When a man's
heart and head is full as it can hold of worldly care and businesses, and he
cannot tell which way to turn himself, in a crowd and throng of worldly
affairs, how can the care of Religion live in such a ones heart? Luke 10. 41,
42. If Martha will trouble her self about many things, the ONE THING needful
shall be neglected. You must buy, and marry, and weep, and rejoice, and trade,
and care for these things, as if you did it not; not laying too much stress
upon these things, nor engaging too eagerly in seeking after them, or else you
will neglect the better things, and learn to pray, and hear, and read, as if
you did it not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. It Is true that the work of your callings is part
of your business for Heaven; but then you must be sure to keep your affairs so
at command, as that you may have so much room for daily Prayer and Meditation,
and self-reflection, as may season your worldly business with Religion, and
sanctisie it to you, that it may become a help, and not a snare.

Rule 6. You must always work as under your Masters eye. When the Masters eye
is known to look on, there is as much work done in an hour, as many times is
done in two, when the sense of his oversight does not quicken the workman,
Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me.

Rule 7. You must ever carry your eye upon your mark. So did Paul in the text,
I press toward the Mark, for the prize of the high-calling of God in Christ,
The mark that a Believer ay^s at, is Gods Glory, and his own, that God may be
glorisied in him, and he with God. This glorious prize will animate you to your
work, and swallow up the sense of labor and difficulty, and make you for the
joy set before you, to endure the Cross, and despise the shame, Heb. 12. 2.
Paul carried the Crown incorruptible in his eye, and that made him with
patience invincible to run, and fight, and keep under his body, 1 Cor. 9. 25,
26, 27. All the afflictions, and reproaches that attended Gods poor people and
ways, in the time of their thralldom, could not discourage Moses, when he eyed
the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 25. 26. Keep heaven in sight, and your work
will go on with pleasure, and all your difficulties will seem light and easy,
and not worthy once to enter into comparison with the expected bliss, 2 Cor. 4.
17 18. Romans 8. 18.

Rule 8. You must at the entrance of every action, remember the Rules that you
are to act by. Else in vain do you receive and lay up Rules, if when occasion
is, you do not apply them to the particular Case. To what purpose have you
rules for prayer, if you do not remember and use them when you come to prayer?
To what purpose have you rules to examine your selves by, if you do not observe
them in examining your selves accordingly? As ever you desire to make any thing
of your Religion, remember when you come to your tables, the rules that you are
to eat by; when you go to your callings, make visits, read, or hear the word,
be sure you think on the rules that you are to read by, or discourse by, or
hear by, etc. You cannot think of God in every motion, but with a little pains,
watchfullness, and prayer, you may come to this, to mind your rule and your end
at the entrance of every solemn action. And this I desire you to enjoin upon
your selves, and take a daily account of your selves, how it is performed. This
would be indeed to keep up the power of Christianity. Oh be at the pains to put
to this, and you will know what it is to walk with God, and to be in the fear
of the Lord all the day long, and will have learnt that happy ^sson, To walk up
and down in the name of the Lord, Prove. 23. 17. Zech. 10. 12.

Rule. 9. Be sure every morning to set out to a right point of the Compass. If
a Man takes a wrong turning and misseth his way at setting forth, he goes
miserably out, it may be, a great part of the day, cut out your business in the
moning, and let your aim be well; Set the hand of your watch to a right point,
and wind it up carefully, and that will be a means to keep it right ^oughout
the day. Never rise from your beds but with some such thoughts as these. I will
set sorth this day in the name of God. Religion shall be my business this day.
I will surely spend this day for Eternity, David would begin with God, Psalm.
139. ver. 18. and 5. 3.

Rule 10. Let the present days practice be still the me^ding of the past days
errors. If you would go through with the work of Religion, you must take this
course. Every evening strictly to examine your selves about your whole carriage
that day with reference to your Duties, Sins, Hearts, Tongues, Tables,
Callings, as I have otherwhere directed you; and when you find your selves
tardy in any thing this day, be sure to amend it the next day. Was the Appetite
too much indulged? when you sit at meat the next day remember the error, and
hold the reins faster then. Do you find that you were not heavenly in your
discourse? be sure that you be not caught in the same fault again the next day.
Have you let loose your Passions, or given your tongues the reins? be humbled,
and be sure that you be not caught again the next day in the same fault; else
to what purpose are all your self-examinations? Psalm. 119. 59. In vain do we
think on our ways, except we turn our feet to Gods Testimonies.

Rule 11. You must deny your selves, and keep under your carnal lusts and
affections. Where self bears the sway, that will set you on work, and you shall
have enough to do to follow its carnal designs. If you (...) your lusts and
earnal assections to command you, to be sure they will find you work enough,
you then will have little room, and little leisure, but these will be all the
day long calling upon you to gratify. One while the appetite will be calling,
and there must be time to give to that what it craves, another while revenge
will be calling, and employing you to contrive how to vent it, and give it
satisfaction; another while pride will set you on work to satisfy that: and
then lust will be calling that you must gratify; and then covetousness will be
chiding that you have neglected it, and be putting you on satisfying that. Thus
your lusts will find you business night and day; and your employment will be to
make provision for the flesh, Romans 13. 14. Get these therefore under, or else
the business of Religion will never, can never go on.

Psalm 144. 3. Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son
of man, that thou make account of him?
THe Psalmist in the foregoing words, had eminently set forth the strange
goodness and Grace of God toward him, upon which he breaks out into admirat^n
of him, that ever God should look upon him. What is man, etc.

Hence observe.

Doct. That it is a wonder above all wonders, that ever the great God should
make such account of such a thing as man.

This I shall open to you in these three generals.

1. It will appear if you consider what a great God the Lord is. 2. What a poor
thing Man is. 3. What a great account the great God has of this poor thing
Man.
First, If you consider what a great God the Lord is. And here I may be
confounded, to think that I can speak no more of his greatness. When I am
studying to speak to you of his greatness, that comes to my mind, can thou by
searching find out God? Alas, we may all complain as Jobs friends did, Job 8.
9. We are but of yesterday and know nothing, yet notwithstanding, though we are
not able to comprehend, much less to express the greatness of God; yet some
thing we may see, and accordingly should conceive of it, and should labor to
set it out to others.

It is seen in his Works, and Word.

1. In his Works. Herein God does discover to us his wonderful greatness, Job
36. 24. 25. Remember that thou Magnisie his work which men behold. Every man
may see it, man may behold it afar off. Man may see afar off if he d^ but cast
his eye as he runs, what a great God that is that made all the world. If we do
but cast our eyes upon the Fabric of the world that he has made; if we look
down-ward, and see how every creature serves its end that it was made for: if
we see how the earth hangs upon nothing; if we are in our wits what should we
do but praise whatever we are doing? whether plowing, or eating, etc. this Hymn
is to be sung to him, It was he that gave me strength to work, and appetite to
eat, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work; day unto day utters speech, etc. Every day cloth
preach to us this Doctrine, what a great, wise, good, glorious God he is, who
does order every season, and their occurrences, Romans 1. 20. Do thou find thy
heart begin to be listed up with pride? Do^t thou begin to forget thy maker? Do
but behold his Works; see if thou can do any such thing: say, let there be
light, and see whether there will be light. Try whether thou can bring sorth
such a thing as this. This does God demand of Job, Chap. 38. But if man cannot
come near any of these works of God, then let him adore his power and
greatness, and subject himself to him.

2. In his word. What glorious descriptions do we find made of him in the
Scriptures? Psalm. 104. 1. O Lord thou art very great, etc. Job. 25. 4, 5, 6.
Man, in comparison of God, is but a worm, a vile worm, as the word signifies;
such a thing is man. A worm that is bred in flesh, which is the wor^t of all.
Now is it not a wonder of all wonders that God should look upon such a one as
man? That God that humbles himself to behold the things that are done in
heaven, that this great God should look upon us? or take any pleasure or
delight in us? O how should we admire this Grace!

Secondly. If you consider what man is. What a Vain, what a Vile thing he is.

1. What a vain thing he is. His vanity appears,

1. By Gods testimony of him. 2. By man's own hand subscribing to it.

(1.) By Gods testimony of him, Isa 40. 15, 16, 17. All natious before him are
as vanity. They are as the drop of a (...), and as the small dust of the
balance, etc.

(2) You shall see man's own hand subscribing to it. If you will but look into
other places of Scripture, you shall see man setting his own hand to it, Psalm.
39. 11. Surely, every man is vanity, mark, every man. Men of all Ranks and
conditions, Psalm. 62. 9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are alye: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than
vanity. The Psalmist does not speak it rashly, but as one that had trial of
what man was; and yet he g^ves this as the result of his experience and trial,
that if man were put into one balance, and vanity in the other, it would
weigh^ him down. So Psalm. 39. 5. Verily every man at his best state is
altogether vanity: Not vain, but vanity it self: yea every, yea altogether, yea
at his best state, he is altogether vanity. Job 11. 11. For he knows vain
men. That is the proper Epethite that belongs to man. Man is a vain thing, and
that in two particulars. He is Worthless, and Useless.

1. He is a worthless thing, Job 11. 12. For vain man would be wise. In the
original it is Empty man. Man is by Nature empty of every good thing. So the
Apostle, in me, that is in my slesh dwells no good thing. There is nothing
that is spiritually good left; all is lost by man's Apostasy from God. Yea, man
is not only nothing worth, but worse than nothing. We use to say that a man
that is over head and ears in debt, is many thousands (it may be) worse than
nothing: so is man, he is insinitely in his makers debt, and cannot come out,
as we acknowledge in that petition forgive our debts; where we acknowledge two
things. (1) That we are in debt to God. (2) That we cannot pay him. This is the
condition of man, he is infinitely in God's debt, and he cannot pay any thing:
he has nothing to pay.

2. He is a useless thing. Able to do the Lord no service, Ephesians. 2. 1. Yea when
he is recovered by grace, it is very poor service, that he can do for his
maker. And therefore our Savior teaches his disciples to say they are
unprofitable servants when they have done their duty. Yea we are so far from
doing him any acceptable service, that we cannot but sin against him, and
offend him. Now put these things together, and does it not appear to be a
wonder that God should make such account of man? Is he a vain thing, Worthless
and Useless, and yet will God set his heart upon him? what a wonder is this!

2. Man is a vile thing. If he were only empty of good, this were something;
but now he is not only empty of all that is good, but he is full of all that
is displeasing to God, Job 15. ver. 16. Man drinks in iniquity like water.
This is the condition of man, he drinks in sin as the fish drinks in water:
Sin is his proper Element. The filthy carcass lying before us is not more
loathsome to us than we are to God in our sins. Man, before God in himself is
like a carcass lying in its crawling worms. Now is it not strange that so vain,
yea, so vile a thing as man have any room in Gods heart? How should we cry out
with the Psamist here in the text, Lord what is man, etc.

Thirdly. This will appear by considering What great account this great God
has of this poor thing man.

What great account God has of him, will appear (1) In what he has laid out
upon him. (2) In what he has laid up for him. (3) By the near union he has
taken him into, with himself. (4.) By his near relation to him. (5) By his
entertaining such familiar communion with man.

First. If you consider what God has laid out upon him. The care, and the cost.

1. The care. Ah brethren, this is strange grace, that the infinite God should
lay out his care, his thoughts upon such a thing as man is, yet thus he does, 1
Pet. 5. 7. For he cares for you. Now this will appear worthy of your
admiration, if you consider what this care is. It Is a Paternal care, a Personal
care, a Perpetual care.

1. It is a Paternal care. A Fatherly care. As a father pittieth his children,
so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. So Mal. 3. 17. God calls them his
Jewels. Now if a man's house be on fire, he will be sure to save his Jewels. But
if a man's children be in the house, he will rather loose his Jewels than his
children. And if he saves any Child, then that that is the dutiful child. So
God will spare them as a son that serves him.

Now this Paternal care is, upon that account, Natural, Constant, Vigorous.

(1) It is a natural care which is in fathers, and this is in God. This the
Apostle commend ed Timothy for, Phil. 2. 20. That he (...) rally cared for
their state. That which is n^tural is delightful: so is Gods care of his
people; he takes pleasure in it, in his projects and designs to bring his
people to glory. Yea God is so Ambitious (as we may so speak,) that he is angry
when we will not cast our cares upon him. He would have us be careful for
nothing.

(2) Upon this account, it is also constant and uninterupted. That whis is
Natural is constant. As the fire does naturally give heat, therefore it always
does so. But that which is contrary to Nature is quickly gone: As if you heat
water over the fire, the heat is quickly gone again; because it is against
nature. Now Gods care is Natural, and therefore Constant.

(3) That which is Natural is vigorous. That which is done against Nature is
done slowly. As when you cast a stone upward. Now Gods care is a Natural care,
and therefore a vigorous care.

2. It is a Personal care. God will look to us himself, Isa. 66. 2. It is true
God does put others to look to us, but he will not trust us with these, but he
will look to us himself.

3. It is a perpetual care. As when Daniel was to be cast into the Lions Den,
Dan. 6. 14. The king set his heart upon Daniel to deliver him, etc. So Gods
heart is set upon us. He is bent for our good, he is still designing for us,
Psalm. 40. 5. Many O Lord -- are thy thoughts to us ward, etc.

2. As it appears by the care, so by the cost that God has laid out upon man.
(1) The Riches of his love. (2) The gold of his grace.

1. The riches of his love. The free grace, favor and love of God is called
Riches in Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 7. The Apostle speaking of the Riches of Christ
shows how unsearchable they are, Ephesians. 3. 8. So Romans 11. 33. O the depth of
the Riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Now all these were laid out
to determine man's deliverance. They are glorious Riches that God does lay out
upon his sons and servants, Romans 2. 7. And well may these be called Riches.
There must be two things to make Riches, there must be (1) Plenty. (2)
Preciousness.

First. There must be Plenty. For a little of never so good, will never make a
man Rich.

Secondly, There must be Preciousness, for abundance of that which is worthless
will never make a man Rich. Now both of these are in Gods Mercy, there is
plenty, and it is precious. The Mercy and Grace of God is very precious. David
sought most for this, when others set their hearts upon other things, Psalm. 4.
And as it is of great worth, so it is of great plenty. It is abundance of grace
that God does put forth in repairing man's Nature, and making him a New Creature.

But this great cost of God upon us will further appear, in that he has laid
out upon us. (1) His Creatures. (2) His Christ.

1. His Creatures upon us. That he should lay out all these Creatures upon us,
These Heavens, and this Earth to be for the comfort of man, Oh how does this
discover Gods goodness to man! This made David admire him, Psalm. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Here you may see what an account God does make of man, in that he should make
him a little god among the Creatures; that their sheaf should bow to his sheaf;
that they must spend and be spent for man: yea, the invisible Creatures, the
Angels, they must be ministering spirits, for them who are the heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. ult.

2. In that he has laid out his Christ upon us. This was a costly gift indeed.
It is much that God should give his Creatures to dye for us, to give us food:
but oh that he should give us his Christ to dye for us, Oh how incredibly has
the Lord advanced man in this! In this he has abundantly showed how man was
esteemed by him. This shows that he had a great regard to us. We were redeemed
by the blood of Christ, which was the blood of God himself, Act. 20. 28. Now is
it not an admirable thing, that so mean a purchase should be made with so great
a price? This was that which God did commend his strange love with, (1 John 3.
16.) that he laid down his life for us. Look into thy self man, what have thou
that thou should have this great purchase to be laid out for thee? Oh How
should man be continually in the prais^ of God!

2. In the gold of his grace, that God has la^d out upon m^n. Grace is called
the true Riches, and this has been laid out upon man, Rev. 3. 18. It is called
gold, yea it is much more precious than gold. When you see the Qu^n attired in
Gold, Psalm. 45. all this is to set forth the Grace that is upon the Saints of
God. I tell thee Christian, thou that have but one dram of Grace, he has give^
thee more than if he had given thee a whole world. In the Creation there were
some footsteps of God upon other Creatures; but upon man there was his Image.
And now that God should distinguish thee from others by one dram of Grace, this
is admirable!

Secondly. It appears what great account this great God has of this poor
thing, Man, in what he has laid up for him. This makes the Psalmist to cry out
as one overcome with admiration, Psalm. 31. 19. O How great is thy goodness,
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! It is much that God has laid
out for us, but more that he has laid up ^or us. The Psalmist could not
express it, he could but (...) it only, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor
(...) heard, neither have entered into the h^rt of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. Eye has no^ seen. The eye of man has
seen much; especially those that have travailed in other Countries. But the eye
of man has not seen any thing that may be compared with this that God has
prepared. Nor ear heard. We have heard o^ more than we have seen; We have heard
of gold Mines and the like, that are in other parts o^ the world; but the ear
has not heard of any thing like this. And though the eye has seen much, and
the ear has heard more; yet the heart of man can conceive of more again; yet
the heart of man cannot conceive of what God has laid up for them that love
him.

Now lay these two together, what God has laid out upon man, and what he has
laid up for him, and will it not appear that the great God makes a great
account of man? How can you choose but cry out in the words of the Psalmist,
What is man, etc. But,

Thirdly. This will appear by that near union that he has taken him up into,
with himself. Oh how wonderfully has God dignified man in this? By uniting his
Nature to the nature of man, as it is in the second person of the Trinity, Joh.
1. 14. And the word was made flesh and dwelt among us, or, in us. That God
should take up the nature of man into personal union with himself, what an
unspeakable dignity is this! So the Apostle, he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. Herein is man dignified above the
Angels of glory, in the near union between God and man in the Godhead. This is
that which the Angels do desire to pry into: well may the Apostle say, great is
the mystery of godliness: and this is the top of it, God manifest in the flesh.
Greatly has God dignified man in these two things, that Man should be partaker
of the Divine Nature; and that God should partake of the Humane Nature.

1. That Man should partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Oh this is a
great privilege that we should bear the Image of God. Let the world scorn at
holiness; yet I tell thee, Man, that have one dram of grace, he has done more
for thee, than he has done for all the world. How ever this is out of fashion
in world, I am sure it is not in heaven. O glory in this, you that are made
partakers of Gods Nature.

2. In his taking upon him our Humane Nature. In this, man's Nature is more
exalted yet. The Nature of Man in Christ is lifted up far above all
Principalities and Powers, 1 Pet. 3. ult. Angels, and Authorities, and Powers
being made subject unto him. This is spoken of Christ, not only in his Divine
Nature, but his Humane Nature, for his Divine Nature was there before:
therefore it must be understood of his Humane Nature. And he has all power of
Angels and Authorities, and he sends them forth to Minister at his peoples
need, Heb. 1. (...), Ephesians. 1, 20, 21, 22. Which he wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, and set him a^ his own right hand in the heavenly
places, far above all Principality, and power, and might, and dominion- And
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to
the Church. Mark, the Man Jesus Christ is head and Lord over all things: for it
is spoken of Christ as to his Humane Nature (as I told you before) for it is
spoken of him as raised from the dead, which was his Humane Nature. So that you
see how wonderfully man's Nature is exalted in Christ.

Fourthly. It appears by his near Relation to him. This is another way by which
God has signified what a great account he has of man, that he will take him
near to himself. You know it is a great honor to be next to the King. Now what
a great honor is it for a man to be next to God? now he has taken man near to
him. (1) As a husband. (2) As a father. (3) As a friend.

1. As a Husband. They twain shall be one flesh. God has owned man in this
Relation, Isa. 54. 5. Thy Maker is thy husband, the Lord of hosts is his name.
O what a thing is this that he should not be ashamed to own us in that
Relation! Jer. 3. 14. I am married unto you, Ephesians. 5. 30. We are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever.
2 Cor. 11. 2. I have ^spoused you unto one husband. O what a great exaltation
is this, that we should become the bride of Christ, the wife and spouse of
Christ! what honor has the Bride, the Lambs wife! A believer is espoused to
Christ: and therefore the Apostle propounds the example of Christ to his
Church, unto men toward their wives, to imitate his example in the performance
of their duties to them. Now what a wonder is this that such beggars as we are
should be taken from the dunghill and be made a bride prepared for him!

2. As a Father. So he is nearly related to us. This is an astonishing
consideration, 1 John 3. 1. O what a wonder is this, that he should take such a
thing as man, so near to himself as to make him become his son! That he should
take him from the dunghill of sin, From the dungeon of darkness, The family of
Satan, The furnace of hell.

There be two dignities conferred upon man here. (1) He is taken into his
family. (2) Admitted to sit at his Table.

(1) He is taken into his family, Ephesians. 3. 15. Of whom the whole family in
heaven and earth is named. Mark, the Lord is a great housekeeper, and all
believers are his family. And though these be in different degrees and orders,
some glorified in heaven, and some here on carth; yet we are all but one
family; so that we are taken into the same family and household that the Saints
in glory be in. And what a dignity is this! Ephesians. 2. 19. Now therefore ye are
no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God. We that were sometimes strangers, are now by our Adoption
become of Gods household. You may think they shall not want good keeping, 1 Timothy
5. 8. He that provides not for those of his own house, is worse than an
infidel. God will be sure to provide for those that be of his own house. Now we
that are his children, shall thus be provided for. O how does David commend
their state that shall be admitted to dwell in Gods house? He prefers it above
all the honor of Princes dignity, Psalm. 84. This is our privilege. We are in
Gods house, of his family. If the Queen of Sheba did think the servants of
Solomon blessed, how much more blessed are they that are the servants of Jesus
Christ? Happy (said she) are those thy servants, etc. but how much more may
this be said of Gods children.

(2) We are admitted to sit at his Table. God does admit his children to his
own Table. This is the childrens portion; and when he has fed them a while at
his table here, he will translate them to an upper-table in the other world,
Luke 23. 28, 29, 30. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
Temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto
me; that ye may eat and drink at my Table. This is the privilege of Gods
children, O what a dignity is this, to sit and eat and drink with Christ at his
Table! This is in part given us here, and shall be perfected upon us hereafter.
God says to believers as David said to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9. 7. I will
surely show thee kindness, etc. and thou shall eat bread at my Table
continually. And therefore since we are admitted to this privilege to eat and
drink at God's Table, let us do as he, and say with him, verse. 8. And he bowed
himself and said, what is thy servant, that thou should look upon such a
dead dog as I am? When Nathan would express the tenderness of the poor man to
his (...), he does it by this, (2 Samuel 12. 3.) That it did eat of his own meat,
and drink of his own cup, and lay in his bosom: This is the privilege that
Christ vouchsases us, to eat of his own bread, and drink of his own cup, and be
as his children.

3. The Relation of a friend. This you know is a very familiar and loving
relation. Among^t others there may be some strangeness, but this is a most
familiar relation. Abraham was called the friend of God. It is the Epithet
that Christ gives his Disciples, I call you friends. Friends, you know, do unbo
some their secrets one to another. Thus it is with God and believers. The Lord
opens his secrets to them; and they rip op^n their hearts to God. The secrets
of the Lord are with them that sear him.

Fifthly. It appears that God makes a great account of man, in that he does
ente^tain such ^amiliar communion with man. O how wonderfully does Go!
condescend to man on this account! How familiarly does he treat with us? He
does open all his mi^d to us. Joh. 14. 2. In my fathers house are many
Mansions, if it were (...) so, I would have told you. Intimating that he would
keep back nothing from them that would be sor their good. He tells all his
heart and mind to believers. And this account he gives to his father when he
leaves the world; he shows his father that he had taught them, and opened his
mind to them, Joh. 17. 6 8, 14. Christ does open and reveal the fathers mind
and will to believers. And as he is pleased to converse familiarly with us, so
he does let us converse with him. My Brethren it is an unspeakable dignity that
God does admit man to, in that he will speak with him. Herein Moses did commend
the people of Isr^l, in that there was no Nation like to them, that God should
speak to them, and they spea^ unto God. This is a glorious privilege that God
will speak to man; especially that he will speak to him by his Son, Heb. 1. 1.
This is more than for God to speak to him out of the fire. This is a great
condes^ention on Gods part, and exaltation on man's part. And then not only
that God should speak to man, but that man should speak to God. Ah brethren,
this is that should make us stand amazed, that we should be admitted to speak
to the great God. This did astonish Abraham, Genesis 18. 27. Behold now, I have
taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and Ashes. He wondered
at this great dignity that the great God should let him converse with him. That
his ear should be open to us, and we should come and knock at his door, and
have admission, O what a privilege is this! what an honor is this, that we
should have the honor to speak with the King, let him be in what company he
w^ll, and be carried into his bedchamber! And yet thus it is. Oh admire this
rich grace of God, and cry out with the Psalmist in the text, Lord, what is
man, that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man that thou make
account of him?

Luke 15. 23, 24. Bring hither the fatted Calls, and kill it, and let us eat,
and be merry. For this my Son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found.
MY beloved this text is so full of mercy, on Gods part, and so full of comfort
for us, that methinks I may close the book, and have done as soon as I have
begun: methinks the text might be a Sermon of it self. In it you have set
before you the joy and triumph of heaven for the recovery of poor, dead, lost
sinners.

1. You have heavens joy and triumph for them. Bring hither the fatted calf,
and kill it and let us eat, and be merry. Under this is signified the Joy that
is in heaven over one returning sinner. The Angels of God, yea, the God of the
Angels, do rejoice in the conversion of one lost sinner.

2. You have the cause of this Joy, and that was from that blessed and happy
change that had passed upon this prodigal. And there is a twofold change that
we find upon him, In his heart, and in his state.

1. In his Heart. That you have in the verses above. When he came to himself,
he said, how mauy hired servants of my fathers, have bread enough, and to
spare, and I perish with hunger? Here is a great change wrought upon his heart,
he is now come to his sens^s again. An impenitent finner is beside himself:
none in the world is so distracted as he is. All the madness in the world is
nothing to this. He that throws firebrarnds at his head, is not in so bad a
(...) as he that throws firebrarnds at God. Well, the man is now come to his
senses: and what was the effect.

(1) He was sensible of his misery, I perish with hunger. This is one of the
first things that God does for his people, when he brings them home, to make
them sensible of their misery. (2) He was sensible of his sin too. Father, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee. Not only misery, but the sense of
sin must be set home upon the heart of a poor sinner, or else the conversion
will not be true. (3) You have his confession and conversion: His confession,
Father I have Sinned. And his conversion, he returned home to his Father.
2. A change in his State. When he comes to his father, you shall see what an
Alteration it made in his Father.

(1) From Nakedness to Clothing, ver. 22. But the father said to his servants,
bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and
shoes on his feet. He was now new clothed from top to toe: yea, not only for
necessity, but for ornament, a ring on his hand. O what a change was here! from
Rags to Robes. And no other but the best Robes. (2) From Penury, to Plenty.
Bring hither the fatted calf. Alas! the poor starveling would have been glad
but a little before, to have eat of the husks that he fed the swine with, but
he could not have them. But now the fatted calf must be fetched out and killed
for him. (3) From being lost, to be found. He was lost, and is found. (4) From
being dead, to be alive again.
There are four Observations that I shall commend to you from the words.

1. Observe. That a Sinner in his Natural condition, is not only diseased, but
dead: not only strayed, but lost.

2. Obs. That there is a possibility even for dead Sinners to be raised, for
lost sinners to be recovered. Consider this you that are here, that are touched
with the sense of your misery. If any souls are touched with the sense of their
misery and undone condition, consider this that you may be found. It has been
thus with all the saints of God. They were dead and lost; and yet are alive and
are found: and why may not you as well as they? Oh pray and use the means: Why
should not you be turned too?

3. Obs. That it is a most glorious and blessed change that God does work in
the state of a believer when he brings him to himself, from the state that he
was in; no less than from being dead to be alive; from being lost to be found.

4. Obs. That it is mateer of Heavens joy and triumph, when poor dead Sinners
are revived; and lost Sinners are recovered. Bring hither the f^ted calf, etc.
and why so? This my son was dead and is alive again; was lost, and is found.

It is the third of these Observations that I intend to insist upon. That it is
a most blessed and glorious change that God does work in the state of a
believer, etc. I shall open this in its several parts. It is a great change
that God does work.

(1) From being dead to be alive. Regeneration is not such a change as does
consist in performing such a duty, or leaving such a sin that thou could not
well live in. It is pitiful to think, how many take the leaving of one sin to
be the new birth; No, it is no less than from being dead to be alive again.

(2) It is such a change, as from being lost to be found. A sinner, in his
Natural state is a lost man, in a lost condition: but when he is recovered by
conversion he is found again. The Son of man is come to seek and save that
which was lost. And so in this Luke 15. What was this lost sheep, and lost
groat, and lost Son? What was the meaning of all this, but the recovering of
lost Souls? So that its a great change, a coming from death to life; from being
lost to be found. If our gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost: (that
is, for the present they are lost,) but when they are converted, then, of lost
they are found.

Use. Is it so blessed and glorious a change, that God does work in the
condition of a believer, when he brings him to himself; no less than from
being dead to be alive, from being lost to be found? Then you that are
believers rejoice in, and be thankful for that blessed and happy condition
that God has translated you into. Ah brethren, how may you look one upon
another, and consider what God has done for you?

1. How that you were dead, and are alive again; You were diseased, yea dead
creatures. diseased, full of all that may render you miserable: all diseases
are met together in a poor sinner. Now that God has recovered thy diseased
soul, yea, thy dead soul, and brought thee to life again, Oh what matter of joy
is this! How should you wonder at so great a change as this? We read that at
the Miracles that our Savior did upon the diseased, there was great
astonishment among the people; they were amazed at this, but here are more
miraculous cures than those; the cure of dead souls is more than the cure of
dead bodies. O Brethren, if all the diseased that Christ had cured should have
conferred together, what strange stories would they have told? One would have
said, I was born deaf; and he said Ephatha, and my ears were opened. Another I
was born blind and he anointed mine eyes, and I washed and received my sight.
Another, I was thirty eight years under a disease, and by a word of his mouth I
was healed. Another, I was eighteen years in a sad condition, and by a touch of
his garment I was cured. And so of the rest. Ah brethren, you were not only
diseased, but dead; and Christ has recovered you. O! what matter of
thankfulness is here? You that are believers, should not look one upon another
without wondering. What should move you to wonder if not this? It will be a
strange change when we shall see all the sons of Adam come forth at last out of
their graves; when we shall see those that were buried in the great deep,
brought forth by the power of Christ; and made all appear together, this will
be a strange change. But the change of dead bodies is not so great as the
change of dead souls. O how should you praise God that has raised you from so
great a death as this! How is it that we are taken up no more with wonderment
for this that he has done for our souls? God does rejoice over it; it is
heavens joy when a lost sinner is found. And does God and Angels take notice of
it, and rejoice, and do you not take notice of it? O what ingratitude is this!

This should excite sinners to ^eed their return to God; for this will rejoice
heaven and earth. Shall I leave my wine (says the Vine) whereby I make glad
the heart of God and man? I may say truly, the recovery of a sinner makes glad
the heart of God and man; not only will Christians and Ministers rejoice over
thee when thou turnest to God: but God himself will rejoice over thee, when
thou returnest: he will call for the fatted Calf, etc. O the Mirror of
unthankfulness, that is upon our hearts, that we should be no more moved with
any work that God has done upon our souls! You that are converted and wrought
upon by Sanctification, one would think that you should be able to enter upon
no other talk than this, to tell what God has done for your Souls. My
brethren, if while we are here together, we should see our dead friends, that
have been dead ten, or twenty, or thirty years ago, to eat and drink, and
walk, and talk, and converse with us, how should we be astonished at it? And
how would they wonder one at another? One that dyed at such a time; and
another, that dyed at such a time and here they live again, and talk again. But
now here is a greater wonder than this; here are dead souls, and they are
brought together and live again, and talk again. O! me thinks you should wonder
to see one another restored from so great a death.

Obj. But you will say, how shall I know that I am recovered from death to life?

Ans. I shall give together the Characters, and the privileges of you that are
recovered from death to life, that so your evidence and comfort may be promoted
together.

And there are these four that belong to you First. He has raised you from a
state of corruption and rottenness, to a state of health, and holiness. You
know a state of death is a state of corruption: the grave is a place of
rottenness and putrefaction. You that lie in your old lusts still, certainly
you have no portion or part in this matter. But you that are changed are
brought from this state: a state of sin, is a state of corruption. The
Scripture every where speaks of sin by the Metaphor that carries in it the
highest pitch of filthiness, Psalm. 14. 3. They are altogether become silthy, or
stinking. And so in Job 15. 16. How much more abominable and silthy is man,
which drinks in iniquity like water? Man in his natural state is a most
silthy creature: no comparison is (...) to set forth the odiousness of his
condition, before he is sanctified by grace; and the reason is, because he
drinks in iniquity like water. As the fish does swim in, and take in water
naturally: so sin is his very element wherein he does naturally live as it
were. Thus the Apostle, Romans 3. 13. Their throat is an open Sepulcher. And so
our Savior compares the Pharisees to to whited Sepulchers. But now you that
are believers, God has raised you from a state of Rottenness to a state of
health and holiness. Grace is the health of the soul; Holiness is the soundness
of the soul. An upright heart, is a sound heart. O beloved, what a privilege
is this to be translated from a state of corruption, to a state of holiness? O
what cause have you of thankfulness, that can find the stamp of God again upon
your souls? you are highly favored indeed whom God has privileged with this.
There is all that is desirable in grace and holiness; Riches, Wealth, beauty,
all. How often do we read of the beauty of Holiness? And so of its Riches too;
I counsel thee to buy of me gold, that thou may be Rich, Rev. 3. 18. It Is
the true Riches. And so it is Health and Soundness too, Prove. 3. 8. It shall be
health to thy Navel, and marrow to thy bones.

Secondly, From a state of darkness, to a Land of Light. You know the grave is
a place of darkness; and death, a state of darkness. Thus is it in the
Spiritual death. Dead souls are all in darkness, under the power of darkness,
Act. 26. 18. The grave for our dead bodies is a place of darkness: but the
grave for dead souls, is a place of utter darkness, of everlasting darkness.
The grave is Formidable, and deep. You know when a body is dead, it must be
buried, that it may not annoy us. God has provided a grave to bury dead souls
in out of his sight; and where do you think that this grave is? Why Hell is the
grave for dead souls. The rich man was dead, and was buried, but where was he
buried? His soul was in Hell, so some translate this place, And being buried,
in Hell he lift up his eyes, Luke, 16. 22, 23. Hell is a place of darkness, and
thick darkness. O that is horrible indeed, that is reserved for poor impenitent
sinners; the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13. He does not only say
darkness, but blackness of darkness for ever. Ah brethren, this is that which
Christ has recovered you from, from death to life. If you go down into the
grave, and see how the dead do lie in darkness, and silence, how formidable is
that! But oh how will it be, to see the grave of hell where dead souls are
buried! This was your place before you were sanctified. Ah brethren, what
manner of praise, what (...) of deliverance should you compass the throne of
Gods grace withal, who have such a change wrought upon you?

Thirdly. From a (...) of Impotence, to a state of power. A natural state is an
impotent state, Romans 5. 6. When we were yet without strength, in due time,
Christ dyed for the ungodly. As a dead man is not able to move a finger to put
off the worms that crawl upon his body and face: So a dead soul cannot get the
victory over his flesh, and lusts. He is under an impossibility of doing any
thing acceptable before God. But now God has given you strength, that you
should leap and walk, (...) praise God. God did put strength into thy feet when
he recovered thee from death to life, that tho^ should^ be able to go through
dissiculties for his names sake. Brethren, those that are altogether without
strength were certainly never brought to a true and spiritual life. If thou art
brought from death to life, thou have some strength. it may be it is but a
little strength; But every Saint has a little strength, so that he does not
live in the wilsul practice of any sin. If thou have not thus much thou art
dead in thy sins.

Fourthly, From a state of Insensibleness, to a state of Sense. A Dead man is
without sense; He has Eyes, but he sees not; and Ears, but he hears not:
And thus it is with a dead soul. But now you that are believers, you are raised
from this miserable state. I may say to you, Blessed are your Eyes, for you
see; and your Ears, for you hear. O what a change has he wrought upon you!

1. He has opened your eyes, when others are in blindness. Brethren! what a
change is this? How many do you see that live where the Gospel is Preached, and
yet remain ignorant? O! what thankfulness should this provoke you to? You are
restored to your spiritual sense. Before, you thought it the smallest matter in
the world to sin against God: Now, you look upon it after another manner. O how
should you bless God in those words of our Savior, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. O! How many be there of the wise
men, and great men of the world that have their eyes closed? God has hid these
things from them that they cannot see them: But your eyes see, give God the
glory.

2. He has bored your Ears, when others are in deafness. When others are like
the deaf Adder, he has given you the hearing Ear, the obedient Ear; O!
consider this, and be thankful. Thou have of thy self a heart as obstinate as
any other heart i^ the world. Now if God has given thee ears to hear, O bless
his Name! How often may we call upon a Dead man, and he never hear? so we may
call upon dead souls, and they hear not, with their souls at least, though they
hear with their ears.

3. God has loosed your Tongues, when others are dumb and silent. O what mercy
is this? Beloved, you could not breath before God your Prayers and Requests
with lise and fervor as you do, unless God did unlose your tongues, and open
your mouths. Man's lips are locked up, and his tongue tied up, that he cannot
utter himself before God; or at least, not with that fervency that others can:
O bless the Lord that he has loosed your tongues.

4. He has given you Appetites, when others relish not the things of God.
Do thou find any hungrings and thirstings after Christ, and his
Righteousness? Is this that which thou do pant after, to be made more
conformable to the Lord? Do thou pant after Christ, as others pant after the
world? O bless God that has put such a difference between thee and others.
When others relish not the things of God, they ar^ sapless things; yea, many
times they seem burdenfome things to them, God has given thee such an
appetite, that thou find a relish in them, that nothing goes down so
sweetly, as the service of God.

5. He has given you your feeling, when some others are past feeling. We read
of some that were past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. You know a dead man has no sense
or feeling; if you lay a Mountain upon him, he feels it not: So it is with a
dead soul, he feels not the burden of his si^s, he complains not for his sins:
Now can thou say, that thy sins be the greatest trouble to thee in all the
world? O bless the Lord for this! It is a great privilege; you that are
Believers do groan under this burden, and it is your duty so to do; yet under
this there is some life, or else you would not feel your corruptions as you do.

And now to close all, let me renew the Exhortation, Rejoice and be Thankful;
that though you were lost, you are found again. O remember what a condition you
were in when you were lost! Do you not remember what bitterness did seize upon
you? How many times did you give up your souls, and did believe that you should
never be found, or restored? And did God find you when you were lost? O
consider who it was that found you. Christ came from Heaven to Earth to take
thee up, poor lost sheep, upon his shoulders, to carry thee to Heaven; O be not
forgetful, ^ut Rejoice, and be Thankful.

A Letter sent by him to an Intimate Friend.
NOw will I make known to my dearest Friend, some of the thoughts of my heart
this morning, besore I begin to write to thee; There was once a poor soul
imprisoned in (...), and clogged with the Iron fetters of corruption, that
retired within it self, and would needs take a view of the best and worst sight
i^aginable at once. Well, he sets open the Floodgates, and in he dives into the
fathomless depths of an evil heart, but there he could sind no bottom; Then up
he springs, and begins to take the Dimentions, and view the Massy weight of
the Crown incorruptible: His heart grew hot within him, and while he was
musing, the fire burned, and on a sudden he pathetically smites on his breast,
and out he breaks into this Language,

Ah wretch, what a sight is here! methinks my heart is like the Chambers of
Imagery, I can turn me no way, but the loathsome sight and silthy stench of my
Corruptions comes up into my Eyes and Nostrils, my pollutions are so ^oul, that
I cannot tell how to look upon them, and yet so common, so universal, that I
cannot look besides them: which way soever I look into my self, I can cast my
eye on nothing but the loathsome sight of some filthy Ulcer, which makes me
filthy in my own eyes, and how much more to the pure eyes of my spotless maker;
when I turn my eye inward, and go about from Cell to Cell, I pass from one to
the other, and am fain to write, Lord have mercy upon me on every door: Every
faculty is as a cage of unclean Birds, and O the noisome lusts that lodge and
live within them! I looked into my memory, and O what a Magazine of wickedness
was there! weak I find it, and slippery when any good is committed to it: Alas,
methinks I am like a narrow mouthed bottle, that takes in but drops when the
bounty of Heaven pours down by showrs. Though the dew of Heaven distill as the
rain, yet how little do I take in? how much is spilt besides? but yet this is
not all, there is a leak in my Vessel that lets all that is good run out, only
the dregs are left behind. It Is little good that I take in amongst a world of
evil, and presently my Rudder lets go the good corn, and the chaff is kept
behind: Capacious it is to receive, faithful to retain what should be
forgotten: well thought I, I will shut up this, but I heard the voice, as to
the Prophet of old, speaking to me, turn thine Eyes, and thou shall see yet
greater Abominations then these. Look into thine understanding. But good Lo^d,
what a sight have I here? why it is all overspread with Egyptian darkness;
yea, much more intolerable, it being not my plague only, but my sin: Alas, how
do I grope about in blindness and ignorance, and wander in the path of error,
and though the light shine in darkness; yet the darkness comprehends it not:
How mean and shallow is my capacity? so dull that I cannot conceive, nor
apprehend the mysteries of Godliness, but am ready to ask with unskilful
Nicodemus, what do these things mean? what Riddles are many Gospel truths to my
soul? I am apt rather to dispute them, than to believe them; as if I had rather
judge of things by the light of reasons candle, than God's Sun: O fool that I
am, and slow of heart to believe, how is my understanding tied to my senses,
that I am apt to believe little but what I see? what poor low conceptions have
I of God, how little a portion do I know of him? he goes by me, and I see him
not; he passes on, and I perceive him not; how little is it that my
understanding will reach too? and how grossly do I apprehend and conceive that
little? Although Christ has anointed my eyes, yet my imperfect sight of the
things of the Gospel is like his we read of, who saw men walking as trees. But
you, O Blessed Souls who are now in Glory, you see face to face what I see in a
glass darkly; your Sun is risen, you see by the clearest Meridian light, what I
am fain to grope for in the dark; those mi^s of darkness and ignorance are
dispelled from your understandings, and you have the blessedness to see, what I
have scarce faith to believe; Thrice happy Souls, your day ends not, your Sun
sets not, you have perfect day, no clouds overcast you; you have perfect
knowledge, no scruples molest you; you are perfect light, and perfect life: The
mysteries hid from us, are made known to you, your light is increased, your
capacities are enlarged, your vail removed, and you are filled with all the
fullness of God: mysterious Providence are all unravelled to you, you see the
glorious contexture of every piece, and all the art and contrivances of that
curious Tapestry, of which I can see but here an arm, and there a leg, and know
not how to put passages together, nor what to make of them. O when shall that
which is in part be done away? when shall the day dawn, and the day star arise
in my heart? my soul waits for the Lord, more than they that wait for the
morning, yea, more than they that wait for the morning. Alas, how does my
spirit sink oftentimes, when I consider the imperfections of my understanding?
how I am at every turn baffled and posed in my own thoughts, and perplexed in a
labyrinth of difficulties, out of which I cannot extricate my self. Oh when
will the time come that I shall see as I am seen; and that I shall have all my
objections answered, my doubts resolved, my difficulties removed? Ah this cloud
of flesh, what glory do thou keep from shining in upon me? how can I see
through all this dirt? well but in thy light Lord I shall see light: In the
mean while I should be contented, if I could walk up to that dim light I have;
but alas: I have so stubborn, so headstrong a will, that it will not use the
light I have; my understanding is backward in assenting to the truths
propounded, but how much more backward is my will in consenting and practicing?
so that I am even like them in the Prophet, Brutish in my knowledge. Who would
believe, did they see my coldness, and deadnes^ in ^oly Duties, how remiss I
am, when begging pardon of sin, for mortifying and quickening grace, that I were
begging for my life? who would think by my negligence in the ways of God, and
that wretched indifferency that is in my heart, that I did believe the Kingdom
of Heaven was to be taken by violence, and that the gate was so strait, and the
way so narrow that leads to life. Oh Hypocrisy! I preach up diligence, and I
live in sloth; I preach up humility, and live in pride; I speak of the vanity
of the creature, yet I idolize it; of the sinfulness of sin, yet I cherish it;
of the lise of faith, yet am a stranger to it. I believe that sin is the
greatest evil, and that Gods wrath is the greatest Curse; but alas! how
strangely do I live below these principles! how am I apt and ready
notwithstanding, to choose sin, rather than affliction, and venture the
displeasure of the Almighty, to gain credit and applause amongst men? If it be
hard to believe, how much harder is it to practice? I know but little, and yet
how little do I of what I know? The flesh is still lusting against the spirit,
so that I cannot do the things that I would; yet though my strength be but
weak, how short do I come of doing all I can? and what a secret Antipathy is
there in my heart against the truths of God, and the ways of God? though my
understanding be over-powred with the evidence of truth; yet I do not receive
it in the love of it. O the deep enmity that there is in my heart against
Christ, notwithstanding all the personal excellencies that I know to be in him,
and all the benefits I have received from him! he shed his heartblood for me,
and yet I do begrudge any service for him. Oh how willingly did he bear the
Cross for me! Yea, was exceedingly straightened till that Baptism was
accomplished, I delight (says he) to do thy will O God, and yet he tells us
this was the will of his Father, that he should lay down his life for his
Sheep; yet do I murmur to bear any thing from or for him. Alas, he did far more
readily part with his life for me, than I do with a lust for him; Yea, those
sins that were my Saviors Murderers, do I entertain and cherish in my heart,
and yet I say I love him; but how can I love two Masters? so much of the love
of sin as there is in my heart, so much enmity is there against Christ; and O
how much is there then in my heart? to this day I flatter my self that I love
him, but alas! where is my tenderness of his honor, my care to please him, my
zeal for him, my delight in him, my longing after him: Ah where are these
fruits of my love to him? Alas! what a stranger am I to these things! well may
he reply upon me, as she upon Sampson, How can thou say thou love me, when
thy heart is not with me? I can see him pouring out his Soul on the Cross for
me, praying, sweating, bleeding for me, conflicting with the Torments of Hell
for me, and wrestling with the wrath of the infinite God for me, that I might
be delivered; and yet, O Rock of Adamant that I am, I bleed not, I melt not, I
mourn not, I can read the story of his Loveletters to my soul, and view all the
passages of his love to me, his compassions toward me, his care of me, his
provision for me, upholding, protecting, strengthening, deliveri^g me; yet
nothing moves me: Ah how I read the story of his bitter death and passion, with
dry eyes, and a hard heart! and all passes away like a Tale that is told;
sometimes it may be my heart may be warmed, and my affections will seem to be
in a flame, and O then what I will do, how I will live, how zealously I will
act, and how cheerfully I will suffer for Christ, I will spend and be spent for
him, not a lust shall be spared, not a duty that shall be baulked; but alas! my
Righteousness is like the morning dew, and like the ea^ly cloud that vanishes
away. It Is strange to see how soon my fire is out, and my affections congealed,
upon a sudden I am all over ice again, and O what a rubbing and a chafing must
I use, to keep alive a little heat, a little warmth! and all is scarce enough
neither, when will the blessed time come, when shall I be swallowed up in Love?
Oh Blessed are you who are now with Christ, that live continually in the sweet
embraces of those blessed Arms, you are all the Beloved Disciples, and have the
privilege to lean on his Breast; you are always in the Lap, and are warmed
continually in his bosom, when my affections freeze with cold, you feel the
beatings of his heart, and see the tender workings within, the warm influence
whereof melts you into the like affection; and thus are you for ever Blessed,
receiving, and returning love; when my wretched heart to this day retains
abundance of enmity against him, who loved me, and gave himself for me. A great
misery it is not to have a return of love, but my misery is not to return love
for love. Ah wretched heart, who can but be out of love with such a heart, as
will not be in love with such a Savior? Oh it troubles me, not so much that I
receive no more Love Tokens from him, but that I can send him no more. I beg
not so much to be beloved by him, as that I may love him: I could be content to
have fewer expressions of love from him, so I might have more love wrought in
my heart toward him: well, but the time will come when my spark shall be all
in a flame, and I shall be all love, when I shall for ever dwell in God, and
dwell in Love. I shall shortly be where no nipping winter shall cool the heat
of my affections, where no waters shall be able to quench my flame, no, my fire
shall never go out more; But I shall be continually taken up in loving and
admiring, and my soul shall be for ever possessed with perfect Love: I shall
then need no pains to warm, no Sermons to quicken me, no faith to raise me; but
mine eye shall affect my heart, and my foul shall make me as the Chariots of
Aminadab. I hear of him now by the hearing of the Ear, at a great distance, but
then my Eye shall see him; yea, with these eyes shall I see God, with these
Arms shall I embrace him; then shall I see the wounds in his side, and in his
heart, and put my singer into the print of the nails, and be no more faithless,
but believing; O blessed time, when he shall take me by the hand, and own me
before Men and Angels, me unworthy wretch, when I shall hear that ravishing
Sentence from his blessed mouth, Come thou blessed of my Father, come inherit
the Kingdom that I have prepared for thee, that I have purchased for thee:
Surely then I shall not need to be bid to love him, when David had made an end
of speaking, it is said, The heart of Jonathan was knit with the heart of
David, and he loved him as his own Soul: So surely will it be with me, when I
have heard that blessed sentence; no jarring then between my understanding and
my will; between my will and my affections; between my self and my brethren,
but a sweet and perfect Harmony. Starlight shall, then become perfect day, and
my affections and life perfectly consonant, and I shall for ever join with that
blessed Quire praising, and admiring that love, that now I have so much ado to
believe, sing out the high praises of our God, and of the Lamb, who has loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. O will it not be a welcome
time? I know you begin to cry out, how long Lord, how long; why this is thy
portion, embrace it, count upon it; let us lift up our heads, the day of our
redemption draws nigh; yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry.

I would have my Friend inflamed by this, though all this while I have scarce
gotten my self into any heat. Well, I conclude with the Martyr, pray, pray,
pray; I know you do, but be importunate; I know you are, but continue to be,
and the Lord fill you with himself, and cherish you in the secrets of his
presence; Farewell,

Christ's and Yours Joseph Alleine.

FINIS.

