A LETTER FROM Genesis MONCK TO King CHARLES SON of the late King CHARLES OF
ENGLAND. DECEASED. Together with King Charles his Answer thereunto.

London, Printed 1660.

A LETTER from General Monck To King CHARLES, etc.
May it please your Majesty,
SEeing it has pleased God out of his gracious will and pleasure, to cause me
to cast my Eye upon this Commonwealth of England, my native Country, (and your
three Kingdoms;) and viewing there, to behold the sad and lamentable
condition, that now, and for many years past, it has been entangled in; which
as reason and conscience together persuades me, is occasioned chiefly for want
of its ancient and ever customed way of Government, (to wit) a King and
Parliament, which has been unsettled altogether amongst us, ever since the
unhappy death of your Majesty's late father our King; by reason whereof, our
ancient and accustomed wholesome laws both of Church and State, are most
strangely torn and massacred; and all through the self-seeking ends of some
certain persons, which at present I judge not fit herein to be communicated,
who having gotten the power of the sword in their hands, thought forever to
rule and reign over their opposers; (I think in spite of God or man:) But of
late some of those (I hope, I may truly bless the name of the Lord for it,)
who were the chief rulers of those unhappy differences between our King, and
his three poor distracted Kingdoms, are taken out of this world; insomuch,
that the Power of those remaining, is much weal^^d; But yet they will (I
perceive) seek to tread in the self same steps of them that have gone before
them; as seeking only to set up their own interest, although to the utter
ruin of the Nation. Studying how of littleness to become great, hating the
name of a King, but would joyfully embrace the power thereof, (yea, I may say,
they seek far more Power, than ever our late King did take upon him,) and all
is done under the zealous pretense of Saintship and religion; the form of
manner whereof, is plainly manifested by their tolerating and setting up of
strange Sects of religion, as Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like, seeking
utterly to d^stroy, and pull down, our ancient Orthodox Divnes, unless timely
prevented. I question not but your Majesty is very well knowing of the Power,
which for some few years past, I have had, in governing the English Army here
in Scotland; which Power, when I had once obtained, I did resolve, as much as
in me lay, to keep, until a fit time and opportunity should offer it self, that
I might employ it for the glory of God, and the good of your Majesty, whose
faithful Subject I humbly accknowledge my self to be. Now so it is, may it
please your Majesty. I plainly seeing and with a sad heart beholding the
threatening hand of the Lords severe Judgments stretched forth against these
three Kingdoms, which forthwith must, and will inevitably fall heavy upon us,
(for ought as can be imagined, to the utter ruin both of King and Subjects,)
unless suddenly prevented by our humble sub^ission to the Lord, and an
unfeigned repentance of our former miscarriages. May it also please your
Majesty to give me leave to acquaint you, that I humbly conceive, I had never a
better opportunity of doing my Country service, (in freeing them from their
Egyptian bondage, as I may term it,) and in restoring the Crown to the right
owner thereof; which if possible to be done shall be done with as much care,
safety, and diligence, as God shall enable me, and that with as little wrong as
may be either to King or Subjects; which work when it is perfected, I hope will
tend to the firm setlement of our ancient Protestant religion: In tender
consideration of all which premises; I most humbly beg that high favor of
your Majesty that you will be graciously pleased, to permit me to make these
Proposals following. First, whether your Majesty will be pleased, to acce^^ of
the real indevours of me your unworthy Subject and Servant to be employed in
being a means in helping your Majesty to a quiet and safe possession of three
Kingdoms; which have (with violence) been so long time withheld from you? If
yea, Then, Will your Majesty be pleased, to consent to a Treaty to be had
between your Majesty, and a free Parliament, which shall be lawfully elected
and chosen by the Country, whose care I hope will be for the choosing of such
honest, godly, and religious men, as had no hand in the death of our late King
or since his death have (by any unlawful means whatsoever,) enjoyed any of his
Lands, Tenements, or Rents, or the Lands, Tenements, and Rents, of the late
Deans and Chapters, or any of your late sequestered Subjects, or which since his
death have appeared violent in their acting against Kingship, and consequently
against your Majesty, our lawful King: Not in the least that I have any malice
or evil will against such persons, but for that my conscience tells me, that so
long, as sels interessed persons are suffered to sit in Parliament, there is
little good to be expected, either for King or Kingdom; for it is a hard thing
for men to act against their own selves, to the loss of their Lands and
livings; which they suppose they have so honestly gained. If your Majesty will
be pleased to consent to such a treaty, and that thereupon it may be agreed
upon, that your Majesty shall be resto^ed to your three Kingdoms; which I
question not, but will be the event of such a treaty: Then I humbly beg that
your Maj. would be pleased, to think fit to declare what mercy and pity, you
are pleased shall be she^^^ to all those that have been the chief of your
enemies; (whose blood in severity of justice, might deservedly be spilt,) upon
their humble submission to your Majesty, and their promise of future obedience;
for I hope, you will judge, that the only way to join the hearts of the People
of your three Kingdoms, to pray for your happy success in all things; and not
only so but it will undoubtedly encourage them all to enter their Lives
against all your opposers, it any shall contest: And also that your Majesty
would be pleased, to declare out of your gracious goodness, what satisfaction
shall be made to the poor Common Soldiery throughout your three Kingdoms, who
have been forced to take up Arms, although against your Majesty, for mere
necessity to keep them and their Families from starving, who indeed are much
behind in their pay; which will be utterly lost, and undone, unless your
Majesty take comp^ssion upon them; which if you are pleased so to do I question
not, but you will find as much humility and submission from them, as can be
expected; and for the future it will engage them to be as ready to serve your
Majesty, as they were to serve your enemies for the time past: And more over, I
conceive it will be a great encouragement to them, to join with me in this
design I shall trouble your Majesty with little more at present; But to let you
know, that my hopes are that you would be ple^sed, to have that confidence in
me, as not to credit any rumors or reports, that may seemingly contradict,
what I have herein proposed; for, as for that, I would have your Majesty to be
confident, that I shall not value neither the ill will, or yet look upon the
favor of any, who shall appear in opposition to a thing that I have so really
purposed, so long as God and my Conscience persuades me, that in so doing I
shall accomplish a good work both for his glory, and my Countries good: And yet
I think fit to carry as fair a corespondency as I can, with those that have
taken upon them the Authority in England: To that end, I have thoughts of going
to London very suddenly, that I may see their actings, and order things there
somewhat for my advantage; I humbly beg your Majesty's speedy Answer touching
these proposals: So with all submissiveness, I crave your Majesty's favor, in
giving me leave to subscribe my self

Edenborough December. 30. 1659. Your Majesty's for ever faithful and Loyal
Subject George Monck.

King Charles his Answer thereunto.
WORTHY FRIEND,
THis is to let you understand, that I have received yours of the Twentieth of
December, the twenty fifth of the same Month. The Contents whereof, do cause
me, to judge you deserving, of the Title that I have given you, and I hope, the
further events of your intended proceedings, may ere long merit a greater; and
for as much, as I concieve it necessary, to give you the speedy result of my
mind in Answer thereunto, I think fit to let you know in the first place, that
I freely pardon you for all offenses or crimes, whatsoever committed (or which
you know your self guilty of) against my la^^ Dear Father, and my self; I
beseech the Lord to forgive you likewise; I must confess, I am not ignorant of
the power, that you for some years past, have had over the English (...) in
Scotland; And I do likewise bless God, who has (...) opened your Eyes, to
behold the miseries of my three poor distressed Kingdoms; And also for that
he has made you so far sensible of his heavy judgments (ready to be showred
down upon them, by reason of the grievous and lamentable outcrying sins of the
people) as to cause you, to make so fair and seasonable a proffer of the tender
of your service, both for the glory of God, and the good of me and my people.
The Lord open your heart, courageously, to go on in the perfecting of so great
a work, as you have intended to set on foot, you having now so fit an
opportunity, And for the answering the proposals therein contained, in order as
they lie, I do declare that I shall with a willing and joyful heart, accept of
your faithful and honest indevours to be employed, for the glory of God, and
the manifest good of Me and my Subjects; not so much for the profit or wordly
advantage that I think to recieve thereby, but that which I shall chiefliest
rejoice in, is, only for the glory of God, and the good of my three Kingdoms.
I mean in freeing them from their slavery, in preserving them from any farther
effusion of blood, and for the settling amongst them their ancient way of Church
and State Government, for the advancement of the true Protestant Religion; and
also for the quashing of all Heresies, Hypocrisies, Sects and Schisms, that
are lately crept into our Protestant Church; Whereby we are become a mere
laughing stock, to all Nations; and as for my consenting to a Treaty, to be had
between Me and a Parliament, to be chosen by a free consent of my people, I am
sure there is not a thing that I can embrace with a greater joy, and
especially, if my Subjects make choice, of persons so qualified as you have
mentioned in your Letter to me, then of necessity, there can nothing but good
come of such a Treaty. But if otherwise, it may be doubted, but however my
trust shall be in the Lord, And whereas it was your desire, for me to declare
what mercy and pity, I would should be shown toward those who are my manifest
enemies. In case I should come quietly to be restored to my three Kingdoms; I
do therefore for the satisfaction both of You and my Subjects, declare the
thoughts of my heart, touching my said enemies in manner following. That as for
all such, who shall humbly submit themselves unto me, and expressing their
Sorrow for all their former actings against Me and my late Father, and upon
promise of their future obedience, I will freely pardon them of their lives;
and as for their estates, those who have lawfully purchased any from any of my
Subjects; I will that they enjoy such their estates according to their
purchase, they only paying (for the space of five years) the moiety of the
profits of such their estates toward satisfaction of the public debts, that
my poor Subjects may be somewhat eased of their Taxes, which have been so
heavily imposed upon them for this many years. And as for such who have gotten
or purchased by any means whatsoever any of my land (to wit) any of the Kings
lands or livings, or the lands and livings of the Bishops, late Deans and
Chapiters, or of any of my Subjects, sequestered or taken from them for their
Delinquency (so accounted:) My will is, that such estates so gotten, shall be
by them surrendered into the hands and possession of the right owners as
formerly, being contented to rest quiet and satisfied with the gain and profit
they have recieved thereby for the time past, and to lose the profit for the
time to come, which my conscience tells me, is but plain reason; and as for
those who shall persist and continue in their rebellion against me, I shall
desire, that such course may be taken with them, as my Parliament and Council
shall think fit, and their estates to be disposed of toward payment of the
Public debts which shall be judged necessary, and fit to be discharged, which
I shall refer to my Parliament and Council; who I shall humbly desire, and I
question not, but it will be their care, in being sparing in spilling as little
blood as may be. And as for the poor Common soldiers, they who will submit
themselves to me, I freely pardon them; and my will is, that their Arrears
shall be paid as speedily as conveniently may be, although it be for their
Service in fighting against me; but I impute all to their necessity; What I
have here above declared, I shall labor to make good, to the utmost of my
power. I shall not, neither do I in the least, question your Reality, in the
faithful performance of what you have declared. God prosper you in all your
undertakings therein; and I shall own you in every thing that you shall act,
for Gods glory, and the good of my people, which I desire may be done with as
much expedition as may be. I render you very many thanks for your Love.

C. R.

FINIS.

