Licensed,

June 13. 1689. Z. Isham.

God's Covenant DISPLAYED, BY John Alexander A CONVERTED JEW. WITH A Prooemial
Discourse OF THE REASONS OF HIS CONVERSION.

(...)

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir JOHN MAYNARD, Chief Lord Commissioner for the
Great Seal of England.
My Lord,
THis Book does humbly present it self to your Honor, as the First Fruits of
my proficiency in Christ, in a dress low and humble, beseeming the Author.

Let others bring into the Tabernacle (to borrow Hierom's words, Prol. in lib.
Reg.) what they are able: some, Gold, Silver, and Gems; others, fine Silks,
Purple, Scarlet and Jacynth: it is well with us, if we can afford Skins and Hair
of Goats.

However under this Veil is contained something of the hidden Wisdom amongst
the perfect, giving an insight to the Mystery of the Crucified JESUS. As such,
be pleased to accept of it, in token of sincere gratitude, upon the score of so
many benefits, due to your Name, by,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most dutiful and most humble Servant, John Alexander.

God's Covenant DISPLAYED, WITH A Prooemial Discourse ABOUT The Manner and
Reasons of the Author's Conversion from Judaism to Christianity.
IT IS not less certain, That every Mortal strives to attain Happiness; than
morally known, That notwithstanding the different Sentiments about the
intrinsic nature, all reasonable Creatures agree in the pursuit thereof. To
wish well to ones self, is congenite; in so much, that Baseness it self is not
cherished by the wicked, unless under a notion of some good. And though perhaps
our Intellect cannot be inveagled so far, as to deem a thing Moral, which is
contrary to it; yet our blind Will, upon a surmise of its being pleasant or
advantageous, embraces it, for good, under such or the like circumstances.

And if this Appetite be promiscuously found in reasonable Souls; it must
doubtless, with an overplus, display it self in such, who being from their
Youth educated above the vulgar sort, by aid of their cultivation, are
furnished with means for ^^^^cing into a critic search of a point, on which
depends Eternity; thereby to rescue their Souls from all imminent danger, and
to make it a Candidate of the desired Beatitude: due means, in this, as in all
other cases, proving often Motives for taking in hand, what otherwise would lie
dormant.

Therefore, since my Parents (Jews by Birth) were willing to bestow cost and
charges on my breeding, after their way; and the sedulity of my Teachers, had
brought me to the perfect view of their Doctrine and Traditions: 'twas no
wonder, that being in some measure accomplished, I used those means I had, in
finding out that object, wherein our chief and only happiness does reside. And
though I was formerly persuaded, that this object was GOD; yet seeing that he
was sought for in diverse ways and manners, my Mind could not be at rest, until
I had searched for the best. Thus, our Mind is of so infinite and restless an
apprehension, that after it has attained the fruition of what constantly
relisheth our fancy, it is yet still appetent of more; in so much, that as the
object never wants fresh glances of admiration, so our Mind is never destitute
of an eagerness for comprehending and possessing of whatever is admirable in it.

And there being three chief means now extant in the World, which, as by so
many lines, seem to tend to the same Center; namely, the Jewish, the Christian,
and the Mahumetan persuasion, I consequently presumed to dive into their
several Truths and advantages.

What the Chair of Moses could afford, therewith I was sufficiently acquainted,
and indeed thought my self to be in possession of Truth; whether by prejudice,
or that the two abovementioned professions themselves did acknowledge God to be
our Lawgiver. In the Mahumetan Religion, I could find nothing of sense or
reason, and Authority as little as both, except wherein they agree in the
Mosaic and Moral Law: Especially, I did want amongst them, the fullfilling of
Promises, the chiefest Faith and Hope of Israel. Thus looking back to the
Christians, where I perceived the fulfilling of Promises pretended (as I then
thought) the assertion of a Messiah come, the Covenant urged, the holy Canon of
Scripture received; considering also their Doctrine, Sobriety of Life, and
skill in all sort of Languages and Learning; I was persuaded into a better
belief of them than before. My way therefore was first to compare Doctrine with
Doctrine, Predictions with Events, and the nature of Promises with their being
accomplished, and then, to make my Applications (though hidden, for fear of the
Jews) to some Divines, by their assistance to be better informed in the concern
of my Souls Salvation.

After sundry Conferences and Debates, overruled by reason and evidence of
Arguments, by the cooperating Grace of GOD, I at last did yield to Christian
Truths, and concluded within me, that their Way (waving the deplorable
animosities, which after a like manner I found to have been amongst the Jews of
old) was the surest means, in order to the obtaining of a blessed End; in
consideration, that GOD cannot be enjoyed as an end of our Happiness, unless by
what he is pleased to prescribe in his several Dispensations.

I. Whereupon in the first place, I considered the Promises of GOD concerning
the King MESSIAH (by whom only we hope to be saved, Psalm. 2. 12.) his coming
into the World. And here that notable passage of Genesis 49. 10. presented it
self, in the very Front; (...) The Rod (or Scepter) shall not depart from Juda,
nor the Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and to him shall the
obedience of the people be. And pray, let any unbyassed Jew answer me (they all
agreeing* that by this Shiloh, is to be understod the Messiah) When this Rod or
Scepter (because (...) signifies both: and custom declares it to be so, by the
diversity of imperial Ensigns; as the Scepter of Ahasuerus and the Roman
fasces, Rods) departed from Juda ((...) so called, and then reduced to two
Tribes and a half) together with the Lawgiver, if not at the coming of Jesus of
Nazareth? For Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee, was a Gentile, and the Roman Eagle
(the Ensign of that Nation) had spread its Wings over all Judea, according to
the threatening Prediction, Deuteronomy. 28. 49. (in case of disobedience.) The LORD
shall bring a Nation against thee from far, from the end of the Earth, flying,
(...) as an Eagle, a Nation whose Tongue thou shall not understand; thereby
meaning the Romans (for the Jews understood Syriack and Chaldaick, and likewise
Hebrew, as in the case of Rabsheka) who both overruled, and utterly overthrew
them, in such a manner, that Josephus their Chronologer, can scarcely touch any
notable passage in his History, particularly in reference to Jerusalem's
destruction, the Metropolis of the Land, and the Seat of the King and the
Lawgiver, wherein the event should not be answerable to the Prediction, from v.
49. to 57. All which, although it did happen after Christ's Ascension; yet the
fooling of the Romans in Canaan before it, and the Jews being deprived of a
formal Scepter (though a material one is said to have hung in the Sanhedrim)
was an antecedent to this Catastrophe. The consideration whereof did extort
from a Jewish Rabbi (as I remember I have read it) this Confession; that either
GOD for their sins did retard the coming of the King Messiah, or else, if he
was come, there could be none else but this Jesus of Nazareth, in whom
Christians believed. Moreover, it is worthy any Man's curious observation, when
it is said; That to him shall be the obedience of the people; as viz. in
opposition to Juda, who swayd his Scepter over a National people, whereas
Shiloh was to do it over the Universe, which our Poland Translation seems to
have aimed at, when it renders these words, by, iemu bedzie oddane
posluszenstwo narodow, i. e. to him shall be NB. delivered the obedience of
Nations; as if it were by succeeding to his bodily Ancestors (for it is
evident, that our Lord sprang out of Juda, Hebr. 7. 14.) in the Throne which
was to be of larger extent than theirs. The English Bible has it, to him shall
be the gathering of the people; I believe, following Rabbi Solomon, who makes
the Radix of (...), to be not (...) but (...), which also is emphatick and
significant; for as all Christians do obey the LORD JESUS, so all the Churches
over the Universe are gathered unto him as their spiritual Prince, who rules
over them with a more or less influence of grace, until the fullness of all.
The Jewish exception against this place, in taking (...) for a Rod of
punishment, is easily evinced, by the adjoining words; the Lawgiver from
between his feet, they having no Lawgiver at present.

In the next place, offered it self, that of Daniel cap. 9. where that the
Prophet foretells the time of Messiah his entering into the World, the Rabbis
do universally allow. Now there we find the restriction of time, from the
Prophecy to the fulfilling of it, tied to (...) seventy Weeks: which being to
be understood prophetically, denote seventy (...) Weeks of Years, that is,
seventy time seven. Making therefore a deduction from the Captivity of Babylon,
to the destruction of the Temple, we shall find exactly 70 Weeks of Years: The
Captivity lasted 70 Years, and the second Temple 420, which added, makes 490.
So, that this Prophecy is an invincible Argument, for the Messiah being come
about the time, unless we are willing to argue the Spirit of God to be false.
Now, did not Jesus of Nazareth come about that time? whom, if the Jews are not
willing to acknowledge for the foretold Messiah, let them produce another. And
though there might be, (as there are) some wranglings about the punctilioes of
time; yet that must prove a sorry shift; The question being not, whether the
promised Seed should not appear about such a time, but whether it should come
after the expiration of it: or, after the Desolator coming with his abominable
Army (even at the consummation of the determined time) had poured out
desolation upon them that were to be desolated? Dan. 9. 27.

And this leads me to the third consideration of Haggai 2. 7. where the LORD
promises, that in the (...) last Temple should appear the desire of all
Nations (to be ruled over, Genesis 49.) which the Rabbis themselves expound of
the Messiah, comparing it with the other place, The Lord will appear in his
Temple, Mal. 3. 1. whereby the glory of this last should by many degrees
surmount that of Salomon's. And indeed, if we consider, how that besides the
inferiority of the structure of this, in comparison to the magnificence and
stupendous riches of the former, there were wanting Vrim and Thummim, the Ark,
the Tables of the Law, the Manna, the Rod of Aaron, the Fire from Heaven,
immediate Revelation, overshadowing of the Cloud of Majesty, etc. what other
reason is there to think, or to believe, that this last Temple should exceed in
glory the first, unless the appearance of him in it, who is the LORD of Silver,
of Gold, of all Riches, and the Universe; even of Messiah the King? And in that
appeared Jesus of Nazareth, the supposed then, and now deservedly believed
Messiah; after whose rejection, desolation came upon the place, without any
hopes of its being rebuilt again, at least for former uses (though Julian the
Apostate boldly ventured it) since that Vision and Prophecy were to be sealed
up (that is, never to appear again) v. 24. and Sacrifice with oblation to
cease, v. 27. instead whereof, everlasting righteousness was to be installed.

Then I went to the place of the promised Messiah, his Nativity, which is
clearly expressed in Micah 5. 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be
amongst the least of the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth
unto me (...) that is, to be the RVLER in Israel: whose goings forth have been
from old, from everlasting. By this (...) Moshel, the Jews of old understood
none but Messiah, in so much, that when Herod did hear the promised King of the
Jews was born, and presently being inquisitive where the place of his Birth
should be, for resolution, had this very same saying, quoted by the chief
Priests and Scribes of the people, as is to be seen in Mat. 2. 1, -- 6. But now
it is notoriously known, that that Bethlehem of Ephratah, at which the Prophet
divinely inspired did then point, does now lie in dust and ashes; so that it
must of necessity follow, the Promise was fullfilled, when that place was as
yet in being, else the Prediction was a Fable. We do read indeed, that Hierom,
the old Father of the Christian Church, had once his Station at Bethlehem
(which the Jews do urge) but, besides that the name was only left and the Town
quite demolished, as this same Father does acknowledge, when he tells us of
some small Cottages there erected; it is for certain, that now, there is neither
sign nor resemblance, no nor the name of the City lest; the Saracens, or rather
Hagarens, having laid it in ashes; and yet the Ruler, or the Governor, was to
be born there. They have another shift to except against this place, viz. That
by (...) is here not to be understood a Ruler, but a Parable, or a Byword.
Which to be a wretched elusion, the context evinces; since that, he who is here
called Moshel, was to stand, and to feed in the strength of the LORD, in the
majesty of the LORD his GOD, and was to be great unto the ends of the Earth, v.
4. which can by no means be attributed to a Parable, that being an accident.
Not to say, that their Forefathers the LXX. interpret it so as we do, and as it
ought, by (...), a Governor, or a Ruler; and accordingly Matthew in the
forequoted place, Matthew. 2.

II. Thus being satisfied about the time and place of Messiah his coming, I
next considered the manner; and knowing what Christians did aver in that point,
I presumed to look back to the Prophecies. Here I might have a large Field to
expatiate into, and not unpleasant to the Reader; yet not intending this Prooem
for a Treatise, and hastening to the displaying of the Covenant (though that
also will be compendious.) I shall only touch the chief passages, interwoven
with suitable observations thereunto.

It Is therefore to be noted, that it is a Maxim amongst the Jews, That every
Promise of GOD ought to be considered as it was pronounced at first, without
further additions or limitations following in process of time; these having a
collateral tendency to the same end, which yet must take effect in that same
simplicity, as it has been held forth in the first Promise.

But it is agreed on all sides, that Genesis 3. 15. after the fall of Adam, the
Messiah was promised in these words; I will put an enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel. Now these do represent him to us as a seed of a Woman,
there being no mention made of a Man. And this was the first promise made of a
Woman's Seed before she had known Man, Genesis 4. 1. Which, though it was
reiterated to Abram, who thereupon was called Abraham, and Sarai, Sarah, the
(...) (as the Cabalists tell us) being taken out of the Tetragrammaton, and
added to both their names, as well for confirming God's Covenant, as to show,
they were equal sharers in the benefit and conveyance of the promise, Genesis 17.
5, -- 16. (upon which the inspired Apostle comments most significantly, Gal. 3.
15, etc.) though likewise this Seed be called the Rod out of the stem of Jesse,
Esaias 11. 12. yet they were only as so many Channels, from which should at last
issue forth a Woman to complete the promise of the Seed: or as so many holy
Predecessors of that Virgin, which was to conceive and bear a Son, whose name
should be (...) Immanuel, Esaias 7. 14. pursuant to the promise made in Paradise,
then shut, and ever shut after. This manner of Messiah his Birth, is expressed
in Jer. 31. 22. The LORD has created a new thing in the Earth, a Woman shall
compass a Man. And if we will list to Cabalistical Mysteries (who averr, that
on every letter of the holy Word, hung Mountains or Rocks of concealed
Mysteries, which being struck at by refined reason, as a Hammer, and by Grace
as a hand, do yield an infinite number of Sparks, tending to the illuminating
of our understandings.) We may have a pleasant observation in the passage of
Esaias 9. 7. Where the Messiah, being introduced as if he had appeared already,
is invested with the following Attribute; (...) etc. (...) In order to the
increase of his Dominion and Peace, whereof there will be no end, he shall sit
upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, etc. Where in the word (...) le
Marbe, (...) is final, ((...)) in the middle, against the nature of Orthography
in that Language. The passage is on all sides allowed to be a Prophecy of the
Messiah to come: But the reason of this extraordinary placing of (...) final,
is in question. What Petrus Galatinus says concerning it, we will refer the
Reader to in his lib. 4. c. 19. de Aro. Cath. ver. And as for the Masorah,
though that be for the reading of this word with an open Mem ((...)) yet it
gives no reason: and a sphalma* it could not be, for that it does not prejudice
the sense: the continued exemplaries (besides) from the Autograph to this day,
retaining the same Character. Let therefore a sober and pious Christian Reader
give me leave to explain this (...) Caballistically. In the first place, the
letter considered numerically, imports 600. Now, from this Prediction, to the
coming of Messiah, even the Lord Jesus, are 600 years complete. And, from
henceforth (as if the Prophet had reflected upon his mysterious (...)) the
increase of the Kingdom of Messiah was to be, i. e. at the end of 600 years
from his prediction, thence, to continue for ever: and to spread it self over
all Nations: (the increase) not only over National Israel. In the next place,
this (...) may be taken figuratively; denoting, that the promised Child and the
Son should be born of a Virgin (the Prophet, having in another place deposited
the same in express terms) that had not interfer'd with a Man; the (...) being
close.

From all this, it appears, that the promised Messiah was to be born of a
Virgin, the truth whereof appeared in the event, so uncontrollable, that
besides the Authority of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 2. and all ancient Founders of
the Christian Church, some of the Rabbis have it upon Record; though not
without blasphemous aspersions.

III. Next to this, I searched into the Nature of the promised Seed; who that
he should be a MAN, was certain, but I found him also called GOD in the holy
Writ, especially by the most venerable name (...) JEHOVA, whereon I will at
present solely insist, not willing to expatiate in a concern, of it self
requiring a Volume, and which, this only instance is able to evince. The Jews
call this (...) Schem hamphorash, a (...) a proper and essential name of GOD;
if so, then it being attributed to Messiah, he must properly and essentially be
GOD. And that the Messiah is called not only the mighty GOD, the everlasting
father, Esaias 9. 6. whose goings forth are from everlasting, Micah 5. 2. but
also Jehova, is manifest out of Jer. 23. 6. And this is the name whereby he
shall be called THE LORD (in the Hebrew it is (...)) OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. On which
passage, I find in the Book called Ikkarim Orat. 2. c. 28. This Rabbinical
Comment, which may tend to their own conviction (...) That is, the Scripture
calls the name of Messiah ( Jehova tzidkenu) the LORD our Righteousness,
because the Mediator is to be GOD, by whose hands we are to obtain
Righteousness from God himself, and therefore it calls him by the name* (...).

And by this, and the like names and proprieties, attributed to the Messiah in
the Old Testament, I was fully convinced of his Godhead. Thence reflecting upon
Christ's Miracles of a mere supernatural Power, I could not but satisfy my
self in that point also, that he was the same that was to come.

All this while, admiring the Divine goodness and wisdom, I was invited to
glorify his holy name, for that he was pleased to open my Eyes, and to show me
the true path of Salvation; that being rescued from the power of Satan, I had
been admitted to the hope of enjoying him for ever, according to his holy
Covenant, under which I now found my self comprehended.

And now as for the COVENANTS of GOD, GOD'S COVENANT.
willing shortly to handle the matter, we will in the first place, consider the
Notion of the name. In Hebrew it is called (...) from (...) he has chosen, for
that persons and conditions are chosen in a Covenant, which word, in the
English, proceeds from Convening or agreeing on such Articles as are liked by
them that are upon a Treaty.

Next we will consider the notion of the thing it self. And thus, it is taken
(1.) in a large sense; when it does import as much as a Commandment; as for
Example (to pass by other passages for shortness sake) Josh. 7. 11. Israel has
sinned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant, which I commanded them;
for they have taken of the accursed thing, etc. and 15. because he has
transgressed the Covenant of the LORD: This Covenant was nothing but a
Commandment under a (...) Jos. 6. 17, 18. Or it is taken (secondly) in a more
strict sense, only for a promise of GOD, without any intervening conditions, as
for Example, Genesis 9. 9. Behold (saying to Noah) with you and with your Seed
after you, and with every living Creature that is with you, etc. I will
establish my Covenant, etc. Where that by this Covenant is understood only a
promise of GOD, is manifest, not only for that there was no stipulation,
neither express nor implicit, but that the benefit thereof extended it self to
the very Beasts, without any regard of Souls Immortal. Or lastly, it is taken
in the strictest sense, for the Covenant (as it is commonly called) of Grace,
established in the promised Seed, under the condition of Faith and Repentance,
as was that, which GOD uttered to Abraham, Genesis 15. 17. Gal. 3. 17.

Thus having shortly explained the several acceptions and meaning of the word
Covenant, my position is, That GOD never entered upon a Covenant (as the word is
duly to be taken) with Man, but the Covenant of Grace in Christ. So that all
other passages, wherein the word Covenant is found, do intimate either a
Commandment, or else a Promise, without any stipulation of the parties
concerned; except that of Sinai, which, by reason of its ratihabition, changed
the Scene of GOD'S purpose and proposal.

There is therefore no Covenant of Nature; for that none was made before the
Fall, and after it, none could be made. The Transaction, that passed between
GOD and Adam in Eden, Genesis 2. was a mere Sanction on God's side, whereunto Adam
was obliged to listen by nature, which as yet uncorrupted, was able to perform
what was enjoined. We find indeed a saying in Hosea 6. 7. They have
transgressed the Covenant (...) as Adam. But, if Adam should here be taken for
the Protoplast, (...) Covenant, must be taken in a large sense for a
Commandment: However, it is agreed upon by the learned and skilled in the
Hebrew, that Adam is taken here for a noun common, that is for every Mortal,
according to several Translations, in particular the English; But they, like
Men, have transgressed my Covenant: The Poland translation (that of my native
soil) takes the word adjectively, for human, they have transgressed my
Covenant, as a human, or as a Man's Covenant, not as if it had been of Divine
Authority; wherein (...) they have dealt disloyally against me. To these and
the like interpretations (which are not against the Analogy of Faith.) I will
add one, which I deem the most grammatical and significant, (...) And they, as
one Man, transgressed the Covenant. That is, they were so unanimous to break
the LORD'S Institution and Will, that in the prosecuting of their sinful and
rebellious Enterprise, all of them were as one Man (...). Thus the doubt being
cleared, and we having showed that Adam is here taken appellatively, I proceed.

If there had been any Covenant of Nature, the Heathens had been under some
Covenant, for that such like conditions, as this Covenant might have had, (if
ever it could have been) were written in their hearts, Romans 2. 15. yet the
Apostle calls them strangers from the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. From
the Covenants in the plural, as pointing at that which was uttered to Abraham,
and, that of Sinai grounded by the rash ratifying of the Jews in some measure,
upon the Law of Nature (though not with a difannulling of the promise) the like
whereof we never read to have been done by the Heathens.

Which leads us to another consideration, about the impossibility of such a
Covenant as that of Nature; for that, neither the Justice of God will permit,
that such conditions as the Law of Nature contains, should in a Covenanting
way, be proposed to Man, after the fall of the first; nor is Man able to
perform them: and Grace without Christ, has nothing to do in mere naturals:
yea, though general Grace may extend it self to the Heathens, yet, neither that
(speaking strictly) can be admitted to the retinue of a Covenant of Nature,
standing on the bottom of selfpossibility.

At last, since wherever an Arithmetical proportion is observed, betwixt the
transacting parties that are unequal, there can be no Covenant; and, if there
could, such a commensuration cannot be expected after the fall; it follows,
there was not, nor is not, yea cannot be any Covenant of Nature.

To make here a long harangue, about the difference between the arithmetical
and geometrical proportion, as it does not belong to my Province, so it would
prove tedious to the Reader. Yet lest I should meet with some not unwilling to
understand me, waving several niceties about it, I will give a taste:
Arithmetical proportion is, when the Medius terminus is equally distant from
both extremes: Geometrical, when it is liker and nearer to one of the extremes
than to the other. Thence, to distributive Justice is allotted Medium
Geometricum; to the communitative, Arithmeticum. And this commutative Justice
is when an equal proportion is observed between giving and receiving, between
the merit and reward, between the injunction and the performance. But pray now,
where is there a person, after the fall of Adam, that should be able to draw
this Radix equally distant from, and equally commensurate to the injoining and
the performing party. And if, at the best, it could at any time be found, yet
what should the upshot of it be in reference to a reward, except that we are
unprofitable Servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. And what is
it Man is supposed to have done? When ye have done All, Luc. 17. 10. Now, as
this All, cannot be done by a Man in the State of Sin; so if it had been done
in the State of Innocence, it had been but a duty, tending to no more than
Vnprofitableness, and therefore not a Result of a Covenant, which, as to us,
has always a proportion Geometrical, as being grounded upon distributive
Justice, 2 Timothy 4. 8. by Grace purchased for us, through the satisfaction of an
equal in Nature, even by Christ Covenanting for us with the Father.

Here it may be, some will say, that by this assertion, and a kind of a
Paradox, I bereave GOD of the power of exacting due obedience to his Law from,
and seem to have little regard of the transmission of original Sin, to the
Posterity of Adam.

Answer. Not in the least. For, suppose a Monarch should bestow on his Subject
a Feud for himself and his Posterity after him, as a mere token of his bounty
toward his new Creature; if this first Feudatary should break his Allegiance
to his Prince, he would doubtless involve his Posterity in the same
disadvantages he felt, merely by not being trusty to his charge, and would
transmit to them, by generation and imputation, the same ignominy, he himself
was branded with for his disobedience, though no such thing as a Covenant had
intercurr'd, and therefore could not be broken; Allegiance being natural, and
sufficient to keep a Subject within the bonds of obligation, without a
supervenient paction, which (in our case) cannot be made but amongst equals,
where the stipulating party is not obliged to any performance whatsoever, but
by free condescension, only for the benefit of others.

And as for the right of God to exact due obedience to his law at the hands of
Adam's Posterity, though there intervened no Covenant, it still remains
inviolable. For though they cannot be tied to the performance of that Sanction;
Of every tree, etc. Genesis 3. 16. having in their root transgressed it, and
forfeited the title to their happiness; yet, they can be tied to the moral Law,
written in the hearts of Men, by the Author of their Lives, not having
forfeited their Nature; by which they owe Allegiance to their Maker; who as
such, has right to exact due Obedience to his Commandments, without a paction.
And to obviate all exceptions, it is to be considered, That though all the
Precepts of mere Morality, may appear to be violated by Adam in the
transgression of this Sanction, yet the moral Law might have been, and, been
either kept or violated, without such a supervening Sanction added to the Moral
Law, for Man's trial and final Conviction.

And let none suspect, that here I do shake hands with the Socinians, because
they likewise deny the Covenant of Nature. For besides that, I do here
acknowledge the Son's coessentiality with the Father, particular grace after
the Fall, meritorious Redemption, satisfaction for sin in our stead;
Justification by Faith taken relatively, etc. All which evert Socinianism. We
differ in the ends of our Positions. They do it to make Adam subject to
mortality in the very state of Innocence, as to a consequence of mere nature
(which I expressly detest somewhat lower.) I again do it, to extol the wisdom
and goodness of God; who not willing to create Man for a mere terrestrial Life,
nor ground his happiness on his frailty, and foreknowing he would sin, and
offend his Justice, found out means to bring him to the fruition of himself in
Heaven: to purchase for him perseverance, to atone his own Justice by a
Covenant made with his Son, which being Everlasting, no other could be made on
God's side, that thereby all the glory, and the rise of it as well as the
accomplishing, might be attributed only to him, who tenders Grace for Grace,
that his Heavenly gifts to Men, for a gracious or free Covenant, fulfilled by
the Son, in order to Men's Salvation.

And now emerges the adorable mystery of the Covenant of Grace, the sole
transaction, which not only by way of excellency, but absolutely can challenge
the name of a Covenant. A mystery which the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet.
1. 12. A Mystery, whose dimensions are unsearchable, Romans 11. 33. A Mystery,
without controversy great, 1 Timothy 3. 16. The tenor whereof, was by the
mystical King and Prophet David, delivered in Psalm. 40. 5, 6, 7, 8. Thy
thoughts (speaking in the Spirit of Christ, and them he Covenanted for.) Thy
thoughts (NB.) toward us, cannot be reckoned up unto thee, in order. If I
would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. Sacrifice
and offering thou did not desire, mine Ears have thou piered: burnt-offerings
and sin offerings have thou not required. Then said I, Lo, I come: in the
Volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy
law is within my heart, etc. Which eminent and mysterious passage, the Aposte
periphrastically explains, Hebr. 10. 5. etc. Wherefore, when he comes into the
World, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body thou have
prepared me. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou had no pleasure:
Then said I, Lo, I come (in the beginning [(...), Genesis 3. 15] of the Book it is
written of me) to do thy will, O God. Above, when he had said; Sacrifice, and
offering and burnt-offerings, and that for sin, thou would not, neither had
thou pleasure in them (which are offered by the Law) then said he, Lo, I come
to do thy will, O God:

Christian Reader! This is the Key, let us now open the Closet of Mystery, and
by assistance of the Everlasting Truth, find out the hidden treasures of God's
counsel about us.

But first, give me leave to clear the Text. The words in the Psalm seem to
differ from those in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in that particular passage,
whereon we lay the stress of our assertion: viz. In the Hebrew it sounds (...)
which the English and other Translators do render, Thou have opened (or
pierced) my Ears; and in Greek again, (...) (...), a body have thou prepared
(or fitted) me: which seem to be quite differing things. But, toward the
unfolding of it (1.) The Author to the Hebrews (St. Paul) in quoting the
Psalmist, did follow the LXX. who were Jews, and understood the Hebrew phrase,
whether proper or improper: therefore, notwithstanding the words may seem to
jar with each other; there is yet a Harmony in the sense, whether (2.) We do
look upon the word (...); which proceeding from (...), denotes not only to
pierce, but also to prepare; in which latter sense the LXX. having taken it,
rendered (...) Ears by body, per Metonymiam adjuncti: or else (3.) upon the res
substrata, the mystical meaning involved in this Veil, which the LXX. might
also have hinted at. For the piercing, or boring the Ear with an Awl, was of
Mosaical Institution, for such Israelites, who having served six Years with
their Brethren Masters, were willing to continue in that state of servitude,
till Death had freed them, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17. By which piercing of an Ear, the
Israelite Servant took upon him, as it were a new political body, whereof,
being thus inaugurated, he could not be divested till the period of his Earthly
Life. So that this is the true reason why the LXX. and greater than them, the
Apostle, as being the immediate Penman of the Holy Ghost, rendered the word
(...) by fitted and (...), Metonymically by body; especially, the promised
Messiah, not only taking upon him the seed of Abraham, Hebr. 2. 16. In the
shape of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. whence he is called a righteous servant, Isai.
53. 11. with all due attendance to the Word of God, piercing his Ears to preach
righteousness, Psalm. 40. 9. but being also the Word, which becoming flesh, Joh.
1. 14. had pierced them: To pass by the mystery, taken from six years labor,
and an entrance upon servitude at the beginning of the seventh; to denote the
time of God's Promise concerning the Seed, Genesis 2. at the brink of the seventh
day, when God having put an end to the work of Creation, rested upon that of
Redemption, through the agreement of his righteous servant, in order to the
purchasing of that rest, which remains to the people of God, Hebr. 4. 9.

I have, to my small capacity, cleared the Text, with all possible brevity, not
willing to enlarge upon what the Holy Ghost has by the hand of the holy
Apostle, conveyed to the Church for a Truth. And though I be not so far a
Pythagorean, or rather a nice Cabalist, as to espouse the numbers for undoubted
verities; yet, when mystical predictions, calculated with event, suggest such
like observations; I judge it an office of every Christian, as well for their
own comfort, as to invite the curious, whom Grace has endowed with more
critical Wits, in order to a narrower search, to lay hold on them; no ways
letting slip the opportunity of admiring the supreme wisdom, which has thus
liked All, in numero, pondere, and mensura, in number, weight, and measure.

But now to the matter. God who is a Being, by way of Excellency, and by reason
of the inseparable goodness from his Essence, is Communicative, willing to
display his Power and Wisdom, resolved to Create the World; over which he
thought fit to set a Ruler as well as a Beholder. And because the Universe was
to be material, the Ruler of it was to participate of matter: But moreover, for
the contemplating of its decency and order, he was to be endued with a Mind,
able to admire and to adore the supreme Architect, 1 Cor. 6. 20. whom, as he
could not suppose corporeal, at least for the immensity of his unsupported
Work, Job 38. 6. so he could not apprehend him as such, without having
something of immateriality within him. This Ruler therefore, was to be MAN, and
to be created after the Image of his Maker, Genesis 1. and to consist of Body and
Soul, Genesis 2. 7. He was to live for ever by the natural means of the Tree of
Life, which was able to continue his vigor, under God, if so be he would stand
to his prescript: nor was any consequence of Nature able to usher death upon
him, whilst obedient, else destruction should accost him, and he perish, Genesis
2. 17. But again, as his goodness would, and his power could accomplish, so his
wisdom, that knew how to contrive the project ( loquimut humano more) did
foresee the flexibleness and frailty of the material part of Man, by a natural
drift to things inviting, even forbidden, Ja. 1. 13, 15. and that the Soul,
which was to restrain the body and its sensitive Appetites, should by the
suggestion of Satan (who was to fall before Man) yield to them, as having a
power that it might not, not that it should not exorbitate in a sinless
capacity of sinning, and thereby draw upon it self, not only everlasting
confusion, but also for a punishment, be, for the future, subject to what it
was to command; GOD in his Justice, whose Eyes are purer than to behold Sin,
did in his predetermination, condemn Man for Sin, which he had foreseen; and
consequently, concluding all his Posterity under the same guilt, Romans 3. 9.
Gal. 3. 21. condemned them also for it, Romans 1. 8. By the by, I quote these
Scriptures, for that there is nothing comes to pass in time, which has not
been in the Idea of GOD, from Everlasting. Thus, a Man, being ideally come to
nothing before he was something, the second person of the most holy Trinity,
out of a mere compassion to so noble a Creature, in the production of whom he
was (if I may say so) to be instrumental, Psalm. 33. 6. Joh. 1. 3. enters upon a
Covenant with his Father, and for making an atonement, since no other sacrifice
would do, condescends to the taking upon him the humane nature, therein to take
away the guilt of the future Man and his Posterity, by offering up his own self
a Sacrifice, Romans 2. 2, 24, 25. and by becoming a Mediator between God and Man,
Gal. 3. 19, 20. The ratification whereof, on both sides, was grounded upon the
name (...), Exodus 6. 3. Rev. 1. 8. to which, in token of approbation, the
Father added an Oath; The LORD has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110. 4. by two
immutable things ( viz. his name (...) and his oath) to ratify his acceptance
of that paction, for the comfort of such, who from the Snares of Satan, should
fly to it for a refuge, and lay hold of the hope set before them, Hebr. 6. 18.
And the Son, on the other side, declared his readiness to stand to his
stipulation, by a present compliance; Lo, I am to do thy will, O GOD, Hebr. 10.
9. Hence it proceeded, that this name (...), by the custom of the Israelites,
was only once in a year, at the day of propitiation, pronounced by the chief
Priest, at the solemn blessing of the people, Number. 6. 24, 25. Here is the true
order of the Covenant betwixt God the Father and his Son Jesus, in order to our
Salvation, on which depends that Grace whereby we are saved, and the
administration whereof to us in Christ, is called the Covenant, by way of
excellency; and, more significantly, the COVENANT of GRACE.

From hence it is, that it is called the everlasting Covenant (none, in order
to the effecting of Gods final purpose before it, none after it) Hebr. 13. 20.
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant: hence it is, that the second
person of the Deity is called the lamb slain from the foundation of the World,
wherewith he was invested by his forerunner, Joh. 1. 29. yea hence it is, that
he is termed the firstborn of the dead, Apoc. 1. 5. for that Adam, and all in
him, were dead ((...)) nor could hope for Life, until the Seed was promised to
a dead (...), who after that, was called (...) the Mother of all living; as
being the primitive Mother of the LORD of life, and by him, a restorer of the
plenitude of Angels, some of which being fallen and dead in trespass, upon Man's
creation, that was to recrute the number, drew him and embroiled him in the
same crime they were guilty off, and made him dead also. Which again was
adumbrated in Isaac, born by promise, out of Sarah, when her Wom^ and
Abraham's, body were dead, Romans 4. 19. on which point demonstratively insists
the enlightened Apostle, Gal. 3. and clears it, Ephesians. 2. 6. God, when we were
dead in sins, has quickened us: NB. together with Christ in our first and
second resurrection: adding immediately; By GRACE you are saved.

Thus the LORD, cuts off all occasion of boasting; and therefore, would never
enter on his own accord, upon a Covenant with a mere Man, for that a mere Man
could never draw a parallel to the justice of God, by reason of his mere
natural abilities, before the fall, and mere sinfulness after it. Therefore,
GOD has set forth his own SON (by mutual agreement) a propitiation through
Faith in his Blood; to declare his righteousness, for the remission of sins
that are past through his forbearance: that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 25, 26. As therefore there was an
arithmetical proportion, betwixt the Father and the Son: betwixt the claim of
God's Justice and Christ's satisfaction; so the purchase of redemption, was,
answerably to the mutual Covenant, a tie for GOD to declare himself just, by
justifying them that laid hold on his Son's satisfaction, discharging in full
the demand, and by an overplus ushering in Grace, for the benefit of them that
were included in this Covenant, under condition of Faith and Repentance. And
the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in
Jacob, says the LORD. As for me (here GOD declares himself just, in performing
his Promise to Christ concerning his Seed ( Esaias 53. 10.) after redemption.) As
for me (says the LORD) this is my Covenant with them; my spirit that is upon
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the LORD, from henceforth and for ever, Esaias 59. 20, 21. Here,
after the atonement by Redemption follows Faith (my words, etc. Deuteronomy. 31. 14.
Romans 10. 8, 9.) and Repentance (to them that turn from transgression.) And
thence, the relyance of the faithful, on this satisfaction, is synecdochically
called a Covenant, Psalm. 50. 5. comp. with Psalm. 40. as before: as sometimes,
(because of the mutual interweaving of mystical affairs) the whole body of the
Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

This Covenant was from the beginning of the Creation, variously adumbrated:
even to the Angels, before the Creation of Man (which I modestly conceive, and
submit to the censure of the Church) when the morning stars sung together, and
all the Sons of God shouted for joy, Job 30. 7. seeing (by God's intimation)
that that Man, who was to be created and assaulted, yea seduced by the Devil,
their former Companion, and now an unhappy Rebel and Enemy, should be rescued
by the Son of God their head, and should be brought to that condition (though
the manner of it was hidden to them as yet) they, under him were in. And here
the Battle between Michael and the Dragon presents it self, Apoc. 12. both for
the rescuing of the Woman, whom Satan was to persecute, and for maintaining
the body of Moses (viz. the Sacrifices typifying Christ, for the comfort of the
Believers, until he came) Jud. 9. Whereupon the Heavens rejoice, and they that
dwell in them, Rev. 12. 12.

From which period, the second person of the Deity was often after called an
Angel of God's Countenance, and emphatically an Angel of the Covenant.

I will not be bold, yet it is not against the analogy of Faith to think, that
the Cherubim likewise standing at the entrance of Paradise, after Man's
banishment, was the second person of the Deity, by his flaming Sword (his Word,
Hebr. 4. 12, 14.) to undeceive him of all he could presume of the earthly Tree
of Life, in order to his full relying upon the promised Seed, which only was
the way, the truth, and the life.

After the actual fall of Adam, this Covenant of God was represented in the
promised Seed, Genesis 3. and Christ's satisfaction, in Sacrifices, until his
coming, at which, by one offering he was to perfect for ever them that are
segregated, Hebr. 10. 14. Afterward it was intimated to Abraham, with
intermixed additions about the Land of Canaan, Genesis 15. 17. everywhere on Man's
side the conditions of Faith and Repentance, (though under several Etymologies)
being annexed. Then it was to be renewed with the Children of Israel, Exodus 19.
5. and that this transaction should have been a Covenant of Grace in the
promised Messiah, appears by God's Message to his people; If you keep my
Covenant (that is the same that was intimated to Abraham, according to Deuteronomy.
29. 13.) then you shall be a peculiar people, etc. comp. with 1 Pet. 2. 9. But
what says the people to it. They did not proceed so orderly as Abraham, who
believed God's abilities above his own, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. afterward manifesting his Faith by walking before
the LORD, and being perfect, Genesis 17. 1. but presently ratifies it by a promise
of Self-performance. All that the LORD has spoken we will do, Exodus 19. 8, and
24. 13. placing their Works before their Faith, and their own righteousness
before that of God and Christ, Romans 9. 31, 32. whereby they sinned against God,
and tied themselves by their ratihabition to the rigor of the Law, under the
brandishing of a Curse, Cursed be he, that confirms (N.B.) not all the words
of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. And this is the chief reason, why they
are said to have vexed, or made sad the holy spirit of the Angel of presence,
who in his love and pity had redeemed them, and bare them, and carried them all
the days of old ( Genesis 48. 16.) and now was willing to make them feel the fruit
of the Covenant between him and his Father, without an impending curse, had
they but relied on his, and not their own ability; had they required the spirit
of Grace, and not boasted of natural self-performance. In desault whereof, he
turned their Enemy, and he fought against them, Esaias 63. 10.

May be you will say, What had become then of the Law? Answer. It had been of
the same use as it is now under the Gospel to them that rely not upon their own
righteousness and abilities, but upon those of Christ; and, what the Law is now
to a Believer, is a point sufficiently known.

However, notwithstanding this unconsiderate ratifying of the Children of
Jacob, whereby on their side the Law got the name of a Covenant; the mercy of
God was of that tendency, as not to forget the first Covenant under this
Mosaical dispensation, wherein consequently it exerted it self, and was
confirmed by so many Types and Sacrifices, in some measure mitigating the
rigor of the Law, which it self also, convincing the Israelites of their
folly, became to them at last, by the forbearance of God, grounded upon future
Redemption, Romans 3. 24, 25. A Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 24. Thus divinely St. Paul;
And this I say unto you, that the Covenant, that was confirmed before of God in
Christ, the Law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul
that it should make the promise of none effect, Gal. 3. 17. God's promise was
of longer date, and a greater consequence (being grounded upon the name (...),
and the ratifying of his Son) than the presumptuous ratihabition of the Law by
the Children of Israel, who in a manner had annul'd the promise by setting up
their own righteousness instead of God's, Romans 10. 3. as if they had not stood
in need of a Savior and a Mediator; and therefore it would stand,
notwithstanding the Idol of Self-performance (here it is observable, by the
bye, that the Apostle terms the one a Law, and the other a Covenant.) And the
regret of their former proceeding with God, is clearly set forth, in many
passages of the holy Volume; but one may serve for all, and that is Esaias 64. 6.
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags,
etc. Whereupon is renewed the Promise, under the name of a righteous branch of
David, which should be called (...) The LORD (Jehova) our Righteousness, Jer.
23. 6. It was no longer; We shall do whatever the Lord commands, but JEHOVA
(the name of Grace, on which the Covenant was grounded) should be their
Righteousness. He was shortly to display the Banner of Salvation, and by the
shade thereof, cover the iniquities, not only of Israel, but of all the World,
as being made unto it; Wisdom, Sanctification and Redemption, as well as
Righteousness, for that he that glories, may glory only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.
30, 31.

GOD therefore having entered upon a Covenant with his Son, rejecting all other
Sacrifices and satisfactions, as no way commensurate to his person and justice
( Sacrifice thou would not) and accepting of his Son's blood, for Man's
iniquity, did pour down upon the elect GRACE, in order to their Salvation. And
the whole Tract of administering the same, after supposed and accepted of
satisfaction of the (...), is called the Covenant of Grace, (as Christ, upon
that same account is called FAITH, Gal. 3. 23.) By Grace you are saved, through
Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. And of his fullness, have all we received GRACE (NB.) for
GRACE, Joh. 1. 6.

The benefit whereof derived on Mankind, is in the first place Adoption,
whereby we are declared to be the Sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. and joint heirs with
Christ, Romans 8. 17. and that, from the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5,
14. manifested in the fullness of time, by taking away the curse of the Law,
Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6, 7. This adoption was first adumbrated in the Children of
Israel, when GOD delivered them from the bondage of Egypt, and called them his
Son, Hosea 11. 1. only in Christ, if the Son therefore make you free, you shall
be free in deed, Joh 8. 36. For which reason, this same passage (though
mystically grounded on another) is applied to our Savior, Matthew. 2. 15. for
that as the Egyptians were the first Enemies of the Israelites, that kept them
in bondage and subjection; so Satan was the first Enemy of Mankind, and they
in his servitude: out of which they were freed by this Angel of the Covenant;
whereupon, by an intervening sojourning of the Israelites, and of Christ in
Egypt, and by their return to Canaan, the Head and the Members composing one
spiritual Body, are called a Son; I called my Son out of Egypt. And such like
Emperichoresies are often found in Scripture, as for instance, that of JESUS;
Saul, Saul, Why do thou persecute me? And as this adoption was represented in
the Children of Israel, so it was afterward extended to all the believing,
Romans 8. 23. there being no difference, 1 Cor. 7. 19. And this gives us the
confidence of calling God Abba.

Secondly, Justification, wherein a Sinner (in himself) is by God the Father
proclaimed just, Romans 4. 5. upon the score of Christ's satisfaction, purfuant
to the Covenant, Isa. 53. 11. Wherein the first condition of the Covenant, viz.
Faith, is a hand applying to our Souls the merit of our Redeemer, Romans 3. 24,
25. and whereby God shows himself just, in standing to his Covenant, after the
appeasing of his wrath by the blood of the Mediator; That he might be just,
Romans 3. 26. and Christ shows himself righteous, in performing what was
stipulated for the taking off of Man's Iniquity; My righteous servant shall
justify many. Whereby? By his knowledge, ibid. which is believing in him, Romans
3. 26. expressed to the life by the Lord, Joh. 17. 3. And this is life eternal,
that they might know thee, the only true GOD, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. The whole process and accomplishment whereof, equally glorifieth the
Father and the Son; Father, the hour (NB.) is come, glorify thy Son, that thy
Son also may glorify thee, Joh. 17. 1. through the truth, v. 19. kept on both
sides, pursuant to the everlasting paction, v. 22, 23, 24. upon which account
GOD the Father, after Christ's Prayer for the ratification of the approaching
Work, is by him called, the Righteous Father, by which Righteousness Christ was
raised from the dead, Hebr. 13. 20. for our justification, Romans 4. 25.

Thirdly, Thence arises Sanctification; Christ of GOD is made unto us
sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. whereby is not only understood the segregation
from all things common, but also a separation from all sinful acts by the
spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4. And here the second condition of
the Covenant of Grace has place, viz. Repentance, Mark 1. 15.

By this Repentance a Believer becomes a new Creature, Gal. 6. 15. renewed in
knowledge, after the image of him that created him, Col. 3. (not after him by
whom he was deceived; you shall know.) In righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4. 23. presenting for the blood of the dead and unreasonable Creatures, a
living Sacrifice, and a reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. Which works are
acceptable to God, upon the score of their being the gifts of GOD, whereof he
does not repent, Romans 11. 29. but as such ( coronat Deus dona sua, non merita
nostra) rewards them with a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. according to
promise, Jam. 1. 12. to show himself a righteous judge by granting an
Equivalent for the purchase of his Son. And here falls the conceit of
meritoriousness of Works; because they being no ways ours but Christ's, and his
holy Spirit's within us, can no more of themselves deserve Heaven, than they
could Redemption, whose effects they are, in order to the better fitting of us
for that end (thence via ad regnum, Bern.) for which we were pre-ordained by
Grace. Thus all things have their Offspring from GOD, and through him, end in
him, not unlike to the periphery of a Circle (the most perfect figure, and
sustaining its own self) ending in the same point from which it began; Of him,
through him, to him, are all things, to him be glory for ever, Romans 11. 36.

Fourthly, After the Conditions follow the signs and seals of the Covenant. In
the first place Baptism, a sign of initiation into the benefit of Christ's
Death, Burial, and Resurrection, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. for that we may put on
Christ, Gal. 3. 27. and even as water, be united in one Body, until the whole
Church, being by it and the word, sanctified and cleansed, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. we
become an aggregate Christ, 1 Cor. 11, 12. The manner of its administration, I
will leave untoucht, and straight proceed to the second sign, viz. the Supper
of the Lord; which, to be short (for I have already gone beyond the limits of
my Province) is a visible sign of invisible grace, purchased by the Sacrifice
of Christ, which, to our comfort, and for the sealing up of God's Promises) it
does efficaciously represent to us. To give an insight into the nature of it,
without launcing into the doleful Chaos of unnecessary, and sometimes
blasphemous Controversies about it, I will only take notice of a passage
amongst the Jews, which, if it should not clear the doubt, will yet give some
light to the lovers of truth. 'Twas therefore, and is now, a common Custom
amongst the Jews, for the chief of the Family, after the eating of the
Passover, at their going to rest, to take the Unleavened-Bread, and to
distribute the same amongst his Household, and after that, Wine, with that
nicety, that not one crum of the Bread, nor one drop of Wine, is to be left;
and this they do in remembrance of the Sacrifice of the Lamb, and separately,
of its Body and Blood, having no Temple wherein to offer, as those that were at
the standing of the Temple, without Jerusalem, could not, and this they call
(...) Whereupon Christ the true Passover-Lamb, who was to bear the iniquity of
the people, and to take away the Sacrifice and the oblation by his Death,
following this Rite, instituted his Sacrament, by Bread and Wine, and called it
his Body and Blood, in remembrance of his Passion and Death.

Lastly, Upon this Covenant is grounded our hope of Resurrection. Christ
himself insists upon it, Matthew. 22. 31, 32. I am the God of Abraham, etc.

Here Christ puts the Sadducees in mind of God's Covenant, grounded upon his
name (...), Exodus 3. 6, 7, 8. For if God be an Essentiator of Beings, by way of
a Covenant, he cannot call himself an Essentiator of what is devoid of being.
If therefore God be a Jehova of Abraham, etc. it must be by making them
existent, for their upholding of the impression of that Covenant, by which he
is theirs. If so, the Patriarchs must be still existent after death, since that
after it, God bears that denomination in reference to them; a non Entity not
being able to bear the stamp of an Entity, as a shadow or nothing cannot
represent the lineaments of a Seal. Hence it proceeded (as we mentioned before)
that at the day of annual propitiation, this name was thrice (not without a
mystery) put upon Israel, Number. 6. 27. to remember them of God's Covenant, and
their Eternal Welfare.

To which, all spiritual Israel, being brought once at the Consummation of the
World, and Christ having finished his work, shall lay down the Office of a
Mediator, and deliver the Kingdom to his Father, that then being only
conspicuous by his name (...), and needing no further Covenanting, he together
with his Father, may begin the period of an Everlasting Sabbath.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 27. add after and, -- they, p. 5. l. 2. for fooling read footing,
p. 18. l. 15. add after that, -- is, p. 21. l. 9. for liked read linked. As for
some Hebrew Letters, the Ingenious Reader is able to perceive the Mistakes of
himself.


