MY Lord Bishop of Edinburgh laving appointed me to reveiw and examine a Book
Compiled by Mr. John Alexander Preacher of the Gospel, Entitled Jesuitico
Quakerism Examined, or Quakers Confuted.

These are assuring that it not only Contains, nothing contrary to the
Christian Religion, to the Doctrine, Worship, or Government of the Church of
Scotland; but that it exactly (though briefly) compriseth the Marrow of many
great Truths, in order to the vindication of those solid Articles of our Faith,
ignorantly and unreasonably invaded by that Heretical fry of Quakers: and that
with knowledge and care the Author has Refuted their Irreligious and
Blasphemous Positions; so that it may prove a very useful Book; And therefore I
humbly judge it very deserving to be Imprinted. This is Testified by

John Hamilton.
Leith October. 16. 1679.
Jesuitico-Quakerism Examined, OR A CONFUTATION OF The Blasphemous and
unreasonable Principles of THE QUAKERS; With a Vindication of the Church of God
IN BRITAIN, FROM Their Malicious Clamours, and Slanderous Aspersions.

By John Alexander, Preacher of the Gospel.

Isaiah 8.20. Te the Law and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Luke 16.29, 31. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Sign of the Kings Arms in the
Poultry. 1680.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Clayton Knight, Lord Mayor of the Famous
City of London, the Author wishes Grace, Mercy and Peace.
MY Lord, this ensuing Treatise comes to Salute the World, and appear upon the
public Stage under the Honorable Shade and Patrociny of your name, not
presuming to add any Luster thereunto, whereof it is incapable, and whereof
your Lordships Prudence and Virtues have been such public Heralds to the
World, that I shall rather impose a Cessation to my Pen, and enjoin my self a
necessary silence, as my highest Encomium, than be Guilty, with Apelles in
forming of the Image, of interweaving the constrained Failzeurs of my best
Rhetoric with your Lordships deserved Commendation.

But knowing the hazard of these public Scenes, and the Worlds view, where
there is always a Momus ready to carp, it comes to seek shelter under your
Lordships favorable Protection, whereunto it is also encouraged with good hopes
of obtaining the cheerful Countenance of your Authority, because of your Pious
and Laudable Zeal against all the enemies of our Orthodox Faith, and the Divine
Truth; especially these pernicious and (beyond all Heathens) most inhumane
Proto-plasta's of Quakerism (I mean the Jesuits) unto whom the latter
Profession owes the Founding of their Order, and a great many of their
Principles, be they never so shie and nice to Confess it.

It does also with Modest humility lay claim to one interest into your
Lordships Tutelage because, albeit it was elsewhere conceived, and had the form
of one Embryo, yet it has received its just measures for a regular Birth
within the precinct of your Honorable Jurisdiction, and though of Scottish
Parentage, yet it is truly London Born.

I know very well there are many in this declining Age of Christianity, who
account all Disputations about Principles of Religion, how necessary soever,
providing men live well, to be but vain Jangling (wherein they exactly
Homologate the Quakers (as I well know) but their provision, though it were
granted to be enough (which it is not) is impossible, if people be misled in
necessary Principles; seeing no man can live well who mistakes his Rode-way;
and follows wrong directions and lies) and therefore as we are very heartily
willing to Discharge all Debates about Opinions which yield no fruit to
Edification, and make us no sounder Christians; so their great care is to have
all the other Cashiered also.

But when the most necessary Truths are boldly invaded, and our common Faith in
danger to be supplanted, it looks not like Christian Courage, or Zeal, but is
rather a plain betraying of Truth, for us to hold our peace, and suffer the
enemy how contemptible soever they may seem, by their real Triumphs, though but
counterfeited Trophies of a pretended Victory, erected merely upon our
Cowardice and Sloth, not the overthrow of our Cause, or their Strength, to
gather Proselytes, and increase their numbers. This is not to be valiant for
the Truth upon the Earth. Christ did not so let the Sadduces (a contemptible
and foolish people) pass without a demonstrative Confutation. Paul also fought
with Beasts at Ephesus, and his Epistles declare what care he took, at the
Spirits direction too, to redargue the Errors of his time.

This Tractate shall not much value the obloquy and Sarcasms of these men, nor
of any other whom nothing can please, which is not either the fruit of their
proper Invention, or else, at least, adequately adjusted to their prejudicate
apprehensions, and foreconceived Opinions; if it be but (which is its great
ambition) acceptable to your Lordship, and Edifying to such as desire to know
and love the Truth.

And though, reflecting upon the Brutish absurdity of the party against whom I
have Embarked in this Province, not only renouncing all true Principles of
Religion, but also stifling their very faculties of reason, my adopting of this
piece so high may almost seem unsuitable, yet when I contemplate the great Worth
and Excellency of the Subject, Matter, and Theme I am to treat upon, being no
less then the whole Divine Ordinances of the Gospel, and the most precious, and
many of them most necessary Truths of Jesus, I hope my Nuncupation shall no
ways be thought incongruous, if I have but been so happy, as rightly to
encounter the Adversaries, and dexterously to vindicate and display the Standard
of the Sacred Truth, which with what force and evidence I have done I submit to
your Lordships Vmpirage and Judgment, whom that God may bless, and make
prosperous here, and eternally happy hereafter, is the earnest Prayer of your
Lordships most Obedient Servant,

John Alexander.

TO THE READER.
THese seventeen following Queries of the Quakers, having come to my hand with
a direction bearing my Name, I did for some time stand in Bivio, doubting with
my self if it should be worth the while to bring them to the Anvil; one while
fearing lest Truth through my weakness should be at a disadvantage; and another
while accounting it almost an unnecessary undertaking to offer to redargue such
distracted and Brutish Errors, the very Grossness whereof might alone be
sufficient to overthrow and Crush their Reputation with every man not deprived
of sense, and robbed of a sound mind. But after more mature and due
consideration, that an undervalued and neglected enemy proves ordinarily the
most dangerous, and that unsavory Hemlock except it be dug out and Exfundat,
may grow and spread in otherwise most pleasant and beautyful Gardens,
perpending also the meaning and Intention of the particular Providence
conveying these Queries to my hand, which by the prospect and veiw of its
contexed Method and inferior Circumstances, seemed to call me, either to give
answer thereunto, or else, in so far betraying Truth by my silence, to have
been Interpreted, either a Tacit consenter to the Doctrine (...) the
Adversaries (which my Soul abhorrs) or at least a Distruster of the Cause
Professed by us, and Impugned by them; I could not but contribute my endeavors
for vindication of the Truth, and stopping of the Mouths of the reproachful
Adversaries, who, like so many Rhabshakehs, have in these Queries, and others
of their Blasphemous Papers disgorged as many lies against God and his Truth,
and as many slanders against the Church of God in Britain, as if they had
exchanged both Persons and Offices with the Father of lies and Accuser of the
Brethren. And who are these uncircumcised Philistines (recouncing Baptism which
is in the room thereof) that they should defy the Camp of the Lord, and Armies
of Israel? Is it because there is neither Sword nor Spear in our Israel, that
the Quakers have given so proud a Challenge and windy Defiance to all the
Ministers in Scotland? Nay, I hope, few of these are so ill provided, or
unworthy of their name and place, but that, without Reserves, they dare sustain
the Quarrel against the chiefest Luminaries and First-Magnitude Stars in the
new Excentrick Quaking-world. And whether I be a Minister or not (its all a
matter) I hope by perspicuous and convincing Demonstration of the irresistible
Truth in the following Survey so to detect their Fallacies, explode their
Errors, and exterge their Calumnies, as they shall not henceforth be so
extravagant in their Challenges, or prodigal of their Cartels against such a
Party, having all the Protestant Sister-Churches engaged in the same Quarrel.
Or if (because a Fool beaten in a Mortar will not be wise) they shall hereafter
dare us with such another bragging appeal, they shall but so much the more
discover their own Nakedness to the world, and that though with much Impudence
they will still be Babbling, yet how Cowardly and Mightless they are for doing
(leaving thereby to our Cause the glory of Victory, and to their own the due
Infamy of an overthrow) except they shall first dissolve and undo the Knots of
my demonstrative Arguments in the following Survey.

In this ensuing Treatise I have endeavored as much Brevity as may consist
with Perspicuity, having no where stood on enlarging Amplifications, except
where the right handling of the purpose does necessarily require it; nor have I
Cited any humane Testimonies against the Adversaries, seeing these they do not
value, except when they think they make for them, especially ad hominem, and
therefore I would not have the work by the unprofitable accession of these to
swell; neither have I adduced any Argument lying far remote from the
Principles, because such long Deductions are by the unlearned more hardly
perceived: But after a brief state of the Question (which the disingenuous
Quakers almost every where pervert) I have delivered a few evident Arguments
thereby irresistibly establishing our Doctrine, and overthrowing the
contradictory Doctrine of the Adversaries, and thereafter I propose, and answer
their Objections, where (except in some few Questions that under the same dress
have been handled formerly betwixt our Writers on the one part, and the
Papists, Anabaptists, Arminians, etc. on the other part, where the Objections
are long ago abundantly answered by our Writers, though even in these also I
propose and and answer some of the chiefest, together with these lately devised
by the Quakers) I adduce and Answer all that (so far as I can learn) they have
to say against us, or for themselves, in defense of their Heretical Doctrine
whereunto their following Queries relate, which indeed comprehend the very
Cardinal hinges and essential Principles wherein the very Life and Soul of
Quakerism consists, and wherewith it stands and falls.

The Scripture has indeed foretold us that in the latter days men shall bring
in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them (2 Pet. 2.1.) and
that they shall give heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils (1 Timothy
4.1.) and shall not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts heap up
Teachers to themselves, and turn away their ears from the Truth, and hearken
unto Fables (2. Tim. 4.3.4.) and that Heresies must, be that these who are
approved may be made manifest (1 Cor. 11.19.) But as Christ says, that offenses
must come, but woe to that man by whom they come (Mat. 18.7.) So we may well
say, that though Heresies must be, yet woe, and a heavy woe, to the Authors
thereof: for whatever Innocence some impious Fools Atheistically Sceptick in
matters of Faith, and the Principles of Religion do ascribe unto Heresy, yet
the Scripture does far otherwise pronounce thereof, calling it a work of the
flesh ( Galat. 5.20.) and a thing that overthrows the Faith (2 Timothy 2.18.)
and a Doctrine of Devils (1 Timothy 4.1.) and knitting and connecting Damnation,
swift Destruction, and the Lake of Fire and Brimstone unto Heretics, false
Teachers, and false Prophets (2 These. 2.11, 12. 2 Pet. 2.1. Rev. 19.20.) nor is
there any Censure in Scripture more peremptory then that against Heretics (
Tit. 3.10.) and the Followers of false Prophets and blind Guides are in the
same danger with the Leaders ( Jer. 14.15, 16. Mat. 15.4. 2 These. 2.11.12.) and
surely Quakerism is one of the chiefest Heresies and most damnable Delusions
that ever set foot in the Christian world. For, beside that by their rejecting
of all manner of external Ordinances, their denying the Scriptures to be the
Rule, and setting up the Light within for the Rule, they do directly strike at
the Foundation of all, with one Blow overturning (so far as they can) the whole
Rule of Faith and Duty, and setting a New one of their own Invention in the
room thereof; Beside this (I say) this Heresy is a very Sink, or an universal
System of almost all the gross Errors which hitherto have annoyed the Church
of God, as cannot be unknown to such as know the Errors which heretofore have
troubled the Church, and have occasion of Converse with the Quakers, or of
reading their Books. And therefore people had need to beware of them ( Mat.
7.15.) for their word eats as does a Canker. 2 Timothy 2.17.18.

Yet we do not look upon all of the Profession of Quaking in the same manner,
or as Constituted in the same Category of Degrees: for we know that some of
them are through simplicity and weakness seduced, who may as yet (peradventure)
obtain repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, and be recovered out of
the snare of the Devil, whose Recovery, as it is one of the special designs of
this small Treatise, so we heartily pray God to make it successful for that
end. Others of them are wilful Seducers and malicious Opposers of the Truth,
whose Blasphemous Mouths must be stopped, and their Heretical fury repressed,
that the Truth may not be Trodden under foot, and the simple Seduced, who are
easily ensnared where such men get way, and are not Redargued.

That which has deceived and been a Snare unto many simple and ignorant people
is some hairy Garments of a few (and but a few) external Duties of the second
Table of the Law wherewith these Instruments of Satan have Clothed themselves.
But such should remember, that false Apostles and Ministers of Satan do
Transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ and Ministers of
Righteousness, even as Satan also Transforms himself into an Angel of light (2
Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.) and false Prophets being inwardly Wolves do
notwithstanding come in Sheeps Clothing ( Mat. 7.15.) and even Resisters of the
Truth put on a form of Godliness (2 Timothy 3.5, 8.) and however these Doctors of
the Quakers Mask and Vizorn themselves with some few externals of the second
Table; yet how even in Doctrine they trample generally upon the whole Moral
Law, but more especially upon the first Table thereof, which yet in reason
ought to have the first room, is not obscure.

For, as for the First Commandment, it is notour to all acquaint with the
Principles of the Quakers how manifestly even in Doctrine, they contradict and
oppose the same, while they Impudently deny that any man who has not received
the Spirit ought to Worship God.

This is so known a Tenet of the Quakers that we need hardly to produce
Testimonies thereof, but it may be seen in a Book of theirs Published in the
year 1668, entitled The Principles of Truth, or a Declaration of their Faith,
in the 81, 82, and 92 pages whereof they expressly Teach (and I shall repeat
their very words) That all men ought First to wait Until they receive the
Spirit in Truth, Then in the same Truth to worship God in Spirit, who is a
Spirit. In plain Terms that is to say, men must first wait until they receive
the Spirit before they offer to meddle in worshipping of God. The same also may
be seen in a most virulent Printed Pamphlet of theirs Entitled in the
beginning of the Chapters or Sections thereof (for I had it without a Title
page) The Principles of the Priest (so they call the Ministers of Scotland of
whom they there speak) of such a Place, and such a Place, in the 14. and 15
pages whereof they directly Impugn and oppose this Position and Principle
alleged by them to have been Taught by Mr. John Carstairs Minister at Glasgow,
viz. That all men whatsoever ought to Worship God.

Unto this their Atheistical Doctrine is Subalternate that other impious
Principle of theirs, That no man ought to Pray to God till he be actually moved
thereunto, and Influenced by the Spirit; otherwise Mr. George Keith one of
their Chief Apostles affirms it is but Will Worship and Superstition, in his
Quakerism no Popery, page 99. and 100. Good Reader allow me to take a small
word of these Mad Principles, and I shall do it very briefly.

Therefore first, all men whatsoever they be are bound to Fear, Reverence,
Love, and praise God; say the Contrary who dare: but these are all most
principal Arts or parts of the Worship of God: Therefore this Principle of the
Quakers is both False and Profane.

Secondly, Obedience to God Essentially and Indispensably includes worshipping
of God, seeing it includes a subjecting and stooping to his Yoke and
Soveraignity, and a doing of Homage and Honor unto him, and this also includes
Reverence, all which are no mean parts of his most Substantial and Moral
worship. Well then, if no man ought to Worship God until first he receive the
Spirit, then no man ought to obey God until first he receive the Spirit, seeing
obedience Essentially includes Worship and cannot be performed without it, as
is showed: but it is utterly Atheistical, Profane, and Absurd to say, that no
man ought to obey God until first he receive the Spirit: for then no unrenewed
man ought to obey God, seeing such men have not received the Spirit ( Joh.
14.17. Romans 8.9.) if then unrenewed men ought not to obey God, then they are
not under any Law of God, and he requires no obedience of them (for if they be
under any Law of his, and if he requires any Duty of them, I am sure, the
Quakers will never get them exempted from it) Well then, if unrenewed men be
not under any Command or Law of God, and he requires no Duty of them, then it
follows Infallibly, first, that let unrenewed men do what they will they cannot
sin against God, seeing such as are not under any Command or Law of God cannot
trasgress any Law of his, and so sin against him (see Romans 4.15. 1 John 3.4.)
Such men then (in the Quakers Principles) may deny, disown, reject, hate, and
Contemn God, Worship the Devil, and Debauch at their pleasure; and yet they
cannot sin against God for all that, seeing they are not under any Law of God.
Secondly, it follows thereupon that Reprobates are all most unjustly Condemned
for their sinning against God, seeing they (not having received the Spirit) are
not under Law to God (as is supposed) and so cannot be Guilty of sinning
against him. Thirdly it follows thereupon that unrenewed men cannot sin albeit
they should never so much Counte-ract and Contraveen all the Precepts of the
second Table of the Law also, seeing these that Transgress no Law of God nor
any Command of his cannot be sinners, seeing Sin is a Transgression of the Law,
and where no Law is there is no Transgression, they are not capable of
Trangressng a Law who are not under it and bound to obey it. Hence then (in the
Quakers Principles) unrenewed men may Lawfully Dishonor, and Defame all men,
Murder, commit Adultery, Steal, bear false Witness, and what not?

Is not that a sweet Doctrine that tends so directly to all mischief and
wickedness, losing all men that have not received the Spirit from all Bonds of
God, and cutting asunder all the Divine Cords of their Duty? are not the Sage
Doctors of these black Mysteries of Satan very Divinely Inspired? Do they not
seem to be very Pious? Would it not be a sweet world if these Principles were
put in practice? God preserve us from from so Impious a Piety, and such stark
Mad Inspirations, which (I am sure) are the very quintessence of the Devils
whole Treasury, and the utmost of his strength and endeavor.

Hence falls that other Lewd and Profane Principle of the Quakers subalternate
to their Doctrine here presently Confuted, viz. That no man ought to Pray to
God until he be actually moved and influenced thereunto by the Spirit, seeing
calling upon God is a part of Moral Worship, or of our Obedience to the Moral
Law, whereunto all men are obliged. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that
know thee not, and upon the Kingdoms that call not on thy name. Psalm. 79.6.
Jer. 10.25.

But the Quakers have somewhat to say in defense of this their impious
Doctrine, viz. unrenewed men (say they) cannot but sin in their Worship to God:
Ergo they ought not to Worship him.

Ans. By this Quaking-Argument no man on Earth should offer to Worship God,
seeing there is somewhat of sin cleaving to the best Actions of the Saints
hereaway, being still defective in the measure, and degrees of goodness
prescribed by the Law, and coming from an heart that is not perfectly clean (
Prove. 20.9.) but the Flesh still lusting against the Spirit, so that we cannot
do the things that we would ( Gal. 5.17.) much less can we reach the whole
Dimensions of our Duty. Again, even the Plowing, and so the Eating, Sleeping,
etc. of the wicked is sin ( Prove. 21.4.) shall the wicked then do nothing at
all, because whatever they do, they will go about in a sinful manner? I think
not. And hence we deny the Consequence of their Argument.

Secondly, no man indeed is obliged to sin, but yet all men are obliged to
worship God, which is another thing, and is (I am sure) no thing, but a Duty;
and that unrenewed men sin in the manner of performance it is their own fault
proceeding from the corruption of their hearts, which can never excuse them
from their Duty. Does men's Faults that they are Guilty of absolve them from
their Duty, and Discharge their obligation to the Law? say it not for shame.
And hence again we deny the Consequence.

Lastly, the worship and obedience performed by unrenewed men (such as it is,
or may be called: for it is not simply obedience, but it is only such, and so
called in respect of the matter and substance of the Act, which is according to
the Law, though the Principles, Manner, and End are not) is much better than a
total rejection of the Commandment, seeing that is good in respect of the
matter and substance of the Act which agrees with the Law, as for example, when
an unrenewed man gives a poor man an Alms, or does any other Action commanded
by the Law: But the total rejection of the Commandment, is upon all accounts
and every way evil. And hence again we defy the Consequence. See this
objection in the Quakers Pamphlet forementioned called the Priests Principles
in the 14 and 15 pages thereof.

Again they object, that no worship is acceptable to God but that which is in
the Spirit; and that therefore no man ought to worship God that has not
received the Spirit.

Ans. Albeit no obedience or worship which unrenewed men are in that state able
to perform, be acceptable to God, yet they are still obliged to worship God,
and that with an acceptable worship; nor does or can their Inability to perform
acceptable worship; take away their obligation to perform it, seeing we did all
once receive ability in our common Parent and representative head Adam, and the
losing of it is our fault whereof we are Guilty ( Romans 5.12.19.) and whereby we
can never be excused from our Duty, or God and his Law lose their Authority
over us. And hence the Consequence perishes. Secondly, we have showed already
that the worship and obedience of unrenewed men (such as it is, as was
explained) is better than their total disobedience and utter rejection of the
Commandment (its better to live Chaste, though neither Principles, Manner, nor
End be good, than to commit Adultery with our Neighbors Wife.) And hence again
falls the Consequence. See this Objection in their forementioned Book called,
The Principles of Truth, or a Declaration of their Faith, page 81, 90, 91.

The Quakers while they are handling this head in their Book called, The
Principles of Truth in the pages Cited, are so extremely confident of victory
to their Heretical sentiments thereupon, That they provoke and appeal all the
prudent Orthodox and Learned Divines in Europe, and every Quarter of the world,
with the wisest of the Sons of men to produce their strong reasons, and
encounter them in this point, as if, forsooth, they had intended to outstrip
the Devil, not only in the defense of lies, but also in his Arrogance and
Pride, in daring so many learned and worthy Champions of the Truth. But they
must needs run whom the Devil drives.

As for the (...) Commandment, it is most manifest how they do oppose
themselves thereunto, by their rejecting, wresting, and abusing the word of
God, which is a most glorious piece of his name, and in their opposing and
trampling upon his precious Truth, and avowing of Error and Blasphemy; yea it
is evident how lightly they regard this Commandment by their very swallowing
down of their Meat and Drink (as so many Brutes) without Prayer and
Thanksgiving, without which (if they will believe the Apostle 1 Timothy 4.3, 4,
5.) they are not sanctified. Let them seriously consider the Text: for the
Apostle does there expressly say that God has created our Meat to be received
with Thanksgiving (and so the receiving of it without that is contrary to Gods
appointment) and that every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused,
upon this condition taken in (and so no otherwise, viz. to us) if it be
received with Thanksgiving, and he adds a reason to prove that its good, viz.
because it is Sanctified by the Word of God (allowing us the use of it) and
Prayer, which asks Gods blessing thereupon. And albeit the same Apostle says
( Tit. 1.15.) Unto the pure all things are pure, yet he does not say that
without Prayer and Thanksgiving they will be so, or blessed in their use; nor
does he in this Text contradict or retract what he says in the forecited Text
where he explains how they are Sanctified and made pure to us, viz. by the Word
of God and Prayer; and so the one Text supplies and explains the other.

The Fourth Commandment they do openly impugn in one of their following
Queries, unto which place we refer the Controversy.

The Quakers respects unto the Fifth Commandment is sufficiently known by their
denying to all men that external Civil Reverence which it plainly enjoins, and
their opposing and condemning the practice thereof in others as unlawful and
Idolatrous. Thus Mr. George Keith one of their chiefest Antesignani declares
all bowing and taking off of Hats unlawful, in his Quakerism no Popery, page
100, 101.

Now that this command enjoins us to give Civil Reverence to men is most
manifest, seeing it enjoins to give Civil honor to men: Ergo Civil Reverence,
seeing honor void of all Reverence is a plain contradiction, honor being
nothing else but a paying of Reverence and regard. And that this command
enjoins the external part, as well as the internal, cannot be doubted, seeing
the Precept is given unto the whole man, not the Soul only; nor can the Body
(being capable of the Duty) be exempted from the Law of God more than the Soul,
they being equally liable to his Soveraignity, and the Law and the Lawgiver
not distinguishing or exempting.

But the Quakers object that all worshipping of Creatures is Idolatry: but all
external Reverencing of Creatures with bowing, etc. is a Worshipping of them:
Ergo, etc.

Ans. But why shall external Civil Reverence be Idolatry, and not the internal
also, which the Quakers have often said to me they own and practice? Is it only
the Body that is capable of Idolatry? Or is not the Soul as much capable of it?
Why then do they condemn, or allow the one more than the other? half an eye may
see the Inconsistency and confusion of these Principles.

Ans. Secondly, that all worshipping of Creatures with Religious worship is
indeed Idolatry ( Exodus 20.5. Mat. 4.10.) But worshipping of Creatures with a
Civil worship is not so, but on the contrary God commands and approves it (
Exodus 20.12. Levit. 19.32. Luke 14.10.) and will they say that Abraham
committed Idolatry when he bowed to the Children of Heth (Genesis 23.7.) or that
Jacob committed Idolatry when he bowed himself to the ground seven times to his
Brother, and that, immediately after such a manifestation of God to him ( Genesis
33.3.) or did Solomon commit Idolatry when he bowed himself to his Mother (1
King. 2.19.) Solomon was no Idolater at that time methinks.

Again, the Quakers allege that Christ condemns all Honoring of Creatures (
Joh. 5.44.) where he says, how can ye believe who receive honor one of another,
and seek not the honor that comes from God only.

Ans. Hereby they Impugn the very letter of the Fifth Commandment, and declare
that (in their Opinion) no manner of Civil Reverence or regard is to be given
to any man.

Secondly, if Christ here condemns all Civil honoring of men, then he condemns
that same Duty here which he himself elsewhere ( Mat. 19.19. Luke 18.20. Ephesians.
6.2. 1 Pet. 2.17.) and his Apostles commands, which is most false. Therefore
thirdly I answer that the honor that Christ there speaks of, is meant of, the
approbation and applause of one another as to their Life and Actions which
these Pharisaical Jews Inordinately gaped after, and merely relied upon,
without seeking therein to be approved of God.

This is confirmed to be the meaning from other Parallel Scriptures where
Christ says, that these Pharisaical Jews did all things for to be seen of men,
and that they might have glory of men ( Mat. 6.2, 5. Mat. 23.5.) that is to say
(as is plain) in all their works they hunted after the mere applause and
approbation of men. And again the Text it self shows this to be the meaning, in
holding forth the receiving of the honor there meant as inconsistent with true
Faith, which cannot agree to the receiving of that Civil honor enjoined in the
Fifth Commandment; but it well agrees with that honor Taxed by Christ in the
Pharisees both Negatively and Positively.

We shall stand here no longer. Only it is too too notour what regard the
Quakers have unto the Sixth and Ninth Commandments, while by opprobrious
Railings and lying Calumnies (as witness all their Printed Pamphlets) they bear
most false witness against, and endeavor to Murder the good Name and
Reputation of all men who will not Dance unto their Tune, and cry a Confederacy
unto their Soul-damning Delusions.

These are the avowed Principles and open Practices of the Quakers, by which
(Christian Reader) I thought it not amiss to give thee a small hint of the
Superlative measures of Piety whereunto the Quakers shrewdly pretend, that thou
might from the Claw (as we say) discern the Lion, and might not be soon
shaken in mind, or suddenly carried away with the specious pretenses of the
Quakers, who by their huge claims unto Godliness (empty Casks and shallow
Streams make most noise) and their dropping in of their Principles, especially
among their younger Proselytes, under a number of Enigmatical Riddles wrapped up
in the chiefest Clouds of Darkness, or a misrepresenting and transforming Vail
(whereby they are Metamorphosed into another likeness, and the Snare is hid
until the Prey be Catched, and the Poison till the Morsel be swallowed down)
They have so Blind-folded the eyes, and misled some simple and ignorant people,
that having once Espoused their Cause they are hard to be regained.

Some are of mind, that it is in vain and to no purpose to offer to reason
with, or redargue the Quakers, in regard of the unstayedness and mutability of
their Principles proceeding from the variableness of their new pretended
Revelations. But I am more Charitable to the Quakers. For, I am sure, though
their Principles were as changeable as the Moon, and unstayed as the
Weathercock, they must hold one of the parts of the Contradiction; and so they
must either acknowledge and yield our Doctrine and Thesis, and then we are
agreed; or else they must contradict our Doctrine and Thesis, and then let them
answer our irresistible Arguments. For they cannot hold both parts of the
Contradiction, otherwise they shall contradict themselves, and be bound to hold
and maintain our doctrine, as well as their own; and so their Principles shall
consist of an Hodg-podge of Self-murthering contradictions each of them cutting
another throat. Nor can they hold none of the parts of Contradiction, but
proclaim both of them to be together false; otherwise they shall proclaim all
their own Principles and Positions to be false, as well as ours (like the
Witches destroying a Friend for a Foes sake) for each of their Principles and
Positions is one of the parts of a Contradiction (and sometimes both, viz. when
they assert formal Repugnances) and I can easily give a contradictory
Proposition to every one of them, or to any Proposition imaginable; yea, if
none of the parts of the Contradiction were true, then there would be no true
saying in the world, seeing every true saying is one of the parts of a
Contradiction.

But here I must cut off, and crave thy Pardon (Courteous Reader) for presuming
so far upon thy good humor with so Large a Preface, albeit (I hope) I have
lost no time to thee, or my self, either with Idle Self-Apologies, or otherwise
vain and needless Complements, but have been Traveling in matters both
pertinent to the purpose in hand, and in themselves Important.

That thou may be thoroughly Established in the Truth of Jesus, and may
hold fast the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, being fruitful in every
good work, receiving in end the Crown of Life is the earnest Prayer of the
Author who is

Thy unworthy Servant in all Christian Duty John Alexander.

THE QUAKERS QUERIES.
THe Quakers Queries here follow to be represented to one view, in the same
Order as they were directed, and sent unto me, from a Convent of that
Profession, though but Signed with one of their hands, where the Reader may see
that in my Surveys I alter their Method as to order and place, that I might
bring together such Queries as are Homogeneous, and of one, or like Nature;
though without the least mutation of either their Matter, or Expression; or
changing of the order of Questions, within the limits of one and the same
Query, or separating any part thereof from another, that it may be seen that I
have not in the least injured the Adversaries, but have only sometimes, for a
distincter Method, altered the place of a Total Query. The Quakers also
Inscribed their Queries, all which here follows, and, first the Inscription.

Quakers Inscription.
Some Queries, as follows, from the People called Quakers, for one, or all of
the Ministers in Scotland to Answer.

First QUERY.
Whether or not Grammar, or Logic, and the many Tongues and Languages, which
began in Babylon, is an Infallible Rule to make a Minister of Christ? And
whether or not Elisha the Plowman, Amos the Herdsman, Peter and John the
Fishermen, who could hardly read a letter, with many others who were not bred
up in these things, Logic and Grammar, and the many Languages; if they could
not be Ministers of Christ Jesus? Yea, or Nay.

Second QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures were the Rule of Enochs Faith, Noah's Faith, and
holy men in the old world, and second world? Whether or not they were a Rule to
Abraham's Faith, Isaacs and Jacobs Faith, and Moses 's Faith, and all the
Patriarchs? And whether or not they had Scriptures, till Moses did write them?
Answer these things by plain Scripture.

Third QUERY.
Or how long was it after Christ and the Apostles days, That that Grammar,
Logic, and Philosophy, and Schools of learning were set up to make Ministers
of Christ Jesus.

Fourth QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures are the Word, or the words of God? seeing the
Scriptures say themselves, God spoke all these words, Exodus 20. And he that
adds to the words, in the last of the Revelation, Plagues are added to him. And
what does the Scripture signify? does it not signify Writings? And whether
all that is written in the Scriptures from Genesis to Revelation be a Rule for
your Faith and Manners? and every title of it from the one end of the Book to
the other, both in the Old and New Testament? If not; distinguish what part is
to be obeyed, and what not. And whether every title from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of the Revelation is the Word, or the Words of God?

Fifth QUERY.
Whether or not the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and holy men of God did
Preach down perfection, and said that men should not be perfect while they were
on Earth, but said men should carry about a body of Death with them, while they
were on this side of the Grave? let us see where this is written by any of them
all.

Sixth QUERY.
Whether or not your singing of David's Psalms, his Prayers, Prophesies,
Fastings, Reproaches, Weepings, Mournings, Lamentations, and Complaints how he
was Mocked have any Warrant in the Scripture? and you bring all these together
in Meeter, without distinction. Have ye not done this your selves? Or did the
Apostles it to the Saints in the Primitive times? Or have ye the same Spirit
the Apostles had? Or a larger measure of it, than the Apostles had, by which ye
have turned these into Meeter since the Apostles days? And what was the Psalms,
Hymns and Spiritual Songs they sang in the Primitive times? Answer these things
by plain Scripture.

Seventh QUERY.
Whether or not your Directory, Confession of Faith, and Catechisms be an
Infallible Rule for you and your people to walk by? Or whether or not equal
with the Scriptures, or above the Scriptures? And whether of them is the better
Book? And whether or not have ye an Infallible Spirit to give forth such a
Directory, or Catechism, or Confession of Faith, as ye have done? And whether
or not the Scriptures are not a better Directory than any ye can make, which
were given forth by the Holy Ghost, by the holy men of God who had the
Infallible Spirit?

Eighth QUERY.
Whether or not is your Sanctification, your Justification, and your Faith and
Grace the Gifts of these, without sin, as they are Manifested within you? Yea,
or Nay.

Ninth QUERY.
Whether or not Christ and the Apostles gave forth a Command that they should
keep the Sabbath Day? Let us see where it is written in the Scriptures. But the
first day of the week the Saints did meet together. This is Scripture. But let
us see the Scripture for a Sabbath Day in the New Testament, which speaks for a
rest for the people of God. But is this a day? Yea, or Nay.

Tenth QUERY.
Whether is there any Scripture, or Command in all the New Testament for the
Sprinkling of Infants? Let us see Scripture, without adding, or diminishing for
it, that ye do not bring the Plagues upon you for it: for the Plagues are added
to them that adds: for we do expect plain Scripture from you for this, without
any shuffling Meanings, or Consequences; or else never pretend Scripture-Rule
more; but acknowledge that it has been your Meanings and Consequences that
has been your Rule.

Eleventh QUERY.
Whether does the Scriptures say in the New Testament, that eating of Bread,
and drinking of Wine, after Supper, was an Ordinance of Christ? And whether do
ye practice this, as Christ and his Apostles did, after Supper? Do not ye take
it before Dinner? Did Christ, or his Apostles do so? What Scripture have ye for
your Rule for this? for they took it in the night. And Christ says, as often as
ye eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Wine, etc. is that a standing Command?
Or is it left to people? seeing its said, as often as ye Eat this, and Drink
this, do it in remembrance of his Death, and showing his Death, until he come
again. Was this coming to the end of the world? Or was it, until his coming to
dwell in his Apostles, who said, he would come, and dwell, and walk in them?
Need they then Bread and Wine to put them in Remembrance of him? And does not
Christ say, Eat this, and Drink this in remembrance of his Death? And does not
the Apostle say, that they must die with Christ? and to die with him is to come
to the Death with him. And they that be in the Death of Christ, and die with
Christ, must they have Bread and Wine to put them in remembrance of his Death?
Yea, or Nay. And does not the Apostle say, that they must Die with Christ, and
be Buried with him? And when the people are Dead, and Buried with Christ, must
they have Bread and Wine to put them in remembrance of Christ's Death? Answer
this, yea, or nay. And the Apostle says, they must rise with Christ Jesus; and
if they be risen with him, then seek these things that are above. And is not
Bread and Wine from below? and if the Apostle puts them to seek these things
that are above, then he brought them off these things that are below: for he
says to the Corinthians, the things that are seen are Temporal, but the things
that are not seen are Eternal. This he spoke when they were Jangling, and in a
disorder about outward things. Does he not bring them off things that are seen,
to things that are not seen? And whether or not ye ever intend, ye your selves
called Ministers, or your hearers shall come any nearer to Christ's Death, and
Die, and be Buried with him, but only to take Bread and Wine in remembrance of
Christ's Death, lest ye, and they should come to forget Christ's Death? Answer us
plainly these things, Yea, or Nay.

Twelfth QUERY.
What is Original sin? Whether it be not the Devil? yea, or nay. For does not
the Original signify the beginning? And what did Christ come to Destroy? Was
it not the Devil, and his works?

Thirteenth QUERY.
Whether or not did Christ die for all the ungodly in the world, and Sinners,
that they should live and die in their ungodliness and sins, or live unto him?
and whether or not did Christ shed his blood for all men, and was a
Propitiation for the sins of all men? and whether or not these that do not hold
this, are these that make Sects, and are out of the same Spirit and Doctrine of
the Apostles?

Fourteenth QUERY.
What makes a Believer? Whether or not is it by believing in the Light,
according to Christ's Doctrine, who says, He is the Light of the World, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, that all men through him might
Believe? and who follows him shall not walk in darkness: for he is the Light,
and says, That he that believes is saved. Then is not the Light saving which he
believes? and he that does not believe in the Light is damned already. Then is
not the Light, or his disobedience to it, his Condemnation? Yea; or Nay?

Fifteenth QUERY.
Can any man be saved by his own works, Self-righteousness, Will Worship? and
are not all men in the Self-righteousness that are not in the Righteousness of
Christ Jesus? and are not all of their own works that be out of the Light, and
the Faith that is the Gift of God? and are not all in their Will-worships that
are not in the worship that Jesus Christ, the heavenly man, set up above
Sixteen hundred years since, that is in the Spirit, and the Truth? So must not
every man come to the Truth, and to the Spirit in their own hearts, if they
come to the worship Jesus Christ set up? and are not your Catechisms,
Confessions of Faith, and Directories your own works, and your own worship
which ye have set down for people to fall down, and do worship to, and be saved
by? and have ye not set up this since the Apostles days, and since Christ set
up his worship?

Sixteenth QUERY.
Whether or not your Directory, and Catechism, and Confession of Faith be
Gospel? yea, or nay. And if so; whether it be not another Gospel, then that
which the Apostles Preached, who said the Gospel was the power of God. Romans
1.16.

Seventeenth QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures do not say, that he that believes has ceased
from his own works as God did from his, and entered into his rest? and whether
or not your Directory, and Church-maid Faith, and Catechisms, and Confessions
be not your own works? and ye follow them, and worship them, and not cease from
them. And whether or not in so doing, ye keep people and your selves in your
own works, and from the Rest? or we desire you show us what difference their is
betwixt Spiritual Babylon and Sodom, and Egypts works of their hands, and
Temporal Babylon and Sodom, and Egypts works of their hands, and their worship.
Of each distinguish, I desire you, Distinguish the mystery from a plain outward
Idol.

These Queries were Subscribed [I. S.] and I could fill up his Name at length,
but I forbear, for some reasons that I think more pertinent to Conceal, than
Divulge unto the world.

This is the true Transcript of their Queries which were directed unto me, as
is said, which I can Attest by many others that saw, and read them before they
came to my hand; and some after, that knows they owned them; and they are also
the true Pourtraiture of their known Principles; and beside, I have in this
Controversy carried along two of their most famous Books yet extant, the
Positions whereof (which I always Cite) do exactly agree with the Scope and
Import of these Queries, viz. their Confession of Faith Subscribed by Eight, or
Nine of their most famous Ringleaders in England (by them called The
Principles of Truth, or a Declaration of their Faith) and their Quakerism no
Popery, written by Mr. George Keith, and Subscribed both by him, and Mr. Robert
Barclay, two of their chiefest Luminaries and greatest Apostles (forsooth) in
Scotland. This Book Mr. Keith writes against Reverend Mr. Menzies Professor of
Theology at Aberdeen, a man of so great Veneration and Learning, that it may be
justly thought a daring boldness for him to have meddled against him. So that
no man knowing the Quakers Principles, or searching these grounds, will, in the
least, doubt the faithfulness of my Transcription; beside what Credit may be
allowed unto my own Ingenuity, who never loved the straining of any man's
Principle too sore, in Consequences unclear and remote; much less the fixing of
Principles falsely upon such as disclaimed them. But of this I need say no more:
for the Quakers Principles are known, and these Queries they will own.

An Alpha^^^ical TABLE.
A
GRacious Acts necessarily require gracious Principles proved. page 157. Adam a
common Representative head of Mankind. page 134. The Analogy of Faith, what it
is. page 78. Apocryphal Books not Canonical, or of immediate Inspiration. page
209. Apostasy of the Saints confuted. page 162. Christian assurance needs not
immediate Dictates. p. 32. Authority of the Scripture-rule over all other Rules
proved. ibid. The Pope (before the Reformation) had Church Authority, and how.
page 199.
B
THe Baptism of John and the Apostles the same in substance. p. 69. Baptism
with Water of Divine Institution under the Gospel. p. 68. Baptism with Water
only properly called Baptism. p. 78. Baptism with Water meant in the Text of
Matthew (Matthew 28.19.) proved. p. 76. Baptism with Water necessary to
Salvation, and how. p. 74. Baptism with Water not an Old Testament Ceremony. p.
68. Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision. p. 86. Baptism of Believers
Infants a Divine Institution under the Gospel. ibid. Baptism the Initiating
Seal proved. ibid. Probable Evidences enough for admission to Baptism. p. 88.
The great Beast mentioned in the Revel. not our will. page 195. Bilocation
pregnant with Contradictions. p. 191. Blasphemies reported in Scripture not
Scripture-sentence. p. 20.
C
EXtraordinary calls attended with extraordinary Furniture. page 7. An inward
call not necessary to the validity of Ministerial Acts. page 202. A Catechism
requisite in a Church, and why. page 123. Our Westminster Catechism (aimed at)
materially Scripturesentence. page 129. How the Command is said to be nigh unto
us. Deuteronomy. 30.14. p. 37. Christ's coming again mentioned (1 Cor. 11.26.) not
meaned of his coming at the Pentecost, but at the day of general judgment. page
99. Conditions of the two Covenants described and distinguished. page 187. A
Confession requisite in a Church, and why. page 123. Our Confession of
Westminster materially Scripture-sentence. p. 128. Consequential fundamental
errors do not Physically and Entitatively unchurch. page 200. Consequential
Scripture is Infallible Scripture-rule. p. 63. Consequential Scripture
necessary to prove Jesus the true Messiah. page 64. Consequential Scripture
necessary against Idolatry. page 65. Consequential Scripture not founded upon
Principles of mere humane reason. page 66. Consequential Scripture no addition
to the Scripture. ibid. Conversion wherein it essentially consists. page 157.
The Disciples converted before the first Gospel Supper. page 97. The Covenant
the same in substance under both Testaments. p. 85. Courtesy and Capping
lawful among Christians. page 205.
D
ONe day of seven a Sabbath Day Moral and perpetual. page 104. Every day not a
Christian Holy Day proved. page 111. The Lords day (mentioned Revel. 1.10.) not
meant of any indeterminate day. page 108. The Lords day meant determinately of
the first day of the week. ibid. Death described. page 100. The Decrees of God
are eternal. page 141. Conditional Decrees in God depending upon conditions not
by him determined vain and repugnant. page 143. The Dictate in all men not the
principal Rule. page 33. The Dictate in all men not Essentially right. ibid.
The Dictate in all men subjected to the Scriptures. page 35. A Dictate of the
Spirit Immediate and Objective in no man. p. 49. A Dictate within Immediate and
Objective not needful. page 32. Christ died not for all men, but only for the
Elect proved. p. 138. A Directory of a Church distinguished into two Notions.
page 120. A Directory warrantable in a Church. page 122. Church Directories not
Infallible. page 123. A Directory formed rightly of a mixed nature, depending
partly upon Scripture general Precepts, and partly flowing from Christian
prudence. page 128.
E
EFfective enlightening of the Spirit distinct from Objective. p. 32. Effective
enlightening of the Spirit sufficient, without Immediate Objective. ibid.
Efficacy of grace not dependent on man's free will. page 159. Efficacy of grace,
from whence. page 161. The Quakers alternative Efficacy of grace confuted. page
160. Christ's enlightening of every man that comes into the world, how to be
understood. page 154.
F
FAith the only condition of the new Covenant. page 181. Faith not considered
as a work in justification. page 183. Fighting lawful for Christians against
unjust Invaders. page 204. Free will to Convert not in any unrenewed man. page
159. Free will in unrenewed men to gracious actions inconsistent with the
Efficacy of grace. page 160.
G
EXtraordinary Gifts not an Infallible evidence of saving grace. page 74. The
Gospel not Properly, but only Synecdochically called the power of God. page
130. Grace without light proportionable can do nothing. p. 156. Grammar
described, and explained. page 3. Grammar lawful among Christians, and
necessary for some men. page 4. How the Spirit Guides us into all truth. page
42.
H
INward habits nourished and maintained by external means. p. 41. Supernatural
habits simply necessary, for supernatural actions. page 157. Holiness of
Believers Children (1 Cor. 7.14.) what it does import. page 85.
I
SInning by mere Imitation confuted. page 133. Infants have interest into the
Kingdom of Heaven. page 88. Immediate Inspiration of the Doctrine of grace
ceased in the Church and not now, upon any ground of promise, to be looked for.
p. 55. Interpretation of Scripture is needful in the Church. page 52.
Interpretation of Scripture is of Divine Institution, and explained what it is.
page 55. Scriptures may be Interpreted by men whose gifts are fallible. p. 59.
Scriptures are the rule of Interpreting Scriptures. page 58. The meaning of
Scripture Interpreted by Scripture is Scripturerule. page 61. Interpreting of
Scriptures is no adding to the Scriptures. ibid. Justification how it is held
by Protestants. page 174. Justification how it is held by the Quakers. page
175. Justification by inherent or inward Righteousness either as a cause, or
condition refuted. page 181.
K
KIlling in just defense against the unjust Invaders of a Kingdom lawful. vid.
fighting lawful for Christians. How the kingdom of God is said to be within us
(Luke 17.2.) p. 40. Knowledge in Divine things how it differs in renewed, and
unrenewed men. page 37.
L
LAnguages how necessary to be learnt, and why. page 4. Christ as God was never
under the Law. page 212. How the Law is said to be written upon our hearts
(Jer. 30.33.) page 38. Learning how necessary for a Minister. page 5.
Sufficient light in all men to Salvation confuted. page 151. Light within all
men not the principal Rule. page 33. Christ how said to live in a true
Christian explained. page 213. Logic described and divided. page 5. Logic a
gift of God. page 6. Logic lawful and necessary among Christians. ibid. Lies
reported in the Scripture not Scripture-sentence. page 19.
M
MErit of good works pregnant with contradictions, and confuted. page 186. An
External Ministry to continue to the worlds end in the Church. page 60.
N
BY Nature all men are corrupt. page 132. Natural men are not sufficiently
enlightened to Conversion or Salvation. page 151. Natural parts are necessary
for a Minister. page 202.
O
IT is not God that obeys God in us. page 212. Ordination of our first
Reformers in time of Popery was valid quoad substantiam. page 199. Ordination
in the time of Popery, before the Reformation did not necessarily make these
Ordained, the Popes Emissaries. p. 198. Ministerial Authority received by
external Ordination. page 202.
P
A Great difference betwixt Papists now, and before the Council of Trent. page
200. Perfection distinguished and described. page 165. Perfection of degrees in
this life confuted. ibid. Perfection in a Moral sense not inferred upon the
agent, or action by Scripture writing. page 171. Perfection not inferred from
the acceptance of our good works. ibid. Paul not perfect when be wrote to the
Romans. page 167. The persons in the Godhead proved. page 29. The persons in
the Godhead Eternal. page 214. Philosophy described and explained. page 8.
Philosophy among Christians lawful. page 9. Philosophy a gift of God. ibid.
Philosophy how rightly used, and how not. ibid. The Dictate within the
principal rule of Faith according to the Quakers. page 28. The principal rule
the Scriptures, not the Dictate within. page 30. Psalms-metring requires not
immediate Inspiration. page 118. Psalms-singing of Divine Institution. page
112. Psalms made upon sad lots may be Sung. page 115. Psalms that are not our
case may be Sung. page 116. Psalms threatening Curses against notorious wicked
men may be Sung. page 117. What Psalms were sung in the Primitive Church. page
118. Punishing of evil doers a duty incumbent to the Magistrates. p. 205.
Q
QUakers Jesuitical and Popish in their Principles. page 206. Quakers smell
deeply of Supererogation. page 208. Quakers great Slanderers. page 206. A
Quakers Minister described, according to their own Principles page 67.
R
COnditional redemption refuted. page 143. External Reverence by signs and
gestures warrantable. vid. Courtesy and Capping Lawful, and how. The
Righteousness whereby we are justified not inward in us. page 181. The imputed
Righteousness of Christ not inward in us. ibid. The Righteousness of our good
works do not merit life to us. p. 186.
S
THe Christian Sabbath of Divine Institution. page 104. The Christian Sabbath
by whom, and by what reasons proved to be changed. page 106. Jewish Sabbaths
abolished infer nothing against our Christian Sabbath. page 105. The Scriptures
of Divine Inspiration. page 18. The Scriptures not a dead Letter. page 11. The
Scriptures the Word of God explained and proved. page 12. The Scriptures pure.
page 16. The Scriptures a complete rule of Faith and Manners proved. page 18.
The Scriptures not mere Saints words proved. page 20. The Scriptures a more
sure way (quoad nos) then any Revelation how immediate soever explained. page
25. The Scriptures have but one sense and no more. page 216. The Scriptures are
not every where Figurative. page 215. Original sin in all men proved. page 132.
Original sin not the Devil. page 131. Original sin not our punishment, or
temptation only but our sin also. page 133. Swearing in due Circumstances,
lawful, necessary, religious. p. 204. God not the substance of any Creature
proved. page 213. The Lords Supper of Divine Institution. page 95. The
Gospel-Supper described. ibid. The Gospel-Supper not from below. page 102. The
Gospel-Supper to continue to the end of the world. page 99.
T
TRuth distinguished and explained. page 217. Christ how said to be the Truth.
page 218.
W
THe great Whore not our Wisdom sitting upon our will. vid. the great Beast,
etc. The Unction (1 John 2.20.) how said to teach all things. p. 43. The title
of the Word of God bereft from the Scriptures, enervates their Authority and
use. page 16. The engrafted Word (Jam. 1.21.) how, and whereof understood. page
45. Works the condition of the first Covenant, or the differencing Character of
Law-righteousness. page 183. None of our good works meritorious of Salvation.
page 186. Salvation by works denied by Protestants, and how. page 174.
Rewarding of good works infers not merit proved. page 187. Worthiness of the
Saints to walk with Christ, etc. in Scripturesense does not infer the merit of
their works. ibid. Gods esteem of the Saints virtues of meekness, etc. infers
not their merit. page 188. A Believers ceasing from his own works (Heb. 4.10.)
how meant. page 194.
QUAKERS DISARMED. OR, A Short Survey of some Queries lately Emitted by the
Quakers, where in the first place follows their Inscription.
INSCRIPTION. Some Queries, as follows, from the people called Quakers for
one, or all of the Ministers in Scotland to answer.
SVRVEY.
IT is indeed a Beautifying Ornament for sumptuous Buildings to have comely
Frontispieces, but for an empty Shop to have a rich and splendid Sign it is but
small glory. This Forerunner advances with such a show of Courage and
Resolution, that one would conjecture each of his Followers to be Companion to
Achilles; but they resembling nothing less than that which they were pretended
to be, it cannot but Coargue both the Arrogance and weakness of the Authors.
What great reason was there to have Bravado'd all the Ministers in Scotland
with these Impious Queries? Pray, let not him that puts on his Armor boast
as he that puts it off. Do the Quakers think that all the Ministers in
Scotland, yea, or that any of them shall be so amuzed with these Queries, or
puzzled to answer them? Nay, then tell it not in Gath, publish it not in
Askelon, lest the Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. We hope there are few
Ministers in Scotland so daunted or consternat with the presumptuous bravery
and windy Bravadoes of the Insolent Quakers, but that (if the Eagle might catch
Flies) they durst, without Seconds, undertake the cause against all the Quakers
in Britain. But because the Quakers are distempered with an high Feverish Fit
of Intoxicating Delusion, therefore I shall pass by the Insolence of their
supercilious and haughty Inscription, and proceed to their Queries, which I
shall not only answer, but (according to the brevity of my Scope) shall
perspicuously overthrow and refel the Heretical Positions of the Adversaries,
upon the several Heads therein contained to the stopping of the mouth of the
reproachful Gainsayer. If the Quakers then desire to be Instructed, Let them
not be as the Horse, or as the Mule which have no understanding, Psalm. 32.8, 9.

First QUERY.
Whether or not Grammar, or Logic, and the many Tongues and Languages which
began in Babylon, is an Infallible Rule to make a Minister of Christ? and
whether or not Elisha the Ploughman, Amos the Herdsman, Peter, and John the
Fishermen, who could hardly read a Letter, with many others who were not bred
up in these things, Logic, and Grammar, and the many Languages; if they could
not be Ministers of Christ Jesus? yea, or nay.

SVRVEY.
Very well does the Scope of this Query agree with their forenamed Book,
Entitled The principles of Truth; wherein (page 56. and 125.) they condemn all
humane Learning. But the Questionist here does, either through malice or
ignorance, pervert the whole state of the Question: for who ever heard that the
Church of Scotland (which here he endeavors to Slander) or any other Church,
made humane Arts and Sciences an Infallible rule to make a Minister of Christ?
Then they should never have required more of any man in order to his admission
to that Office, but his alone sufficient skill in Grammar and Logic, which the
Adversaries themselves know to be most false, and therefore we must hold them
for malicious Slanderers. The Infallible rule is set down in the first Epistle
to Timothy Chapter third, and to Titus Chapter first; and not in Despauter, or
Aristotle's School.

Nevertheless Logic and Grammar are ordinary means of Knowledge, exceedingly
requisite in a Minister, whose lips should preserve Knowledge ( Malac. 2.7.)
and should be apt to Teach, and able to convince the gainsayers (1 Timothy 3.2.
Tit. 1.9.) and the Quakers should have distinguished betwixt that which is
requisite and useful for a Minister, and that which is sufficient to make a
Minister, seeing a rational faculty is requisite and useful for a Minister (for
Beasts and irrational Creatures would be but bad Ministers, methinks) and yet
a rational faculty is not sufficient to make a Minister.

But what just ground of Quarrel can any man have against Learning? Is it not
commended in Daniel? (Dan. 1.4.17.) and in Moses (Act. 7.22?) may they not see
the excellency of Christ's Ministry held forth by a comparison with the Tongue
of the Learned as an high commendation thereof ( Isai. 50.4?) and may they not
see the loss and disadvantage of the want of it from Isai. 29.12, 14. 2 Pet.
3.16?

But more particularly, Grammar is an Art teaching how to Speak or Write a
Language right, so as it may be Sense, and may be understood; for it shows the
Etymology and Gender of words, and how they are Declined, Conjugated,
Constructed, etc. Would they then have a Minister not knowing how to Speak, and
Write Sense? Its like that so he would be somewhat more related to the Quakers;
but (I am sure) he would be the less worthy of his Charge. Would they have me
saying (like Highland-men learning English) They is man, for these are men? or
put she for he, as they do. Alas! what Nonsense should the world then be
troubled with? All men that know how to Speak any Language aright, have either
Artificial Grammar, or else experience equivalent to Artificial Grammar; from
my Cradle (for example) I have a long experience teaching me how to speak
English, and that is a sort of experimental Grammar; but for learning how to
speak Latin, Greek, etc. I was taught Rules of Grammar, as a much more
expedite, ready, and accurate method of Learning.

But it would seem, the Quakers here by Grammar mean Foreign Languages, or
their Grammar, and so their Quarrel is that Ministers should learn Foreign
Languages, or the Grammar thereof.

But this is also most easy to refell; for any man may Lawfully learn a
Foreign Language: therefore he may Lawfully learn the Grammar thereof, seeing
whatever Language a man may Lawfully learn to speak, he may learn (I hope) to
speak it right, and so as it may be Sense; or else it shall be Lawful for a man
to learn to speak a Language, in which it is not Lawful for him to learn to
speak Sense, which is ridiculous. The Antecedent I prove. If a man may not
Lawfully learn Foreign Languages, then who should have Translated the
Scriptures into our Mother Tongue? for Hebrew and Greek (the original Languages
wherein the Scriptures were first Written) are not our Mother Tongue. Again,
how should the Churches of diverse Nations, speaking diverse Languages,
Communicate their Gifts and Knowledge one with another, or have any
Correspondence together? or how should such Kingdoms have any Commerce, if none
of them might learn another Language, or else both, or all of them a third?
and how should Americans, and those places of the World that have not as yet
heard the Gospel, ever hear it, if they should not learn some bodies Language
that have the Gospel, or some body that has the Gospel, theirs? These things
prove it both Lawful and necessary that some men, especially Ministers, may
learn Foreign Languages.

But, say the Quakers, the many Languages began in Babylon; therefore (they
mean to infer) they are not Lawful among Christians.

Ans. But why then do the Quakers speak English? for, sure it is, that Language
is no Ancienter than Babylon. When the Quakers shall have Taught all men to
speak the one Primitive Language again, then it shall be time to lay aside the
many Languages which began in Babylon. But what? was not the knowledge of
diverse Tongues one of the Gifts of the Spirit, which he bestowed at the
Promulgation of the Gospel to all Nations, for the more speedy and easy
publishing thereof ( Acts. 2.4. 1 Cor. 12.10?) and do they think that the day
of Pentecost, when the Disciples began to speak with diverse Tongues, was a day
of Babels Confusion? if the Quakers did not wilfully shut their Eyes they might
easily see that, albeit the Division of Tongues at Babel was a Judgment, making
each of them ignorant of another menaing; yet the knowledge of Tongues and
Grammar are a blessing, causing people to understand one another, and so their
effects are direct contrary.

As for Artificial or School-Logick, it is an Art or practical Science
directing our understanding how to Define, Divide, Judge, and Argument aright.
For all the rules of Logic are concerning these foresaid operations of our
understanding, and they proceed practically by way of direction, showing us how
to do them, both which are evident to all that know any thing of School-Logick,
and we could easily prove it, if that were the business here controverted
betwixt us and the Quakers; but it is none of their present controversy with
us; and if they shall offer to controvert that, I shall provoke them to
instance (if they can) any rule of Logic which is not concerning these
foresaid operations of our understanding, and which does not proceed
practically and by way of Direction, which we defy them to do. These things
then being so, it is infallibly manifest that if the rules of School-Logick be
true, they cannot but direct us how to Define, Divide, Judge, and Argument
aright, seeing they are all concerning these operations of our understanding,
and all of them proceed practically by way of direction, so that if their
Dictate and direction be true, they cannot direct us the wrong way, but must
direct us aright; otherwise their direction should be false, and not true. But
if the Quakers will accuse them of falsehood, I must conjure them to exhibit
their reasons: for these Rules of Logic being derived from, and established
upon the uncontrovertible and Supreme principles of the Light of Nature, of
themselves evident, and being also approved by manifold experience, we cannot
be such Traitors to the Light of Nature and reason, and such enemies to all
experience, as upon the bare say of any Brainsick Quaker to reject them. A
very great Novice at Logic can easily demonstrate the truth of any rule
thereof irresistibly.

Well then, seeing School-Logick directs our understanding to Define, Divide,
Judge, and Argument aright, it cannot but be very requisite for a Minister; he
that knows not how to do these things, wants a piece of fitness that ought to
be in a Minister; or if one utterly ignorant how to do them be no less fit,
than he who is exquisitly skilful in them all, then Balaams Ass should be as
fit to be a Minister as any of the Sons of men, the meanest of whom has some
portion of Logic, either Artificial, or at least Natural, because he is born
essentially Rational. He that knows nothing how to Define, Divide, etc. (if any
such were) is in no better capacity than the Ass speaking to his Master. Take
there the Quakers Minister very fit for Balaams Sadle if he had but four legs.
Ignorance I see, is the Mother of the Quakers Devotion. Ye know my meaning, I
hope.

But the Quakers have often objected to me against the very Lawfulness of
Logic among Christians, because (say they) it was first used among Heathens:

Ans. Whether School-Logick was first used among Heathens or not, is not fully
certain, but be it so or not, the consequence is void enough of Logic, as if
nothing first used among Heathens were Lawful among Christians, forsooth; and
so it shall not be lawful for Christians to speak Greek, Latin, Dutch, French,
or English, or any other Language but Hebrew, which few have; and so they must
speak nothing at all. What shall we think of these merry principles that would
make weeping Heraclitus to change his humor, and laugh to Death almost? But
what shall we do with the Isle of Britain, which (I believe) was first used by
Heathens? must we therefore leave it? let the Quakers be first gone then.
Again, if Artificial or School-Logick be a gift of God, and he its Author, then
it cannot be unlawful among Christians wherever it was first used, seeing the
Gifts of God are not unlawful among Christians; Now that it is a gift of God is
evident, seeing it must either be a gift of God, or else a fruit of Adams Fall
and man's corruption, for there is no other thing to be said: But its against
all Religion, reason and sense, to say that Adams Fall or man's corruption
should cause us to understand how to Define, Divide, etc. therefore it must be
a gift of God.

But say the Quakers, Elisha the Ploughman, Amos the Herdsman, Peter and John
the Fishermen, were not bred up in Grammar and Logic; and yet they were
Ministers of Christ.

Ans. What then I pray? must all Ministers be exactly in every point such as
these were? or is it good consequence to argue from an extraordinary Fact to an
ordinary fixed Rule? let them go on then, and argue from all the extraordinary
works that God has at any time done in the first publishing of the Law and
Gospel, unto ordinary fixed Rules; for the same reason carries all. These men
being extraordinarily called of God to an extraordinary work, were by him
extraordinarily furnished with whatever was needful for their work; and so
though by their education they acquired no Logic or Grammar, yet (beside
natural Logic, and experimental Grammar in their Native Tongue, which they
wanted not) by extraordinary Inspiration or Infusion, they had as much of them
as was requisite for their work. Must God then be Tempted, or can they tie him
to do that same thing ordinarily, which he has sometimes done extraordinarily?
This is a proud prescribing of Laws to God, not to men. We must therefore wait
for the blessing of God upon our diligent use of the ordinary means of
knowledge, and not with the Quakers (tempting God) look, without ground, for
extraordinaries every day, whereof they are as scarce as any Society in the
world beside, for all their vain boasting.

Behold here also the Quakers Blindness, they allege that Peter and John had
no Grammar and Languages, whereas it is manifest that God at the Pentecost
(among other things) bestowed the gift of Tongues upon them before he would
send them forth to publish the Gospel to the world, which notably enervats the
adversaries position, and highly commends the use of Grammar and Tongues.

Second QUERY.
Or how long was it after Christ and the Apostles days, that that Grammar,
Logic, and Philosophy, and Schools of learning were set up to make Ministers
of Christ Jesus?

SVRVEY.
It seems the Quakers are in a perpetual Dream; for Schools of learning were
set up before Moses's time, seeing Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians (Act. 7.22.) and the Sciences taught at Babylon were long before
Christ's days ( Dan. 1.4.) and they were set up for the increase of Knowledge,
maintaining of Equity, and the preservation of humane Societies. But wherein (I
pray) can it be liable to censure, that every man cast in his mite of the small
Relics of Natures yet sparkling light into the common Treasury for the good
and benefit of Mankind? for every man has not all knowledge (to need no help
of his Neighbors gifts) but every one his several portion, which when it is
communicated, it is profitable to others, but when it is suppressed and kept
up, it is a spark of light held Prisoner, and a portion of knowledge concealed
in unrighteousness. This abundantly justifies Schools of learning.

But what do the Quakers feign Philosophy to be? Is it not an Habit or Doctrine
teaching us to know God and his works, so far as by the light of Nature and
reason we can reach them? Is it unlawful then to Study to know God and his
works? Then an Atheist and a brutish fool (such as is described Psalm. 32.9.
Psalm. 92.6.) will be fittest to be a Minister to the Quakers. Or is it unlawful
to Study to know God and his works by means of the light of Nature and reason:
Then the Heathen world could never lawfully Study any knowledge of God and his
works, seeing they had no other or better means. Nay, then the light of Nature
and reason must be rejected and abandoned as an unlawful and sinful means for
that purpose, and (certainly) good for no other purpose imaginable, if not for
that.

Now that Philosophy teaches us to know somewhat concerning God and his works
is most manifest. For it teaches us to know that there is a God; that he is
Infinite, Eternal, Omniscient, Omnipotent, Unchangeable, etc. that every thing
either is, or is not; that nothing can both be, and not be at once; that of
every contradiction the one part is true, and the other false; that every whole
is more than its part; that every cause is prior in Nature to its effect; that
nothing can work before it exist; that all Creatures are changeable; that every
man is a rational Creature; (the Quakers I fear should be excepted) that the
Soul of man is immortal; that no action can be without some Subject, nor
without some Effect, nor any Union without some extremes; that no brute is a
man, nor darkness any positive being. These things (and a Thousand times more
that I may not here stand to reckon) Philosophy teaches us to know concerning
God and his works, the truth whereof is evident, which if the Adversaries
question, let them come forward with sharp-edged Arguments, and not dare us
always with mere blunt assertions. These things prove that Philosophy teaches
us to know several things concerning God and his works. And I am sure, those
that have the greatest knowledge and deepest reach into these, and other
Philosophical principles, may lawfully communicate the same to others for their
Instruction, nay, they may not lawfully conceal it in unrighteousness, as is
before showed.

Again, Philosophy (as I argued of Logic) is either a gift of God, and then it
cannot be unlawful among Christians; or else it is a fruit of Adams Fall and
man's corruption (seeing God is the Author of all we have beside) But it cannot
be an effect or fruit of these; for what ignorant Dunce or impudent face will
or dare say, that Adams Fall, or man's corruption has taught men the foresaid
Principles and Conclusions of Philosophy which were instanced.

What? Is it unlawful for Christians to endeavor after some knowledge of God
and his works? let them consider and answer these Scriptures then. Job. 37.14.
Psalm. 77.12. Psalm. 92.5, 6. Psalm. 3.2. Romans 1.19, 20. Every man has some
Philosophy, either Natural, or else both that and Artificial also. Its a
strange Doctrine that Teaches, that the more ignorant Ass a man is, he is the
more fit to be a Christian, or a Minister. Balaams Sadle-bearer would have got
a better Employment with the Quakers (it seems) than he had with his unthankful
Master.

But, say the Quakers, the Apostle bids Christians beware lest any man spoil
them through Philosophy ( Colos. 2.8.) and we are commanded to avoid Profane
and vain Bablings, and oppositions of Science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6.20.

Ans. The Apostle does not in these Texts condemn true Philosophy subsisting
within its own Sphere, neither can that be condemned, for the reasons now
given. But that which he condemns is sophisticate and corrupt Philosophy (which
we call Sophistry) and Philosophy extended beyond its Sphere to the measuring
of an Object not included within its Principles. This the Apostle shows to be
his meaning, by adding Exegetically in the first Text cited, the Term, Vain
deceit, after the Tradition of men (that is, of men's own mere Dreaming and
Devising, having no ground in the light of Nature and reason, and so whereof
God is not the Author) and by calling it in the last place, Science falsely so
called; none of which can be said of true Philosophy moving within its own Orb,
and not transgressing the Sphere of its activity, as is before demonstrated.
The thing then that we are there commanded to avoid, is Sophisticate and
corrupt Philosophy, as Aristotle's Eternity of the world; or Democritus's
opinion of the worlds being made by the Concourse of Atoms; Manicheus's two
supreme Causes of all things; the Platonic and Manichean conceit about the
making of the Soul of man of the Divine substance; Epicurus's mortality of the
Soul of man; Pithagoras's Transmigration of the Soul out of one Body into
another; The Fate of the Stoics. That and the like corrupt Philosophy we are
commanded to avoid, and beside this, we are also commanded to beware of
Philosophy diverted from its own proper use and object in considering the works
of Nature, and God as the Author of Nature, to the measuring of Gospel truths
(which the Heathen Philosophers in these times foolishly did) according to
their Inclusion in, or Exclusion from Natural Philosophical Principles, upon
which they do not depend, but upon a Principle of an higher Order, viz. Divine
Revelation. Beside these two things, there is nothing else in Philosophy that
can be Condemned; and so there is nothing here against true and genuine
Philosophy (only which I defend) which, for our Demonstations given, is neither
Foolosophy, nor Witchcraft, as the Quakers in bitter Contempt have often called
it in my hearing.

Third QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures are the Word, or the Words of God? Seeing the
Scriptures say themselves God spoke all these words (Exodus 20.) and he that
adds to the words (in the last of the Revelation) Plagues are added to him. And
what does the Scripture signify? Does it not signify Writings? and whether
all that is Written in the Scriptures from Genesis to Revelation be a Rule for
your Faith and Manners, and every tittle of it from the one end of the Book to
the other both in the Old and new Testament? If not; Distinguish what part is
to be obeyed, and what not. And whether every tittle from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of the Revelation is the Word, or the Words of God?

SVRVEY.
The principal Position of the Quakers upon this Head is, that there is not
another Word of God beside Christ the Co-substantial and Eternal Word; and this
they assert of purpose, that they may elude all the Testimonies of Scripture
which Tie us to the external written Word of God as our Rule, and whereby the
Efficacy thereof is commended: for all these Scripture-Testimonies they will
have to be understood of Christ the Eternal Co-substantial Word dwelling within
them, and all men (as they alledg) and teaching them immediately by himself
present within them, without an external written Platform, which they are
pleased to reproach with the Nickname of a Dead Letter, contrary to Joh.
20.31. Act. 7.28. Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. which places declare the
written Word of God to be lively Oracles, and an excellent instrument of Faith,
Growth, Comfort and Life unto us. See also Heb. 4.12. where the Word of God is
said to be Quick and Powerful, and compared to a Two-edged Sword; and that by
the Word of God here, is not meant Christ the Co-substantial Word, but the
external Word of God spoken within time (which Word is written in the
Scriptures, as shall presently be showed) appears from many other Parallel
places of Scripture, where the Efficacy of the external Word is held forth in
most Parallel expressions, and by the very same Comparison, for which see
Ephesians. 6.17. (which place we shall presently prove to be meant of the external
Word) and Rev. 1.16. Rev. 2.12, 16. Rev. 19.15. In which places by the Sword of
Christ's Mouth, and the Two-edged Sword going out of his Mouth (which are the
Expressions there) can be no other thing meant, but the external Word of Christ
spoken by his Mouth, nor do I ever read that Christ himself is compared so, but
his Word only.

It is true, the Law or legal Covenant considered as strictly legal (but never
the whole Scriptures, which, pray observe) is in respect of guilty Sinners
(such as we all are) called a Killing Letter (but not at all a Dead Letter,
dead Dogs neither Bark nor Bite) and a Ministration of Death and Condemnation
(2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9.) because it Accuses, Curses, and Condemns such as are
Guilty of the Breach thereof; though yet the same be a notable Mean to show
Sinners their lostness without a Redeemer, and their absolute need of Christ,
and to Whip and lash them home unto him. These things are evident.

Now for clearing the state of the main Question, we must premise first, that
the Quakers acknowledge the Scriptures to be Gods Testimony and Gods Words;
they do not as yet (at least all of them) openly deny the Scriptures to have
been given by Divine Inspiration; only they do generally deny them to be the
Word of God: for (say they) only Christ is the Word of God.

Secondly, we must premise that we do not say that there is another Eternal,
Co-substantial, or Coequal Word of God beside Christ. But that, beside Christ
the Co-substantial Word, there is another Word of God which was spoken within
time written, in the Scriptures, which we call the external written Word. These
things being premised,

We assert that, beside Christ the Co-substantial and Coequal Word, there is
another Word of God which is written in the Scriptures. For first, the
Commandments of God are not Christ the Eternal Son of God, as is clear: but the
Commandments of God are the Word of God: therefore there is a Word of God which
is not Christ the Co-substantial Word, and that Word of God is written in the
Scriptures, seeing Gods Commandments are written there undeniably. I prove the
Minor from Psalm. 119.172. where David calls the Commandments of God his Word;
and from Mark. 7.9, 10. with 13. where that which Christ calls the Commandment
of God ( ver. 9.) he calls it the Word of God ver. 13.

Secondly, the Predictions, Doctrine, and Sayings of the Prophets (which are
written in the Scriptures) are in Scripture most expressly called the Word of
the Lord, and yet these are not Christ the Co-substantial Word: therefore there
is another Word of God (and which is written in the Scriptures) beside Christ
the Cosubstantial Word. The Antecedent I prove from 1 King. 16.12. 2 King.
9.36. 2 King. 23.16. 2 Chronicles. 36.22. Ezra. 1.1. In all these places the
Predictions and Doctrine of these Prophets are most expressly called the Word of
the Lord.

Thirdly, it is said ( Isai. 28.13.) that the Word of the Lord was unto Israel
Precept upon Precept, and Line upon Line, where the Precepts and Doctrine
contained in the Scripture-lines are called the Word of the Lord: But (sure it
is) Christ himself is not these written Precepts or Doctrine: therefore there
is beside Christ the Co-substantial Word, another Word of God which is written
in the Scriptures.

Fourthly, Hosea calls the beginning of his Prophecies and Doctrine, The
beginning of the Word of the Lord by Hosea, which cannot be the beginning of
Christ the Son of God by Hosea, I am sure; but it must be the beginning of the
Doctrine and Prophecies taught and Prophesied and there written by him:
therefore there is, beside Christ the Eternal Word, another Word of God which
is written in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, to be a Word that the Lord has spoken, and to be the Word of the
Lord is all one thing, methinks; but there is a Word which the Lord has
spoken, which is not Christ, and which is written in the Scriptures: Therefore
there is a Word of the Lord, beside Christ, and the same is written in the
Scriptures. The Minor is clear from Isai. 37.22. where the Prophet says, This
is the Word that the Lord has spoken concerning Senacherib (and this Word is
there written) The Virgin the Daughter of Sion has despised thee, etc. But
surely, that Word is not Christ, Christ is not a complex Oration or saying.

Sixthly, the whole Doctrine of the Prophets (if the Quakers will trust them)
is the Word of the Lord (and yet it is not Christ the Son of God) seeing they
always ascribe it to him with a, Thus says the Lord, and what God says must
certainly be his Word; for to speak, and not say a word, is pretty repugnant,
and may pass for a good Jest amongst men that are merry: therefore there is a
Word of the Lord, beside Christ, and the same is written in the Scriptures,
seeing the Doctrine of the Prophets is written there.

Seventhly, there is a Word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit and an
Instrument in his hand, Ephesians. 6.17. But Christ the Son of God is not the Sword
of the Spirit, nor an Instrument in his hand, seeing the Second person of the
Godhead cannot work from the Third, because so their Order of working would
quite contradict their Order of Subsisting, which is utterly repugnant, much
less can the Second person be the Instrument of the Third; and if by the Spirit
here be meant the New man in us, Christ in his Person cannot be an Instrument
thereof either, nor of any Creature whatsoever that ever had a Being, or
Existence: Therefore there is another Word of God, beside Christ the Son of God.

Lastly (for we need stand no longer in a matter so manifest) The Word of
Christ spoken by him within time is the Word of God, seeing Christ is God as
well as man; and yet it is not Christ himself, as needs no Proof: But there is
a Word of Christ spoken by him within time (and it is written in the
Scriptures) Joh. 5.24. and 8.31, 37. and 12.48. and 15.3. Colos. 3.16. Rev.
3.8. Therefore there is, beside Christ the Eternal Word, another Word of God
which is spoken within time, and written in the Scriptures.

Thou will say perhaps, seeing most part of the Quakers are content to yield to
the Scriptures the Title of, Gods Words, and almost all of them of, Gods
Testimony, it would seem that this Debate is only about the naming of the
Scripture. What then were the hazard to gratify the Quakers in this point, as
Wise men use to please Children and Fools sometimes?

Answer. Though all the Quakers without exception, should yield the Scriptures
the Titles of, Gods Words, and Gods Testimony (and yet some of them do it not,
as we shall see ere we end the Survey of this Query) yet there is a manifest
hazard in denying the Title of the Word of God to the Scriptures. For let it
once be denied (with the Quakers) that the Scriptures are the Word of God, and
then (grant what they will to get their Negative once admitted) it plainly
follows that they have never been spoken by the Mouth of the Lord (seeing what
any person speaks must needs be his Word, or else he speaks and holds his
peace, as the Jest is) and this puts the Scriptures into the same condition
with the Doctrine and Dreams of false Prophets, and brangles their Divine
Authority. See Deuteronomy. 18.20, 21. Jerem. 23.16, 21. Ezekiel. 13.7. and 22.28. Again,
let it once be granted that the Scriptures are not Entitled, The Word of God,
and have no Interest to be so called, and then all the Exhortations given in
the Scriptures for hearkening to the Word, believing and obeying the Word, etc.
and all the commendations of its efficacy and sweetness, must be transferred
from the Word of God written in the Scriptures, unto Christ the Co-substantial
Word immediately, who as he is Jealous of his own Glory, so he will not have
his Word robbed of its due Authority, and Excellency which he had Communicated
thereunto. And so that which the Quakers design (and this is their Formal aim)
in this Affair, is to take all men off from the written Word of God as their
rule: for grant that such a thing has not such a name, and then whatever is
spoken under that name must be applied unto some other Subject so named, and
not unto a Subject which was never so named. And thus again they endeavor to
overthrow the Use, End, and Repute of the Scriptures, so far as they can. And
thus to deny the Scriptures the Title of, The Word of God, strikes at their
Divine Authority, and overthrows their use and regard. And therefore we are
Commanded to hold fast the Form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1.13.

But, say the Quakers, the Scriptures are the Words of God, Exodus 20. Therefore
(they infer) they are not the Word of God.

Ans. But so by the Antecedent the Quakers destroy their own Cause, and
contradict themselves; for if the Scriptures be the Words of God, then, I am
sure, there are Words of God, beside Christ (and yet they deny there is any)
seeing the written words of the Scripture are not Christ the Son of God. Again,
this consequence is as if I should say, Such a Book contains the Doctrines of
the Quakers: Ergo not the Doctrine of the Quakers. The Ten Commands are the
Moral Laws: Ergo not the Moral Law. Is not that well Argued without Logic? But
what? are not whole Sermons and Predictions of the Prophets, and Christ's whole
Doctrine called by them and him the Word of the Lord, and his Word, as may be
seen in almost all our preceding Arguments? Is not the whole Doctrine of the
Scriptures called a Word of Prophecy? 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. Does not Paul call the
whole Revealed Truths of God, Sound Doctrine, and the Doctrine of God? 1 Timothy
1.10. and 6.1. Tit. 1.9. and 2.10. And must the Prophets and Apostles, Christ
and the Holy Ghost learn from the Quakers how their Doctrine should be named?
will they not allow the Scriptures their Essential Attribute which these gives
them, that they are the Word of God? or, albeit we very well know that there
are many more words in the Scripture than one, why will they not admit of that
common Unity here which is not denied in other common Natures, and a
denomination conformable? By these things the objection is both answered and
overthrown.

Again, they insinuate another Argument whereby they endeavor to wrest the
Title of the Word of God from the Scriptures. The Scriptures (say they)
signifies Writings: Therefore (they mean to infer) they are not the Word of God.

Ans. It does equally follow; therefore they are not the Words of God, as the
Word of God, as all may see; and so the consequent of their present Argument
contradicts the Antecedent of their former Objection; and so we may see that
the Quakers are but Juggling while they yield the Scriptures the Title of Gods
Words, whereof their present Argument again endeavors to rob them. Secondly,
our Question is not what the word [Scripture] signifies, but what the Doctrine
written in the Scriptures is, which the signification of that Word cannot
Define. But lastly (for clear satisfaction) I distinguish their Consequent
thus, viz. That because the Scriptures signifies Writings, therefore, as to the
external Form and Mode which they have from the Writers Pen, they are not the
Word of God, be it so; therefore as to their enunciat Doctrine, or Sentence
they are not the Word of God, it follows not. For in the Scripture there are
two things to be considered, viz, their Doctrine and Sentence, which is the
Word of God, and their external Form or Mode which they have from the Pen of
the Writer, which gives the Word of God the Denomination of, Written, and
therefore we call the Scriptures The Written Word.

Because we said that the Quakers, by endeavoring to Wrest the Title of the
Word of God from the Scriptures, do strike at their Divine Authority, therefore
I shall here give a short Touch of the Notes and Arguments whereby the
Scriptures are clearly Demonstrated to be from God, and of Divine Inspiration;
such as are the Majesty of the Style of the Scriptures above all other
Writings, under great simplicity of words; the Divine purity of the Doctrine,
savoring wholly of holiness and virtue; The Divine Scope of the Doctrine, which
is to give all glory to God; The Efficacy of the Doctrine in the hearts of men
above all other Doctrines in the world; The Infallible accomplishment of the
Predictions therein contained, as they were foretold; the wonderful consent of
all the parts thereof, being written by so many diverse Penmen so far distant
from one another both in time and place, which was never to be seen in any
other Book in the World, especially of diverse men's Writing; The manifold
Miracles whereby God has born Witness thereunto, which Satan could never so
much as Counterfeit; The irreconcilable hatred of Satan and the World against
it, more than against all other Books in the World; The firm stability thereof,
and the special hand of God which appears in the preserving and transmitting
thereof from Age to Age, notwithstanding all the Malice of Satan, and the
Devices of him and his wicked Instruments against it; The miserable end of the
greatest Persecutors and enemies thereof; The Testimony of the many Martyrs
Sealing their Witness thereunto with their Blood, and the Testimony of the
whole Church thereunto, which have a piece of weight in their own Order. The
Scriptures cannot be from evil men, or Angels, seeing they show their villainy,
denounce their Doom (which Galls them) and prescribe a Method of living quite
contrary to their Inclination.

Nor can good Angels; or Men be their Author; for, upon the one hand, they
durst not have so usurped upon God, as to feign his Authority and Commission to
so many Laws, Ordinances, Threatenings, and Promises of their own mere
Invention; and, upon the other hand, if they had done it, they could not have
been good Angels or Men; Therefore the Scriptures must be from God himself.
These things put together (which I have but named) are sufficient to convince
that the Scriptures are from God, and of Divine Authority, and are enough
irresistibly to stop the Mouths of all Contradicters.

Notwithstanding, for the full assurance and through persuasion of Faith, that
the Scriptures are from God, and of Divine Inspiration, the Spirit is requisite
by his effectual Working in, with, and by the same upon our hearts and minds to
Seal up their Divine Authority unto us. And yet this makes nothing in the least
for the Quakers, who Teach to follow a Spirit abstracted and separated from the
Scriptures. For, beside that we shall show at the following Query, that the
Spirit speaking in the Scriptures, most straightly Ties us to the Scriptures as
our Supreme Rule in all matters of Faith; It is also evident that it is in,
with, and by the Word of God (written in the Scriptures) that the Spirit
manifests himself unto, and in our hearts, both in the enlightening of our
Minds, and renewing of our Wills and Affections, as these Scriptures following
Witness. Psalm. 19.7.8. Joh. 4.41. Joh. 14.26. Joh. 15.3. Joh. 17.20. Act.
17.11.12. Romans 15.4. Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Isai. 59.21. These, and a Thousand
places more that I might instance, do manifestly convince that the written Word
of God is an Organ and Instrument in the Spirits hand, whereby he Enlightens,
Renews, and Sanctifies us more and more, himself also (as a Physical Cause
does) immediately influencing the Effect, seeing all Effects must depend
immediately upon God, if they include any real being.

But, say the Quakers, whether or not is all that is written from Genesis to
Revelation a Rule for your Faith and Manners?

Ans. No doubt we are bound to believe all Scripture Enunciation from the
beginning to the end, seeing all of it was given by Inspiration of God and
written for our Learning. 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.21. Luke. 24.25. Act. 24.14. 1
Cor. 10.11. There is no more doubt we are bound to obey all the Commands of the
Moral Law (seeing that is of a perpetual binding force Mat. 5.18.19.) with
whatsoever is of common equity ( Philip. 4.8, 9.) or whatever injoyning any
piece of Religious worship, under the New Testament, does belong to Christians
of our Calling and condition. The Quakers must here be content with these clear
generals. But as far the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, that is indeed totally
Abrogated as to its Obligation (albeit yet the same be many ways useful for our
Instruction, but especially to convince us of our Natural uncleanness, and by
the exact Accomplishment of its manifold Types in Jesus of Nazareth, to assure
us that he is our Savior and the True Messiah) together with their Judicial
Law, which, in so far as it particularly respected that State, is exspired
therewith, though, in so far as it is of common right, it still obliges all
men, as is easy to be understood.

Lastly the Quakers inquire, whether every tittle from Genesis to the
Revelation be the Word, or the Words of God?

Ans. It cannot be that this member of the Query is the same with the first
already discussed; or else they have foolishly proposed it twice to us. But to
be short, they seem here to inquire (if any new thing at all) whether every
enunciation and sentence of the Scripture be of Divine Inspiration, and from
God? Whereunto I answer affirmatively: for first, the main substantial Texts of
Scripture cannot be doubted, because of the Notes and Arguments before given,
most part whereof are Intrinsical, and do brightly shine in these with their
inlightening Beams to full conviction. Secondly, for other Sentences of lesser
importance, if the Quakers will say that some ill Seed-sower has Inserted
them, or any of them, since the Writing of the Scriptures, and so that they are
not of Divine Inspiration, but a corruption of the Scripture; we shall first
desire them to prove their affirmative, and until then we shall confirm our
assertion. For seeing they were found in the same original Language inserted
with the rest; seeing they have still some Connection with, or Relation to the
rest; seeing the Scriptures were by the Providence of God kept pure in the time
of the Old Testament, as appears in that, that Christ and his Apostles in all
reproofs to the Scribes and Pharisees never Taxed them for such a thing, nor at
any time touches such a Question; seeing even the Writings of men may continue
pure through many Ages, and if they be vitiated it can hardly escape discovery;
seeing the Scriptures as they now are were transmitted to us by the Church,
unto whom the Oracles of God were committed, and against whom the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail ( Romans 3.2. 1 Timothy 3.15. Mat. 16.18.) and attested by her to
be the true Word of God; seeing the very end of Gods committing his Word unto
writing is for our Learning and Instruction, and that we might have hope and be
Saved ( Joh. 20.31. Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11.) seeing God cares for the feeding
of Ravens, clothing of Lilies, and for our Food and Raiment, how much more (to
use Christ's own Argument in a matter of smaller moment, Luke. 12.28.) will he
care for the purity of his own Word, which is of so weighty concernment to his
Glory and his peoples Salvation. These things, with Gods special Providence
over his Church, duly considered, do sufficiently secure our assertion;
especially seeing the Quakers cannot prove any corruption in the Scriptures,
which if they affirm, they are obliged to do.

But the Quakers will (may be) say, that there are several mistakes of men, yea
and lies written of in the Scriptures, such as the lies of Rahab, the
Gibeonites, Sarah, etc. I, and there are several Blasphemies written of in the
Scriptures too. But what shall follow from hence? That any enunciation of the
Scripture does Lie or Blaspheme? Nay by no means, seeing these Lies and
Blasphemies are not Taught and Enunciat by the Scripture, or Enunciations and
Doctrines thereof; but the Narration and History of them, is the thing Enunciat
and Taught by the Scripture: for the Scriptures do not affirm what these
persons said and affirmed; but only they affirm that such persons said and
affirmed so, which is no Lie nor Blasphemy, as is clear. These Lies therefore
are not Scripture Enunciations, but are only mere complex Predicats thereof,
which the Scripture Attributes to their Authors that said them, as the subjects
of its Enunciations in all such Cases.

Some Quakers are upon this Head so grossly Athiestical as to say, that the
Scriptures are but the Saints words, and Testimony from their own particular
Experiences, unto which horrid Atheism their forementioned Confession of Faith
called, The Principles of Truth (methinks in Derision and Scorn) does also
positively subscribe, page 100, 101, 102, 103, 127. But this impudent assertion
of the Quakers cannot stand. For first, these foresaid Notes and Arguments that
we above named, do convince the Scriptures to be of Divine Inspiration and
Authority, and not the mere bare word of any Creature.

Secondly, this Assertion of the Quakers involves a violent contradiction; for
the Penmen of the Scriptures deliver their Doctrine in the Name and Authority
of the Lord, asserting it to be his Word, his Will, his Command, whereof the
Scriptures are every where so full that we need not stand to instance.

If then it was but their own mere Word and Testimony, these Penmen of the
Scripture are so far from being Saints, that of all men in the world they must
have been the greatest Cheats, and Archest Impostors and Villains, seeing they
have delivered us so many mere humane Precepts and Principles for the Rule of
our Faith and Duty toward God and man, promising Eternal Life and Glory to the
Obedient, and threatening Hell and Damnation to the Disobedient (a terrible
Presumption for them to do by their own mere Authority, and that for Obedience
or Disobedience to their mere Commands) and beside have wickedly Fathered all
this upon God. To be Saints, and yet live and die such Impostors and Villains
is Incurably repugnant.

Thirdly, except the Quakers shall proceed further in their Distraction and
Atheism, and Assert the Scriptures to be a Book of Falsehoods, Fictions and
Lies, they must acknowledge the Scriptures to be somewhat more than the mere
bare Word and Testimony of any Saint, seeing the Old Testament almost every
where Asserts it self to be the Sayings of God; and in the New Testament the
Doctrine and Miracles declared in the four Evangels is expressly therein
ascribed unto Christ who is God, as well as Man; The Apostles also often Assert
the Divine Authority of their Doctrine. Except then they will conclude these
Scriptures to be all mere Fictions and Lies, they must yield the Scriptures to
be the Word of the Living God, either immediately declared by himself, or
mediately by his Servants, by him unerringly directed.

Fourthly, the Scriptures are full of Precepts, Prohibitions, Promises, and
Threatenings: But the Relation or Narration of an experience is none of all
these: Ergo the Scriptures are not universally (at least) a Narration of Saints
experiences.

Lastly, there is much Doctrine Taught in the Scriptures that could never be
acquired by Experience, such as, the Doctrine of Predestination, of the
Hypostatical union of God and man in one Person, of Justification by the
Righteousness of Christ, of the general Judgment, of the three persons in the
Godhead. And what think the Quakers of the Prophetical part of Scripture,
Infallibly foretelling things at a great distance to come? Are these Narrations
of Saints Experiences? Or was the knowledge of them got by Experience? O
learned Divines! Hence we may see that, at least, some of the Quakers prefer
themselves and their Doctrine to the Prophets and Apostles and their Doctrine,
which is (say they) but the Saints Words and Testimony from their own
particular Experiences; but the Quakers Doctrine must be Divinely Inspired,
forsooth.

Fourth QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures were the Rule of Enochs Faith, Noah's Faith, and
Holy men in the Old World, and Second World? Whether or not they were a Rule to
Abraham's Faith, Isaac and Jacobs Faith, and Moses 's Faith, and all the
Patriarchs? And whether or not they had Scriptures till Moses did Write them?
Answer these things by plain Scripture.

SVRVEY.
This Query comprehends the great controversy with the Quakers concerning the
Rule of Faith and Manners; and therefore because my Survey will be large, I
shall divide it into three Sections. In the first I shall prove the Scriptures
to be the Rule of Faith and Manners. In the Second I shall confute an
exception, or distinction which some of the more subtle of our adversaries
offer to our Arguments. In the third I shall answer their Objections.

SECT. I. Proving the Scriptures to be the Infallible Rule.
The thing that the Quakers drive at in this Query, is, that because Enoch,
Noah, and others in the Primitive world had not a written Word of God for the
Rule of their Faith; That therefore neither should the Written Word of God be
the Rule of our Faith. This, beside that it is their known Principles (as
Witnesses their foresaid Confession of Faith, called, The Principles of Truth,
wherein they most frequently cry up the Light within every man as his only
Rule, and decry the Scriptures and all external Ordinances to their utmost
Breath, as may be seen page 5, 78, 79, 80, 92, 102, 103, 124, 133, 136, 140) Is
either the Scope of this their present Query, or else it has no Scope at all,
and so it must be the fruit of some Distraction, they having thereby intended
nothing. Well then, the Quakers must either acknowledge Scripture-Testimony for
Truth (as I hope they will, seeing they here require us to answer by Scripture)
and then we shall soon see an end of the Question from the Scripture; or else
they must deny Scripture-Testimony to be true, and shall proclaim God a Liar,
whose Testimony the Scriptures are, and by whose Inspiration they were given
(as is proved in the former Queries Survey) which is the height of Blasphemy.

These things premised, I Assert, against the Quakers, that the Scriptures are
the Infallible Rule of our Faith and Manners.

That the Scriptures are Infallible is sufficiently proved at the Survey of
their former Query; where we proved them to be of Divine Inspiration, and the
Word of the Living God, and not of any mere Creature, and so they cannot
deceive; so that for their Infallibility we need say no more. That therefore
the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Manners I prove.

For first, That must be the Rule of Faith and Manners by which every matter of
Faith and Manners ought to be examined seeing every thing that is examined must
be examined by its Rule, or else it will be done by Guess and Rule of Thumb, as
the Jest is. But every matter of Faith and Manners ought to be examined by the
Scriptures: Ergo the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Manners. The Major is
proved already. I prove the Minor from Isai. 8.20. Where we are expressly
Commanded to go to the Law and the Testimony with every matter of Faith and
Manners, and it is positively declared, that if it be not according to these,
there is no Light in it, which is a sufficient Prohibition to receive it. And
the Law and Testimony are the Scriptures. Exodus 32.15. and 34.29. Deuteronomy. 31.24,
26. 2 King. 22.8. Neh. 8.1, 3, 8. Psalm. 78.5.

Secondly, Christ says to the Sadducees upon a great Article of Faith, that
ignorance of the Scriptures caused them to err therein: Ergo the Scriptures are
the Rule of Faith. The Antecedent is Taught by Christ himself, Mat. 22.29.
Mark. 12.24. Ye err (says he) not knowing the Scriptures, and because ye know
not the Scriptures. I prove the Consequence, because if the ignorance of any
other Doctrine, except the Rule of Faith, should cause a man to err upon an
Article of Faith; then though a man did perfectly know the Rule of Faith, yet
he might err in the Faith through ignorance. But the Consequent inferred is
repugnant (for then he knows all the Articles of his Faith, and yet he believes
wrong through ignorance, that is, because he knows not what to believe:)
Therefore the Antecedent from which it is inferred is also repugnant.

Thirdly, Christ sends all men to the Scriptures for the Rule of Faith and
Duty: Ergo the Scriptures are certainly the Rule of both. The consequence is
Infallible, seeing Christ did not mistake himself. The Antecedent is clear from
Luke. 16.28, 29, 30, 31. Where while Christ is delivering his Doctrine for all
men in the parable of the Rich Glutton, he sends all men to the Scriptures for
their Direction and Rule in the entire business of Repentance and Salvation,
and that they may not be Eternally Damned (and so he shows we must stand to
them upon pain of Damnation) and delcares, that if they listen not to the
Scriptures, there is no more hope of them, and he will give them no other Rule to
Guide and Direct them. They have Moses and the Prophets (says he) that is the
Scriptures written by them, let them hear them, and if they will not hear them,
one arisen from the Dead (which he refuses to grant them) will not get them
persuaded. There is a bundle of Arguments in one Text proving the Scriptures to
be our Rule.

Fourthly, the Jews at Berea are highly commended for examining by the
Scripture the Doctrine of Grace Preached to them even by a Paul (Act. 17.11,
12.) that they might know if the things which he Taught were so, as the Text
says; for albeit Paul was an infallibly-inspired Apostle, yet seeing they knew
not that, and he being but newly arrived unto them, they had no proof of his
Doctrine, and there being great danger from abounding false Teachers, they are
therefore highly commended for putting his Doctrine to the Test and Trial of
the Fore-constitute Scriptures, wherewith every Doctrine of Religion was in
substance and matter to consent and agree, and they otherwise not to receive
it, Isai. 8.20. Therefore the Scriptures are the undoubted Rule of Faith and
Duty. The Consequence is plain, seeing they would never have been commended for
examining and trying his Doctrine by the Scriptures, except the Scriptures were
the Rule, or for making that a Rule for examining and receiving of Doctrines of
Faith, which is no Rule of matters of Faith; Nay, for this they would have been
deservedly discommended.

Fifthly, The Scriptures are able to make us Wise unto Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Therefore they contain the Rule of Faith and Duty. The Consequence is easy,
seeing without the Rule of these, we cannot be wise unto Salvation, but plainly
ignorant of the way thereunto, having no Rule to direct us.

Sixthly, the whole Scriptures were given by Inspiration of God, and they were
written purposely for the Churches Instruction and Learning, as is before
showed: Therefore they must surely be the Rule of Faith and Duty; for, I am
sure, there is nothing wanting here that is requisite to the Constituting of
them for a public Rule; or else let the Quakers (if they can) show us what
that is; for I can not perceive it, without the Spectacles of their Eagle-eyed
Inspirer.

Seventhly, That Doctrine must be the Rule of Faith and Manners, which in all
matters of Faith and Manners we ought to observe and take heed to, as a
Doctrine full of shining light for our instruction and direction: but that is
the Scriptures: Therefore the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Manners. The
Major is clear, nor do the Quakers deny it. The Minor is laid down in 2 Pet.
1.19, 20. where Peter, after his rehearsing of the glorious Revelation on the
Mount; at the Transfiguration (which was as glorious a Revelation as any else)
he adds, That they had a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto they did well
to take heed as unto a light shining, etc. knowing this first, that no Prophecy
of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation; here it is clear, that it is
the Scriptures which he calls, the more sure Word of Prophecy, and prefers
before all transient Revelations; not as if the Scriptures were more certain in
themselves (Quoad se) than Gods immediate voice from Heaven; but because they
are a more sure way in regard of us; (Quoad nos) they being a Written, yea
Sealed and Sworn Evidence and Contract of the whole Bargain and Terms of
Salvation and Life, delivered into our custody to be perused by us upon all
occasions; and this gives more assurance, in regard of our weakness, than a
passing Revelation, and is more ready for our constant direction, than a
transient Revelation, which we cannot always command, nor retain often in our
memory till we understand; nor are all men able to bear them; That on the Mount
made the Disciples roave and mistake exceedingly, Mark. 9.6.

The Quakers answer, (in their Confession of Faith, or Principles of Truth,
page 135, 136, 140.) That by the more sure Word of Prophecy, the Apostle means
the Light within us, and so they deny our Minor. But contrariwise the 20 Verse
there, where he cautions the interpreting of the Scripture-Prophecy, clearly
coheres with the 19 Verse, as a caution subjoyned concerning the same thing
which he had there called, The more sure Word of Prophecy; and so by the more
sure Word of Prophecy must be meant the Scriptures, because of the clear
coherence. Secondly, I must demand of the Quakers to show, (if they can) How
the Dictat or Light within is more sure than Gods immediate Voice from Heaven,
such as that was at the Transfiguration? I have showed how the Scriptures are
called, and are so in regard of us; but I cannot understand, how the Light
within can be, or be called so. Thirdly, The Testimony of other Scriptures
produced, and to be produced, will not permit this violent Gloss.

Again, They ordinarily answer to this Scripture, That in it we are only
appointed to take heed to the Scriptures, until the day dawn, and the Day Star
arise into our hearts, that is (as they expound) till the Holy Ghost be
bestowed on us, but no longer. But contrariwise; First, by this answer, they
retract their former Gloss upon the Text, and confess the more sure Word of
Prophecy here, to be meant of the Scriptures, and not the Light within.
Secondly, By this answer, they overturn one of their own chiefest Principles,
viz. That all men ought to follow the Light within: for now they yield, That
such as have not received the Holy Ghost, (and these are not few) are exhorted
here to follow the Scriptures, and not the Light within them. Thirdly, Hereby
they insinuate, That the Scriptures (in their Opinion) serve for nothing to
Renewed Men and Believers, who are born of the Spirit and Sealed therewith, (
Joh. 3.5. Romans 8.9. Ephesians. 1.13.) and so the Scriptures (as they will) are
recommended only to Men unrenewed; and so that blessing pronounced upon the
Readers, Hearers, and Keepers of the things written in the Scriptures, ( Revel.
1.3. and 22.7.) is designed and belongs only to unrenewed Men, seeing the
reading, hearing, and keeping of the things written therein, whereunto the
blessing is annexed, belongs only to them, as the Quakers will. What? Does not
Paul, Peter, and John direct all their Epistles, and the Book of the Revelation
to the Churches, the Saints, and them that had obtained like precious Faith
with them, delivering them many Rules of Faith and Manners therein? See their
Inscriptions (I pray,) and these will inform you better.

Eighthly, That must be the Rule of Faith by which we are commanded to try the
Spirits, (1 John 4.1.) seeing we cannot try the Spirits or Doctrines without
the Rule; for that were to try them by guess: But that whereby we are commanded
to try the Spirits, must certainly, be the Scriptures, seeing the Quakers do
not as yet openly profess the Popish Lesbian Rule, of Believing as the Church
of Rome does; and it cannot be the dictat or light within, that we are to try
them by, seeing, that is as fallible, as their Light whose Doctrines I try; and
George Keith (a Ringleading Quaker) confesses the possibility of their
declining from Infallibility, both in Speaking and Writing, (and consequently
in Examining or Judging too) in his Quakerism no Popery, page 33. and beside,
the Dictat within has no Divine Institution to be the Rule; and if it were the
Rule, then the Dictat within every diverse Man would be the Rule to try the
Dictat or Dectrine proceeding from the Dictat in another, which would make the
Dictat of every Man both Superior and Inferior to the Dictat of another;
Superior when it tries and examines, and Inferior when it, or its Doctrine is
tried and examined, which is repugnant.

Ninthly, John shows us, (1 John 4.6.) That the true and sound embracing of
their Doctrine, (now written in the Scriptures) is a manifest evidence of the
Spirit of Truth, and the rejecting of it, a manifest evidence of the Spirit of
Error; and so their Doctrine written in the Scriptures, must be the Rule of
Faith and Manners: For, How shall it be an evidence of the Spirit of Truth, to
embrace a Doctrine that is not the Rule? this is liker to be an evidence of the
contrary; Or, How shall it be an evidence of the Spirit of Error, to reject
such Doctrine? this also is rather an evidence of the contrary, providing the
Rule be retained.

Lastly, God denounces all the plagues mentioned in the Scriptures (quake that
dreads then) against every Man that shall presume to add in matters of Faith
and Duty, (for of these its meant) to the Doctrine and Rules written in the
Scriptures. Therefore the Scriptures do certainly contain the Rule and whole
Rule of Faith and Manners. The antecedent is laid down, Rev. 22.18. where it is
peremptorily said, That if any Man shall add unto these things that are written
in the Scriptures, (for there is the like reason, and no other, or more reason,
against adding to this Book of the Revelation, and the rest of the holy
Scriptures, after the Canon is completed; and this Sanction is added here in
the close of this Book, as the close of the whole Scriptures) God shall add to
him all the plagues written in the Book. The consequence is also evident: For,
if not the Scriptures, but some other Doctrine were the Rule, then we not only
might add to the Scriptures in matters of Faith and Duty, but we ought, of
necessity, to set up that other Doctrine, as the Rule and Directory of both,
which is much worse, methinks, than any partial adding; and so we could not be
liable to such a doom for a partial adding.

And hence by a few arguments of many that may be produced, we see, that the
Scriptures are the infallible Rule of our Faith and Manners, that sure Word of
Prophecy whereunto we ought to take heed; and if an Angel from Heaven shall
preach another Gospel to us, than that which Christ and the Apostles did, let
him be accursed. Every new Dispensation of the Covenant by the Ministry of
Men, though it were but only new in the manner, was confirmed by Miracles and
Wonders, ( Exodus 4.28.30. Deuteronomy. 34.11, 12. 2 Cor. 12.12. Heb. 2.4.) much more
need has the Quakers Doctrine of such confirmations, being new, not only in
the manner, but also in the matter contrary to the Doctrine formerly dictated
by the Holy Ghost, and left upon Record unto us; nor heard we ever of so great
a company of Inspired Teachers, as all the Doctors of the Quakers pretend to
be, and never one Miracle or Wonder to be had amongst them all, excepting only
their extreme Infatuation and Brain-sickness, or that they still retain the
proportion and features of Human bodies, having quite enervated their rational
essence.

SECT. II. Proving the Scriptures to be the principal Rule, and overthrowing
the Light within.
George Keith an Arch- Quaker, and a Man too learned as he imploys it, does
here distinguish our Arguments, yielding us; That the Scriptures are the most
complete external Rule of Faith that is in the World; but, That they are not
for all that, the Principal Rule of Faith, but only a Secundary Rule thereof;
and that the Spirit, or his Dictat within, is the Principal Rule, (in his
Quakerism no Popery, pages 9.13, 25, 59, 108, 109, 110, 111.) and, like Proteus
turning himself into all shaces, (...) ^mes designs Christ himself, oftener the
Spirit (...) he (...) of the Spirit within, to be (...) oftnest the dictat^
(...)

But, I am sure, if George Keith be in earnest while he would have Christ
himself, or the Spirit himself to be our Rule, he is beside himself; For a
Person cannot be a Rule of Faith, for that must be some complex Proposition,
Direction, or Precept, and the like: but Christ and the Spirit are Persons, and
so they cannot be a Rule of Faith. The Major is already proved, nor will the
Quakers deny it. But George Keith (as many of his Brethren, to my hearing) does
flatly refuse the Minor, as an uncertain unscriptural notion, and a barbarous
heathenish term to speak of a Person in the Godhead, in his Quakerism no
Popery, page 97.104. and so, according to him, there are no Persons at all in
the Godhead; (ah Blasphemy!) for if there be, I am sure, we may say there are;
and if Men believe that there are Three Persons in the Godhead, they will not
refuse to say the same. The Quakers then do reject both the thing and notion,
and believe not there are Three Persons in the Godhead: And therefore that
there are, I shall shortly prove.

First, The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are each of them an Intelligent Being,
subsisting incommunicably, or distinctly from another: Ergo, each of them is a
Person. The consequence, being from the Definition to the thing defined, cannot
be denied without a broad contradiction; for, if they grant the Antecedent,
that is the thing which all the World understands by a Person. The Antecedent I
prove, for that each of them is an Intelligent Being, Subsisting, the Quakers
dare not deny, and their great Works declare it; and that they subsist
Incommunicably, or distinctly from one another, (though in the same Godhead) I
prove, because one and the same Subsistence cannot beget it Self, or be
begotten by it Self, nor proceed from it Self, as is palpable: but the Father
begets the Son, the Son is begotten by him, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from
both; and so they must be distinct Subsistences, or subsist distinctly.

Secondly, There are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, Son, and the
Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. Ergo, they must either be Three Persons, or Three Gods,
(which is the beight of impossibility) or let the Quakers show, how they will
call them Three; for, though they also be one, viz. one God, yet the same Text
cited, says they are Three too. I could never get any other answer to this from
a Quaker, but, That they are three Manifestations, viz. of Moses, of Christ,
and of the Spicit. But, if these were the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the
World is much elder than they, and then, Who made it?

Thirdly, While Christ proves Himself the Light of the World against the Jews,
who denied it, He says, ( John 8.17, 18.) It is also written in your Law, That
the Testimony of two Men is true; I am one that bears Witness of my Self, and
the Father that sent Me bears Witness of Me. Now Christ and the Father could
not have been two Witnesses according to their Law, except they be two distinct
Persons: for, their Law admitted the Testimony of two Men proof enough, because
it was the Testimony of two Persons, and otherwise the Testimony had not been
admitted as proof enough. Christ then clearly teaches Himself and the Father to
be two Persons, while he asserts that their Witnessing was proof enough
according to their Laws demand.

Lastly, Christ is said to be the express Image (in the Original Language
Character) of the Fathers Person; ( Heb. 1.3.) Therefore the Father is a
Person, and Christ also, and distinct Persons; for the Father is plainly called
so, and the Son being the very express of his Person, and exact transumpt, must
be one also, and distinct from the Fathers Person. They answer. The Word is
wrong turned here, and, that its turned right in Heb. 11.1. where it is called
Substance. But contrariwise, the word is [(...)] in the Original, which
properly signifies a Subsistence, or Person, and in an Intelligent Being
subsisting distinct, it always signifies a Person; and so the Union of Christ's
two Natures in one Person, is usually called, the Hypostatical Union; and to
turn the word Substance here, would be guilty of Arianism, and would infer,
that Christ is not the same in Substance with the Father, but another Substance
like his Substance. It is then no unscriptural Notion: but these things by the
way. Now to the main point.

I assert against George Keith and his Accomplices, That the Scriptures are the
principal Rule of Faith and Manners, and not any Dictat within: and I prove it
first, that the Scriptures are, and next, that the Dictat within is not.

First then, The Scriptures (we have seen already) are by Divine Authority
ordained to be the Rule of our Faith and Manners, and there is no Divine
Authority ordaining any other Rule, either above them, or of equal Authority
with them; or else, let it be showed, and till then, let them consider, that we
are still sent to the Scriptures as the Rule of all matters of Faith and Duty,
( Isai. 8.20. Luke 16.29.31. 2 Pet. 1.19.) but never to any Dictat within; they
do not say, To the Dictat within; but to the Law and Testimony, to Moses and
the Prophets, etc. Therefore the Scriptures are infallibly the principal Rule,
seeing there is none above them, or equal with them.

Secondly, The Scriptures are the Rule, ruling of Faith and Manners, and not
ruled by any other Rule; or else, they are a Rule ruling thereof, and
themselves ruled by another superior Rule; there cannot be a third thing said,
for the members of the distinction are contradictory: But the Scriptures are
not a Rule ruling and ruled, seeing a Rule is therefore ruled by another Rule,
because it is not essentially right, but fallible and may deceive, (or else it
needed no Rule to rule it:) but, I hope, the Quakers will not say, That the
Scriptures are fallible and may deceive, seeing they are of Divine Inspiration,
and the Word or Words (as the Quakers yield) of the most High God: Therefore
the Scriptures are the Rule ruling, and not ruled of Faith and Manners, and so
the principal Rule thereof.

Thirdly, The Scriptures have Intrinsecal and Essential Authority within
themselves, without derivation from any other Rule, (contradict who dare?)
seeing they are the Word of God, and he deeds not (I judge) derive Authority to
his Word from any other Rule, Humane or Divine: Ergo, they are the Supreme and
Principal Rule of Faith and Manners.

George Keith will (may be) endeavor to retort this Argument, as inferring,
That the Dictat of the Spirit within is the principal Rule, as well as the
Scriptures, seeing that is the Word of God, as well as they. But, by his
favor, An sit, is before Quid sit, and Prius est esse, quam tale, vel tale
esse; he should first prove, that there is such an infallible immediate
objective Dictat (as he calls it) in every Man, and then he says something. For
I deny that there is such a Dictat of the Spirit in every Man to be his Rule,
seeing every Man has not the Spirit, but Believers only; ( Romans 8.9. 1 John
4.13. Jude 19.) and if every Man have the Rule of Faith revealed to him by a
Dictat within, Why have not Americans as much knowledge of that Rule as we
Christians? nor do I believe, that any Man has such an immediate Dictat for
revealing to him the Doctrine of Salvation, who can read or hear, (for others I
am not concerned, nor means of;) nor is there any necessity thereof, that being
so abundantly manifested in the Scriptures.

And whatever particular event a Man may have immediately revealed to him, and
he therefore bound to believe it, This concerns not our Argument concerning the
Doctrine of Salvation, and the Scriptures wherein that was not contained, more
than the particular commands of a Prince to one, two, or three of his Subjects,
will infer that, not his public Laws, but his private immediate commands must
be the rule to all.

Nor needs a Believer an immediate objective Dictat to assure him that he is a
Child of God; (as George Keith would have it) seeing an effective illumination
of the Spirit upon our understanding, (which is also called Subjective in
regard of us) opening and enlightening it is eyes to behold the Scripture-marks,
and inabling it to reflect upon and discern the graces of the Soul in their
gracious actings, will do the business infallibly, though not immediately, but
per medium; for, having these Premises, and that assistance, and the mind not
diverted, it will be forced to the consequence by the clearness of the
objective connection, seeing the meanest Saint cannot resist such evidence of
consequence; nor can a thousand Dictates within merely objective, make a Man
one whit the wiser, without subjective light to perceive them, more than a Man
pur-blind can see the Sun-shining, till his eyes be opened; albeit George Keith
spurns at this distinction between Objective and Subjective, (which in regard
of the Spirit, is called Effective) as Antichristian and deceitful, (in his
Quakerism no Popery, pages 83.84.) as if he would for ever confound an Object
with an Efficient Cause, or a Subject.

Fourthly, A Rule that has authority over all other Rules, and none over it,
must inevitably be the Principal and Supreme Rule. But the Scriptures are such
a Rule: Ergo, they are the Supreme Principal Rule. I prove the Minor (the Major
needs not) because we may not receive any Rule from without, or Dictat within,
which agrees not with the Scriptures, (as George Keith seemingly also confesses
in his Quakerism no Popery, page 28.) to the Law and Testimony, if they agree
not with that, there is no light in them; he is Cursed that Preaches another
Gospel and not agreeing with that we have, and so cannot be Blessed that
receives it; The Plagues are added to them that add to the Scripture-Rule, much
more to such as Teach, or receive a contrary Rule: on the other hand we may,
nay, we are bound to receive the Scripture-Doctrine, though it do not agree
with the Dictate within, or any other pretended Rule, as is clear from many
things foresaid, and the Quakers will not deny, sure. These things hold firm.
Again, it does not hold, that we must not receive the Scriptures if they agree
not with the Dictat within, but may receive the Dictat within, tho it disagree
with the Scriptures. And so the Scriptures have Authority over all other Rules,
and none else has Authority over them.

Now albeit we have sufficiently already affronted the Dictate within; yet
because it is worthy of a Thousand Deaths for its proud Usurpation, we shall
reach it some few Blows more in particulari Specie.

First therefore, the principal Rule of Faith and Manners must be Essentially
right and Infallible; or else we can trust nothing to it with any assurance,
and all were gone, it would mislead and deceive us: But the Dictate within
every man is not Essentially Right: Ergo it is not the principal Rule. I prove
the Minor, because many men have not the Spirit, as all unrenewed men ( Romans
8.9. 1 John 4.13. Jud. 19.) and so their Dictate within, not proceeding from
the Spirit, cannot be Essentially Right, or the principal Rule of Faith and
Manners; and this destroys the Quakers Principle, that the Dictate within every
man is the principal Rule. Nor does the Spirit Teach even Believers by an
inward immediate objective Dictate, seeing God and Nature do nothing in vain,
and Beings ought not to be multiplied without some necessity, which here there
is none that can be showed; for seeing the whole Doctrine of Salvation is
abundantly made known in the Scriptures, so that our understandings being
subjectively Enlightened, and our Eyes in any measure opened, we may plainly
see therein the exactness and purity of the Law, the Riches of the Promises,
and, in fine, our whole Rule by the good help of other means and Ordinances
appointed to further our Instruction and Knowledge in these, by opening up and
explaining their Doctrine and Sense, and so clearing the Object, quoad nos, or
in order to our understanding. And what needs then (I pray) another objective
Rule?

Neither is there any reason for the continuance of the immediate Inspiration
of the Doctrine of Salvation in the Church, more than all the other
extraordinary Gifts (which are gone long since) the Entire Rule of Faith and
Manners being now completed, and publicly Recorded, which is as Infallible as
any immediate Dictate, seeing it is the Word of God that cannot Lie; and it is
more sure for us than any, in regard of the Devils Cunning, who can, and often
does bear in a strong Delusion with so much of seeming Evidence, as makes it be
received for a Divine Dictate. And what needs more? George Keith who pleads
that the Dictate within, is the principal Rule and Touchstone of all Doctrines
(in his Quakerism no Popery, page 59. albeit most inconsistently (as I think)
he grants the same Authority to the Scriptures, page 28 thereof) does yield
that, for all their Infallible Dictate, yet its possible for them (and that is
much indeed) both to Speak and Write (and so to think too) in a mixture (
Quakerism no Popery, page 33) that is to say, Fallibly: for if he means of a
Midway betwixt, Fallibly and Infallibly, (which I am not yet acquainted with,
nor ever read it) he speaks, like a man in a mixture, Infallible Contradiction.
For all the World cannot find me a midst betwixt Fallible, and Infallible.
George Keith then (it seems) is not Infallibly, or immediately Inspired: for he
can both Speak and Write in a mixture, which a man immediately Inspired cannot
be Guilty of. Habernus confitentem reum.

Secondly, that cannot be the principal Rule of Faith and Manners which has no
Divine Institution to Warrant it; or else it is but an Usurper. But the Dictate
within every, I or any man, has no Divine Institution to Warrant it to be the
principal Rule of these; or else produce it (if they can) for all they have
hitherto produced shall be Confuted and Answered too when I come to to their
Objections. Therefore the Dictate within every man, or any man, is not the
principal Rule of Faith and Manners.

Thirdly, a Rule to be examined by another Rule cannot be the principal Rule of
Faith and Manners, I am sure: But the Dictate within all men is such; Therefore
it is not the principal Rule of Faith and Manners. The Minor I prove from Isai.
8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony (says the Text) if they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them; where all
Dictates, or Doctrines of Faith and Manners are very expressly commanded to be
Tried and examined by the Scripture, and if they agree not with that, not to
receive them; seeing so, there is no Light in them, they are but Dictates of
Darkness. And again, George Keith Confesses, that all Doctrines and Principles
of Christian Religion are to be applied to the Scriptures, as a Test and
Touchstone in all external Debates and Disputations whatsoever, and if they
agree not therewith, to be denied and disowned for ever ( Quakerism no Popery,
page, 28.) and so the Scriptures are a Superior Rule to the Dictate within (if
it be a Doctrine of the Christian Religion) seeing it must be examined by these
as a Test and Touchstone, and rejected, if it agree not therewith. I can say no
more, than is dropped (twixt sleeping and waking perhaps) from the Pen of an
Adversary.

Fourthly, the Scriptures (we have seen before) are the principal Rule of Faith
and Manners positively: Ergo the Dictate within cannot be such a Rule. The
Consequence is plain, seeing two Rules, each of them positively principal, are
repugnant; for so each of them should be above, and below the other.

Fifthly, if the Dictate within be the principal Rule of Faith and Manners,
then we must either follow its Directions absolutely, and without Questioning
or Trying them; or else conditionally only that they be right, if conditionally
only, then we must examine them by some other Rule, to know if they be right,
or not; and so they are not the principal Rule (against the supposition) nor
Infallible, seeing an Infallible Rule needs no Superior Rule to be examined by,
being it self Essentially right. If then we must follow the directions of the
Dictate within absolutely, and without any Trial, then he whose Dictate within
prompts him to think that Christ has not two distinct Natures, or that he has
two distinct Persons as well as Natures, or that he is not Coeternal, Coequal,
and Co-substantial with the Father, or First person, or that his Sufferings and
Death was not a Satisfaction for our Sins, or that God is a Corporeal Being
subject to all humane Passions, or that in the Eucharist the Bread is
substantially Changed into the Body of Christ, or that the Pope is Infallible
(and so a great Quaker, or else each of them a small Pope) or that we are not
Justified by the Righteousness of the Redeemer; I say, all of these, and other
such deluded Heretics must absolutely follow these Principles as their
principal Rule. And if the Dictate within bid a man Worship the Sun and Moon,
and Idols of Gold and Silver, worship the Devil, and cut his own Throat too, he
is bound to obey his Rule. There is nothing can be answered to these things but
this, viz. That these and such like evil Directions cannot proceed from the
Spirit of God, but allanerly from a man's own self and the Devil. But granting
all this to be most true, yet the Knot is not untied. For how shall I know and
discern an Imposture of the Devil meeting with my deceitful heart, from the
Dictate of the Spirit, without some Rule to try it by? Thou will answer, that
the Dictates of the Spirit have a Self-evidence in themselves to assure that
they are his Dictates, and hereby they shall be known. But first, the Spirit
does not now adays Inlighten us in that measure as to make us immediately
Inspired and Infallible, seeing George Keith himself may possibly both Speak
and Write (and so think too) in a mixture, for all his Spirit. Secondly, all
men have not the Spirit to direct them Infallibly, though he did do it to them
that have him, by an immediate Dictate. Thirdly, let the Dictate within have a
Selfevidence unto him to whom it is actually presented, yet the Devil, a
cunning Serpent and subtle Sophister, and a great pretended Saint too when he
transforms himself into an Angel of Light, can present an Imposture unto
another man that wants that Dictate, or to him that had it at another time, but
now, he at the time present actually has not that Dictate, with so much
seeming Evidence as, with the concurrence of a deceitful heart, will make it be
received for a Divine Truth: for he had strong Delusions in his Treasury (2
These. 2.11.) or Efficacious, as the word is, which mainly consists in their
seeming Evidence. What shall we do now, if we want a Rule to discern the one
from the other by? viz. we will fall into the Devils Catch-net, as before the
Scriptures were Written they were but very few that escaped his Snare, whereas
with the spreading of the Scriptures into the World, the Worship of the true
God, and Religion grew also; nor is the true God at this day Worshipped where
the Scriptures are wanting.

SECT. III. Answering the Quakers Objections.
First therefore they Object from Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. Where Moses affirms,
that the Commandment which he Commanded the Israelites was not hidden from
them, or far off, but was nigh them in their Mouth and in their Heart:
Therefore the Light within in the heart is the Rule. See this Objection in the
Quakers Confession of Faith abovenamed, page 136.

Ans. It is so manifest how straightly Moses Ties the Israelites to the external
written Word of the Scriptures (for which see Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. and 28.58.
and 30.10. and 31.9, 10, 11. 12, 13, 26. and 32.46.) That it is a wonder that
any man can be so impudently Effronted, as to urge this Text against
Scripture-Rule; and for Establishing the Light within for the Rule. It is sure
by the Scriptures Cited, and by the Context of the place Objected, that Moses
straightly Ties them to the Scripture-Rule; and so he cannot mean in the Text
objected to absolve them from it, or send them to the Light within as the Rule.
Therefore they cannot gain their point here.

Secondly, Moses Means (as Paul expounds him, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9. compared with
verse. 5.) of the easiness of the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, in regard
of the conditions of the Covenant of Works, which both in themselves are more
hard and difficult, and also want that Promise and Efficacy of the Spirit which
is joined with the Covenant of Grace to make it effectual. In which Sense it
can make nothing at all for the Quakers.

Thirdly, I grant that this Text further Imports that the Doctrine of the
Scriptures Written by Moses was, in regard of things necessary to Salvation, in
some where or other so perspicuous and plain, that it was not hidden to these
Israelites, to whom he there Speaks, but that they in some measure understood
it, viz. some of them with an External, Historical, and Grammatical Evidence
only, as men unrenewed; others of them with a Spiritual, Internal, and saving
Evidence also, as renewed men, who albeit the Object be the same, yet they see
with other eyes and another Evidence then the other. But is there any thing
here for the Government of the Dictate within? Nay, neither less nor more; but,
on the direct contrary, (comparing 9, 10. Verses there with 15, 16, 17, 18.) he
ties them to the Scriptures as their chief Rule under the pain of Death and
Perishing. But the Quakers are so exact at consequences, that they can infer
from any Text a flat and direct contradiction to it self. Their Spirit hates
Logic.

Secondly, They object from Jerem. Chap. 31. Verse. 31, 32, 33, 34. where God
says, He will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel and Judah, not
according to the Covenant he made with their Fathers when he brought them out
of Egypt, which Covenant they brake: but this is the Covenant (says he) that I
will make with the House of Israel, after those days I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they shall no more teach every
Man his Neighbor and Brother, saying, Know the Lord: for, they shall all know
me, says the Lord: Therefore, (say the Quakers) What needs Scripturerule under
the New Testament, seeing the Law is written on peoples hearts? See this
objection in their foresaid Confession of Faith, page 112.

Ans. First, This Text will not serve the Quakers turn, for all men whatsoever:
for these on whose hearts the Law here is to be written, are also to have all
their iniquities forgiven, and to know the Lord, as the Text says: But these
things come not to pass in all men whatsoever; and so it cannot prove that the
Dictat within is to be the Rule for all men whatsoever.

Secondly, The Law was written in some measure upon the hearts of Gods People
in Old Testament times, and yet they were straightly tied to the external
Scipture-rule, as was even now showed; and so the writing of the Law upon our
hearts does not absolve us from Scripture-rule, more than them, or establish
the Dictat within for the Rule.

Thirdly, The Law is never perfectly written upon our hearts in this Life, (as
shall be proved at their Query concerning Perfection) and the Scriptures are an
effectual Instrument, whereby God does more and more write his Law upon the
hearts of his People, ( Psalm. 119.93. 98, 99. 104. Joh. 14.26. Joh. 20.31. Act.
17.11, 12. Romans 10.14. Ephesians. 6.17. 2 Timothy 3.16.) Seeing then, the Word of God
written in the Scriptures is an Instrument by which God writes his Law upon our
hearts, enlightening, instructing, renewing, correcting us; (albeit he can work
without Instruments, if so he pleases) it is evident, that this Text of
Jeremiah is so far from overthrowing the External Rule of Scripture, that on
the contrary, it includes it is subordinate influence in the writing of the Law
upon the hearts of People, as a thing requisite, seeing the Instrument of any
work is requisite to the work till it be finished.

Therefore Fourthly, We say, that the Prophet is there comparing the new
Dispensation of the Covenant under the Gospel, with the old Dispensation
thereof under the Law, and he promises in the Name of the Lord, That the new
Dispensation of the Covenant shall be attended with a greater measure of the
Spirit for writing the Law upon Men's hearts, than was bestowed under the old.
This Commentary agrees with other Scriptures, (2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.)
whereas the Quakers Gloss is most false and contrary to the same, as appears
from what is above said in the Survey of this Query.

As for that part of the Text, They shall not teach every Man. his Neighbor,
it is also a comparative expression, holding forth, that the Light under the
Gospel Dispensation shall be so great and clear, and so far exceed that under
the Old Testament, that, in comparison with these under it, we shall scarce
seem to need a Teacher, which is most true in the event. See the like
expression, Hos. 6.6. I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; that is, (as needs
no proof) he required Mercy more than Sacrifice; for he required Sacrifice also.

Secondly, This part of the Text, as it is urged by the Quakers, against all
external Teaching by the Scripture and a public Ministry, does much rather
overthrow all Christian mutual Teaching and Neighbourly Exhortation, than
Teaching by Scripture-Rule, or a Public Ministry, seeing the Teaching whereof
it speaks is, of Brother with Brother, and Neighbor with Neighbor. And seeing
the Quakers urge this Text against all external Teaching under the New
Testament, (as I in experience know they do, and their Principles of following
the Dictat within leads them to it) we charge them in their own Principles, and
as they would not go over the belly of their Light, to give over teaching of
their Blasphemous Errors: for there is none busier to teach Truth, than they
(alas!) are to broach and spread these.

Thirdly, They object from Luke 17.20, 21. where Christ being asked of the
Pharisees, When the Kingdom of God (that is the Messiah Kingdom: for the
Question is plainly concerning that) should come, He answers them, That the
Kingdom of God comes not with observation: for behold (says He) the Kingdom of
God is within you. See this objection in their Confession of Faith, pages 124,
133, 134, 135.

Ans. As to the first part of the Text here alleged, it is not much different
from, or rather it is a consequent of that which Christ says before Pilate, (
Joh. 18.36.) My Kingdom is not of this World, and the meaning clearly is that,
because the Kingdom of Christ is Spiritual, (which that Text of John asserts)
therefore it comes not with worldly, Pomp, and Show, and is not conspicuous for
worldly Splendour, (which is the meaning of this Text of Luke) so as Men of the
World can always discern it, as other Kingdoms: for, though it cannot be denied
that Christ had a Kingdom even at that time amongst the Jews; yet these
Pharisees did not discern it.

But if the Quakers would have the meaning of that saying to be, that the
Kingdom of Christ has no external Laws, Rules, and Ordinances in, or with it,
(unto which scope they do indeed wrest it in the pages of their Confession last
cited, and in which sense alone, and none else, it would serve the Quakers
purpose against external Ordinances, or for Establishing their inward
unwarrantable Dictat, as all see) their Commentary shall be most false; seeing
Christ had a Kingdom in the World in the days of the Old Testament, and a much
larger in the days of the Apostles under the New, and yet there were external
Laws, Rules, and Ordinances in, or with it at both these times, see Deuteronomy.
30.10. and 31.9, 10, 11, 12, 24, 26. Nehem. 8.8. 2 King. 23.2, 3. Isai. 8.20.
Matthew. 28.19, 20. Luke 16.29. and 22.19. Joh. 5.39.46, 47. and 20.31. Act.
8.35. and 17.11. and 18.28. and 28.23. Romans 15.4. 1 Timothy 4.13. 2 Timothy 2.2. and
3.15, 16. and 4.2. These Testimonies, and a thousand more that might be
instanced, do irresistably prove against all Contradictors, that there were
External Ordinances of Scripture, Sacraments, Preaching, etc. in, or with the
Kingdom of Christ, not only under the Old Testament, but also under the New;
and so the Quakers Gloss upon this Text of Luke is most false, That would have
the Dictat within to be the Rule of Faith and Manners, because the Kingdom of
God comes not with observation, that is, as they infer, it is all within, there
is nothing external in it. As for the second part of the Text alleged, (Behold
the Kingdom of God is within you) it may be as well, yea much better
translated, Behold the Kingdom of God is in the midst of you, or amongst you:
for the Original word (...) will read any of the ways, (as it is marked on the
Margin of our Bibles, among you) and the nature and condition of the Party to
whom Christ there speaks, being wicked Enemies of Christ and his Kingdom,
cannot so well admit of our vulgar translation: (The Kingdom of God is within
you) and in translating it the other way, it will be as much, if not more unto
Christ's Scope; for, because these Pharisees expected that the Messiahs Kingdom
should come with worldly Pomp and Grandeur, (of which conceit neither were
Christ's own Disciples free, Matthew. 20.21.) Therefore to confute that fancy, He
tells them, That the Kingdom of God comes not in that manner with worldly Pomp
and Splendour: for behold, (says He) the Kingdom of God is even now amongst you,
though ye perceive it not, because ye look for a Kingdom with worldly Pomp and
Grandeur.

Secondly, The Kingdom of God, that is, the Messiahs Kingdom, was certainly
come in the Apostles days after the pouring forth of the Spirit, and the Gospel
spread through the Gentile-world, (as the Quakers dare not, I think, deny) and
yet it was accompanied with External Laws and Ordinances, whereunto the Church
was straightly tied, (as I have many times before proved) and it was as much
within Gods People then as now: Therefore this Text can afford them no ground
for overturning of External Laws and Ordinances in the Church, and Establishing
their Dictate within for the Rule.

Thirdly, Let the Kingdom of God be within us, what then? Will that necessarily
infer the exclusion of all External helps and means for the inchoating,
promoting, and maintaining thereof in us? Nay, by no means; For how many things
are there inward in us, which yet are inchoate, nourished and maintained by
external helps and means, as the habits of Grammar, Logic, Mathematics, etc.
and have not all Tradesmen their External Rules, for all their inward habit of
the Art? yea, our very Lives (that are inward enough, I think) are upheld and
nourished by the help of things External. Why do not the Quakers nourish their
Lives, that are Essentially inward, with some inward dish of meat, and let
alone External meat and drink? These things dash the Argument in pieces, which
runs with a pur-blind consequence from an infirm Antecedent.

Fourthly, They object, That Christ promises to send his Spirit to guide us
into all Truth, Joh. 16.13. Therefore there is no need of External Rules and
Ordinances to guide us; yea, in their Confession where they propound this
Objection, they contend, That all External Ordinances ought to be rejected,
because of this promise of the Spirit. See their Confession, pages 73, 74, 75,
76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. Where they so triumph in this Argument, as if now
they had incontrollably gained the day, and for ever banished all External
Ordinances out of the Church, and had no more to do, but sing, Te Deum,
Victory, We have won. But he that Reckons without his Host may come to Reckon
twice.

Therefore I answer first, That this promise is only made to Believers, ( Joh.
7.38, 39. and 14.17.) and so it will not serve their turn for absolving all Men
from External Rules, and committing them to the conduct of their Dictate within.

Secondly, Though they should crack and rent their Brains to do it, they will
never prove from hence, that the Spirit is to guide us without the Word and
External Rule of Scripture: (which yet is the very thing in Controversy, and
which they must either prove, or else lose the Cause, for all their boasting)
for Christ does not promise here, nor any where in Scripture, That the Spirit
shall guide us without the written Word; and so from this Text, they can never
prove their point.

Thirdly, I proved at the Survey of their third Query above, and in my Answer
to their second Objection here, That the written Word of God is an Organ and
Instrument whereby the Spirit of God works upon our hearts, enlightening,
converting, renowing, and quickening us thereby; and so the Spirit is not here
promised to guide us without the written Word, but with it.

Lastly, We have the word of that same Spirit for it, and that since he was
poured out in the largest measure, That it is not he, but a Spirit of Error
that leads men when they hearken not to the Doctrine of the Apostles, (which is
written in the Scripture) 1 John 4.6. He exhorts us to take heed to the
Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. He affirms the Scriptures were written for our
learning, and that we might have hope, Romans 15.4. He affirms, that the
Scriptures are profitable for Reproof, Doctrine, Correction, and Instruction in
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. He threatens to take away their part out of the
Book of Life, that diminish from the Scripture-rule, Rev. 22.19. He pronounces
them blessed, that read, hear, and keep the Doctrine of the Scripture, Rev.
22.7. and 1.3. Whoever then rejects the Scripture-Rule, he intends not to
learn, or have hope, or profit any more in the way of Righteousness, or be
blessed, but to have his part taken out of the Book of Life. Will not that Man
be a good Christian, and a happy Saint, no doubt? Christ then means nothing
less than to absolve us from the External Rule of Scripture in this Text of
John, which the Quakers here wrest to that purpose, Vaunting themselves of an
Abortive Victory which shall never see the Sun, like so many windy
Bravadilloes, Et preterea nihil.

Fifthly, They object from the first Epistle of John 2.20, 27. where Saint John
says, But ye have an Unction from the holy One, and ye know all things, and the
anointing which ye have received abides in you, and ye need not that any Man
Teach you: Therefore there is no need of External Rules and Teaching, seeing
there is an Unction within that teaches all things.

Answ. First, The Apostle does not say, That all men whatsoever have that
Unction to teach them, but only such as he writes to, viz. Believers, and so
this Text will not serve their turn for all men.

Secondly, He does not say, That that anointing teaches without the External
written Word; yea, in this same Epistle, ( Chapter 4.6. Chapter 5.13.) He plainly shows
the contrary, where he affirms, That those that are of God hearken to (and so
are taught by; for there is no other end of their hearkening, but to be taught)
their External Doctrine, (which is written in the Scriptures) and that he wrote
this same Epistle, of purpose, to be an Instrument of Faith and Knowledge unto
them. And would they then force an Argument from this Epistle against
Scripture-Rule? nay, there is in this Epistle evident demonstrations
establishing it.

Thirdly, We have before showed, That the Spirit teaches us by the External
written Word, and the Quakers with all their wranglings can never make it
appear, that he teaches us without it; For, all the Texts which they produce,
or can produce, prove no more, but only that the Spirit teaches us, which we
never denied, but heartily acknowledge; but not one Text in all the Scriptures
can prove that the Spirit teaches us without the External Word, which is the
(...); and yet the Quakers by a new sort of Logic invented by their Alogical
Spirit for the abuse of Mankind, do from every Scripture-Text where it is said,
That the Spirit teaches us, very bruto-rationally infer: Ergo, he teaches us
without any External Mean, or Rule.

As for that of their knowing all things, it is not to be understood of all
things whatsoever, without exception, or else they had been too wise, and their
knowledge too infinite: but it is meant of all things Essential to Salvation,
which they knew in some measure, though not perfectly, (1 Cor. 8.2. and
13.9.12.) and therefore still needed Scripture-Rule to teach them more
knowledge. And therefore that part of the Text, That they needed not that any
man should teach them, is the same with that of Jeremiah, (whereof before) and
has the same comparative meaning, That the knowledge of Christ and of the
Covenant was now so manifest and clear, that having received the anointing for
opening the eyes of their understanding, viz. Effectively, (which is therefore
called Eye Salve, Rev. 3.18. which an inward objective Dictate cannot well be
called) that they might be able to behold it, They in regard of, and compared
with their Fathers living under the Old Testament Dispensation, did scarce seem
to need a Teacher, which is most true. For, though they needed still Teaching,
yet in comparison of them, they might all rather have been Teachers of others;
and so the Scope of the place is to commend the New Testament Dispensation
above that of the Old, and to decry External Ordinances and Rules, or Teaching
by Men; Yea, and if it were meant so, then the Apostle did here by his Practice
contradict his Doctrine, and by his Doctrine condemned his Practice as needless
and idle, for which he had a sad Account to make, according to Christ's
Doctrine, Matthew. 12.36. and if the Quakers think that this Text overturneth all
Teaching by Men, we again Charge them in their own Principles, and by the Law
they live on, to give over their Teaching, and spreading of their damnable
Delusions by Word or Writ: for, I am sure, the Quakers are but Men at the most,
and I think, scarce that, by the forfeiture they have made of their Reason.

Sixthly, They object from Jam. 1.21. where the Apostle Exhorts us, That laying
aside all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, we would receive with
meekness the Ingrafted Word, which is able to save our Souls: Therefore, (say
they) the Word which we are to receive is an Ingrafted Word within us.

Ans. First, The Original word [(...)] may be as well rendered, Apt to be
Ingrafted, and then where is the Argument, I pray?

Secondly, The context will not allow the Quakers Gloss: for it is a Word that
we are to receive, and hear, and which is able to save our Souls, (a Character
not given to the Light or Dictate within, any whereof Scripture, but to the
Scripture it is expressly given, 2 Timothy 3.15.) and we cannot in proper speech be
said to receive or hear a Dictate within, which we have already, and is not
audible properly: Therefore they cannot gain their point here, without
diverting the words from a proper to an improper sense, for which they must
show some necessity of the Analogy of Faith; or else it cannot be granted then.

Thirdly, The Apostle does not here Exhort us to commit our selves to the
conduct of the Light and Dictate within, as our Rule; but he exhorts us to
receive the Word of God the length of Ingrafting, (that is, so as it may take
root, and so grow and become fruitful in us) and that we let it not pass out at
one ear as it comes in at the other, being forgetful and negligent hearers; and
so the meaning clearly is, Receive the word, not forgetfully and negligently,
but receive it Ingrafted and rooting-wise. Any Man by reading the context
downward may see, that James there opposes receiving of the Ingrafted Word, or
Word Ingrafted, to the receiving of the Word forgetfully, superficially and
carelessly; and not to the receiving of an External Word, as the Quakers here
expound, taking the grounds of their Gloss out of their own Brainsick heads
alone, being no ways grounded on the Context, or agreeable to any other place
of the Scripture; whereas our Exposition is clearly founded on the Context, and
evidently arises therefrom, and has also the warrant of other Scriptures.
Nothing here then for the Quakers.

Seventhly, They object wonderfully (but it is a lying wonder like the rest)
from Heb. 6.1.2. where the Apostle Exhorts these Hebrews, That leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, they would go on toward perfection, not
laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward
God, of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and laying on of hands, of the Resurrection
of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment. See the Quakers Confession, page 63, 68,
77, 80. where they urge this Text against the Law, (so they call the whole
Scriptures) and against the Priests, (so they call the Ministers of the Gospel,
as all know) and against Baptism with Water, and the Lords Supper.

Answ. But so abusing and wresting the Text for banishing of External
Ordinances out of the Church, they with the same breath infer, That there
ought, or needs not be any of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ in the
Church; for, the Apostle Exhorts to leave these also, and that in the first
branch of the Exhortation; And did Paul (in earnest) Exhort them to reject
these? Did he Exhort them to reject the Foundation of Repentance and of Faith
toward God, which here he calls these Principles? The Building will surely go
to Ruin then, when the Foundation is gone. Is not that a brave Doctrine come
from an immediate Dictate?

Any Man, though half blind, may see, that the Apostle means, that they should
not stick always at the learning of the first common Catechetical, or
Rudimental Principles of Religion, (which he taxes them for ignorance of, in
the close of the former Chapter) but that, having laid the Foundation of these,
(not thrown them away, as the Quakers here expound) they should aspire and
endeavor after a further Proficience and Growth in the Knowledge of Christ and
Gospel Mysteries.

Eighthly, The Quakers object in this Query, That in the Primitive World, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. had not any written Word to be the Rule
of Faith and Manners; and therefore, (they mean to infer, and George Keith
explains it fully in his Quakerism no Popery, page 109. 111.) neither now is
the written Word our Rule.

Answ. A brave consequence forsooth; as if I should say, Christ was not come in
the Flesh in the Primitive World: Ergo, neither as yet is he come. Or, in the
Primitive World there were no Scriptures written: Ergo, neither afterward. I
was not born in the Primitive World, am not I born as yet then? I can hardly
believe so: for, Non-entities cannot act and write, as I am doing just now. The
External manner of Dispensation used with those of the Primitive World, can do
nothing to the Quakers now, (who live not in the Primitive World, except
perhaps by conceit and fancy) but in the last times, after the word of God is
committed to writing, and we commanded to observe that as our Rule.

George Keith, a Man more cunning than his Neighbors, albeit he acknowledges
the Scriptures for a complete External Rule, yet, he contends with all his
might, That the Dictate within is the Principal Rule, and the Scriptures but a
Secondary Rule, he will allow the second Room, or the Footstool to the
Scriptures; but the Throne in the Palace, and chief Seat in the Quakers
Synagoue must be reserved for their great Diana, the Dictate within. Therefore,
though this great Dagon has broke his neck already before the Ark, yet to
defend his Honor lying in the Dust,

He objects Ninthly, ( Quakerism no Popery, page. 9. 13.) That the Testimony of
the Spirit within is greater than the External Testimony of the Scripture; and
therefore the Dictate within must be the Principal Rule, not the Scriptures.

But first I Answ. That George Keith drives the Plough before the Oxen: for, he
must first prove, (or else nothing to his point) that every Man is furnished
with an immediate Dictate of the Spirit within him (which we deny any Man to
have, and he shall never prove) to reveal to him Infallibly the Doctrine of
Salvation, and then, and not till then, it may be to the purpose, to prove,
it is Men's principal Rule, by its Greatness: for be it great or small, it can be
no Rule to them who have it not, more than the Sun can enlighten me, when he
Shines not in my Hemisphere; and so the Argument is a mere impertinence: For,
An sit, is before Quid sit. Let him prove then, (and he shall be great Apollo)
that every man has such an immediate Dictate within him, and then he comes
time enough to prove that it, and not the Scriptures, is his greater and more
principal Rule.

Secondly, let the Testimony of the Light within be greater, or not, the
Scriptures (we see) are Divinely appointed to be the Rule and principal Rule,
and nothing can Infer against that, that the utmost of racked Invention is able
to devise. Nor did, or does God always make use of the greater Witnesses for
Testifying his Will to us; or else he had still employed Angels, and not men to
Teach us, and Christ had continued to this day, and the worlds end in his
Ministry upon the Earth, instead of giving us men of like Passions to Teach
us. It is plentiful security unto us, that we have a Rule of Faith and Duty
altogether Infallible, and an Evidence Written, Sealed, and Sworn to ( Heb.
6.17, 18.) delivered into our hand for our more cheerful assurance, to be
perused by us upon all occasions for resolving our doubts, directing our Duty,
and confirming our Faith. George Keith uses a number of more Arguments (in his
Quakerism no Popery, pages 108, 109, 110, 111.) endeavoring to prove the
Dictate within (and sometimes the Spirit himself, and sometimes Christ himself,
as his Arguments run) to be a better Rule than the Scriptures. But in general
they are all Guilty of the same very Impertinence that his Argument now
Discussed was liable to; and therefore the very same Answers that are given to
this Argument destroy them every one, so that we need not Arraign them
particularly.

But George Keith brings one Argument to prove that God Teaches us by an
immediate Dictate within, viz. because its absurd to say, that God Speaks no
more Intelligibly and perceptibly in an immediate way to the Souls of his
people, than to the Earth to bring forth Grass, or to the Fish to Vomit out
Jonah.

Ans. That he speaks more Intelligibly or perceptibly to his people, than to
such unreasonably Creatures as these, is granted; But that he does it in an
immediate way to us, I deny it, let George prove it. He does indeed immediately
inlighten us with a Divine Beam of Light in our understandings. Effectively
opening our Eyes (yea he always works with his Word, made by himself effectual,
as the immediate principal efficient of its gracious effects in us) that we may
understand what is written in the Scriptures, and know assuredly that it is he
that speaks to us therein; and so speaks to us much more Intelligibly, than to
unreasonable Creatures, whom he never dealt so with.

But that it is absurd if he do it, not by an Objective immediate inward
Dictate, I utterly deny, let him prove it, if he can. But does not George Keith
think it absurd to say, that a man is Taught by an unerring immediate Dictate
within, who cannot, upon his Life, tell how many Gods there are, or who is the
Redeemer? And so much for the Rule of Faith and Manners shall suffice.

Fifth QUERY.
Whether is there any Scripture or Command in all the New Testament for the
Sprinkling of Infants? Let us see Scripture, without Adding or Diminishing for
it, that ye do not bring the Plagues upon you for it; for the Plagues are Added
to them that Add: for we do expect plain Scripture from you for this, without
any Shuffling Meanings, or Consequences; or else never pretend Scripture Rule
more, but acknowledge that it has been your Meanings, and Consequences that
has been your Rule.

SVRVEY.
This Query very well Homologates with their Confession of Faith often
forementioned (page 25, 77, 79, 96, 126.) where they deny, not only
Infant Baptism, but moreover all Baptism with Water to be any Divine Ordinance
belonging to the New Testament. But they here impose upon us two Conditions or
Laws of our Disputation (being the absurd fruit of their foolish Dictate
within) which, before we handle the main Subject of the Query (which is
Baptism) it will not be amiss to Discuss. These two Conditions are,

That we neither interpret Scripture, nor draw Consequences therefrom for
Establishing of our Doctrine, or Thesis, or else that we never pretend
Scripture Rule more. This Certification is so Important and Peremptory, that it
will not be unworthy of the while to enquire into their Demands whereunto it is
annexed.

Therefore we must divide our Survey of this Query into four parts. The first
shall be concerning Scripture-Interpretation; The second concerning
Scripture-consequence, or Consequential Scripture; The third concerning Baptism
with Water; and the fourth concerning Infant Baptism.

SECT. I. Concerning Scripture-Interpretation.
While the Quakers here oppose Scripture-Interpretation they are indeed very
like themselves, and Speak in their own Language: for what external Ordinance
can a Quaker (taking his Dictate within for his Rule) like to hear of?
Therefore when they cannot get the Scriptures overthrown from being our Rule,
their next endeavor is, that, at least, they may render useless and unedifying
to the Bulk and Body of the people, as much of them as they can, even all the
Texts thereof (and these are not a few) which, without the help and labors of
a Gifted Interpreter, they cannot understand; and all the Doctrine thereof
which is not explicitly and formerly Enunciat therein, though yet it be
materially, really, and truly therein contained, and by sound Consequence
Infallibly follows therefrom.

One thing I shall here promise to the Quakers (and more no man can demand) and
that is, that whatever Scripture I shall bring for proving of our Doctrine, the
meaning thereof, which I shall allege, shall either be undeniably (even to a
Quaker) clear of it self; or else I shall evidently and irresistibly prove and
make good the same, and manifestly overthrow the forged meaning of the Quakers
thereupon; and, I think that is very fair. But that we may come to the
Questions to be here handled.

I must premise first, that the Scriptures ought not to be Expounded according
to any man's fore-conceived private Judgment and Opinion (that is, (...) 2 P^^.
1.20.) But they are to be Expounded according to the Analogy of Faith in
general, and by Comparison with other Scriptures that Speak more clearly to the
matter, or by the Scope, Connection, and Dependence of the purpose in the place
it self, compared with its Antecedents and Consequents. Thus the Apostle Paul
says, Let us Prophecy according to the proportion (in the Original Analogy) of
Faith (Romans 12.6.) and (I think) it is proved before, that the Scriptures are
the Rule of all Doctrines of Faith and Manners.

Secondly, I must premise, that the Scriptures are in several places so plain
and easy, especially in respect of things Essential, and simply necessary to
Salvation, that men of very common Capacities, may even without an Interpreter,
attain in some measure to understand them, as is clear both in the Scripture (
Deuteronomy. 30.11. Psalm. 19.7. and 119.130.) and also from Experience. For thus we
see that the attentive Reading, or Hearing of the Scriptures (though without
Commentaries) does beget some measure of Knowledge, especially of the most
Important and Essential Truths (which are therein with most frequency and
plainness delivered) in men of very ordinary and common Capacities; yea, and
otherwise, we could expect no more knowledge of these Truths, amongst men of
such Capacity, though they should never so much Peruse the Scriptures, than
amongst Americans that never heard of them; and in vain should such men be
appointed to take heed to the Scriptures ( Isai. 8.20. Luke 16.29. Joh. 5.39. 2
Pet. 1.19.) if the Scriptures were every where so difficult and obscure, that
they could no ways understand them.

Thirdly, I must premise, that for Gods Holy and Wise ends (for a view whereof
see Mr. Durhams excellent Key presixed to his Exposition of the Song of
Solomon, pages 32, 33, 34.) the Style of the Scriptures are in many other
places so difficult and dark (I mean in respect of our understanding) that
until they be Interpreted by men called of God (though mediately) and furnished
with Gifts for that end, their particular meaning cannot be reached by men of
no mean understanding; yea even those of the greatest gift do not, without much
diligence joined with great capacity, nor yet fully as to all particulars
understand them, as is evident by the Song of Solomon, and the many Mystical
Prophecies contained in the Books of Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah, Revelation,
etc. And yet these same obscure places, if they be skilfully Interpreted
according to the Analogy of Faith in general, and by comparison with other
parallel places of Scripture more perspicuous and plain, or by the scope,
connection, dependence, and circumstances of the place it self, will, without
difficulty be understood, and the sense delivered from the foresaid grounds,
understood to be the true meaning of the Text, by Men of very ordinary
Judgment; for many can discern the truth of an Exposition, when the clear
grounds thereof are represented distinctly before their eyes, who cannot by
themselves search out the methods to find these grounds, and apply them
thereunto, as is both clear in all experience, and also the one work (in
reason) is much easier than the other. Yea the Doctrine and grounds of a
Scripture-Text not a little perspicuous, being skilfully compared (which a well
gifted Interpreter, and whose daily work it is, is much more able to do, than
Men of ordinary reach, common Endowments, and other Imploys) with the Doctrine
and grounds delivered in other parallel places of Scripture in any measure
clear, though none of the clearest, they do by their consociated beams and
united rays more powerfully shine and more copiously send forth their light,
than any one of them apart could ever have done, even as a number of bright
shining Stars being placed into one Constellation, do more powerfully shine,
than any one of them apart could have done.

Lastly, I shall add, that the whole Scriptures were written for our Learning,
and are useful for Edification, as appears from Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16. These
things premised;

I Assert against the Quakers, (who both here, and many a time to my face have
denied it) That Scripture-Interpretation is necessary in the Church for Peoples
understanding, or better understanding of the Scriptures, and Edification, or
further Edification by them, and I prove it because,

If there be many Scriptures profitable for Edification, and written for the
Churches Learning, which, at least, a great part, yea, the far most part of the
Church cannot without Interpretation particularly understand, or so fully
understand, and so be edified, or so far edified by them; and with the help of
Interpretation may in some measure, particularly understand, or more fully
understand, and so receive edification, or a further edification by them; then
Scripture Interpretation is needful in the Church, that such People may
understand, or further understand these Scriptures, and so be edified, or
further edified by them, as is most evident: But the former is true, by our
premised Discourse preceding: therefore the latter also must be true.

Secondly, The Levites Expounded the Scriptures to the People, ( Nehem. 8.7,
8.) Philip Expounded them to the Eunuch, (Act. 8.30, 31, 34, 35.) Christ
Expounded his Parables (which are now a part of the Scriptures) to his
Disciples, ( Mark. 4.34.) He Expounded the Scriptures to the two Disciples, (
Luke 24.27.) and albeit this was Christ Expounding them, (as the Quakers
impertinently use to reply unto our Argument) yet his expounding of them shows,
that Scripture-Interpretation is useful and necessary in the Church, otherwise
his Expounding had been a needless and idle work, which is a piece of
Blasphemy; ( Matthew. 12.36.) Therefore Scripture-Interpretation is needful in
the Church; otherwise the Expounding thereof by the foresaid Persons had been a
mere needless and idle work; and the need thereof is yet further evident,
seeing it is plainly showed, ( Neh. 8.8.) that Exposition is a mean for peoples
understanding the Scriptures. Nor did Christ's own Disciples frequently
understand his Parables, until he Expounded them, ( Matthew. 13.36. Luke 8.9.)
nor did the Eunuch understand what he read ( Act. 8.30, 31.) until it was
Expounded to him.

Thirdly, Peter affirms, (2 Pet. 3.16.) That there are some things in Paul's
Epistles (which are Scripture) hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unstable wrest, together with several other Scriptures, to their own
destruction: Therefore there is need of Scripture-Interpretation in the Church,
seeing Scriptures hard to be understood do need explaining, that they may be
understood, and People instructed and edified by them, for which purpose they
were written; and it is needful to prevent (as much as can be) the mistaking and
wresting of them, and Peoples falling into Soul-destroying Errors thereby:
though all this happens through Men's ignorance and wavering humor, (as the Text
says) and is not the Scriptures fault. Nor can it be answered, (as some do)
That by some things here Peter does not mean some of the Doctrine taught by
Paul, but some of the Extrinsecal Objects represented thereby, seeing the
things hard to be understood here mentioned, are such as are liable to
wresting, which therefore must be understood of the Doctrine it self, seeing
that may be wrested, but the Extrinsecal Objects cannot: for wresting is a
changing of the Sense, which belongs to Discourse and Sayings. Again, where
Peter says, That the unlearned wrest these things hard to be understood, as
also they do the other Scriptures, he plainly intimates, that these things hard
to be understood, are themselves Scriptures too; otherwise the Sense runs very
ill, (I think) viz. the unlearned wrest some of the External Objects of Paul's
Doctrine, as also they do the other Scriptures.

Fourthly, I must enquire of the Quakers, if (in their Principles) Men of mean
capacities understand the Scriptures every where; as for example, all that is
written in the Canticles, Ezechiel, Daniel, Zechariah, Revelation, etc. which
yet was written and is useful for our Learning and Instruction: if they say,
Yea, I shall need no more to bring their Principles in discredit with all Men,
seeing the whole Christian World knows the contrary; If they say, Nay; then
there is need of Scripture-Interpretation in the Church for explaining such
Scriptures by the foresaid means, that People may understand them, and be
edified by them, which is that we plead for.

Lastly, It is too clear in experiencce, that Men of corrupt minds, through
addictedness to their own fore-conceived private Opinions, or through
ignorance, (which by docility and diligence might have been prevented or
removed) or through malice against the Truth, or for advancing some Carnal
design, etc. do frequently by false Glosses and wrested Senses, (and none
busier than Quakers) by violence endeavoring to make them speak the language
of their Interest, abuse and cast a mist upon very clear Scriptures, in order
to Peoples understanding, especially of meaner capacities: Therefore it is in
this case necessary by the Context, the Analogy of Faith, and comparison with
other Scriptures, etc. That these Scriptures be vindicated from such false
Glosses, and their Genuine and true Sense demonstated and cleared. The
Antecedent needs no more proving; for (alas!) it is too manifest in experience,
that every Erroneous Teacher violently wrests and perverts the Sense of the
Scriptures, as much as he can, in favor of his Heretical Doctrine, and thereby
leads many into damnable Delusions. The Consequence is also manifest, seeing
when the Scriptures are abused and wrested, it is necessary for the
preservation of their true meaning, and so of the truth in the Church, and for
preventing of black Soul-damning Errors, and the manifest ruin of poor Souls,
(to say nothing of the Glory of God, which all Men are bound to defend
according to their place and means) that they be vindicated, and their true
sense and meaning demonstrated and cleared; and this work is especially called
for from such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, who must be able to convince
the Gainsayers of the Truth, and stop their Mouths, Tit. 1.9, 11.

Secondly, I Assert, (against the Quakers, who (we see from their Query) deny
it) That the true Genuine, and sound Interpretation of the Scriptures is an
Ordinance of Divine appointment, reaching even to the end of the World. I prove
it,

First, To teach People the Mind and Will of God from the Scriptures, is an
Ordinance of Divine Institution, reaching to the end of the World: But to
Interpret the Scriptures truly, is to teach People the Mind and Will of God
from the Scriptures: Therefore to Interpret the Scriptures truly, is an
Ordinance of Divine Institution, reaching to the end of the World. I easily
prove the Major, because that God has appointed Teachers and teaching in his
Church, and that unto the end of the World, till that day when all the Saints
shall come to a state of complete Perfection, is clear from Matthew. 28.19, 20.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. and that it is the Mind and Will of God they are appointed
to teach, (I am sure) no man can deny; and that it is from the Scriptures they
ought to teach Gods Mind and Will is most evident, seeing these are the Rule of
our Faith and Manners, and the Word of God, (as is proved before) wherein Gods
Mind and Will concerning our Faith and Manners is revealed. And the immediate
Inspiring of the Doctrine of Salvation is long since ceased in the Church, as
all the other extraordinary Gifts, and George Keith himself may both speak and
write in a mixture. The Minor of the Argument is also manifest, seeing to bring
forth, show, clear, and demonstrate the Genuine and true meaning of the
Scriptures, or of the Spirit speaking therein, is to teach the Mind and Will of
God from the Scriptures; or else we are not (...) the wiser concerning the Mind
and Will of God in the Scriptures, by knowing the true meaning thereof, which
is ^ flat contradiction: But to Interpret the Scriptures truly, is to bring
forth, show, clear, and demonstrate the Genuine and true meaning thereof, or of
the Spirit speaking therein; or else a true Interpretation does not make known
the true meaning, which again is a contradiction: Therefore to Interpret the
Scripture truly, is to teach the Mind and Will of God from the Scriptures.

Secondly, The Levites Expounded the Scriptures to the People, ( Nehem. 8.7,
8.) and their doing thereof is Recorded there as highly commendable: Therefore
Scripture-Interpreting had certainly a Divine Institution at that time. The
Antecedent is clear in the place cited: I prove the Consequence, because if it
had not been at that time of Divine Institution, that practice and deed of
these ordinary Officers of that Church would not have been commendable, but
most blameable, as an Innovating an^ up-setting of a public Office and
Ordinance in Gods House of their own mere Invention, and wanting a Divine
Institution to warrant it. See Levit. 10.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 5.32. Jerem. 19.5, 6. I
hope the Quakers will not say, that that Practice and Dee^ of these Officers
was extraordinary, and done by a particula^ command relating only to that one
single action of these Officers, or only to these Individual Officers. For
first, there is no ground can be given of such an Assertion, and so it is
altogether groundless. Secondly, if these had any particular Command, let it be
showed. Thirdly, these were but ordinary Officers, and there is no footstep of
their acting extraordinarily in any thing can be be showed. Lastly, I have
showed before, that Scripture-Interpretation is ordinarily needful in the
Church, for her Instruction and Edification; and so that practice of these
Levites could not be of such an extraordinary nature, as is pretended, seeing
practices of that nature are not wont to be ordinarily needful.

Having proved that Scripture-Interpreting had a Divine Institution under the
Old Testament, the Quakers must either yield it to be an Institution still as
yet in force, which we plead for; or else they must say, that
Scripture-Interpreting was an Ordinance merely Jewish and Ceremonial; (all
which kind of Religious Ordinances are indeed abrogated) But it is most false
that Scripture-Interpreting was a Jewish Ceremony: for there can no ground be
given for this; and so it must be reckoned a groundless Fable. Secondly,
Scripture-Interpretation is as yet needful in the Church we see: but Jewish
Ceremonies are not so, as all know. Thirdly, The Apostles still continued and
constantly retained Scripture-Interpretation in the New Testament Church, even
while they were bending their Doctrine against the continuance and retaining of
Jewish Ceremonies, (for an instance whereof, see Paul's Epistles to the Romans,
Galatians, and Hebrews, where much of his work is the citing and explaining
several Scripture-Texts of the Old Testament.) But, sure it is, the Apostles
did not still continue and constantly retain Jewish Ceremonies in the New
Testament Church, and even while they were bending their Doctrine against the
doing thereof by others; for though the Apostles might sometimes condescend to
the practice of a smaller Ceremony for the weaks sake, yet this was not a
constant retaining of them, but only done upon some occasional emergencies.
Therefore, surely, Scripture-Interpreting cannot be a Jewish Ceremony.

Thirdly, If Scripture-Interpreting be not an Ordinance of Divine Institution,
and that to continue under the New Testament to the Worlds end, Then though all
the black Heretics that ever were in the World should at once arise from the
dead, (and alas! there are too many of them still alive in their Successors)
and should, in favor of their accursed Delusions, most grossly abuse and wrest
the holy Scriptures, (as all Heretics do) and pervert, invert, and deprave the
meaning thereof, and so of God speaking therein; Yet no man, even the most
eminently gifted Ministers of Christ were bound by virtue of any standing
Appointment, or Law of God, (otherwise Scripture-Interpreting will clearly have
a standing Divine Institution) to step out, and by the grounds of Context, the
Analogy of Faith, or comparison with other Scriptures more clear, etc. to
refute these false wrested meanings, vindicate the Texts abused, and clear and
demonstrate their Genuine and true meaning: But that is most false, absurd, and
impious. For then the most eminently gifted and able Ministers of Christ, whose
special Office is to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and are bound to their
utmost (or else to nothing at all) to preserve and promote the purity of the
meaning of the Scriptures among the people, and to convince and stop the mouths
of the Gainsayers thereof, ( Tit. 1.9, 11.) might lawfully, without the breach
of any standing Divine Appointment or Law, stand and look on, and see the
Scriptures abused, perverted, and depraved in their meaning, and instead of
their true meaning, horrible falsehoods, fictions, and blasphemies fathered upon
them, and so on God whose Word they are, (to the highest dishonor of God
imaginable, the treading under foot of the precious Truth, the overflowing of
the Christian World with Soul-damning Errors, and the manifest ruining of poor
Souls) without endeavoring to prevent, remedy, or hinder the same, by the
exercise of a talent that God has given them. If that be not absurd, false,
and impious, nothing can be such. Nay, it involves a contradiction to say, that
Ministers who are required to convince the Gainsayers of the Truth, (and so of
the true meaning of the Scriptures) and to stop their mouths, might lawfully
suffer these things to be done, and not oppose themselves for the defense of
Gods truth, according to their abilities and occasions.

The Quakers being beaten from their former standing, and being loath to allow
us the benefit of Scripture-Interpretation, as thereby foreseeing the danger
of their Heretical Interest, do betake themselves to another shift, and allege
that however necessary, or Divinely appointed Scripture-Interpretation may be,
yet Men that are Fallible may not Interpret the Scriptures. Therefore it will
be necessary for us to prove the contrary, which before we do, that the state
of the Question may be cleared, I grant that these whose Explications formally
as such, and as raught by them are Authentical and Faith-worthy, must of
necessity be Infallible, or immediately Inspired. The Quakers must seek after
such Explications as these, in the Canonical Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles. For it is not so with the ordinary Ministers of the Church, whose
Explications are not formally as such, and as taught by them Authentical and
Faithworthy, nor is it lawful for any Man so to receive them; but allanerly
upon the account of their agreement with, and demonstration from the
Scriptures, whose Infallible Testimony is sufficient to warrant and assure the
meaning delivered.

Secondly, I grant, that in the matter of Scripture-Interpretation, the Supreme
and Magisterial Authority from which there is no appeal, but it ought to be
simply stood to, resideth in the Scriptures themselves, or in the Spirit their
Author speaking therein, seeing their Verdict and Sentence in places speaking
to the purpose more clearly, and such means as reside in them, are the alone
Rule and Directory of our Interpretations thereof in places more dark and
obscure, as appears from many things aforesaid. The Authority therefore which
our Ministers have for Interpreting Scripture, is only a Ministerial Authority
for Interpreting the Scriptures by their own Verdict and Sentence, as the Rule
and Judge of their Interpretations, whereunto they are Subjected, and by whose
determination they stand or fall, as true Interpretations, or forged wrestings;
seeing the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith by which we are to try and judge
Men's Doctrines in matters of Faith: having premised these things for clearing
our mind, and preventing mistakes,

I Assert, that Men who are not endued with an Infallible gift, and so are not
Infallible, but Fallible, may Interpret the Scriptures. And I prove it.

For first, These Levites that expounded the Scriptures ( Neh. 8.8.) were not
Infallible in their Gift, seeing there is no proof or evidence thereof possible
to be produced, nor had they any other extraordinary thing accompanying them in
their Birth, Call, Doctrine or Works; (or else let it be showed) nor was it any
Privilege of the Ordinary Officers of that Church to be Infallible; and yet
their Practice thereof is there Recorded to their high Commendation, and as
Edifying to the People: Therefore Teachers that are not Infallible may
Interpret Scripture; Or else their practice thereof should have been condemned
as unlawful, instead of being commended.

Secondly, A Fallible Teacher may have a far greater and more distinct
knowledge of the meaning of the Scriptures, than many other Men also Fallible,
seeing it is his special Office to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and (if he
does his Duty) he is much more in searching of the Scriptures than Men of other
particular Callings, and has many more helps and means for it, than the
commoner sort of Christians and bulk of the People, neither have all Men an
equal knowledge in any thing: Therefore a Fallible Teacher may Interpret the
Scriptures. The consequence is easy, seeing whatever measure of
Scripturemeaning such a Man discerns beyond others, he may (I hope)
seasonably make it known to them for their Instruction and Edification, May he
not? Nay, I do not see so well how he may not.

Thirdly, if all that Interpret the Scriptures must necessarily upon that
account be Infallible, then no man now adays may presume to Interpret them,
seeing there is no man now adays Infallible, as is before often showed: But
that is most false, seeing it is now proved, that Scripture-Interpretation is
an Ordinance of Divine Institution reaching to the end of the world, and so it
binds and obliges all (according to their ability and the Churches exigency)
whose Office it is to labor in the Word and Doctrine, and from the Word to
Teach people the mind and Will of God, even to the end of the world, albeit
they be not Infallible, but fallible; Nor heard I ever of a Divine Institution
reaching to the end of the world, and yet obliging no body; and if this oblige
any man, it cannot miss the Teachers.

Lastly, seeing the Quakers affirm that Scripture-Interpreting does necessarily
require an Infallible Gift, we must require them to exhibit the grounds of
their affirmation; or else it will be readily thought that they affirm so
without any ground; and so it must be accounted a mere blind conjecture, and a
groundless Fable. All the ground that ever I learned from them is this, viz.
Because a man of a fallible Gift cannot assure people of the meaning.

Ans. It is true, there can no assurance thereof arise unto them from such a
man's Infallibity which he has not, and as little from a Quaker pretending to
it, but can give no evidence to make it appear. But what then? can he not give
them assurance thereof from the clear Infallible Scriptures, by whose Testimony
the meaning is to be Demonstrated? we are not to Build our Faith upon the man's
Gift, but upon the Scriptures, that can give as great assurance as any
Infallible Gift, seeing they are the Infallible Word of God. To the Law and to
the Testimony; if men's Doctrines agree not with these, receive them not.

Lastly, I assert (against the Quakers, who with peremptory Certifications seem
to deny it in this Query) That, when the Scriptures are explained by the
Scriptures, the meaning held forth and delivered is Scripture-Rule; and so it
is no addition (as the Adversaries here allege) nor is it our meaning, but the
meaning of the Scriptures; and so we may still pretend Scripture-Rule, for all
that. I prove it.

First, the meaning of the Scriptures represented and Taught by themselves is,
certainly, Scripture-Rule; for seeing the Scriptures are our Rule (as is
proved) the meaning Taught by them is the very Enunciat Doctrine, the Soul and
Sentence of that Rule, as is palpable: But, when the Scriptures are explained
by the Scriptures, the meaning held forth and delivered is the meaning of the
Scriptures represented and Taught by themselves, and the contrary involves an
incurable Contradiction: Therefore, when the Scriptures are explained by the
Scriptures, the meaning held forth and delivered is, certainly, Scripture-Rule.

Secondly, Scripture-Doctrine Taught by the Scriptures is Scripture-Rule, or
else nothing can be such, if that be not: But, when the Scriptures are
explained by the Scriptures, the meaning held forth and delivered is
Scripture-Doctrine Taught by the Scriptures, seeing the meaning of the
Scripture is, surely, Scripture-Doctrine, nor can these be diverse, or else the
Scriptures should mean what they Teach not, and Teach what they mean not, which
is repugnant. Therefore, when the Scriptures are explained by the Scriptures,
the meaning held forth and delivered is, manifestly, Scripture-Rule.

Lastly, if when the Scriptures are explained by themselves the meaning held
forth by them be not Scripture-Rule, then the Scripture-Rule is some other
thing really distinct from the meaning of the Scriptures held forth thereby:
But that is impossible to be, or to be explained; for so the Scripture-Rule
should by it self mean nothing, seeing another meaning then that which is held
forth by the Scriptures it can never have: Ergo, when the Scriptures are
explained by themselves, the meaning held forth is, Inevitably, Scripture-Rule.

But say the Quakers in this Query, Interpreting of the Scriptures is an adding
to them, against which the Plagues are Denounced, Rev. 22. Chap.

Ans. This Objection proves (if it prove any thing) that all Scripture
Expounding by men fallible, or not so, is utterly unlawful, as an adding to the
Scripture-Rule. But I deny that Interpreting of the Scriptures is an adding to
the Scripture-Rule (let the Quakers Try if they can prove it; for their big
Assertion is not current for Proof) for I have showed before that
Scripture-Expounding is necessary in the Church, and of Divine Institution to
the Worlds end, such as adding to the Scripture Rule is not; and so they cannot
be the same thing. To add to the Scriptures is to impose some false meaning
upon them disagreeing therewith, or to set up any other Doctrine as of equal
Authority with them (I wish the Quakers would notice this, who continually
impose false meanings on the Scriptures, and have set up a new Doctrine
contrary to the Scriptures, not only as of equal Authority with the same, but
above them. O impudent wickedness! But by the Scriptures to unfold, clear, and
Demonstrate their own Genuine and true meaning has not a shadow into it of
adding to the Scripture-Rule, seeing (as is proved) so the meaning delivered is
the Scriptures own true meaning, which therefore cannot be any addition
thereunto. But blind Arguments are all that can be expected from Brainsick
Doctors, whom we find frequently speaking like men indeed in a mixture.

SECT. II. Concerning Scripture-Consequence, or Consequential Scripture.
I come now to the second Imperious condition which the Quakers, like
Dictators, demand of us, and that is, that we do not draw Consequences from the
Scriptures for Establishing our Doctrine; otherwise that we never pretend
Scripture-Rule more. This, I confess, is a very unjust Cowardice, That they
should require us to throw down our Arms, and then they will fight us. I see
the Quakers would fight a Dead man even out of Breath. They Will go to Wars in
time of Peace. I like the Jest well. If the Quakers be so dastardly, why did
they not send their Queries to some Brute, where they should have found a Party
suitable to their mind, which would not have troubled them with Consequences.
But as for us, we must crave their Pardon, seeing by our Creation and Essence
we are Rational, which chiefly consists in a Discursive or Illative Faculty
fitted for discerning of Consequences, of purpose, that being furnished with the
principles of Nature, or Grace, we might be capable to perceive the particular
Conclusions which they implicitly, really and truly contain.

I shall not need to be long in Discussing this Question concerning
Scripture-Consequence, nor shall I need many words for clearing the state of
the Question; but, in one word, it is, Whether or not that which by good
Consequence is deduced and drawn from the Scriptures, be Scripture-Rule? We see
by the Certification of the Quakers demand, that they deny and take the
Negative of the Question. But,

I Assert that whatsoever by good Consequence follows or is deduced from the
Scriptures is Infallible Scripture-Rule. And I prove it.

For first, Scripture-Doctrine is Scripture-Rule, or else nothing can be such.
Now whatever by good Consequence follows, or is deduced from the Scriptures
must be Scripture-Doctrine; otherwise a good Consequence might infer from the
Scriptures that which is not Scripture-Doctrine, or that which they Teach not;
or a Consequence inferring from the Scriptures that which they Teach not, and
is not their Doctrine, should be a good Consequence, which involves a direct
Contradiction, seeing so a Consequence manifestly evil should be a good
Consequence. Hence then, whatever by good Consequence follows, or is deduced
from the Scriptures is evidently Scripture-Rule.

Secondly, Christ plainly affirms ( Luke 20.37.) that that Scripture principle,
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, does show and
Teach the Resurrection of the Dead.

Now it does not expressly and formally Teach that, it says not expressly that
the Dead shall Rise again; but only it follows therefrom by good Consequence,
and no otherways, because God, who is the God of the Living, being their God,
their Dust (which is their one half, albeit the meaner half) behooved to be
Raised and Quickened again, as being a part of their Essences. Here then Christ
Teaches that that which by good Consequence may be Inferred from
Scripture-principles, the same the Scripture shows and Teaches, and so it is
Scripture-Doctrine; and so it is, uncontrolably, Scripture-Rule.

Thirdly, if that which by good Consequence is inferred from the Scriptures be
not Scripture-Rule, then there was no Scripture-Rule in all the Old Testament
Ordaining David, or Solomon, etc. to be Circumcised; and so the Circumcising of
them behooved to be a mere Will Worship wanting Scripture-Warrant, contrary to
Joh. 7.22, 23. My Proposition which I propounded I easily prove, for in no
where of all the Old Testament it is in Formal and Express Terms said [ David
shall be, or ought to be Circumcised] but only by sure Consequence it follows
from the universal Command for Circumcising every Male ( Genesis 17.) That
therefore David shall be, or ought to be Circumcised; nor is it otherwise to be
found in all the Old Testament.

The Quakers then must admit that particular Conclusion by good Consequence
following from the universal Command to be Scripture-Rule (and so that which by
good Consequence follows from Scripture-principles to be Scripture-Rule) or
else they must deny that there was any Scripture-Rule in all the Old Testament
Ordaining David to be Circumcised; for its impossible there should be any
Scripture-Rule Ordaining David to be Circumcised, except it be a Scripture-Rule
that David ought to be Circumcised; or else he was both Ordained to be, and yet
ought not to be Circumcised at once.

Fourthly, if that which by good Consequence is inferred from the Scriptures be
not Scripture-Rule, then there is no Scripture-Rule in all the Old Testament
Testifying and Witnessing that, Jesus the Son of Mary is the Savior of the
world, which is most false, and contrary to the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39, 46. Act.
10.43. and 18.28. and 28.23. My Proposition which I laid down I prove, because
it is no where of all the Old Testament in express Terms said that Jesus the
Son of Mary is the Savior of the world; But by Infallible Consequence it
follows, and may be inferred from many of the Old Testament
Scripture-principles; nor is it otherwise but by good Consequence therein to be
found. It must therefore be granted, that that particular Conclusion, which by
good Consequence follows from these Old Testament Scriptureprinciples, and is
no otherwise to be found therein, is Scripture-Rule, which is that we plead
for; or else they must deny that there is any Scripture-Rule in all the Old
Testament, Testifying and Witnessing that Jesus the Son of Mary is the Savior
of the world; for there cannot be Scripture-Rule Witnessing and showing that
Jesus the Son of Mary is the Savior, except it be a Scripture-Rule that Jesus
the Son of Mary is the Savior; otherwise the Scriptures Testifying that, shall
be Scripture-Rule (as is supposed) and yet the very substantial Doctrine of
their Testimony shall not be Scripture-Rule, which is repugnant.

Lastly, If that which by good consequence follows from Scripture-Principles be
not Scripture-Rule, then we are no where in all the Scriptures forbidden to
worship a Dog, or Cat, etc. which is a most absurd falsehood, seeing then the
worshipping of these things could be no transgression of the Law of God; for
the whole Law of God is delivered to us in the Scriptures; otherwise the
Scriptures would be defective, and not manifest our whole Duty in order to
Salvation, which is contrary to Deuteronomy. 5.32. Isai. 8.20. Luc. 16.28, 29. 2 Timothy
3.15. Rev. 22.18. My proposition laid down, I evidently prove: for it is not in
formal and express Terms said in all the Scriptures, Thou shall not worship a
Dog, or Cat, albeit it is expressly said, That we shall have no other Gods but
the true God, and shall Worship and Serve him only, ( Exodus 20.3. Matthew. 4.10.)
from whence by evident consequence it follows, (but not without a consequence
in all the Scriptures) that we may not Worship a Dog, or Cat. Will the Quakers
then deny the Worshipping of these Creatures to be forbidden in the Scriptures,
and so to be unlawful, because without a Consequence we cannot get any
Scripture forbidding it, and whereby to prove it unlawful? If they stand to
their Principles here, of necessity they must do it, as the Argument
irresistibly infers upon them.

The Quakers may hence see how justly we may as yet pretend Scripture-Rule,
notwithstanding our consequences, seeing we have unanswerably proved, that that
which by good consequence is inferred from Scripture-Principles is
Scripture-Rule; and we have convinced their wild Principles in this point to
dash and run upon contradictions, to disagree from the Doctrine and Practice of
Christ, to make way for denying Jesus the Son of Mary to be the Savior of the
World, (for the Scriptures of the Old Testament do by clear consequence, though
not without a consequence, mightily witness and assure that great Article of
Faith) and to lead the way to Will Worship in the Church, yea, for the grossest
of Idolatry. We see then how little reason we have to grant these impious
demands of the Quakers.

But the Quakers here object, That to draw consequences from the Scriptures, is
to add to the Scripture-Rule, against which all the plagues in the book of God
are denounced.

Answ. By this Objection, the Quakers show how unlawful they think
Scripture-Consequences to be. But I have abundantly showed, that that which by
good consequence is inferred from Scripture-Principles, is no addition to the
Scripture-Rule, but is it self very Scripture-Rule; and how should it be an
adding to Scripture-Rule to draw forth more expressly and distinctly, by
consequence, the same Doctrine which it really and truly teaches, though more
Implicitly? Is it an adding to the Scripture to show more expressly it is own
Doctrine? Then the Scriptures own Doctrine should be an addition to the
Scripture-Rule: they have a great dexterity in speaking of Contradictions.

Secondly, It uses to be objected, That if that which by good consequence is
inferred from Scripture-Principles be Scripture-Rule, and so a Rule of Divine
Faith, then our Divine Faith whereby we believe that Scripture-Rule so
inferred, shall stand upon reason, (which is most absurd) seeing the inferring
of a consequence is an act of reason.

Answ. I deny the Sequel, or consequence of the Major proposition; because when
a conclusion is by good consequence inferred from Scripture-Principles, Reason
is not the Argument or Motive wherefrom the conclusion follows and is inferred,
and moves and constrains us to assent thereunto, seeing the Conclusion is not
inferred from the natural Principles or Premises of Reason, but from
Supernatural Scripture-Principles, as is most manifest.

Reason therefore is only requisite here as a necessary Instrument for
perceiving and discerning the consequence, or connection of the Antecedent with
the Consequent, which way it is indeed requisite; yea, so Reason is requisite
for perceiving every word of God, and without it we should not be capable of
the Principles of Religion more than Brutes are. So also our Ears are a
necessary Instrument for hearing the Word Preached, or Read, and our Eyes for
Reading of it.

Thirdly, It uses to be objected, That the Gospel is above Reason.

Answ. The Gospel is above Reason, in regard of the matter and mysteries which
it teaches, which Reason cannot reach or understand; but not in respect of the
manner how it teaches them, which is suited and accommodated to human capacity;
Or else no Man, upon the account that he is endued with Reason, should be one
whit more capable, so much as Grammatically and Historically to understand any
one saying of the Gospel, than his Sheep and Oxen, which is beyond all measure
absurd: for then Brutes should be no less capable of the Gospel Doctrine than
Men, and Men no more than Brutes.

Lastly, It is objected, That the Learned only are able to perceive
Consequences.

Answ. That is most false, seeing not only the Learned, but also the unlearned
have a rational discursive faculty, and some measure of the use thereof,
(except they be Distracted, or in mere Infancy;) and so, being furnished with
the Principles, are capable to discern their evident Consequences, both in
things Natural and Supernatural; albeit the Learned are indeed able more
promptly to perceive Consequences, and to perceive more Consequences lying far
remote from the Principles, and therefore they are ordinarily more knowing than
the unlearned.

Now by the Quakers grudging of Grammar, Logic, and Philosophy unto Ministers
of the Gospel, and by their opposition to the Scripture-Rule and
Scripture-Consequence, a Man may (if he be curious) learn the Description of a
Minister of the Quakers choice, viz. He must neither have Grammar, Logic, nor
Philosophy, he must reject the Rule (at least the Supremacy of the Rule) of
Scripture, both Express, and by good Consequence. That is to say, He must not
know how to speak Sense, nor how to Define, Divide, Judge, or Argument; he must
abandon the Light of Nature, and throw by the Word of God, at most being but a
Secondary-Rule, and a Subservant to their Queen Regent, the Light within. That
the Quakers may not think I wrong them, this Description is their Principles,
clearly explained by me in the foregoing Queries. And will not such a Man be a
rare Minister? a worthy Messenger? an Interpreter among a Thousand? he is very
like to have more feet than hands, methinks.

SECT. III. Concerning Baptism with Water.
Being now arrived at the main Subject of the present Query, which is Baptism,
before I handle the Question concerning Infant Baptism; I must here inquire,
whether Baptism with Water be an Ordinance of Divine Institution under the New
Testament, and to continue to the end of the World; for albeit the the Quakers
have here omitted it, yet it is the main and most proper debate concerning
Baptism betwixt us and them, wherein the Quakers take the Negative, yea, and
George Keith charges Baptism with Water upon us, as a Popish Doctrine,
forsooth, in his Quakerism no Popery, page 100.

Wherever Baptism is mentioned in the New Testament, and the word Water is not
expressly added, the Quakers do always deny Baptism with Water to be there
meant, sometimes alleging it to be meant of the Baptism of Doctrine; (which
is, when the Word is Preached to People) sometimes of the work of Regeneration,
and sometimes of enduing with the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; all which
are in the Scriptures Metaphorically and Improperly sometimes called Baptism,
Matthew. 21.25. Joh. 1.33. Act. 1.5. And this they do, that (if success would
answer) they may not be forced to acknowledge Baptism with Water to be an
Ordinance of Divine Institution under the New Testament. We shall therefore, as
we proceed, clear every Text that we make use of (where need is) from the false
Glosses of the Adversaries. This premised,

I Assert, (against the Quakers) that Baptism with Water is an Ordinance of
Divine Institution under the New Testament, and an Ordinance which (it shall be
evident) is appointed to continue to the end of the World. I prove it;

First, The Baptism of John was an Ordinance of Divine Appointment belonging to
the New Testament: but that was with Water, Matthew. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Therefore
Baptism with Water is an Ordinance of Divine Institution belonging to the New
Testament. The Scriptures cited prove the Minor; I prove the Major: For that
the Baptism of John was of Divine Appointment, is clear from Matthew. 21.25. Luke
7.30. Joh. 1.33. And that it belonged to the New Testament appears, seeing John
was the very first Minister of the New Testament way of Dispensation, (for
which, see Matthew. 11.12, 13. Luke 16.16.) Together with the breaking forth
whereof (and never till then) God appointed this Ordinance of Baptism with
Water to be dispensed by John. Secondly, The Baptism with Water dispensed by
the Disciples or Apostles of Christ, was an Ordinance of Divine Appointment
under the New Testament, as we shall presently see: But the Baptism of John was
substantially one and the same therewith: for their Author, or Efficient cause
was the same, (by comparing Luke 7.30. Joh. 1.33. with Matthew. 28.19. Joh. 4.1,
2. Act. 10.48.) Their External Matter, or outward Element was the same, (by
comparing Matthew. 3.11. with Act. 10.47.) Their Internal Matter, or the thing
signified, and their ends (and so also their Internal form, which results from
their Institution and Ends) were the same, (by comparing Mark 1.4. Luke 3.3.
with Act. 2.38. and 22.16.) So then they being one and the same as to all their
causes, are, undeniably, the same Baptism Substantially; and I defy any Man to
show any substantial point wherein they differ; and so the one being an
Ordinance of the New Testament, so must the other.

But, say the Quakers, (with Papists) The Baptism of John was substantially
different from Christ's Baptism, seeing John Baptized only with Water, but
Christ Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.

Ans. This objection cannot prove the Baptism of John to be substantially
different from the Baptism dispensed by Christ's Apostles at his Order, seeing
theirs so dispensed was no less with Water than his, and they could no more
Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, than he. Therefore John does not
there ( viz. Luke 3.16.) distinguish his Baptism from Christ's External Baptism
Administered by his Apostles; but he distinguishes his own Work and Office, and
of all Ministers, in Baptism from the Work and Office of Christ, viz. That he
and other Ministers do Administer the Water and External Sign, but that its
Christ that bestows the inward Grace and thing signified.

Secondly, It is objected here, That these who were Baptized with John's
Baptism, were again Baptized with Christ's by Paul, Act. 19.3, 4, 5. Ergo, John's
Baptism did substantially differ from Christ's; or else, these would not have
needed to be Baptized over again with Christ's.

Ans. The Antecedent is most false: for that would depress the dignity of the
Baptism wherewith Christ was Baptized, (being that of John) far below the
dignity of that wherewith Simon Magus was Baptized; and would infer, that
Christ entertained a more absolute and complete Communion with the Church of
the Old Testament, (all whose ordinary Covenant-Seals he partaked of) than with
the Church of the New; and that, though he sanctified in his own Person all the
other ordinary Seals of both Testaments, yet he denied that Honor and
Privilege to his own External Baptism dispensed under the New Testament. Nor
is the Antecedent any ways proved by that place of the Acts cited: for the
sense of that Fifth Verse, (which is wrested for a ground to this Objection) is
not, that these Men were Baptized over again by Paul; but the sense is, that
after they had heard that Doctrine from John, the sum whereof Paul repeats in
the preceding Verse there, they were Baptized by the same John when he
Preached it to them, and not by Paul now when he Repeats it.

Secondly, The Apostles after Christ's Ascension, and the pouring forth of the
Spirit, did with great diligence and studious care Baptize the New Testament
Disciples with Water, and were very forward in promoting that Ordinance amongst
them: Therefore Baptism with Water must, certainly, be an Ordinance of the New
Testament Divinely Instituted. The Consequence is clear, seeing, if it had not
been an Ordinance of Divine Institution belonging to the New Testament, they
would never have been so diligent and forward for promoting the Interest
thereof in the New Testament Church amongst the Disciples after Christ's
Ascension, and the pouring forth of the Spirit; otherwise they had manifestly
betrayed their trust in such a studious and diligent promoting of an Ordinance
in the Church, which was not allowed of God, and they had no Commission for;
which cannot be said they did, and so much the less, because all this passes on
without any reproof from God, or shadow of alteration in them. The Consequence
being so clearly proved, I next prove the Antecedent from the Apostles constant
and speedy dispensing of Baptism with Water to the New Testament Disciples,
after the foresaid Events, and that presently without delay, after their
appearing to be Disciples, as appears from several Scripture-Texts of the New
Testament.

First, From Act. 8.36, 38. and Act. 10.47. in which two Texts, Water is so
expressly mentioned, that I need not prove it to be Baptism with Water that is
meant, and where they were most speedy in dispensing it at the first appearance
of the parties Discipleship.

A second Text is, Act. 2.41. where the Disciples were Baptized as soon as ever
their Discipleship appeared. And that this Baptism here is not meant of any of
these forementioned improperly so called Baptisms, and consequently that it
must be meant of Baptism with Water, which only is properly called Baptism, as
we shall afterward see, I prove; Because the Baptism here mentioned
pre-requires Conversion and Regeneration ( ver. 38. and 41.) to the partaking
thereof; and so it cannot be meant of the work of Conversion or Regeneration;
otherwise it should pre-require it self before partaking of it self, that is,
it self without it self, which is a strong contradiction. Again, It
pre-supposes hearing, yea receiving of the Gospel Doctrine in such Adult
Persons as these were, (as may be seen ver. 41.) which the Baptism of Doctrine
cannot do: for that were it self pre-supposed to it self, and a contradiction
still.

And lastly, the Baptism here mentioned, is in the Text ( ver. 38.) plainly
distinguished from the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit. And moreover is enjoined
as a necessary sacred Pledge of the Remission of Sins, ( viz. by necessity of
precept, and when it can be had) such as never were these Gifts of the Spirit;
and so Baptism here, must be meant of Baptism with Water, or the word, Baptize,
razed out of the Text.

A third Text is, Act. 8.12, 13. where these Disciples were quickly Baptized
after their Discipleship appeared. And neither can Baptism here be meant of the
work of Conversion, or Regeneration, seeing Simon Magus participated of it, who
yet was no true Convert or Regenerated Person, as is there clear. Nor can it be
meant of the Baptism of Doctrine; for it is there plainly declared, That they
believed the things concerning the Kingdom of God and Christ (whether savingly,
or merely historically, really, or in profession only, it matters nothing to
our present Argument) before they partaked of the Baptism there mentioned: but
they could not believe these things, before they in some measure partaked of
the Gospel Doctrine, which reveals them. Nor lastly, can it be meant of their
enduing with the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, seeing it is there expressly
denied, that any of these Baptized Samaritans were for a time after endued with
these.

A fourth Text is, Act. 18.8. where many of the Corinthians presently, upon
their Discipleship appearing, were Baptized; and this Text can neither be meant
of the Baptism of Doctrine, nor the work of Conversion or Regeneration, seeing
the Baptism therein mentioned pre-supposes in Adult Persons, such as these were
(we shall speak afterward of Infants) the hearing of the Gospel-Doctrine, and
believing: But the Baptism of Doctrine cannot pre-suppose the first of these;
nor yet the work of Conversion, the last of them; or else they should
pre-suppose themselves to partaking of themselves. And to mean it of enduing
with the miraculous gifts of the Spirit were most of all impertinent, nor were
these bestowed upon every Believer, as the Baptism there mentioned is plainly
imported to have been.

A fifth Text is, 1 Cor. 1.13. with 17. Where the Apostle asks these
Corinthians, if they were Baptized in the name of Paul? and affirms, that
Christ sent him not to Baptize, (that is, it was not his principal Work; for
the Expression is comparative) but to preach the Gospel. Now Baptism here
cannot be meant of the Baptism of Doctrine; for the Apostle plainly
distinguishes it from that. Nor can it be meant of the work of Conversion; for
then Paul denies that it was his main Errand to Convert People, which is false
and contrary to his very Commission, ( Act. 26.17, 18.) and he should
contradict himself in this first Chapter of the Epistle, where he thanks God he
Baptized so few of them, and in the fourth Chapter of this same Epistle, Verse
15. where he affirms, that through the Gospel he had converted so many of them.
Nor can it be meant of enduing with the miraculous gifts of the Spirit: for the
Baptism here mentioned is intimated to have been common to all of them, such as
these gifts were not.

The last Text shall be Act. 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be
Baptized, says Ananias to Paul. Now he needed not arise to be Converted, or to
hear the Gospel (which Ananias could Preach to him Sitting) nor yet that he
might receive the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit; albeit there was some
necessity for his arising to be Baptized with Water, that he might go where
there was Water.

Seeing then the Circumstances of these Texts will not permit these improperly
so called Baptisms to be meant therein, and its certain that some sort of
Baptism is meant therein (or else the word, Baptize, must be razed out of them)
It inevitably follows, that Baptism with Water must be therein meant; or else
no Baptism at all, which Impudence it self dare not say, and so much the less,
seeing the Circumstances of these Texts do very well agree with the
Circumstances of Baptism in other Texts where the word, Water, is expressly
added. And in these Texts we see what care the Apostles took for the speedy
Administration of the Baptism therein mentioned to the Disciples appearing
such, and to all appearing such. And these things evidently prove our
Antecedent of this second Argument.

Thirdly, our third principal Argument for proving Baptism with Water to be an
Ordinance of Divine Institution under the New Testament is taken from Act.
2.38. (which Text I have now proved to be meant of Baptism with Water) where
Peter Injoyns Baptism with Water to all these New Testament Disciples, as a
necessary Sacred Symbol or Pledge (for Sacred it must be, in regard of its
Sacred and Spiritual signification of a Spiritual Benefit) of the Remission of
Sins. For his Injoyning them to be Baptized for the Remission of Sins does
plainly hold forth some necessity thereof, though not by necessity of Mean, yet
by necessity of Precept.

Therefore Baptism with Water must be an Ordinance of the New Testament
Divinely Instituted. For, certainly, Cancelled Jewish Ceremonies (much less
Humane inventions, or any thing not appointed of God) could never thereafter be
necessary for Justification, or Remission of Sins; though sometimes they might
be necessary for avoiding the Offense, and stumbling of weak brethren, as Act.
15.29. and 16.3.

Fourthly, whoever under the New Testament has probably received the Spirit of
Grace has a right, in the Churches Court, unto Baptism with Water, and she is
bound to admit them thereunto: Therefore Baptism with Water is, surely, an
Ordinance of the New Testament Divinely Instituted; or otherwise these could
never have any Right thereunto, in her Court, nor she be bound to admit them
into it, without a Divine appointment making it due unto them; but, on the
contrary, they should be Bound to abstain from it, and she to Discharge them
therefrom, as unwarrantable Will Worship in the Scriptures Condemned, Colos.
2.20, 21, 22. These things clearly prove the Consequence. The Antecedent is
proved by Peter (Act. 10.47.) where he says, Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as
we? where, by the Holy Ghost (as often else where, Act. 1.5. and 8.16, 17. and
19.6.) is meaned the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as is clear from the
Context.

So then Peter Argues here from these Gifts of the Spirit bestowed on them as a
probable Evidence (though not an Infallible one. See Mat. 7.22.) of the Spirit
of Grace bestowed on them, That therefore they had a Right unto Baptism with
Water, and no man could Debar them from it; for that were absurd, as the
Expression bears, Can any man forbid, etc. So then, according to the Apostle, a
probable Evidence of the Spirit of Grace received does immediately infer a
Right, in the Churches Court (to which his Discourse is here directed) unto
Baptism Water; and so whoever has probably received the Spirit of Grace has
that Right, and the Church is bound to admit them to it, and they are as absurd
as Quakers, that would Debar them from it. These things plainly prove the
Antecedent.

Fifthly, there is one Baptism mentioned Ephesians. 4.5. which is, certainly, an
Ordinance of Divine Institution, and belongs to the New Testament, as can never
be gotten denied: But that must be Baptism with Water, and can be no other: for
when Paul says, There is one Baptism, either he means of one properly so
called, which is Baptism with Water, seeing the signification of the Word
[Baptize] Primarily and properly agrees unto it; or else he means, there is one
Baptism Improperly and Metaphorically so called: but that cannot be, seeing
there is not one, but many of these sorts of Baptisms, as we have already seen,
whereof therefore to mean it would be a contradiction to the Text.

Sixthly, Baptism with Water is necessary to Salvation under the New Testament,
viz. by necessity of Precept, and so as not the simple privation of it when it
cannot be had, but the Contempt of it when it may be had is Damnable: Therefore
Baptism with Water must be an Ordinance of Divine Institution under the New
Testament. The Consequence is manifest, seeing a material piece of Divine
Worship necessary to Salvation, not appointed of God, is a Will Worship
necessary thereunto, which is repugnant to the Scriptures. I prove the
Antecedent. The Baptism mentioned ( Mark. 16.16.) is there made a necessary
Antecedent of Salvation under the New Testament by the plain Sentence of the
Text: But the Baptism there mentioned is Baptism with Water: Therefore Baptism
with Water is necessary to Salvation under the New Testament. The Major needs
no more proving. I prove the Minor, because the Baptism mentioned in that Text
of Mark does in adult persons (we shall speak afterward of Infants)
pre-require Faith in Christ (as the Text shows) without which some way
appearing by external Signs they have not a visible Interest, and cannot be
accounted Disciples by the Church: but the Baptism of Doctrine does not
pre-require that; or else no man might be admitted to partake of the
Gospel-Doctrine, but such as beforehand probably believe; and so it should
never have been Preached to the Gentile-world. Nor does the work of Conversion
pre-require Faith in Christ to a man's partaking of it self; otherwise it should
pre-require it self (without which there can be no such Faith) before partaking
of it self, that is, it self without it self, which is repugnant. Nor yet can
it be meant of enduing with the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, seeing these
were never necessary to Salvation, as this Baptism mentioned in the Text is.
And, I am sure the Quakers will not say, that Baptism here is meant of the
Baptism of the Cross (under which they do not use to seek shelter) or in any
other Text that we have named, seeing the Apostles, and other Ministers of
Christ, are the immediate Administrators of the Baptism mentioned here, and in
all of these; but were not so of the Cross, they had no Commission for that.
Seeing then there is a Baptism meant herein Mark. 16.16. And it cannot agree
with any of these Improperly so called Baptisms, but only with Baptism with
Water, which is properly so called, it must Inevitably, be meant of Baptism
with Water wherewith it agrees; or let the Quakers prove that it disagrees with
that too, and then, I am sure, it shall agree with none at all, and we must
raze the word [Baptize] out of the Text.

Secondly, I prove the Antecedent of this Argument, from the first Epistle of
Peter, 3.21. where the Apostle shows Baptism with Water to be necessary to
Salvation under the New Testament, while he says, The like Figure whereunto,
even Baptism, does also now Save us. And that Baptism here is meant of Baptism
with Water, appears by the comparison which he uses, comparing our Saving by
Baptism to Noah's Saving by Water, as being, the last the Type, and the first
the Antitype (for the word which we have here turned [like Figure] is in the
Original Language [(...), Antitype.] Now there must be some near resemblance
betwixt a Type and its Antitype, which is very little, or rather none here,
betwixt Noah's Temporal Saving by Water and any of these Improper Baptisms; but
very great betwixt that and our Eternal Saving by Baptism with Water, which may
be understood by comparing them, which we may not stay to do. Secondly, the
explication which he subjoyns, in place of a Caution, showing how Baptism now
Saves us, viz. that its not by putting away the filth of the Flesh, or by the
mere external washing of the Body (which Water had a fitness to do) or by the
very work wrought (as Papists would) but by its object which it signifies and
Seals, viz. the Blood of Christ which causes the Answer of a good Conscience
toward God, will not allow it to be meant of any other Baptism, but Baptism
with Water, which he so carefully explains; nor can any man make Sense of the
explication, applying it to any of these Improper Baptisms.

Lastly, Christ gives most express Commission to his Apostles, and other
succeeding Ministers of the New Testament (for the Apostles were not to live to
the worlds end, which is the duration of the Commission) to Baptize with Water
all the Disciples that should come unto him under the New Testament to the end
of the world. Mat. 28.19, 20. Therefore Baptism with water must, uncontrolably,
be an Ordinance of the New Testament Divinely Instituted, and to continue to
the end of the world. The Consequence hereof is beyond the exception of all the
world. The Antecedent will also be clear, if I can but prove, that by Baptism
here is meant Baptism with Water, which if I do not (good Reader) I Entreat
thee believe me not henceforth.

Therefore first, the Baptism here mentioned in this Text of Matthew
pre-requires Discipleship in the party to be Baptized (for the Words in the
Original Language are, Go make Disciples all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
(...)). But the Baptism of Doctrine does not pre-require that; or else a man
might not Preach the Gospel to any that is not beforehand a Disciple; and so it
should never have been Preached to the Gentile, or Heathen world. Nor does
Conversion pre-require Discipleship; or else no man might endeavor the
Conversion of an Heathen, or Pagan, or of any man who is not beforehand a
Disciple. Nor can the Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit be here understood by
Baptism, seeing the Baptism here mentioned is to continue to the end of the
world, which these Gifts were not, as no man, even a Quaker, will deny.
Therefore, seeing none of these Improper Baptisms are here meant, and some
Baptism is meant, it must be meant of Baptism with water, seeing the Text
cannot agree with any other.

Secondly, the Baptism mentioned here in Matthew, is the same with that
mentioned in Mark (Mark. 16.16.) seeing Matthew here, and Mark there are
manifestly giving a Narration of the self-same thing, and Commission, as needs
no proof: But that Baptism mentioned in Mark is Baptism with Water, as is
before proved: Therefore so also is this mentioned here in Matthew, seeing they
are the very same, as said is.

Thirdly, the whole Tenor and Circumstances of the Commission for Baptism in
this Text of Matthew do agree with the Baptism with Water thereafter dispensed
by the Apostles, and other Ministers in their times, at their Order, and can
agree with no other: Therefore the same must be here meant, and no other. The
Consequence is so easy that, except we resolve utterly to abandon and renounce
our Reason, and turn absolute Brutes, we must understand every Saying of that
wherewith it agrees, and not of that wherewith it disagrees. I prove the
Antecedent. For this Commission in Matthew for Baptism pre-requires the
Discipleship of the Party [ Go make Disciples, Baptizing, etc.] or it requires
that they first be made Disciples before they be Baptized, or none to be
Baptized but Disciples, as is most clear. 2dly. It requires them to Baptize all
the Disciples of whatsoever Nation (if they appear to be such viz.) as the
Connection of this Baptism with the Condition required, whereupon it is to be
dispensed, declares; and the Relative word [Them] not being restricted with any
limitating Circumstance, does still repeat its whole Antecedent, and is of the
same full extent therewith. 3dly. It requires them without delay, with the
first convenience after the appearing of their Discipleship to Baptize them,
[Go make them Disciples, Baptizing] as if it should instantly be done, there
being no more now to be waited for, after discovery of the condition; and by
this all needless delays are cut off. And lastly, It requires the Baptism
therein mentioned, to be dispensed in the Name of the Lord, as is plainly
expressed in the Text. These things express the tenor and circumstances of this
Commission, such as are any ways Intrinsecal. Now all these things do plainly
agree unto the Baptism with Water, thereafter dispensed by the foresaid
Persons, and (as is already proved) cannot agree with any other. That they
agree unto that, I prove; for the Baptism with Water dispensed by them,
pre-required Discipleship, or it was dispensed to none but Disciples. Secondly,
It was dispensed to all that became Disciples, (and appeared such to the
Church) of whatever Nation. Thirdly, It was without delay dispensed to them,
upon the appearing of their Discipleship. Fourthly, It was dispensed to them in
the Name of the Lord. All which appears from our second, third, and fourth
Arguments before, and the many Scriptures cited therein. See Act. 2.41. and
8.12, 13, 36, 37. and 10.47. and 18.8. and 22.16. and 1 Cor. 1.13.

Lastly, All the Baptisms, except Baptism with Water, that can be alleged or
pretended to be meant in this Text of Matthew, (as the Baptism of Doctrine, of
Conversion, of the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, and let the Baptism of the
Cross be added too) are only Improperly and Metaphorically so called, as needs
little demonstration, (I think) seeing pouring, dipping, sprinkling, and
washing (which the word, Baptize, signifies in the Original Language, being
(...)) cannot be proper to any of these, and to that any of them agrees in a
proper sense, as any Man, without preserves, may see. Having premised this
ground, I again prove, that the Baptism mentioned in this Text of Matthew, and
in all the Texts that I have named, (which here I advertise, that this evident
Argument may be cumulatively applied to every one of them) is Baptism with
Water; Because we may not throw about the words of any Text of Scripture from a
proper to an improper meaning, except some necessity, either of the Analogy of
Faith in general, (which is the constant and perpetual sentence of many
perspicuous and bright shining Scriptures concerning things essential to
Salvation;) or else of the particular scope and circumstances of the Context it
self, constrain us so to do; otherwise we may, without any necessity
constraining us, at our alone will and mere pleasure, without any other ground
imaginable moving us, throw about from a proper to an improper meaning, the
most properly meant saying in all the whole Scriptures, and reject the proper
sense and meaning of every Text, and make them every where at our mere
pleasure, to speak improperly: but that is utterly absurd, and would enervat
and turn to nothing the very body of the Scriptures, as needs no Demonstration,
I am sure: but there is no such necessity in this or any Text we have Argued
from, to throw about the word, Baptism, from being meant properly of Baptism
with Water, to be meant of any of the forementioned improperly so called
Baptisms; Or else, we charge the Quakers to show and make good that necessity,
(if they can) which we defy them and a whole Legion of their Inspirers ever to
do. Therefore, by this irrefragable Argument from the Analogy of Faith, Baptism
with Water (which alone is properly so called) is both meant here in Matthew,
and in all the Texts that we have named. Analogum per se positum stat pro
principali Analogato.

Having so demonstrated, that Baptism with Water is meant in that Text of
Matthew; hence it is manifest, that Baptism with Water is an Ordinance which
God has appointed to be continued to the end of the World; for the promise
there subjoyned of Christ's presence with his Ministers there Commissionated
always even unto the end of the World, for their encouragement in the Execution
of that their Commission, does most plainly show their Commission to be of that
continuance. Secondly, I have showed, that Baptism with Water was once in the
New Testament Church necessary unto Salvation, (as was explained) and due in
the Churches Court, to all who probably had received the Spirit of Grace. Let
the Quakers show us, (if they can) when it became unnecessary, and when, or
where that Bond and Tie was taken off the New Testament Church. Thirdly, seeing
by all our preceding Arguments, it is evident that Baptism with Water was once
of Divine Institution under the New Testament, the Quakers must either yield
the continuance thereof to be to the end of the World; or else, they must say,
That it is since the Institution repealed again. Let them show us then, where
the repealing thereof is Recorded, or to be found in the Scriptures, which are
the Supreme Rule of Faith and Manners; for the Quakers bare word (spoken (may
be) in a mixture when the Moon was at the Full) is not enough for it. And if
they can show us nothing for it, (which is sure) and yet will say, It is
repealed, they may upon the same ground, (that is to say, without any ground)
say, that the Commandments to repent, believe, fear, and love God, and all the
rest of them, are repealed, and then we may do what we please, and follow the
Light within at the top-speed.

But now, because in Justice we are bound to give the Quakers fair Game, we
must hear what they have to say against our preceding Doctrine; and we need
not doubt, but their Infallible heads are furnished with forcible Arguments.

Therefore first, because from thence they fear their greatest danger, (albeit
I have proved the business by many other convincing Arguments, and could
without that Argument irresistibly make good the point) they assault the
Argument from Matthew with several devices.

First then, They allege that Baptizing in that Text is the same with
Disciple-making, which is not meant of Baptizing with Water; and so neither is
that.

Ans, First, They ought to show us some necessary ground for this Metaphorical
Commentary upon the word, Baptize, which we have not seen as yet. Secondly,
Unto this conceit we shall oppose our second and last Arguments, whereby it is
proved, that Baptism with Water is meant in the Text, in despite of this
Exception. Consider the Arguments; for we need not repeat them. Thirdly, All
their grounds for this Exception is, because when it is said, Go make
Disciples, etc. the word, Baptize, is subjoined in the Present Tence of the
Participle, Baptizing: but by this ground (if good) Teaching, which presently
follows too, and in the same manner, shall also be the same with
Disciple-making; and so the whole Commission shall consist of one and the same
thing thrice repeated; which is most absurd, and no Man, though as absurd as a
Quaker, will say it. For, who shall think, or why, that Christ committed such a
threefold Tautology in delivering so short a Commission? that would neither
have suited the wisdom of the Person, nor the nature of the thing.

Secondly, They except against the same Text, (with their old Friend Socinus)
that the Apostles dispensed their Baptism with Water only in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, whereas the Baptism mentioned in this Text of Matthew is to be
dispensed in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and so they cannot be one
and the same.

Ans. By this Argument they might as well prove, that Paul Preached not in the
Name of any other Person of the Trinity, but of the Lord Jesus only, because he
only is mentioned, ( Act. 9.27, 29.) or that he and Timothy served no other
Person of the Trinity, because he only is mentioned, Philip. 1.1. Secondly, I
shall oppose unto this Exception my first, second, and fourth Arguments,
whereby, maugre this exception, Baptism with Water is proved to be meant in
this Text of Matthew. Thirdly, The rest of the Trinity are omitted in the
History, (though it follows not, that so they were in the action) partly for
shortening the Narration, (which is usual) and partly because, it being the
great doubt and controversy of the time, If Jesus was the true Messiah; for
that cause his name is more frequently mentioned, than the rest of the Trinity,
in the whole New Testament.

Thirdly, They except against the same Text, that the Apostles are therein
commanded to Baptize in the Name of the Lord, which sort of Baptizing is with
the Spirit, (say they) not at all with Water.

Ans. Unto this Exception I shall first oppose all my Arguments, whereby, over
the belly thereof, I have proved Baptism with Water to be meant in the Text.
Secondly, Was not Baptism with Water (say ye) dispensed in the Name of the
Lord? See it done, (I pray) and commanded to be done, that ye may not pretend
ignorance hereafter, Act. 2.38. and 8.16. and 10.48. Lastly, It must be a
desperate cause that forces it is Patrons to such contrary defenses; presently
they affirmed, that Baptism with Water was dispensed in the Name of the Lord;
now they cry, About Ship, and deny that Baptism in the Name of the Lord is
Baptism with Water. Are not these Men indeed in a mixture, who in the unjust
defense of falsehood thus run upon such desperate. (...) of splitting
Contradiction?

But fourthly, They except against the same Text, that Baptism with Water
cannot be meant therein, because the Apostles (say they) had no commission to
Baptize with Water, seeing Paul says, (1 Cor. 1.17.) that Christ sent him not
to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel.

Ans. But in despite of this Exception, all our forementioned Arguments do
plainly prove the Baptism mentioned in the Text to be Baptism with Water, and
so also that the Apostles had a Commission to Baptize with Water. Secondly, The
Quakers are bound by this their reasoning to acknowledge the Baptism there
mentioned, ( viz. 1 Cor. 1.17.) to be Baptism with Water, (or else they will
lose the whole ground pretended for their exception) which acknowledged, (as we
have also before proved it truly to be) it presently appears from the Context
of the same place, that the Apostles had a Commission for Baptizing with Water,
seeing Paul plainly there declares, that he Baptized some of these Corinthians,
which (doubtless) he did not without Commission; or else, he had been a
manifest Intruder and Usurper of an Office in the Church and Worship of God,
for which he had no Order, or Warrant, which must be false. I answer therefore
lastly, that the meaning of these words of Paul is plainly Comparative, viz.
that Baptism was not the principal and chief work that he was sent for, but the
Preaching of the Gospel; such as is the meaning of that expression, ( Hos.
6.6.) I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice: and such as is the meaning of that, (
Joh. 15.22.) If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, that
is, nothing compared to what they now have.

Lastly, They except against the same Text, that Baptism with Water cannot be
meant therein, because (say they) it is not therein expressly mentioned.

Ans. First, A Man might upon this ground much rather argue against Christ's
demonstration, ( Luke 20.37.) that the rising of the dead is not expressly
taught, ( Exodus 3.6. from whence he brings his Argument) where God says, I am
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and that therefore such a thing cannot be
there meant. Or that Circum^sion of the flesh of the Foreskin is not expressly
mentioned under every distinguishing Character thereof, ( Galat. 5.2, 3.) where
the flesh of the Foreskin is omitted; and that therefore it cannot be that
which is there meant, but our Spiritual Circumcision in Christ, that is, our
Regeneration, must be the thing which Paul there disputes against and condemns:
and is not that well argued? Secondly, As Baptism with Water is not here
expressly named, in respect of every punctilio of its designation; So far less
is any of the forementioned improper Baptisms here expressly mentioned, seeing
the name Baptism, is proper to that of Water, and not to the other: Therefore,
by the Quakers own Rule, none of these is meant here either; and so (if the
Rule be good) no sort of Baptism is here meant, but the word Baptizing, is set
down here for an impertinent Cipher signifying nothing. Thirdly, I have showed
before, that there is much Doctrine meant in the Scriptures, which is not
therein expressly taught, but implicitly only; and so this Rule of the Quakers
is most false. I answer therefore lastly, that albeit the word Water, be not
here ( Matthew. 28.19.) formally expressed; yet the circumstances of the Text, the
Analogy of Faith, and other Scriptures that I have compared it with in my
Arguments, do manifestly and irresistibly demonstrate the Baptism here
mentioned, to be Baptism with Water. Let the Quakers answer my Arguments if
they can, I mean at the Greek Calends.

All the particular exceptions of the Quakers against our Argument from that
Text of Matthew, being so overthrown and answered; The Quakers have as yet one
general Argument, whereby they hope to overturn Baptism with Water, viz.
Baptism with Water (say they) was but a figure, that Christ might be made
manifest to Israel, who had diverse Baptisms imposed on them, till the time of
Reformation; but Christ the Substance being come, the shadows must flee away.
This Objection they lay down in their Confession of Faith, page 25.

Ans. Whether Baptism with Water be a Figure, or not, I have now abundantly
proved it to be an Ordinance of the New Testament, Divinely Appointed, due in
the Churches Court to all the visible, or appearing Disciples of the New
Testament, and necessary to Salvation under the same, and to continue to the
end of the World. And what then dare the Quakers say against it? Or, how dare
they oppose their own mere Brainsick fancies to the Word of God and Dictates
of the Holy Ghost? Secondly, Let Baptism with Water be a Figure manifesting
Christ to Jews and Gentiles too, (that is to say, a sacred Symbol of Christ's
blood shed (not to be shed, and so not a shadow of a thing to come) on the
Cross, and a Seal of Remission of Sins there through;) Yet Christ, by his
Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection did not cancel all manner of Figures
universally, seeing the Bow in the Cloud is still a Figure to us, or a Symbol
and Pledge rather, that God will no more destroy the World by Water, ( Genesis
9.11, 12, 13.) Nor did he thereby cancel all manner of Figures, (I would rather
call them sacred Signs and Symbols, if the Quakers would too) representing
Christ and his Passion and Blood Shed; (for we shall moreover prove at the
Survey of their next ensuing Query, that Christ has Ordained Bread and Wine to
be in the Eucharist a Sacred Sign and Symbol of his Body and Blood to the
Worlds end.) But he has only cancelled thereby Old Testament Figures,
shadowing forth Him, and His Death and Passion to come. Thirdly, If Baptism
with Water was only a Figure to manifest unto Israel Christ Jesus, why then did
the Apostles dispense it afterward to the whole Disciples of the Gentile
Church, without ever cashiering it, and with so much speed and diligence after
the appearing of their Discipleship? Lastly, Gospel Baptism, which is done with
Water as the External Symbol, is so far from being a shadow that should have
fled away, when Christ came in the Flesh and Dyed, and the time of Reformation
was come, that, on the direct contrary, it then first received its Institution
after Christ was come, and together with the breaking forth of that
Reformation, ( viz. the New Testament way of Dispensation) and is by Christ put
into the Commission of the Ministers of that Reformation, as an Ordinance to be
continued to the Worlds end, and was thereafter accordingly carried along
therewith, as a Sacred Symbol due to all the visible Disciples; all which we
have before proved. The passage of Scripture here cited by the Quakers out of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, ( Heb. 9.10.) will not help their Erroneous Cause:
for the Apostle does not there speak of the Gospel-Baptism for the evident
grounds now given, and as is clear from the Context it self, (where he speaks
of Old Testament Ordinances only) nor was that imposed on the Israelites in Old
Testament times, but began with the New: But the Baptisms he there speaks of,
are the legal washings and purifications that were imposed upon the Israelites
in the time of the Old Testament, such as are described in Numb. 19. Chap.
Levit. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Chapters.

SECT. IV. Concerning Infant Baptism.
Being now come to Infant Baptism, upon which, I am sure, I shall need to say
very little, in regard that Reverend and Worthy Mr. Baxter has in his Book
against Tombs, so fully and excellently discussed the Point, that I can hardly
expect that ever any Man shall add to him; but only because this may come into
the hands of some Persons who have not seen that, Therefore (though very
briefly) I shall not altogether seem to say nothing, but still referring the
Reader to the foresaid excellent Book.

The Question therefore is, Whether the Infants of Believing Parents, or
Professing to believe, (which is all one to the Church) ought to be Baptized,
or not? Whereunto I answer affirmatively, that they ought be Baptized. I prove
it. But first I must Premise, that the Covenant is the same in Substance under
the Old Testament and the New. For which see Romans 4.11, 12, 13. and 11.17, 24.
Galat. 3.8, 9. and 4.28. Heb. 6. from Ver. 12. to the end.

Secondly, I must Premise, That the Children of Believers have the same
Interest into the Covenant with the Parents: for which see Genesis 17. chapter Act.
2.39. Matthew. 19.14. Luke 18.16. and for that cause Paul calls the Children of
Believers Holy, (1 Cor. 7.14) viz. Externally, Federally, and in regard of
Church Membership, and not because they were not Bastards, (for so the Children
of mere Pagans might as well have been called Holy) but because they were
descended of Believing Parents (though but on the one side) which is the very
reason that he gives in the Text, why they are Holy.

Thirdly, I must premise, that Circumcision was the initiating Seal under the
Old Testament, which is evident by the early Administration thereof upon the
Eight Day, and that by Divine Appointment, Genesis 17. Having premised these
things, I prove my Conclusion.

First, Children of Believers were by a Divine Right Circumcised under the Old
Testament: but Baptism under the New Testament is succeeded in the room of
Circumcision under the Old: Therefore the Children of Believers ought to be
Baptized under the New Testament. Only that needs proving, that Baptism under
the New Testament is succeeded in the room of Circumcision under the Old: which
I prove, First, because they both Seal the very same thing; and Secondly,
because as Circumcision was the initiating Seal under the Old Testament, so is
Baptism under the New. That they both Seal the same thing is clear by comparing
Romans 4.11. with Mark. 1.4. Act. 2.38. where Circumcision is declared to be a
Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, and Baptism is held forth to be a Symbol,
or Pledge of the Remission of Sins: now the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
is really one and the same thing with Remission of Sins (as also may be seen
Romans 4.6, 7, 8.) albeit the respects be diverse. And again, as Circumcision
under the Old Testament was a Symbol of inward Mortification and Repentance, so
is Baptism under the New, for which compare Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. and Jer.
4.4. and Romans 2.28, 29. with Mark. 1.4. and Act. 2.38. and 19.4. from all which
it is clear that Baptism is a Symbol and Seal of the same things whereof
Circumcision was.

Secondly, that as Circumcision was the Initiating Seal under the Old
Testament, so is Baptism under the New. I prove, First, because the Apostles
Dispensed it so early to the Disciples at the first appearing of their New
Breath and Interest into the Covenant, as we showed before. Secondly, because
by Baptism we are said to put on Christ. Galat. 3.7.

Thirdly, the Lords Supper (which I shall prove to be of Divine Institution at
the Survey of their next Query) is a Symbol or Seal of our Growth and
Nourishment into the Covenant: Therefore Baptism, which is the other Seal, must
be the Seal of our New Birth and Entry into the Covenant. For it were absurd to
say, we had two sorts of Seals for our Growth and Confirmation thereof, and our
Birth and Entry into the Covenant left altogether without Seal: nay we have
much more need to be Confirmed concerning this, than that; and so it ought far
rather to be Sealed.

We shall add, as the Epilogue of this Argument, that the Apostle Teaches (
Celos. 2.11, 12.) that our Burial with Christ in Baptism is our Circumcision in
Christ, which shows that Baptism is succeeded to us in the Room of Circumcision.

But the Anti-pedobaptists except against the Argument, that Baptism is not
succeeded in the Room of Circumcision, because Circumcision was Dispensed to
none but Males, and on the eighth day exactly, and because Circumcision was not
a Figure of Baptism.

Ans. But our preceding Arguments prove that Baptism is succeeded in the Room
thereof, seeing it exactly acts the Part and Office that Circumcision formally
acted as the Initiating Seal, which shows it to be come in the Room and place
thereof.

As for that, that Baptism is not Tied to the Circumstance of the eighth day,
as Circumcision was, that says nothing; for albeit Baptism be succeeded in the
Room of Circumcision in the substance of its work, yet it does not therefore
follow that it should succeed to the external Circumstances of Circumcision:
for so, not Baptism, but the Circumstances thereof should have succeeded to the
Circumstances of Circumcision, which is not the Question, nor any thing we
plead for. Again, Circumcision in the Institution was restricted to the eighth
day, which Baptism is not, and so it is not Tied to that Circumstance.

That Circumcision was Dispensed only to Males says, nothing neither, seeing
women by Nature were not capable thereof; and therefore it stood in the Room
thereof to them to be the Daughters of Circumcised Fathers. But they are
capable of Baptism, and are not excepted from it, as they were from
Circumcision; but, on the contrary, women are Baptized, as well as men. Act.
8.12. and 16.15.

For that, that in the matter of Succession they require the Cedent to be a
Figure of the Successor, I believe it is spoken in Jest; otherwise they will
have every Cedent a Figure of his Assigny, and every Servant removing at the
Term to be a Figure of the other that comes in his place, which is Ridiculous.

Secondly, whosoever is Adopted and received within the Covenant, has a Divine
right unto Baptism under the New Testament: but Children of believing Parents
are by God Adopted and received within the Covenant, as is plain from Genesis 17.
chapter Mat. 19.14. Act. 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14. Therefore Children of believing Parents
have a Divine right unto Baptism under the New Testament. The Minor is Evident
by the Scriptures Cited. I prove the Major, because Baptism under the New
Testament is the Initiating Seal and Symbol belonging and appended to our Entry
and Reception into the Covenant (as was before proved) under the New Testament;
and so it belongs to every person that is received into the Covenant upon the
account of their Reception; or else it shall belong to their Entry and
Reception (as is supposed and above proved) and yet not to them as Entered and
Received, which involves a manifest Contradiction.

Thirdly, all who are probably Partakers of the Spirit of Grace and
Regeneration have a Divine Right under the New Testament unto Baptism, in the
Churches Court, and she ought to admit them thereunto, as was before proved
from Act. 10.47, 48. But the Children of believing Parents are probably
Partakers of the Spirit of Grace and Regeneration under the New Testament:
Therefore they have a right unto Baptism, in the Churches Court, and she is
bound to admit them thereunto. The Major was evidently proved before. I prove
the Minor; for Gods taking them in within the Covenant ( Genesis 17. chap.) makes
it probable. His promising to Circumcise the hearts of the Children, as well as
the Parents ( Deuteronomy. 30.6.) makes it probable. Gods Sanctifying some of the
Children of believers from the Womb ( Jerem. 1.5. Luke 1.15.) makes it
probable. Paul's calling them Holy (1 Cor. 7.14.) viz. federally and externally,
makes it probable. And if it were not probable that the Children of Believers
did partake of the Spirit of Grace and Regeneration, then it could not be
probable that any of them Dying in Nonage should be Saved, seeing none but
such as are Born of Water and of the Spirit can enter into the Kingdom of God,
Joh. 3.5. And lastly (for, I am sure, I need no more) Christ's declaring and
asserting their Interest into the Kingdom of Heaven ( Mat. 19.14. Luke 18.16.)
whereunto they cannot enter without being Regenerated, makes it probable.

These things make it Infallibly certain as to the Kind, or Quoad Speciem, and
probable as to particular persons, or Quoad Individua.

But against this Last the Quakers except (with the A^abaptists) That Christ
does not in these Texts say, that the Kingdom of Heaven pertained to these
Infants that were brought to him, and such other Natural Infants; but unto
Spiritual Infants, whom he means of when he says, Of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Ans. But then Christ's reasoning runs thus, suffer little Children (these were
true Natural Infants that were brought to Christ, as we shall presently see)
wanting Interest in the Kingdom of Heaven to come unto me: for the Kingdom of
Heaven belongs to mature persons regenerated, which are Spiritual Infants; and
Infants Improperly so called. This would have been so bad a Consequence, that
it would have bereft the Discourse of all Sense. Secondly, hereby they show
that, in their opinion, there are no Infants that have Interest into the
Kingdom of Heaven; otherwise they should have granted Christ's words in respect
of Infants properly so called; and then farewell to the Objection. Thirdly, we
here appeal the Analogy of Faith, without some necessity from which, the words
must not be detorted from a proper to an Improper Sense.

Secondly they except, that these were not young Infants that were brought to
Christ, but grown to some pretty Age, because Christ says, Suffer them to come,
intimating that they themselves could Walk.

Ans. But when (I Marvel) did, Come, begin so necessarily to signify walking
on ones own Feet? A man is said to Come from America, albeit he should lie all
the while in a Ships Cabin. The Text shows that these Children came not on
their own Feet. For in the Text of Luke they are called (...), that is, Sucking
Infants. And in all the Texts there is a word used for their bringing that
signifies to bear, or carry, (...). Again, Christ took them in his Arms and
Blessed them, but never a word of his Teaching them. These that brought them
spoke (as the Texts Intimate) but never a word in their head. And if they had
been in any small measure capable of Christ's Doctrine, the Disciples (it seems)
would not have forbidden their coming.

Lastly, they except against the Body of the Argument, that it cannot be
discerned, if Infants have received the Spirit, or not.

Ans. I have showed before, how as to the Kind (quoad Speciem) it may be
Infallibly discerned, and probably as to Individuals. Now probable Evidences
are sufficient for the Baptism of particular persons, Old, or Young; or else
none at all should be admitted to Baptism, seeing heart-searching is Gods
Prerogative ( Jer. 17.9, 10.) nor did the Apostles themselves Infallibly
discern peoples hearts: as may be seen Act. 8.13. with 23. and 9.26, 27. 1 John
2.19.

Fourthly, all the visible, or appearing Disciples of Christ ought to be
Baptized under the New Testament, as is evident from Mat. 28.19. Where Christ
commands to make all Nations his Disciples, Baptizing them, etc. From which
Text it is as clear as Noontyde, that whoever is once visibly, or appearingly
become Christ's Disciple (for the Church cannot go beyond probabilities here)
ought to be Baptized, and that forthwith, as soon as it can be conveniently
done, as the Expression imports, Go make them Disciples, Baptizing, as if they
should be Baptized in the very same instant that their Interest and
Discipleship appears, without requiring or expecting any further, that, as
being the Condition, being once probably discovered: But the Children of
believing Parents are visible Disciples of Christ: Therefore they ought to be
Baptized under the New Testament. The Major needs no more proving. I prove the
Minor; for all the visible Members of Christ's School are his visible Disciples,
seeing to be a Member of ones School, and to be his Disciple are both one
thing, as is undeniable; but the Children of believing Parents are visible
Members of Christ's School, seeing Christ's School is his Church, whereof the
Children of believers are, certainly, Members; seeing they were Members thereof
in the time of the Old Testament, and (doubtless) Christ's coming in the Flesh,
when the Grace of God was enlarged, has not deprived them of so merciful a
Privilege; surely not; and since God received them into the Covenant, we never
heard of his putting them out again; and they are Holy, viz. federally and in
order to Church Membership; and of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, all which i^
already declared.

The Anabaptists use to urge this Text of Matthew against Infant Baptism,
reading the words as they are in our Translation, Go ye therefore, and Teach
all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. From whence they Infer that all that are to
be Baptized ought first to be Taught, whereof Children are not capable; and
therefore ought not to be Baptized. But, beside that the Jews Children were
admitted to the Initiating Seal, who were as incapable of Teaching as ours, The
truth is, the word in the Original Language is (...), which does not signify
to Teach, but to Make Disciples, which all know that know the Language; and it
is plainly distinguished in the Text from (...), which follows in the beginning
of the very next Verse, and in the Native Etymology signifies to Teach; and so
this Text is so far from favoring their Error, that it clearly overthrows it,
as we have now showed.

But the Anabaptists still object, that Christ, after he had Commanded his
Apostles and Ministers to go and Preach the Gospel to all the world, adds, that
he that believes, and is Baptized shall be Saved, Mark. 16.16. Therefore Christ
pre-requires Faith unto Baptism: but Children cannot believe, therefore they
ought not to be Baptized. Some answer to the Minor of this Argument, that,
though Children cannot actually believe, yet they are capable of the Seeds and
Principles of Faith, or of a Seminal and Inclinative Faith; which I grant is
true, but seeing the Argument urges actual Faith (which they have not adverted
to) it belongs not to the answer thereof.

I answer therefore, and grant that actual believing is pre-required unto
Baptism in adult persons come to some years of discretion (according to these
Scriptures, Mark. 16.16. Act. 2.38. and 8.12, 13. and 18.8.) and therefore they
must give a serious Profession thereof, or some probable Evidence thereof must
be had before the Church admit them to Baptism, seeing (as is supposed) they
are either before, Strangers unto the Covenant; or else, if that be not, yet,
if they refuse the Gospel-offer, they fore-fault their Interest; and so without
the Profession of their Faith, or some probable evidence thereof, they have not
a visible Interest. But these things are not pre-required of the Children of
believing Parents, who have an Interest (not forefaulted by any refusal) upon
the account of their descent from Christian Parents Professing the Faith, whose
Children are with themselves taken in within the Covenant (as is before showed)
and it stands in the room of a Profession to them, that they are by God taken
in within the Covenant, and born within the Church of Christian Parents
professing the Faith. All which is still further clear in the Circumcision of
the Jews Children, nor can any thing be said against the one which does not
with equal force assault the other.

Again they object, that Baptism is a perfect Ordinance; and that therefore it
ought to be Dispensed to none but Folk that are perfect, such as Children are
not.

Ans. If this Consequence of the Anabaptists be but good, we must send all Gods
Ordinances away to Heaven, seeing there are no perfect Folk upon Earth, as
shall be made appear afterward; and by the same Argument none but perfect Folk
should be admitted to any Ordinance of God, and then (I Will warrant) the
Churches shall be Scant enough. But how can Baptism which Seals to us the
Remission of our Sins require us to be beforehand perfect, and so have no Sin
to be Remitted? But they urge, that, Baptism being a perfect Ordinance, does at
least require such as are capable of perfection, which Children are not.

Ans. Our perfection is not absolved in the very Instant of our Baptism, but is
carried on by degrees while we live in this world, and not absolved till we go
hence to the other world; Therefore Baptism does not require that we be capable
to be perfected that very Instant of its Administration to us: for it will be
enough if we by degrees become capable of perfection, according as by degrees
our perfection is to be carried on. This distinguishes the Major, which I
positively have denied, and they could never have proved with all John of
Leidens Logic. Again, Perfection is opposed either to a Negative Imperfection,
which is the want of any thing, which if we had it, we would be the more
perfect, but it is not competent to us, nor is it our fault to want it; and
this sort of Imperfection all Creatures must be content to be for ever liable
unto, and they shall never be perfect in the Sense of Perfection opposite to
this kind of Imperfection; and so Perfection in this Sense cannot be
pre-required to Baptism, seeing it will not be required to Heaven it self. Or
Secondly, Perfection is opposed to a Privative and Culpable Imperfection, which
is the want of a thing that by the Law we are obliged to have, and it is our
fault to want it; and of Perfection opposite to this kind of Imperfection
Infants are capable, as well as adult persons, seeing if Adam had stood in his
Obedience, there had been no Privative, or Culpable Imperfection in any of his
Children how young soever, more than in himself, which, if Infants were not
capable of the Perfection we now speak of, as well as adult persons, could not
have been. Any that would see Infant Baptism more largely and accurately
handled, I refer them to that forenamed Excellent piece of Learned and Worthy
Mr. Baxter against Tombs, which through Gods Blessing has been a great means of
putting a stop to that wild Error amongst us.

Sixth QUERY.
Whether does the Scriptures say in the New Testament, that, Eating of Bread,
and Drinking of Wine, after Supper, was an Ordinance of Christ? and whether do
ye Practice this as Christ and his Apostles did after Supper? Do not ye take it
before Dinner? Did Christ and his Apostles do so? What Scripture have ye for
your Rule for this? for he took it in the night. And Christ says, as often as ye
Eat of this Bread, and Drink of this Wine, etc. Is that a standing Command? or
is it left to people? Seeing its said, as often as ye Eat this and Drink this, do
it in Remembrance of his Death, and showing his Death till he come again. Was
this coming to the end of the world? or was it until his coming to Dwell in his
Apostles, who said he would come and Dwell and walk in them? need they then
Bread and Wine to put them in Remembrance of him? and does not Christ say, Eat
this, and Drink this in Remembrance of his Death? and does not the Apostle say,
that they must Die with Christ? and to Die with him is to come to the Death
with him. And they that be in the Death of Christ, and Die with Christ, must
they have Bread and Wine to put them in Remembrance of his Death? Yea, or Nay?
and does not the Apostle say, that they must Die with Christ, and be Buried
with him? and when the people are Dead and Buried with Christ, must they have
Bread and Wine to put them in Remembrance of Christ's Death? Answer this, Yea;
or Nay. And the Apostle says, they must Rise with Christ Jesus. And if they be
Risen with him, then seek these things that are above. And is not Bread and
Wine from below? and if the Apostle puts them to seek these things that are
above, then he brought them off these things that are below; for he says to the
Corinthians, The things that are seen are Temporal, but the things that are not
seen are Eternal. This he Spoke when they were Jangling and in a Disorder about
outward things. Does he not bring them off things that are Seen to things that
are not seen? and whether or not ye ever intend, ye your selves called
Ministers, or your Hearers shall come any nearer to Christ's Death, and Die, and
be Buried with him, but only to take Bread and Wine in Remembrance of Christ's
Death, lest ye and they should come to forget Christ's Death? Answer us plainly
these things, Yea; or Nay.

SVRVEY.
Their Doctrine here does very well agree with George Keiths Quakerism no
Popery, (page 100.) where he flatly denies the Supper of the Lord to be any
standing Ordinance of Christ, and will have it (forsooth) a Popish Principle
and Practice: as also with their Heretical Confession of Faith, wherein they
deny all manner of External Ordinances, pages 24, 25, 26, 27, 77, 78, 79, 92,
93, 102, 103, 104, 105, 122, 130, 133, 135.

Before we come to a particular Disquisition upon this Query, we must expunge
that restrictive Clause [After Supper] out of the principal Question which is
first in order, as not being any part of the Sacrament Instituted having any
mystical meaning, neither being any where of Scripture commanded, but being
only an External Circumstance of that first Supper of our Lord merely
occasional, because of the Passover taken before it, which according to its
Institution ( Exodus 12.) was to be Celebrated at Even: In the room whereof,
because Christ was to Institute the Gospel-Supper, it behooved to be taken
after it, and not before it, being thereby to abolish and Antiquat the
Passover. And if we were tied to every circumstance of that first
Gospel-Supper, then we behooved always to take it in an Upper Room, and with
Twelve only in Company, yea, and after a Paschal Lamb too; And albeit a Quaker
should answer, that this last named Circumstance would be against Sciripture
abrogating the Jewish Ceremonies; yet, it is hard to reply that all matters of
Faith, and parts of Religious Worship, must be, not only not against Scripture,
but according thereunto, and having Divine Appointment therein, (see Isai.
8.20. Jer. 7.31, 32. and 19.5, 6. Matthew. 15.9. Mark 7.7. Colos. 2.20, 21, 22.)
When therefore the Quakers shall be able to prove, that that Circumstance of
time when the first Gospel-Supper was Celebrated is any Constituent part of the
Sacrament with mystical signification Instituted by Christ Jesus, or, that it
is any where of Scripture Commanded, then, and not till then, we shall
acknowledge that we are in the wrong in taking it before Dinner; and this they
are obliged to do, if they hold the Affirmative, (as here they pretend to do)
seeing all parts of Religious Worship must have positive Scripture-Warrant,
which if they want, they will be plain contrary to Scripture general Precepts,
forbidding all Will Worship after the commandments of Men.

Having thrust out that limitating Clause [After Supper] from the state of the
Question, we find the state thereof to be yet Vicious: for it may either be
understood of common eating of Bread and drinking of Wine; and so it is no
Gospel Ordinance, seeing Drunkards and Heathens can do that unto excess in a
Tavern. But Secondly, It may be understood (though with much ado, as it is
proposed) of Sacramental eating and drinking of Bread and Wine Consecrated,
Sanctified, and set apart for a sacred Symbol of Christ's Death, for signifying
and sealing all the benefits thereof to the worthy Receivers, their Spiritual
nourishment in Christ, and Communion with him and with each other.

In this sense, I confidently assert the eating of Bread and drinking of Wine
(as the Quakers mockingly term it) to be an excellent Gospel-Ordinance
Instituted by Christ Jesus, to be observed in his Church to the Worlds end.
This conclusion is so clear from Matthew. 26. Chap. and Luke 22. that nothing can
be more clear. For first, We have in both places Christ's Fact and Deed set
down, that he took Bread and Wine and blessed them, that he brake the Bread,
and put the Wine into the Cup, and that he distributed it to the Disciples, and
did eat and drink thereof with them. Secondly, We have Christ's express
Commandment, (albeit the blind Quakers cannot see it) injoyning the whole
action to be, in like manner, done by his Church and People afterward, This
do, etc. Luke 22.19. Thirdly, We have his Word of Promise Sacramentally
enunciating the thing signified, or Internal matter of the External Signs and
Symbols by a Metonimy, attributing the name of the thing signified to the Sign,
expressing the Sacramental Union and Relation of the one to the other, wherein
consists the Internal form of the Sacrament; This is my Body given for you;
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood shed for you, Luke 22.19, 20. Lastly,
We have the Explication of the end of this Sacred Ordinance, which is, that it
should be for a memorial of Christ Death, This do in Remembrance of Me, Luke
22.19. Now what blindness is happened to the Quakers, that they cannot here
read Christ's Institution of the Gospel-Supper, consisting of his own Fact, and
a Commandment to his Church to do the like thereafter, with a rich Promise
annexed, and the End of the work declared? Can any thing be devised more clear
than this? Or, Can the Quakers number their own Fingers? What shall we think of
them, when they can neither Read, nor hear when it is Read by others this clear
Institution of the Eucharist, but that they are possessed with a blind and deaf
Spirit that deprives them both of sight and hearing?

Secondly, For a further assurance (if need were) that the Eucharist is a
Gospel Ordinance of Divine Institution, we have the Practice of the Apostles,
and the whole Church after the pouring forth of the Spirit, Act. 20.7. 1 Cor.
10.16. in which places there is, not only the Example of the Churches Practice
set down; but also further, we have their accustomed use thereof clearly
imported, as any Man, by reading and considering the places, may see.

Thirdly, The Apostle in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, eleventh
Chapter, while he is correcting several abuses that were crept in into the
Worship there, amongst the rest, calls them to the first Institution of the
Lords Supper; where in the 23. Verse he affirms, that it was an Ordinance he
had received of the Lord, and delivered unto them; and in the 26. Verse he
shows the duration of it to be until Christ's coming again. Now what an extreme
distraction shall it be to say, That Christ delivered an Ordinance unto Paul to
be by him delivered unto the Church, and to be by Her observed till Christ's
coming again at the day of general Judgment, and that for showing forth his
Death until then, which notwithstanding is not a Gospel-Ordinance Instituted by
Christ? it is a horrid contradiction to say so. Is this the Spirit of Revelation
(I should say of occaecation and fascination) that the Quakers boast of? Oh
miserable Guide and grand Cheat, who, instead of a plain Path, (as he pretends)
does thus conduct them continually into the dark mists of Cimmerian Clouds, or
rather into the Chimerical Deserts of Utopia, where all their Principles seems
to concenter in the common place of Contradiction!

But, say the Quakers here, Is that a standing Command? or is left to People?
seeing it is said, As often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, do it in
Remembrance of his Death, and for showing forth his Death till he come again.
Was this Coming to the end of the World? Or was it till his coming to dwell in
his Apostles, etc. See their Heretical Confession of Faith, where they harp the
same string, page 26, 27, 77, 78, 79, 80.

Ans. O miseri, Quae tanta Insania, cives? Quis furor? here is a whole heap of
Romantic Fictious and Fantastic Dreams. For first here they allege, that
Christ did not dwell in his Apostles, when the first Gospel-Supper was
Celebrated, (and the same they also largely insinuate in their Confession,
pages 72, 74, 75.) and so they behoove to be all at that time unregenerated Men
merely in Nature, seeing Christ by his Spirit dwells in all Regenerated Persons
and Believers, as these Scriptures witness, Romans 8.9, 10. 2 Cor. 13.5. Galat.
4.6. 1 John 3.24. But it is most false, that Christ did not dwell in his
Apostles when the first Gospel-Supper was Celebrated, and that they were then
unregenerated Men, seeing Christ plainly declares, that they were clean, though
not all, ( Joh. 13.10) by this meaning of Judas the Traitor. And again he
affirms, that they were clean through the Word that he had spoken unto them; (
Joh. 15.3.) and again he says, that they had received the Word of God, and kept
it, and knew surely that he came out from God, and that the Father had sent
him, ( Joh. 17.6, 7, 8.) and these are things which Flesh and Blood never
revealed unto them, and the natural Man cannot discern, Matthew. 16.17. 1 Cor.
2.14. It is indeed true, God had not at that time when the first Gospel-Supper
was Celebrated, furnished the Apostles with the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, to accomplish them for their extraordinary work that ensued, but that
was done at the Pentecost; but, that Christ did not Spiritually dwell in them
before the Pentecost, the Scriptures cited declares to be false: And as for
that which Christ says to Peter, (Luke 22.32.) When thou art Converted,
strengthen thy Brethren, it is not meant of the Conversion of his state, as if
he had been at that time unregenerated; but it is meant of his Conversion from
a particular Fact, or his Rising after a Fall, as (beside what is already said)
is clear in the Text it self: for Christ there tells him, that he had prayed
for him that his Faith might not fail, which intimates that he then had Faith,
and that it should not be totally extinguished by the temptation he was to meet
with, seeing Christ's prayers were always heard, Joh. 11.42.

Secondly, They thereby insinuate, That the Gospel-Supper should be allowed to
none, but unregenerated Persons in whom Christ dwells not, who will surely take
it unworthily, and eat and drink their own Damnation therein, (1 Cor. 11.29.)
for they do not here deny, but acknowledge, that the Apostles were by Christ
admitted to the Gospel-Supper before he came (as they would have it) to dwell
in them; but they will not have them partaking of it after Christ is once come
to dwell in them, alleging that to be its period and term day: but Christ
dwells in all Regenerated Persons, as is proved: Therefore they allow the
Gospel-Supper to none, but Unregenerated Persons, who cannot discern the Lords
Body, nor show forth his Death, which is not a bare Historical Remembrance of a
thing past, but consists in our Spiritual feeding by Faith upon Christ
Crucified, and the application by Faith of him, and all the benefits of his
Redemption to our selves, in our thankfulness to him for so great benefits, and
in our love toward him, and each other; which things Unregenerated Men merely
Carnal cannot do, Romans 8.7, 8. 1 Cor. 2.11, 14. So then the Quakers in this
point do directly contradict the Holy Ghost who requires, (1 Cor. 11.25, 26,
29.) that none come to the Gospel-Supper that cannot discern the Lords Body,
and show forth his Death.

Thirdly, They thereby allege, That there is not a standing Command left to
the Church for Celebrating the Lords Supper, which I have showed to be most
false from Luke 22.19. and 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. in both which places we have a
clear Command set down, Do this in Remembrance of Me; which Command, seeing it
was never to this day repealed, (or else, let the Quakers show where that is
Recorded) must be as yet standing still in force; otherwise they may as well
say, that all the Commands are repealed together, without any ground, as that
this is repealed and not standing, when they can show us no ground for it from
the whole Word of God.

Fourthly, They thereby allege, that the coming again of Christ mentioned, 1
Cor. 11.26. and which is no where else in all the Scriptures mentioned upon
this purpose, is meant of Christ's coming to dwell in his Apostles, viz. at the
pouring forth of the Spirit at the Pentecost, after which time they will not
deny that Christ dwelt in them, (as their Confession of Faith owns, pages 72,
73, 74, 75.) albeit they plainly teach that he did not dwell in them before
that time. But it is impossible that Christ's Coming again mentioned there, (1
Cor. 11.26.) should be meant of Christ's pouring forth of the Spirit, or coming
at the Pentecost; seeing Christ's coming at the Pentecost was already past long
before the writing of that Epistle to the Corinths, whereas his coming there
mentioned is held forth as a thing merely future, and not past; now it is a flat
contradiction to say, a thing merely future, and not past, is already past; and
so his coming again mentioned in the Text of the Corinths, cannot be meant of
his coming at the Pentecost. Again, The Eucharist was Celebrated by the
Apostles, and the Church after the Pentecost, (when Christ either dwelt in the
Apostles, or else never) Act. 2.42. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.28.
Therefore the period of the Gospel Eucharist could not be at the pouring out of
the Spirit at the Pentecost. What? Did not Christ dwell in these Corinthians
whom Paul writes to? seeing they were sanctified in Christ Jesus, and justified
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, and they were
Temples to the Holy Ghost that dwelt in them, (1 Cor. 1.2. and 6.11, 19.) and
yet they did Celebrate the Gospel-Supper among them, and that, by Divine
Appointment, (1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.21, 23, 24, 28.) and so the Gospel-Supper
was appointed to be Celebrated by People in whom Christ does already and
previously dwell, yea none else but such are allowed to partake of it, as is
showed before.

But need they then Bread and Wine (say the Quakers) to put them in Remembrance
of him, after Christ is come to dwell in them?

Ans. Now the Quakers begin to dispute and prove their Thesis against the
Gospel-Supper, and their Argument is a fruit of their conceipted perfection in
this life, from whence they infer, that they need no Ordinances; albeit the
Apostle affirms, (1 Cor. 8.2. and 13.9.12.) that our knowledge in this life is
still short of that which it ought to be, and is but in part, and that all of
it, is but dark and through a Glass; which shows that we have need of Means and
Ordinances, as so many Perspicils or Glasses to help our weak and dim-sighted
Eyes, without which we cannot take up the object. This conceipted Perfection of
theirs I shall discuss at the Fifteenth Query, when I come to it. But, wha^? Do
these in whom Christ dwells need nothing to put them in Remembrance of him,
(for the Argument carries as much against every such thing, as against the
Gospel-Supper, as is manifest?) indeed this very well Homologates with their
Confession, where they decry all manner of External Ordinances, calling them
Unclean, Carnal, Dead, Babylonish, Heathenish Observations, and the Whores Cup
of Abominations in several places thereof, for which see it, pages 10, 24, 77,
79, 87, 92, 102, 104, 105, 108, 111, 122, 130, 133, 135. But, I am sure, it
suits not with the Scriptures any where, that shows us many Ordinances and
Means appointed of God to keep us in mind of him, and our duty unto him, and
particularly of the Sacred Supper, as a Memorial of what Christ has done and
Suffered for us; and our memories that are especially weak in Spiritual things,
have great need of Remembrancers, Joh. 14.26. Philip. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.13. and
3.1, 2. The Divine Institution of the Gospel-Supper, and the Commandment given
to the Church to Celebrate the same, is enough to warrant our practice of it,
(methinks) and our Imperfection in this life proclaims our need of it, and
other helps and means; yea, Adam in Innocence had a Tree of Life allowed him of
God to eat of, as a Symbol and Pledge of Life as long as he stood in his
obedience, much more need have we of a Pledge to strengthen our weak Faith.

In the next place, to show us their good skill in Physical Philosophy, they
give us a very learned, and no less true definition of Death. To Dye with
Christ (say they) is to come to the Death with him. But, is it so? Then never a
Malefactor Died upon a Gibbet, but they Died always by the way while they were
coming to it, seeing they were coming to their Death while they were by the
way, and to Dye, and come to the Death is all one by this definition. Hezekiah
showed himself more expert in Physics, when he distinguished betwixt the Birth
and coming to the Birth, ( Isa. 37.3.) but he did not learn his Philosophy at
the Quakers School, it seems. They would have defined Death much better with
Aristotle, that it is the loss of heat and moisture, because the loss of these
infers it; or if they will stand to my Judgment, Death is the separation of
Soul and Body, because it is the very dissolution of their Union. But I shall
pass this, only I behoove to notice the ignorance of their Inspirer in
Naturals; as well as Spirituals.

In the next place they do again vainly repeat, that their foolish Argument now
refuted and answered, viz. That they that are in the death of Christ, and
buried with him, need not Bread and Wine to put them in Remembrance of his
Death, the contrary whereof is abundantly showed already, and we will not
repeat; only I cannot but with astonishment wonder, that seeing Christ so
peremptorily commands it, (whether it were needful for us, or not) This do in
Remembrance of Me, they dare with their Brainsick fancies directly contradict
Divine Commands. Oh! who (but the Quakers that have gotten a new Christ of
their own to be saved by) would refuse any Token that Christ had appointed for
a Memorial of his Death, who wrote his love to us, which many waters could not
quench, in the Characters of his Blood in the day that he was wounded for us in
the House of his friends?

But (say the Quakers) the Apostle says, they must rise with Christ Jesus; and
if they be risen with him, then seek these things that are above; and is not
Bread and Wine from below?

Ans. Here is another Argument against the Lord's Supper, and whereby they
reproach and condemn all the Ordinances that ever God appointed from the
beginning of the World, whereof any External Element was from below, as well as
the Gospel-Supper. Secondly, I answer, That the seeking of things that are
above does not exclude, but on the contrary, includes the use of the means
which God has appointed for attaining them; seeing then the Lord's Supper is
one of the means appointed of God for our better attaining things above, the
use thereof is not there ( viz. Colos. 3.1.) disallowed, more than the use of
Water is in Baptism, of which before. Thirdly, Let the Elements be from whence
they will, yet I have showed that the Gospel-Supper Celebrated under these
External Elements, as the Symbols is an Ordinance Instituted by Christ to be
observed by the Gospel Church, till his coming to the last Judgment. And what
then can the Quakers say to enervat Christ's Institution? Fourthly, There is
nothing in the Gospel-Supper that is from below, excepting the mere External
Elements materially and entitatively considered; for the Institution, the
Internal Substance, the Mystical Signification, the Ends, and Effects thereof
are all of them things Heavenly and from above; and so, though Bread and Wine
Entitatively considered be from below, yet, the Sacrament of the Supper, and
Bread and Wine taken Sacramentally are not from below; for Bread and Wine
simply, or in themselves do not make a Gospel Eucharist, more than a Body
without a Soul makes a Man, as is palpable from many things above said.

The seeking therefore of these things, above (mentioned Colos. 3.1.) is meant
only in opposition to the seeking of Corporal commodities belonging to this
Life, and that, not in every respect either; but as the chief scope of our
Actions, ( Mat. 6.33.) or to fulfill our Lusts, ( Romans 13.14.) or with
inordinate care and affection, ( Colos. 3.2. Luke 12.22.) or with anxious
distrust, ( Luke 12.29.) or by unlawful means, or without submission to God:
for, that we may seek our worldly necessaries also, as Secundary means,
moderately, without anxious care, by lawful means, for the right use, and with
submission; is manifest from the Scriptures, for which, instead of many, see
only Matthew. 6.11. 1 Timothy 5.8. and if any Man would have us no ways looking
after our Corporal necessaries, either he would have us to live without them,
(which a Quaker may try upon himself) or else to use no means (at least) for
the obtaining of them; and then we shall Plow and Sow no more, but be supplied
by Miracles. The passage of Scripture which they cite from 2 Cor. 4.18. will no
ways Patronise their Erroneous Cause; (though they also cite it to the same
very purpose in their Confession, page 79.) For the Apostle in that place is
speaking of his afflictions, troubles, and the loss of worldly things which he
endured for the Gospel, and these he opposes there unto Eternal Life, calling
these the things that are seen, and this the thing that is not seen; and these
troubles, and the loss of these enjoyments he counted but a small business and
a light affliction, (as it is there ver. 17.) But will any Man say, that he
counted it but a light affliction to be deprived of the Gospel-Supper? This
would not have become Paul. But I need not Apologize for him; he purges himself
sufficiently of this; for the whole purpose of that Chapter shows his meaning
to be of the things that I have said. Again, the External Signs in the Lords
Supper, rightly considered as signifying and exhibiting Christ and his
benefits, are so far from turning our Eyes, or hearts to things that are below
and seen, that on the contrary, they are an excellent means of of elevating
them unto, and setting them upon the things that are above and not seen?

That the Corinthians were jangling, and in a disorder when Paul wrote the
second Epistle to them; (from which the Quakers cite this passage) I truly
perceive not; yea, the Seventh Chapter thereof witnesses the contrary: and so
the Quakers have mistaken the second Epistle for the first.

In the Close of this Query, the Quakers show themselves related to the Accuser
of the Brethren: for (glory to God) there are many Ministers amongst us, who
have intended, not without success, that both themselves and their Hearers
should come nearer Christ's Death, than the eating and drinking of Bread and
Wine for a bare Historical Remembrance of his Death, (as the Quakers here
insinuate it to have been) whom, because their Epistles of Commendation are
written upon the hearts of many Thousands, we shall not need here further,
either to vindicate or commend them.

Seventh QUERY.
Whether or not Christ and the Apostles gave forth a Command that they should
keep the Sabbath Day? let us see where it is written in the Scriptures, but the
first day of the Week the Saints did meet together: this is Scripture; but let
us see the Scripture for a Sabbath Day in the New Testament, which speaks for a
rest for the People of God. But is this a day? yea, or nay?

SVRVEY.
The Quakers Position here is, That there is no day under the New Testament
appointed to be kept as an External Christian Sabbath Day more than another,
but that all days are of equal Condition and Holiness, as (beside what they
here say) they also teach more plainly in their Confession of Faith, page 42.
against which I assert, that there is an External Christian Sabbath Day
appointed to be observed under the New Testament, distinct from all other days
whatsoever. For proving of this Conclusion, I need not bring the ordinary
Argument from the light of Nature concerning some portion of our time and days
to be set apart from all civil and worldly Employments to the exercise of Gods
Public Worship, (which none, but a professed Atheist will deny) knowing that the
party I have to deal with (scarce both of Religion and Reason) do but little
value it.

But first, We are commanded in the fourth Commandment to keep holy unto God
one day of seven, and this Commandment is Moral, and so perpetual, extending to
all Ages of the Church: Therefore there is a command for keeping an External
Sabbath Day under the New Testament, as well as the Old. The consequence is of
it self clear to any Man. The first part of the Antecedent is also clear from
Exodus 20. Chap. I prove the second part thereof, viz. that this Commandment is
Moral, and so perpetual, because God proclaimed it with his own Voice from
Mount Sinai to the whole Assembly of Israel, he wrote it with his own Finger,
he inserted it into the midst of the rest of the Moral Precepts, he wrote it
upon the Tables of Stone showing its perpetual duration, and he caused put it
into the Ark of the Testimony with the rest of the Moral Precepts; all which is
clear from Exodus 20. Chap. throughout, and 25.16. and 31.18. and 32.15, 16.
Deuteronomy. 9.10. and 10.4. But God never conferred the like honor upon any Precept
merely Ceremonial, as is plain from the Scriptures. Again, all the reasons of
this Commandment are entirely Moral, and stand upon common and perpetual
equity: Ergo, so must the Command it self be. The reasons chiefly are, seeing
he himself rested after six days work finished, and he allows us six days to
our work: Therefore in all reason and equity we ought to rest after so many
days allowed to our work, and give God a seventh. Lastly, If this Command were
not Moral, then there should not be Ten, but only Nine Commandments of that
Law, which is plain contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.13. and 10.4. where Moses manifestly
speaks of the Moral Law which God spoke in the Mount out of the midst of the
Fire, and plainly affirms that there are Ten Commandments thereof; from which
Law Christ shows us, that one jot shall not pass away till Heaven and Earth
pass, and that the least Commendment thereof must be perpetually observed,
Matthew. 5.18, 19.

But the Quakers answer, That the Sabbath commanded in the fourth Commandment
was the last day of the week, which is abrogated. Unto this I reply, that the
accommodation of the particular time or diet to the last day of the week is
indeed abrogated; but not the substance of the Command, which (for the
convincing reasons now given) is plainly Moral, and so perpetual, and as yet in
force; and so it does no less now enjoin the first day of the week to be
observed, the accommodation of the particular Diet being made unto the first
day, then it did then, enjoin the last day of the week to be observed, by
reason of the then-accommodation made unto the last day, seeing it still
retains its Authority for a seventh day, or one day of seven to be kept holy
unto God, (wherein the substance of the Precept consists) which of them soever
he shall pitch upon and determine.

As for the change of the particular day, from the last to the first of the
week, (doubtless) Christ himself in his own Person is the Author thereof,
seeing (beside that he Rose thereupon, and rested from the great work of
Redemption, which is the great ground of the change) he gives it the honor of
his most frequent appearings thereafter to his Disciples, ( Luke 24.13, 15.
Joh. 20.19, 26.) and again of that glorious manifestation of himself in the
pouring forth of the Spirit at the Pentecost, (Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.) and again,
it was on this day (as shall be showed) that he made that glorious appearance
to John in the Isle of Patmos, (Revel. 1.10.) again, the first day of the week
was by the Apostles and the Church (following their Masters Example, which is
binding in things imitable, and that by Divine Precept, Ephesians. 5.1.) observed
for the Celebrating of Gods Public Worship as a day set apart for that work,
as appears from Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. where we have not a mere bare
Example or instance of the Churches meeting for once or twice to Gods Public
Worship on that day set down, but also we have their constant custom of so
doing clearly in both places imported; yea further, the last of these two Texts
shows, that, that day was set apart for the Public Divine Worship, while it
expressly requires the public Collections of Charity for the Poor, (a Pendicle
of the Public Worship) to be made on that day, and shows that the same order
was also given to other Churches, as well as to them of Corinth. And lastly,
the Holy Ghost has recorded to us these singular Privileges and peculiar
Honor bestowed by Christ upon this first day of the week above all other days,
as also the Churches observing of it for Gods Public Worship, and that
constantly, and as a day set apart for that use; and the like he does not
mention of any other day, which is very observable. What is all this for, then?
for some reason, uncontrovertibly; and yet no other can be given, or fall under
imagination; (or else I entreat the Quakers to show us it, if they can) But,
that the first day of the week is a day peculiarly set apart and sanctified by
Christ for the Exercise of his Public Worship, and which he would have his
Church peculiarly to regard, as designed for that holy use, beyond and above
all other days, as was accordingly done by the Apostles and Church in the pure
Primitive times. The change of the day then is most surely by Divine Authority.

But Secondly, when Christ foretells the Disciples of the Destruction of
Jerusalem and the Temple by Vespasian, (Matthew. 24.20.) which was forty years
and upwards after Christ's Ascension, and so it was long after the planting of
the Gospel Church, and exautorating of the Ceremonial Law; He bids them pray,
that their flight might not be in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. There, is
a Sabbath Day both name and thing under the New Testament, which Christ wills
his Disciples to pray, that their flight might not be thereupon, because it
would be grievous to them to be forced to travel for preservation of their
natural Lives on that day which was Instituted for Gods Public Worship, and
their Spiritual comfort. Neither is it possible to get the Sabbath Day here
mentioned, meaned of every day, seeing then they behooved either to flee on the
Sabbath Day or else never: Nor yet can it be meant of an uncertain day, or some
day Indeterminately; for then, the Disciples could not have known what day to
pray, that their flight might not be upon, and Christ's Exhortation had been
vain, and to no use or purpose, which is most absurd and false. This one
Scripture proves a Christian External Sabbath Day against all Contradicters;
and that the first day of the week must be this Christian Sabbath Day, appears
from the Claim and Interest above declared, which it has under the New
Testament unto that honorable Title and peculiar Denomination above all other
days, and that by Divine Warrant.

Thirdly, There is a particular determinate day under the New Testament which
has, by the mind and sentiments of the Scripture, a peculiar relation unto the
Lord Christ, above all other days whatsoever; and so it is separated from the
common condition of all other days, having a peculiar Divine relation, which no
other has, and thereby a pre-eminence and dignity before all of them; and so
it must be an Holy Day, seeing common days are not separated from the condition
of common days, except we please to speak plain contradiction. That there is
such a particular determinate day under the New Testament, is clear from Revel.
1.10. where John says, He was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day, which cannot be
meant of every day, seeing then, he could not have been in the Spirit but on
the Lord's Day, whereas it is most evident, that John distinctly points at a
particular day having some peculiar relation to Christ above all others.

But the Quakers (like Dictators) say, that the Lord's Day here is meant of an
uncertain time, called the Lord's Day, because of the Lords special appearing
thereupon. But their Commentary is most false, and cannot agree with the
Apostles Scope, which is, as to show the certain Person Who received the
Vision, (viz. John) and the certain place of the World Where, (In the Isle of
Patmos) and the certain kind of frame Wherein, (While he was in the Spirit) so
also the certain kind of day, or the certain day of the week whereupon he
received the Vision; and so an uncertain time cannot stand with the Scope.
Secondly, Let the Quakers (if they can) prove that an uncertain time is here
meant, or else their Gloss upon the Text will be justly thought uncertain.
Thirdly, Our Adjective does not very perfectly turn the word, which in the
Original Language is (...), signifying Dominick, or (more clearly) pertaining
to the Lord, which plainly imports a particular determinate day, (adding (...)
with it, which is in the Text) having a peculiar and stated relation to the
Lord above others, which by common right are his also. Having dispatched the
Quakers uncertain time, I affirm, that the Lord's Day here is meant of the first
day of the week determinately, seeing it has a peculiar interest into that
Denomination above all other days whatsoever; for, it is the day of Christ's
glorious Resurrection, and ceasing from the great work of Redemption, (whereof
it is a Remembrance;) it is the day of his frequent appearings to his Disciples
thereafter; it is the day of his glorious pouring forth of the Spirit, and
enduing the Apostles with Power from on High; it is the day set apart for his
Public Worship, and observed also for that use by the Apostles and Church in
the pure Primitive time; and finally, it is the day which the Holy Ghost has
particularly noted unto us, as alone honored by Christ and his Church with
such peculiar Privileges; all which is before proved. Seeing then the first
day of the week has, upon so many special accounts, so peculiar an Interest
into that Denomination, which no other can pretend to; The Lords day here
mentioned, must be inevitably understood of the same, seeing the best right
must and ought to gain the Cause, except we resolve utterly to abandon our
Reason, or else determine against clear Justice. Let the Quakers then show us
some other day with a better, or as good right; or else, prove from the Text,
or otherwise, that some other day, certain or uncertain is meant, (which I
defy them to do) otherwise these clear Scripture-grounds must bear more
weight, than their mere bare word and naked assertions.

But the Quakers will object against an External Sabbath Day under the
New Testament, that the Apostle condemns the observation of days and
Sabbath Days, Galat. 4.10. Colos. 2.16.

Ans. The Apostle does not there or any where else, condemn the observation of
the Christian Sabbath Day, but only of the Jewish Sabbath Days, (with any
others that never had Divine Warrant, against which the Argument infers a
Fortiori) whereof, beside their ordinary weekly Sabbath Day, they had a great
many, such as were the first and last days of every one of their three Solemn
Feasts, viz. of the Passover, of Pentecost or Weeks, and of Tabernacles; as
also their Feast of Trumpets on the first day of the seventh Month, and the
Feast of Expiation or Atonement on the tenth day of the seventh Month; and
beside all these, their New Moons, their Sabbath of Years, and great Jubilies;
all which may be seen Levit. 23. and 25. Chap. and Numb. 10. Chap. And that it
is such days as these, and not our Christian Sabbath Day, the observing whereof
the Apostle condemns, is clear in the very Context of these two cited places;
for in the first Text, he expressly names Months and Years, that is, New Moons
and Sabbaths of Years, and the entire scope of the Epistle is bent against
Jewish Ceremonies, pertaining to the then-Bondage-state of the Infant-Church
under the Old Testament, as any man reading it may see. And in the last Text,
he ranks these Sabbaths which he rejects, with Meats, and Drinks and New Moons,
and calls them shadows of things to come, of which kind our Christian
Sabbath Day is not. Nor is all distinction of days, without exception, taken
away here, more than the distinction of the Elements in the Lord's Supper from
other common Meat and Drink, (which, that it is not taken away, I have proved
at the Survey of the last Query) seeing, both Meats and Drinks and Days are
here equally condemned, or not so. What? Does Paul here condemn the observation
of the Christian Sabbath Day, which Christ teaches we shall have under the
New Testament? or, Does he rescind the fourth Commandment? or, Condemns he the
observation of the Day which himself and the whole Church observed, as set
apart for Gods Public Worship? say not so, I pray.

Again, they will Object that the same Apostle holds forth the Indistinction
and equal Condition of all days, Romans 14.5.6.

Ans. That is most false, for the unanswerable reasons now given. Secondly, by
the Context it self, the days there Treated of, are such as are in the same
order with Ceremonial Meats and Drinks of Jewish observation, the estimation
whereof above others was an Infirmity in the weaker sort to be born with by the
stronger, until their better Information and Persuasion: But the Christian
Sabbath Day is not of that sort, as is showed. Nor does Paul here any more
overturn the distinction of the Christian Sabbath Day from other common days,
then of the Elements in the Lord's Supper from other common Meat and Drink,
which it is certain he does not overturn, seeing these in the Lord's Supper are
of a very far different Condition from all common Meat and Drink, in regard of
their Institution, Signification, Ends, Effects, etc.

In the Close of their Query they tell us, that the Scriptures speaks for a
Rest for the people of God. But is this Rest (say they) limited to a day?

Ans. What then, I pray? the Scriptures promise the Eternal Rest of Heaven to
all true Believers, whereof also their Grace and Sanctification is an Earnest
and Degree inchoat and begun here, though not perfected. But will this prove
that there should not be, or is not an external Sabbath Day under the New
Testament? then neither should there have been any under the Old either, seeing
the Rest of Heaven was promised to Believers then, as well as now. And all true
Believers had some measure of Grace and Sanctification then, as well as now. Or
will our resting from sin in some measure begun in this Life, or our Eternal
Resting in Heaven in the next Life infer, that we should rest from our Duty in
this Life? Forsooth such Consequences are very suitable to the Quakers Logic.

But, say the Quakers (which is their last Gun) every day is a Holy day to a
Christian.

Ans. I grant a Christian should be Holy every day, and keep an Internal
Sabbath, as they call it. But it will not from thence follow, that we have not
an External Sabbath Day also; for Adam in Innocence when he maintained, and was
bound to maintain a continual Internal Sabbath of Sanctification, had, for all
that, an External Sabbath Day also ( Genesis 2.3.) and the Jews under the Old
Testament were bound to maintain an Internal Sabbath of Sanctification every
day, and yet they had an External Sabbath Day also. For an External Sabbath Day
requires, not only that we cease from sin and be holy, but also that we cease
from all our Civil and worldly Employments, and Works that on other days are
Lawful (excepting works of necessity and mercy which are every day Duties) and
in that abstraction from the world, spend the whole day in the public and
private Exercise of Divine Worship; which things could not be done every day
even by Adam in Innocence. And if every day were a Holy day to us, we behoove
either to Plow and Sow on Holy day, or else not do such things at all; both
which are utterly absurd.

Eighth QUERY.
Whether or not your Singing of David's Psalms, his Prayers, Prophecies,
Fastings, Reproaches, Weepings, Lamentations, and Complaints how he was Mocked
have any Warrant in the Scripture? and you bring all these together in Meeter,
without distinction. Have ye not done this your selves? or did the Apostles it
to the Saints in the Primitive times? or have ye the same Spirit the Apostles
had? or a larger measure of it, then the Apostles had, by which ye have turned
these into Meeter since the Apostles days? and what was the Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs they Sung in the Primitive times? Answer these things by plain
Scripture.

SVRVEY.
The State of the Question here is very plain. The Quakers deny our Singing of
Psalms to be an Ordinance of the Gospel, or of Divine Institution under the New
Testament. Contrary unto this,

I Assert that Singing of Psalms is an Ordinance of the New Testament Divinely
appointed. I prove it. Therefore first, Singing of Psalms was an Ordinance of
Divine Institution under the Old Testament, 1 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 95.2. and
105.2. Therefore it must be so still under the New. The Scriptures Cited prove
the Antecedent. I prove the Consequence, because Singing of Psalms was no
Jewish Ceremony, and if the Adversaries will say so, let them prove their
Affirmative, as they are obliged; and until then I shall confirm the Negative,
viz. that Singing of Psalms is no Jewish Ceremony, because first, I cannot
think that Christ joined a Jewish Ceremony after the Gospel-Supper, when he
Sung a Hymn, or Psalm (as it is on the Margin of some of our Bibles) Mat.
26.30. Mark. 14.26. Nor that Paul and Silas used any Jewish Ceremony,
especially there not being any fear of Offense and stumbling of weak Brethren
there, when in Prison they Sung Praises unto God, Act. 16.25. Again, the
Apostle does very plainly Exhort the Christians of the New Testament ( Ephesians.
5.19. and Colos. 3.16.) to speak unto themselves in Psalms, Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody in their hearts unto the Lord; and
Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs,
Singing with Grace in their hearts unto the Lord; In which Texts he shows, that
that piece of Worship is edifying both to our selves, and also to others that
join with us, while he says, speaking to our selves in Psalms, and Admonishing
one another in Psalms. And Secondly, that it is a comfortable and
Heart-chearing Duty, while he says making Melody in your hearts. And Thirdly,
that it glorifies God, while he says, doing it unto the Lord: Therefore Singing
of Psalms can be no Jewish Ceremony, having these Examples and Precepts for it
to the Church of the New Testament.

Secondly, In the first Epistle to the Corinthians ( Chap. 14.15.26.) The
Apostle, in the one place of the Chapter and Verses Cited, sharply reproves the
Corinthians for their Disorder and Confusion in Singing in the public
Assemblies, because every one of them had a Psalm by themselves, and did not
all join together; and in the other place he directs them how to Sing Psalms
aright, viz. with the Spirit and with the understanding also, that is, not only
with the Breath, or voice (which there he calls the Spirit; and the
signification from the Original word, (...), most properly signifies the
Breath, or Wind) but also in a known Tongue, which the whole Context there
declares he means when he says, with the Understanding; and so the Apostle does
here Reform the abuse that was crept in into their public Singing of Psalms,
and directs them how to do it aright. But a Superstitious Will Worship (such as
Singing of Psalms must be, if it be not of Divine Institution) can never be
performed aright, it involves a plain Contradiction to say so. What? did Paul
direct men how to Worship God aright by a Superstitious Will Worship? Nay,
surely not. Singing of Psalms then must undeniably be an Ordinance of Divine
Institution under the Gospel.

Thirdly, the Apostle James says ( Jam. 5.13.) Is any man afflicted? let him
pray, is any man merry? let him Sing Psalms: Therefore Singing of Psalms has a
Divine Warrant under the New Testament. The Quakers answer, that he bids us
Sing Psalms only when we are merry. But, it seems then, that the Quakers are
never, never Merry, but are a number of Sullen, Dull, and Melancholic
Hypocondriack Drones, who cannot at all Sing Psalms. Secondly, there is no such
exclusion in the Text, as is pretended; otherwise the Apostle bids us pray only
when we are afflicted also, seeing both these are pronounced with one Breath,
and the manner of the Expression and extent of the Terms are the same in both;
and the Quakers can show no ground for exclusion in the one, more than the
other, notwithstanding they may see how frequently and continually we are
commanded to pray, Ephesians. 6.18. Phil. 4.6. 1 These. 5.17.

They may also see Christ and his Disciples Singing when by all Circumstances
it appears they were Sorrowful, seeing they were so both presently before and
after, as appears from Mat. 26.22. Mark. 14.26. compared with Mat. 26.30.38.
Mark. 14.19.34. Joh. 13.21. The Apostle therefore by Merriness and Affliction
points at the frame and case unto which these Duties are most especially
suited, no ways excluding the exercise of them in other frames and cases. But
let us give them for once (not granting) that the Apostle does there appoint us
to Sing Psalms only when we are Merry; yet Singing of Psalms shall by this Text
(even in the Adversaries own Sense) be of Divine Institution under the New
Testament; or else (in their Principles) we may in our Merry and Joyful frames
offer a Superstitious Willworship unto God, which I have not yet learnt to
believe.

The Quakers applying this Text of James in the 130 page of their Confession of
Faith answer us, that there is none Merry, but the Ransomed of the Lord; and
therefore they mean to infer (for that is their Scope in the place) that none
should Sing Psalms, but these.

But First, then certainly the Quakers are Convict, that they themselves are
none of the Ransomed of the Lord, seeing they here allow the Ransomed of the
Lord to Sing Psalms, which yet they cannot be persuaded to do.

Secondly, all the Members of the visible Church professing Faith in Christ,
and subjecting to his Ordinances, are by visible Profession, and in some degree
of the judgment of Charity, the Ransomed of the Lord: Therefore the Quakers (by
their own principles) ought to allow them to Sing Psalms.

Thirdly, others also, beside the Ransomed of the Lord, are bound to Worship
God, except some special piece of Worship, by some special Conditions which it
requires, does exclude them, as the Lords Supper excludes all that do not, or
cannot Examine themselves, discern the Lords Body, and show forth his Death
(albeit the Church in admitting persons must walk by probabilities, and can
reach no further) and both it and Baptism excludes all that want a visible
Interest into the Covenant: But Singing of Psalms is a piece of Gods appointed
Worship (as is showed) and there is no special condition Recorded in all the
Scripture that debars any man from Singing and joining therein; or else let the
Quakers show it, if they can. If they shall say (as we see they do say) that
the Unransomed by this Text are excluded from Singing Psalms, they shall speak
falsely: for (beside our former reasons given already to this exception) the
Text exhorts any man (Whatsoever he be) unto that duty, but especially when he
is in a joyful frame. And giving (without granting) the Ransomed only to be
meant, yet Psalms-singing will still be of Divine Institution, if these be
allowed, and in the judgment of Charity these will be all the professing
Members of the Church subjecting to Divine Ordinances. And whereas they here
allege, that the Ransomed only are Merry, or joyful, that is also false, for
others, beside these, are sometimes joyful ( Mat. 13.20. Luke 8.13.) and so the
exception is to no purpose.

But the Quakers insinuate here an Argument against Psalmssinging, viz. that
its very unsuitable to make Songs of David's sad Cases of Mourning, Weeping,
Lamenting, etc.

Ans. But its much more unsuitable for the Quakers to presume themselves Wiser
than God and David, who have caused make, and made Songs on David's sad Cases,
as the Title which (almost) every where they get, and which Christ gives them (
Luke 20.42. and 24.44.) sufficiently declares. If then they censure it as a
fault in us to Sing David's sad Lots, much more do they Tax God and David for
making Songs of them, and ordaining them to be Sung.

Secondly, this proves only (if any thing) that we should not Sing Psalms made
upon sad Cases. Why will not the Quakers Sing other Psalms?

Thirdly, if the reading of these sad Lots of David can yield any Edification
(which is certain) the Singing of them may yield the same, seeing Singing is
nothing else but a Melodious kind of reading, a reading with a Tune.

Fourthly, the Singing of David's Weepings, Lamentings, Complaints, etc. is not
therefore unsuitable to us, because the Cases were afflicting to David while he
was under them: for albeit these were afflicting to him for the time; yet the
after Memory of them is very comfortable to us (and to himself when they were
over. Forsan and haec olim meminisse juvabit, said the Poet) unto whom the like
Cases are also incident; for its comfortable to us to see the Path beaten by so
worthy a Saint as David, and it would be sad to us to think that our Lot in
such a Case never befell any Saint.

Fifthly, the making Songs upon, and Singing of these sad Cases Teaches us,
that even in our saddest Lots there is still some matter of praise to God, and
for which we ought to Sing unto his Name, yea and also that we ought therein to
cheer up our hearts rejoicing in God, and not give our selves over to be
swallowed up of heartless despondency. Thus far, beside the Divine Institution,
(which is enough against all they can bring) I have satisfied the Exception.

But, say the Quakers, With what confidence can a Man sing such passages as
these, viz. We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant, neither have our hearts
turned back, Psalm. 44.17, 18.

Ans. This will only prove, (if it could prove any thing) that backslidden
Christians may not sing such passages, and yet it hinders them not to sing
other Psalms. The Quakers then are certainly convict, (as the truth is) that
themselves are a backslidden People, seeing they have no confidence to sing
such passages.

Secondly, Whither now is the Quakers Perfection gone? perfect folk may sing
them, or else none may.

Thirdly, We may sing these as our sincere and constant adherence to God,
(which is all their meaning) albeit we be not perfect in our obedience; and the
greatest Saint in Israel could do no further.

Fourthly, We may sing them as through grace, both possible and hoped for by
us, though we be not as yet come that length.

Fifthly, We may sing them as other Men's seize (for which we are bound to
praise God) on their behalf, or putting our selves in their room, though they
be not our own seize. Some of these ways any Man may sing them.

But, say the Quakers, its said, We have not dealt falsely, etc. which, if it be
not so with us, we lie, seeing its said, We.

Ans. But then we may not read such passages either, if the Argument be good:
for when we read them, we must read We, as well as sing We; again, this hinders
us not to sing them as the seize of others putting our selves in their
room, and acting in their behalf, which is ordinary in other things.

Thirdly, Albeit it be not so with us at present, yet we may sing them in hope,
fore-acting (as it were) the case wherein upon good grounds we hope to be
Constituted, seeing we may praise God for things hoped for, and (as it were)
pre-occupy the possession of them. See these two objections proposed in like
terms and like instances, in the Quakers Confession of Faith, pages 129, 130.

Again they object, That there are several places wherein there are many Curses
pronounced, (as Psalm. 109.) which therefore ought not to be sung, because
thereby People are made to Curse.

Ans. We curse no less in reading such passages, than in singing of them: if
the Argument be good then, we may not read such Psalms. Secondly, I grant, we
may not wish evil to any Man for his private Injuries or Enmity against us; (
Matthew. 5.44. Romans 12.19, 20.) but where God has in his Word pronounced Curses
against notorious wicked M^n and Enemies of his Work and Interest, and has
ordained these Curses against them to be publicly sung, (for the Churches
Triumph, and their terror) we may very lawfully sing them, nor should we refuse
to obey, God appointing it. Thirdly, We may not indeed rejoice in any man's
misery, as such; yet, when God is glorified by his Righteous Judgments upon
such Persons, we may rejoice upon that account, Psalm. 58.10. Revel. 19. Chap.
to Ver. 6. Lastly, Seeing God himself has caused make Psalms of these Curses,
against such notorious Enemies to him, and has ordained them to be sung,
(seeing (as is now proved) he has ordained us to sing the Psalms, and he has
no where excepted any Psalm from that general Rule) we may surely, sing such
Psalms; Nay, we may not make exceptions at our own hand from Divine Rules,
where the Rule it self excepts not. Who dare presume, without Gods Authority,
to diminish and restrict his Laws? Nay, they might as well make his whole Laws
null and void, as so to retrench them, without his Authority. Answer my
Arguments if they can.

But, say the Quakers, Have ye not turned the Psalms into Meeter your selves?

Ans. What then? Did not also some of our selves turn the Scriptures into our
Mother Tongue? Must we cast them away for that? I, that is the business. But
will ye tell me, Does not some of your selves preach (if it might be called so)
when your Spirit, (that often takes a long time to study his Sermon, (though ye
your selves take none, ye say, and condemns them that do, ( Quakerism no
Popery, page, 99.) or else he has the Palsy in his Tongue) comes upon you?
seeing we are appointed to sing Psalms, and we cannot do that, except they be
Meetered, and the turning of Psalms into Meeter requires a good Musician, or
good Poet, rather than an immediately Inspired Apostle; we may sing Psalms,
though by others than Apostles they be put into a Metral form to us. Yea,
seeing the Apostles did not Meeter them in our Language, and yet we are
Ordained to sing them, which requires that they be Meetered in the same, they
must be put into Meeter by some of our selves, or else we cannot obey the
command to sing them.

But, say the Quakers, Have ye the same Spirit the Apostles had, or a larger
measure of it than they had, by which ye have turned these into Meeter since
the Apostles days?

Ans. The same Spirit we have, though not the same measure: for, albeit there
are diversities of gifts amongst Believers, yet they have all the same Spirit,
1 Cor. 12.4, 13. But behold here a rare fancy: The Quakers require either (at
least) the same measure, or else a larger measure of the Spirit, than the
Apostles had, for turning the Psalms into Meeter. What? will no less measure of
the Spirit, than the Apostles had, serve to understand Poetry and the Notes of
Music? Must we be immediately Inspired for these two? O brave Morology! The
Quakers (it seems) will not allow a Boy to sing a Song, nor a Minstreller to
play his Tune, (both which requires something of Music) without immediate
Inspiration, forsooth. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici? The Quakers (it
seems) do not like to be Precenters, lest (perhaps) they get little Salary.

Lastly, They ask, what the Psalms were that were sung in the Primitive times?

Ans. They were certainly, the same that we now sing, seeing these only are
written in the Scriptures, (though the Quakers may have other Psalms in their
wild Scripture-Book within) and appointed by God to be sung, as (beside that,
we are Ordained to sing Psalms, and there is no other to choose upon) is clear
from 2 Chronicles. 29.30. where the Church of Israel sang praises to God with the
words of David and Asaph, says the Text, by the command of the good King and
great Reformer. These that would see any further concerning some scruples about
Psalms-singing, let them read worthy Mr. Durhams Exposition of the Song of
Solomon, from page 48. to page 53. where they may find some doubts resolved,
which I purposely here omit, because there they may be found, though little, or
nothing here meddled with, be there touched.

Ninth QUERY.
Whether or not your Directory Confession of Faith, and Cathechisms be an
Infallible Rule for you and your People to walk by? or whether or not equal
with the Scriptures, or above the Scriptures? and whether of them is the better
Book? and whether or not have ye an Infallible Spirit to give forth such a
Directory, or Catechism, or Confession of Faith, as ye have done? and whether
or not the Scriptures are not a better Directory, than any ye can make, which
were given forth by the Holy Ghost, by the holy Men of God who had the
Infallible Spirit?

SVRVEY.
This Inspirer of the Quakers is surely no Spirit of Truth, but a manifest
Deviser of Lies, seeing almost in every Sentence, that drops from his mouth, he
impudently slanders the Church of God in Britain: for, who ever heard that any
Protestant Church did hold any thing of Ecclesiastical Constitution formally as
such, for an Infallible Rule; But, on the contrary, it has always been the
Doctrine of all Protestant Churches, and as much of the Church of Britain as
any other, (as may be seen in the fourth Article of the 31. Chapter of her
Confession of Faith) that all Synods and Councels since the Apostles days are
liable to Error; and that therefore their Constitutions formally as such, are
not to be made the Rule of Divine Faith and Religious Practice: and yet there
is much more hope of an unerring Spirit in a whole Synod of Orthodox
Church-Guides, than in any Brainsick Quaker falsely pretending thereunto.

The Quakers do not here quarrel with our Directory Confession, or Catechism as
to their subject sentence, and the particular definitions which they contain;
or else, they should have instanced the particulars which they judge to be
wrong, and not agreeable to the Stripture, (that we might have known what to
vindicate) which until they do, I cannot gratify them with particular defenses.

Their quarrel therefore here is at the very common form of a Directory,
Confession, or Catechism in a Church, and that Church-Guides should presume to
Constitute these; and so all Churches are concerned in this affair, seeing all
of them have their Confessions, Catechisms, and Directories; and yet (no doubt)
this quarrel is chiefly intended against the Directory, Confession, and
Catechism of the Church of God in Britain. Therefore, that we may in the
general vindicate these, we shall begin with the Directory.

Therefore first, a Church-Directory may be taken in a large and improper
sense, as comprehending rules concerning parts of the public Worship of God it
self, and the religious manner thereof, as their immediate object directly
regarded; and if these Rules teach and direct no other Worship, nor any other
religious manner of the Worship, but the very same which the Scripture directs
and teaches, then they can never be found fault with, seeing even every
particular Minister has authority, and is obliged by his Office to teach and
enjoin his Flock the Worship of God, and the religious manner thereof from the
Scripture; yea, that is his chief work, and I must still think, that a Synod of
Ministers conveened in Christ's name have no less authority, nor can be any less
obliged. Such Rules there are in our Directory, as the Rules appointing the
Sabbath Day to be kept holy, Psalms to be sung, Ministers to do their work
faithfully, diligently, etc. all which are very Scripture-Rules particularly
taught therein, and their immediate objects are constituent parts, or religious
manners of the Worship.

But Secondly, a Church-Directory may be taken in a more strict and proper
sense, as restricted to, and merely comprehending Rules, or Directions,
concerning the External Circumstances of the Public Worship, and Government of
Gods House. And for vindicating our Directory, (in the general, as was
explained) taken in this proper notion; We must observe first, that, as it is
utterly impossible to exerce any action, except under the vesture of several
circumstances; So likewise the public Worship of God cannot be performed,
except under the vesture of various Circumstances, as needs no demonstration.

Secondly, I must observe that, as the vesture of unbeseeming undecent, and
disorderly circumstances in the exercise of Gods Public Worship, does very
much deform and disgrace the work, (as all may know) and so cannot but very
much hinder Edification, and beget Scandals; So the Vesture of comely, decent,
and orderly circumstances therein, does greatly beautify and adorn the work,
(by the Rule of Contraries) and so does promote and advance Edification and
Growth, which by the contrary are exceedingly let and hindered.

Thirdly, I must observe, that these External Circumstances of Gods Public
Worship, are not in the Scripture particularly defined and determined, seeing
it is no where of Scripture particularly defined, what time of the day, or
night the public Worship shall begin; how long it shall last; what order shall
be observed in reading, preaching, praying, singing, hearing, etc. But only
they are therein determined in the general, as to their common form of order
and decency, that, decency and order must be observed therein, seeing all
things must be so done in the Church, (1 Cor. 14.40.) which command is
manifesty transgressed by the undecency and disorder of one small Circumstance;
and so it plainly injoyns to maintain order, and decency, in all the
Circumstances of Gods Public Worship.

Lastly, I must observe, that it properly belongs to the Church-Guides, and,
they are bound to see to the maintaining of decency, and order, in the
Circumstances of Gods Public Worship: for, seeing God commands to maintain
decency and order therein, and they are the Watchmen and Rulers who have the
Care and Oversight of the Church, ( Act. 20.28. Romans 12.8. 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy
3.5. and 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.2.) it must, of necessity, belong unto
them, and they must be thereunto obliged.

Having observed these things, I hope, I may assert, that Church Officers and
Judicatures have Divine Warrant and Authority to make and set forth
Church-Directories for regulating the External Circumstances of Gods Public
Worship in a decent and orderly way, or so as they may be decent and orderly.
This assertion is clear from our preceding Observations, whereunto I shall add
an Argument, or two.

First therefore, God commands Church Officers and Judicacatures, to maintain
Decency and Order in the whole Circumstances of his Public Worship, (as is
clear from our preceding Observations) and yet he has no where particularly
condescended upon, or defined these Circumstances, as is before showed also:
Therefore, the Church Officers and Judicatures have, certainly, Divine Warrant
and Authority particularly to condescend upon, define, and determine them. The
Consequence (which now only needs proving) is easily proved: for, seeing God
has commanded Church Officers and Judicatures to maintain Decency and Order in
these Circumstances, and yet has not himself particularly defined and
determined them, either he has given them Warrant and Authority particularly
to define and determine the same, which is the thing we plead for; or else, he
has commanded them to maintain Order and Decency in Circumstances never to be
defined or ordered; but left still to be confused, undesined, and unordered;
and so they must do it by random and blind chance. Which is extremely absurd,
seeing, so, he should have commanded Contradictions, viz. order in
Circumstances never to be ordered.

Secondly, Church-Directories rightly regulating the External Circumstances of
Gods Public Worship; so that they may be decent and well ordered, according to
the Scripture do conduce and contribute to set forward a Spiritual Good and
Edification, as is most clear from our preceding Observations: But, it is
beyond all doubt, that Church Officers and Judicatories have Warrant and
Authority to do such things as may conduce and contribute to set forward the
Spiritual Good and Edification of the Churches of their Oversight; or else,
they cannot have Warrant to do any thing: Therefore, sure it is,
Church Officers and Judicatories have Authority and Warrant to make such
Directories, rightly regulating the External Circumstances of Gods Public
Worship in the Churches of their Oversight.

Thou will (may be) say, that men can have no Authority to determine any part
of Gods Worship not determined in the Scripture. Therefore men can have no
Authority particularly to determine these Circumstances not so determined in
the Scriptures.

Ans. The Antecedent I willingly yield; but I utterly deny the Consequence,
seeing the things we now speak of, and which alone are the immediate object of
a Church-Directory in this strict and proper acception, are no part of the
Worship in their particular nature, but are mere External Circumstances of that
which is the Worship, as is evident from all before-said.

These common Rules made by Church Authority according to the general Precepts
and Rules of Scripture, do not of themselves bind Conscience; nor does the
Authority from whence they immediately proceed of it self bind Conscience;
neither is their immediate object in its particular nature, any part of Gods
Worship, as said is. Nevertheless, they being formed according to the general
Precepts of Scripture for Order and Decency, these bind Conscience; and the
general End of Edification it binds Conscience; and Conscience is also bound
not to despise, but reverence lawful Church Authority, it being Gods Ordinance,
and we cannot contemn any of his Ordinances, and be guiltless; and therefore we
may not in wilful conceit reject such Constitutions of the Church; albeit out
of the case of Scandal-giving, and if it do not proceed from a contempt of
Church Authority, or from some unruly Humor of Spirit, we may upon causes just
and reasonable, lawfully sometimes intermit and forbear the observation of
them. These things I have said to prevent Objections.

And hence, I hope, it appears, that Church Officers have an Authority to Make
and Constitute Church-Directories for ordering the External Circumstances of
Gods Public Worship, according to the general Precepts of the Scripture;
albeit I grant that such Directories are not Infallible, and so of themselves
no Bond of Conscience, nor Rule of Divine Faith.

As for our Confession and Catechism, if the Quakers judge them to be unsound
in any of their particular Definitions, when the Quakers shall instance them,
it shall be time enough to make their Apology. But while they declare
themselves Enemies to the very common form of a Confession and Catechism in a
Church; herein they proclaim their Hostile mind against Ministers, their
feeding of the Flock, and Edifying of the Body of Christ; seeing these
Compendious Breviaries of the most fundamental points of Scripture Doctrine and
Christian Principles, do exceedingly conduce for a method of easier learning,
and more distinct understanding of the same; and that partly because of their
succinct and compendious form, shortly representing to us, and quickly
conducting and directing us to the most principal substance of the whole
Scripture-Doctrine, which is methodically summed in them, and which by our own
private Industry we could neither soon, nor easily distinctly gather out of the
whole body of the Scriptures; and partly, because of their greater Explication,
each of their Definitions or Enunciations being the perspicuous sentence of
many parallel Scriptures compared together, and so by their Consociated Beams
and United Rays more powerfully Shining, like so many Stars and Luminaries
placed together into one Constellation; and, lastly, because of their chained
Conjunction, being united, placed, and joined together in a distinct and
continual method. These things do very much contribute, not only to the more
speedy learning, but also to the more distinct understanding of the most
necessary points of Scripture-Doctrine; and so of the rest also, as having some
connection with, or relation unto these. And hence also these methodized Models
of the most Essential Principles of Scripture-Doctrine wisely formed from the
Scriptures, are a notable mean to guard people against Delusions and Errors
which Corrupt Men, are continually broaching in the Church; seeing they being
in that manner Succinctly and Methodically summed, and so quickly learned, and
more distinctly understood, are, as it were, a Measuring Line in every serious
Man's hand to find out the truth, or falsehood of every Man's Doctrine.

What? Ought not Ministers, and have they not Authority to publish from the
Scripture the Principles of Religion to the People? and that in the most
perspicuous and ready way they can? have they not Authority to feed the Flock
and edify the Body of Jesus from his own Word in the nearest method? and have
they not Authority to furnish and guard their People against damnable
Delusions, and Soul-ruining Errors in the most easy and successful manner they
can? If they have not Authority for, and be not bound to do these things, then
they have not Authority for, nor are they bound to do any thing: Let all the
Quakers in Britain answer but one mouthful of sense to it, if Ministers (whose
Office must continue in the Church to the end of the World, and till that day
when all the Saints shall be completely perfected, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13.) be not given to the Church for the very forementioned ends, and
if these be not the Incumbent Works of their Office. But it is vain to demand an
answer which can never be found, or sense from these who (Impugning Grammar)
declare themselves Enemies to Sencespeaking: And have not the Quakers also
published a Confession of their black Faith, Entitled, The Principles of
Truth, (viz. Per Antiphrasin; for they should have said, of Falsehood, Fiction,
Error, Blasphemy, and Calumnies) printed in the year 1668. and we have also
seen several of their sweet Catechisms.

But, say the Quakers, Is not the Doctrine of Christian Religion as good in the
Scriptures, as in any Confession or Catechism?

Ans. Yes, no doubt, but what of that? will that infer any thing against a
Confession or Catechism in a Church, whereby that good Doctrine of the
Scriptures may be more speedily and distinctly learned? I would rather think,
that the better the Doctrine of the Scriptures is, the means contributing to
our more ready and distinct learning thereof should be the more useful and
warrantable. So unfortunate are the Quakers, that their own Weapons turns upon
themselves. Observe, that this Objection of the Quakers (if it could have
proved any thing at all) would have Militated as much against all Preaching, as
against a Confession or Catechism.

Hence, though the Scriptures be a better Book than any Confession or Catechism
in the World, as formally Constituted by Ecclesiastical Authority; yet a
Confession or Catechism are not therefore unlawful or unwarrantable in a
Church, as, I think, is clear enough from what I have said.

But, say the Quakers, Whether or not have ye an Infallible Spirit to give
forth such a Directory, Confession, and Catechism as ye have done?

Ans. Hereby, the Quakers refuse that any Man may direct according to the
Scripture, the External Circumstances of Gods Public Worship, or that any Man
may Catechize, or give an Account or Confession of his Faith, (which every Man
in due Circumstances is bound to do, ( Matthew. 10.32, 33. Romans 10.9, 10. 1. Pet.
3.15.) but much more a Church; partly for satisfaction to other Churches;
partly for distinguishing Orthodox Churches from Heretical Synagogues; and
partly for a short and clear public Test of the Principles of her own Members)
except he be Infallible, which any Man may see to tend to the banishing of all
these Duties out of the World, seeing there is no Man now adays Infallibly
Inspired for such things. But what great need (I pray) is there of Men's
Infallibility in this Affair; They are not to assure their Doctrine from their
own Infallibility, but from the Infallible Scripture: shall not that be
sufficient to assure it? I cannot but think so: To the Law, and to the
Testimony then, instead of your Inspired Parts.

What should be answered to the last Article of their Query, is manifest from
what we have said already concerning a Directory, and it is needless to repeat.

Tenth QUERY.
Whether or not is your Sanctification, your Justification, and your Faith, and
Grace, the gifts of these, without sin, as they are manifested within you? Yea,
or Nay?

SVRVEY.
Here is an obscure Riddle, a dark Aenigma, which where to find the sense of,
is a little difficult; but, if it has any sense, they seem to Query, Whether
or not our Justification, Sanctification, etc. be the gifts of our Directory,
Confession, and Catechism, whereof they were last speaking in the preceding
Query. But what that term [Without Sin] stands for, here is not easily Divined;
nor can it have any Errand or Connection with the present Question; and
therefore I must throw it by as an insignificant, and no less impertinent
Cipher.

I answer therefore to their present Question, That our Justification,
Sanctification, etc. are the Gifts of God only, ( Romans 8.32, 33. Ephesians. 2.8.
Jam. 1.17.) and that the Question is void of sense, seeing the bestowing of a
gift is an action properly relative to an Intelligent Being; for we do not
receive gifts from Stocks, Stonee, or Brutes. Notwithstanding this does not
presently exclude the use of all ordinary means; (for their meaning in this
Query is plain, that our Justification, Sanctification, etc. cannot be the
gifts of God, but must be the gifts of our Confession, Catechism, etc. because
forsooth, we make use of these as ordinary means allowed of God for their
proper ends above described.) For albeit our Corns be not the gifts of our
Ploughs and Harrows, nor the continuance of our Lives the gifts of our Food and
Raiment, but all these things are the gifts of God; yet we may not lay aside
all Ploughing and Harrowing, and the Quakers (I believe) will not reject Food
and Raiment. Let them therefore either permit us the use of Confessions,
Directories, and other inferior helps and means conducible in their own order;
or else by their own example, persuade the world, if they can, never to Plough
or Sow more, never to Eat or Drink more. This is enough for Answer to this
Query, which comes in but by way of Objection and Cavillation.

Eleventh QUERY.
Whether or not your Directory, and Catechism, and Confession of Faith be
Gospel? Yea, or Nay? and if so; Whether it be not another Gospel than that
which the Apostles Preached, who said the Gospel was the Power of God? Romans
1.16.

SVRVEY.
I have above at the Survey of the Ninth Query abundantly justified our
Directory, (in the general, as was there explained) and proved that God has
given Warrant and Authority to Church-Guides and Judicatories for Making and
Constituting these according to the general Precepts of Scripture, for
maintaining Order and Decency, and promoting Edification in the Church; and
therefore I shall not here needlessly repeat any thing to that purpose. Only I
shall take notice, that seeing the Quakers oppose these things, they therefore
declare, that it is their mind, that Church Officers and Judicatories should
not give Obedience to Gods Commands, should slight Order and Decency, and the
Churches Edification. There is the new-coined Directory of the Quakers; let all
Men judge if it be not an Instrument of the Devil.

But, for Answer to their Query, I say, That there are several Rules in our
Directory, that materially considered, are very Scripture-Rules particularly
delivered therein, (as I showed before at the Survey of the Ninth Query) and it
is evident that these are not another Gospel, but are Institutions of the same
Gospel preached by the Apostles.

But secondly, taking our Directory in a more strict and proper notion of a
Church-Directory, as that is restricted to, and merely contains Directions
concerning the External Circumstances of the Public Worship and Government of
Gods House; I must for Answer to their present Query concerning it, first
suppose the particular Directions thereof to be materially right and conform to
the Scripture general Precepts above mentioned, (which here once for all I
warn) seeing I will not here stand to vindicate every particular Direction
thereof in particular. If the Quakers had quarrelled any particular Direction
thereof, I behooved to have vindicated it particularly: but seeing they have
held themselves in the general, so must I.

These things supposed, and taking our Directory in the foresaid strict notion,
I answer, that our Directory thus taken, is not simply Gospel, or
Scripture-Rule, but partly Ecclesiastical Constitution; it is Gospel or
Scripture-Rule in respect of its fundamental ground and chief consideration,
which consists in the Institution and Rule for maintaing Order and Decency, and
promoting Edification, seeing that is Scripture-Rule; it is Ecclesiastical
constitution in respect of the particular definition and accommodation of these
Circumstances, which is an Act elicited by the habit of Christian Prudence,
conform to the general Rules and Institutions of the Scripture forementioned.

Hence it appears, that though the directions of our Directory thus taken, be
not simply Gospel-Rules, yet, neither are they another Gospel, seeing in
respect of their fundamental ground and chief consideration, they are
Institutions of the same Gospel preached by the Apostles, (as is showed) and in
so far as they are Ecclesiastical Constitutions, they are warranted by the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, as in regard of particulars, I suppose, until
the Quakers particularly quarrel, and in the general I have proved it above at
the Survey of their Ninth Query. But another Gospel has no warrant in the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, but is contrary thereunto, and condemned
therein. Again, another Gospel is some Doctrine beside, or contrary to the
Gospel preached by the Apostles, urged as necessary to Salvation, and an
absolute bond of Conscience and Rule of Divine Faith, and so a Doctrine in its
matter only beside, being thus urged becomes contrary. But our Church-Directory
(beside its agreement with the Scripture general Rules) was never so urged, as
the Practice of our Church sufficiently attests.

As for our Confession of Faith and Catechism, I affirm, that albeit, as to the
formal Constitution which they have from Ecclesiastical Authority, they be not
Infallible, or Canonical; otherwise all Ecclesiastical Constitutions would be
such; yet, considering them Materially, as to the whole Articles confessed in
the one, and the whole Definitions delivered in the other, (and for the
questionary part it is no matter, seeing that affirms nothing, nor denies) they
are universally, and throughout, very Scripture-Sentence, very Gospel-Rule, and
Law together, either expressly and formally, or materially, implicitly, and by
good consequence, taught therein. Let the Quakers condescend upon any Article,
or Proposition believed or taught in the one, or the other, that is not either
expressly, or implicitly, and by good consequence contained in the Scriptures,
which until they do, I must superseed particular Apologizing for them. Only I
have already sufficiently defended them in the general, (according as they have
impugned them) and so many of their particular Enunciations as the Quakers
elsewhere in these Queries have particularly impeached, I have also
particularly maintained and vindicated in my Surveys. The Quakers then may see,
that I affirm the whole Enunciations of our Confession and Catechism materially
taken to be very Gospel and Law Rules together; and so they are not another
Gospel, seeing another Gospel does not teach and confess the same Truths, which
the Gospel preached by the Apostles does. And I have told them before, that as
to their formal Constitution by Ecclesiastical Authority, they have not the
same Authority which the Gospel preached by the Apostles had, we do not
equalize them therewith. Let the Quakers see to their own Confession of Faith,
(and a black Faith, I am sure) wherein there is scarce a Sentence that is not
contrary to the Gospel preached by the Apostles, a good part of which we have
already seen, and shall see more hereafter.

As for the Sentence of Scripture here Cited from the Epistle to the Romans, a
man would wonder to what purpose it is here Quoted. But here is the business,
the Quakers feign to themselves a sort of a Dumb-Gospel, without any words, or
Orations, and this they seem to allege to have a real and strict Identity with
the power of God; which is as senseless a Dream as can well be fallen upon, which
the very Context of the place Cited overthrows, while it calls the Gospel the
power of God to Believers only, intimating, that it is not such unto
unbelievers, on whose hearts it does not so powerfully work, whereas the power
of God properly taken, is still the same in respect of all the world.

The Gospel is called the Word of Truth, and the word preached ( Ephesians. 1.13.
Colos. 1.5. Heb. 4.2.) Which cannot be said of the power of God. The Gospel was
committed to Paul's trust (1 These. 2.4. 1 Timothy 1.11.) But the power of God was
never committed to the trust of any mere Creature.

The Apostle therefore calls the Gospel the power of God by a Figure called
Synecdoche, attributing the name of the Principal Cause to the Instrument,
because it is an effectual Instrument of the power of God. So the Preaching of
the Cross is called the power of God to them that are Saved (1 Cor. 1.18.) not
by way of Identity, but thus Synecdochically, as is declared. So also the
Samaritans reputed Simon Magus the great power of God ( Act. 8.10.) not by way
of Identity (for, I think, they were not Quakers) but they called him so
Synecdochically, because in their conceit he was a great Instrument thereof.

Twelfth QUERY.
What is Original Sin? Whether it be not the Devil? yea; or nay? for does not
the Original signify the beginning? and what did Christ come to destroy? was
it not the Devil, and his works?

SVRVEY.
This Inspirer of the Quakers (it seems) must be a great Jester; but, I think
him a great Fool too, to suggest in his sport such Romances and Fictions unto
simple Men void of understanding, who, to his infamy and disgrace, thus report
them in Earnest.

The Devil is indeed a very sinful Creature; but that he should be very Sin it
self is a horrible Fiction. For first then, Original Sin must be a Person,
seeing the Devil is a Person. Secondly, God made the Devil: but God made not
Original Sin, seeing he cannot be the Author of sin: therefore Original Sin is
not the Devil. The Minor is proved already: I prove the Major; God made all
Creatures, otherwise they could not be Creatures: but the Devil is a Creature:
therefore, certainly, God made him.

Secondly, If God made not the Devil, then the Devil is an Uncreated
Independent Being, (for a Being he is) existing from himself; and so there is
not one, but two Uncreated Independent Beings, the one of them Essentially
Good, the other Essentially Evil, being the very same thing with Sin, as the
Quakers would, (which is the demented Ghost of old Manicheus, before the time
arisen from the dead:) but that is most absurd Blasphemy.

Thirdly, If Original Sin be the Devil, then the Original Sin of all Mankind
was existent before any Man had Sinned, and would have been to this day, though
never Man had Sinned, seeing Mankinds continuance in Obedience would not have
destroyed the Devils Being; but these things are ridiculous: and yet that which
is aimed in this Query, has been often said by Quakers in my face and hearing.

Lastly, If Original Sin be the Devil, then there can be no Original Sin
inherent in any Man, but we must be all born as Innocent and Spotless as ever
Adam was Created; for, the Devil being a complete Substantial Being, can never
inhere as an accident into any other Subject. But, it is most false, that we
have no Original Sin, but are born Innocent and Clean, which by these few
Scriptures I prove, Romans 5.12. Death has passed upon all Men, because all have
Sinned, but all have not sinned actually, viz. Infants have not: Therefore it
must be meant of Original Sin, seeing of one of the two it must be meant; or
else the Apostle ignorantly mistakes the reason why Death passes upon all Men,
( viz. because of Sin) but that cannot be said, John 3.6. That which is born of
the Flesh is Flesh, Job 4.14. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? no
not one, viz. naturally and in an ordinary course. Again, I have proved that
God Ordains Infants to be Baptized, which is given us for the Remission of our
Sins, as is showed: Infants then must have Sin to be Remitted; otherwise there
needed no Remission of Sin: but they have no actual Sin: Therefore Original
Sin. Again, Except a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, John 3.5. But Infants, as well as others, partake of the Kingdom of God,
as is before proved: Therefore there are Infants born again; and so they must,
surely, be sinful naturally, or else they could not be born again, or
Regenerated. Again, David for the deeper sense of his own Vileness, ascends to
the fountain, and source, of all the Evil and Uncleanness that he was liable
unto, confessing that in iniquity he was formed, and in sin his Mother
conceived him, Psalm. 51.5. where, what (I pray) would it have done to David's
deeper sense, and further acknowledgment of his Vileness, (which, undeniably is
his scope) that his Mother being in sin, (as Pelagianizers have learned to
answer) did conceive him spotless and without sin? Nay, surely, the wanting of
Original Sin would have made him to be the less vile, not the more; and beside,
it was his own Sin, not his Mothers which he came to confess: and again lastly,
We are by Nature Children of Wrath, (Ephesians. 2.3.) therefore by nature we must
be sinful, which must be Original Sin, seeing we have no other Sin by nature,
and that we are born in. The Consequence is Infallible, seeing, we cannot be
Children of wrath in that very respect, and under that very consideration, in
which respect, and under which consideration, we are sinless and pure: for then
as we are sinless and pure we should be heirs of wrath, which is an absurd
Blasphemy: and cannot stand with the justice of God to curse a Man when he is
Innocent: tell me not the instance of Christ Jesus, who though he was
altogether spotless in himself inherently, yet, he stood in our room as our
Cautioner, and all our sins were laid upon him, Isa. 53.6.

Pelagianizers answer us, that the Posterity of Adam Sins only by Imitation, of
their Predecessors. But Contrariwise, then we are only by Imitation, and not by
Nature Children of wrath, (contrary to the Apostles Doctrine.) For we cannot by
nature be Children of wrath, and yet by nature be pure and sinless. Secondly, I
have showed that Infants have sin in them; but not by imitation (surely) seeing
they are not capable to imitate therein: Therefore they must be sinful by
nature, not by imitation. Thirdly, if we were made sinners only by Imitation,
then some men might escape from that; for, we are not such perfect Apes, as to
imitate necessarily what we see in others. Lastly, if Adams sin be propagat to
us only by Imitation, then we shall be made righteous in Christ only by
imitation, of his righteousness also. But the consequent is utterly false:
Therefore so is the antecedent from which it follows. The connection of the
Major (which only needs proving,) I prove from Romans 5, 19. Where the Apostle
declares that, as by one man's disobedience many were made Sinners: so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Which comparison requires some
special proportion betwixt these members, so exactly compared, whereof there is
scarce any shadow betwixt the imitation, and true and real Communication.

Pelagianizers again answer that, though we be by nature corrupt, yet that
corruption is not our sin, but our affliction and punishment only.
Contrariwise, as the habit, principle, and seed of grace is grace (and so also
all habits are still of the same nature with their acts) so also the seed and
principle of sin must be sin. Romans 7.23. is called the Law of sin, Warring
against the Law of the mind; and so its an enemy to grace, and the Image of
God. Rom: 8.7. its called in the very abstract (to show its wicked nature)
Enmity against God, and that it is not, neither can be Subject to this Law.
Galat. 5.17. Paul says, it lusts against the Spirit, and is contrary
thereunto. Shall that then which is the source, principle, and spring of all
our actual sins; is enmity against God, his whole Image, and his Laws, and a
contrary enemy to the Spirit; shall that (I say) not be sinful? nay, then,
surely, there is no sin in the World, nor is it possible to render a definition
of sin, if that be not sin.

George Keith (in his Quakerism no Popery, page 75, 76) answers that our
natural concupiscence does not infer any real guiltiness upon us, nor makes us
guilty of death, without our actual consent thereunto, and (which is more
strange) that it does not indwell in any, except where it is kindly received
and obeyed; and, that therefore (which is his direct scope) our natural
corruption is none of our sin, until we consent actually unto it. But
contrariwise, the Scripture (which I believe much better) shows, that by the
sin of Adam all were made sinners, and guilty of death ( Romans 5.16, 17, 18,
19.) and, that by nature we are Children of wrath (Ephesians. 2.3.) and so George
Keith straight contradicts the Apostle. Secondly Adam is not to be considered
as a single Person in the matter in hand, but (as the Scriptures last cited
proves) as a Common undertaker for, and representative head of all mankind; and
so his deed in Law was the deed of all men, albeit they did not personally
consent, even as the Public transactions, and deeds, of the representatives of
a Kingdom, State, or City, are in Law the fact and deed of all. Thirdly,
George Keith who (as I am informed) did dispute once for a Professors place,
should have remembered (whatever be said of primo primi) that there are motus
secundo primi, in us preceding our actual consent, which, when toward evil,
are sinful, as when a temptation is tampered with, or somewhat listened unto,
though in end it be rejected and the consent not given. Fourthly, gracious
Principles, and gracious Inclinations are truly grace; or else a man is not
gracious, though he be graciously principled and inclined: therefore sinful
principles and inclinations, (that is, principles and inclinations bending to
sin and evil) must be sin (by the rule of Contraries) yea the worst of sin,
being the bitter Fountain and Source of all the rest. Fifthly George Keith
grants (in the pages of his Book cited) that this natural Concupiscence in men,
is an evil thing, and inclines to evil and sin (and so by a Metonymie, he
allows it to be called Sin.) Therefore it must be properly and formally
sinful, and not by a Motonymie only, seeing if it were not properly sinful, it
would not incline so; for grace cannot incline to sin; nor can that which is
neither good, nor evil, or sinful, incline more to evil, than to good.

That which he says of our natural Concupiscence, its not indwelling without
our actual consent, and kindly reception; I cannot but think, he was in a
strange mixture, when he dropped it from his ill-inspired pen. For I am sure, St.
Paul says in a Text often handled (and by George Keith abused too, as shall
after appear) that there was sin and corruption dwelling in him when he hated
it, disallowed it, and gave no consent thereunto, nor kindly reception, Romans 7
Chap. from Ver: 15, to, 23. and, certainly, our natural Concupiscence (which
George Keith denis not to be in us, but there confesses, that it is (and it
would be repugnant to be otherwise, as is clear) though he deny it to indwell
in us, or to be our sin, till we actually consent to it) being an accident,
must indwell into, and have union with some subject -- of dependence, seeing it
cannot exist without some vehicle, nor move one nails-breadth by it self. In
whom then dwells it, when it is not consented unto? If he says, in the Devil
(and he can say no other thing) then when he does not consent unto it, he has
the Devil and it both to lodge, seeing if it be Subjected and dwells in the
Devil, it cannot be in him without its Subject with it. And, in my opinion, he
had better lodge it alone, as it and the devil too; for two such Devils are
worse together, then any of them it self These are the dictats of a witty
Inspirer.

However, George here objecteth from Ezekiel 18, Chap: Ver: 4. where its said,
the Soul that sins, it shall die. To prove, that, without an actual consent,
unto our natural Concupiscence, we are not held guilty of death.

Ans. The whole Chapter is concerning, the sins of nearest Parents, as is clear
by reading it, and so makes nothing against original sin, derived from our
first Parent Adam. Secondly, the manifest scope of the Chapter, is to give
assurance to every man, of mercy upon his repentance and turning to God,
whatever his Parents, or himself have been before. But will that infer, that
such a man, who finds mercy upon his Repentance, never had original sin? O
brave consequence! again, there is not the same reason of Adam, and of our
other nearer Parents; for he was our common representative; not they; and
therefore, we may be involved into his sin, though not into theirs, before we
were capable actually to consent: for we do not stand and fall in any of them,
but in him we did, as the Scriptures cited plainly proves.

But, having dispatched George Keith, (albeit I will not stand upon all the
objections here which are commonly brought, seeing, this Controversy has been
much handled betwixt our Writers and the Papists, where it may be seen) they
have one great Objection which I must answer, and that is, That if our Nature
be Originally sinful, that sin must either be propagated by the Soul, or by the
Body, or by both. Not by the Soul; for seeing God alone creats that, so God
should be the Author of Sin, which cannot be. Not by the Body; for so the Soul
should be free of it, seeing the Body being a dull thing, cannot propagate it
into the Soul. Not by both, for the first reason given especially.

Ans. Whatever way it be propagated, I have showed from the Scripture that it
is propagated, and therein we ought to acquiesce, though we could no ways
comprehend the manner how it is propagated.

Secondly, I answer, that there is not a sufficient Enumeration of the Parts:
for our Natural Corruption is neither Originally propagated into the Body, by
the Soul, nor into the Soul, by the Body; but by our Impure Natural Generation
into both, which is evident, seeing, abstracting from, and laying aside our
Natural Generation, and our dependence thereby upon Adam, neither our Souls,
nor our Bodies had been naturally infected with that Plague. It descends
therefore, most clearly, by our Natural Generation, not unto the Soul alone, or
the Body alone, but unto the whole Compound consisting of both united, which is
the direct Effect of Generation, seeing it is not Souls, or Bodies separated,
but Men consisting of both united, that Men begets in their generative actions.

In the following part of the Query, they begin to use Grammar against their
Profession. Original (say they) signifies the beginning; and therefore Original
Sin must be the Devil, forsooth. A brave Consequence indeed, which must stand
upon the verity of this proposition, viz. the beginning is the Devil; which, if
they hold for truth, then they must say, that God Created Heaven and Earth in
the Devil, ( Genesis 1.1.) and let them see to these Texts, ( Colos. 1.18. Revel.
1.8.) where the beginning is attributed to Christ; but I never heard it
ascribed Intransitively, (as they call it) and in the Nominative Case unto the
Devil, till now. Origo (for I have learnt my Latin) signifies a Root, Birth,
Fountain, as well as a beginning; why then may it not signify (when the term
Sin, is joined with it) the Sin which we have from our Root of Mankind, Adam?
or the Sin we are born in? or, which is the Fountain and source of the rest?
But let it only signify a beginning, why may not Original Sin signify the Sin
of our beginning to come into the World? or, that Sin in us which is the
beginning of the rest?

For the last words of their Query, we must not think that Christ came to
destroy or annihilate the Devils Entity and Being, (as the Adversaries seem to
mean) for the Devil is not dead yet; and the Scripture tells us, ( Matthew.
25.41, 46. Jud. 6.) That Hell Fire is prepared for him and his Angels: Christ's
coming therefore to destroy the Devil through Death, ( Heb. 2.14.) is meant of
the destroying of his Power and Kingdom in the World, which yet will not be
fully perfected until the Day of Judgment, as the Book of the Revelation
thoroughly witnesses.

Thirteenth QUERY.
Whether or not did Christ Dye for all the Ungodly in the World and Sinners,
that they should live and dye in their Ungodliness and Sins, or live unto Him?
and, Whether or not did Christ Shed his Blood for all Men, and was a
Propitiation for the Sins of all Men? and, Whether or not these that do not
hold this, are these that make Sects, and are out of the same Spirit and
Doctrine of the Apostles?

SVRVEY.
This Inspirer of the Quakers is either an ignorant Blockhead, or else a
captious Sophister: for here we have a disjunctive Question, or Problem
proposed by him in such a manner, that whatever Member thereof we yield, we are
absurdly fanged: for, whether we say that Christ Died for all the Ungodly and
Sinners in the World, that they should live and dye in their Ungodliness and
Sins; or, whether we say that he Died for all the Ungodly and Sinners in the
World, that they should live to him, we still speak falsely and absurdly too:
for the first way, we should say, that Christ Died for all these, that they
might live and dye in their ungodliness and sins, than which, nothing could be
said worse; and the last way, we should say, that Christ Died for all Men in
the World, Elect, and Reprobate, which is also both false and absurd. We must
therefore purge the Question from a Plurality of Interrogations, (which is the
true vice of every Member thereof) and propose it thus. Whether did Christ Dye
for all the Ungodly and Sinners in the World, or only for the Elect? That this
is the true state of their present Question, their scope, and the rest of the
Query declares; albeit the Adversaries either through ignorance could not, or
for wickedness would not rightly propose it.

It is the known Doctrine of the Quakers, (with Arminians and Jesuits) that
Christ Died for all Men whatsoever, without exception, as also they do
insinuate in their Confession, page 16. and 42. I shall not be prolix upon this
Question, or else I should transgress my scope of Brevity: only I shall give a
few clear Demonstrations from the Scriptures, whereby it shall be evident, that
Christ did not Dye for all Men whatsoever, Elect, and Reprobate, but only for
the Elect, and this is the Assertion.

Therefore first; for whomsoever Christ Died and shed his Blood, God loves them
with a special love, yea, the greatest measure of love: but he loves not so all
Men whatsoever: therefore Christ did not Dye and Shed his Blood for all Men
whatsoever. The Major shall be evident by these plain and clear
Scripture-Testimonies, 1 John 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might
live through him: Herein is love, not that we loved Him, but that he loved us,
and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins, 1 John 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his Life for us, Romans 5.8.
But God commends his love to us in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ
Died for us, John 15.13. Greater love has no Man than this, that a Man lay
down his Life for his Friends. These Scriptures make the Major as clear as
Noonday. The Minor is no less evident; for God had never any special love to
any Reprobate, and especially the greatest measure of Love: Depart from me,
(says Christ to Reprobates, Matthew. 7.23.) I never knew you, viz. with a
knowledge attended with love; for, it is otherwise sure that he was not
ignorant of them; but the meaning is plain, that he never knew them with any
special love or kindness for them, which way it is often meant in the
Scriptures, as Psalm. 1.6. Jer. 1.5. Hes. 13.5. Amos 3.2. Romans 8.29. 2 Timothy
2.19. Again, these whom God so dearly loves he quickens them together with
Christ, and makes them sit in Heavenly places in him, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. But he
does not these things to all Men whatsoever, as needs no proof.

Secondly, These for whom Christ Died, God freely with him bestows all things
upon them, Romans 8.32. and it cannot be otherwise, as the Text plainly imports:
but God does not bestow all things upon all Men whatsoever, without exception;
seeing he never bestows any Saving Grace, Life Eternal, or Glory upon any
Reprobate: Therefore, certainly, Christ did not Dye for Reprobates.

Thirdly, These for whom Christ Died cannot come into Condemnation: but all
Reprobates come Eternally into Condemnation, as the Adversaries will not (I
think) deny: Therefore Christ Died not for any Reprobate. I prove the Major
from Romans 8.34. where the Apostle Argues thus; Who is he that Condemns? It is
Christ that Died, etc. here the Apostle brings Christ's Dying for a Man, as an
Infallible Proof and Argument, that, that Man shall not come into Condemnation,
but shall surely be justified; for seeing Christ has Died for him, (says he)
who then shall Condemn him. Now if Christ had Died for all Men whatsoever,
Paul's Argument had been quite void, and utterly null, seeing the most part are,
for all Christ's Death, Eternally Damned; and the Arminians plainly contradict
this Text, affirming, that Christ Died for Reprobates, who are Eternally Damned.

Fourthly, Christ did not Dye for these for whom he would not pray, seeing it is
much less to pray for one, and to lend him but a good wish, than to Dye for
him; nor can it be conceived, that he who will not bestow a small Entreaty for
me, will ever bestow his Life for me: But Christ would not so much as pray for
all Men whatsoever, John 17.9. I pray not for the World, (says Christ) but for
them which thou have given me: Therefore, certainly, Christ did not Dye for all
Men whatsoever, but only for the Elect whom God had given him out of the World.

Fifthly, All whose iniquities Christ bare, (that is, Died for) shall surely be
justified, Isai. 53.11. But all Men whatsoever will never be justified, as will
not be denied: Therefore, Christ did not bear the iniquities of, or Dye for all
Men whatsoever. The Major is clear in the place cited, where the Prophet
peremptorily and positively argues from Christ's bearing of the iniquities of a
Man, that therefore he shall justify him; and he gives this as the ground, why
he shall justify many, viz. Because He shall bear their iniquities; and so
whose iniquities soever Christ bare, shall surely be justified; and that some
whose iniquities Christ bare, shall not be justified, does utterly destroy and
make void the Prophets Inference; and therefore it cannot be said.

Sixthly, For whomsoever Christ by his Death obtained Reconciliation with God,
these much more he saves by his Life, Romans 5.10. But all Men whatsoever are not
saved by the Life of Christ, as the event proves: Therefore Christ did not by
his Death purchase a Reconciliation with God for all Men whatsoever.

Seventhly, All for whom Christ Died, are by God appointed to obtain Salvation
through him: God (says the Apostle 2 These. 5.9, 10.) has not appointed us to
Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ who died for us; where the
Apostle shows, that Christ's Death is a mean appointed of God to procure the
Salvation of these for whom he died; and so God intended the Salvation of all,
for whom Christ died: but God never intended the Salvation of all Men
whatsoever: Therefore, neither did Christ dye for all Men whatsoever. The Major
is proved already, nor do the Arminians deny it; but, on the contrary, affirm,
That God did from Eternity intend the Salvation of all Men whatsoever, by an
Antecedent Conditional Decree, as they call it. I prove the Minor: For first;
If God intended the Salvation of all Men whatsoever, then all Men whatsoever
would surely be saved, seeing whatsoever God purposes and intends, does
Infallibly come to pass: God is in the Heavens, he has done whatsoever he
pleased, Psalm. 115.3. and 134.6. The Lord of Hosts has sworn, surely, as I
have thought so shall it come to poss, as I have purposed so shall it stand,
Isai. 14.24. The Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it? Isai.
14.27. I will work and who shall let it? Isai. 43.13. My Counsel shall stand,
and I will do all my Pleasure, Isai. 60.10. The Counsel of the Lord, that shall
stand, Prove. 19.21. But, it is most false that all Men whatsoever shall be
saved, as needs no proof: Therefore, God never intended the Salvation of all
Men whatsoever. Secondly, Many men are ordained to Condemnation, though justly
to be incurred by them for their sins first committed, before they be
condemned: Therefore, certainly, God has not appointed all Men whatsoever to
Salvation, seeing he cannot appoint, one and the same Man both to Salvation and
Condemnation, and in good earnest intend both to save and to damn one and the
same Man. Nay, no Man of wisdom can seriously intend to do any thing upon a
Condition, which he certainly knows will never come to pass: For, How shall any
Man of a sound mind, seriously intend to do that which he, in the mean time,
certainly knows he shall never do? Nay, this is impossible. The Antecedent is
also manifest; For God has made the wicked for the day of Evil, Prove. 16.4.
God sends many Men strong Delusions, that they may believe Lies and be Damned;
and so he intends their Damnation, (though not as the End; for that is the
Glory of his Justice) 2 These. 2.11, 12. and there are some Men who were before
of old Ordained to Condemnation, Jud. 4. And what needs more? for whatsoever
God does within time, he from Eternity purposed and intended to do it;
otherwise he behooved to do it, either against his intention and purpose; or
else beside his intention and purpose, that is, without having intended and
purposed it, or its contrary; or else lastly, he behooved to begin the
intention and purpose thereof within time; all of which are Blasphemous and
Repugnant, as needs no demonstration: But it is most evident, that God within
time condemns many Men for their Sins, Matthew. 25.32, 41. Therefore he from
Eternity intended and purposed to condemn them; and yet they are justly damned
for their sins first committed, before they be condemned. I may not here stand
to examine all the miserable Evasions, whereby Arminians and Jesuits endeavor
to Elude this Argument; otherwise this one Argument would swell into a Volume.
But what is said, may be sufficient for such as love truth, and for confounding
of the Adversaries, if the grounds here given be but rightly managed.

Lastly, All for whom Christ died are redeemed from the curse of the Law,
Galat. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us (says the Apostle) from the Curse of the
Law, being made a Curse for us, that is, being Crucified for us, as he there
explains; and so Christ being made a Curse, that is, his being Crucified for
any Man, redeems that Man from the Curse of the Law, according to the Apostle;
and so if Christ was Crucified for all Men whatsoever, then all Men whatsoever
are, certainly, redeemed from the Curse: but all Men whatsoever are not not
redeemed from the Curse: Therefore Christ was not Crucified, and did not Dye
for all Men whatsoever.

But here the Arminians and Jesuits meet us with their ordinary distinction,
viz. That Christ has not indeed by his Death redeemed all Men whatsoever from
the Curse Absolutely; but that, for all that, he has redeemed them from it
Conditionally, viz. upon condition of their believing, which condition, because
all men whatsoever do not perform, therefore it comes to pass, that all men
whatsoever are not absolutely Redeemed, but only these few who perform the
Condition. But contrariwise, I cannot stand here to declare all the absurdities
that are wrapped up in this Jesuitico-Arminian Evasion, otherwise I should
exceedingly transgress my scope of brevity. Only for overthrowing this
universal Conditional Redemption, I shall subjoyn two or three of the Arguments
which our Divines most ordinarily bring against it. Therefore, for clearing the
state of the Question, I grant, that the method and order of the application of
the purchased Redemption (taking it for the Price paid by the Mediator to the
Justice of God) is Conditional, that is, it is applied to us upon Condition of
Faith, either Actual, or (at least) Seminal and Inclinative; yet, so as the
Redeemer has also by his Death purchased the Condition it self to all the
Redeemed, and in due time actually conferreth the same upon them. If this would
satisfy our Adversaries, we should consent, and the Controversy were ended.
But this is not the thing in Controversy betwixt us: But the thing
controverted betwixt them and us, is concerning Christ's Dying it self, and the
very work of Redemption it self, if these were performed Conditionally for all
Men; and so if Christ Died for, and Redeemed all Men Conditionally. For
example, a Man procures absolutely a Pardon from the Prince for some
Malefactor; but yet, he firmly resolves that he shall never know of it, nor it
be applied to him for his comfort, until by the persuasion of a Friend, who, he
knows, will surely prevail with him, (this is the holy Spirit with Sinners) he
come and own him for his Deliverer, and Savior, who procured the same.

The Arminians and Jesuits affirm, That Christ Died Conditionally, though not
Absolutely, for all men, without exception. This we utterly deny, and though
the Affirmer only be bound to prove his Affirmation, yet until they do that, I
shall confirm our Negation. Therefore first, If Christ Died for and Redeemed
Reprobates upon condition of their Believing, then God intended that; seeing
Christ did not Dye for, or Redeem any man either against, or beside Gods
intention: But God never intended that Christ should Dye for, or Redeem any
Reprobate upon condition of Believing; seeing so he should have intended the
Redemption of Reprobates, and that upon a condition which he infallibly foresaw
would never come to pass, which sort of Intention cannot even befall any may of
sound mind; much less can it befall the Infinitly-Wise God.

Secondly, According to this Doctrine whereby Christ is said by his Death to
have Redeemed all men whatsoever Conditionally, Christ shall by his Death have
purchased Redemption, upon condition of their Believing, for these who long
before his Death were already actually damned in Hell, for whom there was no
place left for Redemption; which is extremely absurd, that a price should be
exacted from the Redeemer for these who themselves were then Suffering, and
Eternally, without hope, to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire for their
Sins. This cannot stand with Justice.

Thirdly, If Christ has Redeemed Reprobates Conditionally, then the
performance of the Condition, viz. Believing, is either in their own power, or
else it is a gift of God, (whether purchased by Christ's Death, or by God
bestowed, without being thereby purchased, all is one to our present Argument.)
It is not in their own power, Joh. 6.44. and 15.5. 1 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.8.
Philip 1.29. Heb. 12.2. If then the Condition be a gift of God, then God either
bestows it upon Reprobates, or not: if he does, then he either bestows it upon
them Absolutely, or else Conditionally; if Absolutely, then Reprobates shall
thereby be made believers, and so be saved, seeing (as is supposed) God does
Absolutely bestow saving Faith upon them; if Conditionally, then, seeing Faith
is the condition (by the Adversaries own principles) the sense hereof, will be,
that God bestows Faith in Christ upon Reprobates, upon condition that they
first, have Faith in him; which is both nonsense and it also implies a
contradiction that they should believe when they have no Faith, as is supposed.
If then, God does not bestow Faith upon Reprobates, then, they cannot be said
to be redeemed; seeing so, their Redemption (as is clear, from what is now said)
depends upon a Condition, which is neither in their own power, nor yet does God
bestow it upon them; and so, it is, utterly impossible for them ever to
perform. And will any Man, say, that a Man is Redeemed, when yet, his
Redemption is not made so much as possible to him? his Redemption is upon the
suppositions and grounds now laid down as impossible for him, as when a Man
says, if ye will bring down the Stars, I will give you my Daughter, the
Marriage with his Daughter is impossible. How then comes it to be a thing
actual, when yet it is impossible? I confess that object would be worth the
seeing, that were at once actual, and yet impossible.

Fourthly, if Christ by his death Redeemed all men whatsover, only upon
Condition of believing, and otherwise Redeemed them not, then he by his death
Redeemed only believers, and none else, as is manifest: But all men whatsoever
are not believers: therefore Christ did not by his death redeem all men
whatsoever, from the Adversaries own principles; and yet, they contend that
Christ by his death Redeemed all men whatsoever; and so they directly
contradict themselves, and their universal Conditional Redemption is repugnant.

Lastly, (for I will stand no longer, upon a negative especially) if Christ
died for all men whatsoever, (give it what name they will) then he satisfied
Justice, for all men's sins whatsoever: But, the Consequent is most false and
absurd: therefore so is the antecedent, from which it follows. The falsehood of
the Consequent, and its absurdity are obvious: for if Christ satisfied Justice
for all Men's sins whatsoever, then, all Reprobates are most unjustly Condemned,
Seeing their sins for which they are Condemned, are by Christ satisfied for; and
so their Condemnation is, an Act of great injustice, done both to Christ and
them, which cannot be charged upon God, without extreme Blasphemy. I Prove the
Connection of the Major, because, the very immediate end and Intention of
Christ, dying for any Man, was to satisfy Justice for his sins, as appears
from Isaia. 53, 8, 9, 10. Mat. 26, 28. Romans 4, 25. and 5, 9, 10, 2, Cor. 5, 21.
Galat. 3, 13. Heb. 9.26, 28, and 10, 12. 1 Pet. 2, 24. In all which places, it
is manifest that for whomsoever Christ died, he died, to satisfy Justice for
their sins: for, it is expressly asserted in these Texts, that, He was smitton
for their Transgressions; made his Soul an offering for their sins; Shed his
Blood for the Remission of their sins; reconciled them to God, by his Blood;
was delivered to die for their Offenses; was made sin for them; was made a
curse for them, to deliver them from the curse; appeared to put away their sin,
by the Sacrifice of himself; Offered himself a Sacrifice for their sins; bare
their sins in his Body on the Tree. All which, declares, that for whomsoever
Christ died, he died to satisfy Justice for their sins.

If they Answer, that Christ satisfied for all Men's sins whatsoever, upon
condition of their beleiving, (as they use) and otherwise not. Unto this I
shall subsume, that not all Men whatsoever believe, but only some Few:
Therefore, from the Enemies own principles, he did not satisfy for all Men's
sins whatsoever, but only for believers sins, and none else; and so their
principles involves a Contradiction, viz. he satisfied for all Men's sins
whatsoever (say they) and yet, from these same very principles, he did not
satisfy for all Men's sins whatsoever, but only for believers sins.

Secondly, seeing misbelief is a chief and Mother-sin, Christ has surely
satisfied for it also, amongst the rest, for all, for whose sins he did
satisfy; otherwise he could not at all, have Redeemed them from the curse, if
he had left any of their sins unsatisfied for; and so, if Christ died and
satisfied for any Man, that is, for all that, Condemned, then still that Man,
is Condemned for that, which yet is satisfied for, which is an Act of extreme
injustice. What? did not Christ satisfy for all their sins, for whom he
satisfied? if not; how came he to satisfy for a part, and not the rest? and
how are they said, to be Redeemed by a partial satisfaction, which cannot
Redeem any Man? and who should satisfy for the rest, of their sins? If then,
(which is certain) Christ satisfied for all their sins, for whom he did
satisfy, and so for their misbelief, among the rest, I would gladly know, if
Christ satisfied for all Men whatsoever, for what Reprobates are Condemned: for
it cannot, without the greatest injustice be, for their sins, which (as is
supposed) are all satisfied for: misbelief and all. I cannot stand no longer
upon this. But who so pleases may see this universal Conditional Redemption,
very solidly, and yet very briefly Confuted in worthy Mr. Durhams Exposition of
the Book of the Rev. from page 299 the page 326.

Objections Answered.
But, now we must hear what our Adversaries, have to say for themselves.
Therefore First, they instance that Scripture (1, Joh. 2, 2.) where its said,
that Christ was a Propitiation for the sins, of the whole World, that is (as
they will) for the sins of all Men whatsoever.

Ans. By the whole World, John does not mean all Men whatsoever, without
exception; but his meaning is, that Christ's death was not only a Propitiation
for the sins, of the Jews, and Men of their Nation, but also of the Nations of
the Gentiles throughout the whole World; and for that cause, he calls it the
whole World, because the benefit of Christ's death, was not any more restricted,
and limited, to the Nation of the Jews, with their few Proselyts, as it was
before, but was extended, to any Nation throughout the World, as well as to
them. And that this must be the meaning of this Text, the Scripture arguments
which are already produced, against universal Redemption, from which, the
Adversaries, can make no evasion, (as is showed by the confetation, of their
Chiefest devices and answers) do Evidently prove, seeing this Text of the
Scripture does not contradict these, but is explained by them. Beside, the
whole world and all Men do not always, in the Scriptures, signify all Men
whatsoever, without exception, as may be easily seen Isai. 40, 5, Joel. 2, 28,
Joh. 12, 32. Rev. 13, 3.

Secondly, they object from 1 Cor. 15, 22. where its said, For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. (Say they) Christ died for all
men whatsoever,

Ans. If they will have this Scripture to be meant of all men whatsoever,
without exception, it will prove that all men whatsoever shall be made
eventually to live in Christ: for the sense of this Text is plainly eventual; (
They shall be made alive in Christ, says it) But the Adversaries themselves
know that all men whatsoever are not made eventually alive in Christ; and so
they cannot urge this Text, as meant of all men whatsoever, but only of these
who eventually are made partakers of Life. The meaning thereof is, That all
that Dye, Dye in Adam, and he by his fall is the Author of their Death; So all
that again get Life, they get it in Christ, and he is the Author thereof unto
them, seeing out of him there is no Life, Act. 4.12.

Thirdly, They object, That Christ is the Savior of all Men, especially of
them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.1^. Therefore Christ Died for all men whatsoever.
The Text cited, (for answer) is meant only of Gods general providence, which he
has over all men in this Life, in preserving them, and providing for them,
which is chiefly extended toward Believers; otherwise in the sense of the
Adversaries, who mean it, (by the objection) of Eternal Salvation, it will
prove, that all men whatsoever are Eternally saved, especially Believers,
which, I am sure, the Adversaries will acknowledge to be false, and absurd too.

Fourthly, They object, That if Adam has lost more than Christ has restored,
then Adam was stronger than Christ, which is most absurd.

Ans. This Argument endeavors to prove, that the number of them that are
eventually saved, is greater than of the eventually damned, contrary to the
Scriptures, ( Matthew. 7.13, 14. and 20.16.) for as long as the number of the
eventually lost is more than that of the saved, Adam has still lost more, than
are by Christ restored. Secondly, Christ's Death was indeed sufficient to have
expiated the sins of all men, and to have restored all that Adam lost; but it
was not appointed to expiate all men's sins whatsoever, but only of the Elect;
and so the Argument reaches not that which it aims at. Lastly, It is an act of
much greater power, to quicken one dead man, than to kill many Millions of
living men; for, Adam was able to destroy many Millions, but not to restore one
man; and so still the Consequence comes short.

Fifthly, God will have all men to be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. Therefore Christ died
for all men whatsoever.

Ans. The Apostle by all men, means not of all men whatsoever; but of all
Sorts, Ranks, and Degrees, of men, as the word, all, is frequently in the
Scripture understood, as I partly before showed, and as it is expressly
explained, Revel. 13.16. and so the word, all, is meant of Genera singulorum,
that is, all kinds of Men; Not of Singula generum, that is, every Individual
man. An answer of the same kind may be given, to the Objection which they draw
from Heb. 2.9. where we have it turned, Christ tasted Death for every Man. But,
the truth is, there is no more in the Original in this Text, but that Christ
tasted Death for all, [(...)] and the word, Men, is not in the Original; and so
it may be as well supplied in our Language with the word Elect, or Believers,
as with the word, Men; or, albeit it be supplied with the word, Men, yet, it
must be understood as is said, of men of every Sort, Station, Condition,
Calling, Quality, and Degree; not of every Individual Man, seeing by our
foregoing Arguments, that would be utterly false.

Sixthly, We are forbidden to destroy him for whom Christ Died, ( Romans 14.15.)
and again, there are some (2 Pet. 2.1.) that deny the Lord that bought them:
Therefore Christ Died for some, who for all that, may be destroyed and damned.

Ans. The Apostle in the first cited Text means plainly of laying a scandal
before a weak Brother, (of whom he there speaks) whereby we destroy him, as
much as in us; and gives him an occasion and temptation to destroy himself, if
that could be; but it is not meant that any for whom Christ Died, do, or can
eventually perish; yea, in that same Chapter, ( Ver. 4.) the Apostle expressly
says the contrary, where he confidently affirms, That he shall be holden up.
The second place cited, does not mean of these men's being bought and redeemed
from Hell; but of their being bought, redeemed, or delivered from the ignorance
of the World in a Moral, or Historical sense through some common Illuminations;
and from the external pollutions of the World through some common Operations;
from all which they did once seem to the Church to be also bought and redeemed
from Hell, and were so in her Judgment of Charity, according to which respects
the Apostle there speaks, most part whereof may be seen in that same Chapter, (
Ver. 18.20.21.) where the Apostle says, That these men had escaped the Error of
the World, and the Pollutions thereof, and had got some knowledge of the way of
Righteousness, viz. an External, Moral, and Historical knowledge: and the rest
of it is declared by John, (1 John 2.19.) where the Apostle says, That such
Persons (of the same sort that Peter here speaks of) went out from them, that
they might be made manifest, but were not of them; where he teaches, that these
never were of the number of the truly Redeemed; but that before their Apostasy
they were not discerned from them, and had the same Judgment of Charity with
them.

Seventhly, The promises of the Gospel are universal to all: Therefore Christ
Died for all men whatsoever.

Ans. They are universal to all Believers, (Whosoever believes shall be saved)
not unto all men; it is no where said, whosoever is a man shall be saved.

Eighthly, They object, That except Christ have died for all men whatsoever,
many to whom the Gospel is preached, and are exhorted to Believe, shall have
nothing that they can Believe; or if they believe, they shall believe a
falsehood: But these things are absurd.

Ans. It is false, that they shall have nothing to Believe; for they shall have
to believe, that Christ is a sufficient Savior able to save to the utmost, all
that come unto God by him, (Heb. 7.25.) and, that he will also save all that
come to God by him, ( Joh. 3.36. and 5.24. and 6.37.47.) and so they have also
to believe, that Salvation is offered to themselves in particular, and that
they shall surely be saved, if they will receive and embrace Christ as he is
offered in the Gospel; and while they believe these things, they shall believe
no falsehood, but a most certain and sure truth. And if thereupon they shall
flee unto Christ for refuge, and resolutely cleave unto him, it shall be a
clear evidence to them, that they are of the number of these for whom Christ
died, seeing no Reprobate did ever truly flee unto Christ as his only Refuge,
and cordially adhere unto him, Joh. 10.26.

Lastly, They object, That every man is bound to believe, that Christ died for
him: Therefore Christ died for all men whatsoever, seeing we cannot be bound to
believe falsehoods and lies.

Ans. I utterly deny the Antecedent, seeing many in the world never had any
means to hear of Christ's Death, who therefore are not bound to believe so much
as that he died for any man, seeing no man is bound to believe that which was
never held forth unto him, nor could he in any Moral diligence know of.

Secondly, Neither are all who hear and profess the Gospel bound to believe
that Christ died for them, but only such as have embraced Christ on his own
Gospel-terms, whose Faith in Christ and Repentance toward God are Infallible
evidences, that Christ has Died for them. Nor can there be any thing more
absurdly said, than that every man, even that hears the Gospel preached, is
bound to believe that Christ died for him, whether he have embraced Christ, or
not: for, then every man that hears the Gospel should be also bound to believe,
that he shall be saved, whether he embrace Christ, or not; seeing for
whomsoever Christ Died, he also saves them, Romans 5.10. and 8.32. 1 These. 5.9,
10.

Thou will say, Why then are these for whom Christ Died not, Exhorted to
believe in Him?

Ans. They are not exhorted to believe, that Christ died for them, except they
shall first make choice of, and embrace him for their Lord and Savior, as the
Gospel offers him.

Secondly, They are exhorted to believe in Christ, or to accept of him as their
alone Lord and Savior, upon his own terms to show them what is their Duty, and
to make them without excuse, in that there was so much pains and means bestowed
upon them to show them their Duty, and the way to Salvation; and yet they would
not obey and embrace, but rejected the Mercy of God and Life Eternal, when it
was offered to them upon condition of their believing in Christ Jesus. But thou will say, They cannot believe in Christ: How then can they be unexcusable for
not doing it? seeing they could not help it.

Ans. But it is their own fault, that they cannot believe in him, their inward
sinful Corruption is the cause thereof.

Secondly, They are unwilling, as well as unable; and therefore they are
capable enough to become unexcusable; seeing they are both unwilling, and it is
their own fault that they are unable.

Fourteenth QUERY.
What makes a Believer? Whether or not is it by believing in the Light,
according to Christ's Doctrine, who says, He is the Light of the World, and does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, that all men through him might
Believe? and who follows him shall not walk in darkness: for he is the Light,
and says, That he that believes is saved. Then is not the Light saving which he
believes? and he that does not believe in the Light is damned already. Then is
not the Light, or his disobedience to it, his Condemnation? Yea; or Nay?

SVRVEY.
It is one of the chief Articles of the Quakers Creed, that all men whatsoever
are sufficiently enlightened for Conversion and Salvation, (as their Confession
also asserts, page 5, 15, 16, 32, 33, 34.) as also, that they have sufficient
Grace to be Converted and Saved, Quakerism no Popery, page 66, 67, 68, 69, 71.
Therefore I shall divide this Survey into two Sections; the first concerning
Universal Light, the second concerning Universal Grace.

SECT. I. Concerning Universal Sufficient Light.
The Question here is plain, viz. Whether or not there is a sufficient Light,
for Conversion, and Salvation, in all men whatsoever, without exception? The
Quakers affirm, that there is, I deny it; and albeit the Affirmer is still
obliged to prove, not the Denier; yet, I prove my Negative.

Therefore first, The Natural Man does not discern, neither can he know the
things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. Ergo, Natural Men are not
sufficiently enlightened for Conversion, or Salvation. The Quakers expound this
Text, sometimes of the unrenewed part in a Man, and sometimes of Natural
Reason, which (say they) is here meant by the Natural Man. But Contrariwise, it
is plain, that Paul does there compare distinct Persons of Men. Secondly, I
appeal the Analogy of Faith, for this their Figurative Gloss. Thirdly, Though
we give them their own Gloss, they profit nothing, seeing many, yea, most of
men, are not renewed, and have no other Light, but of Natural Reason, being
destitute of the Spirit, and not having the light of the glorious Gospel
shining in unto them; (2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Jud. 19.) and so these men cannot discern
Spiritually, or with a Spiritual evidence, seeing a Spiritual act cannot be
produced, without a Spiritual Principle proportioned thereunto, more than a
Horse can produce acts of Reason; for, nothing can act above it is Sphere and
Capacity.

Secondly, There are many in the World that are covered with gross darkness;
Many have their understanding darkened, and are alienated from the Life of God
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts, ( Isai. 60.2. Ephesians. 4.18.) Believers themselves in their unrenewed
state were under the power of darkness, ( Ephesians. 5.8. Colos. 1.13.) and even
within the pale of the Visible Church, there are many to whom it is not given
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and God has not given them a
Heart to perceive, Eyes to see, nor Ears to hear, but their Eyes are shut that
they cannot see, and their Hearts that they cannot understand, there is a Vail
thereupon, ( Matthew. 13.11. Deuteronomy. 29.4. Isai. 44.18. Romans 11.7, 8.) Are these
then sufficiently enlightened for Conversion and Salvation? then black
ignorance, blindness, and darkness, sufficiently enlightens.

But the Quakers reply in their Confession, (page 8.) That it is not the
brain-knowledge that is blinded in any man, but only the sensible knowledge of
feeling. But the reply signifies nothing.

For first, I inquire, if the brain-knowledge, without the sensible knowledge
of feeling, be sufficient to Salvation? if it be, then they who are quite
stupid, and have no conscience or sense of sin at all, but are past feeling,
(as it is 1 Timothy 4.2. Ephesians. 4.19.) are sufficiently enlightened to Salvation,
which I do not believe. If then, the brain-knowledge alone, without somewhat of
the other, be not sufficient to Salvation, then (with the Adversaries own
grant) all men whatsoever are not sufficiently enlightened to Salvation, seeing
they grant the sensible knowledge of feeling to be blinded in many.

Secondly, All men have not even the brain-knowledge of Christ Crucified, and
the New Covenant, as is clear in experience, (for, How many Americans and
others can tell us one word of Christ?) and the Scriptures also declares it,
Psalm. 147.20. Romans 10.14. and 15.20.21. Ephesians. 2.12. how then are such men
utterly ignorant of Christ, and so of the way to Salvation, ( Joh. 14.6. Act.
4.12.) and are not within the Covenant, (as Believers Children are, who though
they be not capable of actual knowledge, yet they belong to the Covenant) but
are Strangers to the Covenants of Promise, and Aliens to the Church of God, (
Ephesians. 2.12.) How (I say) are these sufficiently enlightened to Salvation? If
these be sufficiently enlightened thereunto, then not a small whisper of Christ
or the Covenant can be needful. And, I am sure, if they never heard of Christ,
they can neither know Him, believe in Him, love Him, nor obey His Gospel.

Lastly, There are many, even who have heard of Christ, that, instead of
brain-knowledge, are given up to strong brain-Delusions, to believe black
Errors and Lies, that bring on their Eternal Damnation, 2 These. 2.11, 12. It is
therefore most false, that the brain-knowledge is not blinded in any man.

But the Quakers here object from Joh. 1.9. where it is said, That Christ
enlightens every one that comes into the World, which they expound of a Light
sufficient to Salvation.

Ans. I deny their Exposition, which they shall never prove; for, the Text only
says, That he enlightens every one that comes into the World, which indeed is
most true in regard of whatsoever kind, or degree of Light any man in the whole
world has; for, every man is enlightened with some kind of Light, viz. either
the Light of Natural Reason; or else, both with that, and the Supernatural
Light of Grace also, all which they have from Christ, who is the Eternal Son of
God, by whom all things were made, ( John 1.3. Colos. 1.16. Heb. 1.2.) and is
also our Spiritual enlightner; ( Matthew. 11.27. John 1.16, 17. and 8.12. and
12.46.) But that he enlightens every man that comes into the World, with a
light sufficient to Salvation, is neither said in this Text of John, nor any
where else of Scripture; but is, on the contrary, therein strongly
contradicted, some few Testimonies whereof I have produced. That which the
Quakers add here, viz. That he enlightens every man that comes into the World,
That all men through him might believe, is not so written in the Text, but only
in the Seventh Verse there preceding, it is said, That John bare witness of the
Light, That all men through him might believe; but the truth is, the word, men,
is not in the Original, but only the word, all, which may be as well supplied
with the word, Elect, as the word, Men; and albeit it were in the Original, yet
(for the reasons before given) it behooved to be understood of all Sorts,
Stations, and Degrees of Men, (or Genera singulorum) not of every Individual
Man, (or Singula generum) and surely, John's witness was neither then, nor yet
is come, to every man's ears in the whole World.

Secondly, It uses to be objected, That, that which may be known of God, was
manifest to the Gentiles, Romans 1.19. Therefore, even the Gentiles were
sufficiently enlightened.

Ans. The knowledge that the Apostle there speaks of, was only a natural
knowledge of God, from the light of Natural Reason, and the works of Creation,
(which was common with them to the Devil) and therefore was no ways sufficient
for Salvation, considering also how small a portion we have retained of it
since the Fall; albeit it is indeed sufficient for conviction, and to make
unexcusable. They should therefore prove, that these knew God in Christ, or
God, as Redeemer, and his new Covenant, or else they profit not.

Thirdly, They object, That the Gentiles had a light in their Consciences,
accusing, or else excusing them, Romans 2.15.

Ans. If that light of a Natural Conscience, which the Gentiles had, be
sufficient to Salvation, (as the Quakers strongly insinuate in their Confession
of Faith, page 6, 15, 16, 32, 33, 34.) then the Devil also, who wants not the
Light of a Natural Conscience, is sufficiently enlightened to Salvation.

Secondly, If that light of a Natural Conscience, which the Gentiles had, be
sufficient to Salvation, then the mere light of Nature and Reason, and that
when it is corrupted and darkened, without the Supernatural light of Grace, or
so much as one Gospelpromise, (which the Gentiles knew not) is sufficient to
Salvation; which, who says, is a deep-dyed Atheist. They sometimes have said to
me, That the Gentiles were sufficiently enlightened, even in respect of the
Covenant of Grace, when it was manifested to Adam, or any other of their
Forefathers.

Ans. We were once sufficiently enlightened in Adam, in order to the Covenant of
Works; but we are not still so now, our understanding is darkened by the Fall:
But, in respect of the Covenant of Grace, Adam was never our head and
undertaker, and so his enlightening is nothing to us.

Secondly, Will their Forefathers enlightening at a great distance of time,
worn out, and extinct, prove, that the Gentiles had still a sufficient light?
Nay, then, let them prove, (for it is as easy) that a blind man sees
sufficiently to read, because, his Father who had Eyes, saw to do it; or, that
all men are sufficiently innocent, and able to do their Duty perfectly, because
Adam was once so, and then we shall need no Savior.

But, Say the Quakers, is not the light then saving, which he believes?

Ans. Christ Jesus, who is meant in the Scriptures, pointed at, ( viz. Joh.
1.9. and 8.12.) is indeed a saving light; but the light of Nature and Reason,
which is the only light that is universally in all men, (as was proved at the
Survey of the fourth Query) is not so.

SECT. II. Concerning sufficient Grace in all Men.
The Question here is, Whether there be sufficient Grace in all Men, Turks,
Pagans, Heathens, etc. able to convert them, and so save them? The Quakers
boldly affirm, that there is; and they do not mean of objective Grace, or Grace
offered only to all, (which some plead for, right, or wrong, my present purpose
is not concerned) but of subjective Grace, whereby the will is made able, and
put into Hapacity and freedom to convert and turn to God, as George Keith
affirms in his Quakerism no Popery, page 66. But I utterly deny, that there is
Grace in all men sufficient for Conversion; and though still the Affirmer ought
to prove, not the Denyer, yet I prove my Negative.

Therefore first, There is not sufficient light for Conversion in all men, as
is proved: Therefore, neither is there sufficient Grace in all men for
Conversion. The Consequence is easy, seeing Grace without Light, will be very
blind Grace; nor can the will be renewed, and the understanding left unrenewed,
and in darkness; for, how then shall it behave, seeing, Nil volitum quin
praecognitum, ignoti nulla cupido.

Secondly, Every sufficient Cause is able to produce the Effect; or else, it is
no ways sufficient, as is palpable. But there is no Grace in Reprobates and
Unrenewed Men, able to convert them, subdue the resistance of their will, and
bring it in subjection to God: Therefore there is not a sufficient Grace to
Conversion in them. The Minor only needs proving, and I prove it, because the
Natural Man cannot, by any assistance, discern the things of the Spirit, and
the carnal mind, which is enmity against God, cannot by any assistance, be --
subject to his Law, (1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7.) Nay, he must be a Spiritual man
that does either, seeing a Spiritual act can never proceed from a Natural or
Carnal Principle, more than a Horse can make a Syllogism, or define an Object:
But Reprobates and Unrenewed men are entirely Natural Men, and Carnal minded.
Therefore there is no Grace in Reprobates and Unrenewed Men, whereby they can
either discern the things of the Spirit, or to be -- subject to his Law; and
so, I am sure, it cannot convert them. The Minor of this also only needs
proving, which is easy; for Reprobates and Unrenewed Men, neither have Christ,
nor the Spirit of Christ, (2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 5.12. Romans 8.9, 10. Galat. 4.6.)
and so they cannot be Spiritual, but entirely Natural and Carnal, being without
Christ, and without his Spirit.

Thirdly, No Man can come to Christ, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. but
he draws not all men whatsoever: Therefore all men whatsoever have not
sufficient Grace, enabling them to go to Christ, and so to convert and turn to
God. The Major is Christ's plain assertion in the place cited. The Minor is
clear from Joh. 6.45. where Christ positively affirms, That every man that has
heard and learned of the Father, comes to him: But all men whatsoever come not
to Christ, ( John 5.40. and 10.26. and 12.39. 2 These. 3.2.) Therefore all men
whatsoever do not hear and learn of the Father, and so are not drawn by him;
and so the whole Argument is evidently proved.

Lastly, Conversion essentially consists in the Habits, Powers, and Principles
of Grace; not in the actual operations of Grace; otherwise Believers would
lose, and recover their Conversion, and so be in a state of Nature and Grace,
as often as they are not, and again are, in the actual exercise and operations
of Grace; and so every Convert would be an Apostate fallen from Grace when he
sleeps, or is not actually exercising his Grace, which is utterly absurd, so to
lose, and recover continually his union with, and relation to Christ, and his
right unto Eternal Life: But, whosoever has sufficient Grace, must, certainly,
have the Powers, Principles, or Habits of Grace: Therefore, whosoever has
sufficient Grace, is, certainly, a Convert; and so if all men have sufficient
grace, then they are also all Converts, which I do not yet believe. The Major
is proved clearly already. I prove the Minor, viz. that whosoever has
sufficient Grace, must, certainly, have the Powers, Principles, or Habits of
Grace; because, without these, there cannot be sufficient Grace: for, there
cannot be sufficient Grace, where the actions and operations of Grace are
impossible, as cannot be denied: But where the Powers, Principles, or Habits of
Grace are wanting, there, the actions and operations of Grace are impossible;
seeing every action and operation is impossible, without the Principles and
Powers whereupon it necessarily depends, as no man can be ignorant of.
Therefore, without the Powers, Principles, or Habits of Grace, there can be no
sufficient Grace.

They will, (may be) say, that habits are not simply necessary for producing of
Acts, but, only for the more easy and ready producing of them. Unto this I
reply that, though, that be true in respect of natural and acquired habits (as
even their acquiring, shows that same Acts proceeded the habit, viz. these by
which it was first acquired) yet it is most false, in regard of supernatural
and infused habits, as both their nature, and their purchase (no ways, but by
infusion) may show that they necessarily preceed all Acts; yea, and otherwise,
a Man might live graciously without grace, and grace would be simply needless,
which a sworn Atheist will not dare to say.

But they object for universal sufficient grace, that, the Gentiles do the
things contained in the Law, Romans 2, 14: therefore they had sufficient grace.

Ans. They did these things by Nature, (says the Text) not by grace. Secondly,
a Man, may do things Naturaly good, and contained in the Law, and yet be void
of grace, seeing he may do them, but yet not from gracious principles of Faith
and Love, nor for gracious ends both which (as also the gracious manner) are
requisite to a gracious action, Romans 14, 23. 1 Cor. 10, 31.

Secondly, they object, that the grace of God that brings salvation, has
appeared to all Men, Tit. 2, 11.

Ans. By the grace of god, the Apostle there means, the gracious Doctrine of
the Gospel, (whereunto, teaching, which is ascribed to it in the following
verse, is most proper) and by all Men, is meant Men of all ranks, Stations,
Qualities, etc. As the word, all, is often taken: for the Gospel was not then
come to every Man's ears in the whole world. This objection George Keith makes,
in his Quakerism no Popery, page 66.

Thirdly, they object, that the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every
Man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12, 7.

Ans. The Apostle speaks only of the members of Christ's body here, by the
Context, not of all Men whatsoever. again, laying aside the Context, the
meaning is easy, viz. that to whomsoever, the manifestation of the Spirit is
given, it is given them for profiting; as when Paul says Colos. 1, 28.) whom we
preach, warning every Man, in all wisdom, he does not mean, that they had then
got every Man in the World warned, but that whomsoever they warned, they warned
them wisely, and not imprudently; as when I say such a Man, speaks to every
Man wisely, I do not mean that he has spoken to all the World, but whomsoever
he speaks to, he does it wisely and discreetly. And just so, when I say, such
a Man honors every Man, or all Men for advantage.

Fourthly, George Keith object (in his Quakerism no Popery, page 66) from Romans
5, 18. That as by the offense of one judgment come upon all men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
Men unto justification of life.

Ans. the meaning is plainly, as in the former objection, that as on whomsoever
the offense came, it came unto Condemnation, so on whomsoever the righteousness
came, it came unto justification, so he is comparing the force and effects, of
the offense of Adam, and the force and effects of Christ's righteousness and
merits together, which is his scope in the whole Context, as may easily be
seen, but especially in the 16, Ver. And if he were comparing the quantity and
latitude, of the objects together, upon whom the offense, and the righteousness
came, making them equal (as the Quakers objection intends, then it would prove
that all Men were as actually in a State of justification by Christ, as ever
they were in a State of Damnation by Adam, which is utterly false.

From this universal grace, the Quakers draw their free will in all Men, even
natural and unrenewed Men to convert and turn unto God at their option and
choice, as George Keith boldly (with holy boldness himself calls it) affirms in
his Quakerism no Popery, page 66, 67, 68, 69.

But the Scriptures says, ( Jer. 24, 7. Ezekiel. 11, 19, and 36, 26,) that its God
that gives us the new heart, which we cannot make our selves by the help of
universal grace, nor does that universal grace bestow it (or else in the
Quakers principles, all Men would be converts) nor can we turn to God without
it. They declare, that it is God that converts us, and not our selves, by our
free will and universal grace assisting ( Jer. 31, 18. Joh. 3, 5. and 6, 44.
Jam. 1 18. 1 Pet. 1; 3.) They also positively teach that men that want a true
Spiritual union with Christ, by Faith, can do nothing, viz. that is acceptable
and Spiritually good ( Joh. 15, 5.) and all unrenewed men are such.

And it is most absurd to say, that there is an ability, and freewill in
Reprobates and unrenewed men, by means of a sufficient grace in them, to
convert and turn to god, or forbear at their Devotion and choice; for so the
efficacy of grace, in the point of Conversion, is made plainly dependent on
man's free will; which that I may prove, we must know that the Quakers (with
their dear Friends the Jesuits) do say, that God bestows this his grace upon
all men only to make them capable, and able, and their free will to Convert, or
not, at their choice, and consent, or Dissent; but that he does not make his
grace, so Powerful on the^ as Infallibly and peremptorily to through and effect
the work, so as it cannot but come to pass; for this he will not do left he
take away the Freedom of their will, whereunto he still leaves them to choose,
or refuse; consent, or dissent. Now then,

First, this universal grace, is not effectual of it self, to Convert any man;
or else, seeing every man has it as well as another (as the Adversaries affirm)
it would Convert them all; otherwise it cannot be called effectual, as not
throughing and effecting that work in many. From whom then has it, to be
effectual? not from God; for he only makes men able, and free thereby to be
Converted, leaving them to their free will, to choose or refuse. not from the
Devil, I am sure: Ergo, it must Infallibly, have its efficacy from man's
free will, which, by choosing and Inclining, applies it that way effectually,
which otherwise had misgiven.

Secondly, this universal grace in the business of Conversion, works at men's
Option and Choice; for, if they Incline it concurs, if not, it forbears:
Therefore it is therein clearly Subordinate to man's free will, and determined
thereunto by his Promotion; and so in effecting that work, plainly depends on
him, and his free will. The consequence is plain from the Definition of a
Predetermining and Predetermined, and a Subordinant and Subordinate cause
contained in the Antecedent, from whence I infer to the things defined in the
consequence.

But George Keith denies ( Quakerism no Popery, page 67, 68.) that so the
efficacy of grace shall depend upon man's free will, because, when it has not
its efficacy in order to Conversion in men who stop and resist it, yet it has
its efficacy in rendering them unexcusable, and in being a just ground of their
Condemnation, which is all that God Intended by it in such Resisters: for God
intended only that it should convert such as resist it not, and be a ground of
just Condemnation against Resisters. But, First, it cannot be so said to be
effectual to Conversion (concerning which the debate here is) but only that its
either Effectually to it, or the other thing mentioned, which also every good
Advice and Exhortation will be. Here there is no efficacy to Conversion, more
then to Non-conversion, seeing it can consist with either of them, at the
parties option. Secondly, you say, it was not intended for their conversion who
resist it How do they then resist it, who are not thereby converted, when they
do not cross its Errand and Intent? I am sure, if they crossed its Intent and
Errand, they would plainly resist it. And so its still resisted, be it crossed,
or not. What an ill natured grace is this, that nothing can please. Thirdly,
its as much Intended, for the Conversion of them that resist, as of them that
resist not; seeing its Intended, for the Conversion of any of them that resist
not, and of none of them, if they resist (you say.) And so, if it be not
Intended for the Conversion of the one, neither is it of the other, and so it
cannot concur to any man's conversion, Except it do it without God's Intention
and Design; and so if it Convert any man, its false to its Master and Author.
I Will have nothing to do with this Ill-natured, and false grace. God send me
better.

George Keith, (in the 68, page of his foresaid Book) endeavors to retort our
Arguments here, alleging that, as they say, their universal grace is
resistible in order to Conversion, so we say that the grace of God may be
resisted in order to perfection; and so we are in the same difficulty, as he
will.

But, George Keith is hugely mistaken (as when not?) for we are not in his
danger, or difficulty as yet, seeing there is no parity; First, because we
never said that we had sufficient grace here, to perfection (God has not seen
it fit so to measure forth unto us so soon, that he may exercise our Faith,
Patience, Humility, Self-denial, Repentance, etc. And raise our affections to
Heaven where we shall have enough.) But the Adversaries do say that all men
have sufficient grace to Conversion; and therefore we cannot be said to resist
that which we have not, nor plead we have. This quite destroys, the pretended
retorsion. Secondly, we never said that the grace of God, works at our
Inclination, Beck, and Choice toward perfection, or not toward it, and so
that we are the determiners of his grace, in order to growth (as we, see from
your Principles, ye Quakers say of that universal pretended grace, in order to
Conversion) but that God, by his grace always determins us. to the growth he
designs it for, not our free will, his grace. Thirdly, we may indeed, resist
both the means and motions of grace, and not improve grace, as we should and
might too; but God makes it still effectual to the growth by him designed, and
when he pleases, not we; which ye Quakers deny he does, lest he take away the
Freedom of your will, whereunto he must leave his grace to be turned this way,
or that, as ye choice. By all these, no Parity there is to be found here for a
Retorsion.

The Quakers against this Doctrine do object, the many Exhortations that are in
Scripture unto our Conversion and turning to God. Whereunto I answer, That
these Exhortations do not show what we can do, but what we ought to do; and
that so putting us to it, we may know our inability to do, that we may see our
lostness, and flee to Christ. And Secondly, These Exhortations are given in
Scripture, as a means by which God does Effectually, by his Spirits Efficacy
joined, work Conversion in his Elect, who promiscuously live amongst the rest
of the Multitude. And Thirdly, They are given to make the wicked the more
unexcusable, when they will not Obey, nor receive Grace offered, and turn, that
they may be saved.

Upon this universal Grace, and their free will thereby, they also build the
Apostasy of the Saints, alleging, that they may totally and finally fall away,
who have true and real beginnings of Sanctification, as George Keith alleges,
(in his Quakerism no Popery, page 73.) but it is all in vain: for, the
Scriptures tell us, that God causes these, to whom he gives a new heart, to
walk in his Statutes and keep his Judgments, without departing from him, ( Jer.
32.40. Ezekiel. 36.26.) and that these that are once planted in the House of God,
shall still bring forth fruit in old age, and so shall persevere, ( Psalm.
92.13, 14.) and that whomsoever God effectually calls, he also justifies and
glorifies them, ( Romans 8.3.) and that he has made them Heirs, and joint Heirs
of God with Christ, and given them the Spirit, as an earnest thereof, ( Romans
8.15, 17. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Galat. 4.6, 7.) and that
Believers are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation: (1 Pet.
1.5.) and that whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin, (with full
consent, or unto death) for his Seed, which is incorruptible, (1 Pet. 1.23.)
remains in him, so that he cannot sin, viz. with full consent, or unto Death,
(1 John 3.9.) because he is born of God. I do not here stand to Argument from
these Scriptures, because both they are of themselves clear, and likewise they
have been often handled before, by our Writers against Jesuits and Arminians.

But, they use to object most ordinarily, from the many Exhortations that we
have in Scripture to perseverance, which (they allege) imports, that true and
real Saints may fall totally and finally away. But they mistake: for these
Exhortations are given as a means, by which God, by his Spiritual Efficacy
joined, designs, and carries on the Saints perseverance, and to show others
their Duty, wherein if they fail, to be their ditty, as was before said.

George Keith objects, ( Quakerism no Popery, page 74.) These who received the
Seed in stony ground, (as it is explained, Matthew. 13.5. Matthew. 4.5.) who
afterward fell finally away.

Ans. These were temporary Believers, never really or truly Regenerated and
Sanctified, (as is sure from the Scriptures we have cited presently to the
contrary) but they had a profession of Conversion, and a temporary Current
Flood of Affection, arising from some Carnal Motives of Pleasure, Advantage,
etc. and thereupon also they seemed to the Church to be really and truly
Converted; albeit it was not so, and they were never really Regenerated, or
Sanctified; for, if they had been so, they had not fallen finally away, seeing
(beside what is above said) the gifts and calling of God are without
Repentance, Romans 11.29.

Secondly, He objects from Romans 11.19, 20. where it is said, That the Jews were
broken off from the Covenant, that we Gentiles might be graffed in. But this
says nothing either, seeing many professed Members are broken off; but they
were never truly and really Sanctified or Regenerated, which are the only
Persons concerning whom the Question is, nor were these Jews whom the Apostle
there speaks of, so much as professed Members of the Gospel and Christian
Church.

Thirdly, He objects from Heb. 10.29. (see the place, for I will not stand to
repeat the words) where the Apostle speaks only of such as had received (though
in a great degree) some common illuminations of the Spirit, and some common
operations of his Grace; but not of these who were truly Regenerated and truly
Sanctified, though they had once escaped the external Pollutions of the World,
as Peter says, (2 Pet. 2.20.) and for all this, I appeal the Scriptures which I
have produced to the contrary, which are both plain and unanswerable. And when
he again objects from the 2 Pet. 2.18. I answer likewise, that the Apostle
there means of men that Externally, and in the Eyes of the World were clean
escaped from them who live in Error; but were not really so, or really and
truly Sanctified; for, these that go away from us, are not of us, ( Joh. 2.19.)
although they may for a time profess and seem to be of us, and in our Judgment
of Charity (when we know no relevant ground against it) be so construed.

Lastly, He objects to us from Jud. 4.5, 6. where truly I hardly see any
Apostasy, but that of the Angels that fell from their Primaeve Condition, which
will never infer the Apostasy of any mean Saint, seeing none of these is so
absolutely at the Devils Devotion. Or, if he means of these in the fourth
Verse, who were crept in, and turned the Grace of God into wantonness, that is
only meant of the means of Grace, (which are often called Grace, ( Tit. 2.11.)
and the offers of Grace; not of Grace once really and subjectively infused, or
conferred, which would have persevered to Salvation; whereas these men there
spoken of, were before of old Ordained to Condemnation, says the Text.

Fifteenth QUERY.
Whether or not the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and holy Men of God,
did preach down Perfection? and said, that Men should not be perfect while they
were on Earth, but that they should carry about a Body of Death with them,
while they were on this side of the Grave? Let us see where this is written by
any of them all?

SVRVEY.
The Quakers here are fighting with their own Shadow, and however this
mock-Inspirer drops in the Quakers own Principles, sure I am, he is a base
Traducer of other men's Doctrine: for, What Minister of ours did ever preach,
that Men should not be perfect here in this Life? sure enough, they should be
perfect; but the Question is not, what is their Duty, and what they should be;
but what is their Reach and Seize. The Saints are indeed perfectly
justified here-away, ( Romans 8.1.) nor can a Remission, or Pardon of Sins, or an
Imputation of Righteousness be understood, except it be a full Pardon, and a
full Imputation.

The Question therefore, is only concerning the Saints their Sanctification in
this Life, in regard of which, I must distinguish a Perfection of Parts; which
is, when we have a degree of every Grace, and are renewed in some measure in
every power and faculty of the whole Man, though we be not come to the just and
due measure in any of them; And a Perfection of Degrees, which consists in the
complete measure of our Conformity, and our exact Correspondence to the Law of
God, in respect of all whatsoever it requires.

But George Keiths Divine Condescension, or (...), (wherein he abuses some
worthy Men) does not consist in Gods remitting, or nullifying of his Law in
it is Direction, and Obligation, as our Rule, which cannot be, ( Matthew. 5.18,
19.) but in the Divine acceptance of the Righteousness of a Redeemer, and
Surety, instead of our own Personal Righteousness of Works.

The first kind of Perfection I willingly yield to the Saints in this Life,
seeing every true and real Saint has some measure of every Grace, and is in
some degree renewed in every power and faculty of the whole Man, Ephesians. 4.24.
Colos. 3.10.

But that any man is Perfect in this Life, in the second sense of Perfection,
(which yet is the most proper) so as to be altogether sinless, (as George Keith
would have it, in his Quakerism no Popery, page 37. 38.) I utterly deny; and
albeit the Affirmer be still obliged to prove, not I the Denier, yet I prove
it. First, Because David says, ( Psalm. 19.12.) Who can understand his Errors?
and he prays, ( Psalm. 143.2.) That God would not enter into judgment with him:
for in thy sight (says he) no man living shall be justified, viz. by his own
Righteousness and Goodness; and so he entreats not to be Examined, or Judged,
according to what he was in himself, and I still believe, that he was as
perfect as any Quaker, or George Keith, an Antesignanus, or Banner-Bearer
amongst them.

Secondly, Solomon, who was as wise as any Quaker, says, ( Prove. 20.7.) Who can
say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? The Quakers answer him,
(forsooth) that they can say it. Let them be doing then, and contradict him,
and the holy Spirit too, by whose Inspiration he was ordered, in writing of
that: for I cannot hinder them. Their Moon is at the Full.

Thirdly, The Apostle tells us, ( Galat. 5.17.) That the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh in Believers, (for he speaks not
of others, who are all Flesh, or wholly Carnal, and have no Spirit, or Renewed
part) so, that they cannot (behold how peremptory the Expression is) do the
things that they would. Such men are not perfect then, albeit the Quakers may
(possibly) differ from the Apostles Judgment.

Fourthly, The Apostle John says most peremptorily, (1 John 1.8.) That, if we
say, we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. The
Quakers answer, That the same Apostle says, ( Chap. 3.9.) That whosoever is
born of God does not commit Sin; for, his Seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God. But first, This Text cannot be meant of a full
and complete Perfection, seeing every Man has Sin, and he deceives himself
that thinks otherwise, by the former Text; and he that has any Sin, cannot be
completely Perfect. Secondly, If this last Text were meant of Perfection, it
would prove every true Convert, from the very first new breath in him, (seeing,
even then, he is born of God, which is the Apostles ground, why he cannot
commit Sin in the manner that he means) to be completely Perfect, and exempted
from Sin; which, yet, I think, the Quakers themselves will not say. The Apostle
therefore in the first Text, means of Sin dwelling in the best of Saints here
away, and therefore he expresses it by, (...), signifying, to have sin; and in
the second Text, he means of sin, not only dwelling, but reigning in us, and
made (as it were) a trade of, and acted with full consent, (which Renewed Men
cannot do) and therefore he expresses this by, (...), signifying, to make, and
devise, or contrive Sin, (as it were) by Trade. George Keith answers, That
though we have Sin in us, yet, it is not our Sin, but our Temptation, (
Quakerism no Popery, page 38. 39.) and that this does not infer Actual Sin
however. Contrariwise, The Apostle calls it Sin, and that peremptorily,
certifying us, That we deceive our selves, if we say we have it not. How then
does George Keith call it only a Temptation to Sin? and, Whether shall we
believe him, or the Apostle that calls it expressly Sin? Secondly, If it be not
our Sin, whose Sin (I pray) is it? it is not the Devils, seeing not he, but we
have it, (says the Text) and, I am sure, they will not be so impudently
Blasphemous, as to ascribe it to God: Therefore, it is certainly ours, seeing
it must be some bodies, and it will also mud and defile our actions.

Fifthly, The Apostle Paul, (who was, I believe, more perfect than any Quaker)
most heavily complains, ( Romans 7.15. ver. to the end) of his Corruption,
Imperfection, and Sin dwelling in him against his will, his heart, and his
strong Inclinations to the contrary; and therefore, certainly, he was not
perfect, and I know not who dare pretend beyond him. But George Keith replies (
Quakerism no Popery, page 39. 40.) That the Apostle is not there describing his
then-present-Condition, but the Condition of himself and others, as they were
in the struggling and warfare Estate, before the Victory was attained. But
Contrariwise, he is describing his then-present-Condition; for, he was not then
perfect, nor long after it, when he wrote the Epistle from Rome to the
Philippians, (compare Philip. 3.12. with Romans 1.11, 13, 15. and 15.22, 23.)
which was several years after his writing of the Epistle to the Romans; and,
certainly, he had got the Victory over his Corruption then, (I mean in the very
time that he points at, whether it were present, or past) seeing it was thrown
out of his affection, and he hated it, ( ver. 15.) and he was come the length
of delighting in the Law of God, after the Inward Man, ( ver. 22.) and with the
mind he served the Law of God, ( ver. 25.) all which import a great Victory,
although the Enemies were not all utterly destroyed and gone, yet their force
was broken. And albeit the Law in his Members was still drawing him into, or
toward captivity, (which George Keith thinks absurd to say of the Apostle at
that time) yet, this expresses only the endeavors of his Natural Corruption,
not it is success; for his unrenewed part was Carnal, sold under Sin, and no
good thing dwelt in it: and what absurdity is there here? and when the Apostle
sums all into one Conclusion, ( ver. 25.) that with the mind then, he himself
served the Law of God, etc. I see not a possibility for George Keiths
Metaschematismus, except he will say, that the Apostle did not at that time,
when he wrote this Epistle to the Romans, with the mind serve the Law of God,
but that he did it only before, when he was in the struggling and
warfare-Estate, before he had got the Victory, which will both be false enough,
and absurd enough, as I judge.

Sixthly, There is not a just man upon Earth, (says Solomon, Eccles. 7.20.)
that does good and sins not: Ergo, there is no man upon Earth Perfect.
George Keith answers to this, ( Quakerism no Popery, page 40.) That the Verb
being in the second future, may be turned in the Potential Mood, There is not a
just man upon Earth, that does good, and may not Sin.

But first, The Verb is in the Indicative Mood; and therefore our Translation
has the advantage.

Secondly, Solomon is explaining something that people might be ignorant of,
which was not a bare possibility of men's sinning, (for who could be ignorant of
that?) but it must be meant of their actual sinning, and short-coming, and that
even in their best performances, in regard of the manner.

Thirdly, No man can say he is pure from his Sin, (Prove. 20.9.) and the Apostle
Paul was not fully pure from it, when he wrote to the Romans and Philippians, (
Romans 7.23.24. Philip. 3.12.) and as long as a man is not pure from his Sin, he
is not perfect, nor can his actions (morally considered) be perfect either; a
Fountain not fully pure, sends not forth perfect pure water, and still
proportionably, the goodness and perfection of the Fruit, follows upon the
goodness and perfection of the Tree, ( Matthew. 7.17.) and that it can no ways
exceed. Add also these three Scriptures, 1 King. 8.46. Isai. 64.6. Jam. 3.2.

Lastly, I cannot but admire, that any man should so far lose all sense of sin,
and short-coming in his Duty, as to think, that he is come up to the full
measure required in Gods Law, to love the Lord his God with all his Heart,
Soul, and Mind, and his Neighbor as himself. Surely, there is no man that dare
pretend to an exact performance hereof; and therefore, there is no man
completely perfect, and exactly sinless.

But the Adversaries object, That all the works and gifts of God are perfect,
and that therefore our Sanctification, being a work and gift of God, must be
perfect.

Ans. This objection endeavors to prove, that our Sanctification is perfect in
the very first moment of our Conversion and Regeneration, seeing even then, it
is a work and gift of God, as well as afterward, and this undoes the Argument.

Secondly, All Gods works and gifts are perfect, if they be considered
Abstractively, and merely as flowing, and depending from him; (for, Who can
impute evil unto him?) Not so always, if they be considered Concretively, and
as inhering and existing into us, who are impure, and in whom they are mixed
with the remainders of Corruption, as water that is pure, as it comes from the
Fountain, may be mudded by running through a miry place; and so the Argument
proves nothing.

Secondly, They object, That David pleaded often with God upon the account of
his Righteousness, praying, that God would judge him according thereunto:
Therefore his Righteousness behooved to be perfect.

Ans. David meant of the Righteousness of his Cause, compared with his Enemies
Cause, who wrongfully Persecuted him; but not of the inherent Righteousness of
his Person before God, ( Psalm. 19.12. and 143.2.) and when sometimes, in
confidence of his Sincerity, he desires God to judge him, he does not mean of
being judged by him according to the severity and strictness of the Law,
Secundum justitiam districtam, (which sincerity, without perfection cannot
satisfy) as may be understood from the Scriptures last cited; but he means of
being judged according to the lenity and compassion of a merciful Father in
Christ.

Thirdly, They object, That the heart of several of the Kings of Judah is in
Scripture expressly said to have been perfect, 2 King. 20.30. 2 Chronicles. 15.17.

Ans. Perfection is there meant of the Perfection of Parts, or sincerity,
(which are both one) not of the Perfection of Degrees; for, that none of these
were gradually perfect, may be seen from 2 Chronicles. 16.7.10. and 32.25, 26. Isai.
38.17. the same is to be said of that large Commendation given to good Josias;
(2 King. 23.25.) for, that he was not gradually perfect, is also clear from 2 Chronicles. 35.22. In this sense Job is also called perfect, ( Job. 1.8.) and yet,
he peremptorily denies himself to be gradually perfect, Job. 9.20. and
sometimes again, Perfection is taken in the Scriptures comparatively, for a
greater growth in the knowledge of God, and his ways, than others have reached
to, (as 1 Cor. 2.6. Philip. 3.15.) where the Original word, (...), will render
Adult or Grown, and so it is rendered Heb. 5.14. where the whole Context (which
I may not stand upon) shows it to be meant comparatively; and so also it best
agrees with the Scope and Context of the particular places themselves; and
where Paul claims unto himself that comparative Perfection, ( Philip. 3.15.)
he, for all that denies himself to have reached an absolute gradual perfection,
ver. 12. there.

Fourthly, They object from 1 John 17, 9. ( Quakerism no Popery, page 39.)
where it is said, He is faithful upon our Confession, to forgive us our Sins,
and that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin.

Ans. As to justification, I yield this cleansing to be perfect, as to all sins
past, and a sure ground thereby laid for pardon of future Sins, seeing the
gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, and whom he justifies he
glorifies, Romans 8.39. and 11.29. But of sanctification it must be understood
only Inchoatively, not perfectly; and the Verb, Cleanses, in the Present
Tense, imports the work not to be ended in this life, but still adoing, (albeit
George Keith would infer the contrary) for, that which is before clean, needs
no more cleansing.

Fifthly, They object, That the Apostle says, (1 Cor. 7.28.) That though a
Woman Marry, she has not sinned: Therefore, there are some actions (at least)
free of all sin.

Ans. If this objection proved any thing, it would prove, that Reprobates, and
Pagans, also have perfect works. Secondly, I answer, that Paul there means of
the action of Marriage considered in respect of it is nature and kind, and in
order to its proper object, as abstracted from all particular circumstances
which may attend it, which way the action has no evil in it; otherwise it
could not be lawful to Marry; (whereas to forbid Marriage, is a Doctrine of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.) Nevertheless, albeit the action of Marriage so
considered, be not sinful, yet, seeing every particular action is necessarily
exercised in several Circumstances wherewith it ought, or ought not to be
clothed, it may easily be defiled and become sinful by the Vesture of evil
Circumstances, (instead whereof, it should have been clothed with good ones)
especially adding the impurity, and uncleanness of the Agent which exerts it
self in every particular action.

Sixthly, The Quakers object, (and hereby they endeavor to prove the
perfection, both of the Saints, and of their good works in this life) The
Saints (say they) have in this life perfect good works: Therefore, the Saints
in this life must be perfect. They prove the Consequence, because perfect
Effects crave perfect Causes. They prove the Antecedent, because they are
acceptable to God; and because if they be not perfect, then they are sinful:
but sinful they cannot be, seeing God commands them, who commands not things
sinful.

Ans. Our good works are acceptable to God through Christ, into whom all
believers are by Faith Ingrafted, and through whom alone both their persons, and
good works are accepted: but none of aur good works here-away ore in themselves
acceptable to God, seeing they are still Imperfect. Again God accepts them as
they are good, that is, Sincerely done, not as they are Imperfect, and so
evil; and so from their acceptance their perfection follows not. To the
Second I Answer, that God Commands our good works, not as we perform them, but
as we ought to perform; nor yet as they are defective as to the Degree, he does
not Command their gradual defect; but he Commands them as they are good in
respect of their Nature and kind. So the objection perishes.

Seventhly, they endeavor, to prove that Christians have (at least) some
perfect Actions in this Life, and for that purpose they Inquire of us, if the
Apostles sinned in writing the Scripures?

Ans. First, this will not prove, the perfection of any Action of any man now
living, except they can first prove him to have as large a measure of grace,
and of the Spirit's Influence, and Assistance, as the Apostles had when they
wrote the Scriptures, which will be hard enough (I think) for them to get done.
Secondly, the writing of the Scriptures, (wherein the Prophets and Apostles
were but Penmen; for the Holy Ghost dictated all) may consist with some Degree
of imperfection, as the Action is considered Morally, and as liable to the Law
of God: ( David, and Asaph wrote Scriptures when they were not perfect, Psalm.
51, 10. and 73, 22.) or else (beside the Instances given) what will they say of
an Hypocrites writing over in whole, or in part, the whole Scriptures, and of
every Action of Printing, while our Printers print them over? But Thirdly, for
full satisfaction, I Answer that in that Action, the Apostles did not at all
sin upon the matter (which yet is the most Formal sense of the objection, which
thus proposed directly imports the matter) seeing the matter of the Action did
perfectly agree, with the Law of God, as also the Action of an unrenewed man
may do. Secondly, there was much good in it compared with all the rest of the
causes, (and so it was sincere, and of another nature and kind, then any Action
of an unrenewed man is, or can be) seeing the principles thereof (love to God
and men.) The ends thereof (the glory of God, and good of Souls.) the form and
manner wherein, it was done, (in obedience to God) were all, certainly, good.
Yet considering it as a Moral Action, liable to God's Law, it was surely (for
the reasons given) Defective and Imperfect, as to the exact and complete Degree
of love to God and men, and respect to the glory of God and good of Souls, and
Acting in it, in pure obedience to Gods Command, wherewith every perfect Action
is to be qualified.

They will (may be) say, that then, the Scriptures would be in danger to
Contract some Impurity from the Impurity of the Agent and Action of writing.

Ans. That is false, as appears from our Instances of an Hypocrite and Printer
and of David, and Asaph, when they were not pure, or perfect. And if the
Doctrine written did necessarily Contract any impuritie from the impurity of
the writer, by the same Reason (and with more Reason, seeing the Tongue is a
more Immediate Instrument of the Heart then the Hand) the Doctrine Preached
should Contract some Impurity from the Impurity of the Preacher; which is
manifestly false to the Worlds eye. Christ was the external object of the
persecutive Actions of the Jews, yet he Contracted no Impurity from thence.

But the Quakers urge, saying, though we cannot do all we ought to do; yet that
which we do, we may do it perfectly.

Ans. This reply must either be understood, of diverse Actions, so that the
sense shall be; though we cannot do all the good Actions we ought to do, yet
that Action, or these Actions, which we do, we may do it, or them perfectly,
which seeing by (Perfectly) they must mean the perfection of Degrees (and
otherwise it would be nothing to their purpose of a sinless perfection which
they plead) we must deny, because of these, and many other Scriptures ( Prove.
20, 9. Eccles. 7, 20. Galat. 5, 17. Romans 7, 21.) or else that reply must be
understood, of one and the same Action; And so the sense is though we cannot
do, an Action in that perfect degree of goodness, that we ought, yet in that
degree of goodness wherein we do it, we may do it perfectly, where (it being
the perfection of degrees, which is here Controverted, and by the Adversaries
pleaded for, and otherwise, we should have no debate with them here) their
reply involves a strong Contradiction, viz. that any Action performed below
that degree of goodness which it ought to have, should notwithstanding be
performed perfectly in respect of the perfection of Degrees, seeing so it would
both want, and yet not want, some Degree of goodness which it ought to have.
For these reasons, I justly deny the latter part of their proposition.

Sixteenth QUERY.
Can any man be saved by his own works, Self-righteousness, will worship? And
are not all men in Self-righteousness that are not in the righteousness of
Christ Jesus? And are not all of their own works that be out of the light, and
the Faith that is the gift of God? And are not all in their will-worships that
are not in the worship that Jesus Christ the Heavenly man set up above Sixteen
hundred years Since, that is in the Spirit, and the truth? So, must not every
man come to the truth, and to the Spirit, in their own hearts, if they come to
the worship Jesus Christ Set up? And are not your Catechisms, Confession of
Faith, and Directories your own works, and your own worship which ye have set
down for People to fall down and do worship to, and be Saved by? And have ye
not set up this since the Apostles days, and since Christ set up his worship?

SVRVEY.
Because this Survey will divide it self into three Subjects, and it would be
too long together, therefore I shall order it into three Sections. The First
shall, Vindicat us from a Popish Salvation, or justification by works, or
Inherent Righteousness, and shall fix a Popish justification upon the Quakers.
The Second shall very briefly confuted their Popish justification. The Third
shall overturn an exception made by the Quakers against the charge of a Popish
justification which we justly lay to their door.

SECT. 1. Vindicating us from a Popish Salvation and Justification, and fixing
a Popish Justification upon the Quakers.
The great scope of this Querie, is to make us seem guilty of holding a Popish
Salvation by works, albeit the whole Christian World knows what a lewd
Calumny this is, It having been the constant Doctrine of ours and all other
Protestant Churches, against the Papists, that the good works of the Saints are
not the causes, or Meritorious procurers of their Salvation, and it is founded
upon Scripture-Testimony as clear as the Sun. For eternal Life is none of our
merit and due, but is the Free gift of God ( Romans 6, 23.) And by grace, not by
works we are Saved ( Ephe^s. 2, 5, 8, 9.) not by works of Righteousness, which
we have done, but according to his mercy he Saves us ( Tit. 3.5.) And the best
of our works are in this Life imperfect, (as is proven) and so they cannot
merit any good, but Contrarily every defect and short coming of our Duty,
Merits, Damnation, and the Curse ( Deuteronomy. 27, 26. Galat. 3, 10.) And if our good
works could merit, then we might trust to them, which the Apostle dare not do,
( Philip. 39 Nor is there any proportion betwixt our best works, and eternal
Life ( Romans 8, 18.) And therefore they cannot merit it.

The whole Protestant Church has no less always abhorred the Doctrine of
justification by our own Inherent Righteousness and good works, from the same
clear Evidence of the Scripture (for which see Romans 3, Chap. from Verse. 20. to
the end, and the whole Chap. following. As also Galat. 2, 16, 21. and 3, 10 11.
and 5, 4. Philip. 3, 9.) and seeing, that is still imperfect in this life, it
can neither be the cause, nor Condition, of our justification before God, in
whose sight no man living shall be justified ( Psalm. 143, 2.) viz. by any
Righteousness inherent or inward in himself.

Nevertheless albeit our inherent Righteousness and good works be not necessary
to Salvation, as Efficient or Meritorious causes thereof; yet they are
necessary indispensably thereunto by necessity of presence, or as pure
Antecedents, without which no man is Saved (excepting these that Die
Immediately after Conversion, and Infants from the Actual performance of good
works.) For which see Mat. 3.10. and 5.20. and 25. from verse. 34. to the end,
and Romans 2.9, 10. and 8.13. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Galat. 5.21. and 6.8. Heb. 12.14.

And albeit our inherent, or inward Righteousness be neither the Cause, nor
Condition of our justification before God; yet it is still an inseparable
Concomitant of justifying Faith. For which see Romans 8.1, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Jam. 2.17.20. 1 John 3.3.

But what if the Quakers be Guilty of a Popish justification? Do not the
Quakers hold justification by a Righteousness wrought within them, and formally
inward and inherent in themselves? in this they join hands with the Papists in
one of their most Fundamental Errors, which does indeed contradict the very
Design and Current of the Gospel (which is to Teach us to seek Righteousness
for justification in Christ, and not in our selves) yea, and the very plain
Design of Christ's Death. See Romans 3.25. and 10.4. Galat. 2.16, 21. and 5.4.

But the Quakers endeavor to elude this our Charge, pretending that they are
far from holding justification by their own Inherent Righteousness, with the
Papists; but by the alone Imputed Righteousness of Christ. Thus they pretend in
their Confession of Faith, page 4.21, 22. But the Quakers will not so Cheat and
deceive the Christian world; for first (in that 21. page Cited, where they
purposely handle this Question, and pretend as is now said) they deny us to be
justified by a Righteousness received of us by Faith, calling that but an Act
of the Creaturely skill, and an Imputation which is an Act of man's Spirit and
forging, and a Fiction and Imagination in the Creaturely will and power.

Hence then, they deny us to be justified by the Righteousness received of us
by Faith, and so consequently by the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; seeing
the Righteousness of his Obedience and Sufferings, Imputed to us in
Justification, is not a diverse Righteousness from the Righteousness of Faith,
but is one and the same, as is clear from Romans 3.21, 22, 24, 25. and 4.6, 11,
13, 22, 23, 24. and 9.30. and 10.4, 10. Galat. 2.16. and 3.8. and 5.5.
Secondly, this justification held by the Quakers must either be, by the
Righteousness received by Faith, or else by the Righteousness of the Law, and
its works; for there is no other third sort of Righteousness known, to compet
in this point, but these are always stated as the only two Members of the
Distinction (for which see Romans 3.28. and 4.2, 3, 4, 5. and 9.30, 31, 32. and
10.3, 5, 6. Galat. 3.11, 12.) But the Quakers plainly deny the Justification
held by them to be by the former; yea, they Scoff and Mock at that more, than
ever Papist did, as is evident from their preceding Language. Therefore they
do inevitably hold Justification by the latter, wherein they manifestly join
hands with the Papists, for all their pretexts to cover it.

Again (in the Forecited 22. page of their Confession) they have these words;
and because (say they) we are against the latter ( viz. Justification by a
Righteousness received by Faith, whereof they were last speaking) we are
Clamoured upon, as if we denied the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, when
it is only to these that are not made Righteous by it, to walk, as he also
walked. Here they hold Justification by a Righteousness Making their walk
Righteous, which is the plain inherent Righteousness of our Life and
Conversation.

But the Quakers (in that last Cited page of their Confession) go on and add,
that it is not Acts of Righteousness as done by them, nor as inherent in them,
as Acts, by which they are accepted of God, and justified before him; but they
are accepted of God, and justified before him by Christ the Author and worker
of these Acts in them.

Ans. That is well. I see then the Quakers hold not themselves to be justified
by all Acts done by them, or inherent in them (as when they commit Blasphemy,
may be) and truly this is all they have yielded, or said for their Vindication:
for if they were justified by any thing upon the very formal account of its
being done by, or inherent in them, then they should be justified by every
thing done by, or inherent in them: for a Quatenus ad omne sequitur
universaliter. But why would not the Quakers say (if they intended to make any
Faith of a vindication) that they hold not justification by Acts of
Righteousness done by, or inherent in them, as they are Acts of Righteousness,
and gracious Acts, and not merely, as they are Acts done by, or inherent in
them? Which seeing they inclined not to say, especially where they are so
purposely endeavoring to purge themselves from the suspicion of a Popish
justification, we see, they do but prevaricat, and throw dust in the eyes of
the Vulgar.

But George Keith is in this point most plain (in his Quakerism no Popery) and
as positive as any Papist I have seen. For in the 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 52,
53. pages thereof, he expressly and positively Teaches, that our inward graces
and virtues of Repentance, Conversion, Faith as a Work, Love, Hope, etc. are
the Righteousness whereby we are justified before God, and that immediately
(page 53.) which was never true of Faith it self, which does not justify
immediately by it self, but only Correlatively, by its object which it
apprehends and relies upon, viz. the Righteousness of Christ. And in his
Definition of justification there (page 47) he gives us no other material Cause
of justification before God, but our mere graces of Repentance and Conversion.
And he cunningly pleads moderate Merit (page 46, 47.) but most openly and
plainly (page 55, 56.) and he quite confounds justification and sanctification,
leaving no imaginable Distinction betwixt these two, making us to be justified
by inward Righteousness, and sanctified by the very same (pages 46, 47, 50, 53.
compared) which in his Popish Principles, he is (I Confess) forced to do.

And is not George Keith plainly Popish in this point, who holds justification
by inherent Righteousness immediately; gives us no other material Cause of our
Righteousness before God, but that only; pleads moderate Merit in us by it;
allows Faith in the business only as a work with the rest; and confounds
justification and sanctification together? Bellarmine himself was never more
Popish than thus, which all know that are acquaint with him upon the
Controversy.

But George Keith endeavors to shift our Charge of a Popish justification,
because he (seemingly) yields (page 44, 46, 47.) that our inward Grace and
Righteousness are not the procuring cause of our justification, by way of
strict Merit, and in a way of strict Justice, strictly and rigidly considered,
as when the work is of equal worth and dignity to the Reward, as he explains
it, page 55. But I would fain know the other Member of this distinction from
the Author. He tells us their inherent grace and Righteousness are not the
procuring cause of their Justification, by way of strict Merit, and strict
Justice, strictly and rigidly considered. How many, Stricts, Strictlies, and
Rigidlies are there here? he has, certainly, been exceedingly concerned, and
eagerly careful to get his Minute and imperfect inherent Righteousness, at
least, next Neighbor to the strictest Merit and Justice; and it would not
fail, nor he be feared for it in any thing, but that; and yet he has been as
careful, as he could, to cover his meaning in this, which must be the other
Member of his distinction. We see then, that, if Justice will not exact the
very rigid Rigor of the Law from the Quakers, and take the very summum Jus
(which uses to be called the summum Nefas) they think to merit their
justification by their inherent Righteousness at Gods Tribunal. And this, and
what this great Ringleader of the Quakers, we see, has said before, shows that
they hold as Popish a justification, as the Pope himself, I believe, does.

But George Keith is yet resolved to shake off this Popish justification, in
the eyes of the world, and to fix it, forsooth, upon us too (in his Quakerism
no Popery, page 48.) first, because they differ both from the Papists and us,
in holding the Act of God in justification to be really Inward, which the
Papists and we (says he) do not.

Ans. Indeed it is true, that upon our believing, the Gospel-promises
pronounces the Sentence, nor have we, nor need we any immediate Dictates to
warrant that; but we may soon, or late, get a Transcript thereof Inwardly for
our Formal assurance; and so we do not differ wholly from this point that
George Keith would have us differ, as to the Inwardness of the Act, or Copy of
the Act rather out of these Divine Records; but we differ hugely from them as
to the Immediateness of the Act, I grant; but I never heard that that was
called Popish till now; but that a Popish justification was always reckoned
upon inherent Righteousness as the Meritorious, or material Cause thereof;
although George Keith denies that a man can Taste of Spiritual Food, except he
get it, in his Enthusiastic way, immediately ( Quakerism no Popery, page 16.)
as if (forsooth) a man could not Taste Meat conveyed to him in any Vessel, or
Dish, and this fully answers a long Discourse which he there has upon this
matter, seeing the Promises are the Vessels conveighing to us all our Spiritual
Comforts, of Justification, Salvation, etc.

Secondly, to shake it off himself, and fix it upon us, he says (page 48.)
that, in regard of the Object, they Teach that we are the Object thereof, not
only as having our sins Pardoned for Christ's sake, but as being Righteous in
the sight of God ( viz. by inherent Righteousness, whereof he still speaks)
through Christ dwelling in us. But in this he is still Popish, not we, in
holding himself to be the Object of Justification, as being, or because he is
(for all is one) Antecedently Inherently Righteous, and therefore justified;
which we never held, but that we are justified by Faith, as laying hold and
relying on Christ's Righteousness; where Faith is not considered as a work, or
immediately in it self, or as it qualifies its subject; But Correlatively, as
apprehending and getting hold of the Object ( viz. Christ's Righteousness) let
George Keith think this Distinction as nice as he will (as he calls it
scornfully in his Quakerism no Popery, page 45, 46.) which was not so nice to
the Apostle Paul, who still opposes justification by Faith, and by works, and
so does not consider Faith therein as a work but under another Notion and
Formality. See (I pray) how he opposes them, Romans 3.27, 28. and 4.2, 3, 4, 5.
and 9.32. and 10.5, 6. Galat. 3.11, 12. Yea, the very Attributes of the Deity
admit of a Formal Precision upon their diverse Considerations and Connotations;
and (I am sure) the Attributes of God have as strict an Identity, as the
Predicates of any Essence beside can have. And when he Quarrels such
distinctions as not plain for Instruction, I must answer him that, then,
Confusion is certainly plain Doctrine, as he thinks: but qui been distinguit,
been docet. But why is George himself so nice ( Quakerism no Popery, page 52.)
to distinguish Faith, as Receptive, from it self, as Inward Righteousness; Unto
this I will say, with reason, as he has said (page 8. of his book) without
reason, to a man of very great worth, Turpe est Doctori (and immediate
inspirato) cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

The next thing that comes in this Query (all the petty Questions whereof I
will resolve in this Section) is a Consequence which they draw from the Mill to
the Moon. Christ (say they) set up his worship above Sixteen Hundred years
since in Spirit, and in truth; so must not every man come to the Truth, and to
the Spirit in their own hearts, if they come to the Worship he set up.

Ans. I shall not stand long in Taxing the Antecedent whereby they seem to
insinuate that there was no Spiritual Worship and consequently Worshippers
under the Old Testament, which is most evidently false; for then these had no
Faith in God, nor love to, or fear of him; but were all Black Atheists, and
must all be Damned.

Christ's meaning therefore in that place ( viz. Joh. 4.23.) is not that there
was no Spiritual Worship in the Church before that time; but that the vail of
Ceremonies, wherewith the Spiritual Worship was, as it were, covered and hidden
under the Old Testament, should be removed and taken away under the New, and
the Worship rendered more simple and more clear, and the Spirituality thereof
more appear, and be expressed externally, as it is plainly declared in the
event 2 Cor. 3.13. with 18. as also the Context of the place shows, that it is
of the removing of that vail of Ceremonies whereof he speaks, under which the
Worship was tied unto Typical places. But how shall it be inferred from that,
that the Worship under the New Testament shall not be veiled with Ceremonies,
Types, and shadows, as before it was, but shall be more simple, manifest, and
clear; that therefore every man under the New Testament must come to the Truth,
and to the Spirit in his own heart? here is a Consequence led by the Quakers,
in a weighty matter of Faith, so quite blind, and wild, that the Chimeraes of
Utopia may sooner break the Bars of Impossibility, and the Bolts of their
necessary Imprisonment, then it shall ever be established with one grain
weight, or Scruple, of either Scripture, or Reason. But of the Light within
(which here they aim at) we have said enough already.

But, say the Quakers near the close of this Query, are not your Catechisms,
Confessions of Faith, and Directories your own works, and your own Worship that
ye have set down (they should have said, set up) for people to fall down and do
Worship to, and be saved by?

Ans. Whose works soever these are, I have at the Survey of their Ninth, Tenth,
and Eleventh Queries sufficiently in the general vindicated them against all
the Quakers Cavillations.

Secondly, I have also vindicated our Church from the Doctrine of Salvation by
works, and I will not repeat.

Thirdly, does the explaining, and opening up, or clearing of the Principles of
Religion, and our Christian Faith, by Catechism, Confession, Vive-voice, or
otherways, by the very deed done, make men Guilty of holding a Salvation by
works? O brave! the Apostles that were diligent in these things are much
Guiltier then, then we are.

As for the Worshipping of these, and the Will Worship which here they are
pleased to charge us with, we shall meet with these in the next Query.

SECT. II. Confuting the Quakers Popish Justification.
Upon this Debate I will not stand long, it has been so much tossed already
betwixt our Writers and the Papists; only I shall bring two, or three forcible
Arguments against our being justified before God by any Righteousness wrought,
or inherent within us, my Assertion being,

That we are justified before God by the Righteousness of Christ without us,
Imputed by God unto us, upon our apprehending and Embracing of Christ and his
Righteousness offered to us, by Faith; and not by any Righteousness wrought, or
inherent in us. Before we prove that we are not justified by any Righteousness
wrought, or inherent in us, but by Christ's without us Imputed to us, we shall
premise this ground, viz. that in the Scripture our own Law-righteousness, and
the Righteousness of our works are still taken for one and the same thing, and
stated in opposition to Christ's Righteousness received by Faith, in this point
of Justification (as I have often showed before from these following
Scriptures, viz. Romans 3. chap. from ver. 20. to the end. and 4.2, 3, 4, 5.6.
and 9.30, 31, 32. and 10.3, 5, 6. Galat. 2.16, 21. and 3.11, 12. and 5.4.
Philip. 3.9.) nor can the Righteousness of our works, and our Law-righteousness
be diverse upon any account that is possible to be shown by any man, and (I
pray) consider the Scriptures that I have Cited, which I may not stand to form
into Arguments, and which are so clear that they need not; these things
premised I Argue.

First, we are justified before God by the Righteousness of Faith, which is the
righteousness of Christ's obedience and sufferings without us (for he did not
obey and die within us) as we have before proved: Ergo we are not justified
before him by a righteousness wrought, or inherent within us, seeing that which
Christ wrought and suffered in his own Person, before we were born, without us
was not then, nor is it now over again, by way of reproduction (which if they
say, is still Popish enough) wrought within us.

Secondly, We are justified before God freely by his Grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus, Romans 3, 24. Ephesians. 1, 7. Col. 1, 14. Ergo, we are
justified by the satisfaction of Christ without us, not by any righteousness
wrought, or inherent within us. The antecedent is the Apostles. I prove the
consequence, because, first, a man cannot be freely justified or pronounced
righteous by a judge, because he is personally in himself Inherently righteous;
for he is bound in all justice to pronounce a man righteous that is such, and
it is not done freely or gratis, and if he do otherwise he does most unjustly.
Secondly, I prove the consequence, because this redemption whereby we are
justified is in Jesus, in whom the righteousness wrought, or inherent in us is
not; except the Quakers Blasphemously will have every justified man to be
Jesus, and that he and we shall be the subject of one and the same thing, and
so the same subject, seeing one and the same thing cannot be subjected in two
diverse subjects, especially seeing here the redemption of Christ is subjected
in his humane nature, which is in Heaven (and in the divine nature it cannot)
and so it would in a justified man on the earth be separated from it self in
Heaven, which is utterly repugnant.

Thirdly, We are not justified by faith as it is any part of our inward
righteousness, or a work wrought within us, albeit, George Keith thinks this
distinction too nice: Ergo, we are not justified by any righteousness wrought,
or inherent within us, seeing faith is one of the best parts of that
righteousness, and first in the order of nature, which could not have been past
by in the business. The Antecedent I prove, because, in the point of
justification, faith, and works are still Stated in a diametral opposition (as
I showed before, I will not repeat) Which, if faith justified as a work, would
be an opposing of justification by works, to a justification by works, and
would infer that we are justified by works, and not by works, which is both
Contradiction, and Nonsense.

Fourthly, The righteousness wrought and inherent in our selves is a
righteousness of works, or else Adams could not have been such, nor do the
adversaries deny it; but George Keith mocks at our distinction of faith in
justification as it is not considered as a work, but Correlatively, as being
too nice, curious, and altogether Impertinent in handling controversies of
Religion, and a work only delighted in by vain Janglers ( Quakerism no Popery,
page 45, 46) for which I think him both Impertinent and Blasphemous, in
reflecting so upon the Spirit of God, who (as is showed) does thus distinguish
faith in this point: But we are not justified before God by the righteousness
of works, even our works of grace, proceeding from the Spirit of God in us; for
the Apostle never grants any Interest to any of our works in Justification, but
still excludes all of them, and whatever affords any matter of glorying in our
selves ( Romans 3.27.28. and 4.2.) and uncontrollably, any man that is justified
by his judge because of his inherent righteousness in himself, has still some
matter of glorying in himself, because the inherent righteousness of his own
person, in justice brought him off. And the same Apostle also most peremptorily
says ( Romans 4.4. and 11.6.) That if we be justified by works, then it cannot be
by Grace, and that because of a clear contradiction; for (says he) that which
is of works cannot be of Grace; otherwise works are no more works, nor Grace
any more Grace, but their Natures, on both hands, are quite destroyed. We are
not then justified by any Righteousness wrought, or inherent in our selves.

Lastly, we are not justified before God by our own Law-righteousness, as is
evident from Romans 3.20, 21. and 10.3, 5. Galat. 2.21. and 3.11, 12. and 5.4.
Philip. 3.9. But all the righteousness wrought, or inherent in us, is our own
Law-righteousness: therefore we are not justified before God by any
Righteousness wrought, or inherent in us. The Scriptures Cited clearly prove
the Major. I prove the Minor; for first, its as much our Law-righteousness, as
Adams could have been if he had stood to this day, being as Inward and
inherent, and as formally and subjectively ours, as his could have been to him;
nor could he, without the Grace of God have had his, more than we ours.
Secondly, it consists in our doing and working; and I showed before, that the
Righteousness of our doings and works, and our Righteousness of the Law are the
same thing, and so does the Apostle ( Rom: 10.5. Galat. 3.12.) when he, after
Moses, Describes the Righteousness of the Law, and distinguishes it thereby
from the Righteousness of Faith, which consists not therein. Thirdly, the
Righteousness wrought, or inherent within a man conforms him to the Law in
himself (though as long as its imperfect, it cannot justify him before God,
but still leaves him under the Curse, Deuteronomy. 27.26.) and, upon the account of
its formal and subjective union with him, it gives him, and only him, its
Intrinsical Denomination, as an Immanent form; albeit efficiently and
transiently it is wrought by the Spirit of God. Upon all these accounts it is a
man's Law-righteousness most clearly: or else no Righteousness could ever have
been such that can be imagined.

George Keith then must not tell us over again (as once he has in his
Quakerism no Popery, page 53.) that our own Law-righteousness is only that
which a man works in, and by himself, without the Grace and Spirit of God:
for I have briefly demonstrated, that all the Righteousness wrought, or
inherent within us is our own Law-righteousness.

But George objects ( Quakerism no Popery, page 43, 44, 45.) that Repentance,
Love, and Hope are necessary to justification; and these are all Inward, and
are Righteousness: Therefore we are justified by an inward Righteousness
wrought and inherent within us.

Ans. I deny the Consequence; for first, though these be necessary to
justification by way of Presence and Existence, and no man wanting them can be
justified (which is sure) yet they are not necessary thereunto as our immediate
Righteousness whereby we must be justified, or as the Meritorious, or material
Cause thereof before God, let the Merit be never so Moderate. Let George Keith
try his hand, if he can prove that they are thus necessary, which he has not
done as yet, nor shall he ever do. Nor secondly are they necessary even as a
Condition thereunto, nor Faith it self as a work, qualitatively, or as a part
of our inward Righteousness; but only in its Relative consideration, as
receiving, apprehending, and relying upon its object ( viz. Christ's
Righteousness) as is plainly before proved. And many things are necessary in
order to a Bargain-making, which are not the condition closing the Bargain, as
here hearing of the Word, conviction of Guilt. etc. in Adult persons are, in an
ordinary Method, necessary to justification, though both of them may be where
the Bargain shall never be closed. And though where these Graces mentioned in
the Objection truly are, the Bargain is certain, yet none of these Formalizes
it, and receives Christ with his Righteousness, nor have they an aptitude so to
do; but that is proper to Faith in its Relative consideration.

Its necessary unto Marriage to know of a Party, and to hear of some offers and
terms; yet none of these closes the Marriage-covenant, but that is done by the
mutual consent and acceptance of the Parties.

Secondly, the Quakers, may be, will object that much used, and abused Text of
James (Jam. 2.21.) where its said that Abraham was justified by works.

Ans. The Text is not meant of the Pronounciation thereof before God (for, I am
sure) Abraham was a justified man, before his resolution to offer up Isaac
(whereof the Text expressly speaks) yea, before Isaac was born, Comparing Romans
4.10. with Genesis 17. chap. But of the Solemn Declaration thereof before the
world, by the clear Fruits and Evidences of one in that State, and that it
cannot be meant of his justification before God, is sure, seeing the Scriptures
Cited show very peremptorily that he was a justified man before he offered that
work, by which James there says he was justified. And the Apostles clear Scope
in the place is to hold forth, that justifying Faith cannot be alone, but must
and will be accompanied with other graces, and virtues, and good works, which
give Luster and Glory thereunto (which there he calls the perfecting of it) and
without which it will be found but a dead Faith.

And when thirdly it is objected, that men will be judged according to, or by
their words and works (as the Scriptures often say) the same answer is to be
given, viz. they will be judged according to, or by them Declaratively, as
Solemn Witnesses and Testimonies of the State they are in, manifesting before
all the Equity of Gods procedure; not as Causes, or Conditions, except in the
Damned, whose evil works are indeed the Meritorious Cause of their Misery.

An Appendix concerning the Merit of our good Works.
George Keith (in his Quakerism no Popery, page 55, 56, 57.) Teaches also that
the good works of the Saints are Meritorious of the Reward of happiness, though
not in the strictest sort of merit, which he calls Condignity, or deserving a
Reward, so as the Merit is equal in worth and dignity to the Reward; yet so as
to obtain ( viz. Meritoriously, for positively he pleads for their merit here)
from God by promise as he out of his Infinite bounty has seen fit to bestow,
viz. unto such a merit; and though he refuses all Condign merit both here, and
likewise in the 72 page of the book, as that signifies an equality betwixt the
Merit and the Reward, yet he still sticks, though subtly, to a Condignity
below an equality, page 57, and in all his Arguments he still aims to prove a
worth and merit in the very works themselves. But I must Assert, that there is
no merit in any of our good, or best works, in any sense of merit that's proper
whatsoever, to obtain from God any good thing, much less the Reward of Heaven.
I shortly prove it. Therefore first, the best of our works in this life are
imperfect (as we have before now proved) and comes far short of that which we
owe: Ergo they can never merit any good at the hands of God, but, upon the
contrary the Curse and Damnation Eternally, which is due to them who do not
exactly in all things keep the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Galat. 3.10.

Secondly, Eternal Life is the Gift of God, says the Apostle Romans 6.23.
therefore it is no ways merited by any good work of ours; for that which a man
merits is not Gifted to him, but it is his due. George Keith answers to this,
that both the Works and Merits are a free Gift, and the Reward too. But I
rejoyn, how can I merit at a man's hand by his free Gift unto me? Can I merit at
his hand because he has obliged me and made me his Debtor? viz. I merit from
him because I owe him. When I give a Beggar a Farthing then, I become his
Debtor, and must give him another in payment of my Debt to him, and then we are
free; and if I give him a third, because now this is a free Gift again, I over
again become his Debtor. Is not that fine Nonsense, and strong, Contradiction?

Thirdly, the Apostle says ( Ephesians. 2.5.8.) that by Grace we are saved, and not
by works: Therefore our good works do not merit the Reward of Heaven in any
proper signification of merit be it never so moderate, and remote from
strictness; especially seeing the same Apostle tells us ( Romans 11.6.) that that
which is of works cannot be of grace, nor that which is of grace be of works,
because, of a clear contradiction, and the destroying of both their Natures
which he their shows. The Quakers then (with their dear Friends the Papists)
must either confess Salvation not to be by any merit of our Works, or else they
must deny it to be by Grace, flat contrary to the Scriptures. George Keith's
Answer, that, as the Reward is of Grace, so the Merit is of Grace, is already
destroyed; for I cannot merit by a free Gift of Grace, seeing I can never merit
by becoming a Debtor to a man; for then the more I receive from him he should
be the more my Debtor, not I his; whereas, in all sense and reason, I must owe
him the more, instead of meriting.

Now when George Keith yields this merit not to be equal in dignity and worth
unto the Reward, I cannot but commend his Modesty; for its very much that the
Quakers cannot merit above Adams merit, if he had stood in his Obedience; for
nothing that he could have done (all being still due to his great Sovereign)
could have merited properly, nor could it ever have been equal to the Reward of
happiness. And the difference betwixt the two Covenants is not, that, under the
first, good works would have Merit Condignly; not so under the Second (for, as
to the First, that is false.) But, it lies here, that, under the First, good
works behooved to be completely performed, as the Condition, before we got, or
had a right unto the reward; but, in the Second, Covenant, we have right upon
our first Entering into, and closing of the Covenant, by Faith unto the
Inheritance, before the performance of good works.

But, George Keith objects there (page 56,) that the Saints are said to be
worthy of the Kingdom of God, and of walking with Christ in white (2 These. 1.5.
Revel. 3, 4) which Infers, at least, a suitableness.

Ans. First, their worth is not reckoned in themselves, but in Christ.
Secondly, a sutableness does not Infer, a dignity and merit; A poor man in
great need (yea, though no good man) is a suitable object of an Alms, though he
does not merit it from us; he has no Jus personae into it.

Again he objects, that God rewards our good works; and therefore they must
have some worthiness in them.

Ans. God's rewarding so far beyond any worth, that dare be pretended, in our
good works, proves that it is not for their worth, but upon some other account,
that we obtain the reward, viz. upon Christ's account, in whom, by his free
grace, we have obtained Redemption, and Salvation.

Thirdly, he objects that, a meek and quiet Spirit, is in the sight of God, of
great price. 1 Pet. 3, 4.

Ans. First, our Souls also are of great price, in the sight of God; yet we do
not for that merit Heaven. Secondly, doubtless God has a great esteem of
virtues, of one of which the Apostle here speaks in the abstract consideration
from vice; but in us they are mixed with Relics of vice, and imperfect, and so
cannot merit. Thirdly, though they were in us perfect, yet they could not merit
at Gods hands, unto whom all that we can do, still is our bound Duty; this then
will not infer moderate merit, till we be perfect in such Virtues, and even
then our merit will be very moderate, seeing all will still be due, and unequal
to the reward. And whereas he there alleges, that this our Doctrine of the
imperfection, and not meriting of our good works, tends to the lessening of the
esteem of righteousness amongst men; I must tell him, that this happens only
amongst proud men, who will not be Righteous, except they can merit by it, as
the Pharisees who would not submit to the Righteousness of the Redeemer, but
would be Righteous in themselves, without that whereby they lost both. And I
must tell him, it but only keeps us humble, in the esteem of our own
Righteousness, that we overvalue not that. And I must tell him it makes us
Diligent to look after more than our present reach is, and not to rest in our
measures attained. And, I am sure, theirs loses these advantages of humility
and diligence (which are great and profitable duties) and of forcing men out of
themselves to Christ for Refuge and Righteousness, which are the weighty
intents of Law and Gospel. These things may declare, which of our principles
here is best, and according to Truth and Godliness. But I make have, Studying
all the brevity I can, without answering every one of their Calumnies, though
loath to omit any of their objections in a Succinct and brief method, which
still I Study, being loath to burden the Reader with any needless discourse.

SECT. III. An Examination of one Exception more made by the Quakers against
our Charge of a Popish justification.
The Quakers, albeit they expressly and positively teach Justification, by an
inward Righteousness inherent and wrought within them, (as is now abundantly
showed) yet they deny (in their Confession, page 4.21, 22.) that they hold a
Popish justification; but that they hold justification by the alone Imputed
Righteousness of Christ, and complain, that they are Clamoured upon as if they
denied the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; And so (according to this their
Doctrine) the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, is Inherently and Inwardly
wrought in the justified. And so, they hope to be Vindicated from their Popish
justification, by adding thereunto, an uncurable Contradiction in Nature and
Reason. Which, that I may show, I shall premise First.

That, the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, consists in his Death, and
Sufferings for us (I do not exclude his active obedience, though I mention only
these, as above all exception) as is most manifest from these Scriptures, Isai.
53.5, 6, 8, 11, 12. Matthew. 26.28. Romans 3.24, 25, and 5, 9, 10. and 8, 33, 34.
Galat. 3.13. Ephesians. 1.7. 2 Cor. 5.21. Heb. 9.26, 28. and 10, 22. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Isai. 42.21

Secondly, I must premise, that if the imputed Righteousness of the Redeemer
thus manifestly consisting in his Death and, Sufferings for us, by which
Imputed we are Justified, Reconciled, Delivered, from the Curse, be really
inward and formally Inherent in the Justified; then so necessarily must his
Death and Passion have been; or else the same very thing, shall be formally
inward where the very self same thing was never formally inward, viz. Christ's
imputed Righteousness shall be formally inward in the Justified where his Death
and Passion, wherein that Righteousness consists, was never formally inward;
which involves a strong Contradiction.

Thirdly, I premise, that if the Death and Passion of Christ has been formally
inward in all that have hitherto been justified (as is now clearly inferred, by
the force of our proceeding Reasons from this Distracted exception of the
Quakers) then Christ has formally Died and been Crucified in them all, (I
speak not here of Christ mystical, but of Christ in his own Person, as is
plain.) Seeing the Death and Passion of Christ cannot formally fall out, or
happen to be, except where Christ formally Dies and suffers, as is Evident, and
the contrary involves a plain Contradiction.

Hence from this wild exception of the Quakers, this Conclusion most manifestly
follows; viz. that Christ has Died and been Crucified, in all that have
hitherto been Justified; from which Conclusion,

I Argue First, (beside that thus Christ behooved to have Died often since the
World began, contrary to Heb. 9.25, 26, 28. and 10, 12, 14.) That if Christ
has Died and been Crucified in all that have hitherto been Justified, then his
Human Body behooved to have been locally present in each of theirs, and so
Penetrated with each of theirs (for the same Room contains a man when
Justified, as before) seeing no man can formally and truly Die, or have his
Soul separated from his Body, in the place where his Body is not formally
present, but where it is: But the consequent is a strong repugnancy, an utter
Contradiction; for so the penetration of Bodies is asserted, which is utterly
repugnant; and let the Quakers (with Papists) consider, if the whole great
Fabric of the World, may be contained in one small Nut-shel; for the
penetration of all Bodies, and of the all integral parts thereof, is as easy
as the penetration of any two of them, seeing their quantitative matter and
Nature, from which the repugnancy of their penetration arises, is all of the
same kind,

Secondly, I argue, that if Christ has formally Died und been Crucified in all
that have hitherto been Justified, then Christ, in his manhood, behooved to
have been formally inward in them all, seeing men cannot Die except where they
are, or were antecedently immediately present, as can never be contradicted:
But the consequent involves here also a most horrid Contradiction; seeing so
Christ's manhood shall have been often, since his Ascension, multiplied unto the
diverse and distant places of the Earth where the Justified lived, being at the
same time, and to the end of the World Substantially and Formally contained
also in Heaven; ( Act. 3.21. Heb. 8.4. and 10, 12 13. Colos. 3.1.) And if
Christ's Individual manhood can, by any possibility be so multiplied unto
diverse and distant places at once, then so may the Individual manhood of any
man, seeing Christ's manhood is of the same essential Nature and Kind, with the
manhood of every man ( Act 2.30. Romans 1.3. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 2.14, 16, 17.) And
so one and the same man shall be capable to be multiplied, so as to be at
London and Jerusalem both at once, yea in all places and corners of the Earth
at once, seeing his multiplication to all of them is as possible, as to any two
of them.

But, these things are utterly repugnant, and blind Popish fictions; for then
one and the same man, might in the same Instant of time be both exceedingly
warm, and yet extremely cold; both wounded, and not wounded; dead, and yet not
dead; blind, and yet not blind; hanged, and yet not hanged. For it would be a
strange fire that, warming the man at London, would also reach him at
Jerusalem, where he may be on the Street in a cold Frost and Snow. Such a fire
would burn all by the way, I fear. Would it not be a long Dagger that wounding,
or killing him at London, would also reach him at Jerusalem, and wound, or kill
him there too? And yet it would be a strong Contradiction to be otherwise. It
would be strange if he lost his eyes at London, where no body is troubling him,
because some body has plucked them out at Jerusalem; and yet it behooved to be
so, or else he should be blind, and yet not blind both at once, and behooved
also to have before, more eyes then two, seeing he has lost two (as is
supposed) and yet he sees. Would it not be very strange, if the man, being a
hanging at Jerusalem, should by some secret and blind Influence of the Hangman
there, be also forced to the Gibbet at London, where no man is offering him any
Violence, nay albeit, all in the City were by force endeavoring his rescue?
for hang and die, he must in the one place as well as in the other; or else he
shall be hanged, and yet not hanged; dead, and yet not dead both at once.

So also, if the same Individual man could be in many diverse and distant
places at once, let him be in London, York, and New Castle all at once; let him
remain still at York some days; at London, let him take journey, upon some
occasion, to York; from New Castle also let him take journey to Edinburgh. Now
this man is both drawing nearer, and removing further from himself at York, and
that in respect of local nearness; and he is both moving, and not moving in
respect of local motion all at once, and he is also both distant and yet not
distant from York at once, seeing by the way in his journey to York, and
Edinburgh, he behooved to be distant therefrom, and not present therein; and
yet this is in one and the same respect, viz. of local distance. Let not the
Jesuits then tell us of diverse respects here.

Are not these a number of brave Contradictions Nursed in the bosom of the
Quakers, exception Vindicating them (as they hope) from a Popish Justification?
nay by this addition of Contradictions they have made, their Justification much
worse, in place of bettering it, and have laid the way also fairly for the
Popish transubstantiation seeing their exception here includes the very
Grounds, wherewith the Papists endeavor (but without success) to support that.

Seventeenth QUERY.
Whether or not the Scriptures do not say, that he that believes hathceased
from his own works as God did from his, and entered into his rest? and whether
or not your directory, and Church-maid Faith, and Catechisms, and Confessions
be not your own works? and ye follow them, and worship them, and not cease from
them. And whether or not in so doing, ye keep people and your selves in your
own works, and from the rest? or we desire you show us what difference their is
betwixt Spiritual Babylon and Sodom, and Egypts works of their hands, and
Temporal Babylon and Sodom, and Egypts works of their hands, and their worship.
Of each distinguish, I desire you, Distinguish the mystery from a plain outward
Idol.

SVRVEY.
The Quakers are still in the same tune; here the scope of their query is
mostly to throw calumnies upon the Church of God in Britain, and to persuade
the World (if they could) to believe, that she did set up her Directory,
Confession and Catechism, as an outward Idol for people to worship. O impudent
slanderers! men of seared Consciences! whom did ever our Church bid worship
these? or who ever did it in our Church? But this is no new thing with the
Quakers, who (it seems) have Monopolized the whole trade of accusing the
Brethren, and outed the Devil of a great part of his Employment. For they never
almost open their mouth without either Blaspheming God and his truth, or
slandering of men. They are certainly extremely galled at the heart with our
Confession, Catechism, etc. For though these had been the entire Subject of
three of their queries, and a part of a Fourth before, yet here they cannot
forget them; and, if truth will not take their part against them, they will out
brave the Devil in lying.

Flectere si nequeant superos, acheronta movebunt In the next place, the Ground
whereby the Quakers Condemn here our Confession, Catechism, etc. is because
they are our own works. But by our own works the Quakers either mean of evil
works, or of good works: if of evil works, they should have proved them to be
evil, before they had condemned them, which I defy them, and their inspirer
both to do. But why do they enveigh here against our Faith also? they have long
since rejected Faith, as its taken Correlatively, and as related to its object
which it apprehends and relies upon. And do they now Condemn it absolutely, as
it is a quality and a work? nay then (I am sure) they have neither Faith, nor
Truth. Or is it only our Faith in the Concret, and in Hypothesi which they
Condemn here? they should have given some grounds for that then, or else their
Sentence is unjust.

If the Quakers, by our own works, mean of good works, then they Condemn our
good works. What then would they have us to do? viz. evil, or nothing; if evil,
the advice is evil; if nothing, then they would have a Christian to be a mere
dead Corpse, or a Lots wife Metamorphosed into a pillar of Salt, never employed
in doing any thing, but continuing as a sensles Trunk to be a prodigy on
Earth, and a mocking-stock to Heaven. Is this the Quakers vaunted of
perfection, consisting in the omission, of all manner of works and doing
nothing? This would agree better to a dog after he is dead, then to Christians
alive, who if they do not something, and that good, neglect a duty whereunto
they are obliged.

The Scripture which they here hint at, (from Heb. 4, 10.) does not Condemn our
good works, which are every where in Scripture, exhorted to and Commanded. The
Apostle therefore means there, only of our works, proceeding from our Corrupt
Nature, which works are evil, from which he asserts that every believer has
ceased, viz. Inchoatively, as the Apostle in the very place Intimats, while he
calls it an entering into rest; the work of Sanctification and Holiness being
Begun in us, and we Entered into the rest thereof, though it be not Perfected,
till we be going hence.

But, say the Quakers, whether or not, in so doing, do ye not keep people, and
your selves in your own works, and from the rest? But, what kind of rest, do
the Quakers mean of here? if they mean the rest of Sanctification, Holiness, or
Heaven, I have before showed, that our Confessions, Catechisms, etc. Are
inferior helps and means, Conducing to set us forward to that rest, they are so
far from keeping us from it. Or do they mean the rest of Idleness and Sloth?
It may be they do; for they will not so much as pray to God, Except when they
Incline to it by a free motion, and Instigation within.

The Quakers, in the Close of their query, require us to distinguish betwixt
Temporal Babylon and Egypt, and Spiritual Babylon and Egypt.

Ans. I have hitherto abundantly vindicated our Church from the Aspersion of
being a Spiritual Babylon, wherewith the Quakers, do ordinarily and wickedly
traduce her, and it is the scope of this Epilogue of their Queries (they must
end as they began, slandering and accusing the Brethren) and it may be also
seen in their Confession of Faith, page 122, 124. Upon the other hand, I have
charged home, the Quakers with their Errors, Blasphemies, Contradictions (and
shall do in a Postscript, with their Papism and with Irresistible Evidence,
have made good every Article of my charge against them.

Only, in the general, to this part of the Query I Answer, that Temporal
Babylon and Egypt, are understood properly of the places so called by the
Inhabitants, and were a tipe of the Spiritual: but Spiritual Babylon and Egypt,
are mystically and improperly understood, and are the Anti-tipe of the other.
And hitherto the Quakers (possibly) will consent. But we will, surely, discord
in the Application: for the Quakers make that great Babylon Spiritually and
mystically so called, so much spoken of in the Book of Revelation, to be only
inward, in the hearts of people. See their Confession, page 114, 115, 121, 122
138, 140. Where they allege that great Spiritual Babylon, to be within, in
the hearts of people, and affirm the great Whore, and mystery Babylon to be our
wisdom, and the Beast be our will whereupon our wisdom sits

I Confess, the Pope is deeply obliged to the Quakers, and (belike) some of
them, are as much obliged to him; he is not so unreasonable, as to make them
work for nothing. The whole Protestant Church has hitherto, proclaimed the
Pope, to be the great Antichrist and Beast, and the Church of Rome, to be that
mystery Babylon, great Whore, and Mother of Harlots. The Quakers are so tender
of his and her credit, as to Contribute their best endeavors, by a new
Invention, because all other devices have long since failed, for Enervating our
Churches libel, and for wiping the reproach from off them both.

But go to; is mystery-Babylon our wisdom, and the Beast and Antichrist our
will. Let the Quakers then Answer these few following Arguments.

First, albeit all Heretics are Commonly called Antichrists (1 John 2, 18.)
yet the great Antichrist, singularly and Eminently so called, was not revealed
in the time of the Apostles, but to be afterward revealed, 2 These. 2, 3, 5, 6,
7, 8. But it cannot be said that the Corrupt wills of men were not then
revealed.

Secondly, it cannot be understood how the Kings who give their power for a
season to the Beast ( Revel. 17, 12, 13,) and afterward, destroy the Whore (
ver. 16. there) shall destroy the carnal wisdom of all men, so that it shall be
found no more at all, as it is said of that great Whore Babylon, after these
Kings have destroyed her. Revel. 18, 21.

Thirdly, seeing they will have our wisdom to be Babylon the great Whore, what
then are these Seven mountains whereupon that Whore sits? and what are these
Seven Kings, Five whereof were fallen before the Book of Revelation was
written, one then was and another was not then come; which are the Seven heads
of that whores Beast; and what again are these Ten Kings, which are the horns
of that Beast? Revel, 17.3, 5, 9, 10, 12. how shall these things be applied to
the Seat, Heads, and Horns of our wisdom and will? Such an application will be
an excellent Romance, i will warrant.

Fourthly, the great whore Babylon has in her, Harpers, Pipers, Trumpeters,
Craftmen, Milstones, Bridegrooms, Brides, etc. Revel. 18, 22, 23. But, are all
these things, in peoples hearts in their wisdom? The Quakers would make
Heraclitus turn a plain Democritus, nay, almost a dead man to laugh himself
alive, by their jocund and facetious humor.

Lastly, the place where Babylon stood, becomes an Habitation of Devils, the
hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, after
her destruction, by the ten Kings, Revel. 18, 2. But I would think, that after
the destruction of our carnal and corrupt wisdom, that the Devil, and all his
foul Spirits should get the less access unto, and worse lodging into our hearts
where our carnal wisdom before remained.

Hence we see, what a wild Romance, the Quakers gloss upon the Beast, and great
whore, amounts unto, and upon how Ridiculous a fiction their apology for the
Pope, and Church of Rome is founded; and yet, I think, the great Doctors of the
Quakers, deserves rewards at their hands: for they have done what, they could
(and who can do more?) Albeit the success and event, (which who can help?) does
not answer their desires.

And now, I hope, that boisterous wind of Arrogance, and storm of pride,
wherewith that supercilious Inscription of the Quakers, the haughty Harbinger
of these Queries, did Insolently swell, is a little calmed; and, I trust, I
have by the evidence, of Irrestible truth so overturned, their Bulwarks and
dashed the force of their Heretical Armado of falsehoods that they shall not so
confidently hereafter Summon the Armies of Israel with a defiance. But if their
courage be so undaunted, that no routing, of their Forces can abate it, nor
Impose silence upon them, but they will still be smattering, and will yet rally
upon us with the new supply of a Reply; then I must, require them at the
Instance of all rational Creatures to speak Reason and sense; for, (in earnest,
not in jest I say it) they are often so obscure in their Aenigmatical Riddles,
and abstruse Expressions of mysterious and Cloudy nonsense that they transcend
and overreach the most Metaphysical capacity of all mortals. This demand is so
exceedingly reasonable that, I presume, if any Quaker, shall as yet have the
boldness, to Compear in the defense of their heretical Interest, it will,
without further pressing, be accepted and granted. Another thing I must desire
of the Quakers, viz. That, they trouble us not with new controversies (as their
manner is, when, they are overpowered and nonplus'd in any one purpose, to skip
away to another, and from that again to a third, without either yiedling, or
satisfying) until they have First, methodically, in form and order, answered
and satisfied this Survey of their present Queries; and this I expect to see at
the Greek calends. let the Quakers then, who, I have often heard are
Threatening a reply, perform these Conditions therein, which most justly I
demand; or else, I assure them, for ought I yet know, I will trouble my self no
more with their Confuse Rapsodies of nauseous nonsense.

A Postscript, for George Keith, which I divide into two Sections. The first
shall wipe off his calumnies of Popery, cast upon us. The Second, shall fix
Popery upon him, and the rest of his Brethren Quakers.
SECT. I. Answers some Calumnies of Popery cast upon us by George Alias Mr.
George Keith.
Sir, I have read and perused your Book, which ye Entitle, Quakerism no Popery,
(albeit the Book it self belies the Title) and I have redargued all your
Erroneous principles whereupon, you treat therein, together with your
Confession of Faith signed by many of the hands of your Brethren; as also, I
have Surveyed and examined, the preceding Queries, that were sent unto me, by
a Convent of your tribe, though signed, but with one of their hands. I come now
to the calumnies of Popery, which ye endeavor to throw upon us.

And First, I find you intend to fix Popery upon us, because the Authority,
which our Ministers have by Ordination, came through the hands of the Roman
Church. I answer you, that your Consequence is utterly null: for albeit, the
authority of our Ministers, came through their hands, yet the authority was not
theirs, but Christ's; it was not humane, but divine; and therefore, this cannot
infer Popery upon us, seeing that authority, as to its substance, was not a
Popish invention but a Divine Institution; albeit as to the manner, of
conveying there was Popish Superstitions and Obligations joined with it, which
were sinful, and behooved to be Repented of, by such of our reformers as had
their Ordination at their hands; and therefore, that Ordination is still valid,
as to the substance, albeit as to the manner it was wrong. And if their
Ordination had not held valid, substantially considered, neither could any man's
Baptism, Baptized in these times by Popish Ministers; but behooved to have been
done over again, as not done before by such as had Authority; but that was
neither done, nor ever thought needful to be done by any of our reformers, or
any Divine since.

Nor can this infer (as ye would have it, in your Quakerism no Popery, page
89,) that we therefore, own the Popes Authority, seeing to own that were to
acknowledge his Papal Supremacy and Usurpation, to comply therewith, and adhere
thereunto, which we from our hearts abhor: But all that we in this point
assert, is, that the Pope and his Clergy (albeit exceeding corrupt) had the
Authority of Christ's Church in their hands, which, though by them clogged and
corrupted extrinsecally in the conveyance, yet retained its Intrinsecal force,
remaining still valid, as to the substance; as Water running through a mire
mudding it does not lose the Nature of Water substantially, though
extrinsically it is made Impure.

Nor can our Ministers, be therefore justly called Popes Emissaries (as you
basely there reproach them) seeing their Commission was not upon the Popes
Errand, but Christ's; nor was the Authority they had the Popes, but Christ's.
Whereas the Popes, or Antichrists Emissaries were always understood of these
who by his Authority, as Pope, were sent upon his special Errands through the
World, to its woeful experience of much mischief, deceitful Plots, most Cruel
and Inhumane Massacres, and imparallel'd Bloodshed (even amongst Turks,
Heathens and Infidels) contrived and practiced by them, as the only suitable
Instruments of a Scarlet dyed whore Drunk with the Blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus.

But Sir, you ask there how the Pope and his Clergy came to have this Authority
and power of Ordination in their hands; and you allege, he must have it either
as Christian, or as Antichristian, whereupon ye (in vain) build a heap of
needless deductions, to prove our Ministry Antichristian, page 89, 90, 91, 92.
But to cut off your long discourse there, I must tell you, he neither had it as
Christian (if your reduplication be formal, as it ought, and as it surely is in
the Second member of the distinction) or else all Christians would have it. A
quatenus ad omne, etc. niether had he it as Antichristian, or Antichrist; for
so he has none of Gods Authority, but the Devils plain Commission; Nor are
these two terms Contradictory, but contrary, and follows the rules thereof,
seeing many things, and persons too, are neither Christian, nor Antichristian.
But I shall show you a Third, viz. He has it, and his Clergy also, as first
Ordained a Presbyter and Minister of the Church, before he, or they, by their
Acts and Constitutions, can ascend the Papal chair; and so they thus having it,
and not being de facto by any Execution of Law taken from them, they can surely
Communicate the same, so as to be valid. I speak of them here as before the
Reformation, not as they are now to be considered, which is another matter, but
not in the course of my present purpose.

And for that you say, that many of the first Reformers had no outward
Ordination, or call, nor were in Orders, it is most false; for they had the
Peoples Earnest entreaties (though but of few such Ministers I read) and also
the approbation, of other Reformers that were in Orders, which was equivalent
to Ordination, though it wanted some of the Solemn rights thereof; and these
times are to be considered too, when the reformed Church was but a constituting
out of confusion and darkness. So that this will not justify your
Enthusiastic Immediate calls, which I know, ye here aim at by this.

But you say, (page 92, 93.) that the Roman Church did at that time, ( viz.
before the Reformation) Fundamentally err, in worshipping a piece of Bread, and
her other gross Idolatries, so that she could not be a true Church. And so
could not have any Church Authority, for ordaining Gospel Ministers.

Ans. Idolatry is a corruption in worship and practice, not an Error in
Judgment or principles, and it does not always unchurch Physically and
Entitatively (as the several gross Idolatries of the Jewish Church, both in
the wilderness, and in the Land of Judea demonstrat) though it exceedingly
corrupts Morally, and takes away her Moral purity. Secondly, a fundamental
Error may either be Formal and Direct, when it is formally and directly held by
a Church; and then it altogether unchurches them, as being quite off the
foundation. ye Quakers look to this who directly deny all persons in the
Godhead. Or a fundamental Error may be Consequential and Material only when it
is not their direct and formal principle; but only by consequence unseen and
unperceived by them (and which if they saw followed, being sincerely Ingenuous,
they would Renounce that principle) it follows from their formal and direct
principle. And though in this case a Church is not morally pure or true, yet it
does not Physically and Entitatively take away the being of a Church from her:
Transubstantiation does consequentially destroy Christ's humane body, and so his
humane Nature, and denies his coming in the Flesh; yet this fundamental error
being only Material and Consequential, not direct and formal, and so not
formally such, could not unchurch them before the Reformation, when the
consequence, in that darkness, was not perceived, nor Intended to be held; or
else the Jewish Church often, the Churches of Galatia, and many others since,
had been quite unchurched (when yet they were not) for their Consequential
fundamental Errors.

But Sir, the Case is now hugely altered, and the Scene changed, after that our
Reformers have, by vive Demonstration, showed the Papists (their Clergy at
least) the unavoidable Consequence, who yet still pertinaciously hold the
principle, which it cannot be conceived how they can do it, in such
Circumstances of shining Light, without allowing the Consequence also. There is
also a vast difference betwixt the Papist-Church now, and before the Council of
Trent, when many Errors that were before that, but taught, or held by some
particular persons, greater, or smaller, but not turned into a Law, are now by
public Consent, and Constitution of their Canon, or Church-law, become their
universal and Church-profession, as she is such a Church, viz. Popish. And this
makes her Guilty now in her very public and stated Notion of such a Church,
and the Errors, if Fundamental (which now I meddle not with, because I need
not) quite Unchurches; whereas the other of particular persons cannot do it; or
else no Church could be long in safety.

It may be, ye will retort this in what I said concerning
Consequential-Scripture above, viz. that if the Terms Material, and
Consequential, be diminutive, as here is said, then Consequential-Scripture
will not be of equal Authority with that formally and expressly Taught. But
there is no parity of reason for this Consequence, seeing men do not always see
or perceive what follows from the Principles they hold; nor frequently would
they, if they saw it, hold, or own such Principles. But God cannot be Guilty of
Ignorance, but sees most perfectly all that follows from every Principle; and
therefore every Consequence of his Word is as much by him intended, and so is
as much of Divine Authority, as that which is most expressly and formally
therein Enunciated. There is no place here then for a Retorsion.

Having Discussed this head, I come to your following Libel of Popery, against
us, charged in your Twelfth Section of that Book of yours often named; Where
first ye charge us with Popery, in Asserting the three Persons in the Godhead,
and a Trinity. But in this the Scriptures are as Popish, from which I have
proved the three Persons in the Deity. And the Concrete also of the word,
Trinity, is in the Scripture (1 John 5.7.) and it is the only abstract thereof.
But the Quakers are herein Blasphemous, and quite off the Foundation too; for
if the Attributes of God, and persons in the Godhead be not Fundamental,
nothing can be such. Your Ordination would, surely, be a mere Nullity.

Secondly, ye allege we are Popish in affirming of Original Sin in Infants,
who have not sinned Actually; and Thirdly, because we deny your universal Grace.

Ans. Indeed your Principles in both these are Jesuitically Popish (and Jesuits
are the worst of Papists, both in their Erroneous Principles, and Bloody
Practices) for ye and they both join exactly in these against the Scripture, as
I have before fully proved.

Fourthly, ye say we are Popish, in affirming that humane Learning and Natural
Parts are more essential qualifications of a Minister, then the Grace of God.

Ans. Sir I described a Minister for these of your Profession before; and ye
needed not have done it over again: for still, I see, ye would have an
ignorant, nay unnatural Dunce. I have known men but moderately Learned be
Ministers with us, because of their Piety, and fit Faculty for exhorting: But a
man utterly void of Learning, and Natural Parts too (that's an Idiot, I think)
cannot in an ordinary Method (and we cannot now, upon any ground of Scripture,
look for extraordinary Inspiration to supply such wants) be fit to Teach; for
how shall a man Teach others that which he knows not himself? a man of great
Gifts, though really wanting Grace, may be able to Instruct and Teach others,
as Judas, and many others have done, but a man void of Gifts and Knowledge,
though he have Grace, cannot do it. And herein we are not Popish, seeing the
Scriptures show that some without Grace have been Ministers, and called by
Christ himself to that Office; but requires, that none without Gifts be
admitted thereunto. 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.9.

Fifthly, ye say we are Popish, because our Ministerial Authority is
transmitted by external Ordination from Age to Age, and that this makes a
Minister, though he have no Inward call, who is thereby Authorized.

Ans. The first was in the Apostles time practiced, viz. The transmitting of
Ministerial Authority by Ordination ( Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Tit. 1.5.) and
for the second, it gives him Ministerial Authority, and so makes him a Minister
surely; nor is the Church obliged, or capable to know his Inward Call, without
which his Ministerial Acts are still valid. None of these are any ways Popish,
I am sure; not the first, for the Scriptures Cited; nor yet the second, for the
reason given.

Sixthly ye allege, we are Popish, in affirming that Clergymen ought to be
distinguished from others by their Black Coats; so that it is not Lawful for
honest Tradesmen, such as the Apostles were, to Preach, who have not past their
Apprenticeship at the University.

Ans. For the Clergy their wearing of Black Coats, I never learnt that our
Church made it necessary, and another Garb not Gaudy unlawful; but that they
accounted it the Gravest and most suitable, I acknowledge; and I do not think it
Popish to be Grave. As for the Apostles Preaching, who were some of them
before, Tradesmen, they were immediately Called and Inspired, which now adays
cannot be looked for, as is showed in our Survey. Nor is it Popish to refuse
men the Pulpit who can do no good in it; for they must be apt to Teach that get
that, by Scripture Command.

Seventhly, ye allege we are Popish because we study our Sermons before we
come to the Pulpit, and does not wait till the Spirit come.

Ans. do ye think, Sir, that a Minister of the Gospel should not both by
prayer, reading and serious meditation prepare himself before he come to Preach
to the people? And is it Popish if he do? viz. Paul exhorted Timothy to be a
Papist (1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.) When he enjoined him to read much, and meditate
much, for the increase of his gifts, that his profiting might appear to all.
But, Sir, what makes your Spirit Study so much? for they say to me, he will
Study sometimes a whole day almost, for the wrabling out of a quarter of an
hours nonsense. It may be, he is a Papist, and I very much fear, it be too
true.

Eighthly, ye allege, we are Popish, because our Ministers have a modified, or
set stipend for their maintenance.

Ans. But, (pray you Sir) was the Law of God, ordaining, the Tenths for the
Tribe of Levi Popish too? Its true that Law, as peculiar to that Church, is
expired, but the Common equity thereof is still a binding example and pattern,
for the Peoples encouraging of Ministers with a suitable maintenance; and, if ye
please, ye may see (1 Cor. 9, chap.) How the Apostle at large proves that
Ministers have a jus personae, that is a right in Law and Reason, unto a
competency to live by, and that decently; for it reflects upon the Gospel and
their Master to see them beggars, and brings contempt upon their Ministry.
But, Sir, its suspected, ye have more Encouragement under hand, then others
have above board. Your Ninth parallel of our Popish principles alleged by you
wherein ye divide parties of the same Religion, and state them (as it were)
into factions, I do not incline to meddle with; for I would rather be ambitious
to heal, or hide, than to enlarge, or widen these differences, which are to
wide already.

Tenthly, ye allege, we are Popish, because we affirm that men should not
delay their worshipping of God, till they be Actually Influenced thereunto by
the Spirit.

Ans. I have showed your Atheism in this point already at my preface, and how
ye hereby overturn almost the duty of all men both to God and man; and, I am
sure, we shall never be Papists for opposing you in that Doctrine of Hells
broatching.

Eleventhly, twelfthly, and thirteenthly, ye say we are Popish, in affirming,
Baptism, with Water, Infants Baptism and the Lords Supper to be Ordinances of
the Gospel of a standing Nature.

Ans. We affirm they are, and have proved above, that they are from the
Scripture; and therefore no Popery here to be found.

Fourteenthly, ye allege we are Popish, because we hold it lawful for
Christians to Swear.

Ans. But in this we are no more Popish, then the Scriptures are, which show it
to be a duty, being duly Circumstantiated (see Isai. 19, 18, and 65, 16. Jer.
12, 16.) nor do I think that Abraham was Popish when he swore to Abimelech, and
caused his own servant to swear to him ( Genes. 21.24. and 24.3.9.) And I
wonder if Paul was so Popish (2 Cor. 1.18.23.) or was the Angel Popish that
swore by him that lives for ever and ever; ( Revel. 10.6.) Nay what think ye
when God himself swears? ( Isai. 54.9. and 62.8. Heb. 6.17.) Will ye impute
Popery unto God too? But, you will say, we are forbidden to swear at all, Matt.
5.34. Jam. 5.12.

Ans. We are there forbidden to swear by creatures, whereof both places speaks,
and enumerats several of them, and all idle and rash swearing is there also
forbidden (no doubt) but we are not forbidden there to swear Holy oaths, Oaths
in judgment when called thereunto, or Oaths upon necessity for vindicating
truth, as the Apostle Paul's was. And that no more is meant in these two Texts
is both clear in the very places themselves, and likewise from the Scriptures
and examples which I have brought for swearing, as is explained.

Fifteenthly, You allege, we are Popish, because we hold it lawful for
Christians to fight and kill there opposits in the quarrel.

Ans. Truly I do not think any offensive war lawful, where any Prince, or
people Invades another, without just cause. But when a Prince or his People are
unjustly abused by their evil neighbors of whom they can have no legal
redress, because they can get no Court that they will answer to on Earth, then,
I am sure, it is lawful, nay necessary for him, and his subjects to redress
their abuses by Arms. There are so many Instances of this in Scripture, that I
will not cite one of them; only I shall propose a case which may, and does
often fall out betwixt neighboring Princes. What if any neighboring Christian
Prince should invade unjustly the Isle of Britain? should our King and his
subjects sit still, and let him take it, and not resist him? All the World then
might call us both fools and cowards. I assure you George, I would both fight
in the quarrel, and kill all I could, till we were once masters of them (what
ever ye would do) and judge it my duty thus to serve my King, and save my
Country from slavery.

Sixteenthly, ye allege, we are Popish, because we say, the civil Magistrate
may punish men for their errors in doctrine, and worship.

Ans. Do you think that these are not punishable; when a man must be hanged for
stealing a horse, what shall he deserve for murdering of a Soul by Damnable
Heresies? is not a Soul more worth then a horse, think ye? Are not false
Prophets ordained to be even put to death, who lead people away from the
worship of the true God? ( Deuteronomy. 13.5.) And, I am sure, ye do not worship the
true God, seeing ye acknowledge no person in the Deity; and so can not worship
any of them. The Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, but is to be a
revenger of wrath upon them that do evil ( Romans 13.4.) which soul-destroyers
are highly guilty of (contradict, if ye dare) and therefore he is bound to
punish them.

Lastly, Ye allege, we are Popish, in affirming it lawful for men to kneel,
bow, and take off their hats to one another.

Ans. Seeing ye think it unlawful, then we see, ye place worship into it, and
count it a duty to keep on your hats, etc. which I must think the height of
Superstition and Folly, till you produce scripture-precept for it, which I can
never expect to see. When two horses meet, they will neigh to one another.
What! will you not be so civil as a horse, Sir? But I shall say no more to this
here, having in my Preface, in touching the fifth Commandment, proved that
external reverence (in the general, what ever is the custom of the Country in
these things, if they hold of Divine worship) is thereby enjoined.

For that which ye tell us Eighteenthly, concerning peoples ornaments, and
recreations, I thought it not worthy to be numbered. For Albeit, I know these
things are too often abused (and I am sure, we are sorrier for it, than you
are) yet, seeing all the gifts of God have a lawful use, and these ornaments
are such, they may be lawfully used, and were used when Popery was not known.
And as for games, though some may be unlawful, and others unfit, yet others of
them are very lawful, and healthful too. And as for sporting, and Comedies, I
am sure, ye may suffer me to break a jest upon you, without thinking me Popish;
and school-boyes, for putting them to diligence, to act an innocent comedy,
which only we allow.

You say, Sir, you could have instanced several other particulars of our
Popishness. But none of these that ye have instanced holds good. And I doubt
nothing of your willingness, but that, if ye could have found any thing to
charge us with of that nature, it would soon have been laid to our door,
especially seeing ye have libelled so many Popish principles against us, which,
we see clearly, do not hold good, and ye are therein found a traducing
calumniator greatly allied to the Devil, the accuser of the brethren. I say not
this for your hurt, Sir, but that you may, consider what state ye are in and
repent, if that be possible, after ye have so abused the Truths of Jesus, and
his inheritance.

Second Section, fixing Popery upon the Quakers
Having discussed your charge of Popery calumniously (...) against us, I shall
present a true one against you, and that very briefly.

First, Therefore (for I resolve to adhere to the order of the queries above
dispatched) It is a Popish rule, and a great one too, That ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion, and ye (both in those queries, Quakerism no Popery page
98.) are not a jot behind with them in that, where ye condemn all means of
knowledge, both humane and divine; and consequently knowledge it self, seeing
we cannot reach knowledge without the use of the means of knowledge, whereby
through Gods blessing we may attain unto it; for extraordinary Inspiration is
now ceased (as is proved before) nor must we tempt God to work extraordinary
miracles, and neglect and despise the ordinary means which he had allowed.

Secondly, the Papists deny the Scriptures to have any authority over us, or in
order to us, until they get it from the Church, whereby they mean the Pope,
and his Clergy; and do also deprive the whole body of the people, or Laity (as
they call them) of the use of the Scriptures. And do not ye also deny the
Scriptures to be our rule, at least, our principal rule, and endeavor to cause
all men reject them, at least, as the principal rule? Witness the proceeding
Queries, and your Quakerism no Popery. And is not this one dish indifferent
dressings? for both of you aim to bring the Scriptures low, yea to naught,
without your approbation; they without their Pope and Councils approbation; yea
without the approbation of your light and sentiments within; and so both of you
agree exactly in subjecting the Scripture-authority to the authority of another
rule, which, Inevitably, must be as ye apprehend. I am sure, in both these
articles ye are as like the Pope, as any bastard can be like his father.

Thirdly, The Papists and ye agree, in denying Infant Baptism, an external
Christian Sabbath Day, and Psalms-singing to be ordinances of Divine
Institution under the Gospel; they alleadgingthem to be only traditional; ye,
that they are superstitious will(...). All which things we have seen in your
queries, Con(...) faith, and Quakerism no Popery.

Sixthly, ((...) have put three Articles into the last) The Papists deny Bread
and Wine to be in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, affirming that, after the
priests consecration, it is no more Bread and Wi^e, but is substantially
changed into the very body and blood (...) Christ; so your brethren divinely
Inspired, as ye are, in their fixth query here mock and scoff at the eating of
bread, and drinking of wine in that Sacrament, making way (it seems) for that
Popish Transubstantiation; whereof we are the more confirmed, because at the
Sixteenth Query (as I cleared before) they lay down an assertion that cannot
stand without the very grounds of that Transubstantiation.

Seventhly, The Papists assert the Infallibility of their Pope and Councils,
and make that a ground of defense for their Church-constitutions, and whole
religion, rejecting all that want the authority of such Infallible guides; So,
do not you assert the Infallibility of your teachers (Albeit often they are
rather lunatic) and oppose our Confession, directory, etc. upon the very
account of the fallibility of these that formed them, though to no purpose, as
is showed.

Eighthly, The Jesuit Papists (worse then any of the rest) stiffly deny original
sin, and assert universal redemption, universal light, universal grace,
free will in natural unrenewed men unto good, and the Apostasy of the Saints
(all which I have showed to be contrary to the Scriptures.) and in all these
the Quakers are not a jot behind them, but on the contrary, do exceedingly
out-reach them.

Fourteenthly, (For there are six articles in my last charge) the same Jesuit
Papists hold perfection to be attainable in this life; Wherein ye are indeed
more positive then they, albeit still against the Scriptures (as is before
proved) which show us, that according to Gods way of disposition (for the
debate depends not on potentia absoluta) who will have us here to have a
continual war with our corruptions (that the victories of his grace may be the
more glorious, we the more humble, and dependant on him) We shall never here
be fully perfect, or freed from all corruption. And, Sir, methinks ye strongly
savor of supererogation too, while ye say Quakerism no Popery, Page 37.38.)
that ye can attain a sinless perfection in this life, and yet grow in more
degrees of grace for, Sir, when ye are altogether sinless, and so neither God,
nor his law can ask any more of you, as not being defective, or unconform in a
jot (or else ye cannot be sinless) ye may spare that which ye have more than is
required and due, to a needful friend, or throw it into the Roman-Churches
grand treasury of merit, and be Canonized next day for a Saint, for exceeding
your duty, and giving that overplus to the Church.

Fifteenthly, Ye hold justification by your inherent righteousness, and
salvation by the merit of works as much as any Papist, nay as the Pope himself
does, as is showed.

Sevententhly, (for there are two in the last) your brethren have endeavored
what they can in your Confession of Faith (as we saw before) And ye in your
Quakerism no Popery (Page 94) do sweetly also combine, to clear the Pope from
that reproachful name of Antichrist, they alleging that the Antichrist is our
will, and the Whore our wisdom that sits upon the same; ye affirming that
Antichrist, more strictly taken, is a spirit sitting in man's heart Properly,
which the Pope certainly, is not, and so according to you, Sir, we cannot, at
least Properly, call the Pope Antichrist. Ye are understood, Sir.

Eighteenthly, Ye hold the Apocryphal books, at least many of them to be of
divine Inspiration, and consequently of equal authority with the Scriptures;
for every doctrine divinely Inspired is of Infallible divine authority: and
Scripture assurance, or authority can rise no higher. And herein, Sir, ye also
join with the Papists. And when ye ask (which is your only argument) by what
rule of faith we know, that these Apocryphal books are not of divine authority,
or equal to the Scriptures? seeing the Scriptures says not whether they are or
not. I Answer, that though by express Scripture sentence, or plain positive
saying, this cannot be cleared, yet seeing these books do all of them want
Scripture-stile (which by the rest of the undoubted Scriptures compared we
easily see;) and they were not found in the original language of the Old
Testament; and they are never cited in the New Testament; and in many of them
there are things frivolous written, yea quite unsuitable; and in some of them
the writer excuses his failings; and they were never accounted any part of
Canonical Scripture in the Old Testament-times; and this passes without any
reproof from Christ, or his Apostles (though most material) when they are
reproving all the other vices of that Old-Testament-Church. We may clearly see
that these Apocryphal books are no part of Scripture-Canon, or rule, place them
in what degree ye will next; for that I care not, but a part or all of these
things misses none of these books.

As for what ye object, Sir, of many books wanting that might be useful (as ye
say) in the Scripture-Canon, I must tell you (to cut short) that I am not here
concerned what books are wanting, that is none of the present controversy; but
it is concerning some books ( viz. these called Apocryphal) which ye will have
added to the Canon with the rest that are known to be Canonical, and which we
deny to be Canonical, and requires you, the affirmers, to prove that they are
such; and though not obliged, as being the denyers; yet we have proved they are
not such. And hereby I cut off, your tedious rapsody of confused arguments,
whereby ye have wasted more paper in your Quakerism no Popery (page
60.61.62.63.) then all your work was worth.

But the Quakers have one grand principle, of following the Dictate within as
the principal rule, at least, which it would seem, and George Keith also
insinuates ( Quakerism no Popery, page 49.59, 103.) will never reconcile with
that other grand principle of Popery, to believe as the Church of Rome
believes. But unto this I Answer, that a great number (we see) of the direct
principles of the Quakers are but mere Popish doctrines disguised (nay all of
their principles almost, except some that are much worse, being more
Blasphemous, then ever a Papist held) and that, of following the dictate
within, is but a reflex principle obliging them the more to follow their direct
principles, which (we see) are generally Popish. And so when their great
doctors teach their disciples to follow their Dictate within, they do in
effect, teach them to believe as the Church of Rome does; yet not so, as to
discover their design and make every man wise of their secret; but subtly
under a disguise, They are no fools, Albeit, they can desipere in loco.

Sir, I have vindicated our Church from the Entire frivolous charge of Popery,
Calumniously cast upon her by you in your Quakerism no Popery; and upon the
other hand, I have libelled against your eighteen real Popish principles, from
which ye can make no evasion, or tergiversation, they are all so clear in the
preceding survey. And therefore I must here tell you, that your Quakerism no
Popery should have been called, Quakerism no Verity: for there is hardly one
true word in it all which I do'nt say to irritate or exasperate you, but rather
with a desire from my heart (if it be possible) to convince you: for I know you
are a Scholar; but (alace! your gifts and parts are ill Employed against the
truths, laws, and ordinances of Jesus, which his dear purchase of them, teaches
their great value. Be no more a stated Enemy to these; or else dreadful and
terrible shall the event be unto you, and all who thus tread upon his truths,
and Blaspheme his Person as you do, and trample under foot also his whole
Institutions and ordinances.

A Second Postscript for Doctor Everards Ghost.
There is one Doctor Everard (I wish he had been never heard) who has
published a book which he calls, Gospel Treasury opened up, or the Holiest of
all Un-vailing; and this Book he has divided into two parts, In the first part
whereof (Page 150.206.347.) he asserts that, after we are regenerated, it is no
more we that think, see, speak, go, wish, will, rejoice; but that it is God
that does them, and that it must be Christ the Son of God in us that loves God,
fears God, obeys God, and believes in God; and (says he) though that may seem a
Paradox, yet it is a truth; for Indeed and in truth (says he) there is nothing
fears God, but God; nothing obeys God, but God; nothing loves God, but God. And
again he affirms (Page 442.443.444. part second) that the good man is so
swallowed up in God, that wanting sense, will, desire, he now (as the word
requires) covets nothing; but now God in him wills, knows, desires, reads,
writes, preaches, gives, prays, hears, and is all things: for God (says he)
desires not our works, but our Sabbath, and that himself in us, without
hindrance may work, know, praise, pray, hear, crown, and reward himself in us.
Thus the Doctor teaches, the great sum of all which is, That nothing obeys God,
but God only. The Quakers seem to join with the Doctor in this his wild
principle, while at the last of their Queries here, they seem to require our
resting, or not working, and condemn our Confessions, Catechisms, etc. upon
that very ground because they are our works; and to my sure experience I do
know that this book of Doctor Everard has predisposed several persons, and
been their preamble unto Quaking, and therefore that this treatise may be
somewhat complete, I resolve here to answer this principle of the Doctor, and
to confute it, and two, or three more of his positions that have some alliance
with the principles of the Quakers.

Therefore first, (against the Doctors foresaid principle) it is not God that
believes in Christ crucified, accepts and receives his righteousness for
justification, that looks for salvation through his merits; It is not God that
loathes himself for sin, sorrows for his sin, confesses his sin, and denies
himself, etc. And these are all works of obedience commanded of God, and
exercised in the godly; and therefore the Doctors principle here is most false.
2ly. Angels and men are either obliged to obey God, or not; if not, then they
may do what they please, they cannot sin; and so also fallen Angels, and
reprobate men are all most unjustly damned for their disobedience, wherewith
they cannot be justly charged seeing (as is supposed) they are not obliged to
obey. If then they be obliged to obey God, then the holy Angels that stood,
obeys God, or not; if they do, then something obeys God, that is not God
(against the Doctors principle) seeing Angels are not God, I am sure; if not,
then the holy Angels that stood are disobedient to God, seeing they are obliged
to obey God, and yet does it not; and that is to say, the Angels that stood are
fallen Angels. 3ly. If nothing obeys God, but God, then never any of all the
creatures obeyed God to this day, seeing none of them is God; and all the
creatures are equally guilty, or not guilty of disobedience to God, seeing not
one of them ever obeyed him. But these things are absurd Romances. Fourthly,
whatever obeys God must be commanded to obey him, seeing all obedience is to
some command and Law: But God is not commanded to obey, seeing all the
commandments are directed to creatures, and God is not under the Law he has
given to them, nor has he any superior sovereign; and though Christ was under
the Law as man, yet he was never under it as God, or else so should the Father
and Spirit also, seeing they are all one and the same God, though they be
distinct persons. Therefore God cannot be said to obey God in any proper
speech, and the Doctor (we see by his expressions above rehearsed) means
properly. Lastly, the Doctor here contradicts himself; for if God requires our
Sabbath, and not working (as he affirms) and the regenerate and good man does
so lay aside all works, as he no more thinks, sees, speaks, goes, wishes,
wills, etc. (as he affirms too) then the good man obeys God, In doing that
which God requires of him; and yet the Doctor denies that any thing obeys God,
but God himself.

But the Doctor (may be) would object, that the good works of the Saints are in
the Scripture ascribed to God, and said to be done by his power, Ephesians. 1.19.
Philip. 1.6. and 2.13. 2 These. 1.11.

Ans. God is indeed a very special Title the principal efficient cause of all
our good works, and the Scriptures ascribe that unto him; But no Scripture
says that in our works of obedience only God obeys himself in us; for the
reasons given that could not be. Nor can it be said that it is God that in us
wishes, wills, prays, believes, desires, etc. Seeing these actions are not
Immanent in God, but are merely transient as to him; and its Impossible for any
person to will, wish, desire, etc. by any act not Immanent in it self, ^s any
man knows. But these good works and actions, whereunto we are quickened and
determined by God and his grace and Spirit, are Formally subjected in us, and
Immanent; and so being Intrinsecally united and Informing us, cannot but give
us their Intrinsecal and formal denomination for an act of love being Immanent,
or united to my will, or affections, cannot but denominate me as loving some
object, and it cannot so denominate any other person, as is manifest: Though
God therefore works in us the acts of obedience, faith, repentance; yet it is
not God that obeys, believes, repents, etc.

The Quakers afford us another objection from Gal. 2.20, where Paul denies
himself to live ( viz. Spiritually) but that Christ lived in him.

Ans. Paul does not there deny himself to live Spiritually, or vitally to
exerce the operations of a Spiritual life; or else, if that were, Then Paul was
then Spiritually as dead a man, as before he was converted, which is most
false, and in the very next words he declares himself to live, viz.
Spiritually. When therefore he denies himself to live Spiritually, but Christ
in him, he plainly means of the fountain and source, or stock and supply of his
Spiritual life, viz. That that was not in himself, or in nature, but in Christ
the redeemer, and so the objection proves not their point.

The Doctor teaches also in that same book (Page 16.17.299.361. part first, And
Page 27.29.259.264.265. part second) That take but off all accidents from every
creature, and that which remains is Christ and God; as if we take away all
height and depth, greatness and littleness, weight and measure, heat and cold,
matter and form: for (says he) these are all accidents; and then that which is
left is Christ, is God: God is the substance of all things, and all the
creatures are but mere accidents, and they are not only Gods workmanship, as
most men teach and believe, but also God is their very substance and Being, he
is their very Essence and Being. Thus he.

But if these things were so, God would be the most passive Being in all the
world, for so he should be the passive subject whereinto all creatures should
inhere as mere accidents, and he should be the passive and changed subject in
all their mutations, and alterations; This would make a very changeable God,
more changeable then the Moon, or Wind. 2ly. If God be the very, Being and
Essence of every creature, then every creature is Essentially God Almighty,
Infinite, Eternal, etc. for that whose Being and Essence is God, must, in
respect of its Essence, or Essentially, be God; or else, in respect of its
Essence, it will be both God, and not God, which is a Contradiction. 3ly. If
God be the Being and Essence of every creature, then the Being and Essence of
every creature is an uncreated Being, seeing God is such; and so every creature
as to its Essence, or Essentially is not a creature, that is to say, it is
Essentially not it self. 4ly. Every evil action is a creature, if then God be
the being of every creature, then he is the being of every evil action too; and
so the sin inhering into every evil action shall inhere into God (absit
Blasphemia) who is the being of the action. Lastly, If all creatures be but
mere accidents, and if God be the very Essence and Being of every creature,
then God shall also be an accident merely, he being the very essence and Being
of these created accidents as the Doctor will. Blasphemous, Absurd, and
Repugnant.

The Doctor also teaches (page 83.84.343. part first) that if we speak of God
Abstractedly from all creatures; so the Father, Son, and Spirit are all one.
But if we come to speak of any thing created, then we divide the Godhead into
Persons, and there is Immediately Father, Son, and Spirit. When God puts forth
himself in the creating of any creature, here now the Word is spoken and came
forth from the bosom of his Father; before there was any creature made, there
was neither Father, Son, nor Spirit in the Godhead as divided: for the Trinity
is expressed only in relation to creatures. Thus he.

But by the Oneness, or Unity of the Father, Son, and Spirit, as God is spoken
of Abstractedly from Creatures, the Doctor either means of the Oneness of their
Essence and Godhead; and thus they are still one, what ever way we speak of
them, seeing they are still but one God; or else he thereby means of the Unity
and Oneness of their persons, and this way (which is the way he does mean,
which appears by his opposing the distinction of their persons in the second
member of his Antithesis to the unity mentioned in the first) the Doctor
teaches mere blasphemy, in denying that there was any distinction of persons in
the Godhead, before God made any creature, and except in relation to creatures:
for so, if God had never made any creature (which might easily have been,
seeing he did not create by necessity, or impulsion) there should never-have
been three persons in the Godhead, nay nor any person; for before God made any
creature there was neither Father, Son, nor Spirit in the Godhead, and the
Trinity is expressed only in relation to creatures, says the Doctor. So also
the three distinct persons in the Godhead must be merely temporary created
within time, if there was no distinct person in the same before the creatures
were made. Yea so the persons in the Godhead shall be debitors to the creatures
for their Subsistences and Persons, without whom (if we will believe the
Doctor) they would never have been. Its all Blasphemous.

Again the Doctor teaches (page 284.285. part first) that throughout the Old
Testament from the beginning of Genesis to the last of the Prophets there runs
an Allegory; and (page 86. part second) all the Scriptures (says he) are
Figurative.

But in the Old Testament it is said, That there is a God, that we ought to
worship him, that God created man, That man fell and sinned, That we ought to
repent and believe, that God will be merciful to returning penitent sinners,
that he is a blessed man whose sins are forgiven. Are these, and many the like
expressions to be Allegorically understood? If the Doctor denied the things
asserted by these expressions, and we, to prove the affirmatives thereof
against him, urged these Scripture-sayings, would he distinguish with an
Allegorically true, Properly false? If that distinction were (valid or
relevant, then all were gone. And are the whole Scriptures Figurative? Then
(beside what is just now said) That Christ was born, suffered, satisfied
Justice, is risen again, Ascended; That there is a life to come, a Heaven, a
Hell, a day of General judgment, that believers shall be saved, and the rest
damned; these I say, shall be all Figurative sayings, and to be understood
Figuratively. And what can be said worse? for so the whole foundations are
destroyed, if these sayings be Improperly meant.

Lastly, (for I will stand no longer) that Allegorical Doctor teaches also
(page 289.294.318.320. 322.323.334.342.347.348. part first) That the whole
Scriptures have two meanings, one whereof he calls Outward, Grammatical, and
Literal; The other Inward, Hidden, and Spiritual. Where, if he had said, that
one and the same meaning of the Scripture may be understood with two sorts of
Evidences; one of them External, Historical, and Grammatical, only; The other
Internal, Supernatural, and Spiritual, he had not aberred from the truth. Or if
he had said, that there may be sometimes in one text two meanings, the one
subordinate to, and typified by the other (which yet is not Properly two
meanings but one and the same compounded meaning, or meaning compounded) he had
likewise said truth. But so he neither says, nor can be meaned: for in the
places cited he often affirms, that the Outward and Literal meaning of the
Scripture is but Excrements good for nothing, can give no nourishment, is not
only dead, but killing and destructive; yea in some of these places he denies
the literal sense to be Gods mind, and affirms it to be but humane; Nay, he
flatly also denies the Scriptures to be the Word of God; or that ever any man
did as yet see, hear, or read the truth. The other sense of the Scriptures he
calls saving, and an excellent mean of life to us.

These things declare that the Doctor means of two Coordinate and Inconnexed
meanings, and not of Subordinate meanings, seeing these meanings devised by him
have no Respect, Connection, or Relation with one another, seeing the one is but
dead Destructive Excrements, and the other is Saving and nourishing. But it is
not so with causes Subordinate, which jointly concur to produce the effect,
each in their own sphere and order, as is known.

Now to affix two Co-ordinat Inconnexed meanings upon the Scriptures is to make
the true meaning thereof utterly uncertain; and to make them a clear Fraud and
a Cheat put upon the World to deceive with their uncertain and Ambiguous
senses, and consequently their Author to be an Impostor and deceiver (Absit
Blasphemia) with his Doubtful and two-fac'd meanings, and his variable, and
Proteus-like Intended senses, for they can have no more meanings, then their
Author intended therein, seeing a meaning affixed on the Scriptures which there
Author never intended therein, is not the meaning of the Scriptures, or else
every wrested meaning would be their meaning.

But Secondly, more particularly against the Doctor. Is the literal sense of
the Scriptures, that teach us very plainly Christ's Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and the use and ends thereof, good for nothing, but a
non-nourishing and destroying Excrement? He seems indeed to say so (page 52.
part first) where he affirms that we must first wave the knowledge of the
History of Christ Externally, before we come to the knowledge of the true
Christ (hereby he Insinuats that the External Christ is no true Christ) that is
able to save our Souls, But if these things asserted by the Doctor be true,
Then its no matter, or harm to us, Albeit the letter and History of the
knowledge of Christ were all false, seeing that is good for nothing, can give
no nourishment (as he will) and must be waved before we come to know the true
and saving Christ. What can it matter to us then though it were all false?
seeing it can do us no good, is but non-nourishing and destructive Excrements;
nay, it hinders us to know the true and saving Christ; for we cannot know him
(as the Doctor alleadges) until it be first waved; and so its an opposite enemy
to the knowledge of him.

Secondly, If it be true that the literal sense of the Scriptures is not Gods
mind (as the Doctor affirms) then we may Counter-act the whole Scriptures in
their literal sense, and yet be guiltles, seeing, though we do so, yet we do
nothing against the mind and meaning of God in his Word, according to the
Doctors doctrine, and then we may commit Idolatry, Adultery, and what not?

Thirdly. If the Literal sense of the Scriptures be not Gods meaning, how comes
the Doctor to call it Scripture-sense at all, or Scripture-meaning? The Doctor
herein manifestly contradicts himself, seeing the Scripture can never have any
sense, or meaning, beside the mind and meaning of its Author therein by him
intended, as is both clear in it self, and just now I proved.

Fourthly, For his denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God I shall oppose
unto this the Survey of the Quakers Third Query, above where I have discussed
that question. But when he denies that ever any man as yet heard, or read the
truth, he speaks a little too Transcendentally: for if he means of the truth of
Proposition, or Enunciation (which is only to the purpose; for we are not
concerned with the Metaphysical Incomplex truth of Being, but with the Complex
truth of Oration here) then he either takes truth in the Abstract form; and so
never man henceforth shall hear, or read it, more then heretofore, seeing in
the Abstract form it is not a thing Legible, or Audible; or else he takes truth
Concretively* and as it denominats some particular Enunciation, or Enunciations
true, so that the means that never man as yet heard, or read a true saying, or
Enunciation to this day; and then he denies that himself ever spoke, or wrote a
true word to any man's hearing, or reading, and cuts his own Throat, and I
cannot help it; But (which is much worse) so he denies the Scriptures (which
many man has read and heard) to be true. Its a very strange and a sad business
too, if we never heard a word of truth.

But the Doctor (I know) will say, that only Christ is the truth.

Ans. Christ cannot be the Formal truth of any Enunciation, or Oration, which
is nothing but a mere relation of Conformity betwixt it and its Object; but
Christ is called the truth, because he is the Author and Revealer, the Object
and End of the Divine truth; for he makes it known, it treats of him as the
main Subject, and it leads unto him.

Albeit, the Doctor makes many wranglings to clear himself of being thought a
contemner and vilifier of the Literal sense of Scripture; yet all comes to this
at the last and most (which he never parts with) that the literal sense of the
Scripture can do no good; but will kill and destroy us, except we reach another
sense beyond that, and hidden under it, having no connection therewith, or
relation thereunto, The absurdity whereof I have very briefly showed. And
beside, we see, he refuses to own the literal sense as Divine but as a thing
merely Humane, denying it to be the mind of God. And so no Apology can bring
him fairly, off.

But the Doctor objects (page 52.318. part first) that the Literal sense of the
Scripture is not saving, nor the mind of God, seeing the Devil, and natural men
can reach that.

Ans. But the Doctor supposes here a manifest falsehood, viz. that the
Scriptures have one sense reached by the Devil, and natural men; and another
which they know nothing of, and cannot reach, which, I have showed to be most
absurd, the Devil, and some men unrenewed know as many senses of Scripture, as
the Doctor does. But the difference betwixt a Natural and Spiritual man's
knowledge of the Scripture is not, that the one of them knows a sense of the
Scripture more than the other, and which the other cannot reach; but that the
one knows the same sense of Scripture with an Internal, Spiritual,
Supernatural, and saving evidence; which the other knows only with an
Historical, Grammatical, External, and Common evidence; and so there are very
diverse kinds of evidences in their acts of knowledge, proceeding from
Essentially diverse principles of light and Eyes to see with; But the Object
known is the same.

I have therefore here Inserted, and briefly confuted these principles of the
Doctor, which indeed are a considerable part (though not all) of the substance
of that his foresaid book, because the Quakers know (and I in sure experience
too, by the necessary and Inevitable, though Involuntary converse I have had
with them) who are deeply concerned with the same principles; and (as I hinted
before) I never almost knew any (and I have known too many) that once became
the Disciples and Proselyts of that book, but in end they became professed
Quakers; and therefore I judged it very convenient here (though shortly) to
give an Antidote against it.

FINIS.

