A LETTER FROM THE Lord General Monck And the OFFICERS here, to the several and
respective Regiments and other Forces In England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers,
YOu cannot be ignorant of the many endeavors and earnest desires of many good
men in these Nations, to bring us to a Settlement, which it has pleased God to
disappoint unto this day, and leave us as a broken and divided People, ready to
run into blood and confusion; which that we might prevent so great calamities
impending, after our earnest seeking God for his Direction and Assistance, we
find no expedient so likely for the satisfaction of the good people, and the
quiet and welfare of this Commonwealth, as the readmission of the Secluded
Members, in order to a Legal Dissolution of this Parliament by their own free
consents, and to issue Writs for a future Full Representative of the whole
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, under such Qualifications as
may secure our Cause, to convene on the twentieth day of April next at
Westminster, for the establishing of this Commonwealth upon the Foundations of
Justice and true Freedom, and to take away all just jealousies from you, we do
assure you, that we shall join with you in the maintenance of those ends
expressed in the enclosed, and do expect your cheerful concurrence with us; and
we desire to take God to Witness, that we have no Intentions or Purposes, to
return to our old Bondage; but since the Providence of God has made us free at
the Cost of so much blood, we hope we shall never be found so unfaithful to God
and his People, as to lose so glorious a Cause; But we do resolve with the
Assistance of God, to adhere to you in the continuing of our Dear Purchased
Liberties, both Spiritual and Civil. The reason of our Proceedings in this
manner may seem strange, but if (...) duly consider the necessities of our
Affairs, and the present state of things, you will certainly conclude nothing
so safe to secure Public Interest, and to engage the Nations peaceably to
submit to a Free State; most of these Members having given us full assurance,
that their Session in Parliament shall not be longer than absolute necessity
will require, to the putting the Government into Successive Parliaments, they
not being free so to act by the old Writts, as when they shall be called upon a
Commonwealth Account, and it is the Opinion of the truest Friends to a Free
State, That it cannot be consistent with the perpetual Sitting of these
Members, being contrary to the nature of such a Government.

And as we are Confident the Present Parliament now Sitting, will not Repeal
any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this Parliament, for Sales, or
Public Disposition of Lands; so We shall in our Station observe, and cause to
be observed, all other Acts and Ordinances of this Parliament, whatsoever, and
humbly interpose with the next Succeding Parliament, not only to pass a farther
Act of Confirmation, of all such Sales and Dispositions of Lands, here and in
Scotland, but also of all the Distributions, and Dispositions of Lands and
Houses in Ireland, to the Soldiery, Adventurers, or any other Persons, made by
or in pursuance of any of the Acts, Ordinances, or Orders of this present
Parliament, or any pretended Parliamentary Authority. And We entreat You to
send up an Officer, to give to the L. Genesis Monck an Account of Your
Acquiescence with us herein: And if any disaffected persons shall hereby take
occasion to make disturbance of the Peace of the Commonwealth, either in
favor of Charles Stuart, or any other pretended Authority, we desire you to
secure them, till the pleasure of the Parliament or Council of State be known
in that behalf. You shall speedily receive Encouragement and Supplies of
Moneys, and indeed it was not the least Motive to induce us to this way of
Composure of Affairs, That we might facilitate the raising of Moneys for the
subsistence of the Army and Navy, which would not otherwise have been done (if
at all) bu^ with effusion of blood. We have nothing more at this time, but to
assure you that we shall ever remain,

Whitehall, Feb, 21. 1659. Dear Brethren and Fellow Soldiers, Your very
Affectionate Friends.

LONDON, Printed by, John Macock. 1659.


