LICENSED.

Dec. 28. 1677. To. L'Estrange

FIVE LOVE LETTERS FROM A NUN TO A CAVALIER. Done out of French into English.

LONDON Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1678.

TO THE Reader
YOu are to take this Translation very Kindly, for the Author of it has
ventured his Reputation to Oblige you: Ventured it (I say) even in the very
Attempt of Copying so Nice an Original. It is, in French, one of the most
Artificial Pieces perhaps of the Kind, that is any where Extant: Beside the
Peculiar Graces, and Felicities of that Language, in the Matter of an Amor,
which cannot be adopted into any other Tongue without Extreme Force, and
Affectation. There was (it seems) an Intrigue of Love carried on betwixt a
French Officer, and a Nun in Portugal. The Cavalier forsakes his Mistress, and
Returns for France. The Lady expostulates the Business in five Letters of
Complaint, which She sends after him; and those five Letters are here at your
Service. You will find in them the Lively Image of an Extravagant, and an
Unfortunate Passion; and that a Woman may be Flesh and Blood, in a Cloister, as
well as in a Palace.

FIVE Portugaise LETTERS Turned into ENGLISH.
The first Letter.
OH my Inconsiderate, Improvident, and most unfortunate Love; and those
Treacherous Hopes that have betrayed both Thee, and Me! The Passion that I
designed for the Blessing of my Life, is become the Torment of it: A Torment,
as prodigious as the Cruelty of his Absence that causes it. Bless me! But must
this Absence last for ever? This Hellish Absence, that Sorrow it self wants
words to express? Am I then never to see those Eyes again, that have so often
exchanged Love with Mine, and Charmed my very soul with Extacy, and Delight?
Those Eyes that were ten thousand worlds to me, and all that I desired; the
only comfortable Light of Mine, which, since I understood the Resolution of
your Insupportable Departure, have Served me but to weep withal, and to
lament the sad Approach of my Inevitable fate. And yet in this Extremity I
cannot, methinks, but have some Tenderness, even for the Misfortunes that are
of your Creating. My Life was vowed to you the first time I saw you* and since
you would not accept of it as a Present, I am Content to make it a sacrifice. A
Thousand times a day I send my Sighs to hunt you out: and what Return for all
my Passionate Disquiets, but the good Counsel of my Cross fortune? that
whispers me at every turn; Ah wretched Mariane! why do thou flatter, and
Consume thy self in the vain pursuit of a Creature never to be Recovered? He Is
gone, he is gone; Irrevocably gone; h'as past the seas to fly thee. He Is now
in France; dissolved in pleasures; and thinks no more of thee, or what thou
suffer'st for his false sake, then if he had never known any such woman. But
hold: You Have more of Honor in you then to do so ill a thing; and so have I,
then to believe it, especially of a Person that I Am so much concerned to
justify. Forget me? It Is Impossible. My Case is bad enough at best, without the
Aggravation of vain suppositions. No, no: The Care and Pains you took to make
me think you loved me, and then the Joys that That Care gave Me, must never be
forgotten: and should I love you less this Moment, then when I loved you most,
(in Confidence that you loved me so too) I were Ungrateful. It Is an Unnatural,
and a strange thing methinks, that the Remembrance of those blessed hours
should be now so terrible to me; and that those delights that were so ravishing
in the Enjoyment, should become so ter in the Reflection. Your last Letter gave
me such a Passion of the heart, as if it would have forced its way thorough my
Breast, and followed you. It laid me three hours senseless: I wish it had been
dead; for I had died of Love. But I revived: and to what End? only to die
again, and lose that Life for you, which you your self did not think worth the
saving. Beside that there is no Rest for me, while you're Away, but in the
grave. This fit was followed with other Ill Accidents which I shall never be
without, till I see you: In the mean while, I bear them yet without repining,
because they came from you. But with your Leave: Is this the Recompense that
you intend me? Is this your way of treating those that love you? Yet it is no
Matter, for (do what you will) I am resolved to be firm to you to my last gasp;
and never to see the Eyes of any other Mortal. And I dare assure you that it
will not be the worse for you neither, if you never set your heart upon any
other woman: for certainly a Passion under the degree of mine, will never
content you: You may find more Beauty perhaps elsewhere (though the time was when
you found no fault with mine) but you shall never meet with so true a heart;
and all the rest is nothing.

Let me entreat you not to stuff your Letters with things Unprofitable, and
Impertinent to our Affair: and you may save your self the trouble too of
desiring me to THINK of you. why it is Impossible for me to forget you: and I
must not forget the hope you gave me neither, of your Return, and of spending
some part of your time here with us in Portugal. Alas! And why not your whole
Life rather? If I could but find any way to deliver my self from this unlucky
Cloister, I should hardly stand gaping here for the performance of your
Promise: but in defiance of all opposition, put my self upon the March, Search
you out, follow you, and love you throughout the whole world. It is not that I
please my self with this Project as a thing feasible; or that I would so much
as entertain any hope of Comfort; (though in the very delusion I might find
pleasure) but as it is my Lot to be miserable, I will be only sensible of that
which is my Doom. And yet after all this, I cannot deny but upon this
Opportunity of writing to you which my Brother has given me, I was surpised
with some faint Glimmerings of Delight, that yielded me a temporary Respite to
the horror of my despair. Tell me I conjure you; what was it that made you so
sollicitous to entangle me, when you knew you were to leave me? And why so
bloudily bent to make me Unhappy? why could you not let me alone at quiet in
my* Cloister as you found me? Did I ever do you any Injury?

But I must ask your Pardon; for I lay nothing to your Charge. I am not in
condition to meditate a Revenge: and I can only complain of the Rigor of my
Perverse fortune. When she has parted our Bodies, she has done her worst, and
left us nothing more to fear: Our hearts are Inseparable; for those whom Love
has United are never to be divided. As you tender my soul let me hear often
from you. I have a Right methinks to the Knowledge both of your Heart, and of
your fortune; and to your Care to inform me of it too. But what ever you do, be
sure to come; and above all things in the world, to let me see you. Adieu. And
yet I cannot quitt this Paper yet. Oh that I could but convey my self in the
Place on it! Mad fool that I am, to talk at this Rate of a thing that I my self
know to be Impossible! Adieu. For I can go no farther. Adieu. Do but Love me
for ever, and I care not what I endure.

THE SECOND Letter.
THere is so great a difference betwixt the Love I write, and That which I
feel, that if you measure the One by the Other, I have undone my self. Oh how
happy were I if you could but judge of my Passion by the violence of your own!
But That I perceive is not to be the Rule betwixt you, and me. Give me leave
however to tell you with an honest freedom, that though you cannot love me, you
do very ill yet to treat me at this Barbarous Rate: It puts me out of my Wits
to see my self forgotten; and it is as little for your Credit perhaps, as it is
^or my Quiet. Or if I may not say that you are Unjust, it is yet the most
Reasonable thing in the World to let me tell you that I am Miserable: I foresaw
what it would come to, upon the very Instant of your Resolution to leave me.
Weak Woman that I was! to expect, (after this) that you should have more
Honor, and Integrity then other Men, because I had unquestionably deserved it
from you, by a transcendent degree of Affection above the Love of Other Women.
No, no; Your Levity, and Aversion have overrul'd your Gratitude, and Justice;
you are my Enemy by Inclination: whereas only the Kindness of your Disposition
can Oblige me. Nay your Love it self, if it were barely grounded upon my Loving
of you, could never make me happy. But so far am I even from that Pretense,
that in six Months I have not received one syllable from you; Which I must
impute to the blind fondness of my own Passion, for I should otherwise have
foreseen that my Comforts were to be but Temporary, and my Love Everlasting.
For Why should I think that you would ever content your self to spend your
Whole Life in Portugal; and relinquish your Country, and your fortune, only to
think of me? Alas! my sorrows are Inconsolable, and the very Remembrance of my
past Enjoyments makes up a great part of my present pain. But must all my hopes
be blasted then, and fruitless? Why may not I yet live to see you again within
these Walls, and with all those Transports of Extacy, and Satisfaction, as
heretofore? But how I fool my self! for I find now that the Passion, which on
my side, took up all the faculties of my soul, and Body, was only excited on
your part by some loose Pleasures, and that they were to live and die together.
It should have been my Business, even in the Nick of those Critical, and
Blessed Minutes, to have Reasoned my self into the Moderation of so Charming,
and deadly an Excess; and to have told my self beforehand, the fate which I
now suffer. But my Thoughts were too much taken up with You to consider my
self; So that I was not in Condition to attend the Care of my Repose, or to
bethink my self of what might poison it, and disappoint me in the full
Emprovement of the most Ardent Instances of your Affection. I was too much
pleased with you, to think of parting with you, and yet you may remember that I
have told you now and then by fits, that you would be the Ruin of me. But those
Phancies were soon dispersed; and I was glad to yield them up too; and to give
up my self to the Enchantments of your false Oaths, and Protestations. I see
very well the Remedy of all my Misfortunes, and that I should quickly be at
Ease if I could leave Loving you. But Alas! That were a Remedy worse then the
disease. No, no: I Will rather endure any thing then forget you. Nor could I if I
would. It Is a thing that did never so much as enter into my Thought. But is not
your Condition now the worse of the two? Is it not better to endure what I now
suffer, then to enjoy Your faint satisfactions among your French Mistresses? I
am so far from Envying your Indifference, that I Pity it. I defy you to
forget me absolutely: and I am deceived if I have not taken such a Course with
you, that you shall never be perfectly happy without me. Nay perhaps I am at
this Instant the less miserable of the two; in regard that I am the more
employed. They have lately made me doorkeeper here in this Convent. All the
people that talk to me think me mad; for I answer them I know not what; And
certainly the rest of the Convent must be as mad as I, they would never else
have thought me Capable of any Trust. How do I envy the good Fortune of poor
Emanuel, and Francisco! Why cannot I be with you perpetually as they are? tho
in your Livery too? I should follow you as Close without dispute, and serve you
at least as faithfully; for there is nothing in this World that I so much
desire as to see you; But however, let me entreat you to think of me; and I
shall Content my self with a bare place in your Memory. And yet I cannot tell
neither, whether I should or no: for I know very well that when I saw you every
day I should hardly have satisfied my self within these Bounds. But you have
taught me since, that whatsoever you will have me do, I must do. In the
Interim, I do not at all repent of my Passion for you; Nay, I am well enough
satisfied that you have seduced me; and your Absence it self though never so
rigorous, and perhaps Eternal, does not at all lessen the vigor of my Love:
which I will avow to the Whole world, for I make no secret on it. I have done
many things irregularly it is true; and and against the Common Rules of good
Manners: and not without taking some Glory in them neither, because they were
done for your sake. My honor, and Religion are brought only to serve the Turn
of my Love, and to carry me on to my lives end, in the Passionate Continuance
of the Affection I have begun. I do not write this, to draw a Letter from you;
wherefore never force your self for the Matter: for I will receive nothing at
your hands; no not so much as any Mark of your Affection unless it comes of its
own accord, and in a Manner, whether you Will or No. If it may give you any
satisfaction, to save your self the trouble of Writing, it shall give me some
likewise, to excuse the Unkindness of it; for I am wonderfully inclined to pass
over all your faults. A French Officer, that had the Charity this morning to
hold me at least three hours in a discourse of you, tell me that France has
made a Peace. If it be so; Why cannot you bestow a visit upon me, and take me
away with you? But it is more then I deserve, and it must be as you please; for
my Love does not at all depend upon your Manner of treating me. Since you went
away I have not had one Minutes Health, nor any sort of Pleasure, but in the
Accents of your Name, which I call upon a Thousand times a day. Some of my
Companions that understand the deplorable Ruin you have brought upon me, are so
good as to entertain me many times concerning you. I keep as Close to my
Chamber as is possible; which is the dearer to me even for the many Visits you
have made me there. Your Picture I have perpetually before me, and I Love it
more then my hearts blood. The very Counterfeit gives me some Comfort: But oh
the Horrors too! When I consider that the Original, for ought I know, is lost
for ever. But why should it be possible, even to be possible, that I may never
see you more? Have you forsaken me then for ever? It turns my Brain to think
on it. Poor Mariane! But my Spirits fail me, and I shall scarce outlive this
Letter? -- Mercy -- Farwell, Farwell.

THE THIRD Letter.
WHat shall become of me? Or what will you advise me to do? How strangely am I
dissappointed, in all my Expectations! Where are the Letters from you? the Long
and Kind Letters that I looked for by every Post? To keep me alive in the hopes
of Seeing you again; and in the Confidence of your faith, and Justice; to
settle me in some tolerable state of Repose, without being abandoned to any
insupportable Extreme? I had once cast my Thoughts upon some Idle Projects of
endeavoring my own Cure, in Case I could but once assure my self that I was
totally forgotten. The distance you were at; Certain Impulses of Devotion; the
fear of utterly destroying the Remainder of my Imperfect health, by so many
restless Nights, and Cares; the Improbability of your Return; The Coldness of
your Passion, and the Formality of your last Adieu's; Your Weak, and frivolous
pretenses for your departure: These, with a thousand other Considerations, (of
more weight, then profit) did all concur to encourage me in my design, if I
should find it necessary; In fine; having only my single self to encounter I
could not doubt of the success, nor could it enter into my Apprehension what I
feel at this day. Alas! how wretched is my Condition, that am not allowed so
much as to divide these sorrows with you, of which you your self are the Cause?
You are the Offender, and I am to bear the Punishment of your Crime. It strikes
me to the very heart, for fear you, that are now so Insensible of my Torments,
were never much affected with our mutual delights. Yes, yes; It Is now a Clear
Case that your whole Address to me was only an Artificial disguise. You
betrayed me as often as you told me, how overjoyed you were that you had got
me alone: and your Passions, and Transports were only the Effects of my own
Importunities. Yours was a deliberate design to fool me; your business was to
make a Conquest, not a friend; and to triumph over my Heart, without ever
engaging or hazzarding your own. Are not you very Unhappy now, and (at least)
Ill-natured, if not ill-bred, only to make this wretched use of so Superlative
a friendship? Who would have thought it possible that such a Love as mine,
should not have made you happy? It Is for your sake alone if I am troubled for
the Infinite delights that you have lost, and might as easily have enjoyed, had
you but thought them worth the while. Ah! If you did but understand them
aright, you would find a great difference betwixt the Pleasure of Obliging me,
and that of Abusing me; and betwixt the Charming felicities of Loving
violently, and of being so beloved. I do not know either what I am, or what I
do, or what I would be at. I am torn to pieces by a Thousand contrary Motions,
and in a Condition deplorable beyond imagination. I love you to death, and so
tenderly too that I dare hardly wish your heart in the same condition with
mine. I should destroy my self, or die with Grief, could I believe your nights
and Thoughts, as restless as I find Mine; your Life as Anxious and disturbed;
your Eyes still flowing, and all things and people Odious to you. Alas! I am
hardly able to bear up under my own Misfortunes; how should I then Support the
Weight of yours; which would be a Thousand times more grievous to me? And yet
all this While I cannot bring my self to advise you, not to Think of me. And to
deal freely with you, there is not any thing in France that you take pleasure
in, or that comes near your heart, but I Am most furiously jealous of it. I do
not know what it is I write for. Perhaps you will pity me; but what good will that
pity do me? I Will none on it. Oh how I hate my self when I consider what I have
forfeited to oblige you! I have blasted my Reputation; I have lost my Parents;
I have exposed my self to the Laws of my Country against Persons of my
Profession; and finally, to your Ingratitude, the worst of my Misfortunes. But
why do I pretend to a Remorse, when at this Instant, I should be glad with all
my Soul, if I had run ten thousand greater hazzards for your dear Sake? and for
the danger of my Life and Honor; the very thought on it is a kind of doleful
Pleasure to me, and all is no more then the delivery of what is your own, and what
I hold most Precious, into your Disposition; And I do not know how all these
risques could have been better Employed. Upon the Whole matter, every thing
displeases me, my Love, my Misfortune; and alas! I cannot persuade my self that
I am well used even by You. And yet I Live, (false as I am) and take as much
pains to preserve my life, as to lose it. Why do I not die of shame then, and
show you the despair of my Heart, as well as of my Letters? If I had loved you
so much as I have told you a thousand times I did, I had been in my Grave long
ere this. But I have deluded you, and the Cause of Complaint is now on your
side. Alas! why did you not tell me of it? Did I not see you go away? Am I not
out of all hopes of ever seeing you again? And am I yet alive? I have betrayed
you, and I beg your pardon. But do not grant it though; Treat me as severely as
you will: Tell me that my Passion is Weak, and Irresolute. Make your self yet
harder to be pleased. Write me word that you would have me die for you. Do it,
I conjure you; and assist me in the Work of surmounting the Infirmity of my
Sex; and that I may put an end to all my fruitless deliberations, by an
effectual despair. A Tragical Conclusion would undoubtedly bring me often into
your thoughts, and make my Memory dear to you. And who knows how you might be
Affected, with the Bravery of so Glorious a death? A death Incomparably to be
preferred before the Life that you have left me. Farwell then; and I wish I had
never seen the Eyes of you. But my heart Contradicts my Pen; for I feel, in the
very moment that I write it, that I would rather choose to Love you in any state
of Misery, then agree to the bare Supposition that I had never Seen you.
Wherefore since you do not think fit, to mend my fortune, I shall cheerfully
submit to the worst on it. Adieu; but first promise me, that if I die of grief,
you will have some Tenderness for my Ashes: Or at least that the Generosity of
my Passion shall put you out of Love with all other things. This Consolation
shall satisfy me, that if you must never be mine, I may be secured that you
shall never be Another. You cannot be so Inhumane sure, as to make a mean use
of my most Affectionate despairs, and to recommend your self to any other
Woman, by showing the Power you have had upon me. Once more, Adieu. My Letters
are long, and I fear troublesome; but I hope you will forgive them, and dispense
with the fooleries of a Sot of your own making. Adieu. Methinks I run over and
over too often with the story of my most deplorable Condition: Give me leave
now to thank you from the Bottom of my heart for the Miseries you have brought
upon me, and to detest the Tranquillity I lived in before I knew you. My
Passion is greater every Moment than other. Adieu. Oh what a World of things
have I to tell you!

THE FOURTH Letter.
YOur Lieutenant tells me that you were forced by foul Weather to put in upon
the Coast of Algarve. I am afraid the Sea does not agree with you; and my Fears
for your Misfortunes make me almost to forget my own. Can you imagine your
Lieutenant to be more concerned in what befalls you, than I am? If not, How
comes he to be so well informed, and not one syllable to me? If you could never
find the means of writing to me since you went, I am very Unhappy; but I am
more so, if you could have written, and would not. But what should a body
expect from so much Ingratitude, and Injustice? And yet it would break my
heart, if heaven should punish you upon any account of mine. For I had much
rather gratify my kindness, than my Revenge. There can be nothing clearer,
than that you neither Love me, nor Care what becomes of me; and yet am I so
foolish, as to follow the Dictate of a blind, and besotted Passion, in
opposition to the Counsels of a demonstrative Reason. This Coldness of yours,
when you and I were first acquainted, would have saved me many a sorrowful
Thought. But where is the Woman, that in my Place, would have done otherwise
than I did? Who would ever have questioned the Truth of so pressing and
Artificial an Importunity? We cannot easily bring our selves to suspect the
Faith of those we Love. I know very well, that a slender Excuse will serve your
Turn; and I Will be so kind as to save you even the Labor of That too, by
telling you, that I can never consent to conclude you guilty, but in order to
the infinite Pleasure I shall take to acquit you, in persuading my self that
you are Innocent. It was the Assiduity of your Conversation that refined me;
your Passion that inflamed me; Your good humor that Charmed me; your Oaths,
and Vows that confirmed me; but 'twas my own precipitate Inclination that
seduced me; and what is the Issue of these fair, and promising Beginnings, but
Sighs, Tears, Disquiets, nay, and the worst of Deaths too, without either Hope,
or Remedy. The Delights of my Love, I must confess, have been strangely
surprising; but followed with Miseries not to be expressed; (as whatever comes
from you works upon me in Extremes.) If I had either obstinately opposed your
Address; or done any thing to put you out of humor, or make you jealous, with
a design to draw you on: If I had gone any crafty, artificial ways to work with
you; or but so much as checked my early, and my growing Inclinations to comply
with you, (though it would have been to no purpose at all) you might have had
some Color then to make use of your Power, and deal with me accordingly. But
so far was I from opposing your Passion, that I prevented it; for I had a
kindness for your Person, before you ever told me any thing of your Love; and
you had no sooner declared it, but with all the joy imaginable I received it,
and gave my self up wholly to that Inclination. You had at that time your Eyes
in your Head, though I was Blind. Why would you let me go on then to make my self
the miserable Creature which now I am? Why would you ^rain me on to all those
Extravagances which to a person of your Indifference must needs have been very
Importune? You knew well enough that you were not to be always in Portugal; Why
must I then be singl'd out from all the rest, to be made thus Unfortunate? In
this Country without dispute you might have found out handsomer Women than my
self, that would have served your turn every jot as well, (to your course
purpose) and that would have been true to you as far as they could have seen
you, without breaking their hearts for you, when you were gone: and such as you
might have forsaken at last, without either Falsness, or Cruelty: Do you call
this the Tenderness of a Lover, or the Persecution of a Tyrant? And it is but
destroying of your own neither. You are just as easy, I find, to believe ill
of me, as I have always been to think better of you than you have deserved. Had
you but loved me half so well as I do you, you would never have parted with me
upon so easy Terms. I should have mastered greater Difficulties, and never
have upbraided you with the Obligation neither. Your Reasons, it is true, were
very feeble, but if they had been the strongest imaginable, it had been all one
to me: for nothing but death it self could ever have torn me from you. Your
Return into France was nothing in the World but a Pretext of your own
contriving. There was a Vessel (you said) that was thither bound. And why could
not you let that Vessel take her Course? Your Relations sent for you away. You
are are no stranger sure to the Persecution, that for your sake, I have
suffered from mine. Your Honor (forsooth) engaged you to forsake me. Why did
you not think of that scruple, when you deluded me to the loss of mine? Well!
but you must go back to serve your Prince. His Majesty, I presume, would have
excused you in that point; for I cannot learn that he has any need of your
Service. But, Alas! I should have been too happy, if you and I might have
lived, and died together. This only Comfort I have in the bitterness of our
deadly separation, that I was never false to you; and that for the whole World
I would not have my Conscience tainted with so black a Crime. But can you then,
that know the Integrity of my Soul, and the Tenderness that I have for you; can
you (I say) find in your heart to abandon me for ever, and expose me to the
Terrors that attend my wretched Condition? Never so much as to think of me
again, but only when you are to sacrifice me to a new Passion. My Love, you
see, has distracted me; and yet I make no complaint at all of the violence of
it: for I am so wonted to Persecutions, that I have discovered a kind of
pleasure in them, which I would not live without, and which I enjoy, while I
love you, in the middle of a thousand afflictions. The most grievous part of my
Calamity, is the hatred, and disgust that you have given me for all other
things: My Friends, my Kindred, the Convent it self is grown intolerable to
me; and whatsoever I am obliged either to see, or to do, is become odious. I am
grown so jealous of my Passion, that methinks all my Actions, and all my Dutys
ought to have some regard to you. Nay, every moment that is not employed upon
your service, my Conscience checks me for it, either as misbestow'd, or cast
away. My Heart is full of Love, and Hatred; and, Alas! what should I do without
it? should I survive this restlessness of thought, to lead a Life of more
tranquillity, and ease, such an Emptiness, and such an Insensibility could never
consist. Every Creature takes Notice how strangely I am changed in my Humor,
my Manners, and in my Person. My Mother takes me to task about it: One while
she speaks me fair, and then she chides me, and asks me what I ail. I do not
well know what answers I have made her; but I Fancy that I have told her all.
The most severe, even of the Religious themselves, take pity of me, and bear
with my Condition. The whole World is touched with my Misfortunes; your single
self excepted, as wholly unconcerned: Either you are not pleased to write at
all; or else your Letters are so cold; so stuffed with Repetitions; the Paper
not half full, and your Constraint so grossly disguised, that one may see with
half an Eye the pain you are in till they are over. Dona Brites would not let
me be quiet the other day, till she had got me out of my Chamber, on to the
Balcon that looks (you know) toward Mertola: she did it to oblige me, and I
followed her: But the very sight of the Place struck me with so terrible an
Impression, that it set me a Crying the whole day after. Upon this, she took me
back again, and I threw my self upon my Bed, where I passed a thousand
Reflections upon the despairs of my Recovery. I am the worse I find for that
which people do to relieve me; and the Remedies they offer me do but serve to
aggravate my Miseries. Many a time have I seen you pass by from this Balcon;
(and the sight pleased me but too well) and there was I that fatal day, when I
first found my self struck with this unhappy Passion. Methought you looked as
if you had a mind to oblige me, even before you knew me; and your Eye was more
upon me than the rest of the Company. And when you made a stop, I fooled my
self to think that it was meant to me too, that I might take a fuller view of
you, and see how every thing became you. Upon giving your Horse the spur (I
remember) my heart was at my mouth for fear of an untoward leap you put him
upon. In fine; I could not but secretly concern my self in all your Actions;
and as you were no longer indifferent to me, so I took several things to my
self also from you; and as done in my favor. I need not tell you the sequel of
Matters (not that I care who knows it) nor would I willingly write the whole
Story, lest I should make you thought more culpable (if possible) than in
Effect (perhaps) you are. Beside that it might furnish your Vanity with subject
of reproach, by showing that all my Labors, and Endeavors to make sure of
you, could not yet keep you from forsaking me. But what a fool am I, in
thinking to work more upon your Ingratitude, with Letters, and Invectives, than
ever I could with my Infinite Love, and the liberty that attended it! No, no: I
am too sure of my ill Fortune, and you are too unjust to make me doubt of it;
and since I find my self deserted, what mischief is there in Nature which I am
not to fear? But are your Charms only to work upon me? Why may not other Women
look upon you with my Eyes? I should be well enough content perhaps to find
more of my Sex (in some degree) of my Opinion; and that all the Ladies of
France had an esteem for you, provided that none of them either doted upon you,
or pleased you: This is a most ridiculous, and an impossible Proposition. But
there is no danger (I may speak it upon sad Experience) of your troubling your
head long with any one thing; and you will forget me easily enough, without the
help of being forced to it by a new Passion. So infinitely do I love you, that
(since I am to lose you) I could even wish that you had had some fairer color
for it. It is true, that it would have made me more miserable; but you should
have had less to answer for then. You Will stay in France, I perceive, in perfect
Freedom, and perhaps not much to your Satisfaction; The Incommodities of a long
Voyage; some Punctilioes of good Manners; and the fear of not returning Love
for Love, may perchance keep you there. Oh, you may safely trust me in this
Case: Let me but only see you now and then, and know that we are both of us in
the same Country, it shall content me. But why do I flatter my self? Who knows
but that the Rigor and Severity of some other Woman may come to prevail upon
you more than all my Favors? though I cannot believe you yet to be a Person that
will be wrought upon by ill usage.

Before you come to engage in any powerful Passion, let me entreat you to
bethink your self of the Excess of my Sorrows; the Uncertainty of my Purposes;
the Distraction of my Thoughts; the Extravagance of my Letters; the Trusts I
have reposed in you; my Despairs, my Wishes, and my Jealousies. Alas! I am
afraid that you are about to make your self unfortunate. Take warning, I beg
of you, by my Example, and make some Use to your self of the Miseries that I
endure for you. I remember you told me in Confidence, (and in great Earnest
too) some five, or six Months ago, that you had once a Passion for a French
Lady. If she be any Obstacle to your Return, deal frankly with me, and put me
out of my Pain. It will be a kind of Mercy to me, if the faint hope which yet
Supports me, must never take effect, even to lose my Life, and that together.
Pray'e send me her picture, and Some of her Letters, and write me all she says.
I shall find Something there undoubtedly that will make me either better, or
worse. In the Condition that I am, I cannot long continue; and any Change
whatsoever must be to my Advantage. I should take it kindly if you would send
me your Brothers, and your Sisters pictures too. Whatsoever is dear to you must
be so to me; and I am a very faithful Servant to any thing that is related to
you: and it cannot be otherwise: for you have left me no power at all to
dispose of my self. Sometimes methinks I could Submit even to attend upon the
Woman that you Love. So low am I brought by your Scorns, and ill Usage, that I
dare not so much as say to my self, Methinks I might be allowed to be jealous,
without displeasing you. Nay, I chide my self as the most mistaken Creature in
the World to blame you: and I am many times convinced that I ought not to
importune you as I do, with those passages, and thoughts which you are pleased
to disown.

The Officer that waits for this Letter grows a little Impatient: I had once
resolved to keep it clear from any possibility of giving you Offense. But it is
broken out into Extravagances, and it is time to put an end to it. But Alas! I
have not the heart to give it over. When I write to you, methinks I speak to
you: and our Letters bring us nearer together. The first shall be neither So
long, nor So troublesome. But you may venture to open, it, and read it upon the
assurance that I now give you. I am not to entertain you, I know, with a
Passion that displeases you, and you shall hear no more on it. It is now a year
within a few days, that I have delivered my self wholly up to you, without any
Reserve. Your Love I took to be both Warm, and Sincere: And I could never have
thought you would have been so weary of my favors, as to take a Voyage of five
hundred leagues; and run the Hazzards of Rocks, and Pirates, only to avoid
them. This is a Treatment that certainly I never deserved at any man's hands.
You can call to mind my Shame my Confusion, and my Disorders. But you have
forgotten the Obligations you had to Love me even in despite of your Aversion.
The Officer calls upon me now the fourth time for my Letter. He will go away
without it, he Says; and presses me, as if he were running away from another
Mistress. Farewell. You had not half the difficulty to leave me (though perhaps
for ever) which I have, only to part with this Letter. But Adieu. There are a
thousand tender names that I could call you now. But I dare not deliver my self
up to the freedom of Writing my thoughts. You are a thousand times dearer to me
than my Life, and a thousand times more than I imagine too. Never was any thing
So barbarous, and so much beloved. I must needs tell you once again, that you
do not write to me. But I am now going to begin afresh, and the Officer will be
gone. Well, and what matters it? Let him go. It Is not so much for your sake
that I write, as my own; for my Business is only to divert, and entertain my
self: Beside that the very Length of this Letter will make you afraid on it: And
you will never read it thorough neither. What Have I done to draw all these
Miseries upon me? And why should you of all others be the poisoner of my peace,
and blast the Comfort of my Life? Why was I not born in some other Country?
forgive me, and farewell. See but to what a Miserable point I am reduced, when I
dare not so much as entreat you to Love me. Adieu.

THE FIFTH Letter.
YOu will find, I hope, by the different Air and style of this Letter, from
all my former, that I have changed my Thoughts too; and you are to take this
for an Eternal farewell; for I am now at length perfectly convinced, that since
I have Irrecoverably lost your Love, I can no longer justify my own. Whatsoever
I had of Yours shall be sent you by the first Opportunity: There shall be no
more writing in the Case; No, not so much as your Name upon the Pacquett. Dona
Brites is a Person whom I can trust as my own soul, and whom I have entrusted
(as you know very well) Unfortunate, Wretch that I am! in Confidences of
another Quality betwixt you and me. I have left it to her Care to see your
Picture and your Bracelets dispatched away to you, (those once beloved Pledges
of your Kindness) and only in due time to assure me that you have received
them. Would you believe me now, if I should swear to you, that within these
five days, I have been at least fifty times upon the very point of Burning the
One, and of Tearing the Other into a Million of Pieces? But, You have found me
too easy a fool, to think me Capable of so Generous an Indignation. If I could
but vex you a little in the story of my Misfortunes; it would be some sort of
Abatement methinks to the Cruelty of them. Those Bawbles (I must confess, both
to Your shame, and Mine) went nearer my heart than I am willing to tell you,
and when it came to the Pinch of parting with them, I found it the hardest
thing in the World to go thorough with it: So Mortal a Tenderness had I for any
thing of Yours, even at that Instant when you your self seemed to me the most
Indifferent thing in Nature: But there is no resisting the force of Necessity
and Reason. This Resolution has cost me Many, and Many a Tear; A thousand, and
a thousand Agonies, and Distractions, more than you can imagine; and more,
Undoubtedly, than you shall ever hear of from me. Dona Brites (I say) has them
in Charge; upon Condition, never to name them to Me again; No, not so much as
to give me a sight of them, though I should beg for it upon my Knees; but, in
fine, to hasten them away, without one Syllable to Me of their Going.

If it had not been for this Trial to get the Mastery of my Passion, I should
never have understood the force of it; and if I could have foreseen the Pains,
and the hazzards of the Encounter, I am afraid that I should never have
ventured upon the Attempt: for I am verily persuaded that I could much better
have Supported your Ingratitude it self, though never so foul, and Odious, than
the Deadly, Deadly Thought of this Irrevocable Separation. And it is not your
Person neither that is so dear to me, but the Dignity of my unalterable
Affection. My soul is strangely divided; Your falseness makes me abhor you, and
yet at the same time my Love, my Obstinate, and Invincible Love, will not
consent to part with you.

What a Blessing were it to me now, if I were but endu'd with the Common
Quality of other Women, and only Proud enough to despise you? Alas! Your
Contempt I have born already: Nay, had it been your Hatred, or the most Raging
Jealousy; All this, compared with your Indifference, had been a Mercy to me.
By the Impertinent Professions, and the most Ridiculous Civilities of your Last
Letter, I find that all mine are Come to your hand; and that you have read them
over too: but as unconcerned, as if you forsooth had no Interest at all in the
Matter. Sot that I am, to lie thus at the Mercy of an Insensible, and
Ungrateful Creature; and to be as much afflicted now at the Certainty of the
Arrival of those Papers, as I was before, for fear of their Miscarriage! What
have I to do with your telling me the TRVTH OF THINGS? Who desired to know it?
Or the SINCERITY you talk of; a thing you never practiced toward me, but to my
Mischief. Why could you not let me alone in my Ignorance? Who bad you Write?
Miserable Woman that I am! Methinks after so much pains taken already to delude
me to my Ruin, you might have streyn'd one point more, in this Extremity, to
deceive me to my Advantage, without pretending to excuse your self. It Is too
late to tell you that I have cast away many a Tender Thought upon the Worst of
Men; the most Obliged, and the most Unthankful. Let it suffice that I know you
now as well as if I were in the heart of you. The only favor that I have now
to desire from you, after so many done for you, is This: (and I hope you will
not refuse it me) Write no more to me; and remember that I have conjured you
never to do it. Do all that is Possible for you to do, (if ever you had any
Love for me) to make me absolutely forget you. For Alas! I dare not trust my
self in any sort of Correspondence with you. The least hint in the World of any
kind Reflection upon the reading of this Letter, would perchance expose me to a
Relapse; and then the taking of me at my Word, on the other side, would most
certainly transport me into an Extravagance of Choler, and Despair. So that in
my Opinion it will be your best course not to meddle at all with Me, or my
Affairs: for which way so ever you go to work, it must inevitably bring a great
disorder upon both. I have no Curiosity to know the success of this Letter:
Methinks the Sorrows you have brought upon me already, might abundantly
content you (even if your Design were never so malicious) without disturbing me
in my Preparations for my future Peace. Do but leave me in my Uncertainty, and
I will not yet despair, in time, of arriving at some degree of Quiet. This I
dare promise you, that I shall never hate you; for I am too great an Enemy to
Violent Resolutions ever to go about it. Who knows but I may yet live to find a
truer friend than I have lost? But Alas! What signifies any man's Love to me, if
I cannot Love him? Why should his Passion work more upon my heart, than mine
could upon Yours? I have found by sad Experience, that the first Motions of
Love, which we are more properly said to Feel, than to Understand, are never to
be forgotten: That our souls are perpetually Intent upon the Idol which we our
selves have made: That the first Wounds, and the first Images are never to be
cured, or defaced: That all the Passions that pretend to succor us either by
Diversion, or Satisfaction, are but so many vain Promises of bringing us to our
Wits again, which, if once lost, are never to be recovered: And that all the
Pleasures that we pursue, (many times without any desire of finding them)
amount to no more, than to convince us, that nothing is so dear to us as the
Remembrance of our Sorrows. Why must you pitch upon Me, for the subject of an
Imperfect, and Tormenting Inclination; which I can neither Relinquish with
Temper, nor Preserve with Honor? The dismal Consequences of an Impetuous Love,
which is not Mutual? And why is it that by a Conspiracy of Blind Affection, and
Inexorable fate, we are still condemned to Love where we are Despised, and to
hate where we are Beloved?

But what if I could flatter my self with the Hope of diverting my Miseries by
any other Engagement? I am so sensible of my own Condition, that I should make
a very great scruple of Using any other Mortal as you have treated me: and
though I am not Conscious of any Obligation to spare you, yet if it were in my
Power to take my Revenge upon you, by changing you for any other, (a thing very
Unlikely) I could never agree to the gratifying of my Passion that way.

I am now telling my self in your behalf, that it is not reasonable to expect,
that the simplicity of a Religious should confine the Inclinations of a
Cavalier. And yet methinks, if a body might be allowed to reason upon the
Actions of Love, a man should rather fix upon a Mistress in a Convent than any
where else. For they have nothing there to hinder them from being perpetually
Intent upon their Passion: Whereas in the World, there are a thousand
fooleries, and Amusements, that either take up their Thoughts entirely, or at
least divert them. And what Pleasure is it (or rather how great a Torment, if a
body be not Stupid) for a man to see the Woman that he loves, in a Continual
Hurry of Delights; taken up with Ceremony, and Visits; no discourses but of
Balls, Dresses, Walks etc. Which must needs expose him every hour to fresh
jealousies? Who can secure himself that Women are not better Satisfied with
these Entertainments than they ought to be? even to the Disgusting of their own
Husbands? How can any man pretend to Love, who without examining Particulars,
contentedly believes what is told him, and looks upon his Mistress under all
these Circumstances with Confidence, and Quiet? It is not that I am now Arguing
my self into a Title to your Kindness, for this is not a way to do my business:
especially after the Trial of a much more probable Method, and to as little
purpose. No, no: I know my Destiny too Well, and there is no struggling with it.
My Whole Life is to be miserable. It was so, when I saw you every day; When we
were together, for fear of your Infidelity; and at a distance, because I could
not endure you out of my sight: My heart ak'd every time you came into the
Convent; and my very life was at stake when you were in the Army: It put me out
of all Patience to consider that neither my Person, nor Condition were Worthy
of you: I was afraid that your Pretensions to me might turn to your Damage: I
could not Love you enough me thought: I lived in daily Apprehension of some
Mischief or other from my Parents: So that upon the Whole Matter, my Case was
not much better at that time then it is at present. Nay had you but given me
the least Proof of your Affection since you left Portugal, I should most
certainly have made my Escape, and followed you in a disguise. And what would
have become of me then, after the loss of my honor, and my friends to see my
self abandoned in France? What a Confusion should I have been in? What a plunge
should I have been at? What an Infamy should I have brought upon my family,
which I do assure you, since I left loving of you, is very dear to me. Take
Notice I pray'e, that in Cold thoughts I am very Sensible that I might have
been much more Miserable than I am; and that once in my Life I have talked
Reason to you: but whether my Moderation pleases you, or not; and what Opinion
soever you entertain of me, I beseech you keep it to your self. I have desired
you already, and I do now re-conjure you, never to Write to me again.

Methinks you should sometimes reflect upon the Injuries you have done me; and
upon your Ingratitude to the most Generous Obligations in Nature. I have Loved
you to the degree of Madness; and to the Contempt of all other things, and
Mortals. You have not dealt with me like a Man of honor. Nothing but a Natural
Aversion could have kept you even from adoring me. Never was any Woman
bewitched upon So easy terms. What did you ever do that might entitle you to my
favor? What did you ever Lose, or but so much as hazard for my Sake? Have you
not entertained your self with a thousand other delights? No, not so much as a
Set at Tennis, or a Hunting-Match, that you would ever forbear upon any
Account of Mine. Were you not still the first that went to the Army, and the
last that came back again? Were you ever the more Careful of your Person there,
because I begged it of you, as the greatest Blessing of my Soul? Did you ever
so much as offer at the Establishment of your fortune in Portugal? A place
where you were so much esteemed. But one single Letter of your Brothers hurried
you away, without so much as a moments time to consider of it: and I am
certainly informed too, that you were never in better humor in your Whole
Life, than upon that Voyage. You your self cannot deny, but that I have reason
to hate you above all men Living; and yet, in Effect, I may thank my Self; for
I have drawn all these Calamities upon my own head. I dealt too openly, and
plainly with you at first: I gave you my heart too soon. It is not Love alone
that begets Love; there must be Skill, and Address; for it is Artifice, and not
Passion, that creates Affection. Your first design was to make me Love you, and
there was not any thing in the World which you would not then have done, to
compass that End: Nay rather than fail, I am persuaded you would have loved Me
too, if you had judged it necessary. But you found out easier ways to do your
Business, and so thought it better to let the Love alone. Perfidious Man! Can
you ever think to carry off this Affront, without being called to an Account
for it? If ever you Set foot in Portugal again; I do declare it to you, that
I Will deliver you up to the Revenge of my Parents. It is along time that I have
now lived in a kind of Licentious Idolatry, And the Conscience of it strikes me
with horror, and an Insupportable Remorse; I am Confounded with the Shame of
What I have done for your Sake; and I have no longer (alas!) the Passion that
kept the foulness of it from my Sight. Shall this tormented heart of Mine never
find ease? Ah barbarous Man! When shall I see the End of this Oppression? And
yet after all this I cannot find in my heart to wish you any Sort of harm; Nay
in my Conscience I could be yet well enough content to see you happy: which as
the Case stands, is utterly Impossible.

Within a While, you may yet perhaps receive another Letter from me, to show
you that I have outlived all your Outrages, and Philosophiz'd my self into a
state of Repose. Oh what a Pleasure will it be to me, when I shall be able to
tell you of your Ingratitude, and Treacheries, without being any longer
concerned at them my Self! When I shall be able to discourse of you with Scorn;
When I shall have forgotten all my Griefs, and Pleasures, and not so much as
think of your Self, but when I have a mind to it.

That you have had the better of me, it is true; for I have Loved you to the
very Loss of my Reason: But it is no less true that you have not much cause to
be proud on it. Alas I was young, and Credulous: Cloistered up from a Child; and
only Wonted to a rude, and disagreeable sort of People. I never knew what
belonged to fine Words, and Flatteries, till (most unfortunately) I came
acquainted with you: And all the Charms, and Beauties you so often told me of,
I only looked upon as the Obliging Mistakes of your Civility, and Bounty. You
had a good Character in the World; I heard every body Speak well of you: and to
all this, you made it your Business to engage me; but you have now (I thank you
for it) brought me to my self again, and not without great need of your
Assistance. Your two last Letters I am resolved to keep, and to read them over
oftener than ever I did any of the former, for fear of a Relapse. You may well
afford them, I am sure, at the Price that they have cost me. Oh how happy might
I have been, if you would but have given me Leave to Love you for ever! I know
very well that betwixt my Indignation, and your Infidelity, my present thoughts
are in great Disorder. But remember what I tell you: I am not yet out of hope
of a more peaceable Condition, which I will either Compass, or take some other
Course with my self; which I presume, you will be well enough content to hear
of. But I will never have any thing more to do with you. I am a fool for saying
the Same things over, and over again so often. I must leave you, and not so
much as think of you. Now do I begin to Fancy that I shall not write to you
again for all This; for what Necesity is there that I must be telling of you at
every turn how my Pulse beats?

THE END.
Books Printed for and sold by H. Brom, since the dreadful Fire of London
1666, to 1678.
The Life of the great Duke of Espernon, being the History of the Civil Wars of
France, beginning 1598. where D' Avila leaves off, and ending in 1642. by
Charles Cotton Esquire

The Commentary of M. Blaiz de Montluc the great Favorite of France, in which
are contained all the Sieges, Battles, Skirmishes, in three Kings Reigns by
Charles Cotton Esquire

Mr. Rycaut's History of Turkey.

The History of the Three last Grand Seigniors.

The History of Don Quixot, fol.

Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, fol.

Bishop Cosens against Transubstantiation.

Dr. Guidots History of Bathe and of the hot Waters there.

The Fair one of Tunis.

Domus Carthusiana, or the most Noble Foundation of the Charter House in
London, with the Life and Death of Thomas Sutton Esquire

The History of the Sevarites a Nation inhabiting part of the third Continent.


