AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death OF Mr. Philip Henry. Minister of the Gospel
near Whitchurch in Shropshire. Who Died June 24. 1696* in the Sixty fifth Year
of his Age.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
and John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey. School.

TO His much Honored Friend Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet.
SIR,
THE Ministers of the Gospel, are in the Scripture Language, Stars in the right
Hand of Christ, to signify their diffusive Light, and beneficial Influences.
As in the future State of the Resurrection, some Stars shall differ from others
in Glory; so in the present State of the Regeneration, some Ministers are
distinguished from others, by a brighter Eminence in their Endowments, and a
more powerful Emanation of Light in their Preaching. Of this Select Number was
Mr. Philip Henry, in whom there was Union of those real Excellencies, of parts,
Learning, and Divine Graces, that signalized him among his Brethren. This does
evidently appear in the Narrative of his Life, drawn by one very fit to do it:
as having had entire knowledge of him, by long and intimate Conversation: and
having by his Holy Instructions, and the impression of his Example, been made
partaker of the same sanctifying Spirit. The describing the External Actions of
Saints, without observing the Holy Principles and Affections from whence they
derived their Life and Purity, is a defective and irregular Representation of
them. It Is as if an account were given of the Riches and Faecundity of the
Earth, from the Flowers and Fruits that grow upon it, without considering the
Mines of Precious Metals contained in its Bosom. Now, only an inward Christian
that has felt the Power of Religion in his Heart, can from the Reflection upon
himself, and his uncounterfeit Experience, discover the Operations of Grace in
the Breasts of others.

Mr. Henry was Dedicated to the Service of Christ by his Mother, in his tender
Age. His first Love and Desires (when he was capable to make a judicious
Choice) were set upon God. He entered early into the Ministry, and Consecrated
all the Powers of his Soul, Understanding, Memory, Will and Affections, with
his Time and Strength, to the Servio^ of Christ. And such was the Grace and
Favor of God to him, that he lost no Days in his Flourishing Age, by
satisfying the voluptuous Appetites, nor in his declining Age by Diseases and
Infirmities, but uncessantly applied himself to his Spiritual Work. He was
called to a private place in Wales, but his shining Worth could not be shaded
in a Corner. A Confluence of People from other parts attended on his Ministry.
Indeed the word of Truth that dies in the Mouths of the cold and careless, (for
they are not all Saints that serve in the Sanctuary) had Life and Spirit in his
Preaching: For it proceeded from a Heart burning with Zeal for the Honor of
Christ and Salvation of Souls. Accordingly he suited his Discourses to the wise
and the weak: and imitated the Prophet, who contracted his Stature to the dead
Body of the Widows Son, applying his Mouth to the Mouth of the Child, to
inspire the Breath of Life into him. The poor and despised were instructed by
him, with the same compassionate Love and Diligence as the Rich, notwitstanding
the civil distinction of Persons, which will shortly vanish for ever: For he
considered their Souls were of the same Precious and immortal value. In the
Administration of the Lord's Supper, he expressed the just temperament of
sweetness and severity: with melting Compassion he invited all relenting and
returning Sinners to come to Christ, and receive their Pardon Sealed with his
Blood: But he was so jealous of the Honor of Christ, that he deterred by the
most fearful Consequences, the Rebellious that indulged their Lusts, from
coming to partake of the Feast of the unspotted Lamb. He was not allured by
Temporal Advantage (which is the mark of a Mercenary) to leave the first place,
where by the Divine Disposal, he was seated.

When the fatal Bartholomew-day came, tho* he had fair Hopes of Preferment, by
his Attendance upon the King and Duke of York, in their early Age, of which the
remembrance might have been revived; Yet he was guided by a Superior Spirit,
and imitated the Selfdenyal of Moses (a Duty little understood, and less
practiced, by the Earthly minded) rather choosing to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the good things of this World. As the Light of
Heaven, when the Air is stormy and disturbed, does not lose the rectitude of
its Rays: So his enlightened Conscience did not bend in compliance with the
Terms of Conformity, but he obeyed its sincere Judgment.

After his being Expelled from the place of his public Ministry, his
deportment was becoming a Son of Peace. He refused not Communion with the
Church of England, in the Ordinances of the Gospel, so far as his Conscience
permitted. Yet he could not desert the Duty of his Office, to which he was,
with sacred Solemnity set apart. He was Faithful to improve Opportunities for
serving the Interest of Souls, notwithstanding the Severities inflicted on him.
And after the restoring our Freedom of Preaching, he continued in the
Performance of his delightful Work, till Death put a period to his Labors.

After this account of him, as a Minister of Christ, I will glance upon his
Carriage as a Christian. His Conversation was so Holy and regular, so free from
taint, that he was unaccuseable by his Enemies: they could only object his
Nonconformity as a Crime. But his vigilant and tender Conscience, discovered
the spots of sin in himself, which so affected his Soul, that he desired
Repentance might accompany him to the Gate of Heaven: an excellent Testimony of
Humility, the inseparable Character of a Saint. His love to God was supreme,
which was declared by his chosen* Hours of Communion with him every day. The
Union of Affections, is naturally productive of Union in Conversation.
Accordingly our Savior promises, He that loves me shall be loved of my
Father; and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him: And he repeats
the Promise, If a man love me he will keep my words: and my Father will love
him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with him. To his special and
singular Love to God, was joined a universal Love to Men: He did good to all
according to his Ability. His forgiving of Injuries, that rare and difficult
Duty, was eminently conspicuous in the sha^pest Provocations. When he could not
excuse the offense, he would pardon the offender, and strive to imitate the
perfect Model of Charity expressed in our suffering Savior: who in the extremity
of his Sufferings, when resentments are most quick and sensible, prayed for his
cruel Persecutors. His filial trust in God was Correspondent to God's Fatherly
Providence to him. This was his Support in times of Trial, and maintained an
equal temper in his mind, and tenor in his Conversation. In short, he led a
Life of Evangelical Perfection, most worthy to be honorably preserved, in the
memory of future times. The following Narrative of it, if read with an
observing Eye, how instructive and affecting will it be to Ministers, and apt
to Transform them into his likeness?

Thus, Sir, I have given a short view of the Life of that Man, for whom you had
such a high Veneration and dear Love. It argues a clear rer Spirit and a
Diviner Temper than is usual in Persons of Conspicuous Quality, when Holiness
is so despicably mean in the esteem of Carnal Men, to value it above all Titles
and Treasures, and the Perishing Pride of this World. I am persuaded it will be
very pleasing to you, that your Name and excellent Mr. Henry's, are joined in
the same Papers. I am,

Sir, Your very Humble and Faithful Servant, William Bates.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THAT which we aim at in this Undertaking, and which we would set before us, at
our entrance upon it is, not so much to embalm the Memory of this good Man
(though that also is Blessed) as to exhibit to the World a Pattern of that
Primitive Christianity, which all that knew him well, observed to be
exemplified in him, while he lived; and when they saw the end of his
Conversation, as it were with one Cons^t, desired a public and lasting Account
of, or rather demanded it, as a just Debt owing to the World, by those into
whose Hands his Papers came, as judging such an Account likely to conduce much
to the Glory of God's Grace, and to the Edification of many, especially of
those that were acquainted with him. He was one whom the Divine Providence did
not call out (as neither did his own Inclination lead him) to any very public
Scene of Action: He was none of the forward Men of the Age, that make
themselves talked of: The World scarce knew that there was such a Man in it.
But in his low and narrow Sphere he was a burning and shining Light, and
therefore we think his pious Example is the more adapted to general use,
especially consisting not in the Ecstasies and Raptures of Zeal and Devotion,
which are looked upon rather as admirable than imitable: But in the long series
of an even, regular, prudent, and well ordered Conversation, which he had in
the World, and in the ordinary business of it, with simplicity and godly
sincerity; not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God. It has been said,
that quiet and peaceable Reigns, though they are the best to live in, yet they
are the worst to write of, as yielding least variety of Matter for the
Historians Pen to work upon: But a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness
and Honesty, being the Sum and Substance of Practical Christianity, the
recommending of the Example of such a Life, in the common and familiar
Instances of it; together with the kind and gracious Providence of God
attending it, may b^, if not as diverting to the curious, yet every whit as
useful and inctructive to the pious Readers. If any suggest, that the design of
this attempt is to credit and advance a Party, let them know, that Mr. Henry
was a Man of no Party, but true Catholic Christianity (not debauched by
bigottry, nor leavened by any private Opinions or Interests) was his very
Temper and Genius. According to the Excellent and Royal Laws of this Holy
Religion, his Life was led, with a strict and conscientious adherence to Truth
and Equity; a great tenderness and inoffensiveness to all Mankind; and a mighty
Tincture of sincere Piety and Devotedness to God: and according to those Sacred
Rules we shall endeavor, in justice to him, as well as to our Reader, to
represent him in the following Account; and if any thing should drop from our
Pen, which may justly give offense to any, (which we promise industriously to
avoid) we desire it may be looked upon as a false stroke; and so far not truly
representing him, who was so blameless and harmless, and without Rebuke. Much
of our Materials for this Structure we have out of his own Papers, especially
his Diary, for by them his Picture may be drawn nearest to the Life, and from
thence we may take the truest Idea of him, and of the Spirit he was of. These
Notes being intended for his own private use in the review, and never
Communicated to any Person whatsoever; and appearing here (as they ought to do)
in their own native dress, the candid Reader will excuse it, if sometimes the
Expressions should seem abrupt, they are the genuin, unforced, and unstudied
Breathings of a gracious Soul; and we hope will be rather the more acceptable
to those, who through Grace, are conscious to themselves of the same devout and
pious Motions; for as in Water, Face answers to Face, so does one sanctified
and renewed Soul to another; And (as Mr. Baxter observes in his Preface to Mr.
Clark' s Lives) God's Graces are much the same in all his Holy ones; and
therefore we must not think that such Instances as these, are extraordinary
Rarities; but God has in wonderful Mercy raised up many, by whose Graces even
this Earth is Perfumed and Enlightened. But if one Star be allowed to differ
from another Star in Glory; perhaps our Reader will say, when he has gone
through the following Account, that Mr. Henry may be ranked among those of the
First Magnitude.

ERRATA.
Page 15. lin. 27. for o- read others. p. 20. l. 9. for make r. makes. p. 82.
l. 31. for becoming r. unbecoming. p. 88. l. 31. between and and with, add not.
p. 113. l. 14. for Sixth, r. Six. p. 204. l. 23. add of. p. 207. l. 17. add is.
p. 227. l. 6. for must r. much. Besides which the Reader is desired to excuse
some running Mistakes: as Equivolent for Equivalent. p. 6. l. 29. hapn'd for
happened. p. 30. l. 12. presevering for Persevering. p. 31. l. 10. sitting for
setting. p. 32. l. 10. elegible for eligible. p. 55. beging for begging. p. 83.
beginning for beginnings. p. 91. incuring for incurring. p. 118. words for
word. p. 210. Intecessor for Intercessor. p. 239. and any such that may occurr.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF MR. PHILIP HENRY, etc.
CHAP. I.
Mr. Philip Henry's Birth, Parentage, early Piety, and Education at School.

HE was born at White Hall, in Westminster, on Wednesday August 24. 1631. being
Bartholomew-day. I find usually in his Diary some pious Remark or other upon
the Annual return of his Birthday: As in one Year he Notes, that the Scripture
mentions but two who observed their Birthday with Feasting and Joy, and they
were neither of them Copies to be Written after: viz. Pharaoh, Genesis 40. 20. and
Herod, Mat. 14. 6. But (says he) I rather observe it as a Day of Mourning and
Humiliation, because shapen in Iniquity and conceived in Sin. And when he had
completed the Thirtieth Year of his Age, he noted this, So old and no older
Alexander was when he had Conquered the great World, but (says he) I have not
yet subdued the little World my self. At his Thirty third Year he has this
Humble Reflection; A long time lived to small purpose, What shall I do to
redeem it? And at another, I may Mourn as Caesar did when he Reflected upon
Alexander' s early Achievements, that others younger than I am, have done much
more than I have done for God, the God of my life. And (to mention no more)
when he had lived Forty two Years he thus writes; I would be loath to live it
over again, least instead of making it better, I should make it worse, and
besides, every Year and Day spent on Earth is lost in Heaven. This last Note
minds me of a Passage I have heard him tell of a Friend of his, who being grown
into Years, was asked how old he was, and answered, On the wrong side of Fifty:
Which (said Mr. Henry) he should not have said; for if he was going to Heaven,
it was the right side of Fifty.

He always kept a Will by him ready made, and it was his Custom yearly, upon
the return of his Birthday, to Review, and (if occasion were) to Renew and
Alter it; For it is good to do that at a set time, which it is very good to do
at some time. The Last Will he made bears Date, This 24th day of August, 1695.
being, as he said, the day of the Year on which I was Born, 1631. and also the
day of the Year on which by Law I Died, as did also near Two thousand Faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, 1662. alluding to that Clause in the Act of
Uniformity, which disposes of the Places and Benefices of Ministers not
Conforming, as if they were naturally Dead.

His Father's Name was John Henry, the Son of Henry Williams of Brittons Ferry,
betwixt Neath and Swansey in Glamorganshire. According to the old Welsh Custom
(some say conformable to that of the ancient Hebrews, but now almost in all
Places laid aside) the Father's Christian Name was the Sons Surname. He had
left his Native Country and his Father's House very Young, unprovided for by
his Relations; but it pleased God to bless his Ingenuity and Industry, with a
considerable Income afterward, which enabled him to live Comfortably himself,
to bring up his Children well, and to be kind to many of his Relations; but
Public Events making against him at his latter End, when he Died he left
little behind him for his Children, but God graciously took care of them.
Providence brought this Mr. John Henry when he was Young, to be the Earl of
Pembroke'^ Gentleman, whom he served many Years: The Earl coming to be Lord
Chamberlain, preferred him to be the King's Servant: He was first made Keeper
of the Orchard at White Hall, and afterward Page of the Back Stairs to the
King's Second Son, James Duke of York, which place obliged him to a Personal
Attendance upon the Duke in his Chamber. He lived and died a Courtier, a hearty
Mourner for his Royal Master King Charles the First, whom he did not long
survive. He continued, during all the War time in his House at White Hall,
though the Profits of his Places ceased: The King passing by his Door, under a
Guard; to take Water, when he was going to Westminster, to that which they
called his Trial, inquired for his old Servant Mr. John Henry, who was ready to
pay his due respects to him, and prayed God to Bless his Majesty, and to
Deliver him out of the Hands of his Enemies, for which the Guard had like to
have been rough upon him.

His Mother was Mrs. Magdalen Rochdale, of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, in Westminster. She was a virtuous pious Gentlewoman, and one that
feared God above many: She was altogether dead to the Vanities and Pleasures of
the Court, though she lived in the midst of them. She looked well to the ways of
her Household; Prayed with them daily, Catechized her Children, and taught them
the good Knowledge of the Lord betimes. I have heard him speak of his Learning
Mr. Perkins his Six Principles, when he was very Young; and he often mentioned
with Thankfulness to God, his great Happiness in having such a Mother, who was
to him as Lois and Eunice were to Timothy, acquainting him with the Scriptures
from his Childhood: And there appearing in him early inclinations both to
Learning and Piety, she devoted him in his tender Years to the Service of God,
in the work of the Ministry. She Dyed of a Consumption March 6. 1645. leaving
behind her only this Son and Five Daughters. A little before she Dyed she had
this saying, My Head is in Heaven, and my Heart is in Heaven, it is but one
step more, and I shall be there too.

His Susceptors in Baptism were Philip Earl of Pembroke (who gave him his Name,
and was kind to him as long as he lived, as was also his Son Philip after him)
James Earl of Carlisle, and the Countess of Salsbury.

Prince Charles and the Duke of York being somewhat near of an Age to him, he
was in his Childhood very much an Attendant upon them in their Play, and they
were often with him at his Father's House, and were wont to tell him what
Preferment he should have at Court, as soon as he was fit for it. He kept a
Book to his Dying Day, which the Duke of York gave him; and I have heard him
bewail the loss of Two curious Pictures, which he gave him likewise,
Archbishop Laud took a particular Kindness to him when he was a Child, because
he would be very officious to attend at the Watergate (which was part of his
Fathers Charge in White Hall) to let the Archbishop through when he came late
from Council, to cross the Water to Lambeth.

These Circumstances of his Childhood he would sometimes speak of among his
Friends, not as glorying in them, but taking occasion from thence to bless God
for his Deliverance from the Snares of the Court, in the midst of which it is
so very hard to maintain a good Conscience and the Power of Religion, that it
has been said (though Blessed be God it is not a Rule without exception) Exeat
ex aula qui velit esse pius. The breaking up and scattering of the Court, by
the Calamities of 1641. as it dashed the expectations of his Court Preferments,
so it prevented the danger of Court Entanglements: And though it was not, like
Mofes's Choice of his own, when come to Years, to quit the Court; yet when he
was come to Years he always expressed a great Satisfaction in his Removal from
it, and blessed God who chose his Inheritance so much better for him.

Yet it may not be improper to observe here what was obvious as well as aimable
to all who Conversed with him; viz. that he had the most sweet and obliging air
of Courtesy and Civility that could be; which some attributed in part to his
early Education at Court. His Mien and Carriage was always so very decent and
respectful, that it could not but win the Hearts of all he had to do with.
Never was any Man further from that Rudeness and Morofeness which some
Scholars, and too many that profess Religion, either wilfully affect, or
carelessly allow themselves in, sometimes to the Reproach of their Profession.
It Is one of the Laws of our Holy Religion, exemplifi'd in the Conversation of
this good Man, to Honor all Men. Sanctified Civility is a great Ornament to
Christianity. It was a saying he often used, Religion does not destroy good
Manners; and yet he was very far from any thing of Vanity in Apparel, or
Formality of Compliment in Address, but his Conversarion was all Natural and
easy to himself and others, and little appeared in him, which a severe Critic
could call Affected. This Temper of his tended very much to the adorning of the
Doctrine of God our Savior; and the general Transcript of such an excellent
Copy, would do much toward the healing of those Wounds which Religion has
received in the House of her Friends by the contrary. But to return to his
Story. --

The first Latin School he went to was at St. Martin's Church, under the
teaching of one Mr. Bonner. Afterward he was removed to Battersey, where one
Mr. Wells was his School master. The grateful mention which in some of his
Papers he makes of these that were the Guides and Instructors of his Childhood
and Youth, brings to mind that French Proverb to this purpose: To Father,
Teacher, and God All-sufficient, none can render Equivolent.

But in the Year 1643. when he was about Twelve Years old, he was admitted into
Westminster-School, in the Fourth Form, under Mr. Thomas Vincent then Usher,
whom he would often speak of, as a most able diligent Schoolmaster; and one
who grieved so much at the Dullness and Non-proficiency of any of his Scholars,
that falling into a Consumption, I have heard Mr. Henry say of him, that he
even killed himself with false Latin.

A while after he was taken into the upper School, under Mr. Richard Busby
(afterward Dr. Busby) and in October, 1645. he was admitted King's Scholar,
and was first of the Election, partly by his own Merit, and partly by the
Interest of the Earl of Pembroke.

Here he profited greatly in School-Learning, and all his Days retained his
Improvements therein to admiration. When he was in Years, he would readily in
Discourse quote Passages out of the Classic Authors that were not common, and
had them ad unguem, and yet rarely used any such things in his Preaching,
(though sometimes (if very apposite) he inserted them in his Notes.) He was
very ready and exact in the Greek Accents, the Quantities of Words, and all the
several kinds of Latin Verse; and often pressed it upon young Scholars in the
midst of their University Learning, not to forget their School-Authors.

Here and before his usual Recreation at vacant times, was either reading the
printed accounts of Public Occurrences, or attending the Courts at
Westminster Hall, to hear the Trials and Arguments there, which I have heard
him say, he has often done to the loss of his Dinner, and oftener of his Play.

But Paulo major a canamus -- Soon after those unhappy Wars begun, there was a
daily Morning Lecture set up at the Abby-Church, between Six and eight of the
Clock, and Preached by Seven worthy Members of the Assembly of Divines in
Course, viz. Mr. Marshal, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Herl, Dr. Staunton, Mr. Nigh, Mr.
Whitaker, and Mr. Hill. It was the Request of his pious Mother to Mr. Busby,
that he would give her Son leave to attend that Lecture daily, which he did,
not abating any thing of his School-Exercise, in which he kept pace with the
rest; but only dispensing with his absence for that Hour: And the Lord was
pleased to make good Impressions on his Soul, by the Sermons he heard there.
His Mother also took him with her every Thursday to Mr. Case's Lecture at St.
Martins. On the Lord's Days he sat under the powerful Ministry of Mr. Stephen
Marshal in the Morning at New Chapel, in the Afternoon at St. Margarets
Westminster (which was their Parish Church) in the former place Mr. Marshal
Preached long from Phil. 2. 5, 6, etc. in the latter from Ioh. 8. 36. of our
Freedom by Christ. This Minister, and this Ministry, he would to his last,
speak of with great Respect, and Thankfulness to God, as that by which he was
through Grace, in the beginning of his Days begotten aga^in to a lively hope. I
have heard him speak of it, as the saying of some wise Men at that time, That
if all the Presbyterians had been like Mr. Stephen Marshal, and all the
Independents like Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, and all the Episcopal Men like
Archbishop Usher, the Breaches of the Church would soon have been healed. He
also attended constantly upon the Monthly Fasts at St. Margarets, where the
best and ablest Ministers of England Preached before the then House of Commons;
and the Service of the Day was carried on with great strictness and Solemnity,
from Eight in the Morning till Four in the Evening. It was his constant
Practice from Eleven or Twelve Years old to write (as he could) all the Sermons
he heard, which he kept very carefully, Transcribed many of them fair over
after, and notwithstanding his many Removes, they are yet forthcoming.

At these monthly Fa^s, (as he himself has Recorded it) he had often Sweet
Meltings of Soul in Prayer, and Con^ession of Sin, (particularly once with
special Remark, when Mr. William Bridge of Yarmouth Prayed) and many warm and
lively Truths came home to his Heart, and he daily increased in that Wisdom and
Knowledge which is to Salvation. Read his Reflections upon this, which he wrote
many Years after: If ever any Child (says he) such as I then was, between the
Tenth and Fifteenth year of my Age, enjoyed Line upon Line, Precept upon
Precept, I did. And was it in vain? I trust not altogether in vain. My Soul
rejoices and is glad at the remembrance of it; the word distilled as the Dew,
and Dropped as the Rain: I loved it, and loved the Messengers of it, their very
Feet were beautiful to me. And, Lord, what a Mercy was it, that at a time when
the poor Countries were laid waste, when the noise of Drums and Trumpets, and
the clattering of Arms was heard there, and the way to Sion Mourned, that then
my Lot should be where there was Peace and Quietness, where the voice of the
Turtle was heard, and there was great plenty of Gospel Opportunities! Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, as long as I live, I will bless the Lord, I will praise my God
while I have my Being. Had it been only the restraint that it laid upon me,
whereby I was kept from the common Sins of other Children and Youths; such as
Cursing, Swearing, Sabbath breaking and the like; I were bound to be very
Thankful: But that it prevailed through Grace, effectually to bring me to God,
How much am I indebted, and what shall I render!

Thus you see how the Dewes of Heaven sof^ned his Heart by degrees. -- From
these early Experiences of his own

1. He would blame those who laid so much stress on Peoples knowing the exact
time of their Conversion, which he thought was with many not possible to do.
Who can so soon be aware of the Daybreak, or of the springing up of the Seed
Sown? The Work of Grace is better known in its Effects than in its Causes.

He would sometimes illustrate this by that saying of the blind Man to the
Pharisees, who were so Critical in Examining the Recovery of his Sight: This
and 'tother I know not concerning it, but This one thing I know, that whereas I
was Blind, now I see, Ioh. 9. 25.

2. He would bear his Testimony to the comfort and benefit of early Piety, and
recommend it to all young People, as a good thing to bear the Yoke of the Lord
Jesus in Youth. He would often witness against that wicked Proverb, A young
Saint an old Devil, and would have it said rather, A young Saint, an old Angel.
He observed it concerning Obadiah (and he was a Courtier) that he feared the
Lord from his Youth, 1 King. 18. 12, and it is said of him, v. 3. that he
feared the Lord greatly. Those that would come to fear God greatly, must learn
to fear him from their Youth. No Man did his Duty so naturally as Timothy did
(Phil. 2. 20.) who from a Child knew the Holy Scriptures: He would sometimes
apply to this that common saying, He that would Thrive, must rise at Five; and
in dealing with young People, how earnestly would he press this upon them. I
tell you You cannot begin too soon to be Religious, but you may put it off too
long. Manna must be gathered early, and he that is the first must have the
first. He often inculcated Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy
Youth, in the Original, of thy choice.

I remember a passage of his in a Lecture Sermon, in the Year 1674. which much
affected many; he was preaching on that Text, Matt. 11. 30. My Yoke is easy;
and after many things insisted upon, to prove the Yoke of Christ an easy Yoke,
he at last appealed to the Experiences of all that had drawn in that Yoke. Call
now if there be any that will answer you, and to which of the Saints will you
turn? turn to which you will, and they will all agree that they have found
Wisdoms ways Pleasantness, and Christ's Commandments not grievous: and (says
he) I will here witness for one, who through Grace have in some poor measure
been drawing in this Yoke, now above thirty Years, and I have found it an easy
Yoke, and like my Choice too well to change.

3. He would also recommend it to the care of Parents, to bring their Children
betimes to public Ordinances. He would say, that they are capable sooner than
we are aware, of receiving good by them. The Scripture takes Notice more than
once of the little ones in the solemn Assemblies of the Faithful, Deuteronomy. 29. 11.
Ezra 10. 1. Acts 21. 5. If we lay our Children by the Pool-side, who knows but
the blessed Spirit may help them in and heal them. He used to apply that
Scripture to this, Cant. 1. 8. Those that would have Communion with Christ must
not only go forth by the Footsteps of the Flock, themselves, but feed their
Kids too; their Children, or other young ones that are under their Charge,
beside the Shephards Tents.

4. He would also recommend to young People the practice of Writing Sermons. He
himself did it not only when he was young, but continued it constantly till
within a few Years before he Dyed, when the decay of his Sight obliging him to
the use of Spectacles, made Writing not so ready to him as it had been. He
never wrote Shorthand, but had an excellent Art of taking the Substance of a
Sermon in a very plain and legible hand, and with a great deal of ease. And the
Sermons he wrote he kept by him, in such Method and Order, that by the help of
Indexes, which he made to them, he could readily turn to almost any Sermon that
ever he heard, where he noted the Preacher, Place, and Time; and this he called
Hearing for the Time to come. He recommended this Practice to others, as a
means to engage their Attention in Hearing, and to prevent drowsiness, and to
help their Memories after Hearing, when they come either to meditate upon what
they have heard themselves, or to Communicate it to others; and many have had
reason to bless God for his Advice and Instructions herein: He would advise
People sometimes to look over the Sermon-Notes that they had written, as a
ready way to revive the good Impressions of the Truths they had heard, and
would blame those who made waste Paper of them; for (says he) the day is
coming when you will either thank God for them, or heartily wish you had never
written them.

But it is time we return to Westminster-School, where having begun to learn
Christ we left him in the Successful pursuit of other Learning, under the Eye
and Care of that great Master Dr. Busby; who, on the Account of his Pregnancy
and Diligence took a particular kindness to him, called him his Child, and
would sometimes tell him he should be his Heir; and there was no Love lost
betwixt them. Dr. Busby was noted for a very severe School master, especially
in the beginning of his time. But Mr. Henry would say sometimes, that as in so
great a School there was need of a strict Discipline, so for his own part, of
the Four Years he was in the School, he never felt the weight of his Hand but
once, and then (says he in some of the Remarks of his Youth which he wrote
long after) I deserved it: For being Monitor of the Chamber, and according to
the Duty of his Place, being sent out to seek one that played Truant; he found
him out where he had hid himself, and at his earnest Request promised to make
an excuse for him, and to say, he could not find him, which (says he in a
Penitential Reflection upon it afterward) I wickedly did. Next Morning the
Truant coming under Examination, and being asked whether he saw the Monitor,
said, yes, he did, at which Dr. Busby was much surprised, and turned his Eye
upon the Monitor, with this word, (...); (What thou my Son) and gave him
Correction, and appointed him to make a penitential Copy of Latin Verses, which
when he brought he gave him Six Pence, and received him into his Favor again.

Among the Mercies of God to him in his Youth (and he would say twere well if
Parents would keep an Account of those for their Children, till they come to be
capable of doing it for themselves, and then to set them upon the doing of it)
he has Recorded a remarkable Deliverance he had here at Westminster-School,
which was this: It was Customary there among the studious Boys, for one or two
or more to sit up the former part of the Night at Study, and when they went to
Bed about Midnight to call others, and they others at two or three a Clock, as
they desired. His Request was to be called at Twelve, and being awaked, desired
his Candle might be lighted, which stuck to the Beds Head; but he dropped asleep
again, and the Candle fell, and burnt part of the Bed and Bolster, e're he
awaked; but through God's good Providence seasonable help came in, the Fire
soon quenched, and he received no harm. This gave him occasion long after to
say, It is of the Lord's Mercies that we are not Consumed.

When he was at Westminster-School he was employed by Dr. Busby, as some others
of the most ingenious and industrious of his Scholars were, in their reading of
the Greek Authors, to Collect, by his Direction, some Materials for that
Excellent Greek Grammar, which the Doctor afterward Published.

But be the School never so agreeable, Youth is desirous to Commence Man by a
Removal from it. This step he took in the Sixteenth Year of his Age. It was the
ancient Custom of Westminster-School, that all the King' s Scholars who stood
Candidates for an Election to the University, were to receive the Lord's Supper
the Easter before, which he did with the rest, in St. Margarets Church at
Easter, 1647. and he would often speak of the great pains which Dr. Busby took
with his Scholars, that were to approach to that Solemn Ordinance, for several
Weeks before, at stated times; with what skill and seriousness of Application,
and manifest Concern for their Souls, (...) ^ed to them the Nature of the
Ordinance, and (...) the work they had to do in it, and instructed them what
was to be done in Preparation for it, and this he made a Business of,
appointing them their Religious Exercises, instead of their School Exercises.
What Success this had through the Grace of God upon young Mr. Henry (to whom
the Dr. had a particular Regard) read from his own Hand. There had been
Treaties (says he) before, between my Soul and Jesus Christ, with some weak
Overtures toward him; but then, then I think it was that the Match was made,
the Knot tied: Then I set my self in the strength of Divine Grace, about the
great Work of self-Examination, in order to Repentance; and then I repented,
that is, solemnly and seriously, with some poor meltings of Soul, I confessed
my Sins before God, original and actual, Judging and Condemning my self for
them; and casting away from me all my Transgressions, receiving Christ Jesus
the Lord, as the Lord my Righteousness, and Devoting and Dedicating my whole
self absolutely and Unreservedly to his Fear and Service. After which, coming
to the Ordinance, there, there I received him indeed, and he became mine, I say
mine. Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

Dr. Busby's Agency under God in this blessed work, he makes a very grateful
mention of in diverse of his Papers: The Lord recompense it (says he) a
Thousand fold into his bosom.

I have heard him tell how much he surprised the Doctor, the first time he
waited upon him after he was turned out by the Act of Uniformity: For when the
Doctor asked him, prithee (Child) what made thee a Nonconformist, truly Sir,
says Mr. Henry, you made me one, for you taught me those things that hindered
me from Conforming.

Encouraged by this Experience, I have my self (says he in one of his Papers)
taken like pains with diverse others at their first Admission to the Lord's
Table, and have through Grace seen the comfortable Fruits of it, both in mine
own Children and ^to God be Glory.

Mr. Jeremy Dyke's Book Of the Sacrament, Since well abbreviated by Mr. Faldo.
I have heard him say was of great use to him at that time, in his Preparation
for that Ordinance.

Thus was this great Concern happily settled before his Lanching out into the
World, which through Grace he had all his Days more or less the comfort of, in
an even serenity of Mind, and a peaceful Expectation of the Glory to be
Revealed.

May 17. 1647. he was chosen from Westminster-School to Christ's-Church in
Oxford, jure loci, with Four others, of which he had the second place. At his
Election he was very much Countenanced and Smiled upon by his Godfather the
Earl of Pembroke, who was one of the Electors.

CHAP. II.
His Years spent at Oxford.

THough he was Chosen to the University in May, yet being then young, under
Sixteen, and in love with his School-Learning, he made no great haste thither.
'Twas in December following, 1647. that he removed to Oxford. Some merciful
Providence in his Journey (he being a young Traveller) affected him much, and
he used to speak of them, with a sense of God's Goodness to him in them,
according to the Impressions then made by them; and he has Recorded them with
this thankful Note, That there may be a great Mercy in a small Matter; as the
care that was taken of him by Strangers, when he Fainted and was Sick in his
Inn the first Night, and his casual Meeting with Mr. Annesly, Son to the
Viscount Valentia (who was chosen from Westminster-School, at the same time
that he was) when his other Company going another way, had left him alone, and
utterly at a loss what to do. Thus the sensible remembrance of old Mercies may
answer the intention of new ones, which is to engage our Obedience to God, and
to encourage our Dependence on him.

Being come to Oxford, he was immediately entered Commoner of Christ-Church,
where Dr. Samuel Fell was then Dean; the Tutor assigned to him and the rest of
that Election was Mr. Underwood, a very Learned ingenious Gentleman.

His Godfather the Earl of Pembroke had given him Ten Pounds to buy him a Gown,
to pay his Fees, and to set out with. This in his Papers he puts a Remark upon,
as a Seasonable Mercy in regard of some Straits, which Providence, by the
Calamity of the Times, had brought his Father to. God had taught him from his
Youth that excellent Principle, which he adhered to all his Days, that Every
Creature is that to us, and no more, than God makes it to be; and therefore
while many seek the Rulers Favor, and so expect to make their Fortunes, as
they call it, seeing every Man's Judgment proceeds from the Lord; it is our
Wisdom to seek his Favor who is the Ruler of Rulers, and that is an effectual
way to make sure our Happiness.

To the proper Studies of this place he now vigorously addressed himself; but
still retaining a great Kindness for the Classick Authors, and the more polite
Exercises he loved so well at Westminster-School.

He was admitted Student of Christ-Church March 24. 1647/8. by Dr. Henry
Hammond, that great Man, then Sub-Dean, who called him his God-Brother, the
Earl of Pembroke being his Godfather also, and Prince Henry the other, who gave
him his Name.

The Visitation of the University by the Parliament happened to be in the very
next Month after. Oxford had been for a good while in the Hands of the
Parliament, and no Change made; but now the Earl of Pembroke, and several
others thereunto appointed, came hither to settle things upon a new bottom. The
Account Mr. Henry in his Papers gives of this Affair, is to this purpose. The
sole Question which the Visitors proposed to each Person, high and low, in
every College, that had any place of Profit, was this, Will you submit to the
Power of the Parliament in this present Visitation? to which all were to give
in their Answer in Writing, and accordingly were either displaced or continued:
Some cheerfully complied, others absolutely refused, (among whom he would
sometimes tell of one that was but of his standing, who gave in this bold
Answer, I neither can nor will submit to the Power of the Parliament in this
present Visitation, I say I cannot, I say I will not J. C.) others answered
doubtfully, pleading Youth and Ignorance in such Matters. Mr. Henry's Answer
was, I submit to the Power of the Parliament in the Present Visitation, as far
as I may with a safe Conscience and without Perjury. His reason for the last
Salvo, was because he had taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy a little
before, at his Admission; which he was (according to the Character of the good
Man, that he fears an Oath) very jealous of doing any thing to contradict or
infringe; which has made him sometimes signify some dislike of that Practice
of Administering Oaths to such as were scarce past Children, who could hardly be
supposed to take them. with Judgment, as Oaths should be taken. However this
Answer of his satisfied; and by the Favor of the Earl of Pembroke he was
continued in his Students place. But great Alterations were made in that as in
other Colleges, very much (no question) to the hinderance and Discouragement
of young Scholars who came thither to get Learning, not to Judge of the Rights
of Government. Dr. Samuel Fell the Dean was removed, and Dr. Edward Reynolds
afterward Bishop of Norwich was put in his room; Dr. Hammond and all the
Canons, except Dr. Wall were displaced, and Mr. Wilkinson, Mr. Pocock, and
others of the Parliaments Friends were preferred to their places. His thoughts
of this in the reflection long after was, that milder methods might have done
better, and would have been a firmer establishment to the New Interest, but
considering that many of those who were put out (being in expectation of a
sudden change, which came not of many Years after) were exasperating in their
carriage toward the Visitors; and that the Parliament (who at this time rode
Masters) had many of their own Friends ready for University preferments, (which
Oxford having been from the beginning a Garrison for the King they had been
long kept out of) and these they were concerned to oblige, it was not strange
if they took such strict methods. And yet nothing being required but a bare
Submission, which might be intepreted but as crying, Quarter, he thought
withal, that it could not be said, the terms were hard, especially (says he)
if compared with those of another nature imposed since.

Among other Student-Masters removed, his Tutor Mr. Underwood was one, which he
often bewailed as ill for him, for he was a good Scholar, and one that made it
his business to look after his Pupils, who were very likely by the Blessing of
God to have profited under his Conduct: But upon the removal of Mr. Underwood,
he with some others were turned over to Mr. Finmore, who was then in with that
Interest which was uppermost, and was afterward Prebendary of Chester; a
Person (as he notes) able enough, but not willing to employ his Abilities for
the good of those that were committed to his Charge; toward whom he had little
more than the name of a Tutor. This he lamented as his Infelicity, at his first
setting out. But it pleased God to give him an Interest in the Affections of a
Young Man, an Under-graduate then, but Two or Three Years his Senior from
Westminster, one Mr. Richard Bryan, who took him to be his Chamberfellow while
he continued at Oxford, read to him, overlooked his Studies, and directed him
in them. Of this Gentleman he make a very honorable mention, as one who was
through Gods Blessing an Instrument of much good to him. Mr. John Fell also,
the Dean's Son, (afterward himself Dean of Christ-Church, and Bishop of
Oxford) taking pity on him, and some others that were neglected, voluntarily
read to them for some time; a kindness which he retained a very grateful sense
of, and for which he much honored that Learned and Worthy Person.

Here he duly performed the College Exercises, Disputations every day, in
Term-time; Theams and Verses once a Week, and Declamations when it came to his
turn; in which performances he frequently came off with very great Applause:
And many of his Manuscripts which remain, show how well he improved his time
there.

And yet in some Reflections I find under his hand, written long after (wherein
he looks back upon his early days) he charge it upon himself, that for a good
while after he came to the University, (though he was known not to be inferior
to any of his standing in Public Exercises yet) he was too much a Stranger to
that hard Study which afterward he became acquainted with, and that he lost a
deal of time which might have been better improved. Thus he is pleased to
accuse himself of that which (for ought I ever heard) no one else did, or could
accuse him of. But the truth is, in all the secret accounts he kept of himself,
he appears to have had a very quick and deep sense of his own Fallings and
Infirmities, in the most minute instances, the loss of time, Weakness and
Distractions in Holy Duties; not improving Opportunities of doing good to
others, and the like; lamentably bewailing these imperfections, and charging
them upon himself, with as great expressions of shame and sorrow, and
self-abhorrence; and crying out as earnestly for Pardon and Forgiveness in the
Blood of Jesus, as if he had been the greatest of Sinners: For though he was a
Man that walked very closely, yet withal he walked very humbly with God, and
lived a Life of Repentance and self-denial. This minds me of a Sermon of his
which one might discern came from the heart, on that Scripture, Romans 7. 24. O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! A
strange complaint (says he) to come from the Mouth of one who had learned in
every estate to be content. Had I been to have given my thoughts (said he)
concerning Paul, I should have said, O blessed Man that thou art, that have
been in the Third Heaven, a great Apostle, a Spiritual Father to Thousands,
etc. and yet a Wretched Man, all this while in his own account and esteem. He
never complains thus of the Bonds and Afflictions that did abide him, the
Prisons that were frequent; the Stripes above measure; but the Body of Death:
that is, the Body of Sin, that was it he groaned under. How feelingly did he
observe from thence, That the remainders of indwelling corruption are a very
grievous burden to a gracious Soul.

But to return: It may not be amiss to set down the Causes to which he ascribes
his loss of time when he came first to the University. One was, that he was
Young, too Young, and understood not the day of his opportunities, which made
him afterward advise his Friends not to thrust their Children forth too soon
from School to the University, though they may seem ripe, in respect of
Learning, till they have discretion to manage themselves; while they are
Children, What can be expected but that they should mind childish things?
Another was, that coming from Westminster School, his seize in
School-learning were beyond what generally others had that came from other
Schools, so that he was tempred to think there was no need for him to study
much, because it was so easy to him to keep pace with others, which, he says,
was the thing that Dr. Caldecott, Chaplain to the Ea^ of Pembroke, and his
great Friend warned him of at his coming to Oxford. Another was That, there
were two sorts of Persons his Co-temporaries, some of the New Stamp, that came
in by the Visitation, and were diverse of them serious pious Young Men, but of
small ability, comparatively, for Learning, and those for that reason he
desired not to have much fellowship with. But there were others that were of
the old Spirit and way, Enemies to the Parliament, and the Reformation they
made; and these were the better Scholars, but generally not the better Men.
With them for a while he struck in because of their Learning, and conversed
most with them, but he soon found it a snare to him, and that it took him off
from the Life of Religion, and Communion with God, Elanguescere mox cepit
(says he in his Latin Narrative of his younger years,) pristinae pietatis
ardor, etc. But for ever praised be the Riches of God's free Grace (says he in
another Account) that he was pleased still to keep his hold of me; and not to
let me alone when I was running from him, but set his hand again the second
time, (as the expression is, Isa. 11. 11.) to snatch me as a brand out of the
Fire.His Recovery from this snare he would call a kind of Second Conversion; so
much was he affected with the preventing Grace of God in it, and sensible of a
double bond to be for ever thankful, as well as of an engagement to be watchful
and humble. 'Twas a saying of his, He that stumbleth and does not fall, ^ets
ground by his stumble.

At the later end of the Year 1648, he had leave given him to make a visit to
his Father at White Hall, with whom he stayed some time; there he was Ian. 30.
when the King was beheaded, and with a very sad heart saw that Tragical Blow
given. Two things he used to speak of, that he took notice of himself that day,
which I know not whether any of the Historians mention. One was, that at the
instant when the Blow was given, there was such a dismal universal Groan among
the Thousands of People that were within sight of it, (as it were with one
consent) as he never heard before; and desired he might never hear the like
again, nor see such a Cause for it. The other was; That immediately after the
stroke was struck, there was according to Order, one Troop marching from
Chearing-Cross toward Kings-street, and another from Kings-street toward
Chearing-Cross, purposely to disperse and scatter the People, and to divert the
dismal thoughts which they could not but be filled with, by driving them to
shift every one for his own safety. He did upon occasion testify his dislike
of this rash Action, which he always said was a thing that could not be
justified, and yet he sometimes said he saw not how it could be called a
National Sin, for as the King urged upon his Trial, it was certain that not one
Man of Ten in the Kingdom did consent to it; See the Bishop of Chichester's
Sermon before the King, Ian. 30. 1697. p. 25, 29. Where he says, he did not
see how it could be called a National Sin.
nor could it becall'd the Sin of the Long Parliament, for far the greatest
part of them were all that time while the thing was in agitation imprison^d,
and kept under a force, and scarce 27 of the 40 that were left to carry the
name of a Parliament did give their Vote for it; which the Commissioners for
the. Trying of the Kings Judges in the Year 1660. (some of whom had been
themselves Members of the long Parliament) urged again and again, in answer to
that plea which the Prisoners stood so much upon, that what they did was by
Authority of the Parliament: But it is manifest it was done by a prevailing
Party in the Army, who (as he used to express it) having beaten their
Plowshares into Swords, could not so easiely beat their Swords into Plowshares
again, as having fought more for Victory and Dominion, than for Peace and
Truth; but how far these Men were acted and influenced by another sort of
People behind the Curtain, the World is not altogether ignorant. For some Years
after King Charles II. came in, he observed the yearly day of Humiliation for
this Sin, desiring that God would not lay the Guilt of Blood to the charge of
the Nation: But afterward finding to what purposes it was generally observed,
and improved even to the reproach and condemning, not only of the Innocent but
of some of the Excellent ones of the Land, and noting, that there is no
precedent in Scripture of keeping Annual days of Humiliation for particular
Sins; especially after the immediate judgment is at an end, Zech. 8. 19. Heb.
10. 2, 3. he took no farther notice of it. But in his Diary, he adds this
tender remark, (according to the Spirit he was of) Yet good Men no doubt may
observe it to the Lord, Romans 14. 6. Thus he judged not, and why then should he
be judged?

In the Year 165^ he took his Bachelor of Art's Degree, and he has recorded
the Goodness of God in raising him up Friends, who helped him out in the
expenses. Such kindnesses have a peculiar sweetness in them to a good Man, who
sees and receives them as the Kindness of God, and the tokens of his Love.

He would often mention it with thankfulness to God, what great helps and
advantages he had then in the University, not only for Learning but for
Religion and Piety. Serious Godliness was in reputation, and besides the
Public Opportunities they had, there were many of the Scholars that used to
meet together for Prayer, and Christian Conference, to the great confirming of
one another hearts, in the Fear and Love of God, and the preparing of them for
the Service of the Church in their generation. I have heard him speak of the
prudent method they took then about the University Sermons on the Lord's Day in
the Afternoon, which used to be Preached by the Fellows of Colleges in their
course, but that being found not so much for Edification, Dr. Owen, and Dr.
Goodwin performed that Service alternately, and the Young Masters that were
wont to Preach it, had a Lecture on Tuesday appointed them. The Sermons he
heard at Oxford he commonly wrote, not in the time of hearing, but afterward
when he came home in his reflection upon them, which he found a good help to
his Memory.

In December 1652, he proceeded Master of Arts, and in January following
Preached his first Sermon at South-Hincsey in Oxfordshire, on Ioh. 8. 34.
Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. On this occasion he writes in
his Diary, what was the breathing of his heart toward God, The Lord make use
of me as an Instrument of his Glory, and his Churches good in this high and
holy Calling.

His great Parts and Improvement notwithstanding his extraordinary Modesty and
Humility had made him so well known in the University that at the following Act
in July 1653. he was chosen out of all the Masters of that Year to be Junior of
the Act, that is, to answer the Philosophy Questions in Vesperi is, which he
did with very great applause, especially for the very witty and ingenious
Oration which he made to the University upon that occasion: His questions were:
1 An licitum sit carnibus vesci? Aff. 2. An Institutio Academiarum sit utilis
in Republica? Aff. 3. An Ingenium pendeat ab humoribus Corporis? Aff. At the
Act in 1654. He was chosen Magister Replicans, and answered the Philosophy
Questions in Comitiis with a like applause. His Questions then were, 1. An
melius sit sperare quam frui? Neg. 2. An Maxima Animi Delectatio sit agrave;
sensibus? Neg. 3. An utile sit peregrinari? Aff.

Dr. Owen who was then Vice Chancellor has spoken with great commendation of
these performances of Mr. Henry's to some in the University afterward, who
never knew him otherwise than by report; and I have heard a Worthy Divine (who
was somewhat his Junior in the University, and there a perfect Stranger to him)
say, how much he admired these Exercises of his, and loved him for them, and
yet how much more he amir'd, when he afterward became acquainted with him in
the Country, that so Curious and Polite an Orator should become so Profitable
and Powerful a Preacher, and so readily lay aside the enticing Words of Man's
Wisdom which were so easy to him.

There is a Copy of Latin Verses of his in print among the Poems which the
University of Oxford published upon the Peace concluded with Holland, in the
Year 1654, which show him to be no less a Poet than an Orator.

He has noted it of some Pious Young Men, that before they removed from the
University into the Country, they kept a day of Fasting and Humiliation for the
Sins they had been guilty of in that place and state. And in the visits he made
afterward to the University, he inserts into His Book, as no doubt God did
into His, -- a tear dropped over my University Sins.

CHAP. III.
His removal to Worthenbury in Flint-shire; His Ordination to the Ministry, and
his Exercise of it there.

WOrthenbury is a little Town by Dee side in that Hundred of Flint-shire, which
is separated some Miles from the rest of the County, and known by the name of
English Mailoes, because tho it is reputed in Wales, as pertaining to
Flint-shire, yet in Language and Customs it is wholly English, and lies mostly
between Cheshire and Shrop-shire. Worthenbury was of old a Parochial Chapel
belonging to the Rectory of Bangor, but was separated from it in the Year 1658
by the Trustees for uniting and dividing of Parishes, and was made a Parish of
itself. But what was then done being vacated by the Kings coming in, it then
came to be in statu quo, and continued an appurtenant to Bangor, till in the
Second Year of the Reign of King William and Queen Mary, it was again by Act of
Parliament separated, and made Independent upon Bangor. That was the only Act
that passed the Royal Assent with the Act of Recognition, at the beginning of
the Second Parliament of this Reign. The Principal Family in Worthenbury
Parish, is that of the Pulestons of Emeral. The Head of the Family was then
John Puleston Sergeant at Law, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas.

This was the Family to which Mr. Henry came from Christ-Church, presently
after he had completed his Master's Degree, in 1653. Ordered into that remote,
and to him unknown, corner of the Country, by that Overruling Providence which
determines the times before appointed, and the bounds of our Habitation.

The Judges Lady was a Person of more than ordinary Parts and Wisdom, in Piety
inferior to few, but in Learning Superior to most of her Sex, which I could
give Instances of from what I find among Mr. Henry's Papers, particularly an
Elegy she made upon the Death of the Famous Mr. John Seldom, who was her great
Friend.

This was the Lady whose Agency first brought Mr. Henry into this Country. She
wrote to a Friend of hers Mr. Francis Palmer Student of Christ-Church, to
desire him to recommend to her a Young Man to be in her Family, and to take the
oversight of her Sons (some of whom were now ready for the University) and to
Preach at Worthenbury on the Lord's-Dayes, for which a very honorable
Encouragement was promised. Mr. Palmer proposed it to his Friend Mr. Henry, who
was willing for one half Year to undertake it, provided it might be required of
him to Preach but once on the Lord's Day, and that some other supply might be
got for 'tother part of the day, he being now but Twenty two Years of Age, and
newly entered upon that great Work. Provided also, that he should be engaged but
for half a Year, as little intending to break off so soon from an Academical
Life, which he delighted in so much. But preferring Usefulness before his own
private Satisfaction, he was willing to make trial for a while, in the Country,
as one that sought not his own things, but the things of Jesus Christ, to whose
Service in the Work of the Ministry he had entirely devoted himself, bending
his Studies wholly that way. In the latter part of his time at Oxford, as one
grown weary of that which he used to say he found little to his purpose; he
employed his time mostly in searching the Scriptures, and collecting useful
Scripture Observations, which he made very familiar to him, and with which he
was thoroughly furnished for this good Work. He got a Bible interleav'd, in
which he wrote short Notes upon Texts of Scriptures as they occurred. He would
often say, I ^ad other B^k, that I may be the better al^ to ^nderstand the
Scripture.

'Twas a stock of Scripture Knowledge that he set up with, and with that he
traded to good advantage. Tho he was so great a Master in the eloquence of
Cicero, yet he preferred far before it, that of Apollos, who was an eloquent
Man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Act. 18. 24.

He bid very fair at that time for University preferment, such was the
Reputation he had got at the late Act, and such his Interest in Dr. Owen: but
the Salvation of Souls was that which his heart was upon, to which he
post-poned all his other Interests.

In September 1653, he came down to Emeral, from whence a Messenger was sent on
purpose to Oxford to conduct him thither. Long after when it had pleased God to
settle him in that Country, and to build him up into a Family, he would often
reflect upon his coming into it first, what a Stranger he then was, and how far
it was from his thoughts ever to have made his home in those parts, and passing
over the Brook that parts between Flint-shire and Shrop-shire would sometimes
very affectionately use that word of Jacob's, With my Staff I passed over this
Jordan, and now I am become two bands.

At Emeral he prayed in the Family, was Tutor to the young Gentlemen, and
Preached once a day at Worthenbury, other help being procured for the other
part of the day, according to his request, out of a fear, being so young, to
take the whole Work upon him. But it soon hapn'd, that one Lord's Day the
supply that was expected, failed, and so he was necessitated rather than there
should be a vacancy to Preach twice, in which he found the Promise so well
fulfilled, as the day is so shall the strength be, and to him that has (i. e.
that has and uses what he has) shall be given, and he shall have abundance,
that to the great satisfaction of his Friends there, from thence forward he
waved, looking out for other help than what came from above, and would
sometimes speak of this as an Instance that we do not know what we can do, till
we have tried.

Here he applied himself to a plain and practical way of Preaching, as one
truly concerned for the Souls of those he spoke to. He would say sometimes, We
study how to speak that you may understand us. And, I never think I can speak
plain enough when I am speaking about Souls and their Salvation. I have heard
him say, he thought it did him good, that for the first half year of his being
at Worthenbury, he had few or no Books with him, which engaged him (in studying
Sermons) to a closer search of the Scripture, and his own heart. What success
his labors had in that Parish, which before he came to it, (I have been told)
was accounted one of the most loose and profane places in all the Country, may
be gathered from a Letter of the Lady Puleston's to him, at the end of the
first half, Year after his coming to Emeral, when he was uncertain of his
Continuance there, and return to settle at Christ-Church. Take the Letter at
Large,

Dear Mr. Henry,
THE Indisposition that my Sad^ has bred, and the stay of Mrs. V. here
yesterday, hindered my Answering your last Expressions. As to ordering the
Conversation, and presevering to the Practice of those good intents, taken up
while one is in pursuit of a Mercy: You and I will confer, as God gives
opportunity, who also must give the Will and the Deed, by his Spirit, and by
the Rule of his Word. As to begging that one thing for you, God forbid (as
Samuel said) that I should cease to pray, etc. This I am sure, that having
wanted hitherto a good Minister of the Word among us, I have often by Prayer and
some Tears, above Five Years besought God for such a one as your self; which
having obtained, I cannot yet Despair, seeing he has given us the good Means,
but he may also give us the good End. And this I find, that your Audience is
increased three for one in the Parish, (though in Winter more than formerly in
Summer); and five for one out of other Places. And I have neither heard of
their being in the Alehouse on our Lords Day, nor Ball-playing that day, which
before you came was frequent (except that Day that young Chapter Preached) I think
I can name four or five in the Parish, that of formal Christians are becoming
or become real: But you know all are not wrought on at first, by the Word.
(Some come in no misfortune like other Men, and this is the Cause they be so
holden with Pride, etc) Hypocrites also have Converted Conversion itself: Yet
God may have reserved those that have not bowed the Kne^ to Baal, etc. and may
call them at the latter part of the Day, though not in this half Year, It is a
good sign most are loath to part with you; and you have done more good i^ this
half Year, then I have discerned these Eighteen Years. But however, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear, you have delivered your own Soul.
I have prayed, and do pray, seeing God has sent you, that you may be for his
Glory, and not for our Condemnation.


It is easy to imagine what an Encouragement this was to him, thus at his
first sitting out to see of the Travel of his Soul, and what an inducement it
was to him not to leave those among whom God had thus owned him. However that
Spring he returned to Oxford. The Lady Puleston soon after came to him thither,
with her Five Sons, of whom she placed the two Eldest under his Charge, in the
College. In the following Vacation he went to London to visit his Relations
there; and there in October he received a Letter from Judge Puleston, with a
very solemn and affectionate Request subscribed by the Parishoners of
Worthenbury, earnestly desiring his Settlement among them, as their Minister,
which he was persuaded to comply with, having fixed to himself that good Rule,
In the turns of his Life, to Follow Providence, and not to force it: So in the
Winter following he came down again, and settled with them. He continued in his
Students place in Christs-Church for two or three Years, attending the Service
of it once a Year; but disposing of most of the Profit of it for the use of
poor Scholars there.

The Tithe of Worthenbury belonged to Emeral Family, paying some Rent to the
Rector of Bangor; this Tithe Judge Puleston was willing to give (clear of that
Charge) to the Minister of Worthenbury for ever: But such was the peculiar and
extraordinary kindness he had for Mr. Henry, upon the Experience of his Merits,
that he chose rather by Deed of Indenture, bearing Date October. 6. 1655. between
himself and Mr. Henry, In consideration of his being pleased to undertake the
Cure of Souls, and to Preach and teach, and perform other Duties of Divine
Service in the Parish Church of Worthenbury (so the Deed runs) to give, grant
and confirm for himself and his Heirs, unto the said, Philip Henry, the Yearly
Rent of One Hundred Pounds, charged upon all his Messilages, Lands and
Tenements in the several Counties of Flint, Denbigh, and Chester, to be paid
Quarterly, until such times as the said Philip Henry shall be promoted or
preferred to some other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Living or Preferment, with
Power of Distress in Case of Non-payment. A Hundred a Year was more than
Worthenbury Tithes were worth at that time; and the manner of the Gift freed
the maintenance from much of that Loss and Encumbrance which commonly attends
the gathering of Tithe.

He still continued for some Years in Emeral Family, where he laid out himself
very much for the Spiritual good of the Family, even of the meanest of the
Servants, by Catechizing, repeating the Sermons, and Personal Instruction, and
he had very much Comfort in the Countenance and Conversation of the Judge and
his Lady. Yet he complains sometimes in his Diary of the Snares, and
Temptations that he found in his way there, especially because some of the
Branches of the Family who did not Patrizare were uneasy at his being there,
which made him willing to remove to a House of his own, which when Judge
Puleston perceived, in the Year 1657. out of his abundant and continued
kindness to him, he did at his own proper Cost and Charges build him (...) very
handsome House in Worthenbury, and settled it upon him by a Lease, bearing Date
March. 6. 1657. for Threescore Years, if he should so long continue Minister at
Worthenbury, and not accept of better Preferment.

He has Noted in his Diary, that the very Day that the Workmen began the
Building of that House, Mr. Mainwaring of Malpas, preached the Lecture at
Bangor, from Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the House, they Labor in vain
that build it. There never was Truth (says he) more seasonable to any than
this was to me: It was a word upon the Wheels. He has Recorded it as his great
Care, that his Affections might be kept loose from it, and that it might not
incroach upon God's Interest in his Heart. When it was finished he thus writes.
I do from my Heart bless God, that no hurt or harm befell any of the Workmin in
the Building of it.

Thus was his Maintenance settled at Worthenbury. In the Year 1659. he was by a
Writing of Judge Puleston's, Collated, Nominated and Presented to the Church of
Worthenbury, and (the Powers that then were, having so appointed) he had an
Approbation thereof from the Commissioners for Approbation of public Preachers.

Some little opposition was made to his Settlement at Worthenbury by Mr. Fogg
then Rector of Bangor, because he conceived it an Intrenchment upon his Right
to Worthenbury. and thought it might prejudice his Recovering of it by Course
of Law. I only mention this for the sake of the Note he has upon it in his
Diary, which is this, I do earnestly desire that the Judge may give Mr. Fogg
all reasonable Satisfaction, that there may be no appearance of wrong to him,
or any other in this thing. And when Mr. Fog insisted upon it, that he would
have Mr. Henry give it under his Hand, that he desired the Consent of the said
Mr. Fogg to be Minister of Worthenbury; he yielded to do it for peace-sake, and
from thence forward there was an intimate entire Friendship between Mr. Fogg
and him.

Being thus settled at Worthenbury his next Care was touching Ordination to the
Work of the Ministry, to which he would-see his Call very clear, before he
Solemnly Devoted himself to it. And though afterward in the Reflection
(especially when he was Silenced) it was some trouble to him that he had so
long deferred to be Ordained (and he would often, from the Consideration of
that press those who intended the Ministry, not to put it off) yet as the times
then were, there was something of a reason for it.

The nearest acting Class of Presbyters, was in the Hundred of Bradford. North
in Shropshire, wherein Mr. Porter of Whitchurch was the leading Man, of whom
Mr. Baxter gives so high a Character in his Life, Part 3. Page 94, and who was
one of those whom he recommended to the Lord Chancellor, as fit to be made a
Bishop Part 2. p. 283. This Class was Constituted by Ordinance of Parliament,
in April 1647. the Members of it then, were the aforesaid Mr. Porter, Mr.
Boughy of Hodnet, Mr. Hougton of Prees, Mr. Parsons of Wem, and Mr. John Ruby
by, and afterward Mr. Malden of Newport, Mr. Binney of Ightfield, and Mr.
Steel of Hanmer, (though in Flintshire) were taken in to them, and acted with
them. This Class in Twelve Years time publicly Ordained Sixty three Ministers.
Mr. Henry was very desirous to have been Ordained at Worthenbury, plebe
praesence, which he thought most agreeable to the Intention, but the Ministers
were not willing to set such a Precedent: However that was one thing which
o^asioned the Delay, so that he was not Ordained till Sept. 16. 1657.

The way and manner of his Ordination was according to the known Directory of
the Assembly of Divines, and the common usage of the Presbyterians; and yet he
having left among his Papers a particular Account of that Solemnity, and some
of the Workings of his Soul toward God in i^; I hope it may be of some use
both for Instruction and Quickening to Ministers and for the information of such
as are perhaps wholly strangers to such a thing, to give some account of te
whole Transaction.

He made Addresses to the Presbytery, in order to his Ordination Iul. 6. at
Prees, when he submitted to Trial, and Enquiry was made in the first place,
concerning his Experience of the Work of Grace in his Heart; in Answer to which
he gave a reason of the Hope that was in him, with Meekness and Fear; that the
Spirit of Grace had been dealing with him when he was young, and he hoped had
Discovered to him his need of Christ, and had bowed his Will in some Measure to
close with him upon his own Terms, etc. His Skill in the Original Languages of
the Scripture was then tried; and he read and construed two Verses in the
Hebrew Bible, and two in the Greek Testament: He was then Examined in Logic
and natural Philosophy, next in Divinity, what Authors he had read, and what
Knowledge he had touching the Mediation of Christ, etc. and his Skill in the
Scripture was tried, by propounding to him a Difficult Text to give his Sense
of; a Case of Conscience was also put to him to be resolv^d, and Enquiry made
into his Acquaintance with Church History. Lastly, a Question was given him to
provide a Thesis upon against next Meeting, which was this, An Providentia
Divina extendat se ad omnia (...) Aff. On this Question he exhibited his
Thesis, Aug. 3. and defended it. Several of the Ministers opposed, and Mr.
Porter moderated. He then produced two Certificates, which he left with the
Register of the Class, one from Oxford Subscribed by Dr. Wilkinson, Dr.
Langley, etc. the other from the Neighbor Ministers, Mr. Steel, Mr. Fogg, etc.
both testifying of his Conversation, etc. The Lord forgive me (says he in his
Diary upon this) that it has not been more Exemplary as it ought for Piety and
Industry. Amen, Lord, in Christ. The Day for Ordination was appointed to be
Sept. 16. at Prees, of which Notice was given at Worthenbury by a Paper, read
in the Church, and afterward affixed to the Church-door the Lord's Day before,
signifying also, That if any one could produce any just Exceptions against the
Doctrine or Life of the said Mr. Henry, or any sufficient Reason why he might
not be Ordained, they should certify the same to the Classis, or the Scribe,
and it should be heard and considered.

On the Day of Ordination there was a very great Assembly gathered together;
Mr. Porter began the Public work of the Day with Prayer, then Mr. Parsons
Preached on 1 Timothy 1. 12. I thank Christ Jesus who has enabled me, for that he
counted me Faithful, putting me into the Ministry. Putting Men into the
Ministry is the Work of Jesus Christ. After Sermon Mr. Parsons, according to
the usual Method, required of him a Confession of his Faith, which he made as
follows.

The Ground and Rule of my Faith toward God, is the Scripture of the Old and
New Testament; I believe they were written 2 Pet. 1. 21.
by Holy Men, immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost; having found the efficacy
of them in some measure upon my own Heart; I believe they are further able to
make me wise to Salvation. 2 Timothy 3. 15.


Concerning God, I believe that he is, and that he is the Rewarder of those
that diligently Heb. 11. 6.
seek him.

The Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead, I receive and own as a
Truth, 1. Ioh. 5. 7.
I admire and adore as a Mystery; though no Man has seen God at any time, yet
the only. Begotten Son, which is in the Bosom Ioh. 1. 18.
of the Father, he has declared him, and what he has declared concerning him
that I believe. I believe that God is a Spirit, for the Son has said, God is a
Spirit. Ioh. 4. 24.
I believe that he has Life in himself, and that he has given to the Son to
have Ioh. 5. 26.
Life in himself. I believe all things were made by him, and without him was
not any thing made that was made. I believe by his Providence he preserves,
guides, and governs all the Creatures, according to the purpose of his own,
Will to his own Glory; for the Father works hitherto, and the Son Ioh. 5. 17.
also works.

I believe he made Man upright after his Eccl. 7. 29. Genesis 1. 26. Col. 3. 10.
Ephesians. 4. 24.
own Image and Likeness, which Image consisted in Knowledge, Righteousness, and
true Holiness, but Man by Sin lost it.

I believe we were all in the Loins of our first Parents, and that they stood,
and fell as public Persons, and upon that Account justly, without any color
of wrong, we bear our share, both in the Guilt of their Ps. 51. 5.
Disobedience, and also the Corruption of Nature following thereupon; so that
we Ephesians. 2. 3. Zech. 11. 8.
come into the World Children of Wrath, and Heirs of the Curse, one as well as
another; Enemies to God, hating him, and Romans 7. 18.
hated of him: Averse to what is good, and prone to all manner of Evil. Though
all are born in, this Condition, yet there are Genesis 6. 5.
some that do not dye in it.

I believe, there is a Mediator, and 1 Timothy 25.
there is but one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Those
whom the Father has from Everlasting pitched his Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
Love upon, and given to Christ, not because of Works or Faith foreseen, but
merely of Romans 5. 11.
his Free Grace; for those, I believe Christ was sent forth into the World made
of a Woman, made under the Law; for their Gal. 4. 4. Ioh. 17. 19.
sakes he sanctified himself, and became obedient to Death, even the Death of
the Phil. 2. 8, 9.
Cross; wherefore God also highly exalted him; and having raised him from the
Dead Ephesians. 1. 20. 21.
on the third Day, se^ him at his own Right Hand, where he ever lives, to make
Intercession Heb. 7. 25. Ioh. 17. 9.
for those for whom he shed his Blood. All these Elect redeemed ones I believe
are in due time, sooner or later, in their Lives effectually called, washed,
sanctified, justified Romans 8. 30.
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by 1 Cor. 6. 11.
the Spirit of our God.

I believe the Righteousness of Christ alone, To. 5. 1.
apprehended by Faith, is the matter of our Justification before God; and that
Ps. 143. 2.
no Flesh can stand in his Sight upon any other terms, for he is the Lord our
Righteousness, Ier. 23. 6.
and in him only the Father is well Mat. 3. 17.
pleased.

I believe the Work of Sanctification, managed by the Spirit, who dwells in
us, Romans 15. 16.
though in respect of Parts it be complete, for the whole Man is renewed; yet
in respect Col. 3. 11.
of Degrees it is not fully perfected till we come to Glory; and I believe all
that 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10.
are Justified shall be Glorified, for we are kept by the Four of God, through
Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 5.


I believe the gathering in and Building up of Saints, is the special end why
Pastors and Ephesians. 4. 11.
Teachers are appointed in the Church; and that Jesus Christ, according to his
Promise, will be with them, in that Work to the end Matt. 28. 20.
of the World.

The Two Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, I
receive and own as Signs and Seals of the Romans 4. 11.
Covenant of Grace; the former Instituted by our Lord Jesus, as a Sign and Seal
of Matt. 28. 1^ Romans 6. 7.
our engrassing into him, due of right to all the Infants of Believing Parents,
and but Acts 2. 39. Matt. 26. 26.
once to be Administered; the other instituted by our Lord Jesus in the Night
wherein he was Betrayed, to show forth his Death, and to 1 Cor. 11. 26.
Seal the Benefits purchased thereby to his Church and People, and to be often
repeated.

When the Body returns to the Dust, I believe the Soul returns to God that gave
it; Eccl. 12. 7.
and that immediately it receives from him the Sentence, according to what has
been Matt. 25. 34, 41.
done in the Flesh, either Come inherit the Kingdom, o^ Depart accursed into
everlasting Fire.

I believe besides this, a Day of general Judgment in the end of the World,
wherein Acts 17. 31.
we must all appear before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ; and that our Bodies
being 2 Cor. 5. 10.
raised by an Almighty-Power from the Dust, shall be United to the same Souls
again, and shall partake with them in the same Condition, 1 Cor. 15. 42.
either of Happiness or Misery; to all Eternity. Those that have done good
shall come forth unto the Resurrection of Life, and those that have done evil
to Ioh. 5. 29.
the Resurrection of Damnation: This is the Sum and Substance of my Faith, into
which I was Baptized, and in which, by the Grace of God I will live and Dye.



Mr. Parsons then proposed certain Questions to him, according to the
Instructions in the Directory, to which he returned Answer as follows:

Question 1. What are your Ends in undertaking the Work and Calling of a
Minister?

Answer. As far as upon search and Enquiry I can hitherto find, though there be
that within me that would seek great things for my self (if indeed they were to
be found in this Calling) yet with my Mind I seek them not. But the Improvement
of the Talent which I have Received in the Service of the Gospel, for the Glory
of God and the Salvation of Souls, I hope is in my Eye; if there be any thing
else I own it not, I allow it not; while so many seek their own, it is my
desire, and shall be my endeavor, to seek the things of Jesus Christ.

Qu. 2. What are your purposes, as to Diligence and Industry in this Calling?

Answ. I do purpose and resolve, by the help of God, to give my self wholly to
these things; to Prayer, Reading, Meditation, instant Preaching in Season and
out of Season, wherein I shall very gladly spend and be spent, if by any means
I may both save my self and them that hear me. And when at any time I fail
herein, I desire God by his Spirit, and my Christian Friends, Neighbors and
Brethren, by seasonable Reproof and Admonition, to put me in mind of this
Engagement now made, in the presence of this great Congregation.

Qu. 3. Do you mean to be Zealous and Faithful in the Defense of Truth and
Unity, against Error and Schism?

Answ. I believe what the Spirit has foretold, that in the last days, perilous
times shall come, wherein Men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their
own lusts shall heap unto themselves Teachers. It Is my resolution by the Grace
of Christ to watch in all things; to contend earnestly for the Faith, to hold
fast the Form of sound and wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus, and
the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, in Meekness as I am able;
instructing those that oppose themselves: And for Peace and Unity if my heart
deceive me not, I shall rather choose to hazard the loss of any thing that is
most dear to me, than be any way knowingly accessory to the disturbance of
these in the Churches of Christ.

Qu. 4. What is your Persuasion of the Truth of the Reformed Religion?

Answ. My persuasion is, that the Bishop of Rome is that Man of Sin and Son of
Perdition, whom the Lord Jesus will consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and
whom he will destroy by the Brightness of his coming. And the Separation which
our first Reformers made I do heartily rejoice in, and bless God for, for had
we still continued to partake with him in his Sins, we should in the end have
partaked with him also in his Plagues.

Qu. 5. What do you intend to do when the Lord shall alter your condition, and
bring a Family under your charge?

Answ. When the Lord shall please in his Providence to bring me into new
Relations, I hope he will give me Grace to fill them up with Duty, it is my
purpose to wait upon him and to keep his way, to endeavor in the use of means,
that all that are mine may be the Lords.

Qu. 6. Will you in Humility and Meekness submit to Admonition and Discipline?

Answ. I believe it to be a Duty incumbent upon all that profess the Name of
Christ to watch over one another, and that when any is overtaken in a fault,
those that are Spiritual are to set him in joint again with the Spirit of
Meekness. It shall be my endeavor in the strength of Jesus Christ to walk
without rebuke, and when at any time I step aside (for who is there that lives
and sins not) I shall account the smitings of my Brethren kindness, and their
wounds Faithful.

Qu. 7. What if Troubles, Persecutions, and Discouragements arise, will you
hold out to the end notwithstanding?

Answ. Concerning this I am very jealous over my own heart, and there is cause,
I find a great want of that Zeal and courage for God, which I know is required
in a Minister of the Gospel, nevertheless I persuade my self that no Temptation
shall befall me but such as is common to Man, and that God who is faithful will
not suffer me to be tempted above that which I am able, but that with the
Temptation he will also make a way to escape, that I may be able to bear it. I
promise faithfulness to the Death, but I rest not at all in my promise to God:
But in his to me, when thou go through the Fire, and through the Water, I
will be with thee.

When this was done, Mr. Parsons Prayed; and in Prayer he and the rest of the
Presbyters (Mr. Porter, Mr. Houghton, Mr. Malden and Mr. Steel) laid their
hands upon him with words to this purpose, Whom we do thus in thy Name set
apart to the Work and Office of the Ministry. After him there were five more
after the like previous Examinations and Trials, Professions and Promises at
the same time in like manner set apart to the Ministry.

Then Mr. Malden of Newport closed with an Exhortation, directed to the newly
Ordained Ministers, in which (says Mr. Henry in his Dairy) this word went near
my heart. As the Nurse puts the Meat first into her own mouth, and chews it,
and then feeds the Child with it, so should Ministers do by the Word, Preach it
over beforehand to their own hearts, it loses none of the virtue hereby, but
rather probably gains. As that Milk nourishes most which comes warm, from the
warm Breast, so that Sermon which comes warm from a warm heart. Lord quicken me
to do thy will in this thing.

The Classes gave him, and the rest, Instruments in Parchment certifying this,
which it may satisfy the curiosity of some to read the Form of.

Whereas, Mr. Philip Henry of Worthenbury, in the County of Flint Master of
Arts, has addressed himself unto us, Authorized by an Ordinance of both Houses
of Parliament, of the 29th of August 1648, for the Ordination of Ministers,
desiring to be Ordained a Presbyter, for that he is chosen and appointed for
the Work of the Ministry at Worthenbury in the County of Flint, as by a
Certificate now remaining with us, touching that his Election and Appointment
appears, And he having likewise exhibited a sufficient Testimonial of his
deligence and proficiency in his Studies, and unblameableness of his Life and
Conversation, he has been examined according to the Rules for Examination in
the said Ordinance expressed; and thereupon approved, there being no just
exception made, nor put in against his Ordination and Admission. These may
therefore testify to all whom it may concern, that upon the Sixteenth day of
September 1657. We have proceeded solemnly to set him apart for the Office of a
Presbyter, and work of the Ministry of the Gospel, by laying on of our hands
with Fasting and Prayer, By virtue whereof we do declare him to be a lawful and
sufficiently authorized Minister of Jesus Christ: And having good Evidence of
his lawful and fair Calling, not only to the Work of the Ministry, but to the
Exercise thereof at the Chapel of Worthenbury in the County of Flint: We do
hereby send him thither, and actually admit him to the said Charge, to perform
all the Offices and Duties of a faithful Pastor there, exhorting the People in
the Name of Jesus Christ, willingly to receive and acknowledge him as the
Minister of Christ, and to maintain and encourage him in the Execution of his
Office, that he may be able to give up such an account to Christ of their
Obedience to his Ministry, as may be to his joy, and their everlasting comfort.
In Witness whereof we the Presbyters of the Fourth Class, in the County of
Salop, commonly called Bradford-North Class, have hereunto set our Hands, this
16th day of September, in the Year of our Lord God, 1657.

Tho. Porter, Moderator for the time. Andrew Parsons, Minister of Wem. Aylmar
Haughton, Minister of Prees. John Malden. Minister of Newport. Richard Steel,
Minister of Hanmer.


I have heard it said by those who were present at this solemnity, that Mr.
Henry did in his Countenance, Carriage and Expression, discover such an
extraordinary Seriousness and Gravity, and such deep Impressions made upon his
Spirit, as greatly affected the Auditory, and even struck an Aw upon them.

Read his Reflection upon it in his Diary. Methoughts I saw much of God in the
carrying on of the work of this day^, O how good is the Lord, he is good and
does good; the Remembrance of it I shall never loose, to him be Glory. I made
many promises of Diligence, Faithfulness, etc. but I lay no stress at all on
them, but on God's Promise to me, that he will be with his Ministers always to
the end of the World. Amen, Lord, so be it. Make good thy Word unto thy
Servant, wherein thou have caused me to put my Trust. And in another place, I
did this day receive, as, much Honor and Work, as ever I shall be able to know
what to do with; Lord Jesus proportion supplies accordingly, Two Scriptures he
desired might be written in his Heart, 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, etc. and 2 Chronicles. 29. 11.

Two Years after, upon occasion of his being present at an Ordination at
Whitchurch, he thus writes; This Day my Ordination Covenants were in a special
manner renewed, as to diligence in Reading, Prayer, Meditation, Faithfulness in
Preaching, Admonition, Catechizing, Sacraments, Zeal against Error and
Profaneness, Care to preserve and promote the Unity and Purity of the Church,
notwithstanding Opposition and Persecution, though to Death. Lord thou have
filled my Hands with Work, fill my Heart with Wisdom and Grace, that I may
discharge my Duty to thy Glory, and my own Salvation, and the Salvation of
those that hear me. Amen.

Let us now see how he applied himself to his Work at Worthenbury. The Sphere
was narrow, too narrow for such a burning and shining Light: There were but
Forty one Communicants in that Parish, when he first set up the Ordinance of
the Lord's Suppe; and they were never doubled: Yet he had such low Thoughts of
himself, that he not only never sought for a larger Sphere, but would never
hearken to any Overtures of that kind made to him: And withal, he had such high
thoughts of his work, and of the worth of Souls, that he laid out himself with
as much diligence and vigor here, as if he had had the over-fight of the
greatest and most considerable Parish in the Country.

The greatest part of the Parish were poor Tenants, and laboring Husbandmen;
but the Souls of su^ (he used to say) are as precious as the Souls of the Rich,
and to be looked after accordingly. His Prayer for them was, Lord, despise not
the day of small things in this place where there is some willingness, but much
weakness. And thus he writes upon the Judges settling a handsome Maintenance
upon him: Lord, thou know, I seek not theirs but them: Give me ^he Souls. --

He was in Labors more abundant to win Souls; besides Preaching, he Expounded
the Sciptures in order, Catechized and Explained the Catechism At first he took
into the Number of his Catechumens some that were adult, who (he found) wanted
Instruction; and when he had taken what pains he thought needful with them, he
dismissed them from further attendance, with Commendation of their Proficiency,
and Counsel to hold fast the form of found Words; to be watchful against the
Sins of their Age, and to apply themselves to the Ordinance of the Lord's
Supper, and make ready for it; afterward he Catechized none above Seventeen or
Eighteen Years of Age.

He set up a Monthly Lecture there of Two Sermons, one he himself Preached, and
the other his Friend Mr. Ambrose Lewis of Wrexham, for some Years. He also kept
up a Monthly Conference in private from House to House, in which he met with
the more knowing and judicious of the Parish; and they discoursed Familiarly
together of the things of God, to their mutual Edification, according to the
Example of the Apostles; who though they had the liberty of public Places, yet
taught also from House to House, Acts 5. 42. 20. 20. That which induced him to
set and keep up this Exercise as long as he durst (which was till August,
1660.) was, that by this means he came better to understand the state of his
Flock, and so knew the better how to Preach to them, and pray for them, and
they to pray one for another. If they were in doubt about any thing relating to
their Souls, that was an opportunity of getting Satisfaction. It was likewise a
means of increasing Knowledge and Love and other Graces; and thus it abounded
to a good Account.

He was very industrious in visiting the Sick, instructing them, and preying
with them; and in this he would say, he aimed at the good, not only of those
that were Sick, but also of their Friends and Relations that were about them.

He Preached Funeral Sermons for all that were Buried there, rich or poor, old
or young, or little Children; for he looked upon it as an opportunity of doing
good: He called it, setting in the Plow of the Word when the Providence had
softened and prepared the Ground He never took any Money for that or any over
ministerial Performance, besides his stated Salary, for, which he thought
himself obliged to do his whole Duty to them as a Minister.

When he first set up the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper there, he did it with
very great solemnity. After he had endeavored to instruct them in his public
Preaching, touching the Nature of that Ordinance, he discoursed personally with
all that gave up their Names to the Lord in i^ touching their Knowledge,
Experience, and Conversation, obliged them to observe the Law of Christ,
touching brotherly Admonition in case of Scandal; and gave ^otlce to the Co^gre
ga^on who they were that were ^mitted; adding the (...) Concerning these, and
my self, I have two things to say, 1. As to what is past we have sinned, if ^e
should say we have n^; we should deceive our selves and the Truth were not in
us; and yet this withal we can say, and have said it some of us with Tears, We
are grieved that we have sinned. (...) For time to come we are resol^ed by
God's G^ce to walk in new Obedience; and yet le^g. we are not Angels, but Men
and Women, compassed about with Infirmities and Temptations, it is possible we
may fall, but if we do, it is our declared Resolution to submit to Admonition,
and censure according to the Rule of the Gospel. And all along he took care so
to manage his Admissions to that Ordinance, as that the weak might not be
discouraged, and yet the Ordinance might not be profaned. He would tell those
whom he was necessitated to debar from the Ordinance for Ignorance, that he
would undertake, if they were but truly willing, they might in a Weeks time by
the Blessing of God upon their diligent use of Means, Reading, Prayer, and
Conference, get such a competent Measure of Knowledge, as to be able to ^scern
the Lord's Body. And those that had been scandalous, if they would but come in
and declare their Repentance and Resolutions of new Obedience, they should no
longer be excluded.

To give a Specimen of his lively Administrations of that Ordinance, let me
transcribe the Notes of his Exhortationat the first Sacrament that ever he
administered, Nov. 27. 1659. I suppose they are but the Hints of what he
enlarged more upon, for he had always a great fluency upon such occasions.

Dearly. beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, We are met together this
day about the most solemn weighty Service under Heaven; we are come to a Feast,
where the Feast-maker is God the Father, the Provision God the Son, whose Flesh
is Meat indeed, and whose Blood is Drink indeed; the Guests a company of poor
Sinners, unworthy such an Honor; the Crumbs under the Table were too good for
us, and yet we are admitted to taste of the Provision upon the Table; and that
which makes the Feast is hearty welcome: God the Father bids you welcome; and
ten Thousand Welcomes this day, to the Flesh and Blood of his Son; think you
hear him saying it to you, o believing Souls, Cant. 5. 1. Eat, O Friends,
drink, yea, drinkabundantly, O Beloved. The end of this Feast is to keep in
remembrance the Death of Christ, and our Deliverance by it, and thereby to
convey spiritual Nourishment and Refreshment to our Souls. But withal, give me
leave to ask you one Question, What Appetite have you to this Feast? Are you
come hungring and thirsting? such have the Promise, they shall be filled. He
fills the Hungry with good things, but the Rich are sent empty away; a
Honeycomb to a full Soul is no Honeycomb -- Can thou say as Christ said?
With desire I have desired to eat this. In this Ordinance here is Christ and all
his Benefits exhibited to thee. Art thou weak? here is Bread to strengthen thee;
Art thou sad? here is Wine to comfort thee: What is it thou stand in need of,
a Pardon? here it is sealed in Blood, take it by Faith, as I offer it to you in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, though thy Sins have been as Scarlet, they shall be
as Wool, if thou be willing and obedient. It may be, here are some that have
been Drunkards, Swearers, Scoffers at Godliness, Sabbath Breakers, and what
not? And God has put it into your Hearts to humble your selves, to mourn for,
and turn from all your Abominations; O come hither, here is forgiveness for
thee. What else is it thou want? O (says the poor Soul) I would have more
of the Spirit of Grace, more Power against Sin, especially my own Iniquity;
why, here it is for thee, from the fullness, that is in Jesus Christ we receive,
and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. We may say as David did, Psalm. 108. 7, 8. God
has spoken in his Holiness, and then Gilead is mine, and Manasseh mine. So God
has spoken in his Word sealed in his Sacrament, and then Christ is mine,
Pardon is mine, Grace is mine, Comfort mine, Glory mine; here I have his Bond
to show for it. This is to those among you, that have engaged their Hearts to
approach unto God this Day.

But if there he any come hither with a false, unbelieving, filthy, hard Heart,
I do warn you seriously, and with Authority, in the Name of Jesus Christ,
presume not to come any nearer to this sacred Ordinance, you that live in the
practice of any Sin, or the omission of any Duty against your Knowledge and
Conscience; you that have any Malice or Grudge to any of your Neighbors, leave
your Gift and go your ways; be reconciled to God, be reconciled to your
Brother, and then come --! Better shame thy self for coming so near, than damn
thy self by coming nearer: I testify to those, who say they shall have Peace,
though they go on still in their Trespasses, that there is Poison in the Bread;
take it and eat it at your own Peril; there is Poison in the Cup too, you drink
your own Damnation: I wash my Hands from the guilt of your Blood, look you to
it. On the other hand, you poor penitent Souls that are lost in your selves,
here is a Christ to save you, Come, O come ye that are weary and heavy laden,
etc.

It may not be amiss to transcribe also some Hints of preparation for the
administering of the Ordinance of Baptism, which I find under his Hand at his
first setting out in the Ministry, as follows.

It is a real Manifestation of the Goodness and Love of God to Believers, that
he has not only taken them into Covenant with himself, but their Seed also;
saying, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. Though to be born of such,
does not necessarily entitle Infants to the spiritual Mercies of the Covenant,
for Grace does not run in a Blood; we see the contrary many times, even godly
Parents have wicked Children; Abraham had his Ishmael, and Isaac his Esau, yet
questionless it does entitle them to the external Privileges of the Covenant.
The like Figure unto Noah's Ark, even Baptism does also now save us: Noah, and
all that were his, entered into the Ark, though we have cause to doubt whether
they all entered into Heaven. While our Lord Jesus was here upon the Earth, they
brought little Children to him, and he laid his Hands on them, and blessed
them; and said moreover, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid,
them not, (there are many at this day that forbid little Children to come to
Christ); he adds the reason, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Whether it
be meant of the visible Church, often so called in the Gospel, or of the state
of Glory in another World; either way it affords an Argument for Proof of
Infant Baptism. When either Parent is in Covenant with God, their Children also
are in Covenant with him; and being in Covenant, they have an undoubted Right
and Title to this Ordinance of Baptism, which is the Seal of the Covenant. So
that in the Administration of this Ordinance this Day, according to the
Institution of Jesus Christ, we look upon you who are the Father of this Child,
as a Person in Covenant with God: How far you have dealt unfaithfully in the
Covenant, is known to God and your own Conscience; but this we know, the Vows
of God are upon you; and let every one that names the Name of Christ depart
from Iniquity. But before we Baptize your Child, I am to acquaint you in a few
words what we expect from you.

Q. (1.) Do you avouch God ^n Jesus Christ this Day to be your God? -- See to
it that this be done in Truth and with a perfect Heart: you may tell us you do
so, and you may deceive us, but God is not mocked. Q (2.) And is, it your
desire, that your Children also may be received into Covenant with the Lord,
and that the Lord's Broad-seal of Baptism may be set to it? Q. (3.) And do you
promise in the presence of God and of this Congregation, that you will do your
endeavor toward the training of it u^ in the way of Godliness, that as it is
by you through Mercy that it lives the Life of Nature, so it may by you also,
through the same Mercy, live the Life of Grace; else I must tell you, if you be
wanting herein, there will be a sad Appearance one Day, when you shall meet
together before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and this solemn Engagement of
yours will be brought in to witness against you.

These were but the first Instances of his Skilfulness, in dispensing the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. He declined the private Administration of the
Lord's Supper to sick Persons, as judging it not consonant to the Rule and
Intention of the Ordinance. He very rarely, if ever, Baptized in private; but
would have Children brought to the solemn Assembly upon the Lord's Day, that
the Parents Engagement might have the more Witnesse^ to it, and the Child the
more Prayers put up for it, and that the Congregation might be edified. And yet
he would say there was some inconvenience in it too, unless People would agree
to put off the Feasting part of the Solemnity to some other time, which he very
much persuaded his Friends to; and observed, that Abraham made a great Feast
the same Day that Isaac it is weaned, (Genesis 21. 8.) not the same Day that he
was circumcised.

His Carriage toward the People of his Parish was very exemplary,
condescending to the meanest, and conversing familiarly with them; bearing with
the Infirmites of the weak, and becoming all things to all Men. He was
exceeding tender of giving Offense, or occasion of Grief to any body, minding
himself in his Diary upon such occasions, that the Wisdom that is from above,
is pure, and peaceable, and gentle, etc. Yet he plainly and faithfully reproved
what he saw amiss in any, and would not suffer Sin upon them; mourning also for
that which he could not mend. There were some untractable People in the Parish,
who sometimes caused Grief to him, and exercised his Boldness and Zeal in
reproving. Once hearing of a merry Meeting at an Alehouse on a Saturday Night,
he went himself and broke it up, and scattered them. At another time, he
publicly witnessed againt (...) ^rolick of some vain People, that on a
Saturday Night came to the Church with a Fiddler before them, and dressed it up
with Flowers and Garlands, making it (as he told them) more like a Playhouse;
And, was this their preparation for the Lord's Day, and the Duties of it? etc.
He minded them of Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young Man in thy Youth, but know thou
--

Many out of the neighboring Parishes attended upon his Ministry, and some
came from far, though sometimes he signified his dislike of their so doing, so
far was he from glorying in it. But they who had spiritual Senses exercised to
discern things that differ, would attend upon that Ministry which they found to
be most edifying.

He was about Eight Years from first to last, laboring in the Word and
Doctrine at Worthenbury, and his Labor was not altogether in vain: He saw in
many of the travel of his Soul to the rejoicing of his Heart, but with this
particular Dispensation (which I have heard him sometimes speak of) that most
or all of those in that Parish whom he was (through Grace) instrumental of Good
too, died before he left the Parish, or quickly after; so that within a few
Years after his removal thence, there were very few of the visible Fruits of
his Ministry there; and a new Generation sprung up there who knew not Joseph.
Yet the opportunity he found there was there of doing the more good, by having
those that were his Charge near about him, made him all his days bear his
Testimony to Parish Order, where it may he had upon good Terms, as much more
elegible, and more likely to answer the end, than the Congregational way of
gathering Churches from places far distant; which could not ordinarily meet to
worship God together. From his Experience here (though he would say, we must do
what we can, when we cannot do what we would) he often wished and prayed for
the opening of a Door, by which to return to that Order again.

He had not been long at Worthenbury, but he began to be taken notice of by the
neighboring Ministers, as likely to be a considerable Man. Though his
extraordinary Modesty and Humility (which even in his Youth he was remarkable
for) made him to sit down with silence in the lowest Room, and to say as Elihu,
Days shall speak; yet his eminent Gifts and Graces could not long be hid, the
Ointment of the Righthand will betray it self; and a Person of his Merits could
not but meet with those quickly, who said, Friend, go up higher; and so that
Scripture was fulfilled, Luke 14. 10. He was often called upon to preach the
Weekday. Lectures, which were set up plentifully, and diligently attended upon
in those parts, and his Labors were generally very acceptable and successful.
The Vox Populi fastened upon him the Epithet of Heavenly Henry, by which Title
he was commonly known all the Country over, and his Advice was sought for by
many neighboring Ministers and Christians, for he was one of those that found
Favor and good Understanding in the sight of God and Man. He was noted at his
first setting out (as I have been told by one who was then intimately
acquainted with him, and with his Character and Conversation) for three things,
1. Great Piety and Devotion, and a mighty savor of Godliness in all his
Converse. 2. Great Industry in the pursuit of useful Knowledge; he was
particularly observed to be very inquisi^ive when he was among the Aged and
Intelligent, hearing them, and asking them Questions; a good Example to young
Men, especially young Ministers. 3. Great Self-denial, Self-diffidence, and
Self-abasement; this eminent Humility put a Luster upon all his other Graces.
This Character of him, minds me of a Passage I have sometimes heard him tell
us, a check to the forwardness* and conference of young Men, That once at a
Meeting of Ministers, a Question of Moment was started, to be debated among
them; upon the first proposal of it, a confident young Man shoots his Bolt
presently, Truly (says he) I hold it so; You hold Sir, (says a grave
Minister) it becomes you to hold your Peace.

Besides his frequent preaching of the Lectures about him, he was a constant
and diligent Attendant upon those within his reach, as a Hearer; and not only
wrote the Sermons he heard, but afterward recorded in his Diary what in each
Sermon reached his Heart, affected him, and did him good; adding some proper
pious Ejaculations, which were the Breathings of his Heart, when he meditated
upon and prayed over the Sermon.

What a wonderful degree of Piety and Humility does it evidence, for one of so
great acquaintance with the things of God, to write, This I learnt out of such
a Sermon; and this was the Truth I made up to my self out of such a Sermon; and
indeed something out of every Sermon. His diligent improvement of the Wo^d
preached, contributed (more than any one thing, as a means) to his great
Seize of Knowledge and Grace. He would say sometimes, that one great use
of Weekday Lectures, was, that it gave Ministers an opportunity of hearing one
another preach, by which they are likely to profit, when they hear not as
Masters, but as Scholars, not as Censors, but as Learners.

His great Friend and Companion, and Fellow Labourer in the Work of the Lord,
was the worthy Mr. Richard Steel (Minister of Hanmer, one of the next Parishes
to Worthenbury) whose praise is in the Churches of Christ, for his Excellent
and Useful Treatises, The Husbandman's Calling; An Antidote against
Distractions, and several others. He was Mr. Henry's alter idem, the Man of his
Counsel; with him he joined frequently at Hanmer and elsewhere, in Christian
Conference, and in Days of Humiliation and Prayer: Besides, their Meetings with
other Ministers at Public Lectures; after which it was usual for them to spend
some time among themselves in set Disputations in Latin. This was the Work that
in those Days was carried on among Ministers, who made it their Business, as
Iron sharpens Iron, to provoke one another to Love and to good Works. What was
done of this kind in Worcestershire, Mr. Baxter tells us in his Life.

In the beginning of his Days he often labored under Bodily Distempers; it was
feared that he was in a Consumption; and some blamed him for taking so much
pains in his Ministerial Work, suggesting to him Master spare thy self: One of
his Friends told him, he lighted up all his Pound of Candles together; and that
he could not hold out long at that rate; and wished him to be a better Husband
of his Strength: But he often reflected upon it with comfort afterward, that
he was not influenced by such Suggestions: The more we do, the more we may do
(so he would sometimes say) in the Service of God. When his Work was sometimes
more than ordinary, and bore hard upon him, he thus appealed to God; Thou
know, Lord, how well contented I am to spend and to be spent in thy Service;
and if the outward Man decay, O, let the inward Man be renewed. Upon the
returns of his Indisposition he expresses a great Concern, how to get
Spiritual good by it; to come out of the ^urnace, and leave some Dross behind;
for it is a great Loss to loose an Affliction. He mentions it as tha^ which he
hoped did him good, that he was ready to look upon every return of Distemper,
as a Summons to the Grave; thus he learned to dye daily. I find (says he) my
earthly. Tabernacle t^tering, and when it is taken down, I shall have a
Building in Heaven, that shall never fail. Blessed be God the Father and my
Lord Jesus Christ, and the good Spirit of Grace, Even so, Amen. This was both
his Strength and his Song, under his Bodily Infirmities.

While he was at Worthenbury he constantly laid by the Tenth of his Income for
the Poor, which he carefully and faithfully disposed of, in the liberal things
which he devised, especially the teaching of poor Children: And he would
recommend it as a good Rule to lay by for Charity (in some proportion,
according as the Circumstances are) and then it will be the easier to lay out
in Charity; we shall be the more apt to seek for opportunities of doing good
when we have Money lying by us, of which we have said, This is not our own but
the Poors. To encourage himself and others to Works of Charity, he would say,
He is no Fool who parts with that which he cannot keep, when he is sure to be
Recompensed with that which he cannot loose. And yet to prove Alms to be
Righteousness, and to exclude all Boasting of them, he often expressed himself
in these words of David, Of thine own, Lord have we given thee.

In the Year 1658. the Ministers of that Neighborhood, began to enlarge their
Correspondence with the Ministers of North Wales; and several Meetings they had
at Ruthin and other places that Year, for the settling of a Correspondence, and
the promoting of Unity and Love, and good Understanding among themselves, by
entering into an Association, like those some years before of Worcestershire and
Cumberland, to which, as their pattern (those two having been Published) they
did refer themselves. They appointed particular Associations; and
(notwithstanding the differences of Apprehension, that were among them; some
being in their Judgments Episcopal, others Congregational, and others
Classical) they agreed to lay aside the thoughts of Matters in Variance, and to
give to each other the Right Hand of Fellowship; that with one Shoulder and
with one Consent, they might Study each in their places to promote the Common
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, and the Common Salvation of precious Souls. He
observed that this Year, after the Death of Oliver Cromwell, there was
generally throughout the Nation, a great Change in the Temper of God's People,
and a mighty tendency toward Peace and Unity, as if they were by Consent weary
of their long clashings, which in his Diary he expresses his great Rejoicing
in, and his Hopes that the time was at Hand, when Judah should no longer vex
Ephraim, nor Ephraim envy Judah, neither should they learn War any more. And
though these hopes were soon disappointed by a Change of the Scene; yet he
would often speak of the Experience of that and the following Year in those
parts, as a Specimen of what may yet be expected; (and therefore in Faith
prayed for) when the Spirit shall be poured out upon us from on high. But alas,
Who shall live when God does this? From this Experience he likewise gathered
this Observation, That it is not so much our Difference of Opinion that does us
the mischief; (for we may as soon expect all the Clocks in the Town to strike
together, as to see all good People of a mind in every thing on this side
Heaven) but the mismanagement of that difference.

In the Association of the Ministers it was referred to Mr. Henry to draw up
that part of their Agreement which concerned the Worship of God, which task he
performed to their Satisfaction: his Preface to what he drew up begins thus:
Though the main of our Desires and Endeavors be after Unity in the greater
things of God; yet we judge Uniformity in the Circumstances of Worship, a thing
not to be altogether neglected by us, not only in regard of that influence,
which external visible Order has upon the Beauty and Comeliness of the Churches
of Christ; but also; as it has a Direct Tendency to the strenthning of our
Hands in Ministerial Services, and withal to the removing of those Prejudices
which many People have conceived even against Religion and Worship itself. We
bless God from our very Souls, for that whereunto we have already attained; and
yet we hope some further thing may be done, in reference to our closer walking,
by the same Rule, and minding the same things. The word of God is the Rule
which we desire and resolve to walk by in the Administration of Ordinances; and
for those things wherein the Word is silent, we think we may and ought to have
recourse to Christian Prudence, and the Practice of the Reformed Churches,
agreeing with the general Rules of the Word: And therefore we have had (as we
think we ought) in our present Agreement, a special Eye to the Directory, etc.

These Agreements of theirs were the more likely to be for good, for that here
(as in Worcestershire) when they were in agitation, the Ministers set apart a
Day of Fasting and Prayer among themselves to bewail Ministerial neglects, and
to seek to God for Direction and Success in their Ministerial. Work. They met
sometimes for this purpose at Mr. Henry's House at Worthenbury.

One Passage may not improperly, be inserted here, that once at a Meeting of
the Ministers, being desired to subscribe a Certificate concerning one whom he
had not sufficient acquaintance with; he refused, giving this Reason, That he
preferred the peace of his Conscience before the Friendship of all the Men in
the World.

Sept. 29. 1658. the Lady Puleston dyed. She was (says he) the best Friend I
had on Earth, but my Friend in Heaven is still where he was, and he will never
leave me nor forsake me. He preached her Funeral Sermon from Isa. 3. last,
Cease from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils. He has noted this Expression
of hers not long before she died: My Soul leans to Jesus Christ, lean to me
sweet Savior. About this time he writes, A dark Cloud is over my Concernments
in this Family, but my desire is, that whatever becomes of me and my Interest,
the Interest of Christ may still be kept on foot in this place. Amen, so be it.
But he adds soon after that saying of Athanasius, which he was used often to
quote and take comfort from; Nubecula est and cito pertransibit. It is a little
Cloud, and will soon blow over.

About a Year after, Sept. 5. 1659. Judge Puleston died, and all Mr. Henry's
Interest in Emeral Family was buried in his Grave. He preached the Judges
Funeral Sermon from Neh. 13. 14. Wipe not out my good Deeds that I have done
for the House of my God, and for the Offices thereof; the Design of which
Sermon was not to ^pplaud his Deceased Friend; I find not a word in the Sermon
to that purpose: But he took occasion from the instance of so great a
Benefactor to the Ministry, as the Judge was, to show that Deeds done for the
House of God and the Offices thereof, are good Deeds: and to press People
according as their Ability and Opportunity was, to do such Deeds. One passage I
find in that Sermon which ought to be Recorded; That it had been for several
Years the practice of a worthy Gentleman in the Neighboring County in renewing
his Leases, instead of making it a Condition that his Tenants should keep a
Hawk or a Dog for him, to oblige them that they should keep a Bible in their
Houses for themselves, and should bring up their Children to learn to Read and
to be Catechized. This (says he) would be no charge to you, and it might
oblige them to that which otherwise they would neglect. Some wished (says he)
in his Diary, that I had chosen some other Subject for that Sermon, but I
approved my self to God, and if I please m^n, I am not the Servant of Christ.

What personal Affronts he received from some of the Branches of that Family at
that time need not be mentioned, but with what Exemplary Patience he bore them,
ought not to be forgotten.

In March, 165^. he was very much solicited to leave Worthenbury, and to
accept of the Vicaridge of Wrexham, which was a place that he had both a great
Interest in, and a great kindness for, but he could not see his Call clear from
Worthenbury, so he declined it. The same Year he had an offer made him of a
considerable Living near London, but he was not of them that are given to
Change, nor did he Consult with Flesh and Blood, nor seek great things to
himself.

That Year he had some disturbance from the Quakers, who were set on by some
others, who wished ill to his Ministry; they Challenged him to dispute with
them; and that which he was to prove against them, was, that the God he
Worshipped was not an Idol; that John Baddely (a Blacksmith in Malpas, and the
Ringleader of the Quakers in that Country) was not Infallible nor without Sin;
That Baptism with Water, and the Lord's Supper are Gospel Ordinances; that the
Scriptures are the word of God, and that Jesus Christ will come to judge the
World at the last Day: But he never had any public Disputes with them, nor so
much disturbance from them in public Worship, as some other Ministers had
elsewhere about that time. He had some apprehensions at that time, that God
would make the Quakers a Scourge to this Nation; but had Comfort in this
Assurance, that God would in due time vindicate his own Honor, and the Honor
of his Ordinances, and those of them who will not Repent to give him Glory,
will be cast into the Fire.

One passage I cannot omit, because it discovers what kind of Spirit the
Quakers were of: A Debauched Gentleman being in his revels at Malpas, Drinking
and Swearing, was after a sort reproved for it by Baddely the Quaker, who was
in his Company; Why (says the Gentleman) i will ask thee one Question, Whether
is it better for me to follow Drinking and Swearing, or to go and Hear Henry?
He answered, Of the two, rather follow thy Drinking and Swearing.

The Cheshire Rising this Year (in Opposition to the Irregular Powers that then
were ^ppermost) under Sir George Booth (afterward Lord Delamere) and that of
North Wales under Sir Thomas Middleton, could not but affect Worthenbury, and
the Country thereabouts. Mr. Henry's Praye^ for them in ^his Di^y the Day of
their first appearing is, Lord own them, if they truly own thee. He note^, that
Lambert's Forces which came down to Suppress them, did in that Neighborhood
espouse the Quakers Cause, and offer Injury to some Ministers; and therefore,
(says he) unless God intend the Ruin of the Nation by them, they cannot
prosper: Nor did they long, though in that Expedition they had Success. In
their Return some of Lambert's Soldiers were at Worthenbury Church hearing Mr.
Henry upon a Lord's Day; and one of them sat with his Hat on, while they were
Singing Psalms, for which he Publicly admonished him: And there being many
Anabaptists among them, he has Recorded it as a good Providence, that those
Questions in the Cate^hism which are concerning Baptism, came in Course to be
Expounded that Day. The first Rising of the Cheshire Forces was Aug. 1. 1659.
and the 19th following they were worsted and scattered by Lambert's Forces,
near Northwich, a strange Spirit of fear being upon them, which quite took off
their Chariot Wheels. The Country called it not the Cheshire Rising, but the
Cheshire Race. Some blamed him, that he did not give God thanks publicly for
the defeat of Sir George Booth; to whom he answered with his usual mildness,
that his Apprehensions concerning that Affair, were not the same with theirs.
We are now (says he) much in the dark, never more. He preached the Lecture at
Chester soon after, just at the time when Mr. Cook, a^ eminent Minister in
Chester, and several others were carried Prisoners to London, for their Agency
in the late Attempt: and the City was threatened to have their Charter taken
away, etc. The Text in Course that day (for they Preached over the latter part
of that Epistle, if not the whole, at that Lecture) happened to be Heb. 13, 14.
We have here no continuing City, which he thought a word upon the Wheels at
that time. He Notes in his Diary, that when, after that, the Army Ruled,
disturbed the Parliament, and carried all before them, with a high Hand, there
were great Grounds to fear sad times approaching; and his Prayer is, Lord, fit
thy People for the Fiery Trial.

He was a hearty well-wisher to the return of the King, the Spring following,
April, 1660. and was much affected with the Mercy of it. While others rejoice
carnally, (says he) Lord, help thy People to rejoice spiritually, in our
public National Mercies. 'Twas upon that occasion that Mr. Baxter preached his
Sermon of Right Rejoicing, on Luke 10. 20. But he and others soon saw cause to
Rejoice with Trembling, and to sing both of Mercy and Judgment; for about that
time he has this Melancholy Remark; Religion loses Ground exceedingly, and
Profan^ss gets it: Help Lord! However he was very Industrious to quiet the
minds of some who were uneasy at that great Revolution; and that Scripture
yielded him much Satisfaction: Ioh. 3. 35. The Father loves the Son, and has
given all things into his Hands. If Christ be not only Head of the Church, but
Heir over all things to the Church, we may be assured, that all things shall be
made to work together for good to it. The Text also which the Lord put it into
his Heart to preach upon, on the day of Public Thanksgiving for the King's
Restoration, was very comfortable to him* Prove. 21. 1. The Kings Heart is in
the hand of the Lord. His sense of that great Mercy of God to the Nation, in
the unbloody, peaceable and legal Settlement of King Charles the 2d, upon the
Throne, was the same with that of Multitudes, besides both Ministers and others
that were of the quiet in the Land, who yet not long after suffered very hard
things under him. Soon after the Return of the King, he notes, how industrious
some were to remove him from Worthenbury, on which he writes this as the
Breathing of his Soul toward God; Lord, if it please thee, fasten me here as a
Nail in a sure place; if otherwise, I will take nothing ill which thou do
with me: and when pressed by his Friends more earnestly than before to accept
of some other place; Lord, (says he) Mine Eye is up unto thee, I am wholly at
thy disposal, make my way plain before my Face, because of mine Enemies; my
Resolution is, to deny my self if thou call me. Here (or any where, it is no
great Matter where) I am. Many Years after the King's Return, he Dated a Letter
May 29. (...).

There are two things further which I think it may be of use to give some
account of in the close of this Chapter. 1. Of the Course of his Ministry at
Worthenbury, and 2. Of the State of his Soul, and the Communion he had with God
in those Years: The former out of his Sermon-Notes, the latter out of his Diary.

As to the Subjects he Preached upon, he did not use to dwell long upon a Text.
Better one Sermon upon many Texts, (viz. many Scriptures opened and applied)
than many Sermons upon one Text: To that purpose he would sometimes speak.

He used to Preach in a fixed Method, and linked his Subjects in a sort of a
Chain; not confining himself to the Method of the Assemblies Catechism; (which
some commend) but he adapted his Method and Style to the Capacity of his
Hearers, fetching his Similitudes for Illustration, from those things which
were familiar to them. He did not shoot the Arrow of the Word over their Heads
in high Notions, or the Flourishes of affected Rhetoric, nor under their Feet
by blunt and homely Expressions, as many do under pretense of plainness, but to
their Hearts in close and lively Applications. His Delivery was very graceful
and agreeable, far from being either noisie and precipitate on the one Hand, or
dull and slow on the other. His Doctrine did drop as the Dew, and distill as the
soaking Rain, and came with a charming pleasing Power, such as many will bear
witness to, that have wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his
Mouth.

He wrote the Notes of his Sermons pretty large for the most part, and always
very legible; he wrote most of them twice over. But even when he had put his
last Hand to them, he commonly left many imperfect Hints, which gave room for
Enlargements in Preaching, wherein he had a very great Felicity. And he would
often advise Ministers not to tie themselves too strictly to their Notes, but
having well digested the Matter before, to allow themselves a liberty of
Expression, such as a Man's Affections, if they be well raised, will be apt to
furnish him with. But for this, no certain Rule can be given, there are
diversities of Gifts, and each to profit withal.

He kept his Sermon-Notes in very neat and exact Order; Sermons in Course,
according to the Order of the Subject* and occasional Sermons according to the
Scripture-order of the Texts; so that he could readily turn to any of them. And
yet, though afterward he was removed to a place far enough distant from any of
that Auditory, yet (though some have desired it) he seldom preached any of
those hundreds of Sermons which he had preached at Worthenbury, no not when he
preached never so privately, but to the last he studied new Sermons, and wrote
them as elaborately as ever; for he thought a Sermon best preached, when it was
newly meditated: Nay, if sometimes he had occasion to preach upon the same
Text, yet he would make and write the Sermons over; and he never offered that
to God which cost him nothing.

When he went to Oxford, and preached there before the University in
Christ-Church, as he did several times, his Labors were not only very
acceptable, but successful too; particularly one Sermon which he preached
there, on Prove. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at sin; for which Sermon, a young
Master of Arts came to his Chamber afterward to return him thanks, and to
acknowledge the good Impressions, which Divine Grace by that Sermon had made
upon his Soul, which he hoped he should never forget.

In his Diary, he frequently records the frame of his Spirit in studying and
preaching. Sometimes blessing God for signal help vouchsafed, and owning him
the Lord God of all his Enlargements; at other times, complaining of great
deadness and straitness. It is a wonder (says he) that I can speak of Eternal
things, with so little Sense of the reality of them. Lord, strengthen that
which remains, which is ready to die. And he once writes thus upon a studying
Day; I forgot explicitly and expressly when I began to crave help from God, and
the Chariot Wheels drove accordingly. Lord, forgive my Omissions, and keep me
in the way of Duty.

As to the state of his Soul in these Years, it should seem by his Diary, that
he was exercised with some Doubts and Fears concerning it. I think, (says he)
never did any poor Creature pass through such a mixture of Hope and Fear, Joy
and Sadness, Assurance and Doubting, down and up, as I have done these Years
past -- (The Notice of this may be of use to poor drooping Christians, that
they may know their Case is not singular; and that if God for a small Moment
hide his Face from them; he deals with them no otherwise than as he uses
sometimes to deal with the dearest of his Servants). It would affect one; to
hear one that lived a Life of Communion with God, complaining of great
straitness in Prayer. No Life at all in the Duty, many Wanderings; If my Prayers
were written down, and my vain Thoughts interlined, What incoherent Nonsense
would there be? I am ashamed, Lord, I am ashamed, O pity, and Pardon. To hear
him suspecting the workings of Pride of Heart, when he gave an Account to a
Friend, who enquired of him, touching the success of his Ministry, and that he
should record this concerning himself, with this Ejaculation annexed, The Lord
pardon and subdue: 'Twas a sign that he kept a very watchful Eye upon the
Motions of his own Heart.

To hear him charging it upon himself, that he was present at such a Duty in
the midst of many Distractions not tasting sweetness in it, etc. When a Fire is
first kindled (says he) there is a deal of Smoke and Smother, that afterward
wears away; so in young Converts, much peevishness, frowardness, darkness: So
it has been with my Soul, and so it is yet in a great measure. Lord pity, and
do not quench the smoking Flax; though as yet it do but smoke, let these
Sparks be blown up into a Flame.

Great Mercies, but poor Returns, signal Opportunities, but small Improvements:
Such are his Complaints frequently concerning himself. And though few or none
excelled him in profitable Discourse, yet in that he often bewails his
Barronness, and Unprofitableness. Little good done or gotten such a day for
want of a Heart; it is my Sin and Shame. O that I had Wings like a Dove.

Yet when he wanted a Faith of Assurance, he li^'d by a Faith of Adherence.
Such a Day (says he) a full Resignation was made of all my Concernments, into
the Hands of my Heavenly Father, let him deal with me, as seems good in his
Eyes; I am learning and laboring to live by Faith, Lord help my Unbelief.
Another time he notes, that many perplexing Fears being upon his Spirit, they
were all silenced with that sweet Word which was seasonably brought to his
remembrance, Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer.

He very frequently kept Days of Fasting and Humiliation in secret, which he
calls his Days of Atonement. Sometimes he observed these monthly, and sometimes
only upon special occasions; but the Memorandums in his Diary (not only while
he was at Worthenbury, but often after) show what sweet Communion he had with
God in those solemn Duties, which no Eye was Witness to, but his who sees in
secret, and will reward openly. Remember (O my Soul) such a Day, as a Day of
more then ordinary Engagements entered into, and strong Resolutions taken up of
closer Walking, and more Watchfulness, O my God, undertake for me! And upon
another of those Days of secret Prayer and Humiliation, he notes, If sowing in
Tears be so sweet, what then will the Harvest be when I shall reap in Joy?
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and will in due
time heal all thy Diseases.

CHAP. IV.
His Marriage, Family, Family Religion, and the Education of his Children.

His removed from Emeral, to the House in Worthenbury, which the Judge had
built for him, in February, 1658/9, and then had one of his Sisters with him to
keep his House. No sooner had he a Tent, but God had an Altar, in it, and that
a smoking Altar. There he set up Repetition on Sabbath-Evenings, and welcomed
his Neighbors to it.

His Christian Friends often, and sometimes his Brethren in the Ministry, kept
Days of, Fasting and Prayer at his House. He used to tell People when they had
built new Houses, they must dedicate them (referring to Deuteronomy. 20. 5. and Psalm.
30. ult.) that is, they must invite God to their Houses, and devote them to his
Service.

Providence having thus brought him into a House of his own, soon after
provided him a Help-meet for him. After long Agitation, and some Discouragement
and Opposition from the Father, Apr. 26. 1660. he Married Katherine, the only
Daughter and Heiress of Mr. Daniel Matthews, of Broad-Oak in the Township of
Iscoyd, in Flint-shire, (but in the Parish of Malp^, which is in Cheshire, and
about two Miles distant from Whitchurch, a considerable Market Town in
Shropshire). Mr. Matthews was a Gentleman of a very competent Estate; such a
one as King James the First used to say was the happiest Lot of all others,
which set a Man below the Office of a Justice of Peace, and above that of a
Petty-Constable. This was his only Child: very fair and honorable Overtures
had been made for her disposal; but it pleased God so to order Events, and to
overruled the Spirits of those concerned, that she was reserved to be a
Blessing to this good Man, in things pertaining both to Life and Godliness.

His purpose of Marriage was published in the Church three Lord's Days before;
a laudable Practice, which he greatly approved, and persuaded others to.

The Day before his Marriage, he kept as a Day of secret Prayer and Fasting.

He used to say, Those who would have comfort in that Change of their
condition, must see to it, that they bring none of the Guilt of the Sin of
their single State with them into the married State. And the presence of Christ
at a Wedding, will turn the Water into Wine; and he will come, if he be invited
by Prayer.

He took all occasions while he lived, to express his thankfulness to God, for
the great comfort he had in this Relation, A day of Mercy (so he writes on his
Marriage day) never to be forgotten. God had given him one (as he writes
afterward) every way h^ helper, in whom he had much comfort, and for whom be
thanked God with all his Heart. He writes in his Diary, April 26. 1680. This
day we have been Married Twenty Years, in which time we have received of the
Lord more than Twenty Thousand Mercies; to God be Glory. Sometimes he writes;
we have been so long Married, and never Reconciled; that is, there was never
any occasion for it. His usual Prayer for his Friends in the Married State, was
according to his own Practice in that State; That they might be mutually
serviceable to each others Faith and Holiness, and jointly serviceable to God's
Honor and Glory.

Her Father, though he put some Hardships upon him in the Terms, and had been
somewhat a verse to the Match, yet by Mr. Henry's great Prudence, and God's
good Providence, he was influenced to give a free consent to it; and he
himself, with his own Hand, gave her in Marriage. From this, as from other
Experiences, Mr. Henry had learned to say with Assurance; It is not in vain to
wait upon God and to keep his way. Mr. Matthews settled part of his Estate
before Marriage upon them and theirs; he lived about seven Years after; and
when he dyed, the remainder of it came to them. This competent Estate which the
Divine Providence brought into his Hand, was not only a Comfortable Support to
him when he was turned out of his Living, and when many Faithful Ministers of
Christ were reduced to great Poverty and Straits; but it enabled him likewise,
as he had opportunity, to Preach the Gospel freely, which he did to his dying
Day; and not only so, but to give for the Relief of others that were in want,
in which he sowed plentifully, to a very large proportion of his Income; and
often blessed God that he had wherewithal, remembering the words of the Lord,
how he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.

Such was his House, and such the Vine which God graciously planted by the side
of his House. By her God gave him six Children, all born within less than e^ht
Years; the two eldest Sons, John and Matthew: ^he other four Daughters, Sarah,
Katharine, Eleanor and Ann. His eldest Son John dyed of the Measles in (...)
sixth year of his Age; and the rest were in Mercy continued to him.

The Lord having built him up into a Family, he was careful and faithful in
making good his solemn Vow at his Ordination, that he and his House would serve
the Lord. He would often say, That we are really that which we are relatively.
It is not so much what we are at Church, as what we are in our Families.
Religion in the Power of it will be Family Religion. In this his Practice was
very Exemplary; he was one that walked before his House in a perfect way, with
a perfect Heart, and therein behaved himself wisely. His constant Care and
prudent endeavor was not only to put away Iniquity far from his Tabernacle,
but that where he dwelt, the word of Christ might dwell richly. If he might
have no other Church, yet he had a Church in his House.

He made Conscience of Closet-Worship, and did abound in it, not making his
Family Worship to excuse for that. He has this affecting Note in his Diary,
upon the removing of his Closet, but from one Room in the House to another;
this day (says he) my new Closet was Consecrated, if I may so say, with this
Prayer; That all the Prayers that ever should be made in it, according to the
Will of God, Morning, Evening, and at Noonday, ordinary or extraordinary,
might be accepted of God, and obtain a gracious Answer, Amen and Amen. It was
the Caution and Advice which he frequently gave to his Children and Friends; Be
sure you look to your Secret Duty, keep that up whatever you do; the Soul
cannot prosper in the neglect of it. He observed that Apostasy generally begins
at the Closet-door. Secret Prayer is first neglected, and carelessly performed,
then frequently omitted, and after a while wholly cast off; and then farewell
God and Christ and all Religion.

He also advised, that Secret Duty be performed secretly, which was the
Admonition he gave sometimes to those who caused their Voice to be heard on
high in that Duty.

Besides this, he and his, Wife constantly prayed together Morning and Evening;
and seldom if they were together at home or abroad was it intermitted; and from
his own Experience of the Benefit of this Practice, He would take all
opportunities to recommend it to those in that Relation, as conducing very much
to the comfort of it, and to their furtherance in that, which he would often
say, is the great Duty of Yoke-fellows; and that is, to do all they can to help
one another to Heaven. He would say, that this Duty of Husbands and Wives
Praying together, is intimated in that of the Apostle, 1. Pet. 3. 7. where they
are Exhorted to live as Heirs together of the Grace of Life, that their Prayers
(especially their Prayers together) be not hindered; that nothing may be done to
hinder them from Praying together, nor to hinder them in it, nor to spoil the
Success. of those Prayers. This Sanctifies the Relation, and fetches in a
Blessing upon it, makes the Comforts of it the more sweet, and the Cares and
Crosses of it the more easy, and is an excellent means of preserving and
increasing Love in the Relation. Many to whom he has recommended the Practice
of this Duty, have blessed God for him, and for his advice concerning it. When
he was abroad and lay with any of his Friends, he would mind them of his Rule,
That they who lie together must pray together. In the performance of this part
of his daily. Worship he was usually short, but often much affected.

Besides these he made Conscience, and made a Business of Family Worship in all
the parts of it; and in it he was uniform, steady and constant, from the time
that he was first called to the Charge of a Family, to his dying Day; and
according to his own Practice, be too^ all occasions to press it upon others.
His Doctrine once from Josh. 24. 15. was, That Family Worship i^ Family-Duty.
He would say sometimes, if the Worship of God be not in the House, write, Lord
have Mercy on us, upon the Door; for there is a Plague, a Curse in it. It is
the Judgment of Archbishop Tillotson, in that excellent Book which he
Published a little before his Death upon this Subjecct; That constant Family
Worship is so necessary to keep alive a sense of God and Religion in the Minds
of Men, that he sees not ho^ any Family that neglects it, can in reason be
esteemed a Family of Christians, or indeed to have any Religion a^ all. How
earnestly would Mr. Henry reason with People sometimes about this Matter, and
tell them what a Blessing it would bring upon them and their Houses, and all
that they had. He that makes his House a little Church, shall find, that God
will make it a little Sanctuary. It may be of use to give a particular Account
of his Practice in this Matter, because it was very Exemplary. As to the Time
of it, his Rule was, commonly the earlier the better both Morning and Evening;
in the Morning before Worldly Business crowned in, early will I seek thee: He
that is the first should have the first; nor is it fit that the Worship of God
should stand by and wait while the Worlds turn is served. And early in the
Evening, before the Children and Servants began to be sleepy; and therefore if
it might be he would have Prayer at Night before Supper, that the Body might be
the more fit to serve the Soul in that Service of God. And indeed he did
industriously contrive all the Circumstances of his Family Worship, so as to
make it most solemn and most likely to answer the end. He always made it the
Business of every day, and not (as too many make it) (...) By-business. This
being his fixed Principle, all other affairs must be sure to give way to this.
And he would tell those who objected against Family Worship, that they could
not get time for it; that if they would but put on Christian Resolution at
first, they would not find the Difficulty so great as they imagined; but after
a while, their other Affairs would fall in easily and naturally with this
especially where there is that Wisdom which is profitable to direct. Nay, they
would find it to be a great preserver of Order and Decency in a Family, and
would be like a Hem to all their other Business, to keep it from Ravelling. He
was ever careful to have all his Family present at Family Worship; though
sometimes living in the Country he had a great Household; yet he would have not
only his Children and Sojourners, (if he had any) and Domestic Servants, but
his Workmen and Day-Labourers, and all that were employed for him, if they were
within call to be present, to join with him in this Service; and as it was an
act of his Charity many times to set them to work for him, so to that he added
this act of Piety, to set them to work for God. And usually when he paid his
Workmen their Wages, he gave them some good Counsel about their Souls: Yet if
any that should come to Family Worship were ^t a distance, and must be staid
for long, he would rather want them, than put the Duty much out of time; and
would sometimes say at a Night, Better one away than all sleepy.

The Performances of his Family Worship were the same Morning and Evening. He
observed that under the Law, the Morning and the Evening Lamb, had the same
Meat Offering and Drink Offering, Exodus 29. 38 -- 41. He always began with a
short, but very solemn Prayer, imploring the Divine Presence and Grace,
Assistance and Acceptance; particularly beging a Blessing upon the word to be
read, in reference to which he often put up this Petition; That the same Spirit
that indicted the Scripture, would enable us to understand the Scripture, and to
make up something to our selves out of it that may do us good: And esteeming
the Word of God as his necessary Food, he would sometimes pray in a Morning,
that our Souls might have a good Meal out of it. He commonly concluded even
this short Prayer, as he did also his Blessings before and after Meat, with a
Doxology, as Paul upon all occasions, To him be Glory, etc. which is properly
Adoration, and is an Essential part of Prayer.

He next sung a Psalm, and commonly he sung David's Psalms in order,
throughout; sometimes using the old Translation, but generally Mr. Barton's:
and his usual way was to sing a whole Psalm throughout, tho perhaps a long one,
and to sing quick; (yet with a good variety of proper and pleasant Tunes) and
that he might do so, usually the Psalm was sung without reading the Line
betwixt, (every one in the Family having a Book) which he preferred much before
the common way of Singing, where it might conveniently be done, as more
agreeable to the Practice of the Primitive Church, and the Reformed Churches
abroad; and by this means he thought the Duty more likely to be performed in
the Spirit and with the Understanding; the Sense being not so broken, nor the
affections interrupted, as in reading the Line betwixt. He would say, that a
Scripture Ground for singing Psalms in Families, might be taken from Psalm. 118.
15. The voice of Rejoicing and of Salvation, is in the Tabernacles of the
Righteous; and that it is a way to hold forth Godliness (like Rahab's Scarlet
Thread, Josh. 2. 17.) to such as pass by our Windows.

He next read a Portion of Scripture, taking the Bible in order; and would
sometimes blame those who only pray in their Families, and do not read the
Scripture: In Prayer we speak to God, by the Word he speaks to us; and is there
any reason (says he) that we should speak all. In the Tabernacle the Priests
were every day to burn Incense, and to light the Lamps; the former Figuring the
Duty of Prayer, the latter the Duty of reading the Word. Sometimes he would
say, those do well that Pray Morning and Evening in their Families, those do
better that pray and read the Scriptures; but those do best of all, that pray
and read and sing Psalms, and Christians should covet earnestly the best Gifts.

He advised the reading of the Scripture in order; for though one Star in the
Firmament of the Scripture differ from another Star in Glory, yet wherever God
has a Mouth to speak, we should have an Ear to hear; and the diligent searcher
may find much excellent Matter in those parts of Scripture, which we are
sometimes tempted to think, might have been spared. How affectionately would he
sometimes bless God for every Book and Chapter, and Verse and Line in the Bible.

What he read in his Family he always expounded: and exhorted all Ministers to
do so, as an excellent means of increasing their acquaintance with the
Scripture. His Expositions were not so much Critical, as Plain and Practical,
and Useful; and such as tended to Edification, and to answer the end for which
the Scriptures were written, which is to make us wise to Salvation. And herein
he had a peculiar Excellence performing that daily Exercise with so much
Judgment, and at the same time with such Facility and Clearness, as if every
Exposition had been premeditated; and very instructive they were, as well as
affecting to the Auditors. His Observations were many times very pretty and
surprising, and such as one shall not ordinarily meet with. Commonly in his
Expositions he reduced the Matter of the Chapter or Psalm read, to some Heads;
not by a Logical Analysis, which often minceth it too small, and confounds the
sense with the Terms; but by such a Distribution as the Matter did most easily
and unforcedly fall into. He often mentioned that saying of Tertullian's, I
adore the fullness of the Scriptures; and sometimes that; Scriptura semper habet
aliquid relegentibus. When sometimes he had hit upon some useful Observation
that was new to him, he would say afterward to those about him; How often have
I read this Chapter, and never before now took Notice of such a thing in it. He
put his Children, while they were with him, to write these Expositions; and
when they were gone from him, the Strangers that sojourned with him did the
same. What Collections his Children had, though but broken and very imperfect
hints; yet, when afterward they were disposed of in the World, were of good
use to them and their Families. Some Expositions of this nature, that is, plain
and practical, and helping to raise the Affections and guide the Conversation
by the Word, he often wished were Published by some good Hand, for the benefit
of Families: But such was his great Modesty and Self-diffidence (though few
more able for it) that he would never be persuaded to attempt any thing of that
kind himself. As an evidence how much his Heart was upon it, to have the Word
of God read and understood in Families, take this passage out of his Last Will
and Testament: I give and bequeath to each of my Four Daughters Mr. Pool' s
English Annotations upon the Bible, in two Volumes, of the last and best
Edition that shall be to be had at the time of my Decease; together with Mr.
Barton' s last and best Translation of the Singing Psalms, one to each of them;
requiring and requesting them to make daily use of the same, for the
Instruction, Edification, and Comfort of themselves and their Families. But
it is time we proceed to the Method of his Family Worship.

The Chapter or Psalm being Read and Expounded, he required from his Children
some account of what they could remember of it; and sometimes would discourse
with them plainly and familiarly about it, that he might lead them into an
acquaintance with it; and (if it might be) impress something of it upon their
Hearts.

He then Prayed, and always Kneeling, which he looked upon as the fittest and
most proper Gesture for Prayer; and he took care that his Family should address
themselves to the Duty, with the outward Expressions of Reverence and
Composedness. He usually fetched his Matter and Expressions in Prayer, from the
Chapter that was read, and the Psalm that was sung, which was often very
affecting, and helped much to stir up and excite praying Graces. He sometimes
observed in those Psalms, where reference is ^ad to the Scripture Stories, as
Psalm. 83. and many others, that those who are well acquainted with the
Scriptures, would not need to make use of the help of prescribed Forms, which
are very necessary for those that cannot do the Duty without them, but are
becoming those that can; as a Go-cart is needful to a Child, or Crurches to one
that is Lame, but neither of them agreeable to one that needs them not: 'Twas
the Comparison he commonly used in this Matter. In Family Prayer he was usually
most full in giving. Thanks for Family-Mercies, confessing Family-Sins, and
beging Family-Blessings. Very particular he would sometimes be in Prayer for
his Family; if any were absent, they were sure to have an express Petition put
up for them. He used to observe concerning Job. Chap. 1. 5. that he offered
Burnt-offerings for his Children, according to the number 'of them all, an
Offering for each Child; and so would he sometimes in Praying for his Children,
put up a Petition for each Child. He always observed at the Annual Return of
the Birth day of each of his Children, to bless God for his Mercy to him and
his Wife in that Child; the giving of it, the continuance of it, the comfort
they had in it, etc. with some special Request to God for that Child. Every
Servant and Sojourner, at their coming into his Family and their going out,
(besides the daily Remembrances of them) had a particular Petition put up for
them, according as their Circumstances were. The Strangers that were at any
time within his Gates, he was wont particularly to recommend to God in Prayer,
with much Affection, and Christian Concern for them and their Concernments. He
was daily mindful of those that desired his Prayers for them, and would say
sometimes, It is a great Comfort that God knows who we mean in Prayer, though
we do not name them. Particular Providence concerning the Country, as to
Health or Sickness, good or bad Weather, or the like, he commonly took Notice
of in Prayer, as there was occasion; and would often beg of God to fit us for
the next Providence, whatever it might be: Nor did he ever forget to pray for
the Peace of Jerusalem. He always concluded Family Prayer, both Morning and
Evening, with a solemn Benediction, after the Doxology; The Blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be with us, etc. Thus did he
daily bless his Household.

Immediately after the Prayer was ended, his Children together, with bended
Knee, asked Blessing of him and their Mother; that is, desired of them to pray
to God to bless them: which Blessing was given with great Solemnity and
Affection; and if any of them were absent, they ever remembered, The Lord help
you and your Brother, or you and your Sister that is absent.

This was his daily Worship, which he rarely altered (unless as is after
mentioned) though he went from home never so early, or returned never so late,
or had never so much business for his Servants to do. He would say, that
sometimes he saw Cause to shorten them; but he would seldom omit any; for if an
Excuse be admitted for an Omission, it will be often returning. He was not
willing (unless the necessity were urgent) that any should go from his House in
a Morning before Family Worship; but upon such an Occasion would mind his
Friends, that Prayer and Provender never hinder a Journey.

He managed his daily Family Worship, so as to make it a Pleasure and not a
Task to his Children and Servants; for he was seldom long, and never tedious in
the Service; the variety of the Duties made it the more pleasant; so that none
who joined with him had ever any reason to say, Behold what a Weariness is it!
Such an Excellent Faculty he had of rendering Religion the most sweet and
aimable Employment in the World; and so careful was he (like Jacob) to drive as
the Children could go, not putting new Wine into old Bottles. If some good
People that mean well would do likewise, it might prevent many of those
Prejudices which young Persons are apt to conceive against Religion, when the
Services of it are made a Toil and a Terror to them.

On Thursday Evenings (instead of Reading) he Catechized his Children and
Servants in the Assemblies Catechism, with the Proofs, or sometimes in a little
Catechism, Concerning the matter of Prayer, published in the Year 1674. and
said to be written by Dr. Collins, which they learned for their help in the
Gift of Prayer, and he Explained it to them. Or else they Read, and he Examined
them in some other useful Book, as Mr. Pool's Dialogues against the Papists,
the Assemblies Confession of Faith with the Scriptures, or the like.

On Saturday Evenings, his Children and Servants gave him an Account what they
could remember of the Chapters that had been Expounded all the Week before, in
order, each a several part, helping one another Memories for the Recollecting
of it. This he called gathering up the Fragments which remained, that nothing
might be lost. He would say to them sometimes as Christ to his Disciples, Have
ye understood all these things? If not, he took that occasion to explain them
more fully. This Exercise (which he constantly kept up all along) was both
delightful and profitable, and being managed by him with so much Prudence and
sweetness, helped to instill into those about him betimes, the Knowledge and
Love of the Holy Scriptures.

When he had Sojourners in his Family, who were able to bear a part in such a
Service, he had commonly in the Winter time set Weekly Conferences on Questions
proposed, for their mutual Edification and Comfort in the fear of God; the
Substance of what was said, he himself took and kept an Account of in Writing.

But the Lord's Day he called and counted the Queen of Days, the Pearl of the
Week, and observed it accordingly. The Fourth Commandment intimates a special
regard to be had to the Sabbath in Families, Thou and thy Son and thy Daughter,
etc. it is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your Dwellings. In this therefore he
was very exact, and abounded in the work of the Lord in his Family on that Day.
Whatever were the Circumstances of his Public Opportunities, (which vari'd, as
we shall find afterward) his Family Religion on that day was the same:
Extraordinary Sacrifices must never supersede the continual Burnt-offering and
his Meat Offering, Numb. 28. 15. His common Salutation of his Family or
Friends, on the Lord's Day in the Morning, was that of the Primitive
Christians; The Lord is risen, he is risen indeed; making it his chief Business
on that day to Celebrate the Memory of Christ's Resurrection; and he would say
sometimes, Every Lord's Day, is a true Christians Easter- day. He took care to
have his Family ready early on that day, and was larger in Exposition and
Prayer on Sabbath-Mornings, than on other days. He would often remember, that
under the Law the daily Sacrifice was doubled on Sabbath Days, two Lambs in the
Morning, and two in the Evening. He had always a particular Subject for his
Expositions on Sabbath Mornings; the Harmony of the Evangelists several times
over; the Scripture Prayers; Old Testament Prophesies of Christ; Christ the
true Treasure (so he Entitled that Subject) sought and found in the Field of
the Old Testament. He constantly sung a Psalm after Dinner, and another after
Supper, on the Lord's Days. And in the Evening of the Day his Children and
Servants were Catechized and Examined in the sense and meaning of the Answers
in the Catechism, that they might not say it (as he used to tell them) like a
Parrot, by Rote. Then the Days Sermons were repeated, commonly by one of his
Children when they were grown up, and while they were with him; and the Family
gave an Account what they could remember of the word of the Day, which he
endeavored to fasten upon them, as a Nail in a sure place. In his Prayers on
the Evening of the Sabbath, he was often more than ordinarily Enlarged; as one
that found not only God's Service perfect Freedom, but his Work its own Wages;
and a great Reward; not only after keeping, but (as he used to observe from Ps.
19. 11.) in keeping God's Commandments. A perfect Reward of Obedience in
Obedience. In that Prayer he was usually very particular, in praying for his
Family and all that belonged to it. It was a Prayer he often put up, that we
might have Grace to carry it as a Minister, and a Minister's Wife, and a
Minister's Children, and a Minister's Servants should carry it, that the
Ministry might in nothing be blamed. He would sometimes be a particular
Intercessor for the Towns and Parishes adjacent: How have I heard him, when he
has been in the Mount with God, in a Sabbath Evening Prayer, wrestle with the
Lord for Chester, and Shrewsbury, and Nantwich, and Wrexham, and Whitchurch,
etc. those nests of Souls, wherein there are so many, that cannot discern
between their Right Hand and their Left in Spiritual things, etc. He closed his
Sabbath Work in his Family with singing Psalm 134. and after it a solemn
Blessing of his Family.

Thus was he Prophet and Priest in his own House; and he was King there too,
Ruling in the fear of God, and not suffering Sin upon any under his Roof.

He had many Years ago a man Servant that was once over-taken in Drink abroad;
for which, the next Morning at Family Worship, he solemnly Reproved him,
admonished him, and Prayed for him with a Spirit of Meekness, and soon after
parted with him. But there were many that were his Servants, who by the
Blessing of God upon his Endeavors, got those good Impressions upon their
Souls, which they retained ever after; and blessed God with all their Hearts,
that ever they came under his Roof. Few went from his Service till they were
Married, and went to Families of their own; and some after they had been
Married, and had Buried their Yoke fellows, returned to his Service again,
saying, Master, it is good to be here.

He brought up his Children in the fear of God, with a great deal of Care and
Tenderness, and did by his Practice, as well as upon all occasions in
Discourses, condemn the Indiscretion of those Parents, who are partial in their
affections to their Children, making a Difference between them, which he
observed did often prove of ill Consequence in Families; and lay a Foundation
of Envy, Contempt and Discord, which turns to their shame and ruin. His
Carriage toward his Children was with great Mildness and Gentleness, as one
who desired rather to be loved than feared by them. He was as careful not to
provoke them to Wrath, nor to discourage them, as he was to bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. He Ruled indeed, and kept up his
Authority, but it was with Wisdom and Love, and with a high Hand. He allowed
his Children a great degree of Freedom, with him, which gave him the
opportunity of reasoning them, not frightning them into that which is good. He
did much toward the Instruction of his Children, in the way of Familiar
Discourse, according to that Excellent Directory for Religious Education, Deuteronomy.
6. 7. Thou shall whet these things (so the word is which he said noted frequent
Repetition of the same things) upon thy Children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thy House, etc. which made them love home, and delight in his
Company, and greatly endeared Religion to them.

He did not burden his Childrens Memories by imposing upon them the getting of
Chapters and Psalms without Book; but endeavored to make the whole word of God
familiar to them, especially the Scripture Stories, and to bring them to
understand it and love it, and then they would easily remember it. He used to
observe from Psalm. 119. 93. I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them
thou have quickened me; that we are then likely to remember the word of God when
it does us good.

He taught all his Children to write himself, and set them betimes to write
Sermons, and other things that might be of use to them: He taught his eldest
Daughter the Hebrew Tongue when she was about six or seven Years old, by an
English Hebrew Grammar, which he made on purpose for her; and she went so far
in it, as to be able readily to Read and Construe a Hebrew Psalm.

He drew up a short Form of the Baptismal Covenant, for the use of his
Children; it was this: I take God the Father to be my chiefest Good, and
highest End.

I take God the Son to be my Prince and Savior.

I take God the Holy Ghost to be my Sanctifier, Teacher, Guide and Comforter.

I take the Word of God to be my Rule in all my Actions. And the People of God
to be my People in all Conditions.

I do likewise Devote and Dedicate unto the Lord my whole self, all I am, all I
have, and all I can do.



And this I do deliberately, sincerely, freely and for ever.

This he taught his Children, and they each of them solemnly repeated it every
Lord's Day in the Evening, after they were Catechized, he putting his Amen to
it, and sometimes adding, so say, and so do, and you are made for ever.

He also took pains with them, to lead them into the Understanding of it, and
to persuade them to a free and cheerful Consent to it. And when they grew up,
he made them all write it over severally with their own Hands, and very
solemnly set their Names to it, which he told them he would keep by him, and it
should be produced as a Testimony against them, in Case they should afterward
depart from God, and turn from following after him.

He was careful to bring his Children betimes (when they were about Sixteen
Years of Age,) to the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, to take the Covenant of
God upon themselves, and to make their Dedication to God their own Act and
Deed; and a great deal of pains he took with them, to prepare them for that
great Ordinance, and so to transmit them into the State of adult
Church Membership: And he would often blame Parents, who would think themselves
undone if they had not their Children baptized, and yet took no care when they
grew up and made a profession of the Christian Religion, to persuade them to
the Lord's Supper. It Is true (he would say) Buds and Blossoms are not fruit but
they give hopes of fruit, and Parents may and should take hold of the good
beginning of Grace which they see in their Children, by those to bind them so
much the closer to, and lead them so much the faster in the way that is called
Holy. By this solemn engagemement the Door which stood half-open before, and
invited the Thief, is shut and bolted against Temptation. And to those who
pleaded that they were not fit, he would say, that the further they went into
the World the less sit they would be. Qui non est body cras minus aptus erit.
Not that Children should be compelled to it, nor those that are wilfully
ignorant, untoward and perverse, admitted to it, but those Children that are
hopeful and well inclined to the things of God, and appear to be concerned in
other Duties, of Religion, when they begin to put away childish things, should
be incited and encouraged and persuaded to this, that the matter may be brought
to an Issue. Nay, but we will serve the Lord; Fast bind, fast find. Abundant
Thanks-givings have been rendered to God by many of his Friends for his Advice
and assistance herein.

In dealing with his Children about their spiritual State, he took hold of them
very much by the handle of their Infant Baptism, and frequently inculcated that
upon them, that they were born in God's House, and were betimes dedicated and
given up to him, and therefore were obliged to be his Servants, Psalm. 116. 16.
I am thy Servant, because the Son of thy handmaid. This he was wont to
illustrate to them by the comparison of taking a Lease of a fair Estate for a
Child in the Cradle, and putting his Life into it; The Child then knows nothing
of the matter, nor is he capable of consenting; however, then he is maintained
out of it, and and has an Interest in it; And when he grows up and becomes
able to choose, and refuse for himself, if he go to his Landlord, and claim the
Benefit of the Lease, and promise to pay the Rent, and do the services well and
good, he has the Benefit of it, if otherwise, it is at his Peril. Now Children
(would he say) our great Landlord was willing that your Lives should be put
into the Lease of Heaven and Happiness, and it was done accordingly, by your
Baptism, which is the Seal of the Righteousness that is by Faith; and by that
it was assured to you that if you would pay the Rent and do the Service, that
is, live a Life of Faith and Repentance, and sincere Obedience, you shall never
be turned off the Tenement; but if now you dislike the Terms, and refuse to pay
this Rent (this chief Rent, so he would call it, for it is no Rack) you forfeit
the Lease; However you cannot but say, that you had a Kindness done you, to
have your lives put into it. Thus did he frequently deal with his Children, and
even Travel in Birth again to see Christ formed in them, and from this Topic
he generally Argued, and he would often say, If Infant Baptism were more
improved, it would be less disputed.

He not only taught his Children betimes to pray, (which he did especially by
his own Pattern, his Method and Expressions in Prayer being very easy and
plain) But when they were young he put them upon it, to pray together, and
Appointed them on Saturdays in the Afternoon, to spend some time together, none
but they and such of their Age, as might occasionally be with them, in Reading
good Books, especially those for Children, and in singing and praying; and
would sometimes tell them for their Encouragement, that the God with whom we
have to do, understands broken Language. And if we do as well as we can in the
Sincerity of our Hearts, we shall not only be accepted but taught to do better:
To him that has shall be given.

He sometimes set his Children in their own reading of the Scriptures, to
gather out such Passages as they took most notice of, and thought most
considerable, and write them down: Though this Performance was very small, yet
the Endeavor was of good use. He also directed them to insert in a Paper Book,
which each of them had for the purpose, Remarkable Sayings and Stories, which
they met with in Reading such other good Books as he put into their hands.

He took a Pleasure in relating to them the remarkable Providence of God, both
in his own time and in the days of Old, which he said, Parents were taught to
do by that Appointment, Exodus 12. 26, 27. Your Children shall ask you in Time
to come; what mean you by this Service? and you shall tell them so and so.

What his pious Care was concerning his Children, and with what a godly
Jealousy he was jealous over them, take in one Instance; when they had been
for a week or Fortnight kindly entertained at B. (as they were often) he thus
writes in his Diary upon their Return home. My Care and Fear is, lest Converse
with such so far above them, Though of the best, should have Influence upon
them to lift them up, when I had rather they should be kept low. For as he did
not himself, so he was very Sollicitous to teach his Children, not to mind high
Things, not to desire them, not to expect them in this World.

We shall conclude this Chapter with another Passage out of his Diary, Apr. 12.
1681. This Day fourteen Years the Lord took my Firstborn Son from me, the
Beginning of my Strength, with a Stroke. In the Remembrance whereof my heart
melted this Evening: I begged pardon for the Jonah that raised that Storm, I
blessed the Lord that has spared the Rest, I begged Mercy, Mercy for every one
of them, and absolutely and unreservedly devoted and dedicated them, my self,
my whole self, Estate, Interest, Life, to the will and Service of that God from
whom I received all. Father Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come etc.

CHAP. V.
His Ejectment from Worthenbury, His Nonconformity, his Removes to Broad-Oak,
and the Providence that were concerning him to the Year 1672.

HAving thus laid together the Instances of his Family Religion, we must now
return to the History of Events that were concerning him, and are obliged to
look back to the first Year after his Marriage, which was the Year that King
Charles the Second came in; a Year of great Changes and struggles in the Land,
which Mr. Baxter in his Life gives a full and clear and Impartial Idea of; by
which it may easily be guessed, how it went with Mr. Henry in his low and
narrow Sphere, whose Sentiments in those things were very much the same with
Mr. Baxter's.

Many of his best Friends in Worthenbury Parish were lately removed by Death;
Emeral Family contrary to what it had been; and the same Spirit which that Year
revived all the Nation over was working violently in that Country, viz. a
Spirit of great Enmity to such Men as Mr. Henry was. Worthenbury, upon the
Kings coming in, returned into its former Relation to Bangor, and was looked
upon as a Chappelry dependant upon that. Mr. Robert Fogg had for many Years
held the sequestered Rectory of Bangor, to which now Dr. Henry Bridgman (Son to
John Bishop of Chester, and Brother to the Lord Keeper Bridgeman) returned to
the Possession of. By which Mr. Henry was soon Apprehensive that his Interest
at Worthenbury was shaken, but thus he writes. The will of the Lord be done.
Lord If my Work be done here, provide some other for this People that may be
more Skilful, and more Successful, and cut out Work for me elsewhere; However,
I will take nothing ill which God does with me.

He labored what he could to make Dr. Bridgman his Friend, who gave him good
words and was very civil to him, and assured him that he would never remove him
till the Law did. But he must look upon himself as the Doctors Curate, and
depending upon his Will, which kept him in continual expectation of a removal;
however, he continued in his Liberty there above a Year, though in very
ticklish and precarious Circumstances.

The Grand Question now on foot was, whether to conform or no. He used all
means possible to Satisfy himself concerning it, by reading, and discourse,
(particularly at Oxford with Dr. Fell (afterward Bishop of Oxford) but in
vain, his dissatisfaction remained; however (says he) I dare not judge those
that do conform, for who am I that I shall judge my Brother: He has noted,
that being at Chester, in discourse with the Dean and Chancellor and others,
about this time, the great Argument they used with him to persuade him to
conform was, that else he would lose his Preferment, and what (said they) you
are a young Man, and are you wiser then the King and Bishops? But this is his
reflection upon it afterward, God grant I may never be left to consult ^ith
Flesh and Blood in such matters.

In September 1660. Mr. Fogg and Mr. Steel and Mr. Henry were Presented at
Flint-Assizes for not Reading the Common Prayer, though as yet it was not
enjoined, but there were some busy People, that would outrun the Law. They
entered their Appearance, and it fell; for soon after the King's Declaration,
touching Ecclesiastical Affairs came out, which promised Liberty and gave hopes
of Settlement, but the Spring-Assizes afterward Mr. Steel and Mr. Henry were
presented again. On this he writes. Be merciful to me O God, for Man would
swallow me up. The Lord show me what he would have me to do, for I am afraid of
nothing but Sin.

It appears by the Hints of his Diary that he had Melancholy Apprehensions, at
this Time about public Affairs, seeing and hearing of so many faithful
Ministers distur'b, silenced, and ensnared; the ways of Sion mourning, and the
quiet in the Land treated as the troublers of it; his Soul wept in Secret for
it. And yet he joined in the Annual Commemoration of the King's Restoration,
and preached on Mar. 12. 17. Render to to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's,)
considering (says he) that it was his right; also the sad Posture of the Civil
Government through Usurpers, and the manner of his coming in, without
Bloodshed. This he would all his Days speak of as a national Mercy, but what he
rejoiced in with a great Deal of Trembling for the Ark of God; and he would
sometimes say, That during those Years between forty and sixty, though on Civil
accounts there were great Disorders, and the Foundations were out of Course,
yet in the matters of God's Worship, things went well; there was Freedom, and
Reformation, and a Face of Godliness was upon the Nation, though there were those
that made but a mask of it. Ordinances were administered in Power and Purity,
and though there was much amiss, yet Religion at least in the Profession of it
did prevail: This (says he) we know very well, let Men say what they will of
those times.

In November 1660. he took the Oath of Allegiance at Orton, before Sir Thomas
Hanmer, and two other Justices, of which he has left a Memorandum in his
Diary, with this added, God so help me, as I purpose in my Heart to do
accordingly: Nor could any more Conscientiously observe that Oath of God than
he did, nor more sincerely promote the Ends of it.

That Year (according to an Agreement with some of his Brethren in the
Ministry, who hoped thereby to oblige some People) he Preached upon
Christmas Day. The Sabbath before it happened that the 23d Chapter of Leviticus
(which treats entirely of the Jewish Feasts, called there the Feasts of the
Lord) came in course to be Expounded, which gave him occasion to distinguish of
Feasts into Divine and Ecclesiastical; the Divine Feasts that the Jews had were
those there appointed; their Ecclesiastical Feasts were those of Purim and of
Dedication: and in the Application of it he said, He knew no Divine Feast we
have under the Gospel but the Lord's Day, intended for the Commemoration of the
whole Mercy of our Redemption. And the most that could be said for Christmas
was, that it is an Ecclesiastical Feast; and it is questionable with some,
whether Church or State, though they might make a good Day, Esth. 9. 19. could
make a Holy Day: Nevertheless, for as much as we find our Lord Jesus (Joh. 10.
22.) so far complying with the Church Feast of Dedication, as to take occasion
from the Peoples coming together to Preach to them, he purposed to Preach upon
Christmas- day, knowing it to be his Duty in Season and out of Season. He
Preached on 1 Ioh. 3. 8. For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that
he might destroy the Works of the Devil. And he minded his People, that it is
double dishonor to Jesus Christ, to practice the Works of the Devil, then when
we keep a Feast in Memory of his Manifestation.

His Annuity from Emeral was now with held, because he did not read the Common
Prayer: (though as yet there was no Law for Reading of it) hereby he was disabled
to do what he had been wont, for the Help and Relief of others; and this he has
Recorded as that which troubled him most under that Disappointment; but he
blessed God, that he had a Heart to do good, even when his Hand was empty.

When Emeral Family was unkind to him, he reckoned it a great Mercy, which he
gave God thanks for (who makes every Creature to be that to us that it is) that
Mr. Broughton and his Family (which is of considerable Figure in the Parish)
continued their kindness and respects to him, and their countenance of his
Ministry, which he makes a grateful mention of more than once in his Diary.

Many attempts were made in the Year 1661. to disturb and ensnare him, and it
was still expected, that he would have been hindered; Methinks (says he)
Sabbaths were never so sweet as they are, now we are kept at such
uncertainties; now a day in they Courts is better than a thousand; such a day
as this (says he of a Sacrament Day that Year) better than ten thousand; O
that we might yet see many such days!

He was advised by Mr. Ratcliff of Chester and others of his Friends to enter
an Action against Mr. P. for his Annuity, and did so; but concerning the
Success of it (says he) I am not over sollicitous; for though it be my due,
(Luke 10. 7.) yet it was not that which I Preached for; and God knows I would
much rather Preach for nothing than not at all; and besides I know assuredly,
if I should be Cast, God will make it up to me some other way. After some
Proceeding he not only moved but solicited Mr. P. to refer it, having learned
(says he) that it is no Disparagement but an Honor, for the Party wronged, to
be first in seeking Reconciliation; The Lord (if it be his Will) incline his
Heart to Peace. I have now (says he) two great Concerns upon the Wheel, one in
reference to my Maintenance for time past, the other as to my continuance for
the future; the Lord b^ my friend in both, but of the two rather in the latter.
But (says he) many of greater Gifts and Grace than I are laid aside already,
and when my turn comes, I know not, the Will of God be done; He can do his Work
without us.

The issue of this affair was, that there having been some Disputes between Mr.
P. and Dr. Bridgman, about the Tithe of Worthenbury, wherein Mr. P. had clearly
the better Claim to make, yet by the Mediation of Sir Tho. Hanmer they came to
this Agreement, September. 11. 1661. that Dr. Bridgman and his Successors,
Parsons of Bangor, should have and receive all the Tithe Corn and Hay of
Worthenbury, without the Disturbance of the said Mr. P. or his Heirs (except
the Tith-Hay of Emeral Demesne) upon Condition that Dr. Bridgman should before
the first of November following, avoid and discharge the present Minister or
Curate Philip Henry, from the Chapel of Worthenbury, and not hereafter at any
time re-admit the said Minister Philip Henry, to Officiate the said Cure. This
is the Substance of the Articles agreed upon between them, pursuant to which
Dr. Bridgman soon after dismissed Mr. Henry; and by a Writing under his Hand,
which was published in the Church of Worthenbury, by one of Mr. Puleston's
Servants October the 27th following, Notice was given to the Parish of that
Dismission. That Day he Preached his Farewell Sermon on Phil. 1. 27. Only let
your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. In which (as he says in
his Diary) his desire and design was rather to profit then to affect; it
matters not what becomes of me (whether I come unto you, or else be absent) but
let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel. His parting Prayer for them
was, The Lord, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, set a Man over the
Congregation. Thus he ceased to Preach to his People there, but he ceased not
to love them, and pray for them; and could not but think there remained some
dormant Relation betwixt him and them.

As to the Arrears of his Annuity from Mr. P. when he was displaced; after some
time Mr. P. was willing to give him 100 l. which was a good deal less, than
what was due, upon Condition that he would surrender his Deed of Annuity, and
his Lease of the House, which he for Peace-sake was willing to do, and so he
lost all the Benefit of Judge Puleston's great Kindness to him. This was not
completed till September, 1662. until which time he continued in the House at
Worthenbury, but never Preached so much as once in the Church, though there were
vacancies several times.

Mr. Richard Hilton was immediately put into the Curacy of Worthenbury by Dr.
Bridgman; Mr. Henry went to hear him, (if he were at home) as long as he
continued at Worthenbury; and joined in all the parts of the public Worship,
particularly attending upon the Sacrament of Baptism; not daring (says he) to
turn my back upon God's Ordinance, while the Essentials of it are retained,
though corrupted circumstantially in the Administration of it, which God amend.
Once being allowed the liberty of his Gesture, he joined in the Lord's Supper.
He kept up his Correspondence with Mr. Hilton; and (as he says in his Diary)
endeavored to possess him with right Thoughts of his Work, and advised him the
best he could in the Soul affairs of that People; which (says he) he seemed to
take well; I am sure I meant it so, and the Lord make him Faithful.

Immediately after he was Removed and Silenced at Worthenbury, he was
solicited to Preach at Bangor, and Dr. Bridgman was willing to permit it,
occasionally; and intimated to his Curate there, that he should never hinder
it; but Mr. Henry declined it: Though his Silence was his great Grief, yet such
was his Tenderness, that he was not willing so far to discourage Mr. Hilton at
Worthenbury, nor to draw so many of the People from him, as would certainly
have followed him to Bangor: But (says he) I cannot get my Heart into such a
Spiritual Frame on Sabbath Days now, as formerly; which is both my Sin and my
Affliction. Lord quicken me with quickening Grace.

When the King came in first, and showed so good a Temper, as many thought;
some of his Friends were very earnest with him, to revive his Acquaintance and
Interest at Court, which it was thought he might easily do. 'Twas reported in
the Country, that the Duke of York had enquired after him; but he heeded not
the Report: nor would he be persuaded to make any Addresses that way. For
(says he) my Friends do not know so well as I the Strength of Temptation, and
my own inability to deal with it. Qui been latuit been vixit; Lord lead me not
into Temptation.

He was greatly affected with the Temptations and Afflictions of many Faithful
Ministers of Christ at this time, by the pressing of Conformity; and kept many
private Days of Fasting and Prayer in his own House at Worthenbury, seeking to
turn away the Wrath of God from the Land. He greatly pitied some, who by the
urgency of Friends, and the fear of want, were over persuaded to put a force
upon themselves in their Conformity. The Lord keep me (says he) in the
Critical time.

He Preached sometimes occasionally in diverse neighboring places, till
Bartholomew-day 1662. the day (says he) which our sins have made one of the
saddest days to England, since the Death of Edward the 6th; but even this for
good, though we know not how nor which way. He was invited to preach at Bangor
on the black Bartholomew-day, and prepared a Sermon on Ioh. 7 37. in the last
day, that great day of the Feast, etc. but was prevented from Preaching it; and
was loath to strive against so strong a stream.

As to his Nonconformity, which some of his worst Enemies have said was his
only fault, it may not be amisshere to give some Account of it.

1. His Reasons for his Nonconformity were very considerable. 'Twas no rash
act, but deliberate and well weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary. He could
by no means submit to be Re-ordain'd; so well satisfied was he in his Call to
the Ministry, and his solemn Ordination to it, by the laying on of the Hands of
the Presbytery, which God had graciously owned him in; that he durst not do
that which looked like a Renunciation of it, as null and sinful, and would be
at least a tacit invalidating and condemning of all his Administrations. Nor
could he truly say, that he thought himself moved by the Holy Ghost, to take
upon him the Office of a Deacon. He was the more confirmed in this Objection,
because the then Bishop of Chester, Dr. Hall (in whose Diocese he was) besides
all that was required by Law, exacted from those that came to him to be
Re-ordain'd, a Subscription to this Form. Ego A. B. praetensas meas
Ordinationis literas, a quibusdam Presbyteris olim obtentas, jam penitus
renuncio, and dimitto pro vanis; humiliter supplicans quatenus Rev. in Christo
Pater and Dominus Dominus Georgius permissione divina Cestr. Episc. me ad
sacrum Diaconatus ordinem juxta morem and ritus Ecclesiae Anglicanae dignaretur
admmittere. This of Reordination was the first and great Bar to his Conformity,
and which he mostly insisted on. He would sometimes say, that for a Presbyter
to be Ordained a Deacon, is at the best, suscipere gradum Simeonis.

Besides this, he was not at all satisfied to give his unfeigned Assent and
Consent, to all and every thing contained in the Book of Common Prayer, etc.
for he thought that thereby he should receive the Book it self, and every part
thereof, Rubricks and all, both as true and good; whereas there were several
things which he could not think to be so. The Exceptions which the Ministers
made against the Liturgy, at the Savoy Conference, he thought very
considerable; and could by no means submit to, much less approve of the
Imposition of the Ceremonies: He often said, that when Christ came to free us
from the Yoke of one Ceremonial Law, he did not leave it in the Power of any
Man or company of Men in the World, to lay another upon our Necks. Kneeling at
the Lord's Supper he was much dissatisfied about, and it was for many Years his
great Grief, and which in his Diary he does often most pathetically lament;
that by it he was debared from partaking of that Ordinance, in the solemn
Assembly: For to submit to that Imposition he thought whatever it was to others
(whom he was far from judging) would be Sin to him. He never took the Covenant,
nor ever-express'd any foundness for it; and yet he could not think, and
therefore durst not declare that (however unlawfully imposed) it was in itself
an unlawful Oath, and that no Person that took it, was under the Obligation of
it: For sometimes Quod fieri non debuit factum valet. In short, it cannot be
wondered at, that he was a Nonconformist, when the Terms of Conformity were so
industriously contrived, to keep out of the Church such Men as He; which is
manifest by the full Account which Mr. Baxter has left to Posterity of that
affair; and it is a passage worth noting here, which Dr. Bates in his Funeral
Sermon on Mr. Baxter relates; that when the Lord Chamberlain Manchester told
the King (while the Act of Uniformity was under debate) that he was afraid that
the Terms were so hard, that many of the Ministers would not comply with them;
Bishop Sheldon being present replied, I am afraid they will. And it is well
known how many of the most sober, pious, and laborious Ministers, in all parts
of the Nation, Conformists as well as Nonconformists did dislike those
Impositions.

He thought it a Mercy (since it must be so) that the Case of Nonqonformity was
made so clear as it was, abundantly to satisfy him in his Silence and
Sufferings. I have heard that Mr. Anthony Burgoss, who hesitated before, when
he read the Act, blessed God that the Matter was put cut of doubt. And yet to
make sure Work, the Printing and Publishing of the New Book of Common Prayer
was so deferred, that few of the Ministers, except those in London, could
possibly get a sight of it much less duly consider of it before the time
prefixed; which Mr. Steel took Notice of in his Farewel-Sermon at Hanmer,
August 17. 1662. That he was silenced and turned out, for not declaring his
unfeigned Assent and Consent to a Book which he never saw nor could see.

One thing which he comforted himself with in his Nonconformity was, that as to
Matters of doubtful Disputation touching Church Government, Ceremoni^s and the
like, he was unsworn either on one side or the other, and so was free from
those snares and bands in which so many find themselves both tied up from what
they would do, and entangled that they knew not what to do. He was one of those
that feared an Oath, Eccl. 10. 2. and would often say, Oaths are Edg-Tools, and
not to be played with. One passage I find in his Papers which confirmed him in
this satisfaction; it is a Letter from no less a Clergyman than Dr. F. of
Whitchurch to one of his Parishioners, who desired him to give way that his
Child might be Baptized by another without the Cross and Godfathers, if he
would not do it so himself; both which he refused: 'Twas in the Year 1672/3.
For my part (says the Doctor) I freely profess my Thoughts, that the strict
urging of indifferent Ceremonies, has done more harm than good; and possibly
(had all Men been left to their liberty therein) there might have been much
more Unity, and not much less Uniformity. But what Power have I to dispense
with my self, being now under the Obligation of a Law and an Oath? And he
Concludes, I am much grieved at the unhappy condition of my self, and other
Ministers, who must either lose their Parishioners Love, if they do not comply
with them, or else break their solemn Obligations to please them.

This he would say was the Mischief of Impositions, which ever were and ever
will be bones of Contention. When he was at Worthenbury, though in the Lord's
Supper he used the Gesture of Sitting himself, yet he Administered it without
scruple to some, who chose rather to Kneel; and he thought that Ministers Hands
should not in such things be tied up; but that he ought in his place (though he
suffered for it) to witness against the making of those things the
indispensable Terms of Communion, which Jesus Christ has not made to be so.
Where the Spirit of the Lord, and the Spirit of the Gospel is, there is liberty.

Such as these were the Reasons of his Nonconformity, which as long as he
lived, he was more and more co^firm'd in.

2. His Moderation in his Nonconformity was very exemplary and eminent, and had
a great influence upon many, to keep them from running into an Uncharitable and
Schismatical Separation; which upon all occasions he bore hi^ Testimony
against, and was very industrious to stem the Tide of. In Church Government,
that which he desired and wished for, was Archbishop Usher's Reduction of
Episcopacy. He thought it lawful to join in the Common Prayer in Public
Assemblies, and practiced accordingly, and endeavored to satisfy others
concerning it. The Spirit he was of, was such as made him much afraid of
extremes, and sollici^ous for nothing more than to maintain and keep Christian
Love and Charity among Professors: We shall meet with several Instances of
this, in the progress of his Story, and therefore wave it here. I have been
told of an aged Minister of his acquaintance, who being as'd upon his
Deathbed, What his thoughts were of his Nonconformity, replied, he was well
satisfied in it, and should not have Conformed so far as he did (viz. to join
in the Liturgy) if it had not been for Mr. Henry. Thus was his Moderation known
unto all Men.

But to proceed in his Story. At Michaelmas, 1662. he quite left Worthenbury,
and came with his Family to Broad-Oak, just Nine Years from his first coming
into the Country. Being cast by Divine Providence into this new place and state
of Life, his Care and Prayer was, that he might have Grace and Wisdom to manage
it to the Glory of God, which (says he) is my chief End. Within three Weeks
after his coming hither, his second Son was Born, which we mention, for the
sake of the Remark he has upon it. We have no Reason (says he) to call him
Benoni, I wish we had not to call him I^habod. And on the Day of his
Family-Thanksgiving for that Mercy, he writes, We have reason to Rejoice with
Trembling, for it goes ill with the Church and People of God, and reason to
fear worse, because of our own Sins, and our Enemies Wrath.

At the latter end of this Year he has in his Diary this Note. It is observed
of many who have Conformed of late, and fallen from what they formerly
Professed, tha^ since their so doing, from unblamable, orderly, pious Men, they
are become exceeding dissolute and profane, and instanceth in some: What need
have we every day to Pray, Lord lead us not into Temptation.

For several Years after he came to live at Broad-Oak, he went constantly on
Lords days to the public Worship, with his Family, at Whitewell-Chapel (which
is hard by) if there were any supply there, as sometimes there was from Malpas,
and if none, then to Tylstock, (where Mr. Zachary Thomas continued for about
half a Year, and the place was a little Sanctuary) and when that string failed
usually to Whitchurch; and did not Preach for a great while, unless
occasionally, when he visited his Friends, or to his own Family on Lords days,
when the Weather hindered them from going abroad. He comforted himself, that
sometimes in going to public, he had opportunity of instructing and exhorting
those that were in company with him, by the way, according as he saw they had
need; and in this his Lips fed many, and his Tongue was as choice Silver; and
he acted according to that Rule which he often laid down to himself and others,
That when we cannot do what we would, we must do what we can, and the Lord will
accept us in it. He made the best of the Sermons he heard in Public; It is a
Mercy (says he) we have Bread, though it be not as it has been, of the finest
of the Wheat. Those are froward Children who throw away the Meat they have, if
it be wholesome, because they have not what they would have. When he met with
Preaching that was weak, his Note is, That Is a poor Sermon indeed, out of which
no good Lesson may be learned. He had often occasion to remember that Verse of
Mr. Herbert's: The worst speaks something good, if all want sense,
God takes the Text, and preaches Patience.
Nay, and once he says, he could not avoid thinking of Eli's Sons, who made
the Sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred: Yet he went to bear his Testimony to
public Ordinances; For still (says he) the Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more
than all the Dwellings of Jacob, and so do I. Such then were his Sentiments of
things, expecting that God would yet open a door of return to former public
Liberty, which he much desired and prayed for, and in hopes of that was,
backward to fall into the stated Exercise of his Ministry otherwise, (as were
all the sober Nonconformists generally in those parts) but it was his grief,
and burden, that he had not an opportunity of doing more for God. He had
scarce one Talent of opportunity, but that one he was very diligent and
faithful in the improvement of. When he visited his Friends, how did he lay,
out himself to do them good! Being asked once (where he made a visit) to
Expound and Pray, which his Friends returned him thanks for; he thus writes
upon it, They cannot thank me so much for my pains, but I thank them more, and
my Lord God especially, for the Opportunity. Read his Conflict with himself at
this time: I own my self a Minister of Christ, yet do nothing as a Minister;
What will excuse me! Is it enough for me to say, Behold, I stand in the Market
place, and no Man has hired me: And he comforts himself with this Appeal, Lord
thou know what will I have to thy Work, public or private, if I had a Call
and Opportunity; and shall this willing mind be accepted? Surely this is a
Melancholy Consideration, and lays a great deal of blame somewhere, that such a
Man as Mr. Henry, so well qualified with Gifts and Graces for Ministerial Work,
and in the prime of his time for usefulness; so Sound and Orthodox, so Humble
and Modest, so Quiet and Peaceable, so Pious and Blameless, should be so
industriously thrust out of the Vineyard, as a useless and unprofitable
Servant, and laid aside as a despised broken Vessel, and a Vessel in which
there was no pleasure. This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation;
especially since it was not his Case alone, but the Lot of so many Hundreds of
the same Character.

In these Circumstances of Silence and Restraint, he took comfort himself, and
administered Comfort to others from that Scripture Isa. 16. 4. Let mine
outcasts dwell with thee Moab. God's People may be an Outcast People, cast
out of men's Love, their Synagogues, their Country; but God will own his People
when Men cast them out; they are outcasts, but they are his, and somewhere or
other he will provide a dwelling for them. There were many worthy, able
Ministers thereabouts turned out, both from Work and Subsistence, that had not
such comfortable Support for the Life that now is, as Mr. Henry had, for whom
he was most affectionately concerned, and to whom he showed kindness. There
were computed within a few Miles round him, so many Ministers turned out to the
wide World, stripped of all their Maintenance, and exposed to continual
Hardships, as with their Wives and Children (having most of them Numerous
Families) made up above a Hundred, that lived upon Providence; and though often
reduced to wants and straits, yet were not forsaken, but were enabled to
rejoice in the Lord, and to joy in the God of their Salvation notwithstanding:
to whom the promise was fulfilled, Psalm. 37. 3. So shall thou dwell in the
Land, and verily thou shall be fed. The World was told long since, by the
Conformists Plea, that the worthy Mr. Lawrence (Mr. Henry's intimate Friend)
when he was turned out of Baschurch, and (if he would have Consulted with Flesh
and Blood) having (as was said of one of the Martyrs) Eleven good Arguments
against Suffering, viz. a Wife and Ten Children; was asked how he meant to
maintain them all, and cheerfully replied, they must all live upon the 6th of
Matthew, Take no thought for your Life, etc. and he often sung with his Family
Psalm. 37. 16. And Mr. Henry has Noted concerning him in his Diary, some time
after he was turned out, that he bore witness to the love and care of our
Heavenly Father, providing for him and his in his present Condition, beyond
Expectation.

One Observation Mr. Henry made not long before he Dyed, when he had been young
and now was old, that though many of the Ejected Ministers were brought very
low, had many Children, were greatly harrassed by Persecution, and their
Friends generally poor and unable to support them; yet in all his Acquaintance
he never knew, nor could remember to have heard of any Nonconfor mist Minister
in Prison for Debt.

In October 1663. Mr. Steel and Mr. Henry, and some other of their Friends,
were taken up and brought Prisoners to Hanmer, under pretense of some Plot,
said to be on foot against the Government: and there they were kept under
confinement some days, on which he writes; it is sweet being in any Condition
with a clear Conscience: The Sting of Death is Sin, and so of Imprisonment
also, It Is the first Time (says he) I was ever a Prisoner, but perhaps may not
be the last. We felt no hardship, but we know not what we may. They were after
some Days examined by the Deputy Lieutenants, charged with they knew not what,
and so dismissed, finding verbal security to be forthcoming upon Twenty four
hours notice, whenever they should be called for. Mr. Henry returned to his
Tabernacle with Thanksgivings to God, and a hearty prayer for his Enemies, that
God would forgive them. The very next day after they were released, a great Man
in the Country, at whose Instigation they were brought into that trouble, died
(as was said) of a drunken Surfeit. So that a Man shall say, verily there is a
God that judges in the Earth.

In the Beginning of the Year 1665. when the Act for a Royal Aid to his Majesty
of two Millions and a half came out; The Commissioners for Flintshire were
pleased to nominate Mr. Henry Sub-collector of the said Tax for the Township of
Iscoyd, and Mr. Steel for the Township of Hanmer. They intended thereby to put
an Affront and disparagement upon their Ministry, and to show that they looked
upon them but as Laymen, His note upon it is, It is not a Sin which they put us
upon, but it is a Cross, and a Cross in our Way, and therefore to be taken up
and born with patience. When I had better work to do, I was wanting in my Duty
about it, and now this is put upon me, the Lord is righteous. He procured the
gathering of it, by others only took account of it, and saw it duly done and
deserved, (as he says, he hoped he should) that Inscription mentioned in
Suetonius (...). To the Memory of an honest Publican.

In September the same Year, he was again by warrant from the Deputy
Lieutenant's fetched Prisoner to Hanmer, as was also Mr Steel and others. He
was examined about private Meetings: some such (but private indeed) he owned he
had been present at of late in Shropshire, but the Occasion was extraordinary;
the Plague was at that Time raging in London, and he, and several of his
Friends having near Relations there, thought it time to seek the Lord for them,
and this was imputed to him as his Crime. He was likewise charged with
Administering the Lord's Supper, which he denied, having never Administered it
since he was disabled by the Act of Uniformity. After some Days Confinement,
seeing they could prove nothing upon him, he was discharged upon Recognizance,
of 20 l. with two Sureties to be forthcoming upon Notice, and to live
Peaceably. But (says he) our Restraint was not Strict for we had liberty of
Prayer, and Conference together, to our mutual Edification: thus, out of the
Eater came forth meat, and out of the strong Sweetness, and we found Honey in
the Carcass of the Lion. It was but a little before this, that Mr. Steel
setting out for London, was by a Warrant, from the Justices, under Color of
the report of a Plot, stopped and searched, and finding nothing to accuse him
of, they seized his Almanac in which he kept his Diary for that Year; and it
not being written very legibly, they made what malicious readings and comments
they pleased upon it, to his great Wrong and Reproach; though to all sober and
sensible people, it discovered him, to be a Man that kept a strict Watch over
his own heart, and was a great Husband of his time, and many said they got good
by it, and should love him the better for it, Psalm. 37. 5, 6. This Event made
Mr. Henry somewhat more cautious and sparing in the Records of his Diary, when
he saw how evil Men dig up Mischief.

At Lady Day 1666. The Five-mile Act, commenced, by which all Nonconformist
Ministers, were forbidden upon pain of Sixth Months imprisonment to come, or be
within five Miles of any Corporation, or of any pla^e, where they had been
Ministers, unless they would take an Oath: of which Mr. Baxter says, 'twas
credibly reported, that the Earl of Southampton then Lord High Treasurer of
England said, no honest Man could take it. Mr. Baxter in his Life, has set
down at large, his Reasons against taking this Oxford Oath, as it was called,
part. 2. p. 396. etc. part. 3. p. 4. etc. Mr. Henry, set his down in short.
'Twas an Oath, not at any time, to endeavor any Alteration of the Government
in the Church or State. He had already taken an Oath of Allegiance to the King,
and he looked upon this to amount to an Oath of Allegiance to the Bishops,
which he was not free to take, Thus he writes, March. 22. 1665/6.

This Day methoughts it was made more clear to me than ever, by the Hand of my
God upon me, and I note it down, that I may remember it. (1) That the
Government of the Church of Christ, ought to be managed by the Ministers of
Christ. It appears, Heb. 13 7. that they are to rule us, that Speak to us the
Word of God. (2) That under Prelacy, Ministers have not the Management of
Church Government, not in the least, being only the Publishers of the Prelates
Decrees, as in Excommunication, and Absolution, which Decrees sometimes are
given forth by Lay Chancellors. (3) That therefore Prelacy is an Usurpation in
the Church of God upon the Crown and Dignity of Jesus Christ, and upon the
Gospel-Rights of his Servants the Ministers. And therefore (4) I ought not to
subscribe to it, nor to swear not to endeavor in all lawful ways the
Alteration of it, viz. by Praying, and Persuading, where there is opportunity.
But (5) that I may safely venture to suffer in the refusal of such an Oath,
committing my Soul, Life, Estate, Liberty, all to him who judges righteously.

And on March 25. the day when that Act took place, he thus writes. A sad day
among poor Ministers up and down this Nation; who by this Act of Restraint are
forced to remove from among their Friends, Acquaintance, and Relations, and to
sojurn among strangers, as it were in Mesech, and in the Tents of Kedar. But
there is a God who tells their wanderings, and will put their Tears, and the
Tears of their Wives, and Children into his Bottle, are they not in his Book?
The Lord be a little Sanctuary to them, and a place of Refuge, from the Storm,
and from the Tempest, and pity those Places, from which they are ejected, and
come and dwell where they may not.

He wished their Removes might not be figurative of Evil to these Nations, as
Ezekiel's were, Ezekiel. 12. 1. 2. 3. This severe Dispensation forced Mr. Steel,
and his Family from Hanmer, and so he lost the comfort of his Neighborhood;
but withal it drew Mr. Laurence from Baschurch to Whitchurch Parish, where he
continued till he was driven thence too.

Mr. Henry's house at Broad O^k was but four reputed Miles from the utmost
Limits of Worthenbury Parish, but he got it measured, and accounting 1760 Yards
to a Mile (according to the Statute 35 Eliz. cap. 6.) it was found to be just
five Miles and threescore Yards, which one would think might have been his
Security: but there were those near him who were ready to stretch such Laws to
the utmost rigor, under Pretense of construing them in Favor of the King, and
therefore would have it to be understood of reputed Miles: this obliged him for
some time to leave his Family, and to sojurn among his Friends, to whom he
endeavored wherever he came to impart some Spiritual Gift. At last he ventured
home, presuming among other things, that the Warrant by which he was made
Collector of the Royal Aid, while that continued, would secure him, according
to a Promise in the last Clause of the Act, which when the Gentlemen perceived,
they discharged him from that Office, before he had served out the Time.

He was much affected with it, that the Burning of London happned so soon after
the Nonconformists were banished out of it. He thought it was in Mercy to them,
that they were removed before that desolating judgment came, but that it spoke
aloud to our Governors, Let my People go that they may serve me, and if ye
will not, behold thus and thus will I do unto you. This was the Lord's voice
crying in the City.

In the Beginning of the Year 1667. he removed with his Family to Whitchurch,
and dwelt there above a Year, except that for one quarter of a Year, about
harvest he returned again to Broad-Oak. His Remove to Whitchurch was partly to
quiet his Adversaries, who were ready to quarrel with him upon the five Mile
Act, and partly for the benefit of the School there for his Children.

There in Apr. following he buried his eldest Son, not quite six Years old, a
child of extraordinary praegnancy and forwardness in learning, and of a very
towardly disposition, his Character of this Child is,

Praeterquam aetatem nil puerile fuit.

This Child before he was seized with the Sickness whereof he died, was much
affected with some Verses, which he met with in Mr. Whites Power of Godliness,
said to be found in the Pocket of a hopeful young Man, who died before he was
twenty four Years old. Of his own accord he got them without Book, and would be
often rehearsing them, they were these. Not twice twelve Years, (he might say
Not half twelve years) full told a wearied Breath
I have exchanged for a happy Death.
Short was my Life; the longer is my Rest,
God takes them soonest whom he loves best.
He that is born to day and die's to morrow,
Loses some hours of joy, but months of sorrow;
Other Diseases often come to grieve us,
Death Strikes but once and that Stroke does relieve us.


This was a great Affliction, to the render Parents: Mr. Henry writes upon it
in the reflection,

Quicquid amas oupias non placuisse nimis.

Many Years after he said, he thought he did apply to himself at that Time but
too sensibly that Scripture, Lam. 3. 1. I am the Man that has seen affliction.
And he would say to his Friends upon such occasions, Loosers think they may
have leave to speak. but they must have a care what they say, lest speaking
amiss to God's dishonor, they make work for Repentance and shed tears that
must be wipt over again. He observed concerning this child, that he had always
been very patient under rebukes, The remembrance of which (says he) teaches
me now how to carry it under the rebuke's of my heavenly Father. His Prayer
under this Providence was, show me, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest
with me; have I over-boasted, overlov'd, over-priz'd? A Lord's Day intervening
between the Death, and burial of the Child, I attended (says he) on public
Ordinances though sad in Spirit, as Job who after all the evil Tidings that
were brought him, whereof, Death of Children was the last and heaviest, yet
fell down and worshipped. And he would often say upon such occasions, that
weeping must not hinder sowing. Upon the Interment of the Child, he writes, My
dear Child, now mine no longer, was laid in the cold Earth, not lost, but sown
to be raised again a glorious Body, and I shall go to him, but he shall not
return to me. A few days after his dear Friend Mr. Lawrence (then living in
Whitchurch Parish) Buried a Daughter, that was grown up and very hopeful, and
giving good Evidence of a work of Grace wrought upon her Soul; how willing
(says he) may Parents be to part with such when the Lord calls; they are not
amissi but praemissi. And he has this further Remark, The Lord has made his
poor Servants, that have been often Companions in his Work, now companions in
Tribulation, the very same Tribulation; me for my Sin, him for his Trial.

While he lived at Whitchurch, he attended constantly upon the public
Ministry, and there (as ever) he was careful to come to the beginning of the
Service, which he attended upon with Reverence and Devotion; standing all the
time, even while the Chapters were read. In the Evening of the Lord's day, he
spent some time in instructing his Family, to which a few of his Friends and
Neighbors in the Town would sometimes come in; and it was a little gleam of
opportunity, but very short, for (as he Notes) He was offended at it, who
should rather have rejoiced, if by any means the Work might be carried on in
his Peoples Souls.

He observes in his Diary this Year, how zealous People had generally been for
the Observation of Lent, a while ago. and how cold they are toward it now. The
same he Notes of Processions in Ascension Week; for (says he) what has no
good Foundation, will not hold up long; but in that which is Duty, and of God,
it is good to be zealously affected always.

In this Year (I think) was the first time that he Administered the Lord's
Supper (very privately to be sure) after he was Silenced by the Act of
Uniformity; and he did not do it without mature Deliberation. A fear of
Separation kept him from it so long; what induced him to it at last, I find
thus under his own Hand: I am a Minister of Christ, and as such I am obliged,
Virtute Officii, by all means to endeavor the good of Souls. Now here is a
company of serious Christians, whose Lot is cast to live in a Parish, where
there is one set over them, who Preaches the Truth; and they come to hear him,
and join with him in other parts of Worship; only as to the Lord's Supper; they
scruple the lawfulness of the Gesture of Kneeling; and he tells them, his hands
are tied, and he cannot administer it unto them any other way; wherefore they
come to me, and tell me, they earnestly long for that Ordinance; and there is a
competent number of them, and opportunity to partake; and how dare I deny this
Request of theirs, without betraying my Ministerial Tr^st, and incuring the
Guilt of a grievous Omission.

In February 1667/8. Mr. Laurence and he were invited by some of their Friends
to Betley in Staffordshire, and (there being some little public Connivance at
that time) with the Consent of all concerned, they adventured to Preach in the
Church, one in the Morning, and the other in the Afternoon of the Lords day,
very peaceably and profitably. This Action of theirs was presently after
Reported in the House of Commons, by a Member of Parliament, with these
Additions, That they tore the Common Prayer Book, trampled the Surplice under
their Feet, pulled the Minister of the place out of the Pulpit, etc. Reports
which there was not the least Color for. But that, with some other such like
false Stories, produced an Address of the House of Commons to the King, to
issue out a Proclamation, for the putting of the Laws in Execution, against
Papists and Nonconformists, which was issued out accordingly; though the King
at the opening of that Session. a little before, had declared his desire, that
some Course might be taken, to compose the minds of his Protestant Subjects, in
matters of Religion; which had raised the Expectations of some, that there
would be speedy enlargement; but Mr. Henry had Noted upon it, We cannot expect
too little from Man, nor too much from GOD.

And here it may be very pertinent to observe, how industrious Mr. Henry was at
this time, when he and his Friends suffered such hard things from the
Government, to preserve and promote a good affection to the Government
notwithstanding. It was commonly charged at that time upon the Nonconformists
in general, especially from the Pulpits, that they were all a factious and
turbulent People, and as was said of old, Ezra 4. 15. hurtful to Kings and
Provinces; that their Meetings were for the sowing of Sedition and Discontents,
and the like; and there is some reason to think, that one thing intended by the
Hardships put upon them, was to drive them to this; there is a way of making a
wise Man mad: But how peaceably they carried themselves, is manifest to God,
and in the Consciences of many. For an Instance of it, it will not be amiss to
give some Account of a Sermon, which Mr. Henry Preached in some very private
Meetings, such as were called Seditious Conventicles, in the Year 1669. when it
was a day of treading down, and of perplexity; it was on that Text, Psalm. 35.
20. Against them that are quiet in the Land; Whence (not to curry favor with
Rulers, for whatever the Sermon was, the very Preaching of it had it been
known, must have been severely Punished, but purely out of Conscience toward
God) he taught his Friends this Doctrine, That it is the Character of the
People of God, that they are a quiet People in the Land. This Quietness he
described to be an orderly, peaceable Subjection to Governors and Government
in the Lord. We must maintain a reverent Esteem of them, and of their
Authority, in opposition to despising Dominion, 2 Pet. 2. 10. we must be Meek
under severe Commands, and burdensome Impositions, not murmuring and
complaining, as the Israelites against Moses and Aaron; but take them up as our
Cross in our way, and bear them as we do foul Weather. We must not speak evil
of Dignities, Jude 8. nor revile the gods, Exodus 22. 28. Paul checked himself
for this, Acts 23. 5, (...): I did not consider it, if I had, I would not have
said so. We must not traduce their Government as Absalom did David's, 2 Samuel
15. 3. Great care is to be taken, how we speak of the faults of any, especially
of Rulers, Eccl. 10. 20. -- The People of God do make the word of God their
Rule, and by that they are taught, (1.) that Magistracy is God's Ordinance, and
Magistrates God's Ministers; that by him Kings Reign, and the Powers that be,
are Ordained of him. (2.) That they as well as others, are to have their Dues,
Honor and Fear, and Tribute. (3.) That their lawful Commands are to be obeyed,
and that readily and cheerfully, 1 Tit. 3. 1. (4.) That the Penalties inflicted
for not obeying unlawful Commands, are patiently to be undergone. This is the
Rule, and as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be upon them, and
there can be no danger of their Unpeaceableness. They are taught to pray for
Kings and all in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. and God forbid we should do
otherwise: yea, tho they Persecute, Ier. 29. 7. Peaceable Prayers bespeak a
peaceable People, Psalm. 109. 4. If some professing Religion have been unquiet,
their unquietness has given the lie to their Profession. Jude 8. 11, 12.
Quietness is our Badge, Coll. 3. 12. '^will be our Strength, Isa. 30, 7, 15.
our Rejoicing in the day of Evil, Ier. 18. 18. it is pleasing to God, 1 Timothy 2.
2, 3. it may work upon others, 1 Pet. 2. 12, 13. The means he prescribed for
the keeping of us quiet, were to get our Hearts filled with the Knowledge and
Belief of these two things, 1. That the Kingdom of Christ is not of this World,
Ioh. 18. 36. many have thought otherwise, and it has made them unquiet. 2.
That the wrath of Man works not the righteousness of God, Iam. 1. 20. he
needs not our Sin to bring to pass his own Counsel. We must mortify
Unquietness in the Causes of it, Iam. 4. 1. we must always remember the Oath of
God, Eccl. 8. 2. the Oath of Allegiance is an Oath of Quietness, and we must
beware of the Company and Converse of those that are unquiet, Prove. 22. 24, 25.
Tho deceitful Matters be devised, yet we must be quiet still; nay, be so much
the more quiet.

I have been thus large in gathering these hints out of that Sermon, (which he
took all occasions, in other Sermons to inculcate, as all his Brethren likewise
did) that if possible it may be a Conviction to the present Generation; or
however, may be a Witness in time to come, that the Nonconformist Ministers,
were not Enemies to Caesar, nor troublers of the Land; nor their Meetings any
way tending to the disturbance of the public Peace, but purely designed to
help to repair the Decays of Christian Piety.

All that knew Mr. Henry, knew very well that his Practice all his days, was
consonant to these his settled Principles.

In May 1668. he returned again with his Family from Whitchurch to Broad-Oke,
which, through the good Hand of his God upon him, continued his settled home,
without any Remove from it, till he was removed to his long home above twenty
eight Years after. The edge of the Five Mile Act began now a little to rebate,
at least in that Country; and he was desirous to be more useful to the
Neighbors, among whom God had given him an Estate, than he could be at a
distance from them, by relieving the Poor, employing the Laborers, and
especially instructing the Ignorant, and helping as many as he could to Heaven.
He made that Scripture his standing Rule, and wrote it in the beginning of his
Book of Accounts, Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy Substance, etc. And
having set apart a day of Secret Prayer and Humiliation, to beg of God a wise
and an understanding Heart, and to drop a Tear (as he expresses it) over the
sins of his Predecessors, formerly in that estate; he laid out himself very
much in doing good. He was very serviceable upon all Accounts in the
Neighborhood, and though it took up a great deal of his time, and hindered him
from his beloved Studies, yet it might be said of him, as the Bishop of
Salisbury says of Archbishop Tillotson, in his Sermon at his Funeral, that he
chose rather to live to the good of others than to himself; and thought, that
to do an Act of Charity, or even of Tenderness and Kindness, was of more value
both in it self, and in the sight of God, than to pursue the pompous parts of
Learning, how much soever his own Genius might lead him to it.

He was very useful in the common Concernments of the Township and Country, in
which he was a very prudent Counselor; it was indeed a narrow Sphere of
Activity, but (such as it was) to him as to Job, chap. 29. 21, 22. Men gave ear
and waited, and kept silence at his Counsel, after his words they spoke not
again; and many of the Neighbors who respected him not as a Minister, yet
loved and honored him as a knowing, prudent and humble Neighbor. In the
Concernments of private Families, he was very far from busying himself, and
further from seeking himself, but he was very much busied, advising many about
their Affairs, and the disposal of themselves and their Children, arbitrating
and composing Differences among Relations and Neighbors, in which he had an
excellent Faculty, and often good Success, inheriting the Blessing entailed
upon the Peacemakers. References have sometimes been made to him by Rule of
Court, at the Assizes, with Consent of Parties. He was very affable and easy
of access, and admirably patient in hearing every ones Complaint, which he
would answer with so much Prudence and Mildness, and give such apt advice, that
many a time to Consult with him, was to ask Counsel at Abel, and so to end the
matter. He observed in almost all Quarrels that happened, that there was a
fault on both sides; and that generally they were most in the fault, that were
most forward and clamorous in their Complaints. One making her moan to him of a
bad Husband she had, that in this, and 'tother instance was unkind; and (Sir,)
says she, after a long Complaint which he patiently heard, what would you have
me to do now? Why truly (says he) I would have you to go home, and be a better
Wife to him, and then you will find that he will be a better Husband to you.
Laboring to persuade one to forgive an injury that was done him; he urged
this, Are you not a Christian? and followed that Argument so close, that at
last he prevailed.

He was very industrious, and often successful in persuading People, to recede
from their Right, for Peace sake; and he would for that purpose tell them
Luther's Story of the two Goats, that met upon a narrow Bridge over a deep
Water; they could not go back, nor durst not fight; after a short parley, one
of them lay down, and let the other go over him, and no harm done. He would
likewise relate sometimes a remarkable Story, worthy to be here incerted
concerning a good Friend of his, Mr. T. Y. of Whitchurch, who in his Youth was
greatly wronged by an unjust Uncle of his, being an Orphan; his Portion, which
was 200 l. was put into the hands of that Uncle; who when he grew up, shuffled
with him, and would give him but 40 l. instead of his 200 l. and he had no way
of recovering his Right but by Law; but before he would engage in that, he was
willing to advise with his Minister, who was the famous Dr. Twiss of Newberry;
the Counsel he gave him (all things considered) was, for Peacesake, and for the
preventing of Sin and Snares, and trouble to take the 40 l. rather then
contend; and Thomas (says the Doctor) if thou do so, assure thy self, that
God will make it up to thee and thine, some other way, and they that defraud
thee will be the losers by it at last. He did so, and it pleased God so to
bless that little which he began the World with, that when he died in a good
old Age, he left his Son possessed of some Hundreds a Year, and he that wronged
him fell into decay.

Many very pious worthy Families in the Country would say of Mr. Henry, that
they had no Friend like minded, who did naturally care for their State, and so
affectionately sympathize with them, and in whom their Hearts could safely
trust. He was very Charitable to the Poor, and was full of Almsdeeds, which he
did (as is said of Tabitha, Acts 9. 36) not which he said he would do, or which
he put others on to do, but which he did himself, dispersing abroad and giving
to the Poor, seeking and rejoicing in Opportunities of that kind: And whenever
he gave an Alms for the Body, he usually gave with it a Spiritual Alms, some
good word of Counsel, Reproof, Instruction or Comfort, as there was occasion,
and in accommodating these to the Persons he spoke to, he had a very great
Dexterity.

He was very forward to lend Money freely, to any of his poor Neighbors that
had occasion, and would sometimes say, that in many Cases there was more
Charity in lending than in giving, because it obliged the Borrower both to
Honestly and Industry. When one of his Neighbors, to whom he had lent three
Pound, failed, so that he was never likely to see a Farthing of it, he writes
thus upon it; notwithstanding this, yet still I judge it my Duty to lend,
(...), nothing despairing, so Dr. Hammand reads it, Luke 6. 35. Though what is
lent in Charity be not repaid, yet it is not lost. When those that had borrowed
Money of him paid him again, he usually gave them back some part, to encourage
Honesty. He judged the taking of moderate Interest for Money lawful, where the
Borrower was in a way of gaining by it: But he would advise his Friends that
had Money, rather to dispose of it other ways, if they could.

It must not be forgotten, how punctual and exact he was in all his accounts
with Tenants, Workmen, etc. being always careful to keep such things in black
and white (as he used to say) which is the surest way to prevent Mistakes, and
a Man's wronging either himself or his Neighbor; such was his Prudence, and
such his Patience and Peaceableness, that of all the time he was at Broad-Oak,
he never Sued any, nor ever was Sued, but was instrumental to prevent many a
vexatious Lawsuit among his Neighbors. He used to say, There are four Rules
to be duly observed in going to Law; (1. We must not go to Law for Trifles, as
he did who said, he would rather spend a Hundred Pound in Law then lose a
Penniworth of his Right. Matt. 5. 39, 40, 41. (2) We must not be rash and hasty
in it, but try all other means possible to compose differences wherein he that
yields most, as Abraham did to Lot, is the better Man, and there is nothing
lost by it in the end, 1 Cor. 6. 1 2. (3) We must see that it be without Malice
or desire of Revenge. If the undeing of our Brother be the end of our going to
Law, as it is with many, it is certainly evil, and it speeds accordingly. (4) It
must be with a disposition to Peace, whenever it may be had, and an Ear open to
all Overtures of that kind. The two Motto's proper for the great Guns are
applicable to this, Ratio ultima Regum, and Sic quaerimus Pacem.

Four Rules he sometimes gave to be observed in our Converse with Men: Have
Communion with few; Be familiar with one; Deal justly with all; Speak evil of
none.

He was noted for an extraordinary neat Husband about his House and Ground,
which he would often say, he could not endure to see like the Field of the
Sloathful, and the Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding. And it was
strange, how easily one that had been bred up utterly a Stranger to such
things; yet when God so ordered his Lot, acquainted himself with, and
accommodated himself to the Affairs of the Country, making it the Diversion of
his vacant Hours, to over-see his Gardens and Fields; when he better understood
that known Epode of Horace, Beatus ille qui procul negotiis, than he did when
in his Youth; he made an ingenious Translation of it. His care of this kind was
an Act of Charity to poor Laborers, whom he employed; and it was a good
Example to his Neighbors, as well as for the Comfort of his Family. His
Converse likewise with these things was excellently improved, for Spiritual
purposes, by occasional Meditations, hints of which there are often in his
Diary, as those that Conversed with him had many in Discourse; Instances of
this were easy, but endless to give. He used to say, that therefore many of
the Scripture Parables and Similitudes are taken from the common Actions of
this Life, that when our Hands are employed about them, our Hearts may the more
easily pass through them to Divine and Heavenly things. I have heard him often
blame those, whose irregular Zeal in the Profession of Religion, makes them to
neglect their Worldly Business, and let the House drop through; the affairs of
which the good Man will order with Discretion; and he would tell sometimes of a
Religious Woman, whose Fault it was, how she was convinced of it, by means of
an intelligent godly Neighbor; who coming into the House, and finding the good
Woman far in the Day, in her Closet, and the House sadly neglected, Children
not tended, Servants not minded; What says he, is there no fear of God in this
House? which much startled and affected the good Woman that overheard him. He
would often say, Every thing is beautiful in its Season; and that it is the
Wisdom of the Prudent, so to order the Duties of their General Callings as
Christians, and those of their particular Callings in the World, as that they
may not clash or interfere: I have heard it observed from Eccl. 7. 16. That
there may be over-doing in well-doing.

I cannot omit one little passage in his Diary, because it may be Instructive:
When he was once desired to be bound for one that had, upon a particular
occasion been Bound for him, he writes, Solomon says, He that hates
Suretiship is sure; but he says also, he that has Friends must show himself
friendly. But he always cautioned those that became Sureties, not to be Bound
for any more than they knew themselves able to pay, nor for more than they
would be willing to pay, if the Principal fail.

His House at Broad-Oake was by the Road-side, which though it had its
inconveniences, yet (he would say) pleased him well, because it gave his
Friends an opportunity of calling on him the oftener, and gave him an
opportunity of being kind to Strangers, and such as were any way distressed
upon the Road, to whom he was upon all occasions cheerfully ready, fully
answering the Apostles Character of a Bishop, that he must be of good
Behavior, ((...), decent, affable, and obliging) and given to Hospitality, 1 Timothy 3 2. like Abraham, sitting at his Tent Door, in quest of Opportunities to
do good. If he met with any poor near his House, and gave them Alms in Money,
yet he would bid them go to his Door besides for Relief there. He was very
tender and compassionate toward poor Strangers and Travelers, though his
Charity and Candor were often imposed upon by Cheats and Pretenders, whom he
was not apt to be suspicious of; but would say in the most favorable sense,
Thou know not the Heart of a Stranger. If any asked his Charity, whose
Representation of their Case he did not like, or who he thought did amiss to
take that Course; he would first give them an Alms, and then mildly reprove
them: And labor to convince them that they were out of the way of Duty, and
that they could not expect that God should bless them in it; and would not
chide them, but reason with them: And he would say, if he should tell them of
their Faults, and not give them an Alms, the Reproof would look only like an
Excuse to deny his Charity, and would be rejected accordingly.

In a word, his greatest Care about the things of this World, was how to do
good with what he had, and to devise liberal things; desiring to make no other
Accession to his Estate, but only that Blessing which attends Beneficence. He
did firmly believe (and it should seem, few do) that what is given to the Poor,
is lent to the Lord, who will pay it again, in kind or kindness; and that
Religion and Piety is undoubtedly the best Friend to outward Prosperity, and he
found it so; for it pleased God abundantly to bless his Habitation, and to make
a Hedge about him, and about his House, and about all that he had round about:
And though he did not delight himself in the abundance of Wealth; yet which is
far better, he delighted himself in the abundance of Peace, Psalm. 37. 11. All
that he had and did observably Prospered, so that the Country oftentimes took
Notice of it, and called his Family, a Family which the Lord had Blessed. And
his Comforts of this kind were (as he used to pray they might be) Oil to the
Wheels of his Obedience, and in the use of these things he served the Lord his
God with joyfulness and gladness of Heart, yet still mindful of, and grieved
for the Affliction of Joseph. He would say sometimes, when he was in the midst
of the Comforts of this Life, as that good Man; All this and Heaven too! surely
then we serve a good Master. Thus did the Lord bless him, and make him a
Blessing; and this abundant Grace, through the Thanksgiving of many, redounded
to the Glory of God.

Having given this general Account of his Circumstances at Broad-Oak, we shall
now go on with his Story, especially as to the Exercise of his Ministry there,
and thereabouts; for that was his (...) the thing in which he was, and to which
he wholly gave himself, taking other things (...). After this Settlement at
Broad-Oak, whenever there was Preaching at Whitewell Chapel (as usually there
was two Lord's days in the Month) he constantly attended there with his Family,
was usually with the first, and reverently joined in the Public Service; he
diligently wrote the Sermons; always staid if the Ordinance of Baptism was
Administered, but not if there were a Wedding, for he thought that Solemnity not
proper for the Lord's Day. He often Dined the Minister that Preached; after
Dinner he sung a Psalm, repeated the Morning Sermon, and Prayed; and then
attended in like manner in the Afternoon. In the Evening he Preached to his own
Family; and perhaps two or three of his Neighbors would drop in to him. On
those Lord's Days when there was no Preaching at the Chapel, he spent the
whole Day at home, and many an excellent Sermon he Preached, when there were
present only four besides his own Family (and perhaps not so many) according to
the limitation of the Conventicle Act. In these narrow private Circumstances he
Preached over the former part of the Assemblies Catechism, from diverse Texts.
He also Preached over Psalm 116. besides many particular occasional Subjects.

What a grief of Heart it was to him, to be thus put under a Bushel, and
consigned to such a narrow Sphere of Usefulness, read in his own words, which I
shall Transcribe out of an Elegy he made (to give vent to his thoughts) upon
the Death of his worthy Friend Mr George Mainwaring, sometime Minister of
Malpas, (who was Silenced by the Act of Uniformity, and Died Mar. 14. 1669/70)
wherein he thus bewails (feelingly enough) the like restraints and Confinements
of his Friend. His later Years he sadly spent,
Wrapped up in Silence and Restraint.
A Burden such as none do know,
But they that do it undergo.
To have a Fire shut up and pent
Within the Bowels, and no vent;
To have gorged Breasts, and by a Law
Those that fain would, forbidden to draw.
But his dumbSabbaths here did prove,
Loud crying Sabbaths in Heaven above.
His Tears, when he might sow no more,
Wat'ring what he had Sown before.


Soon after his Settlement at Broad-Oak, he took a young Scholar into the House
with him; partly to teach his Son, and partly to be a Companion to himself to
Converse with him, and to receive help and instruction from him; and for many
Years, he was seldom without one or other such; who before their going to the
University, or in the intervals of their attendance there, would be in his
Family, sitting under his Shadow. One of the first he had with him, in the Year
1668. (and after) was Mr. William Turner, born in the Neighborhood; afterward
of Edmund Hall in Oxford, now Vicar of Walberton in Sussex, to whom the World
is beholden for that Elaborate History of all Religions, which he Published in
the Year 1695. and from whom is earnestly expected the Performance of that
Noble and useful Project, for the Record of Providence. Betwixt Mr. Henry and
him there was a most entire and affectionate Friendship; and notwithstanding
that distance of place, a constant and endearing Correspondence, kept up as
long as Mr. Henry lived.

It was observed that several young Men who had sojourned with him, and were
very hopeful, and likely to be serviceable to their Generations, died soon
after their Removal from him; (I could instance in Six or seven) as if God had
sent them to him, to be prepared for another World, before they were called for
out of this; yet never any died while they were with him.

He had so great a kindness for the University, and valued so much the mighty
advantages of improvement there, that he advised all his Friends who designed
their Children for Scholars, to send them thither, for many Years after the
Change, though he always counted upon their Conformity. But long Experience
altered his mind herein, and he chose rather to keep his own Son at home with
him, and to give him what help he could there, in his Education, than venture
him into the Snares and Temptations of the University.

It was also soon after this Settlement of his at Broad-Oak, that he Contracted
an intimate Friendship with that learned and pious, and judicious Gentleman Mr.
Hunt of Boreatton, (the Son of Colonel Hunt of Salop) and with his excellent
Lady Frances, Daughter of the Right Honorable the Lord Paget. The Acquaintance
then begun betwixt Mr. Henry and that worthy Family continued to his dying day,
about Thirty Years. One Lords day in a Quarter he commonly spent with them,
besides other interviews: And it was a constant rejoicing to him to see
Religion and the Power of Godliness uppermost, in such a Family as that; when
not many Mighty, not many Noble are called, and the Branches of it, Branches of
Righteousness, the planting of the Lord. Diverse of the Honorable Relations of
that Family contracted a very great respect for him, particularly the present
Lord Paget, now his Majesty's Ambassador at the Ottoman Court, and Sir Henry
Ashurst, whom we shall have occasion afterward to make mention of.

In the time of Trouble and Distress, by the Conventicle Act, in 1670. he kept
private, and stirred little abroad, as loath to offend those that were in Power,
and judging it Prudence to gather in his Sails, when the Storm was violent: He
then observed, as that which he was troubled at, That there was a great deal of
precious time lost among Professors, when they came together, in discoursing of
their Adventures to meet, and their escapes, which he feared tended more to set
up self, than to give Glory to God. Also in telling how they got together, and
such a one Preached, but little enquiring what Spiritual Benefit and advantage
was reaped by it; and that we are apt to make the circumstances of our
Religious Services, more the matter of our Discourse, than the Substance of
them.

We shall close this Chapter with two Remarks out of his Diary, in the Year
1671. which will show what manner of Spirit he was of, and what were his
Sentiments of things at that time. One is this, All acknowledge that there is
at this day a number of sober, peaceable Men, both Ministers and others, among
Dissenters, but who either says or does any thing to oblige them; who desires
or endeavors to open the Door to let in such; nay, do they not rather
provoke them to run into the same Extravagancies with others, by making no
difference, but laying load on them, as if they were as bad as the worst. It Is
true, that about this time the Lord Keeper Bridgman and Bishop Wilkins, and the
Lord chief Justice Hale, were making some Overtures toward an Accommodation
with them; but it is as true, that those Overtures did but the more exasperate
their Adversaries, (who were ready to account such moderate Men, the worst
Enemies the Church of England had) and the event was greater Acts of Severity.

Another is this, If all that has been said and written, to prove that Prelacy
is Antichristian, and that it is Unlawful to join in the Common Prayer, had
been effectually to persuade Bishops to Study and do the Duty of Church Rulers,
in preaching and feeding the Flock, according to the Word, and to persuade
People to be serious, inward, and spiritual in the use of Forms, it had been
much better with the Church of God in England, than it now is. Consonant to the
Spirit of this Remark, was that which he took all occasions to mention as his
settled Principle. In those things wherein all the People of God are agreed I
will spend my Zeal, and wherein they differ, I will endeavor to walk according
to the Light that God has given me, and Charitably believe that others do so
too.

CHAP. VI.
His Liberty by the Indulgence in 1672. and thence forwards, to the Year 1681.

NOtwithstanding the severe Act against Conventicles, in the Year 1670. yet the
Nonconformists in London, ventured to set up Meetings in 1671. and were
connived at; but in the Country there was little Liberty taken till the King's
Declaration of March 15. 1671/2. gave Countenance and Encouragement to it. What
were the secret Springs which produced that Declaration Time Discovered;
however, it was to the poor Dissenters, as Life from the Dead, and gave them
some reviving in their Bondage, God graciously ordering it so, that the Spirit
he had made might not fail before him. But so precarious a Liberty was it, that
it should never be said, those People were hard to be pleased, who were so well
pleased with that, and thanked God who put such a thing into the King's Heart.
The Tenor of that Declaration was this; In Consideration of the inefficacy of
Rigor, tried for diverse Years, and to invite Strangers into the Kingdom,
ratifying the Establishment of the Church of England, it suspends Penal Laws
against all Nonconformists and Recusants, promises to License separate places
for Meetings, limiting Papists only to private Houses.

On this Mr. Henry writes, It is a thing diversely resented, as Men's Interests
lead them; the Conformists displeased, the Presbyterians glad, the Independents
very glad, the Papists triumph. The danger is (says he) lest the allowing of
separate places help to overthrow our Parish-Order, which God has owned, and
to beget Divisions and Animosities among us, which no honest Heart but would
rather should be healed. We are put hereby (says he) into a Trilemma, either
to turn Independents in Practice, or to strike in with the Conformists, or to
sit down in former Silence and Sufferings (and Silence he accounted one of the
greatest Sufferings) till the Lord shall open a more effectual door. That which
(he says) he then heartily wished for, was, That those who were in place,
would admit the sober Nonconformists, to Preach sometimes occasionally in their
Pulpits; by which means he thought Prejudices would in time wear off on both
sides, and they might mutually strengthen each others Hands against the common
Enemy the Papists; who (he foresaw) would fish best in troubled Waters. This he
would choose much rather than to keep a separate Meeting: But it could not be
had; no, not so much as leave to Preach at Whitewel Chapel when it was vacant,
as it often was, though 'twere three long Miles from the Parish Church. He
found that some People, the more they are courted, the more coy they are;
however, the Overtures he made to this purpose; and the slow steps he took
toward the setting up of a distinct Congregation yielded him satisfaction
afterward in the Reflection, when he could say, we would have been united, and
they would not.

'Twas several Weeks after the Declaration came out, that he received a License
to Preach, as Paul did, in his own House, and elsewhere, no Man forbidding him.
This was procured for him by some of his Friends at London, without his
Privity, and came to him altogether unexpected. The use he made of it was, that
at his own House, what he did before to his own Family, and in Private, the
Doors being shut for Fear, he now did more Publicly; threw his Doors open, and
welcomed his Neighbors to him, to partake of his Spiritual things: Only one
Sermon in the Evening of the Lord's Day, when there was Preaching at Whitewel
Chapel, where he still continued his Attendance with his Family and Friends, as
usual; but when there was not, he spent the whole Day, at public time, in the
Services of the Day, Exposition of the Scriptures read, and Preaching, with
Prayer and Praise. This he did gratis, receiving nothing for his Labors,
either at home or abroad, but the Satisfaction of doing good to Souls (which
was his Meat and Drink) with the trouble and charge of giving Entertainment to
many of his Friends, which he did with much cheerfulness; and he would say, he
sometimes thought, that the Bread did even Multiply in the Breaking; and he
found, that God did abundantly bless his Provision, with that Blessing, which,
as he used to say, will make a little go a great way. He was wont to observe,
for the encouragement of such as had Meetings in their Houses, (which sometimes
drew upon them inconveniences) That the Ark is a Guest, that always pays well
for its Entertainment. And he Noted, that when Christ had borrowed Peter's ^oat
to preach a Sermon out of it, he presently repaid him for the Loan, with a
great draught of Fishes, Luke 5. (...), 4.

Many thoughts of Heart he had, concerning this use he made of the Liberty, not
knowing what would be in the end hereof; but after serious Consideration, and
many Prayers, he saw his way very plain before him, and addressed himself with
all diligence, to the improvement of this Gale of Opportunity. Some had dismal
apprehensions of the issue of it; and that there would be an after-reckoning:
but (says he) let us mind our Duty, and let God alone to order Events, which
are his Work, not ours.

It was a word upon the Wheels, which he preached at that time for his own
Encouragement, and the Encouragement of his Friends, from that Scripture, Eccl.
11. 4. He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the
clouds shall not reap. Those that are minded either to do good, or get good,
must not be frighted with seeming Difficulties and Discouragements. Our Work is
to Sow and Reap; to do good, and get good; and let us mind that, and let who
will mind the Winds and Clouds. A Lion in the way, a Lion in the streets; a
very unlikely place (he would, say) for Lions to be in; and yet that serves the
Sluggard for an Excuse.

While this Liberty lasted, he was in labors more abundant; many Lectures he
Preached abroad in Shrapshire, Cheshire, and Denbighshire, laying out himself
exceedingly for the good of Souls, spending, and being spent in the work of the
Lord. And of that Neighborhood, and of that Time it was said, that this and
that Man was born again, then and there; and many there were who asked the way
to Sion, with their Faces thitherwards, and were (not Proselyted to a Party,
but) savingly brought home to Jesus Christ. I mean this; such as had been vain
and wordly, and careless, and mindless of God and another World, became sober
and serious, and concerned about their Souls, and a Future State. This was the
Conversion of Souls, aimed at, and labored after, and through Grace not
altogether in vain. Whatever Lectures were set up in the Country round, 'twas
still desired that Mr Henry would begin them (which was thought no small
Encouragement to those who were to carry them on) and very happy he was, both
in the choice and management of his Subjects at such opportunities, seeking to
find out acceptable Words. Take one Specimen of his Address, when he began a
Lecture with a Sermon, on Heb. 12. 15. I assure you, (says he) and God is my
Witness, I am not come to Preach, either Sedition against the Peace of the
State, or Schism against the Peace of the Church, by persuading you to this or
that Opinion or Party; but as a Minister of Christ, that has received Mercy
from the Lord, to desire to be faithful: My errand is to exhort you to all
possible Seriousness, in the great Business of your Eternal Salvation,
according to my Text, which if the Lord will make as profitable to you, as it
is material, and of weight in it self, neither you nor I shall have cause to
repent cur coming hither, and our being here to day; looking diligently, lest
any of you fail of the Grace of God. If it were the last Sermon I were to
Preach, I did not know how to take my aim better to do you good.

In doing of this Work, he often said, that he looked upon himself, but as an
Assistant to the Parish Ministers, in promoting the common Interests of Christ's
Kingdom, and the common Salvation of precious Souls, by the Explication and
Application of those great Truths, wherein we are all agreed. And he would
compare the Case to that in Hezekiah's time, when the Levites helped the
Priests to kill the Sacrifice, which was something of an irregularity, but the
exigence of affairs called for it; the Priests being too few, and some of them
not so careful as they should have been, to sanctify themselves, see 2 Chr.
29. 34. and wherever he Preached, he usually prayed for the Parish Minister,
and for a Blessing upon his Ministry. He has often said how well pleased he
was, when after he had preached a Lecture at Oswestry, he went to visit the
Minister of the Place, Mr. Edwards, a worthy good Man; and told him, he had
been Sowing a handful of Seed among his People, and had this Answer, That Is
well, the Lord prosper your Seed and mine too, there is need enough of us both.
And another worthy Conformist that came privately to hear him, but was
reprimanded for it by his Superiors, told him afterward with tears, that his
Heart was with him.

His Heart was wonderfully enlarged in his Work at this time, the Fields were
white unto the Harvest; and he was busy, and God did remarkably own him,
setting many Seals to his Ministry, which much confirmed him in what he did. He
has this observable passage in his Diary, about this time, which he recorded
for his after Benefit, (and the Example of it may be instructive) Remember,
that if trouble should come hereafter, for what we do now in the use of present
Liberty, I neither shrink from it, nor sink under it; for I do therein approve
my self to God, and to my own Conscience, in truth and uprightness; and the
Lord whom I serve, can and will certainly, both bear me out, and bring me off
with comfort in the end. I say, Remember, and forget it not, this 24th day of
March, 1672/3.

'Twas at the beginning of this Liberty, that the Society at Broad-Oak did
Commence; made up (besides the Neighborhood) of some out of Whitchurch, and
Whitchurch Parish, that had been Mr. Porter's People, some out of Hanmer
Parish, that had been Mr. Steel's, and some out of the Parishes of Wem, Prees,
and Ellismere, Persons generally of very moderate and sober Principles, quiet
and peaceable Lives, and hearty wellwishers to the King and Government; and not
Rigid or Schismatical in their Separation, but willing to attend (though
sometimes with difficulty and hazard) upon those Administrations which they
found most lively and edifying, and most helpful to them, in the great business
of working out their Salvation. To this Society he would never call himself a
Pastor, nor was he willing that they should call him so; but a Helper, and a
Minister of Christ for their good. He would say, That he looked upon his
Family, only as his Charge, and his Preaching to others was but accidental,
whom if they came, he could no more turn away, than he could a poor hungry Man,
that should come to his door for an Alms. And being a Minister of Jesus Christ,
he thought himself bound to Preach the Gospel, as he had opportunity.

Usually once a Month he administered the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Some
of his Opportunities of that kind he sets a particular Remark upon, as sweet
Sealing Days, on which he found it good to draw near to God.

When about the Years end there was a general Expectation of the Cancelling of
the Indulgence: He has this Note upon a precious Sabbath and Sacrament day, as
he calls it; perhaps this may be the last, Father thy will be done; it is good
for us to be at such uncertainties; for now we receive our Liberty from our
Father, fresh every day, which is best and sweetest of all.

On the 3d of March, 1676/7. being Saturday night, the Town of Wem in
Shropshire (about six Miles from him) was burnt down; the Church, Market House,
and about One hundred twenty six dwelling Houses, and one Man, in little more
than an Hours time, the Wind being exceeding violent; at which time Mr. Henry
was very helpful to his Friends there, both for their support under, and their
improvement of this sad Providence. It was but about half a Year before, that a
threatening Fire had broke out in that Town, but did little hurt; some serious
People there, presently after Celebrated a Thanksgiving for their Deliverance,
in which Mr. Henry imparted to them a Spiritual Gift (Oct. 3. 1676) from Zech.
3. 2. Is not this a brand plucked out of the Fire? In the close of that Sermon,
pressing them from the consideration of that remarkable Deliverance, to
personal Reformation and Amendment of Life: That those who had been Proud,
Covetous, Passionate, Liars, Swearers, Drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, would be so
no more; and urging Ezr. 9. 13, 14. he added, If this Providence have not this
effect upon you, you may in reason expect another Fire; for when God judges he
will overcome; and minded them of Lev. 26. where it is so often threatened
against those who walk contrary to God, that he would punish them yet seven
times more. The remembrance of this could not but be affecting, when in so
short a time after, the whole Town was laid in Ruins. The first time he went
thither after that Calamity, a Neighboring Justice having Notice of it, sent
to forbid him to Preach, to his own Grief, as well as to the Grief of many
others, who came expecting. But (says he in his Diary) there was a visible
Sermon before us, the Ruins Preaching, that Sin is an evil thing, and God a
terrible God. However, a few days after, he got an opportunity of Preaching to
them a word in Season, which some will not forget, from Hos. 6. 1. Come, and
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn -- And at the return of the Year,
when the Town was in the Rebuilding, he gave them another very suitable Sermon,
from Prove. 3. 33. The Curse of the Lord is in the House of the wicked, but he
blesses the Habitation of the just. Though it be rising again (says he in his
Diary) out of its Ashes, yet the burning of it should not be forgotten,
especially not the Sin that kindled it. He often prayed for them, that the Fire
might be a Refining Fire.

In the Years 1677, 1678, and 1679, in the Course of his Ministry at Broad-Oak,
he Preached over the Ten Commandments, and largely opened from other Texts of
Scripture the Duties required, and Sins forbidden, in each Commandment. For,
tho none delighted more than he in Preaching Christ and Gospel Grace; yet he
knew, that Christ came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill;
and that, though through Grace we are not under the Law, as a Covenant; yet we
are under it as a Rule, under the Law to Christ. He was very large and
particular in pressing second Table Duties, as essential to Christianity. We
have known those (says he) that have called Preaching on such Subjects, good
Moral Preaching; but let them call it as they will, I am sure it is necessary,
and as much now as ever. How earnestly would he press upon People, the
necessity of Righteousness and Honesty, in their whole Conversations. A good
Christian (he used to say) will be a good Husband, and a good Father, and a
good Master, and a good Subject, and a good Neighbor, and so in other
Relations. How often would he urge to this purpose, that it is the Will and
Command of the Great God, the Character of all the Citizens of Sion, the Beauty
and Ornament of our Christian Profession; and the surest way to thrive and
prosper in the World. Honesty is the best Policy. He would say, that these are
things in which the Children of this World are competent Judges. They that know
not what belongs to Faith and Repentance, and Prayer, yet know what belongs to
the making of an honest Bargain: they are also Parties concerned, and
oftentimes are themselves careful in these things; and therefore those who
profess Religion, should walk very circumspectly, that the Name of God and his
Doctrine be not Blasphemed, nor Religion wounded through their sides. Thus he
Preached, and his constant Practice was a Comment upon it. One thing I remember
he was more than ordinarily enlarged in the pressing of, which was upon the
Ninth Commandment, to speak evil of no Man, from Tit. 3. 2. If we can say no
good of Persons, we must say nothing of them. He gave it as a Rule, Never to
speak of any ones faults to others, till we have first spoken of them to the
Offender himself. He was himself an eminent Example of this Rule. Some that
have Conversed much with him, have said, That they never heard him speak evil
of any Body; nor could he bear to hear any spoken evil of, but often drove away
a Backbiting-tongue with an angry Countenance. He was known to be as Faithful a
Patron of Offenders before others, as he was a Faithful Reprover of them to
themselves.

Whenever he Preached of Moral Duties, he would always have something of Christ
in his Sermon; either his Life, as the great Pattern of the Duty, or his Love,
as the great Motive to it; or his Merit, as making Atonement for the neglect of
it.

In the Year 1680. he preached over the Doctrines of Faith and Repentance, from
several Texts of Scripture. He used to say, that he had been told concerning
the famous Mr. Dod, that some called him in scorn, Faith and Repentance,
because he insisted so much upon those two, in all his Preaching. But (says
he) if this be to be vile, I will be yet more vile, for Faith and Repentance
are all in all in Christianity.

Concerning Repentance he has sometimes said, If I were to dye in the Pulpit,
I would desire to dye Preaching Repentance; as if I dye out of the Pulpit, I
would desire to dye practicing Repentance. And he had often this saying
concerning Repentance; He that Repents every day, for the sins of every day,
when he comes to dye, will have the sins but of one day to repent of. Even
Reckonings make long Friends.

That Year also, and the Year 1681 he preached over the Duties of Hearing the
Word and Prayer; of the former, from the Parable of the four sorts of Ground;
of the latter, from Luke 11. 1, etc. when he preached over the Lord's Prayer,
in above Thirty excellent and elaborate Discourses. Helook'd upon the Lord's
Prayer, to be not only a Directory or Pattern for Prayet, but (according to the
advice of the Assembly of Divines) proper to be used as a Form; and accordingly
he often used it, both in Public and in his Family. And as he thought, 'twas
an Error on the one hand, to lay so much stress upon it, as some do, who think
no sol^mn Prayer accepted, nor any solemn Ordinance or Administration of
Worship complete without it; and so repeat it five or six times, and perhaps
oftener, at one Meeting; so he thought it an Error on the other hand not to use
it at all; since it is a Prayer, a compendious comprehensive Prayer, and may be
of use to us, at least as other Scripture Prayers; but he thought it a much
greater Error to be angry at those that do use it, to judge and censure them,
and for no other reason to conceive Prejudices against them, and their
Ministry. A great strait (says he) poor Ministers are in, when some will not
hear them, if they do not use the Lord's Prayer, and others will not hear them
if they do; What is to be done in this case? We must walk accordto the Light we
have, and approve our selves to God, either in using or not using it, and wait
for the day when God will mend the matter; which I hope he will do in his own
due time.

He was in the close of his Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, when a dark Cloud
was brought upon his Assemblies, and he was necessitated to contract his Sails.

CHAP. VII.
The Rebukes he lay under at Broad. Oal^, betwixt the Years 1680. and 1687.

IN the beginning of the Year 1681. in April and May, the Country was greatly
afflicted and threatened by an extreme Drought; there was no Rain for several
Weeks, the Grass failed; Corn that was Sown languished, and much that was
intended to be Sown could not; the like had not been known for many Years;
'twas generally apprehended that a Dearth would ensue, especially in that
Country, which is for the most part dry. And now it was time to seek the Lord;
and (according to his own appointment) to ask of him Rain in the Season
thereof: Several serious thinking People being together at the Funeral of that
worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr. Malden; It was there said how requisite it
was that there should be some time set apart on purpose for Fasting and Prayer,
in a solemn Assembly upon this occasion. Thomas Millington of Weston in Hodnet
Parish in Shropshire, desired it might be at his House; and Tuesday June 14.
was the Day pi^ch'd upon. The Connivance of Authority was presumed upon,
because no disturbance of Meetings was heard of at London, or any where else.
Mr. Henry was desired to come and give his assistance at that Days work. He
asked upon what terms they stood with their Neighboring Justices, and 'twas
answered well enough. The Drought continuing in extremity, some that had not
used to come to such Meetings, yet came thither, upon the apprehension they had
of the threatening Judgment, which the Country was under. Mr. Edward Bury of
Bolas (well known by several useful Books he has Published) Prayed, Mr. Henry
Prayed and Preached on Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my Heart, the Lord
will not hear me; whence his Doctrine was, that Iniquity regarded in the Heart,
will certainly spoil the success of Prayer. When he was in the midst of his
Sermon, closely applying this Truth, Sir T. V. of Hodnet, and Mr. M. of
Ightfield, two Justices of the Peace for Shropshire, with several others of
then Retinue, came suddenly upon them; disturbed them, set Guards upon the
House door, and came in themselves, severely ralli'd all they knew, reflected
upon the late Honorable House of Commons, and the Vote they passed, concerning
the present Unreasonableness. of putting the Laws in Execution against
Protestant Dissenters, as if in so Voting, they had acted beyond their Sphere,
as they did who took away the Life of King Charles I. They diverted themselves
with very abusive and unbecoming talk; Swearing and Cursing, and Reviling
bitterly; being told, the occasion of the Meeting was to seek to turn away the
anger of God from us in the present Drought: 'twas answered, Such Meetings as
these were the cause of God's anger. While they were thus entertaining
themselves, their Clerks took the Names of those that were present, in all,
about One hundred and fifty, and so dismissed them for the present. Mr. Henry
has noted, in the Account he kept of this event, that the Justices came to
this good Work, from the Alehouse upon Prees-Heath, about two Miles off; to
which, and the Bowling-Green adjoining, they with other Justices, Gentlemen and
Clergymen of the Neighborhood, had long before obliged themselves to come
every Tuesday, during the Summer time, under the Penalty of Twelve Pence a time
if they were absent; and there to spend the day in Drinking and Bowling; which
is thought to be as direct a violation of the Law of the Land, viz. the Statute
of 33. Henry VIII. cap. 9. for debarring, unlawful Games, which was never yet
Repealed, as the Meeting was, of the Stat. of 22 Car. II. and as much more to
the Dishonor of God, and the Scandal of the Christian Profession; as Cursing
and Swearing, and Drunkenness, is worse than Praying and singing Psalms, and
hearing the Word of God. It is supposed that the Justices knew of the Meeting
before, and might have prevented it by the least intimation; but they were
willing to take the opportunity of making sport to themselves, and trouble to
their Neighbors. After the Feat done, they returned back to the Alehouse, and
made themselves and their Companions merry, with calling over the Names they
had taken, making their Reflections as they saw cause; and recounting the
particulars of the Exploit. There was one of the Company, whose Wife happened
to be present at the Meeting, and her Name taken among the rest; with which
upbraiding him, he answered, that she had been better employed than he was, and
if Mr. Henry might be admitted to Preach in a Church, he would go a great many
Miles to hear him. For which words he was forthwith Expelled their Company, and
never more to show his Face again at that Bowling-Green; to which he replied,
if they had so ordered long ago, it had been a great deal the better for him
and his Family. Two days after they met again at Hodnet, where, upon the Oath
of two Witnesses, wh^ (as was supposed) were sent on purpose to inform, they
Signed and Sealed two Records of Conviction. By one Record they Convicted the
Master of the House, and ^in'd him 20 l. and 5 l. more as Constable of the Town
that Year, and with him all the Persons present whose Names they had taken, and
Fined them 5 l. apiece, and issued out Warrants accordingly. By another Record
they Convicted the two Ministers, Mr. Bury and Mr. Henry. The Act makes it only
punishable to Preach or Teach in any such Conventicle; and yet they Fined Mr.
Bury 20 l. though he only Prayed, and did not speak one word in the way, either
of Preaching or Teaching, not so much as Let us Pray; however they said,
Praying was Teaching, and right or wrong he must be Fined; though his great
Piety, Peaceableness, and Usefulness, besides his deep Poverty, one would
think, might have Pleaded for him, against so palpable a piece of Injustice.
They took 7 l. off from him, and laid it upon others, as they saw cause; and
for the remaining 13 l. he being utterly unable to pay it, they took from him
by Distress, the Bed which he lay upon, with Blanket and Rug; also another
Feather-Bed, Nineteen pair of Sheets, most of them new; of which he could not
prevail to have so much as one pair returned, for him to lie in; also Books, to
the value of 5 l. besides Brass and Pewter. And though he was at this time
perfectly innocent of that heinous Crime of Preaching and Teaching, with which
he was charged (for so the Record runs again and again, concerning Mr. Henry
and Mr. Bury, Quod ad tun^ and ibidem precaverunt, praedi^averunt and
docuerunt.) Yet he had no way to right himself, but by appealing to the
Justices themselves in Quarter Sessions, who would be sure to affirm their own
Decree (as the Justices in Montgomery-shire had done not long before in a like
Case) especially when 'twas to Recover to themselves treble Costs. So the good
Man sat down with his Loss, and took joyfully the spoiling of his Goods;
knowing in himself, that he had in Heaven a better, and a more enduring
Substance.

But Mr. Henry being the greatest Criminal, and having done the most Mischief,
must needs be animadverted upon accordingly, and therefore he was fined 40 l.
the pretense of which was this: In the Year 1679. Oct. 15. Mr. Kynaston of
Oatly, a Justice of Peace in S^shire, meeting him and some others coming as he
supposed, from a Conventicle, he was pleased to Record their Conviction, upon
the notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact: The Record was Filled at
Salop the next Sessions after; but no Notice was ever sent of it, either to Mr.
Henry, or the Justices of Flintshire; nor any Prosecution upon it, against any
of the Parties charged (the reason of which Mr. Henry in a Narrative he wrote
of this affair, supposes to be not only the then favorable posture of Public
Affairs toward Dissenters, but also the particular Prudence and Lenity of Mr.
Kynaston) so that having never smarted for this, he could not be supposed to be
deterred from the like offense; nor if he were wronged in that first
Conviction, had he ever any opportunity of making his Appeal. However, the
Justices being resolved he should have summum jus, thought that first Record
sufficient to give denomination to a second Offense, and so he came to be Fined
double. This Conviction (according to the direction of the Act) they certifi'd
to the next adjoining Justices of Flintshire, who had all along carried
themselves with great Temper and Moderation toward Mr. Henry, and had never
given him any disturbance; though if they had been so minded, they had not wanted
opportunities; but they were now necessitated to Execute the Sentence of the
Shropshire Justices. 'Twas much pressed upon him to pay the Fine, which might
prevent his own Loss, and the Justices Trouble. But he was not willing to do
it, partly because he would give no Encouragement to such Prosecutions, nor
voluntarily Reward the Informers, for that which he thought they should rather
be punished for; and partly because he thought himself wronged in the doubling
of the Fine. Whereupon his Goods were Distrain'd upon, and carried away; in the
doing of which many passages occurred, which might be worth the Noting, but
that the Repetition of them would perhaps grate and give offense to some. Let
it therefore suffice (waving the Circumstances) to remember only that their
Warrant not giving them Authority to break open doors, nor their Watchfulness
getting them an opportunity to enter the House; They carried away about Thirty
three Cart Load of Goods without doors, Corn cut upon the Ground, Hay, Coals,
etc. This made a great noise in the Country, and raised the indignation of
many, against the Decrees which prescribed this grievousness; while Mr. Henry
bore it with his usual evenness and serenity of mind, not at all moved or
disturbed by it. He did not boast of his Sufferings, or make any great matter
of them; but would often say, alas, this is nothing to what others suffer, nor
to what we our selves may suffer before we dye: And yet he rejoiced and blessed
God that it was not for Debt, or for evil doing, that his Goods were carried
away. And (says he) while it is for well-doing that we suffer, they cannot
harm us. Thus he writes in his Diary upon it, How often have we said that Changes
are at the door, but blessed be God there is no Sting in this.
He frequently expressed the assurance he had, that whatever damage he
sustained, God is able to make it up again: And (as he used to say) Though we
may be losers for Christ, yet we shall not be losers by him in the end. He had
often said, that his Preaching was likely to do the most good when it was
Sealed to by Suffering; and if this be the time (says he) welcome the Will of
God; even this also shall turn to the furtherance of the Gospel of Christ: Been
agere and male pati vere Christianum est.

Soon after this was the Assizes for Flint-shire held at Mold, where Sir George
Ieffries, afterward Lord Chancellor, then Chief Justice of Chester sat Judge.
He did not in private Conversation seem to applaud what was done in this
matter, so as was expected; whether out of a private pique against some that
had been active in it, or for what other reason is not known; but it was said,
that he pleasantly asked some of the Gentlmen, by what new Law they pressed
Carts, as they passed upon their occasions along the Road, to carry away Goods
distreyn'd for a Conventicle. It was also said, that he spoke with some respect
of Mr. Henry; saying, he knew him and his Character well, and that he was a
great Friend of his Mothers, (Mrs. Ieffries of Acton near Wrexham, a very pious
good Woman) and that sometimes at his Mothers Request, Mr. Henry had Examined
him in his Learning, when he was a Schoolboy, and had commended his
Proficiency. And it was much wondered at by many, that of all the times Sir
George Ieffries went that Circuit, (though it is well enough known what was his
temper, and what the temper of that time) yet he never sought any occasion
against Mr. Henry, nor took the occasions that were offered, nor countenanced
any Trouble intended him, though he was the only Nonconformist in Flintshire.
One passage I remember, not improper to be mentioned; there had been an
Agreement among some Ministers (I think it began in the West of England, where
Mr. Allen was) to spend some time, either in Secret or in their Families, or
both, between six and eight a Clock every Monday Morning, in Prayer for the
Church of God, and for the Land and Nation more fully and particularly than at
other times, and to make that their special Errand at the Throne of Grace; and
to engage as many of their praying Friends, as ever they could, to the
observance of it. This had been Communicated to Mr. Henry, by some of his
Friends at London, and he punctually observed it in his own Practice; I believe
for many Years. He also mentioned it to some of his Acquaintance, who did in
like manner observe it. It happened that one in Denbighshire, to whom he had
Communicated it, was so well pleased with it, that he wrote a Letter of it to a
Friend of his at a distance; which Letter happened into Hands that perverted
it: and made Information upon it, against the Writer and Receiver of the
Letter, who were bound over to the Assizes, and great Suspicions Sir George
Ieffries had, that it was a Branch of the Presbyterian Plot, and rallied the
Parties accused severely. It appeared, either by the Letter, or by the
Confession of the Parties, that they received the Project from Mr. Henry, which
(it was greatly feared) would bring him into trouble; but Sir George, to the
admiration of many, let it fall, and never inquired further into it. It seems
there are some Men, whose ways so please the Lord, that he makes even their
Enemies to be at peace with them; and there is nothing lost by trusting in God.

Mr. Henry, at the next Assizes after he was Distrain'd upon, was presented by
one of the High Constables; 1. For keeping a Conventicle at his House; and 2.
for saying, That the Law for suppressing Conventicles ought not to be obeyed,
and that there was never a tittle of the Word of God in it. As to this latter
Presentment, 'twas altogether false. He had indeed, in Discourse with the High
Constable, when he insisted so much upon the Law, which required him to be so
rigorous in the Prosecution; objected, That all Humane Laws were not to be
obeyed, merely because they were Laws. But as to any such Reflections upon the
Law he suffered by, he was far from it, and had Prudence enough to keep Silence
at that time; for it was an Evil time, when so many were made Offenders for a
word. But these Presentiments met with so little Countenance from Judge
Ieffries, that Mr. Henry only entered his Appearance in the Prothonotaries
Office, and they were no more heard of; wherein he acknowledged the hand of
God, who turns the Hearts of the Children of Men, as the rivulet of water.

As to what was taken from him by the Distress, they who took it made what
Markets they pleased of it, paid those they employed, and what the remainder
was, is not known for certain; but it was said, that the following Summer about
27 l. was paid to Sir T. V. of which (and the rest that was levied in other
places, which amounted to a considerable Sum) it was c^edibly reported, (and I
have not heard it contradicted) that neither the King nor the Poor had their
Share, (which by the Act is to be two thirds) nor the Informers theirs neither;
but People said, the Gentleman had occasion for it all. But as they that had it
were never the Richer for it, so he that lost it, would often say, that he
found that God did so abundantly bless the remainder to him, that he was never
the Poorer; which he would mention for the encouragement of his Friends, not to
balk Duty, (as he used to express it) for fear of Suffering.

In the same Year 1681. happened a public Discourse at Oswestry, betwixt the
then Bishop of St. Asaph (Dr. William Lloyd, now Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield) and some Nonconformist Ministers, of which Mr. Henry was one. The
Story in short this. That Learned Bishop, at his first coming to the Diocese of
St. Asaph, in his Zeal for the Established Church, set himself with vigor to
reduce Dissenters to it; and that he might do it with the Cords of a Man, he
resolved, before he took any other Methods, to reafon the matter with them, and
to endeavor their Conviction by Discourse, in which he had a very great
Felicity, both by his Learning and Temper. If there were any that declined
Discoursing with him, he improved that against them very much; urging (as he
wrote afterward to Mr. Henry) That no Man can pretend Conscience for not
coming when he is required, to give an account of his Religion, to them that
have Authority to demand it, by the Laws under which he Lives, and to hear from
their Mouths what can be said for the Established Religion. These are things
from which Conscience is so far from exempting, that the great Rule of
Conscience requires it, as an indispensable Duty; that we should be always
ready to give an Account of the Hope that is in us; and that we should hear
them that are in Moses' s Chair, etc. and therefore those who refused this, he
would consider as Men Governed, not by Conscience, but Obstinacy.

He publicly Discoursed with the Quakers at Lanvillin in Montgomery-shire;
their Champion was Dr. Lloyd a Physician; one of the most considerable
Nonconformist Ministers in his Diocese, was Mr. James Owen of Oswestry, then
very young, but well known since by his Learned Book, which he calls, A Plea
for Scripture Ordination; proving Ordination by Presbyters without Diocesan
Bishops, to be valid, (Published in the Year 1694) a point of Controversy,
which he was then obliged in his own Defense to search into. Several Discourses
the Bishop had with him in Private; at last his Lordship was pleased to appoint
him, to give him the Meeting in the Town Hall of Oswestry, on Tuesday Sept. 27.
1681. there to give Account by what Right he Exercised the Ministry, not having
Episcopal Ordination. He directed him also to procure what other Ministers he
could to assist him, for he would be glad to hear what any of them had to say
for themselves. The Notice was very short, not above four or five Days: Some
whose assistance was desired, apprehended it might do more hurt than good, and
might be prejudicial to their own Liberty, and therefore declined it. It was
not agreeable to Mr. Henry's mild and modest Temper, to appear in such
Circumstances; but he was loath to desert his Friend Mr. Owen, and so with much
importunity, he was prevailed with to come to Oswestry, at the time appointed;
and there came no other but he and Mr. Jonathan Roberts of Denbighshire, in the
Diocese of Bangor, a plain Man, of great Integrity, and a very good Scholar.
The Bishop came according to appointment, and brought with him for his
Assistant, the Famous Mr. Henry Dodwell: Mr. Henry, who was utterly a Stranger
to the Bishop, pressed hard to have had the Discourse in private, before a
Select Number, but it would not be granted. He also desired his Lordship, that
it might not be expected from him, being of another Diocese, to concern himself
in the Discourse, but only as a Hearer: Nay Mr. Henry (said the Bishop) it is
not the concern of my Diocese alone, but it is the common Cause of Religion,
and therefore I expect you should interest your self in it, more than as a
Hearer. His Lordship was pleased to promise, that nothing that should be said
by way of Argument, should be any way turned to the prejudice of the
Disputants, nor advantage taken of it to give them trouble. There were present
diverse of the Clergy and Gentry of the Country, with the Magistrates of the
Town, and a great number of People, which if it could have been avoided, was
not easy to Mr. Henry, who never loved any thing that made a noise; herein
like his Master, who did not strive nor cry. The Discourse began about two a
Clock in the Afternoon, and continued till between seven and eight at Night;
much was said pro and con, touching the identity of Bishops and Presbyters, the
Bishopping and Unbishopping of Timothy and Titus, the Validity of Presbyterian
Ordination, etc. 'Twas managed with a great deal of Liberty, and not under the
strict Laws of Disputation, which made it hard to give any tolerable account of
the Particulars of it. The Arguments on both sides, may better be fetched from
the Books written on the Subject, than from such a Discourse. The Bishop
managed his part of the Conference with a great deal of Gravity, Calmness and
Evenness of Spirit, and therein gave an excellent Pattern to all that are in
such Stations. Mr. Henry's Remark upon this Business in his Diary is this; That
whereas many Reports went abroad far and near concerning it, every one passing
their Judgment upon the result of it as they stood affected; for my own part,
(says he) upon Reflection, I find I have great reason to be ashamed of my
manifold infirmities and imperfections; and yet do bless God, that seeing I
could manage it no better, to do the Truth more Service, there was not more
said and done to its disservice; to God be Glory. But there were others, who
said that Mr. Henry was an Instrument of glorifying God, and serving the Church
in that affair, almost as much as in any thing that ever he did, except the
Preaching of the Gospel. And some who were Adversaries to the Cause, he
pleaded, tho they were not Convinced by his Arguments, yet by his great
Meekness and Humility, and that truly Christian Spirit, which appeared so
evidently in the whole Management, were brought to have a better Opinion of
him, and the way in which he walked.

The Conference broke off a little abruptly; the Bishop and Mr. Henry being
somewhat close at an Argument, in the Recapitulation of what had been
Discoursed of; Mr. Jonathan Roberts whispered to Mr. Henry, Pray let my Lord
have the last word; which a Justice of Peace upon the Bench over-hearing,
presently replied, You say my Lord shall have the last word, but he shall not,
for I will; we thank God we have the Sword of Power in our hands, and by the
Grace of God we will keep it, and it shall not rust, and I hope every lawful
Magistrate will do as I do: and look to your selves Gentlemen, by the Grace of
God I Will root you out of the Country. To which a forward Man in the Crowd said
Amen, throw them down Stairs. This the Bishop heard with Silence, but the Mayor
of the Town took order for their safety.

Two Days after this Discourse, the Bishop wrote a very obliging Letter to Mr.
Henry, to signify to him, how very much he was pleased with the good Temper and
Spirit that he found in him at Oswestry, and that he looked upon him, as one
that intended well, but labored under Prejudices; and to desire further
Acquaintance and Conversation with him; particularly that he would come to him
straitway to Wrexham, and about three Months after, sent for him again to
Chester; in both which interviews a great deal of Discourse, with much Freedom,
passed between them in private, in which they seemed to vye nothing more than
Candor and Obligingness, showing to each other all Meekness. I remember the
Bishop was pleased to show him his Plan for the Government of his Diocese, and
the Method he intended to take in Church Censures, which Mr. Henry very well
approved of; but pleasantly told his Lord-ship, he hoped he would take care
that Iuvenal's Verse should not be again verified, (Sat. 2.) Dat veniam Corvis,
vexat Censura Columbas.
which the Bishop smiled at, and told him he would take care it should not. His
Lordship observing his true Catholic Charity and Moderation, told him he did
not look upon him as (...), but only as (...), and that if he were in his
Diocese, he did not question, but he should find out some way to make him
useful. But all his Reasonings could not satisfy Mr. Henry's Conscience of the
Lawfulness of being Reordain'd and Conforming. The Bishop for some Years after,
when he came that way, toward London, either called on Mr. Henry at his House,
or sent for him to him, to Whitchurch, and still with all outward expressions
of Friendship.

The Trouble which Mr. Henry was in, about the Meeting at Weston, obliged him
for a while, to keep his Sabbaths at home, somewhat private; but in the Year
1682. he took a greater Liberty, and many flocked to him on Lord's Days,
through the kind Connivance of the Neighboring Magistrates; but in the Year
1683. when the Meetings were generally suppressed throughout the Kingdom, he
was again necessitated to contract his Sails, and confine his Labors more to
his own Family, and his Friends that visited him. He continued his Attendance
at Whitewell Chapel, as usual; and when he was abridged of his Liberty, he
often blessed God for his Quietness. Once when one of the Curates Preached a
bitter Sermon against the Dissenters, on a Lord's Day Morning, some wondered
that Mr. Henry would go again in the Afternoon, for the second part. But (says
he) if he do not know his Duty, I know mine; and I bless God I can find Honey
in a Carcass.

In this time of treading down, and of perplexity, he stirred little abroad,
being forced (as he used to express it) to throw the Plough under the Hedge;
but he preached constantly at home, without disturbance; and often comforted
himself with this, When we cannot do what we would, if we do what we can, God
will accept of us; when we cannot keep open Shop, we must drive a secret Trade.
And he would say, There is a mean, if we could hit it, between Fool-hardiness,
and Faintheartedness. While he had some opportunity of being useful at home; he
was afraid lest he should prejudice that by venturing abroad. One of his
Friends in London, earnestly soliciting him to make a visit thither in this
time of restraint in the Country; he thus wrote to him; I should be glad once
more to kiss my Native Soil, though it were but with a kiss of Valediction; but
my indisposedness to Travel, and the small prospect there is of doing good to
countervail the Pains, are my prevailing Arguments against it. I am here ('it is
true) buried alive, but I am quiet in my Grave, and have no mind to be a
walking Ghost. We rejoice, and desire to be thankful, that God has given us a
Home, and continued it to us, when so many better then we, have not where to
lay their Head, having no certain dwelling place; ('it was at the time of the
dispersion of the French Protestants) Why, they Exiles, and not we? they
strangers in a strange Land, and not we? We must not say we will dye in our
Nests, lest God say nay; nor we will multiply our Days as that Bird, the
Phaenix, (referring to Job 29. 18.) lest God say, this Night, etc. Our times
and all our ways are at his dispose, absolutely and universally, and it is very
well they are so.

At the time of the Duke of Monmouths Descent, and the Insurrection in the
West, in the Year 1685. Mr. Henry, as many others, (pursuant to a general Order
of the Lord Lieutenant, for securing all suspected Persons, and particularly
all Nonconformist Ministers) was taken up by a Warrant from the Deputy
Lieutenants, and sent under a Guard to Chester Castle, where he was about three
Weeks a close Prisoner: He was lodged with some Gentlemen and Ministers that
were fetched thither out of Lancashire; who were all Strangers to him; but he
had great comfort in the Acquaintance and Society of many of them.

He often spoke of this Imprisonment, not as matter of Complaint, but of
Thanksgiving, and blessed God he was in nothing uneasy all the while. In a
Sermon to his Family, the day after he came home, he largely and affectionately
recounted the Mercies of that Providence: As for Instance, That his
Imprisonment was for no Cause: it is Guilt that makes a Prison. That it was his
Security in a dangerous time. That he had good Company in his Sufferings, who
Prayed together, and read the Scriptures together, and Discoursed to their
mutual Edification. That he had Health there, not Sick, and in Prison. That he
was visited and Prayed for, by his Friends. That he was very cheerful and easy
in his Spirit, many a time a sleep and quiet when his Adversaries were
disturbed and unquiet. That his Enlargement was speedy and unsought for, and
that it gave occasion to the Magistrates who committed him, to give it under
their Hands, that they had nothing in particular to lay to his Charge; and
especially that it was without a Snare, which was the thing he feared more than
any thing else.

It was a surprise to some that visited him in his Imprisonment, and were big
with the Expectations of the Duke of Monmouth's Success, to hear him say, I
would not have you to flatter your selves with such hopes, for God will not do
his work for us in these Nations, by that Man; but our Deliverance and
Salvation will arise some other way.

It must not be forgotten how ready he was, nay, how-studious and industrious
to serve and oblige such as had been any way instruments of trouble to him, as
far as it lay in his Power, and he had any opportunity to do it; so well had he
learned that great Lesson of Forgiving and Loving Enemies; of this it were
easy to give Instances.

When a Gentleman who had sometimes been an Instrument of Trouble to him, had
occasion to make use of his help to give him some light into a Cause he had to
be tried, Mr. Henry was very ready to serve him in it; and though he might have
declined it, and it was somewhat against his own Interest too, yet he appeared
a Witness for him, which so won upon the Gentleman, that he was afterward more
Friendly to him. Mentioning in his Diary the Death of another Gentleman in
Shropshire; He Notes, that he was one that had been his professed Enemy; but
(says he) God knows I have often prayed for him.

Some have wondered to see how courteously and friendlyly he would speak to
such as had been any way injurious to him, when he met with them, being as
industrious to discover his forgiving of wrongs, as some are to discover their
Resentments of them. It was said of Archbishop Cranmer, that the way to have
him ones Friend, was to do him a diskindness; and I am sure it might be said of
Mr. Henry, that doing him a diskindness would not make him ones Enemy. This
minds me of an exemplary passage, concerning his worthy Friend Mr. Edward
Lawrence, once going with some of his Sons, by the House of a Gentleman that
had been injurious to him; he gave a charge to his Sons to this purpose, That
they should never think or speak amiss of that Gentleman, for the sake of any
thing he had done against him; but whenever they went by his House, should lift
up their Hearts in Prayer to God for him and his Family. And who is he that
will harm those, who are thus followers of him that is good, in his Goodness.
It is almost the only temporal promise in the New Testament, which is made to
the Meek, Matt. 5. 5. That they shall inherit the Earth; the meaning whereof,
Dr. Hammond in his Practical Catechism takes to be especially this, That in the
ordinary Dispensations of God's Providence, the most mild and quiet People are
most free from disturbance. Those only have every Man's Hand against them, that
have theirs against every Man.

CHAP. VIII.
The last Nine Years of his Life in Liberty and Enlargement at Broad-Oak, from
the Year 1687.

IT was in the latter end of the Year 1685. when the stream run so very strong
against the Dissenters, that Mr. Henry, being in Discourse with a very great
Man of the Church of England, mentioned King Charles's Indulgence in 1672. as
that which gave rise to his stated Preaching in a separate Assembly; and added,
if the present King James should in like manner give me leave, I would do the
same again: to which that great Man replied, Never expect any such thing from
him, for take my word for it, he hates you Nonconformists in his Heart. Truly
(said Mr. Henry) I believe it, and I think he does not love you of the Church
of England neither. It was then little thought, that the same Right Reverend
Person who said so to him, should have the Honor, as he had soon after, to be
one of the Seven Bishops committed to the Tower by King James; as it was also
far from any ones Expectation, that the same King James should so quickly give
liberty to the Nonconformists: But we live in a World, wherein we are to think
nothing strange, nor be surprised at any turn of the Wheel of Nature, as it is
called, Iam. 3. 6.

The Measures then taken by King James's Court and Counsel were soon laid open,
not only to view but to contempt, being in a short time, by the overruling
Providence of God broken and defeated: However the Indulgence granted to
Dissenters in April, 1687. must needs be a reviving to those, who for so many
Years had lain buried in Silence and Restraint; nor can any, who w^ll allow
themselves the liberty of supposing the Case their own, wonder that they should
rejoice in it, though the Design of it being manifest, they could not choose but
rejoice with trembling. Mr. Henry's Sentiments of it were, Whatever Men's Ends
are in it, I believe God's End is to do us good.

There were many that said, surely the Dissenters will not embrace the Liberty
which is intended only for a Snare to them. Mr. Henry read and considered the
Letter of Advice to the Dissenters, at that juncture; but concluded, Duty is
ours, and Events are Gods. He remembered the Experience he had had of the like
in K. Charles's time, and that did good and no hurt; and why might not this do
so too. All Power is for Edification, not for Destruction. Did Jeremiah sit
still in the Court of the Prison, because he had his Discharge from the King of
Babylon. Nay, did not Paul, when he was presented by his Countrymen, for
Preaching the Gospel, appeal to Caesar; and find more kindness at Rome, than he
did at Jerusalem? In short, the Principle of his Conversation in the World
being not fleshly Wisdom, or Policy, but the Grace of God, and particularly the
Grace of Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, he was willing to make the best of
that which was, and to hope the best of the Design and Issue of it. Doubtless
it was intended to introduce Popery; but it is certain, that nothing could arm
People against Popery more effectually, than the plain and powerful Preaching
of the Gospel; and thus they who granted that liberty, were out-shot in their
own Bow, which manifestly appeared in the Event and Issue. And as they did good
Service to the Protestant Religion among Scholars, who wrote so many Learned
Books against Popery at that time, for which we return them our best thanks; so
they did no less Service among the Common People (who are the Strength and Body
of the Nation) that Preached so many good Sermons to arm their Hearts against
that strong Delusion, which Mr. Henry (as the rest of the Nonconformists
generally did) took all occasions to do. How often would he commend his Hearers
(as Dr. Holland Divinity Professor in Oxford was wont to do) to the Love of
God, and the Hatred of Popery.

Besides his Preaching professedly to discover the Errors and Corruptions of
the Church of Rome, (which he would have taken occasion to do more fully, had
he seen those he Preached to, in any immediate danger of the Infection) there
could not be a more effectual Antidote against Popery, than the instructing and
confirming of People in the Truth, as it is in Jesus; and advancing the
Knowledge of, and a Value and Veneration for the Holy Scriptures; to which, how
much Mr. Henry in his place did contribute, all that knew him well bear Record.
He used to observe, that the Fall of Babylon followed, upon the free and open
Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14. 6, 7. He apprehended this Liberty
likely to be of very short continuance, and to end in trouble; and because he
could not see how his not using of it would help to prevent the Trouble; but he
did see, that his vigorous improvement of it, would help to prepare for the
Trouble, he set himself with all diligence, to make the best use he could of
this Gleam, both at home and abroad, on Sabbath Days, and Weekdays, to his
Power, yea, and beyond his Power.

The great Subject of Debate at this time in the Nation, was concerning the
Repeal of Penal Laws and Tests; Mr. Henry's thoughts were, as to the Penal
Laws, that if those against the Dissenters were all Repealed, he would Rejoice
in it, and be very thankful both to God and Man; for he would sometimes say,
without Reflection upon any, he could not but look upon them as a National Sin;
and as for those against the Papists, if our Lawgivers see cause to Repeal
them in a regular way; I will endeavor (says he) to make the best of it, and
to say, The Will of the Lord be done.

When King James came his Progress into that Country, in September 1687. to
court the Compliments of the People, Mr. Henry joined with several others, in
and about Whitchurch, Nantwich and Wem, in an Address to him, which was
presented when he lay at Whitchurch; the purport of which was, not to Sacrifice
their Lives and Fortunes to him and to his Interest, but only to return him
thanks for the Liberty they had, with a promise to demean themselves quietly in
the use of it.

Some time after, Commissioners were sent abroad into the Country, to enquire
after the Trouble that Dissenters had sustained by the Penal Laws; and how the
Money that was Levied upon them, was disposed of, little of it being found paid
in the Exchequer; they sent to Mr. Henry to have an account from him of his
Sufferings; he returned Answer by Letter, that he had indeed been Fined some
Years before, for a Conventicle, and Distreyn'd upon, and his Goods carried
away, which all the Country knew, to which he referred himself. But being
required particularly to give account of it upon Oath; though, he said, he
could be glad to see such Instruments of Trouble legally removed; yet he
declined giving any further Information concerning it; having (as he wrote to
the Commissioners) long since, from his Heart, forgiven all the Agents,
Instruments and Occasions of it; and having purposed never to say any thing
more of it.

It was on Tuesday June 14. 1681. that he was disturbed at Weston in
Shropshire, when he was Preaching on Psalm. 66. 18. and on Tuesday June 14.
1687. that day Six Years he Preached there again without disturbance, finishing
what he was then prevented from delivering, concerning Prayer, and going on to
v. 19. 20. But verily God has heard me, -- Blessed be God. -- Concerning the
Duty of Thanksgiving. This Seventh Year of their Silence and Restraint, proved,
through God's wonderful good Providence the Year of Release.

In May, 1688. a new Commission of the Peace came down for the County of Flint,
in which (by whose Interest or procurement was not known) Mr. Henry was
nominated a Justice of Peace for that County. It was no small surprise to him,
to receive a Letter from the Clerk of the Peace, Directed to Philip Henry,
Esquire, acquainting him with it, and appointing him when and whither to come
to be Sworn. To which he returned answer, that he was very sensible of his
Unworthiness of the Honor, and his unfitness for the Office, which he was
nominated to, and therefore desired to be excused, and he was so, and did what
he could, that it might not be spoken of in the Country. There were some, who
upon this occasion unhappily remembered, that a few Years before, a Reverend
Clergyman in Shropshire told Mr. Henry to his Face, that he had done more
mischief in the Country, than any man that ever came into it; and that he
himself hoped shortly to be in the Commission of Peace, and then he would rid
the Country of him. But alas, he ^as quite disappointed. Thus Honor is like
the shadow, which flies from those that pursue it, and follows those that flee
from it.

For two Years after this Liberty began, Mr. Henry still continued his
Attendance, as usual, at Whitewel-Chappel, whenever there was Preaching there;
and he Preached at his own House only when there was no supply there, and in
the Evening of those days when there was. For doing thus he was greatly
clamoured against, by some of the rigid Separatists, and called a Dissembler,
and one that halted between two, and the like. Thus (as he Notes in his Diary)
one side told him he was the Author of all the mischief in the Country, in
drawing People from the Church; and the other side told him, he was the Author
of all the mischief, in drawing People to the Church: And which of these (says
he) shall I seek to please? Lord, neither, but thy self alone, and my own
Conscience, and while I can do that, I have enough.

In a Sermon at Whitewel-Chappel, one Lord's Day in the Afternoon, where he and
his Family, and many of his Congregation were attending, much was said, with
some keen Reflections, to prove the Dissenters Schismatics, and in a damnable
State: When he came immediately after to Preach at his own House, before he
begun his Sermon, he expressed himself to this purpose; Perhaps some of you may
expect now that I should say something in answer to what we have heard, by
which we have been so severely charged; but truly I have something else to do;
and so, without any further Notice taken of it, went on to Preach Jesus Christ
and him Crucified.

It was not without some fear and trembling, that Mr. Henry received the
Tidings of the Prince of Orange's Landing, in November 1688. as being somewhat
in the dark concerning the clearness of his Call, and dreading what might be
the consequence of it. He used to say, Give Peace in our time, O Lord, was a
Prayer that he would heartily set his Amen to. But when secret things were
brought to light, and a regular Course was taken to fill the vacant Throne with
such a King and such a Queen; none rejoiced in it more heartily than he did. He
Celebrated the National Thanksgiving for that great Deliverance, with an
excellent Sermon on that Text, Romans 8. 31. What shall we then say to these
things? If God be for us, who can be against us?

Soon after that happy Settlement, there were Overtures made, toward a
Comprehension of the Moderate Dissenters, with the Church of England, which Mr.
Henry most earnestly desired, and wished for, if it could be had upon any Terms
less than sinning against his Conscience; for never was any more averse to that
which looked like a Separation than he was, if he could possibly have helped
it, salva Conscientia. His Prayers were constant, and his endeavors as he had
opportunity, that there might be some healing Methods found out and agreed
upon. But it is well known, what was the Vox Cleri at that time, viz. That
forasmuch as the Oaths, Subscriptions, and Ceremonies were imposed only to keep
out such Men, they would never consent to their Removal, for the letting them
in again. Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, was a saying perverted to this purpose:
And the fixed Principle was, Better a Schism without the Church, than a Faction
within it, etc. This was at that time Published and Owned, as the Sense of the
Clergy in Convocation. Which Temper and Resolve, so contrary to that which
might have been expected, upon that Happy and Glorious Revolution, did a little
alter his Sentiments in that matter; and he saw himself perfectly driven from
them. Despairing therefore to see an Accommodation, he set himself the more
vigorously to improve the present Liberty. In June 1689. the Act of Indulgence
passed, which not only Tolerated, but allowed the Dissenters Meetings, and took
them under the Protection of the Government.

Soon after which, though he never in the least changed his Judgment, as to the
lawfulness of joining in the Common Prayer, but was still ready to do it
occasionally: Yet the Ministers that Preached at Whitewel-Chappel, being often
uncertain in their coming, which kept his Meeting at Broad-Oak at like
uncertainties, to the frequent disappointment of many of his Hearers that came
from far; he was at last prevailed with to Preach at Public time every
Lord's Day, which he continued to do while he lived, much to his own
satisfaction, and the satisfaction of his Friends. An Eminent Minister in
Lancashire, who did in like manner alter his Practice about that time, gave
this for a reason, That he had been for Twenty seven Years striving to please a
Generation of Men, who after all would not be pleased, and therefore he would
no longer endeavor it as he had done.

It may be of use to give some account how he managed his Ministerial Work, in
the latter part of his time, wherein he had as signal Tokens of the Presence of
God with him, as ever; enabling him still to bring forth Fruit in old Age; and
to renew his Youth like the Eagles. Though what he did, he still did gratis,
and would do so, yet he was not willing to have any constant Assistant, nor had
he any; so much was he in his Element, when he was about his Master's Work:
'Twas his Meat and Drink to do it.

1. As to his constant Sabbath Work, he was Uniform, and abundant in it. He
began his Morning Family Worship on Lord's days, at 8 a Clock, when he Read
and Expounded pretty largely, Sung a Psalm and Prayed; and many strove to come
time enough to join with him in that Service. He began in Public just at Nine
a Clock Winter and Summer. His Meeting Place was an Out-building of his own,
near adjoining to his House, fitted up very decently and conveniently for the
purpose. He began with Prayer, then he sung Psalm. 100. without reading the
Line; next he read and expounded a Chapter in the Old Testament in the Morning,
and in the New Testament in the Afternoon. He looked upon the Public reading
of the Scriptures in Religious Assemblies, to be an Ordinance of God; and that
it tended very much to the Edification of People by that Ordinance, to have
what is Read Expounded to them. The bare reading of the Word, he used to
compare to the throwing of a Net into the Water; but the Expounding of it, is
like the spreading out of that Net, which makes it the more likely to catch
Fish; especially as he managed it with Practical profitable Observations. Some
that have heard him read a Chapter with this thought; how will he make such a
Chapter as this useful to us? have been surprised with such pertinent useful
Instructions, as they have owned to be as much for their Edification as any
Sermon. And commonly when he had Expounded a Chapter, he would desire them when
they came home, to read it over, and recollect some of those things that had
been spoken to them out of it.

In his Expounding of the Old Testament, he industriously sought for something
in it concerning Christ, who is the true Treasure, hid in the Field, the true
Manna hid in the Dew of the Old Testament. Take one Instance; The last Sabbath
that ever he spent with his Children at Chester, in the public Morning
Worship, he Read and Expounded the last Chapter of the Book of Job: After he
had gone through the Chapter, and observed what he thought fit out of it, he
expressed himself to this purpose: When I have read a Chapter in the Old
Testament, I use to enquire what there is in it that points at Christ, or is
any way applicable to Christ; Here is in this Chapter a great deal of Job, But
is there nothing of Christ here? Yes; you have heard of the Patience of Job,
and have in him seen the end of the Lord. This in Job is applicable to Christ,
that after he had patiently gone through his Sufferings, he was appointed an
Intercessor for his unkind Friends. V. 8. Go to my Servant Job, and my Servant
Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept. If any one has an Errand to
God, let him go to Jesus Christ, and put it into his hand, for there is no
acceptance to be hoped for with God, but by him, who is his beloved Son; not
only with whom he is well pleased, but in whom, viz. with us in him: he has
made us accepted in the Beloved.

After the Exposition of the Chapter he sung a Psalm, and commonly chose a
Psalm suitable to the Chapter he had Expounded; and would briefly tell his
Hearers how they might sing that Psalm with Understanding, and what affections
of Soul should ^e working toward God, in the singing of it; his hints of that
kind were of great use, and contributed much to the right Performance of that
Service; he often said, The more singing of Psalms there is in our Families and
Congregations, on Sabbath Days, the more like they are to Heaven, and the more
there is in them of the Everlasting Sabbath. He would say sometimes, he loved
to sing whole Psalms rather than pieces.

After the Sermon in the Morning, he sung the 117th Psalm, without reading the
Line.

He intermitted at Noon about an Hour and a half, and on Sacrament days not
near so long, in which time he took some little Refreshment in his Study,
making no solemn Dinner; yet many of his Friends did partake of his Carnal, as
well as of his Spiritual things, as those did that followed Christ, of whom he
was careful they should not faint by the way. The Morning Sermon was repeated,
by a ready Writer, to those that staid in the Meeting place, as many did, and
when that was done, he begun the Afternoons Exercise; in which he not only Read
and Expounded a Chapter, but Catechized the Children, and Expounded the
Catechism briefly before Sermon. Thus did he go from strength to strength, and
from Duty to Duty, on Sabbath Days; running the ways of God's Commandments with
an enlarged Heart. And the variety and vivacity of his public Services, made
them exceeding pleasant to all that joined with him, who never had cause to
complain of his being tedious. He used to say, Every Minute of Sabbath Time is
precious, and none of it to be lost; And that he scarce thought the Lord's day
well spent, if he were not weary in Body at Night; wearied with his Work, but
not weary of it, as he used to distinguish. He would say sometimes to those
about him, when he had gone through the Duties of a Sabbath; Well, if this be
not the way to Heaven, I do not know what is. In pressing People to Number
their days, he would especially exhort them to Number their Sabbath Days, how
many they have been, and how ill they have been spent; how few it is like they
may be, that they may be spent better; and to help in the Account he would say,
that for every twenty Years of our Lives, we enjoy above a thousand Sabbaths,
which must all be accounted for in the day of Reckoning.

As to his constant Preaching, it was very Substantial and Elaborate, and
greatly to Edification. He used to say, he could not Starch in his Preaching;
that is, he would not; as knowing that where the Language and Expression is
stiff, and forced, and fine (as they call it) it does not reach the greatest
part of the Hearers. When he grew old he would say, sure he might now take a
greater liberty to talk, as he called it, in the Pulpit; that is, to speak
familiarly to People; yet to the last he abated not in his Preparations for the
Pulpit, nor ever delivered any thing raw and undigested; much less any thing
unbecoming the Gravity and Seriousness of the Work. If his Preaching were
talking, it was talking to the purpose. His Sermons were not Common Place, but
even when his Subjects were the most plain and (...), yet his management of
them was usually peculiar and surprising. In those Years as formerly, he kept
for the most part in a method for Subjects, and was very seldom above one
Sabbath upon a Text. And his constant Practice was, as it had been before, when
he concluded a Subject that he had been a good while upon, he spent one Sabbath
in a brief Rehearsal of the Marrow and Substance, of the many Sermons he had
Preached upon it; which he called the clenching of the Nail, that it might be
as a Nail in a sure place. So very industrious was he, and no less ingenious in
his endeavors, that his Hearers might be able, after his Decease, to have
these things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1. 15. and it is hoped, that by the
Blessing of God, the effect did not altogether disappoint his Expectation. In
the later times of his Ministry, he would often contrive the Heads of his
Sermons to begin with the same Letter, or rather two and two of a Letter; but
he did not at all seem to affect or force it; only if it fell in naturally and
easily, he thought it a good help to Memory, and of use, especially to the
younger sort. And he would say, the chief reason why he did it, was because
it is frequently observed in the Scripture, particularly the Book of Psalms. And
though it be not a fashionable Ornament of Discourse, if it be a Scripture
Ornament, that is sufficient to recommend it, at least to justify it against
the imputation of Childishness; (Mr. Porter of Whitchurch very much used it, so
did Mr. Malden) But the Excellency of his Sermons, lay chiefly in the
Enlargements, which were always very solid, grave and judicious; but in
expressing and marshalling his Heads, he often condescended below his own
Judgment, to help his Hearers Memories. Some of his Subjects (when he had
finished them) he made some short Memorandums of in Verse, a Distich or two of
each Sabbaths work, and gave them out in Writing, among the young ones of his
Congregation, many of whom wrote them, and learned them, and profited by them.

It might be of use (especially to those who had the happiness of sitting under
his Ministry) to give some Account of the Method of his Sabbath Subjects,
during the last Eight or Nine Years of his Ministry; and it was designed, till
'twas found 'twould swell this Narrative into too great a Bulk.

2. As to the Administration of the Sacraments, those Mysteries of God, which
Ministers are the Stewards of.

As to the Sacrament of Baptism, he had never (that I know of) Baptized any
Children (except his own) from the time he was turned out in 1662. till this
last Liberty came, though often desired to do it; such was the tender regard he
had to the Established Church; but now he revived the Administration of that
Ordinance in his Congregation. The occasion was this; One of the
Parish-Ministers Preaching at Whitewe^ Chapel, Mr. Henry and his Family, and
many of his Friends being present, was earnestly cautioning People not to go to
Conventicles, and used this as an Argument against it, That they were Baptized
into the Church of England: Mr. Henry's Catholic Charity could not well digest
this Monopolizing of the great Ordinance of Baptism, and thought it time to
bear his Testimony against such narrow Principles, which he ever expressed his
dislike of in all Parties and Persuasions. Accordingly he took the next
opportunity that offered it self, publicly to Baptize a Child, and desired the
Congregation to bear witness, That he did not Baptize that Child into the
Church of England, nor into the Church of Scotland, nor into the Church of the
Dissenters, nor into the Church at Broad-Oak, but into the visible Catholic
Church of Jesus Christ. After this he Baptized very many, and always publicly,
though being in the Country they were commonly carried a good way. The public
Administration of Baptism, he not only judged most agreeable to the Nature and
End of the Ordinance, but found to be very profitable and edifying to the
Congregation; for be always took that occasion, not only to explain the nature
of the Ordinance, but affectionately and pathetically to excite People duly to
improve their Baptism. He usually received the Child immediately out of the
hands of the Parent that presented it, and returned it into the same hands
again, with this or the like charge, Take this Child, and bring it up for God.
He used to say, that one advantage of public Baptism was, that there were many
to join in Prayer for the Child, in which therefore, and in Blessing God for
it, he was usually very large and particular. After he had Baptized the Child,
before he gave it back to the Parent he commonly used these words; We receive
this Child into the Congregation of Christ's Church, having washed it with
Water, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in
token that hereafter it shall not be ashamed to confess Christ Crucified, and
manfully to fight, etc.

He Baptized many adult Persons, that through the Error of their Parents, were
not Baptized in Infancy, and some in Public.

The Solemn Ordinance of the Lord's Supper he constantly Celebrated in his
Congregation once a Month, and always to a very considerable number of
Communicants. He did not usually observe public days of Preparation for that
Ordinance, other than as they fell in course in the weekly Lectures; nor did he
ever appropriate any particular Subject of his Preaching to Sacrament-days,
having a great felicity in adapting any profitable Subject to such an occasion:
and he would say, What did the Primitive Christians do, when they Celebrated
the Lord's Supper every Lord's day? His Administration of this Ordinance was
very solemn and affecting. He had been wont to go about in the Congregation,
and to deliver the Elements with his own hand; but in his latter time, he
delivered them only to those near him, and so they were handed from one to
another, with the assistance of one who supplied the Office of a Deacon, as
having also the Custody and disposal of the Money gathered for the use of the
Poor; Mr. Henry taking, and carefully keeping a particular account of it.

Such as desired to be admitted to the Lord's Supper, he first discoursed with
concerning their Spiritual State; and how the Case stood between God and their
Souls, not only to examine them, but to instruct and teach them, and to
encourage them as he saw occasion; gently leading those whom he discerned to be
serious, though weak and timorous: He usually discoursed with them more than
once, as finding Precept upon Precept, and Line upon Line necessary: but he did
it with so much Mildness and Humility, and tenderness, and endeavor to make
the best of every body, as did greatly affect and win upon many. He was herein
like our Great Master, who can have compassion on the ignorant, and does not
despise the day of small things.

But his admission of young People, out of the rank of Catechumens into that of
Communicants, had a peculiar solemnity in it. Such as he Catechized, when they
grew up to some Years of discretion, if he observed them to be intelligent and
serious, and to set their Faces Heaven-wards; he marked them out to be admitted
to the Lord's Supper; and when he had a competent number of such, twelve or
fifteen perhaps, or more; he ordered each of them to come to him severally, and
discoursed with them of the things belonging to their Everlasting Peace; put it
to their choice whom they would serve; and endeavored to affect them with
those things with which by their Catechisms they had been made acquainted;
drawing them with the Cords of a Man, and the bands of Love, into the way which
is called Holy. For several Lord's days he Catechized them, particularly in
Public, touching the Lord's Supper, and the Duty of Preparation for it, and
their Baptismal Covenant, which in that Ordinance they were to take upon
themselves, and to make their own Act and Deed. Often telling them upon such
occasions, that they were not to oblige themselves to any more than what they
were already obliged to by their Baptism, only to bind themselves faster to it.
Then he appointed a day in the Week before the Ordinance; when in a solemn
Assembly on purpose, he prayed for them, and preached a Sermon to them, proper
to their Age and Circumstances; and so the following Sabbath they were all
received together to the Lord's Supper. This he looked upon as the right
Confirmation, or Transition into the State of adult Church membership. The more
solemn our Covenanting with God is, the more deep and the more durable the
impressions of it are likely to be. He has Recorded it in his Diary, upon one
of these occasions, as his Hearts desire and prayer for those who were thus
admitted; That it might be as the day of their Espousals to the Lord Jesus, and
that they might each of them have a Wedding Garment.

3. The Discipline he observed in his Congregation was, not such as he could
have wished for, but the best he could get, considering what a scattered Flock
he had, which was his trouble, but it could not be helped. He would sometimes
apply to the circumstances he was in, that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 12. 8, 9. However, I
see not but the end was effectually attained by the methods he took, though
there wanted the formality of Officers and Church-Meetings, for the purpose. If
he heard of any that walked disorderly, he sent for them, and reproved them,
gently or sharply, as he saw the Case required. If the Sin had scandal in it,
he suspended them from the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, till they gave some
tokens of their Repentance and Reformation. And where the offense was public
and gross, his judgment was, that some public satisfaction should be made to
the Congregation, before Readmission. But whatever offense did happen, or
breaches of the Christian Peace, Mr. Henry's peculiar Excellency lay in
restoring with the Spirit of meekness; which, with his great Prudence and Love,
and Condescension, did so much command the respects of his People, and win upon
them, that there was a Universal Satisfaction in all his Management; and it may
truly be said of him as it was of David, 2 Samuel 3. 36. That whatsoever he did
pleased all the People. And it is an Instance and Evidence, that those
Ministers who will Rule by Love and Meekness, need no Laws or Canons to Rule
by, other than those of the Holy Scripture. How forceable are right words? Job.
6. 25.

4. He was very strict and very serious in observing the Public Fasts
appointed by Authority, and called them a delight. He had seldom any one to
assist him in carrying on the Duties of those Days, but performed the Service
of them himself alone. He began at Nine of the Clock, or quickly after, and
never stirred out of the Pulpit till about four in the Afternoon, spending all
that time in Praying and Expounding, and Singing, and Preaching, to the
admiration of all that heard him, who were generally more on such days than
usual. And he was sometimes observed, to be more warm and lively toward the
latter end of the Duties of a Fast Day, than at the beginning; as if the Spirit
were most willing and enlarged when the Flesh was most weak. In all his
Performances on Public Fast-days; he did, hoc agere, attend to that which was
the proper work of the day; every thing is beautiful in its Season. His Prayers
and pleadings with God on those days, were especially for National Mercies, and
the pardon of National Sins; How excellently did he order the Cause before God,
and fill his Mouth with Arguments in his large and particular Intercessions for
the Land, for the King, the Government, the Army, the Navy, the Church, the
French Protestants, etc. He was another Jacob, a Wrestler, an Israel, a Prince
with God, Before a Fast Day he would be more than ordinarily inquisitive
concerning the state of public affairs, as Nehemiah was, Neh. 1. 2. that he
might know the better how to order his Prayers and Preaching: for on such a day
(he has sometimes said) as good say nothing, as nothing to the purpose. He
made it his business on Fast-days, to show People their Transgressions,
especially the House of Jacob their Sins. It Is most proper (said he) to Preach
of Christ on Lord's days, to Preach of Sin on Fast-days, and to Preach Duty on
both. He went over the third Chapter of the Revelation, in the Fast Sermons of
two Years. Another Year he Preached over the particulars of that Charge, Zeph.
3. 2. Hypocrisy in Hearers, and Flattery in Preachers (as he would sometimes
say) is bad at any time, but it is especially abominable upon a day of
Humiliation.

5. He Preached a great many Lectures, in the Country about, some stated, some
occasional, in supplying of which he was very indefatigable. He has sometimes
Preached a Lecture; ridden eight or nine Miles, and Preached another, and the
next day two more: To quicken himself to diligence he would often say, our
opportunities are passing away, and we must work while it is day, for the Night
comes. Once having very wet and foul Weather to go through to Preach a
Lecture; he said, he comforted himself with two Scriptures, one was 2 Timothy 2.
3. Endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. The other (because he
exposed and hazarded his Health, for which some blamed him) was 2 Samuel 6. 21.
It was before the Lord. He took all occasions in his Lectures a broad, to
possess the minds of People with sober and moderate Principles, and to stir
them up to the serious regard of those things wherein we are all agreed. We are
met here together (said he once in an Exhortation, with which he often began at
his Lecture) not because we think our selves better than others, but because we
desire to be better than we are.

He was very happy in the choice of his Subjects for his Weekday Lectures. At
one which was stated, he Preached against Errors in general, from Iam. 1. 16.
Do not err my beloved Brethren, particularly from diverse other Scriptures he
showed, that we must not Err; concerning God and Christ, and the Spirit,
concerning Sin and Repentance, Faith and Good Works; concerning God's
Ordinances, concerning Grace and Peace, and Afflictions and Prosperity, and the
things of the Life to come. At the Monthly Lectures at his own House, he chose
to Preach upon the Four last things Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, in
many particulars, but commonly a new Text for every Sermon. When he had in many
Sermons finished the first of the Four; one that used to hear him sometimes,
enquiring of his progress in his Subjects, asked him if he had done with Death?
meaning that Subject concerning Death; to which he pleasantly replied, No, I
have not done with him yet; I must have another turn with him, and he will give
me a Fall; but I hope to have the Victory at last. He would sometimes remove
the Lectures in the Country from one place to another, for the benefit of those
that could not Travel. Once having adjourned a Lecture to a new place, he began
it there with a Sermon on Acts 17. 6. These men that have turned the World
upside down, are come hither also; in which he showed how false the Charge is
as they meant it; for Religion does not disturb the Peace of Families or
Societies, does not cause any disorder or unquietness, etc. And yet that in
another sense there is a great Truth in it; That when the Gospel comes in Power
to any Soul, it turns the World upside down in that Soul, such is the Change it
makes there.

All this he did gratis, and without being burdensome to any; nay he was best
pleased, when at the places where he Preached, nothing was got for his
Entertainment, but he came home (though some Miles) Fasting; as in other places
it was a trouble to him to see his Friends careful about much serving, though it
was out of their respect to him.

Lastly, As he was an excellent Preacher himself, so he was an exemplary Hearer
of the Word, when others Preached, though every way his Inferiors, so
reverent, serious, and attentive was he in hearing, and so observant of what
was spoken. I have heard him tell, that he knew one (and I suppose it was as
Paul knew a Man in Christ) who could truly say, to the Glory of God, that for
Forty Years he had never slept at a Sermon. He was diligent also to improve
what he heard afterward by Meditation, Repetition, Prayer and Discourse; and
he was a very great Encourager of young Ministers that were humble and serious,
though their Abilities and Performances were but mean. He has noted in his
Diary, (as that which affected him) this saying of a godly Man, a Hearer of
his, I find it easier to go six Miles to hear a Sermon, than to spend one
quarter of an Hour in Meditating and Praying over it in Secret, (as I should)
when I come home.

As to the Circumstances of his Family in these last nine Years of his Life,
they were somewhat different from what they had been; but the same Candle of
God which had shined upon his Tabernacle, continued still to do so. In the
Years 1687, and 1688. he Married all his Five Children, the three eldest in
four Months time, in the Year 1687. and the other two in a Year and a half
after; so many Swarms (as he used to call them) out of his Hive; and all not
only with his full Consent, but to his abundant Comfort and Satisfaction. He
would say, he thought it the Duty of Parents to study to oblige their Children
in that affair. And though never could Children be more easy and at rest in a
Father's House than his were, yet he would sometimes say concerning them, as
Naomi to Ruth, Ruth 3. 1. Shall I not seek rest for thee? Two advices he used
to give, both to his Children and others, in their Choice of that Relation: One
was, Keep within the bounds of Profession, such as one may charitably hope is
from a good Principle. The other was, Look at Suitableness, in Age, Quality,
Education, Temper, etc. He used to observe from Genesis 2. 18. I will make him a
help meet for him; that where there is not Meetness, there will not be much
Help. And he would commonly say to his Children, with reference to that choice;
Please God and please your selves, and you shall never displease me; and
greatly blamed those Parents, who conclude Matches for their Children, and do
not ask Counsel at their Mouth. He never aimed at great things in the World for
his Children, but sought for them in the first place the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof. He used to mention sometimes the saying of a Pious
Gentlewoman, that had many Daughters. The Care of most People, is how to get
good Husbands for their Daughters; but my care is to fit my Daughters to be
good Wives, and then let God provide for them. In this as in other things, Mr.
Henry steered by that Principle; That a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things that he possesses. And it pleased God so to order it,
that all his Children were disposed of, into Circumstances very agreeable and
comfortable, both for Life and Godliness. He was greatly affected with the
Goodness of God to him herein, without any forecast or contrivance of his own.
The Country (says he in his Diary) takes notice of it, and what then shall I
render? Surely this is a Token for good.

All his Four Daughters were Married at Whitewel Chapel, and he Preached a
Wedding Sermon for each of them, in his own Family after. He would often tell
his Friends, That those who desire, in the Mar^ied Condition, to live in the
Favor of God, must enter upon that Condition in the Fear of God. For it is an
ill Omen to stumble at the Threshold; and an Error in the first Concoction, is
seldom amended in the second.

While he lived, he had much comfort in all his Children and their Yoke
fellows, and somewhat the more, that by the Divine Providence, four of the five
Families which Branched out of his, were settled in Chester.

His youngest Daughter was Married April 26. 1688. the same Day of the Year (as
he observes in his Diary) and the same Day of the Week, and in the same place
that he was Married to his dear Wife, twenty eight Years before; upon which
this is his Remark, I cannot desire for them, that they should receive more
from God than we have received, in that Relation and Condition; but I would
desire, and do desire, that they may do more for God in it than we have done.
His usual Complement to his New-Married Friends, was, others wish you all
Happiness, I wish you all Holiness, and then there is no doubt but you will
have all Happiness.

When the Marriage of the last of his Daughters was about to be concluded on,
he thus writes; But is Joseph gone, and Simeon gone, and must Benjamin go also?
We will not say that all these things are against us, but for us: If we must be
thus in this merciful way bereaved of our Children, let us be bereaved; and God
turn it for good to them, as we know he will if they love and fear his Name.
And when, sometime after she was Married, he parted with her to the House of
her Husband, he thus writes; We have sent her away, not as Laban said he would
have sent his Daughters away, with Mirth, and with Songs, with Tabret, and with
Harp, but with Prayers and Tears, and hearty good wishes; And now (says he in
his Diary) we are alone again, as we were in our beginning; God be better to us
than twenty Children. Upon the same occasion he thus writes to a dear Relation;
We are now left as we were, One and One, and yet but one One; the Lord, I
trust, that has brought us thus far, will enable us to finish well; and then
all will be well, and not till then.

That which he often mentioned, as the matter of his great Comfort that it was
so, and his desire that it might continue so, was, the Love and Unity that was
among his Children; and that (as he writes) the Transplanting of them into new
Relations, had not lessened that Love, but rather increased it; for this he
often gave thanks to the God of Love; noting from Job 1. 4. That the Childrens
Love to one another is the Parents Comfort and Joy. In his Last Will and
Testament, this is the Prayer which he puts up for his Children, That the Lord
would build them up in Holiness, and continue them still in Brotherly Love, as
a bundle of Arrows which cannot be broken.

When his Children were removed from him, he was a daily Intercessor at the
Throne of Grace, for them and their Families. Still the Burnt-offerings were
offered according to the number of them all. He used to say, Surely the
Children of so many Prayers will not miscarry. Their particular Circumstances
of Affliction and Danger, were sure to be mentioned by him with suitable
Petitions. The greatest Affliction he saw in his Family, was the Death of his
dear Daughter in Law, Catharine, the only Daughter of Samuel Hardware, Esquire who,
about a Year and a half after she was Transplanted into his Family (to which
she was the greatest Comfort and Ornament imaginable) died of the Smallpox in
Childbed, upon the Thanks giving day for King William's coming in. She died
but a few Weeks after Mr. Henry had Married the last of his Daughters, upon
which Marriage he had said; Now we have a full Lease, God only knows which Life
will drop first. She comforted her self in the extremity of her illness with
this word, Well, when I come to Heaven, I shall see that I could not have been
without this Affliction. She had been for some time before under some Fears as
to her Spiritual State, but the Clouds were through Grace dispelled, and she
finished her Course with Joy, and a Cheerful Expectation of the Glory to be
revealed. When she lay ill, Mr. Henry (being in fear not only for her that was
ill, but for the rest of his Children in Chester, who had none of them past the
Pikes of that perilous Distemper) wrote thus to his Son, on the Evening of the
Lord's Day; I have just done the public Work of this Day, wherein, before many
scores of Witnesses, many of whom I dare say, are no little concerned for you:
I have absolutely, freely, and unreservedly given you all up to the good Will
and Pleasure of our Heavenly Father, waiting what he will do with us, for good
I am sure we have received, and shall we not receive Evil also. He Preached at
Chester, upon occasion of that sad Breach in his Family, on Job 10. 3. Show me
wherefore thou contendest which me.

When two of his Children lay ill, and in perilous Circumstances, after he had
been wrestling with God in Prayer for them, he wrote thus in his Diary; If the
Lord will be pleased to grant me my Request this time concerning my Children, I
will not say as the Beggars at our Door use to do, I Will never ask any thing of
him again; but on the contrary, he shall hear oftener from me than ever; and I
will love God the better, and love Prayer the better, as long as I live.He used
to say, Tradesmen take it ill, if those that are in their Books, go to another
Shop; while we are so much indebted to God for past Mercies, we are bound to
attend him for further Mercies.

As he was an Intercessor for his Children at the Throne of Grace, so he was
upon all occasions a Remembrancer to them, both by Word and Letter, to quicken
them to that which is good. How often did he inculcate this upon them? Love one
another, and the God of Love and Peace will be with you. Do all you can, while
you are together, to help one another to Heaven, that you may be together
there, for ever, and with the Lord. When the Families of his Children were in
Health and Peace, the Candle of God shining upon their Tabernacles, he wrote
thus to them; 'Twas one of Job's Comforts in his Prosperity, that his Children
loved one another, and feasted together: The same is ours in you, which God
continue. But you will not be offended, if we pray that you may none of you
Curse God in your Hearts. Remember, the Wheel is always in Motion, and the
Spoke that is uppermost will be under, and therefore mix Tremblings always with
your Joy.

He much rejoiced in the Visits of his Children, and made that as other things,
which were the matter of his Rejoicing, the matter of his Thanksgiving. His
usual saying at parting, was, This is not the World we are to be together in,
and it is well it is not, but there is such a World before us: And his usual
Prayer was, That our next Meeting might be either in Heaven, or further on in
our way toward it.

He had in eight Years time, twenty four Grandchildren Born, some by each of
his Children, concerning whom he would often bless God, that they were all the
Sealed ones of the God of Heaven, and Enrolled among his Lambs. On the Birth of
his Second Grandchild, at a troublesome time as to public Affairs, he thus
writes, I have now seen my Childrens Children, let me also see Peace upon
Israel; and then I will say, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart. Some
were much affected with it, when he Baptized two of his Grandchildren together
at Chester, publicly, and Preached on Genesis 33. 5. They are the Children which
God has graciously given thy Servant. He observed in what a savory, pious,
gracious manner Jacob speaks. He had spoken good Sense if he had only said,
They are my Children, but then he had not spoken like Jacob, like one that had
so lately seen the Face of God. Though our Speech be not always of Grace, yet
it must be always with Grace, Grace poured into the Lips. There is a kind of
Language, the air of which speaks it the Language of Canaan; Christians should
speak like Christians.

It was not long after his Children were Married from him, but his House was
filled again with the Children of several of his Friends, whom he was, by much
importunity, persuaded to take to Table with him. All that knew him, thought it
a thousand pities, that such a Master of a Family, should have but a small
Family, and should not have many to sit down under his Shadow. He was first
almost necessitated to it, by the death of his dear Friend and Kinsman, Mr.
Benyon of Ash, who left his Children to his Care. Some he took gratis, or for
small Consideration; and when by reason of the advances of Age he could not go
about so much as he had done, doing good, he laid out himself to do the more at
home. He kept a Teacher to attend their School-Learning; and they had the
benefit, not only of his Inspection in that, but (which was much more) his
Family Worship, Sabbath Instructions, Catechizing and daily Converse, in which
his Tongue was as choice Silver, and his Lips sed many. Nothing but the hopes
of doing some good to the rising Generation could have prevailed with him, to
take this trouble upon him. He would often say, We have a busy House, but
there is a Rest remaining. We must be doing something in the World while we are
in it; but this fashion will not last long, methinks I see it passing away.

Sometimes he had such with him, as had gone through their Course of University
Learning, at private Academies, and desired to spend some time in his Family,
before their Entrance upon the Ministry, that they might have the benefit, not
only of his Public and Family Instructions, but of his Learned and Pious
Converse, in which, as he was thoroughly furnished, for every good Word and
Work, so he was very Free and Communicative. The great thing which he used to
press upon those who intended the Ministry, was to study the Scriptures, and
make them familiar. Bonus Textuarius est bonus Theologus, was a Maxim he often
minded them of. For this purpose he recommended to them the study of the
Hebrew, that they might be able to search the Scriptures in the Original. He
also advised them to the use of an inter-leav'd Bible, wherein to insert such
Expositions and Observations, as occur occasionally in Sermons or other Books;
which he would say, are more happy and considerable sometimes, than those that
are found in the professed Commentators. When some young Men desired the
Happiness of coming into his Family, he would tell them, You come to me as
Naaman did to Elisha, expecting that I should do this and 'tother for you, and
alas, I can but say as he did, Go wash in Jordan; Go, Study the Scriptures. I
profess to teach no other Learning but Scripture Learning. It was but a little
before he dyed, that in reading Isa. 50. he observed from v. 4. The Lord
God-hath given me the Tongue of the learned etc. That the true Learning of a
Gospel Minister consists not in being able to talk Latin fluently, and to
dispute in Philosophy, but in being able to speak a word in Season to weary
Souls. He that knows how to do that well, is a learned Minister.

CHAP. IX.
His Sickness, Death, and Burial.

IN the time of his Health, he made Death very familiar to himself, by frequent
and pleasing Thoughts and Meditations of it; and endeavored to make it so to
his Friends, by speaking often of it. His Letters and Discourses had still
something or other which spoke his constant expectations of Death; thus did he
learn to dye daily: And it is hard to say, whether it was more easy to him to
speak, or uneasy to his Friends, to hear him speak of leaving the World. This
minds me of a passage I was told by a worthy Scotch Minister, Mr. Patrick
Adair, that Visiting the famous Mr. Durham of Glasgow. in his last Sickness,
which was long and lingering; he said to him, Sir, I hope you have so set all in
order, that you have nothing else to do but to dye: I bless God (said Mr.
Durham) I have not had that to do neither these many Years. Such is the comfort
of dying daily, when we come to dye indeed.

Mr. Henry's Constitution was but tender, and yet by the Blessing of God upon
his great Temperance, and care of his Diet, and moderate Exercise by walking in
the Air, he did for many Years enjoy a good measure of Health, which he used to
call The Sugar that sweetens all Temporal Mercies, for which therefore we ought
to be very thankful, and of which we ought to be very careful. He had sometimes
violent Fits of the Cholick, which would be very afflictive for the time.
Toward his latter end he was distressed sometimes with a pain, which his
Doctor thought might arise from a Stone in his Kidneys. Being once upon the
Recovery from an ill Fit of that Pain, he said to one of his Friends, that
asked him how he did, he hoped by the Grace of God, he should now be able to
give one blow more to the Devil's Kingdom; and often professed, he did not
desire to live a day longer than he might do God some Service. He said to
another, when he perceived himself Recovering; Well I thought I had been
putting into the Harbor, but find I must to Sea again.

He was sometimes suddenly taken with fainting Fits, which when he recovered
from, he would say, Dying is but a little more.

When he was in the Sixty third Year of his Age, which is commonly called the
Grand Climacterick, and has been to many the Dying Year, and was so to his
Father, he numbered the Days of it, from August 24. 1693. to August 24. 1694.
when he finished it: And when he concluded it, he thus wrote in his Diary. This
Day finisheth my commonly dying Year, which I have numbered the Days of; and
should now apply my Heart more than ever to Heavenly Wisdom. He was much
pleased with that Expression of our English Liturgy in the Office of Burial,
and frequently used it. In the midst of Life we are in Death.

The Infirmities of Age, when they grew upon him, did very little abate his
vigor and liveliness in Preaching, but he seemed even to renew his Youth as
the Eagles; as those that are Planted in the House of the Lord, who still bring
forth Fruit in old Age; not so much to show that they are upright, as to show
that the Lord is upright, Psalm. 92. 14, 15. But in his latter Years, Traveling
was very troublesome to him; and he would say, as Mr. Dod used to do, that when
he thought to shake himself as at other times, he found his hair was cut; his
Sense of this led him to Preach an occasional Sermon not long before he dyed,
on John 21. 18. When thou wast young thou girdedst thy self, etc. Another
occasional Sermon he Preached when he was old, for his own Comfort, and the
Comfort of his aged Friends, on Psalm. 71. 17, 18. O God thou have taught me
from my Youth, etc. he observed there, That it is a blessed thing to be taught
of God from our Youth; and those that have been taught of God from their Youth,
ought to declare his wondrous Works all their days after. And those that have
been taught of God from their Youth, and have all their days declared his
wondrous Works, may comfortably expect, that when they are old he will not
forsake them. Christ is a Master that does not use to cast off his old Servants.

For some Years before he dyed, he used to complain of an habitual weariness,
contracted he thought, by his standing to Preach, sometimes very uneasily, and
in inconvenient places, immediately after Riding. He would say, every Minister
was not cut out for an Itinerant; and sometimes the manifest attention and
affection of People in Hearing, enlarged him both in length and fervency,
somewhat more then his strength could well bear. It was not many Months before
he died, that he wrote thus to a dear Relation, who inquired sollicitously
concerning his Health. I am always habitually weary, and expect no other till I
lie down in the Bed of Spices. And (blessed be God) so the Grave is to all the
Saints, since he lay in it who is the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the
Valleys. When some of his Friends persuaded him to spare himself, he would say,
It Is time enough to rest when I am in the Grave; What were Candles made for,
but to burn?

It does not appear that he had any particular Presages of his Death; but many
instances there were of his actual gracious expectation of it, somewhat more
than ordinary for some time before. The last Visit he made to his Children in
Chester, was in July, 1695. almost a Year before he died, when he spent a
Lordsday there, and Preached on the last Verse of the Epistle to Philemon, The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit. By Grace he understood nor
so much the good Will of God toward us, as the good Work of God in us, called
the Grace of Christ, both because he is the Author and finisher of it, and
because he is the Pattern and Samplar of it. Now the choicest Gift we can ask
of God for our Friends is, that this Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ may be with
their Spirit. This is the one thing needful, the better part, the Root of the
Matter, the whole of Man, the Principal thing, the more excellent Way, a
Blessing indeed, and the thing that accompanies Salvation. The Grace of Christ
in the Spirit, enlightens and enlivens the Spirit, softens and subdues the
Spirit, purifies and preserves the Spirit greatens and guides the Spirit,
sweetens and strengthens the Spirit, and therefore what can be more desirable.
A Spirit without the Grace of Christ, is a Field without a Fence, a Fool
without Understanding; it is a Horse without a Bridle, and a House without
Furniture; it is a Ship without Tacle, and a Soldier without Armor; it is a
Cloud without Rain, and a Carcass without a Soul; it is a Tree without Fruit,
and a Traveller without a Guide. How earnest therefore should we be in praying
to God for Grace, both for our selves and for our Relations. He had intended to
preach upon that Text, when he was at Chester the Year before, but was then
prevented, by a particular sad occasion, which obliged him to a Funeral Sermon,
Divine Providence reserving that Benediction (which his Heart was much upon)
for his Valediction. The Thursday following, being kept as a Fast in his Sons
Congregation at Chester, he Preached on Luke 19. 41. He beheld the City and
wept over it, which proved his Farewell to the Town, as the former was his
Farewell to his Friends and Relations in it.

It was not many Weeks before he dyed, that he wrote thus to one of his
Children, We are well here, thanks be to God, and are glad to hear that you and
yours are well also, God in Mercy continue it: But why should we be well
always? Do we deserve it? Are there no mixtures in our Obedience? Are there any
Persons or Families, at whose door Sickness and Death never knocked? Must the
Earth be forsaken for us, or the Rock removed out of its place? Is it not
enough that we be dealt with according to the manner of Men? and that we have a
Promise, that it shall end well, everlastingly well.

To another of his Children, about the same time he writes, We are sensible
that we decline a pace, but the best of it is, that as Time goes, Eternity
comes; and we are in good hope, through Grace, that it will be a comfortable
Eternity.

It was in April, 1696. a few Weeks before he died, that his Sons
Father-in-Law, Robert Warbinton, Esquire was gathered to his Grave in peace, in a
good old Age; Upon the tidings of whose Death, Mr. Henry wrote thus to his Son;
Your Fathers, Where are they? Your Father-in-Law gone, and your own Father
going; but you have a Godfather that lives for ever. He was wont sometimes to
subscribe his Letters, Your ever-loving, but not ever-living Father.

It was not a Month before he Died, that in a Letter to his very dear and
worthy Friend and Brother, Mr. Tallents of Shrewsbury, he had this passage;
Methinks it is strange, that it should be your Lot and mine, to abide so long
on Earth by the Stuff, when so many of our Friends are dividing the Spoil
above, but God will have it so; and to be willing to live in obedience to his
Holy Will, is as true an Act of Grace, as to be willing to dye when he calls,
especially when Life is Labor and Sorrow. But when it is Labor and Joy,
Service to his Name, and some measure of Success and Comfort in serving him;
When it is to stop a Gap, and stem a Tide, it is to be rejoiced in; it is Heaven
upon Earth: nay, one would think, by the Psalmists often repeated Plea, Psalm. 6.
and 30. and 88. and 115. and 118. that it were better than to be in Heaven
itself, and can that be?

A little before his Sickness and Death, being Summer time, he had several of
his Children, and his Childrens Children about him, at Broad-Oak, with whom he
was much refreshed, and very cheerful; but ever and anon spoke of the fashion
he was in, as passing away; and often told them, he should be there but a while
to bid them welcome. And he was observed frequently in Prayer, to beg of God,
that he would make us ready for that which would come certainly, and might come
suddenly. One asking him how he did, he answered, I find the Chips fly off
apace, the Tree will be down shortly.

The last time he Administered the Lord's Supper, a Fortnight before he died, he
closed the Administration with that Scripture, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. It does not yet
appear what we shall be; not yet, but it will shortly.

The Sabbath but one before he died, being in the course of his Exposition,
come to that difficult part of Scripture, the 40th of Ezekiel, and the
following Chapters; he said he would endeavor to explain those Prophecies to
them; and added, If I do not do it now, I never shall: And he observed, that
the only Prophetical Sermon which our Lord Jesus Preached, was but a few days
before he died. This many of his Hearers not only Reflected upon afterward,
but took Notice of at that time with a Concern, as having something in it more
than ordinary.

On the Lord's Day, June 21. 1696. he went through the work of the Day with his
usual vigor and liveliness. He was then Preaching over the first Chapter of St.
Peter's second Epistle, and was that day on those words, add to your Faith
Virtue, v. 5. he took Virtue for Christian Courage and Resolution in the
Exercise of Faith; and the last thing he mentioned, in which Christians have
need of Courage, is in Dying; for (as he was often used to say) It is a serious
thing to dye, and to dye is a work by itself. That day he gave Notice, both
Morning and Afternoon, with much Affection and Enlargement, of the Public
Fast, which was appointed by Authority the Friday following, June 26. pressing
his Hearers as he used to do upon such occasions, to come in a prepared Frame,
to the solemn Services of that day.

The Tuesday following, June 23. he rose at Six a Clock, according to his
Custom, after a better Nights Sleep than ordinary, and in wonted Health.
Between seven and eight a Clock he performed Family Worship, according to the
usual manner; he Expounded very largely, the former half of the 104th Psalm,
and sung it; but he was somewhat shorter in Prayer than he used to be, being
then (as it was thought) taken ill. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord,
when he comes, shall find so doing. Immediately after Prayer he retired to his
Chamber, not saying any thing of his illness, but was soon after found upon his
Bed in great Extremity of pain, in his Back, Breast and Bowels; it seemed to be
a complicated Fit of the Stone and Cholick together, with very great Extremity.
The means that had been. used to give him Relief in his illness were altogether
ineffectual; He had not the least intermission or remission of Pain, neither up
nor in Bed, but in a continual toss. He had said sometimes, that God's Israel
may find Jordan rough; but there is no Remedy, they must through it to Canaan;
and would tell of a good Man who used to say, He was not so much afraid of
Death as of Dying. We know they are not the Godly People, part of the
Description of whose Condition it is, that there are no Bands in their Death,
and yet their End is Peace, and their Death Gain, and they have Hope in it.

In this Extremity he was still looking up to God, and calling upon him, who is
a present. Help in the needful Hour. When the Exquisiteness of his Pain forced
Groans and Complaints from him, he would presently Correct himself with a
patient and quiet submission to the Hand of his Heavenly Father, and a cheerful
acquiescence in his Heavenly Will. I am ashamed (says he) of these Groans, I
want Virtue, O for Virtue now when I have need of it (referring to his Subject
the Lord's day before) For give me that I groan thus, and I will endeavor to
silence them; But indeed my stroke is heavier than my groaning. It is true what
Mr. Baxter said in his Pain, there is no disputing against sense. It was his
trouble, as it was Mr. Baxter's, that by reason of his bodily pain, he could
not express his inward comfort; however that was it, with which God graciously
strengthened him in his Soul. He said to those about him, they must remember.
what Instructions and Counsels he had given them when he was in Health, for now
he could say but little to them, only to refer them to what he had said, as
that which he would live and dye by.

It was two or three Hours after he was taken ill, before he would suffer a
Messenger to be sent to Chester for his Son, and for the Doctor, saying, he
should either be better or dead before they could come; but at last he said, as
the Prophet did to his importunate Friends, Send. About eight a Clock that
Evening they came, and found him in the same Extremity of Pain, which he had
been in all day. And Nature being before spent with his constant and
indesatigable Labors in the Work of the Lord now sunk, and did perfectly
suceumb under its Burden, and was q^ite disabled to grapple with so many Hours
uncessant pain. What further means were then used proved fruitless, and did not
answer the intention. He apprehended himself going a pace, and said to his Son
when he came in, O Son you are welcome to a dying Father: I am now ready to be
offered, and the time of my Depart^e. is at Hand. His pain continued very
acute, but he had Peace within. I am tormented (said be once) but blessed be
God not in this Flame; and soon after I am all on Fire (when at the same time
his extreme parts were cold) but he presently added, Blessed be God it is not
the Fire of Hell. To some of his next Neighbors who came in to see him (for
those at a distance had not notice of his illness) he said, O make sure work
for your Souls, by getting an Interest in Christ while you are in Health, for
if I had that work to do now, what would become of me? but I bless God I am
satisfied. It was a Caution he was often wont to give; See to it, that your
work be not undone, when your time is done, lest you be undone for ever.

Toward ten or eleven a Clock that Night, his Pulse and Sight began to fail;
of the latter he himself took notice, and inferred from it the near approach of
his Dissolution. He took an affectionate farewell of his Dear Yoke Fellow, with
a thousand thanks for all her Love and Care, and Tenderness, left a Blessing
for all his dear Children, and their dear Yo^e-fellows and little ones, that
were absent. He said to his Son who sat under his head; Son, the Lord bless
you, and grant that you may do worthily in your Generation, and be more
serviceable to the Church of God than I have been, such was his great Humility
to the last. And when his Son replied, O Sir, pray for me that I may but tread
in your steps; he answered, yea follow Peace and Holiness, and let them say
what they will -- More he would have said to bear his Dying Testimony to the
way in which he had walked, but Nature was spent, and he had not strength to
express it.

His Understanding and Speech continued almost to the last Breath, and he was
still in his dying Agonies calling upon God, and committing himself to him. One
of the last words he said, when he found himself just ready to depart, was, O
Death, where is thy; -- with that his Speech falter'd, and within a few Minutes
(after, about sixteen Hours illness) he quietly Breathed out his precious Soul,
into the Embraces of his dear Redeemer, whom he had trusted, and faithfully
served in the work of the Ministry, about forty three Years. He deparetd
betwixt twelve and one a Clock in the Morning, of June 24. Midsummer-day, in
the Sixty fifth Year of his Age. Happy, thrice Happy he, to whom such a sudden
Change was no surprise, and who could Triumph over Death, as an unstung,
disarmed Enemy, even when he made so fierce an onset. He had often spoke of it
as his desire, that if it were the Will of God, he might not outlive his
usefulness; and it pleased God to grant him his desire, and give him a short
passage from the Pulpit to the Kingdom, from the height of his usefulness, to
receive the recompense of Reward. So was it ordered by him, in whose Hands our
Times are.

After the Account we have given of his great Usefulness, it is easy to
imagine what sorrow and Mourning there was among his Friends, when they heard
that the Lord had. taken away their Master from their Head. One that lived so
much desired, could not but dye as much lamented. The surprise of the stroke
put People into a perfect astonishment; and many said, the Lord removed him so
suddenly, because he would not deny the many Prayers that would have been put
up for his Recovery, had it been known that he was in Peril. One thing that
aggravated this severe Dispensation, and made it in the apprehension of many
look the more dismal, was, that this powerful Intercessor was taken away just
before a Fast Day, when he would have been Wrestling mightily with God, for
Mercy for the Land. However it proved a Fast Day indeed, and a day of
Humiliation to that Congregation, to whom an empty Pulpit was an awakening
Sermon. The Broad-Oak was then like that under which Rebekah's Nurse was
buried, Genesis 35 8. Allon-bacuth Bochim, a place of Weepers. They who had many a
time fitten with dry Eyes, under melting Ordinances, could not sit so under
such a melting Providence, by which the Lord God called so loudly to weeping
and to mourning, and to girding with Sack cloth. But because Mr. Henry had been
wont to give it for a Rule, that Weeping must not hinder Sowing; a Mite was
cast into the Treasury of the Nations Prayers, and a word spoken to bring the
Work of the day, and the event of the day together, from 2 Kings 13. 20.

The day following being Saturday, June 27. the Earthen Vessel, in which this
Treasure had been lodged was laid up in the Grave, in Whitchurch Church,
attended thither with a very great Company of true Mourners, all the Country
round; many from Chefler and Shrewsbury, and the Towns about, came to do him
Honor at his Death: And besides the Floods of Tears that were shed, there were
abundance of Testimonies given to him, by Persons of all sorts, like that
Iehojadah, 2 Chronicles 24. 16. That he was one that had done good in Israel. And
there were those who said, He was a Man that no Body did or could speak evil
of, except for his Nonconformity. He was used to say to his Relations, when I
am dead make little a do about me, a few will serve to bring me to my Grave;
but his mind could not be observed in that; 'twas impossible such a burning and
shining light could be extinguished, but there must be a Universal Notice taken
of it. Multitudes came unsought unto, not to fill their Eyes (as Mr. Vines
expresses it) but to empty them; nor was there any other noise there, but that
of general Lamentation.

That Morning, before the removal of the Corpse, a most affectionate Sermon was
Preached in Mr. Henry's Meeting place, by his dear and worthy Friend Mr.
Tallents of Shrewsbury, who was eleven Years elder than he, and through God's
goodness still survives him. He was willing to take that opportunity, to
testify the great Love and Honor that he had for Mr. Henry, whom he called a
Friend that is nearer than a Brother. His Text was Rom 8. 23. And not only
they, but our selves also, which have the first Fruits of the Spirit, even we
our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit the
redemption of our Body. In his Application he showed excellently, and with much
affection, how the consideration of the Spirit and Life of this Eminent Servant
of God, would greatly lead us to believe on Christ, and to have the Spirit of
Christ and live after it; and to suffer with Christ, and to groan for our
Adoption. Several things were hinted concerning him, which have been mentioned
already in this Narrative, and a very honorable Testimony born to him. From a
long acquaintance with him, he witnessed concerning him, to those who knew his
Record to be true, that he was humble and meek, kind and peaceable, wise and
charitable, and one in whom the Fruits of the Spirit were eminently: That he
was a Friend and a Counselor, and a Father to many; that his Expounding and
Preaching was plain and pleasant, warm and savory, full, and such as few could
reach, and greatly blessed by God; and that in it he labored more abundantly
than any. And after a great encomium of him, it was excellently observed, and
must be mentioned here, as that which was highly agreeable to Mr. Henry's
Spirit, and his Expressions upon all occasions; That it was not his own
Righteousness that saved him, nor his own strength that quickened and upheld
him, but Christ's Righteousness and Christ's Strength, for to him to live was
Christ: And in all his Discourses, Sermons and Letters, he was very careful to
ascribe the Honor of all to Christ, and to make Christ his All in-all. He
concluded with some words of seasonable Advice to those of that Society and
Neighborhood.

1. Give thanks to God, that ever you had him or saw him, and that you had him
so long, above thirty Years in this place. Do not many of you owe even your
very Souls to him under God? While you Mourn, give thanks to God that you ever
knew him; old and great Mercies must be thankfully remembered.

2. Rejoice in the Glory that he now enjoys; weep not for him, but weep for
your selves: 'Twas the Text on which he Preached, not much above a Year ago, at
the Funeral of that intelligent, holy, useful Man, Mr. William Lawrence of Wem.
The Primitive Christians buried their Saints with Hymns and Psalms of Joy.
Chrysostom on the Hebrews says, we are to glorify God, and give thanks to
him, that he has Crowned the Deceased, and freed them from their Labors; and
chides those that Mourned and Howled. And the Days of their Death were called
Natalitia Martyrum and Sanctorum, the Birth-days of the Saints and Martyrs. And
Hierom in his Epitaph on Holy Paula (and in the Lives of other Holy Persons,
writ by him) says, that at her Funeral no Shreeks were heard, but multitudes
of Psalms and Hymns were sung in diverse languages.

3. Bewail the Loss, the general Loss, and yours in particular, yet so as to
have Hope in God. I need not tell you how great your loss is, you teel it more
than I am able to express. If any rejoice that he is gone, because he tormented
them, say as the Church, Mic. 7. 8, 9.

4. Seek out for a Supply; do not mourn and sit still, but up and be doing in
your places; you have had a cheap Gospel hitherto; God sent you one that could
Preach freely, and which is more that would do so too; one that sought not
yours but you; and now God will see what you will do for your selves, that now
the Shepherd is smitten, the Sheep may not be scattered. Pray to God to raise
up others like him, and graciously to give you one.

5. Take heed of liking no Preacher, now he is gone. This a usual Fault among
many that have had excellent Preachers, no Body can please them. But God may
bless weaker means, and make your Souls live and thrive under them.

6. Hold fast that which you have; it is the advice given to Philadelphia, the
best of the Churches, Rev. 3. 11. Keep that good thing which is committed to
you, that savoriness of Heart, that love to Christ and to Saints, to all
Saints, that Knowledge of the Truth. Keep to his sober Principles. Remember his
dying Counsel, Follow Peace and Holiness; have these things always in
remembrance. Take heed of falling off, take heed of falling away; the World
will draw you, and Satan will tempt you, and your own busy Hearts will be apt
to betray you; but go on humbly and honestly in the strength of Christ, and
fear not. Be not like those Jews that turned aside, when John Baptist was dead,
John 5. 35. The Lord keep you from being such, and give you to go on so his
Heavenly Kingdom.

It would have swelled this Book too much, if we had inserted the Sermon at
large, and therefore we forbear it.

The next day being Lord's day, Mr. Owen of Oswestry Preached a most excellent
Sermon in the Morning, agreeable to that sad occasion, upon that pathetical
Farewell which Elisha gave to Elijah, 2 Kings 2. 12. My Father, my Father, the
Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof, and he saw him no more; and he
took hold of his own Cloths, and rent them. He observed, 1. That faithful
Ministers are the Fathers of a People, and their Chariots and Horsemen; the
former a Metaphor taken from a Family, a peaceable Society; the latter from an
Army, a warlike Body. Fathers to provide good things, Chariots and Horsemen to
protect from evil things. 2. There is a time when we shall see these Fathers,
these Chariots and Horsemen of Israel no more. Their time is appointed, their
work cut out for them, and when those are finished they are removed. 3. When
God takes away our Fathers, the Chariots of our Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof, it is a proper Season for Mourning and Lamentation. Under this he did
most affectionately excite us, 1. To be sensible of our Loss, which is better
felt than expressed. It Is the loss of one that was a Father; a Father to his
Family, to whom he was constant, in unfolding the Holy Oracles; a Father to the
Prophets, for Counsel, and Conduct, and Example; the Sons of the Prophets never
Conversed with him, but they were, or might have been the better for him; a
Father to his Congregation, now left Orphans: It Is the loss of one of the
Chariots and Horsemen of our Israel; so eminent was he for Prevalency in
Prayer, Courage in Duty, Conduct in Affairs, Constancy in Religion, and a firm
adherence to his Ministerial Vows, and Lastly, a Contempt. of the World, in
which, as he that Warreth, he did not entangle himself. 2. To be sensible of
those Sins, which have provoked God to deprive us of him. Barrenness and
Unfruitfulness under his Ministry; it is for this that God has a Controversy
with us. 3. To bless God that we enjoyed him so long; eaten Bread must not be
forgotten. 4. To be Followers of him, as he was of Christ. He was a Pattern for
Ministers, excelling in the knowledge of the Scriptures, which made this Man of
God perfect, and industrious to advance the Honor of Jesus Christ, whom he
made the Alpha and Omega of his Religion; not addicted to Controversies, but
walking in the good old way, unwearied in the Work of God; it was the delight
of his Heart, to be laying out himself for the good of Souls. Exemplary for
Humility and low Thoughts of himself, and his own Performances, for meekness
and readiness to forgive Injuries, for Candor in speaking of others, and their
words and actions, on which he ever put the best Construction, and was never
apt to speak evil of any Man. Eminent for Family-Religion, and in that an
excellent Copy to all Masters of Families. Those things therefore which you
have heard and seen in him do, and the God of Peace shall be with you. These
were the Heads which were copiously and excellently enlarged upon in that
Sermon.

In the Afternoon of that Sabbath, another Sermon was Preached by a near
Relation of Mr. Henry's, on Heb. 11. 4. And by it, he being dead yet speaks,
(...) is yet spoken of by us, and yet speaks to us.

The Wednesday following, July 1. being the Lecture in course at Danford in
Whitchurch Parish, Mr. Samuel Lawrence of Nantwich, whose turn it was to Preach
that Lecture brought up the-long train of Mourners, (as he expressed it) in a
most savoury and pertinent Discourse on Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have
(or have had) the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the words of God,
whose Faith follow, considering the end of their Conversation. Bishops no doubt
(says he) are here meant, Scripture Primitive Bishops, the Pastors of
particular Congregations, for they were such as had spoken to them the word of
God, and watched for their Souls, v. 17. Such a one Mr. Henry was, that great
Man, who is fallen this day in Israel, removed from us, but has left behind
him a good Name to be remembered, a good Example to be imitated; many a good
word spoken to us, and many a good Prayer put up for us. Remember him with
thankfulness, that God has given such Power, such Gifts and Graces unto Men. I
never knew a Man (said he) in all my Acquaintance, in whom I have seen so much
of God as in good Mr. Henry, whose Holy, Humble, Heavenly, Gracious
Conversation has been to me, no small Confirmation of the Truth of the
Christian Religion; that God gave him to you, and continued him so long, to see
the Church in a better State than he had sometimes seen it; that God Crowned
his Labors with such great Success. Many Souls in Heaven, and some on Earth
blessing God that ever they saw his Face, and that God continued him in his
usefulness to the last. Remember him with a quiet submission to the Hand of God
in his Removal from us. Sensible we must be of the stroke; it is a public Loss,
a Loss to to the Ministry, our Hands are this Day weak; a Loss to the Nation,
for which he was a powerful Intercessor; a Loss to this Country, in which he
was a burning and shining Light; but yet we must acquiesce in the Divine Will.
The Treasure was in an Earthen Vessel, and God will bring us to depend more
upon himself; and he is teaching us to live, and live to Christ without good
Mr. Henry, though we have sometimes said, we did not know how we could live
without him. Remember him to pay all Honor and Respect to his Name and Memory;
rise up, and call him Blessed. That Is a foul Tongue, as well as a lying one,
that can say any thing of him unbecoming a Disciple, Servant, and Minister of
Jesus Christ. Remember him, to imitate his good Example. Many of you will be
called Mr. Henry's Followers, be so indeed. He was a Pattern to Ministers of
Diligence, Zeal, Humility, and great Meekness in dealing with all People, which
contributed abundantly to his Success; his Preaching affectionate, without
affectation. To all People he was a Pattern of Faith and Charity, and Contempt
of the World, of Zeal and Moderation, patience in Suffering, and of Constancy
and Perseverance to the end. Remember him, and remember your Sins which have
provoked God to take him away. Have not we grieved this good Man's Spirit? etc.
Remember him, and remember Christ's fullness, who is the same, v. 8. and has
the residue of the Spirit. Instruments shifted, Cisterns emptied, but there is
the same in the Fountain. Remember him, and remember your own Death, and Heaven
where he is: We may think the worse of this World. which is much impoverished,
and the better of Heaven which is somewhat enriched, by the removal of this
good Man.

Thus we have gleaned a little out of the Sermons, which very well des^ed to
have been Published at large some of the Testimonies that were born to him, by
such as had had long and intimate acquaintance with him, that knew his
Excellencies very much, and knew as little to give flattering Titles; nor was
it any invidious piece of Service, to speak thus Honorably of one, who like
Demetrius, had a good report of all Men, and of the Truth it self.

Nor was it there only, but from abroad, that very Honorable Testimonies were
given of him. Sir Henry Ashhurst (whose great worth and usefulness the World
has been made to know, by some of the best Pens of the Age) besides the
personal Acquaintance he had with Mr. Henry, both at Boreatton and in London,
had kept up a constant Correspondence with him, by Letter, for many Years. Read
the Character he gave of him, in a Letter to a near Relation of Mr. Henry's,
upon the Tidings of his Death. I need not tell you how sadly I received the
doleful News of Mr. Henry' s Translation, who, I do think, lived the greatest
Example of sincere Godliness, with Prudenc^ and sweetness of Temper, of any I
ever knew. And i^ another Letter, not only proposing, but pressing the
Publication of an Account of his Life, he professes he thought there was none
like him in his day, at lea^ of his Acquaintance, which is known to be both o^
the largest and of the best: And (says he) if Si^ Fulk Grevil, would have it
inscribed upon his Tomb^ stone, that he was a Friend to Sir Philip Sidney. I m^
well be pleased to have it told the World, that I Loved an^ Honored Blessed
Mr. Henry; a Man of so much Prudence, and withal so much Sincerity, of so good
a Temper, so much a Gentleman, and yet of such strict Pie^ and Devotedness to
God, that I scarce ever knew his Fellow.

The Reverend Mr. William Turner, now Vicar of Walburton in Sussex, (of whom
mention was made before) lately sent to me a very kind Letter, Ex mero motu,
with his free Consent to have it inserted in this Account; some hints whereof I
think sit to subjoin.

Worthy Sir,
I am glad to hear that you have been prevailed with to set upon so good a
Work, as Recording the most remarkable Passages of Mr. Henry's Life. I doubt
not but you will meet with some, that will give such a History but a cold
Reception. All that part of the World that lies in Darkness, will be offended,
when Beams of clear Light and Sunshine first dart into their Faces. Virtutem
praesentem odimus.

A little before I went to the University, I was, upon the Commendation of my
worthy Schoolmaster Mr. E. (yet living) and with my Father's Consent, half a
Year a Domestic with him; partly as a Tutor to his young ones, and partly as a
Pupil to himself; and in some little Degree as a Companion; where I had the
opportunity of informing my self more fully concerning the Humor and
Principles, and Conversation of a sort of People (and especially him and his
Family) whom I had heard aspersed very freely in former Companies, and
represented to the World, as very Hypocritical and Disloyal People. At my first
going I resolved to stand upon my Guard, and pry into the Cause, which was then
the great Subject of Difference and Dispute; and upon the whole do say, That
Mr. Henry was a Man of so clear a Brain, so gentle a Behavior, so steady a
Conversation, so regular a Devotion, was so courteous and condescending to
Inferiors, so respectful and Dutiful to Superiors, so sweet and obliging to
all; was so careful to improve his time well, to do as much good as possible to
every Body, so constantly affectionate in his Prayers for the King and
Government, so desirous to keep up a fair Correspondence and Communion with his
conformable Brethren, so very indifferent in making Proselytes to his
particular Opinions; and withal, so zealous to promote substantial Goodness and
true Christianity, so mighty inoffensive and peaceable in all his Expressions
and Actions; so prudent, pure, pious, just, sober, charitable, cheerful and
pleasant, that I profess I am almost afraid to give him his due Character
without some Correctives, lest they that knew him not should suspect my
veracity, and imagine my Pen to be managed by some mercenary Hand. I remember
the Worshipful Rowland Hunt of Boreatton, Esquire speaking of Mr. Henry, thus
expressed himself to me (and if I mistake not, the Lord Ambassador Pagett was
present) I was (said he) near seven Years resident in the Universities, and
seven more at the Inns of Court in London, and had opportunity of knowing and
acquainting my self with the most eminent Divines and Preachers in both those
places; yet I never found any every way so accomplished, for clearness and
quickness of apprehension, solidity of Judgment, and roundness of Style, as Mr.
Henry is. I have Noted in my Book of Providence, the Remark I made upon the
Temporal Blessings God had rewarded him with; viz. a good and virtuous Consort,
who brought him a good Estate, gave him a due Reverence, loved him with an
entire affection, an ingenious and hopeful Offspring, well affected, well
Educated, and well disposed of in the World, the favor of Men, and a quiet
undisturbed Habitation upon Earth, in great measure, etc.

Sic Testatus, sic monet, sic precatur. Amicus maerens, anhelus, superstes. W.
Turner, A. M.


Another very worthy Conformist, formerly of his Acquaintance, but now living
at a great distance, having occasion to mention him in a Letter to a Friend,
calls him The Great, Good. and now Glorious Mr. Henry, whose Memory (says he)
shall ever be precious, and even sacred to me.

Such as these were the Honorable Testimonies which all that knew him, and
knew how to value true Excellency attended him with. It is part of the
Recompense of Charity and Moderation in this World, that it obtains a good
Report of all Men. The Kingdom of God (says the Blessed Apostle, Romans 14. 17,
18.) is not meat and drink (which were then the matters of doubtful
disputation) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and he
that in these things serves Christ, is not only acceptable to God, but
approved of men; as on the contrary, they that judge will be judged, and with
what meas^re we meet, it will be measured to us again. And this is the
Excellency of a Good Name, that it is out of the reach of Death, and is not
Buried in the Grave, but rather grows up from it. It is not for nothing that
Solomon has joined this good Name, which is better than precious Ointment,
with the day of ones death, which upon that account is better than the day of
ones birth, that it compleats the Character of those that finish their Course
well, and are faithful unto Death; whereas a Great Name, like the Names of the
great Ones of the Earth is often withered and blemished by Death. We read of
those that bear their shame when they go down to the Pit, though they were the
terror of the mighty in the Land of the Living, Ezekiel. 32. 35.

At a Meeeting of the Dissenting Ministers of Cheshire at Knutford, in May
1696. (a few Weeks before Mr. Henry dyed) it was agreed, that their next
Meeting should be at Chester (though inconvenient to many of them) upon
condition that he would meet them there, and give them a Sermon. It was with
much difficulty that he was prevailed with to promise it, but his Master called
for him before the time appointed came. Mr. Flavel of Devonshire dyed when he
was under a like appointment. But happy they that are come to the General
Assembly, and Church of the First Born, and to the Spirits of just Men made
perfect.

As to his Bodily Presence, he was of a middle Stature, his Complexion not
approaching to any extreme, of a very pleasant Aspect, and an unusual mixture
of Gravity and Sweetness in the air of his Countenance, which was the true
Index of his Mind. When some of his Friends have solicited him to have his
Picture drawn, he would put them off with this, that the best Picture of a
Minister is in the Hearts of his People.

CHAP. X.
A Miscellaneous Collection of some of his Sayings, Observations, Counsels and
Comforts, out of his Sermons, Letters and Discourses.

MR. Henry, through the excess of his Modesty and Self-diffidence, never
Published any of his Labors to the World, nor ever fitted or prepared any of
them for the Press; and yet none more valued the Labors of others, or rejoiced
more in them; nor have I heard any complain less of the multitude of good
Books, concerning which he often said, that Store is no Sore, and he was very
forward to persuade others to Publish; and always expressed a particular
pleasure in reading the Lives, Actions and Sayings of Eminent Men, Ancient and
Modern, which he thought the most useful and instructive kind of Writings. He
was also a very candid Reader of Books, not apt to pick Quarrels with what he
read, especially when the Design appeared to be Honest, and when others would
find fault, and say, this was wanting, and 'tother amiss, his usual Excuse was,
There is nothing Perfect under the Sun.

It will be but a small Repair of this want of the publishing of some of his
Works, (but I doubt it will prove the best we can make) to glean up some few of
many of his Sayings, Observations, and good Instructions (as his Remains) which
we shall not Marshal in any Order, but give them as they occur, besides those
which have been already inserted into this Narrative.

'Twas a saying he frequently used, which has been mentioned already, that
Every Creature is that to us, and only that which God makes it to be: And
another was, Duty is ours, Events are God's: And another was, The Soul is the
Man, and therefore, That is always best for us, which is best for our Souls:
And another was, The Devil cozens us of all our time, by cozening us of the
present time.

In his Thanksgivings for Temporal Mercies, he often said, If the end of one
Mercy were not the beginning of another, we were undone: And to encourage to
the Work of Thanksgiving he would say, That new Mercies call for new Returns of
Praise, and then those new Returns will fetch in new Mercies; and from Psalm.
50. 23. He that offers praise glorifies me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright. -- He observed, That Thanksgiving is good, but
Thanks-living is better.

When he spoke of a Good Name, he usually described it to be a Name for good
things with good People.

When he spoke of Contentment, he used to say, When the Mind and the Condition
meet, there is Contentment. Now in order to that, either the Condition must be
brought up to the Mind, and that is not only unreasonable but impossible; for
as the Condition rises, the Mind rises with it; or else the Mind must be
brought down to the Condition, and that is both possible and reasonable. And he
observed, That no Condition of Life will of it self make a Man content, without
the Grace of God; for we find Haman discontented in the Court, Ah^b
discontented on the Throne, Adam discontented in Paradise, nay (and higher we
cannot go) the Angels that fell discontented in Heaven it self.

The Three Questions which he advised People to put to themselves in self
Examination before the Sacrament, were, What am I? What have I done? and what
do I want?

He used to recommend to his Friends these four Scripture Arguments against
Sin. expressed for Memory sake in four Verses, to be ready in an Hour of
Temptation. Is this thy kindness to thy Friend?
It will be bitterness in the end.
The Vows of God upon me lie;
Should such a Man as I am fly?


He said there were four things, which he would not for all the World have
against him, The Word of God, His own Conscience, The Prayers of the Poor, and
The Account of Godly Ministers.

He that has a blind Conscience which sees nothing, a dead Conscience which
feels nothing, and a dumb Conscience which says nothing, is in as miserable a
Condition as a Man can be in, on this side Hell.

Preaching on 1 Pet. 1. 6. If need be, you are in Heaviness. -- He showed what
need the People of God have of Afflictions. The same need that our Bodies have
of Physic, that our Trees have of Pruning, that Gold and Silver have of the
Furnace, that Liquors have of being emptied from Vessel to Vessel, that the
Iron has of a File, that the Fields have of a Hedge, that the Child has of the
Rod.

Preaching on that Prayer of Christ for his Disciples, John 17. 21. That they
all may be one, which no doubt is an answered Prayer; for the Father heard him
always: He showed, That notwithstanding the many sad Divisions that are in the
Church, yet all the Saints, as far as they are Sanctified, are One; one in
Relation, one Flock, one Family, one Building, one Body, one Bread: one by
Representation, one in Image and Likeness, of one Inclination and Disposition:
one in their Aims, one in their Askings, one in Amity and Friendship, one in
Interest, and one in their Inheritance; nay, they are one in Judgment and
Opinion; though in some things they differ, yet those things in which they are
agreed are many more, and much more considerable, than those things wherein
they differ. They are all of a mind concerning Sin, that it is the worst thing
in the World; concerning Christ, that he is All in all; concerning the Favor
of God, that is better than Life; concerning the World, that it is Vanity;
concerning the Word of God, that it is very precious, etc.

Preaching on Gal. 1. 16. concerning the Conversion of Paul, he began his
Sermon with this Remark, to raise Attention: Much is said in Story concerning
the seven Wonders of the World, the Temple of Ephesus, the Pyramids of Egypt,
the Tomb of Mausolus, etc. all which are now no more; but I have been sometimes
thinking, whether I could not name seven things which I would call the Seven
wonders of the Church; and what do you think of these Seven? are they not
wonderful? 1. Our Redemption by Jesus Christ, who is called Wonderful; 2. the
Salvation of Noah in the Ark; 3. the Faith of Abraham in Offering up Isaac; 4.
the Patience of Job; 5. the Providence of God toward the Nation and People of
the Jews; 6. the pouring out of the Spirit upon the Apostles; 7. the Conversion
of Paul.

But it would be endless to gather up such Passages as these out of his
Sermons, which were full of them, and we mention these only because they occur
first.

He used to observe concerning the Nation of the Jews, that before the
Captivity in Babylon, no People could be more strongly addicted to Idols and
Idolatry than they were, to admiration, considering what clear Warnings they
had against it. But after that Captivity, never was any People more averse to
Idols and Idolatry than they, that the Promise might be fulfilled, Ephraim
shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols; and he looked upon it, that
the Idolatry of the Papists was one of the greatest Obstructions to the Jews
Conversion, which he did expect and look for, as not apprehending how the
Promises, Romans 11. have yet had their full accomplishment; not that they shall
again be Incorporated into a People, but shall join themselves to the Churches
of Christ, in the several Nations whither they are scattered.

The great thing that he condemned and witnessed against in the Church of Rome,
was their Monopolizing of the Church, and Condemning all that are not in with
their Interests, which is so directly contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, as
nothing can be more. He sometimes said, I am too much a Catholic, to be a
Roman Catholic.

He often expressed himself well pleased with that healing Rule, which if duly
observed would put an end to all our Divisions: Sit in necessariis Unitas, in
non necessariis Libert^, in omnibus Charitas. Let there be in necessary things
Unity, in every thing Charity, and then there need not be in every Punctilio
Uniformity.

By the Institutions of the Gospel (he said) he knew of no Holy Place, one Holy
Day, two Holy Sacraments, and four Holy Canons. Let all things be done in
Charity: Let all things be done to Edifying: Let all things be done Decently
and in Order: and let all things be done to the Glory of God.

When his Opinion was asked about any doubtful Matter, as Playing at Cards, the
Marriage of Cosin-Germans, or the like, he was very cautious in determining
such things to be sinful; but he would say, its good keeping on the safer side;
and a Man would not choose to go upon a Precipice, when he might go upon even
Ground, Prove. 10. 5. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, in opposition to
walking at all adventures.

In the Observations he made of God's Providence, he frequently took Notice in
Discourse with his Friends, of the fulfilling of the Scripture in them, for
(says he) The Scripture has many accomplishments, and is in the fulfilling
every day. Speaking of a wicked Son in the Neighborhood, that was very
undutiful to his Mother, he charged some of his Children to observe the
Providence of God concerning him; Perhaps (says he) I may ^ot live to see it,
but do you take Notice, whether God do not come upon him with some remarkable
Judgment in this Life, according to the threatening employed in the Reason
annexed to the Fifth Commandment: But he himself lived to see it fulfilled not
long after, in a very signal Providence.

He observed from Scripture Instances, as well as from some Providence which
he had taken Notice of in his own Day, That if any began well in the ways of
Religion and Godliness, and afterward cast off their Profession, and returned
to Profaneness again usually God sets a mark of his displeasure upon them, by
some visible Judgment in this World; their Estates ruined, their Reputation
blasted, their Families sunk, or themselves brought to Misery; so that all who
passed by might say, This was an Apostate. If any Man draw back, my Soul shall
have no pleasure in him.

He observed from Numb. 10. 12. That all our Removes in this World, are but
from one Wilderness to another. Upon any change that is before us, we are apt
to promise our selves a Canaan, but we shall be deceived, it will prove a
Wilderness.

Once pressing the Study of the Scriptures, he advised to take a verse of
Psalm. 119. every Morning to Meditate upon, and so go over the Psalm twice in
the Year, and that (said he) will bring you to be in love with all the rest of
the Scripture; and he often said, All Grace grows, as love to the Word of God
grows.

One asking his advice, what to do when (as often unavoidably) we are in the
sight and hearing of the wickedness of the Wicked, and whether we are to
reprove them; why (says he) you know what an angry Countenance does, and we
may sometimes give a Reproof by our looks, when we have not opportunity of
giving it otherwise.

He would not bear that any should be evil spoken of in his Hearing, 'twas to
him as Vinegar to the Teeth. He would mind those who Reflected upon People
behind their Backs, of that Law, Lev. 19. 14. Thou shall not Curse the Deaf.
Those that are absent are Deaf, they cannot right themselves, and therefore say
no ill of them. A Friend of his enquiring of him concerning a matter which
tended to reflect upon some People; he began to give him an account of the
Story, but immediately broke off, and checked himself with these words, But our
Rule is, to speak evil of no Man, and would proceed no further in the Story.
'Twas but the Week before he dyed, that one desired him to lend him such a
Book; Truly (says he) I would lend it you, but that it rakes in the Faults of
some, which should rather be covered with a Mantle of Love, 'Twere easy to
Multiply instances of this.

To quicken People to diligence and liveliness in the Worship of God, he would
sometimes observe, that the Temple was built upon a Threshing-floor, a place of
Labor. He would also urge, that in Answer to those who turned it to his
Reproach, that his Meeting place had been a Barn; no new thing (would he say)
to turn a Threshing-floor into a Temple.

When some zealous People in the Country would have him to Preach against
Top-knots, and other Vanities in Apparel, he would say, that was none of his
Business; if he could but persuade People to Christ, the Pride and Vanity, and
Excess of those things would fall of Course; and yet he had a dislike to Vanity
and Gaiety of dress, and allowed it not in those that he had influence upon.
His Rule was, that in such things we must neither be Owls nor Apes; not affect
singularity, nor affect modishness; nor (as he used to observe from 1 Pet. 3.
3.) make the putting on of Apparel our adorning, because Christians have better
things to adorn themselves with. When some complained to him of a Relation of
theirs, that would not let them dress his Children with Ribbands, and other
fine things, why truly (said Mr. Henry) those things are fit for Children;
thereby reproving both him that would not allow them to his Children, and them
that perhaps minded them too much themselves.

He often, both in Sermons and Discourses, would press People to fix to
themselves some good Principles, and to come off from the Corrupt and Carnal
Principles that Worldly People go by. He took all occasions to recommend such
Principles as these: That God who is the first and best, should have the first
and best; That a Part in Christ is a good Part; That Soul Prosperity is the
best Prosperity, and that it is well or ill with us, according as it is well or
ill with our Souls; That Honesty is the best Policy; That those that would have
the comfort of Relations, must be careful to do the Duty of them; That All is
well that ends everlastingly well; That Time and the things of Time, are
nothing compared with Eternity and the things of Eternity; That it is better to
suffer the greatest Affliction, than to commit the least Sin; That it highly
concerns us to do that now, which we shall most wish we had done when we come
to dye; That Work for God is its own Wages; That it is folly for a Man to do
that which he must certainly undo again by Repentance, or be undone to all
Eternity Such as these were the Principles he would have Christians to govern
themselves by.

Speaking of the Causes of Atheism, he had this Observation; That a Head full
of vain and unprofitable Notions, meeting with a Heart full of Pride and
Self-conceitedness, dispose a Man directly to be an Atheist.

A Gentlewoman, that upon some unkindness betwixt her and her Husband, was
parted from him, and lived separately near a Twelvemonth, grew Melancholy, and
complained of Sin, and the withdrawing of the Light of God's Countenance, and
the want of Assurance; he told her, she must rectify what was a miss between
her and her Husband, and return into the way of Duty, else 'twas in vain to
expect Peace. Her Friends were against it; but he said, he was confident it
would prove so.

He said he had observed concerning himself, that he was sometimes the worse
for eating, but never for abstinence; sometimes the worse for wearing too few
Clothes, but never for wearing too many; sometimes the worse for speaking, but
never for keeping Silence.

As to his Letters, he was very free in writing to his Friends. A good Letter,
he would say, may perhaps do more good than a good Sermon, because the Address
is more particular, and that which is written remains. His Language and
Expressions in his Letters were always pious and heavenly, and seasoned with
the Salt of Grace; and when there was occasion, he would excellently Administer
Counsels, Reproofs or Comforts by Letter. He kept no Copies of his Letters, and
it is impossible if we should attempt it, to retrieve them from the Hands into
which they were scattered. Mr. Rutherford's, and Mr. Allen's Letters, that
(like some of the most excellent of Paul's Epistles) bo^e date out of a Prison,
have a mighty Tincture of their peculiar Prison-Comforts and Enlargements; we
have none such to Produce of Mr. Henry's, no Pastoral Letters or Prison
Letters; he was himself, in his whole Conversation, an Epistle of Christ.

But we shall only glean up some Passages out of such of his Letters as are in
our Hands, which may be affecting and edifying.

To his Son when he was abroad for Improvement at London, in the Year 1685, and
1686, with the common business of his Letters, which was always written with a
savor of Religion, he would intermix such Lines as these:

We are all well here, Thanks be to God, the Divine Providence watching about
our Tabernacle, and compassing us about with Favor, as with a Shield. Our
great Enquiry is, What shall we render? Alas! our Rendrings are nothing to our
Receivings; were like the Barren Field, on which must Cost is b^wed, but the
Crop is not accordingly. Our Heavenly Father is loading us with his Benefits,
and we are loading him with our Sins, grieving him that comforts us; and how
long, how long shall it be so? O that it might be otherwise! that our Mercies
might be as Oil to the Wheels, to make us so much the more active and lively in
our Masters Work, especially considering how it is with our fellow Servants,
they empty and we full, they Marah and we Naomi. There may a Day come, when it
may cost dear to be honest, but after all. To fear God and keep his
Commandments, is the whole of Man. I therefore commend it to you, and you to
God, who is a shield and buckler to them that fear him.

We are well, but in daily expectation of that which we are born, and born
again to, and that is Trouble in this World, yet rejoicing in hope of the Glory
of God, which we are reaching after, and pressing toward, as we trust you are
also. Where you are, you see more of the glittering Vanities of this World in a
Day, than we here do in an Age; and are you more and more in love with them, or
dead and dying to them? I hope dead and dying to them, for they are poor
things, and perish in the using; make many worse that enjoy them, but none
better. What is Translated vexation of Spirit, Eccl. 1. 2. may be read Feeding
upon Wind, comp. Hos. 12. 1. and can Wind satisfy? The Lord preserve and keep
you from all Evil, the Lord preserve and keep your Soul. We both send you our
Love, and bless you together, and apart, every day, in the Name of the Lord.
Amen and Amen.

Be sincere and humble and choice in your Company, always either getting go^ or
doing good, gathering in or laying out. Re^ber to keep the Heart with all
diligence and above all keepings, for there the Fountain is, and if that be
well kept and clean, the streams will be accordingly.

It Is some short Refreshment to Friends and Relations, to see and hear from one
another, but it passes away, and we have here no continuing City, no abiding
Delights in this World; our Rest remains elsewhere; those we have, lose much of
their sweetness, from the thoughts of parting with them while we enjoy them,
but the Happiness to come is Eternal. After Millions of Millions of Ages (if we
may so speak of Eternity) as far from an end as the first Moment; and the last
of Glory will be Glory (so some read Prove. 25. 27.) keep that in your Eye (my
dear Child) and it will as much as any thing dazzle your Eyes, to all the
fading deceiving Vanities of this lower World; and will be a quickening Motive
to you, to abound always in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know your
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. The Lord bless you, who blesses
indeed.

See that you walk circumspectly, not as the Fools, but as the wise; many Eyes
are upon you, his especially, who is all Eye; Cave, Deus videt, memento hoc
agere; our Blessing with 1 Chr. 28. 9.

The same which is yet the Prologue of yours, is of ours also. Ommia been. laus
Deo! but he that girdeth on the Harness, must not boast as that puts it off.
While the World we live in is under the Moon, constant in nothing but
inconstancy; and such Changes are made in other Families, why should we alone
promise our selves immunity from the common Lot? There would be no need of
Faith and Patience which are Winter Graces, if it should be always Summer time
with us. We have three Unchangeables to oppose to all other Mutabilities; an
unchangeable Covenant, an unchangeable God, and an unchangeable Heaven: And
while these three remain the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; Welcome the
Will of our Heavenly Father in all Events that may happen to us; come what
will, nothing can come amiss to us.

Keep the Invisible things of the other World always in your Eye. He that
ventures the loss of an Eternal Crown and Kingdom, for a Cup or two of puddle
Water (such as all ter^ene pleasures in Comparison are) makes a bargain, which
no less a space than that which is Everlasting will be sufficient to bewail and
repent of. How much better is it to lay up in store now a good Foundation for
time to come, and to lay hold on Eternal Life? doing those Works which we would
be willing should hereafter follow us, yet still making the blessed Jesus our
All in all.

The further Progress you make in your Studies, you will find them the easier;
it is so with Religion, the worst is at first. It is like the Picture that
frowned at first entrance, but afterward smiles and looks pleasant. They that
walk in sinful ways, meet with some Difficulties at first, which Custom
conquers, and they become as nothing. It Is good accustoming our selves to that
which is good. The more we do, the more we may do in Religion. Your
Acquaintance (I doubt not) increases abroad, and accordingly your watch must
be; for by that oftentimes, e're we are aware, we are ensnared. He that walks
with wise men shall be wise.

The return of the Spring invites our Thanksgiving for the mercy of it. The
Birds are singing early and late, according to their Capacity, the Praises of
their Creator; but Man only, that has most cause, finds something else to do.
It Is Redeeming Love that is the most admirable Love; less than an Eternity will
not suffice to adore it in. Lord, how is it! Lord, what is man? As the Streams
lead to the Fountain, so should all our Mercies lead us to that. We both of us
send you our most affectionate Love and Blessing; Blessing? That is, we pray
and beseech the most Blessed God, even our own God, to give you his Blessing
for he only can command the Blessing; and those whom he Blesses are Blessed
indeed. Let us still hear to our comfort, that you walk in the Truth. living
above the things of the World, as dead to them. The Lord in Mercy fit us for
his Will in the next Providence, Public and Personal, for Time is always
teeming.

Your Improvement is our Joy. Be sincere and serious, clothed with Humility,
abounding always in the work of the Lord; and when you have done all saying, I
am an unprofitable Servant. 'Twas the good advice of the Moral Philosopher, in
your Converse with Men, (...) (Distrust) but I must add, in every thing toward
God (...) (Believe) expect Temptation and a Snare at every turn, and walk
accordingly. We have a good Cause, a vanquished Enemy a good Second, and
extraordinary Pay; for he that overcomes, needs not desire to be more happy
than the second and third of the Revelation speaks him to be. The God of all
Mercy and Grace compass you about always with his Favor as with a shield.

I would have you redeem time for hearing the word in Season and out of Season;
your other studies will prosper never the worse, especially if you could return
immediately from it to the Closet again, without cooling Divertisements by the
way.

See your need of Christ more and more, and live upon him; no Life like it, so
sweet, so safe. Christus meus mihi in omnia. We cannot be discharged from the
Guilt of any Evil we do, without his Merit to satisfy; we cannot move in the
performance of any good required, without his Spirit and Grace to assist and
enable for it; and when we have done all, that All is nothing, without his
Mediation and Intercession to make it acceptable; so that every day, in every
thing. he is All in All. Though you are at a distance from us now, we rejoice
in the good hope we have through Grace, of meeting again in the Land of the
Living, that is, on Earth, if God see good, however in Heaven, which is the
true Land of the truly Living, and is best of all. The Lord God Everlasting be
your Sun and Shield in all your ways: See time hasting away a pace toward
Eternity, and the Judge even at the Door, and work accordingly, wherever you
are, alone or in Company; be always either doing or getting good, Sowing or
Reaping. As for me, I make no other Reckoning, but that the Time of my
Departure is at hand, and what Trouble I may meet with before, I know not, the
Will of the Lord be done: One of my chief Cares is, that no Iniquity of mine
may be laid up for you, which God grant for his Mercy sake in Christ Jesus.
Amen.

Be careful of your Health. Remember the Rule, Venienti occurrere; but
especially neglect not the main matter. The Soul is the Man; if that do well,
all is well. Worship God in the Spirit; rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
Confidence in the Flesh. God be gracious unto thee my Son. Redeem Time,
especially for your Soul: Expect Trouble in this World, and prepare for it;
expect Happiness in the other World, and walk worthy of it, unto all pleasing.

A good Book is a good Companion at any time, but especially a good God, who is
always ready to hold Communion with those that desire and seek Communion with
him. Keep low and humble in your Thoughts and Opinion of your self; but aim
high in your Desires and Expectations, even as high as the Kingdom of Heaven it
self, and resolve to take up with nothing short of it. The Lord guide you in
all your ways, and go in and out before you, and preserve you blameless to his
Heavenly Kingdom.

Immediately after his Son was Ordained to the Work of the Ministry at London,
in the Year 1687. he thus wrote to him: Are you now a Minister of Jesus Christ?
Has he counted you Faithful, putting you into the Ministry? then be Faithful;
out of love to him feed his Lambs: Make it your (...), as a workman that needs
not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. I hope what you Experienced
of the presence of God with you in the Solemnity, has left upon you a truly
indelible Character, and such Impressions, as neither time, nor any thing else
shall be able to wear out. Remember Psalm. 71. 16. It is in the Eye of Sense, a
bad time to set out in; but in Sowing and Reaping, Clouds and Wind must not be
heeded. The Work is both Comfortable and Honorable, and the Reward rich and
sure; and if God be pleased to give Opportunity and a Heart, though there may
be Trouble attending it, 'twill be easily born. If we suffer with him, we shall
also reign with him. I am, and shall be, according to my Duty and Promise,
earnest at the Throne of Grace, on your behalf, that the Lord will pour out
upon you of his Holy Spirit, that what he calls you to, he would fit you for;
especially that he would take you off your own bottom, and lay you low in the
Sense of your own Unworthiness, Inability and Insufficiency, that you may say
with the Evangelical Prophet; Woe is me, I am undone! And with Jeremiah, I am a
Child; and with Paul, I am nothing; where this is not, the main thing is
wanting; for God resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble. Now the Lord
give you that Grace to be Humble; and then, according to his Promise, he will
make you rich in every other Grace.

It were very easy to Transcribe many more such Lines as these, out of his
Letters to his Son, but these shall suffice.

We shall next gather up some few passages out of some of his Letters to a
Person of Quality in London, (such of them as are come to our Hands, which are
but few of many.) The beginning of his Correspondence with that Gentleman,
(which continued to his Death, and was kept up Monthly for a great while) was
in the Year 1686. and the following Letter broke the Ice.

Honored Sir,
HOping you are by this time, as you intended, returned to London, to your Home
and Habitation there. I make bold, according to my Promise, to Salute you in a
few Lines. In the first place to be your Remembrancer of the Vows of God which
are upon you, upon the account of the many Mercies of your Journey, both in
your going out and in your coming in. Was not every step you took hedged about
with special Providence? Had not the Angels charge over you? Did not they pitch
their Tents where you pitched yours? Did not Goodness and Mercy follow you, and
should it not then be had in thankful Remembrance? Where Mercy goes before,
should not Duty follow after? If you have Mr. Angier's Life, you will find
there, Page 88, 89. a Collection out of his Diary, of ten Heads of Mercies,
acknowledged in a Journey, to heighten God's Praises, and to quicken his own
and others Hearts therein, and they are certainly very affecting Next (Sir) I
am to acquaint you, that I have faithfully disposed of the Money you left with
me at parting, to eight poor praying Widows in this Neighborhood, as you
appointed. And this among all the rest of your Alms Deeds is had in Memorial
before God; it is Fruit that will abound to your Account, Bread sent a Voyage
upon the Waters, which you and yours will find again after many Days; for he is
Faithful that has promised. The Apostles Prayer shall be mine, 2 Cor. 9, 10.
Now he that ministers Seed to the Sower, both Minister Bread for your Food,
and multiply your Seed sown, and increase the Fruits of your Righteousness.
Amen.


And some time after he writes, Your Acknowledging God in all your Affairs, I
cannot but rejoice in, as an evidence of the uprightness of your Heart toward
him; it is the Life and Soul of all Religion; it is indeed to walk with God: That
includes as much as any other Scripture command in so few words, In all thy
ways acknowledge him; in every thing thou do have an Eye to him; make his
Word and Will thy Rule, his Glory thy End; fetch in strength from him; expect
success from him; and in all Events that happen, which are our ways too
(whether they be for us or against us) he is to be acknowledged, that is
adored: if prosperous with Thankfulness, if otherwise with Submission; as Job,
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, and blessed be the Name of the
Lord. This is to set the Lord always before us, to have our Eye ever toward
the Lord; where this is not, we are so far without God in the World.

In another Letter, As to the Accession lately made to your Estate, much good
may it do you; that is, much good may you do with it, which is the true Good of
an Estate. The Lady Warwick would not thank him, that would give her a Thousand
a Year, and tie her up from doing good with it. I rejoice in the large Heart
which God has given you with your large Estate without which Heart the Estate
would be your Snare.

I have lately met with a Letter of Mr. Henry's, to a Couple related to him,
who in a very short time had Buried all their Children of the Small Pox, to
their great Grief, 'twas in the Year 1679. What Comfort and Counsels he
Administered to them, may be of use ^o others in their Afflictions, and
therefore I shall Transcribe the whole Letter, though it be long.

Dear Cosins,
THis is to you both, whom God has made one in the Conjugal Relation, and who
are one also in the present Affliction; only to signify to you that we do
heartily Sympathize with you in it. The Trial is indeed sharp, and there will
be need of all the Wisdom and Grace you have, and of all the help of Friends
you can get, both to bear and to improve it aright. You must bear it with
Silence and Submission. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
Chastisement. He is Sovereign Lord of all, and may do with us and ours as
pleases him. It is not for the Clay to quarrel with the Potter. It was Mercy
you had Children, and comfort in them so long; it is Mercy that yet you have
one another, and your Children are not lost, but gone before, a little before,
whither you your selves are hastening after. And if a Storm be coming, (as God
grant it be not) it is best with them that put first into the Harbor. Your
Children are taken away from the Evil to come, and you must not Mourn as they
that have no hope. Sensible you cannot but be, but dejected and sullen you must
not be, that will but put more bitterness into the Cup, and make way for
another, perhaps a sharper stroke. You must not think, and I hope you do not,
that there cannot be a sharper stroke, for God has many Arrows in his Quiver;
he can heat the Furnace seven times hotter, and again and again seven times
hotter, till he has Consumed us; and if he should do so, yet still we must
say, he has punished us less than our Iniquities have deserved. For Examples
of Patience in the like kind, we have two eminent ones in the Book of God,
those are Job and Aaron; of the latter it is said, Lev. 10. 3 He held his
Peace; and that which quiered him, was what his Brother Moses said to him, This
is that which the Lord has said I will be sanctified; and if God be
Sanctified, Aaron is Satisfied; if God have Glory from it, Aaron has nothing
to say against it. Of the former it is said, Job 1. 20. he fell down, but it
was to Worship; and we are told how he expressed himself, The Lord gave, etc.
He acknowledges God in all: And indeed after all, this is it (my dear Cosins)
that you must satisfy your selves with under this sad Providence, that the
Lord has done it, and the same Will that ordered the thing it self, ordered
all the Circumstances of it; and who are we that we should dispute with our
Maker: Let the Potsherds strive with the Potsherds of the Earth, but let not
the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? And as
for the Improvement of this Affliction, (which I hope both of you earnestly
desire, for it is a great Loss to lose such a Providence, and not be made
better by it) I conceive there are four Lessons which it should teach you, and
they are good Lessons, and should be well learned, for the advantage of them is
unspeakable. 1. It should for ever imbitter Sin to you; you know what she said
to the Prophet, 1 Kings 17. 18. Art thou come to call my Sin to remembrance,
and to slay my Son? It Is Sin, Sin that is the old Kill-Friend, the Jonah that
has raised this Storm, the Achan that has troubled your House; then how
should you grow in your hatred of it, and endeavors against it? that you may
be the Death of that which has been the Death of your dear Children; I say the
Death of it, for nothing less will satisfy the true Penitent, than the Death
of such a Malefactor. 2. It should be a Spur to you, to put you on in Heavens
way; It may be you were growing remiss in Duty, beginning to slack your former
pace in Religion, and your Heavenly Father saw it, and was grieved at it, and
sent this sad Providence to be your Monitor, to tell you, you should remember
whence you were fallen, and do your first Works, and be more Humble and Holy,
and Heavenly, and self-denying, and Watchful, abounding always in the work of
the Lord. O Blessed are they that come out of such a Furnace thus resined, they
will say hereafter, 'twas a happy day for them that ever they were put in. 3.
You mu^ learn by it as long as you live, to keep your Affections in due Bounds
toward Creature Comforts. How hard is it to love and not to over-love, to
delight in Children or Yoke-fellows, and not over-delight; now God is a jealous
God, and will not give his Glory to any other; and our excess this way does
often provoke him to remove that Mercy from us, which we do thus make an Idol
of; and our Duty is to labor when he does so, to get that matter mended, and
to rejoice in all our Enjoyments with Trembling, and as if we rejoiced not. 4.
It should be a means of drawing your Hearts and Thoughts more upwards and
homewards; I mean your Everlasting-Home. You should be looking oftener now than
before into the other World. I shall go to him, says David, when his little
Son was gone before. It is yet but a little while e're all the things of Time
shall be swallowed up in Eternity. And the matter is not great, whether we or
ours die first, whilst we are all dying; in the midst of Life we are in Death:
What manner of persons then ought we to be? Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself,
and God, even our Father, be your support under, and do you good by this
Dispensation, and give you a Name better than that of Sons and Daughters. We
are daily mindful of you at the Throne of Grace, in our poor measure, and
dearly recommended to you, etc.


We shall next gather up some Passages out of his Letters to his Children,
after they were married and gone from him.

To one of his Daughters with Child of her first Child, he thus writes, You
have now one kind of Burden more than ever you had before to cast upon God,
and if you do so, he will sustain you, according to his Promise.

And when the time of Travel was near, thus, You know whom you have trusted,
even him who is true and faithful, and never yet did, no^ ever will forsake the
Soul that seeks him. Though he be Almighty, and can do every thing, yet this he
cannot do, he cannot deny himself, nor be worse than his Word: But what is his
Word? Has he promised that there shall be always a safe and speedy delivery?
that there shall be no Iabez, no Benoni? No, but if there be, he has promised
it shall work together for good; has promised, if he does not save from, he
will save through: If he call to go, even through the valley of the shadow of
death, (and what less is Childbearing (...)) he will be with you, his Rod and
his Staff shall comfort you, and that is well: Therefore your Faith must be in
those things as the Promise is, either so or so, and which way soever it be,
God is good, and does good. Therefore (my dear Daughter) lift up the Hands that
hang down, cast your Burden upon him, trust also in him, and let your Thoughts
be established. We are mindful of you in our daily Prayers but you have a
better Intecessor than we, who is heard always.

To another of them in the same Circumstance; he thus writes, Your last Letter
speaks you in a good Frame, which rejoiced my Heart, that you were fixed, fixed
waiting upon God; that your Faith was uppermost, above your Fears; that you
could say, Behold the handmaid of the Lord, let him do with me as seems good
in his eyes. We are never fitter for a Mercy, nor is it more likely to be a
Mercy indeed, than when it is so with us; now the Lord keep it always in the
Imagination of the Thoughts of your Heart. And he concludes, 'Forget not 1 Tom.
2. last.

When one of his Daughters was safely delivered, in a Letter to another of them
that was drawing near to that needful Hour, he observed, that when David said,
Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I render? He presently adds, v. 13. I will call upon
the Name of the Lord. As if (says he) calling upon the Name of the Lord for
Mercy for you, were one way of rendering unto the Lord, for the great Benefit
done to your Sister.

On occasion of affliction in their Families by the sickness or Death of
Children, or otherwise, he always wrote some word in season.

In the Furnace again? (says he) but a good Friend sits by, and it is only to
take away more of the Dross. If less Fire would do, we should not have it so
much and so often; O for Faith to trust the Refiner, and to refer all to his
Will and Wisdom, and to wait the Issue -- for I have been young, and now am
old, but I never yet saw it in vain to seek God, and to hope in him.

At another time he thus writes, Tough and knotty Blocks must have more and
more Wedges; our heavenly Father when he judges will overcome. We hear of the
death of dear S. T. and chide ourselves for being so often pleased with his
little pretty fashions lest we offended therein, by being too much so. No Rival
must sit with him in his Throne, who deserves all our Love and Joy, and has
too little of it.

At another time, upon the death of another little one, The dear little one
(says he) made but a short Passage through this to another World, where it is
to be for ever a living Member of the great Body, whereof Jesus Christ is the
ever-living Head; but for which Hope there were cause for Sorrow indeed. If he
that gives takes, and it is but his own, why should we say, What do thou?

At another time upon the like occasion; Our Quiver of Childrens Children is
not so full, but God can soon empty it: O for Grace, Grace at such a time,
which will do that that Nature cannot. The God of all Grace supply your Need
and ours, according to his Riches in Glory. The Lord is still training you up
in his good School; and though no Affliction for the present be joyous but
grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields well; your Work is in every thing
to bring your Will to the Will of God.

To one of his Daughters concerning her little one, he thus writes; They are
but Bubbles: we have many warnings to sit loose; the less we rely upon them in
our Ioys and Hopes, the more likely to have them continued to us. Our God is a
jealous God, nor will he suffer the Creature to usurp his Throne in our
Affections.

Upon the death of a little Child but few days old, he thus writes; The tidings
of the death of your little one were afflicting to us, but the Clay must nor
say to the Potter, What do thou? If he that took be the same that gave, and
what he gave and took was his own, by our own consent, it becomes us to say,
Blessed be the Name of the Lord. I hope you have been learning to acknowledge
God in all Events, and to take all as from his Hand, who has given us to know
Isay, to know (for Paul says so) that all things do work together, (not only
shall, but do) for our good, that we may be more and more partakers of his
Holiness. He can make the two left as comfortable to you as all the three, as
all your five could have been. However, if all the Cisterns were drawn dry
while you have your Fountain to go to, you are well; you may also by Faith look
forward, and say, it was a Covenant-child, and through Mercy, we shall see it
again in a better World.

Upon the sickness of a dear Child, he thus writes to the Parent; You and we
are taught to say, It is the Lord; upon his Will must we wait, and to it must
we submit in every thing; not upon constraint, but of choice; nor only because
he is the Potter and we the Clay; and therefore in a way of Sovereignty he may
do what he pleases with us and ours: But because he is our Father, and will do
nothing but what shall be for good to us. The more you can be satisfied in
this, and the more willing to resign, the more likely to have. Be strong
therefore in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus; it is given for such a time of
need as this. I hope your Fears and ours will be prevented, and pray they may;
but thanks be to God, we know the Worst of it, and that Worst has no harm in
it, while the better part is ours, which cannot be taken away from us.

To one of his Children in affliction he writes thus; It Is a time of Trial with
you, according to the Will of your and our Heavenly Father. Though you see not
yet what he means by it, you shall see. He means you good and not hurt; he is
showing you the vanity of all things under the Sun, that your happiness lies
not in them, but in himself only; that they and we are passing away, withering
Flowers, that therefore we may learn to die to them, and live above them,
placing our Hope and Happiness in better things, trusting in him alone who is
the Rock of Ages, who fails not, neither can fail, nor will fail those that fly
to him. I pray you, think not a hard thought of him, no not one hard thought,
for he is good, and does good in all he does, and therefore all shall work for
good; but then, as you are called according to his purpose (blessed be his Name
for it) so you must love him, and Love (you know) thinks no evil, but puts the
best construction upon all that the Person loved says or does, and so must
you, though now for a Season if need be, you are in Heaviness.

And at another time; Your Times and the Times of yours are in the Lord's good
Hand, whose Will is his Wisdom. It Is one thing (as we read and observed this
Morning, out of Ezekiel. 22) to be put into a Furnace and left there as Dross to
be consumed; and another thing to be put in as Gold or Silver to be melted for
use, and to have the Refiner set by. You know whom you have believed, keep your
hold of the everlasting Covenant: He is faithful that has promised. We pray
for you, and we give Thanks for you daily, for the Cup is mixed, therefore
trust in the Lord for ever, and rejoice in the Lord always; again I say rejoice.

To one of his Sons in Law that was a little engaged ^n building, he thus
writes; Be sure to take God along with you in this, as in all other your
Affairs; for except he build the House, they labor in vain that build it.
Count upon troublesome O^crrences in it, and keep the Spirit quiet within: And
l^ nor God's Time nor Dues be entrenched upon, and then all will be well.

'Twas but a little before he died that he wrote thus to one of his Children;
We rejoice in God's goodness to you, that your Distemper has been a Rod shaken
only, and not laid on. He is good, and does good; and should we not love him,
and rest in our love to him? He says, he does in his to us, and rejoices over
us with singing, Zeph. 3. 17. And have not we much more cause? What loveliness
in us? What not in him? I pray let me recommend him to your Love; love him,
love him, with all the Powers of your Soul, and out of love to him please him.
He is pleased with honest Endeavors to please him; though after all, in many
things we come short, for we are not under the Law, but under Grace.

To one of his Children recovered from Sickness he gives this hint; Remember
that a New Life must be a New Life indeed; Reprieves extraordinary call for
Returns extraordinary.

The last Journey he made to London was in August 1690. before he went he sent
this Farewel-Letter to his Son at Chester: I am going forth this Morning
toward the great City, not knowing but it may be Mount Nebo to me: Therefore I
send you this as full of Blessings as it can hold, to your self, my Daughter
your Wife, all the rest of my Daughters, their Husbands, and all the little
ones, together and severally. If I could command the Blessings, I would; but I
pray to him that has and does, and I trust will* The Lord bless you, and keep
you, and lift up the light of his countenance upon you. As you have received,
and you for your part preached Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him: keeping
Conscience always void of offense, both toward God, and toward all Men. Love
your Mother, and be dutiful to her, and live in love and peace among your
selves, and the God of Love and Peace that has been, will be with you. Amen.

To one who desired his Direction for the attaining of the Gift of Prayer, he
wrote the following Letter of Advice.

If you would be able in words and Expressions of your own, without the help of
a Form, to offer up Prayers to God, observe these following Rules of Direction,
in the use whereof, by God's Blessing you may in time attain thereunto.

1. You must be thoroughly convinced that where such a Gift is, it is of great
use to a Christian, both very comfortable and very profitable, and therefore
very desi^able, and worth your serious endeavors; this must first be, or else
all that follows will signify nothing: For it is as the wise Man says, Prove.
18. 1. Through desire a Man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth
with all wisdom; that is, till we are brought in some good measure to desire
the end, we shall never in good earnest apply our selves to the use of means,
for the obtaining of it. It is a Gift that fits a Person to be of use to others
in the Duty of Prayer, according as there is occasion, either in a Family or in
Christian Communion. It is also of great advantage to our selves; For how can
any Form (though never so exact) be possibly contrived, so as to reach all the
Circumstances of my particular case, and yet it is my Duty, in every thing to
make my Requests known to God.

2. As you should be persuaded of the excellent use of it, where it is
attained, so also you should believe, that where it is not, it may be attained,
and that without any great difficulty. No doubt but many are discouraged from
endeavoring after it by an Opinion they have, that it is to no purpose; they
think it a thing so far above their Abilities, that they were as good sit still
and never attempt it: This is of very bad Consequence, as in other matters of
Religion, so particularly in this, and therefore watch against this Suggestion,
and conclude, that (though it may be harder to some than others) yet it is
impossible to none: Nay, this wisdom is easy to him that understands, where
means are used in the fear of God.

2. You must rightly understand and consider who it is, with whom you have to
do in Prayer, for your encouragement to come to him, though in the midst of
many Infirmities and Imperfections. He is your Father, your loving, tender
hearted Father, who knows your Frame, and remembers you are but dust; who is
not extreme to mark what we do amiss, in manner and expression, where the Heart
is upright with him. You may judge a little concerning his Love, by the
Disposition that is in you toward your Children, when they come to ask things
needful of you: And believe him to be infinitely more merciful and
compassionate, than the most merciful and compassionate of Fathers and Mothers
are or can be: especially remembering that we have an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is the great High Priest of our Profession, and
whom he hears always.

4. You must pray that you may pray; beg of God the Father of Lights, from whom
every good and perfect Gift comes, to bestow this Gift upon you. We read, Luke
11. 1. that one of the Disciples came to Jesus Christ upon this Errand, Lord
teach us to pray, and he had his Request granted presently. Go you to him on
the same Errand. You may plead the Relation of a Child, from that Scirpture,
Gal. 4. 6. And because you are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father: And the Promise also from that
Scripture, Zech. 12. 10 I will pour upon the House of David, and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace, and of Supplication; which two,
Relation and a Promise, if they be not sufficient to encourage your Faith and
Hope in this Address, what is or can be?

5. It is good before you address your self to the Duty, to read a portion of
Holy Scripture, which will be of great use to furnish you both with matter and
words for Prayer, especially David's Psalms, and Paul's Epistles. The Holy
Spirit has provided for us a Treasury or Store house, of what is suitable for
all occasions, and where both the word and the matter are his own, and of his
own framing, and inditing, if affections be stirring in us accordingly, we have
great reason to believe he will accept of us. In diverse places he has himself
put words into our Mouths for the purpose, as Hos. 14. 2. Take with you words;
Matthew. 6. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, and often elsewhere.

6. There must be some acquaintance with our own Hearts, with our Spiritual
State and Condition, our Wants and Ways, or else no good will be done in this
Matter. It Is sense of Need, Hunger, Thirst, Cold, Nakedness, that supplies the
poor Beggar at your Door with pertinent Expressions and Arguments, he needs not
the help of any Friend or Book to furnish him; so if we know our selves, and
feel our Condition, and set God before us as our God, able and ready to help
us, words will easily follow wherewith to offer up our Desires to him, who
understands the Language even of Sighs and Tears, and groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8. 26.

7. It is of use in stated Prayer, ordinarily to observe a Method, according to
the several parts of Prayer, which are these Four:

1. Compellation or Adoration, which is the giving of due Titles to God in our
Addresses to him, and therein ascribing to him the Glory due unto his Name.
With this we are to begin our Prayers, both for the working of a Holy aw and
dread upon our Hearts toward him, on the account of his Greatness and Majesty;
as also for the strengthening of our Faith and Hope in him, upon the account of
his Goodness and Mercy.

2. Confession; Sin is to be confessed in every Prayer: Original Sin as the
Root, Spring head and Fountain; and Actual Sin as the Fruit and Stream
proceeding from it. Herein you must not rest in generals, as the most do, but
especially when you are in secret before the Lord you must descend to
particulars, opening the whole Wound, hiding nothing from him, also aggravating
the Fault from the Circumstances of it, judging and condemning your self for it
in the sight of God; and for your help herein, you must acquaint your self with
the Divine Law, the Precepts and Prohibitions of it, especially their Extent
and Spiritual Nature, as the Rule, and then bring your own Thoughts, Words, and
Actions to it daily, to be tried by it.

3. Petition, for such good things as God has promised, and you have need of,
both concerning this Life and that which is to come. As to the latter, you are
to pray for Mercy to pardon, and Grace to help in time of need. As to the
former, for Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, and a Heart to be therewith
contented. You are to pray for others also, the Church of God, the Land of your
Nativity, Magistrates, Ministers, Relations, and Friends, not forgetting the
Afflictions of the Afflicted.

4. Thanksgiving, which should have a considerable share in every Prayer; for
our Duty is, in every thing to give thanks for Mercies received, Public and
Personal, which is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning us.

This Rule of Method is not so necessary to be observed in Prayer, as in no
case to be varied from; but it is certainly very useful and expedient, and a
great help to young beginners in that Duty.

8. My advice is, that you would delay no longer, but forthwith apply your self
in the strength of Jesus Christ, to this sweet and excellent way of Praying
(...) and I dare say, in a short time you will find, through the aids and
supplies of Divine Grace, what is at first hard and difficult, will by degrees
be easy and delightful. The promise is, that to him that has, i. e. that
has, and uses what he has, more shall be given. Though you cannot do what
you would, yet fail not to do what you can, wherein the Lord will accept of
you, according to his Everlasting Covenant in Christ Jesus, for we are not
under the Law but under Grace.

CHAP. XI.
A short Account of some of his Friends, especially his Brethren in the
Ministry, that dyed before him.

WE think our selves obliged to add this Account out of his own Papers, partly
as an Evidence of the great esteem he had of the Gifts and Graces of others, to
whom he delighted to do Honor; (an Instance of that Humility, which he was in
all respects a great Example of); and partly that we may preserve the
remembrance of some in that Country, whose Names ought not to be buried in
Oblivion. It is part of that Honor which we owe to them that fear the Lord; to
mention them with respect when they are dead and gone, that we may contribute
something to the fulfilling of the Promise, That the Righteous, and especially
they who turn many to Righteousness, shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
While their glorified Souls shine as the Stars in the Firmament of our Father,
it is fit that their embalmed Memories should in these lower Regions go forth
as a Lamp that burns. The Jewish Rabbis read Prove. 10 7. as a Precept, Let
the Memory of the Just be Blessed. We will take them in the Order wherein we
find them in his Diary, according to the time of their Death, premising only
this Note of his, occasioned by a particular instance; Such a day I read the
Life of old Mr. Bruen of Stapleford, in which I met with some things that shame
me, some things that confirm me, and some things tha quicken me. Blessed be God
for that Cloud of Wit nesses we are encompassed about with.

Mr. John Machin was buried at Newcastle, September. 8. 1664. a worthy instrument
in Gospel Work: Laborious, Faithful, and Successful above his Fellows; taken
away in the midst of his Days; the first Candle I have heard of put out by God,
among the many hundreds put under a Bushel by Men. [An account of his Holy
Exemplary Life was Printed many Years after, drawn up, I think, by Mr. Newcome.]

Mr. Heath, late Minister of Iulians Church in Salop, was buried May 28. 1666.
He was of Christ's-Colledge in Cambridge, where he was much valued for his
great Learning, especially in the Oriental Tongues, in which he was one of the
greatest Masters of his Age. He was employed to Correct the Syriac and Arabic
of the Polyglot Bible, which was sent down to him in Sheets for that purpose,
for which Bishop Walton gave him a Copy. He read the Liturgy till August 24.
1662. and then was Silenced, because he could not come up to the imposed Terms
of Conformity. When the Five Mile Act Commenced, March 25. 1666. he removed to
Wellington, and there within a few Weeks Dyed, and was Buried. When he lay upon
his Death bed, Mr. Lawrence asked him what Reflections he had upon his
Nonconformity; Truly (said he) I would not but have done as I did for a
Thousand Worlds. He had great Confidence, that God would provide for his Widow
and Children, according to Promise. [The Character Mr. Baxter gives of him is,
that he was moderate, sedate, quiet and Religious.]

Much about the same time Mr. York dyed in Salop, a Holy good Man, and well
approved in the Ministry, who wasted his own Candle in giving Light to others,
even after he was removed out of the Candlestick. Lord, Is this the meaning of
Rev. 11. 12 concerning the Witnesses.

Mr. Thomas Porter, late Minister of Whitchurch, dyed at Salop in a good old
Age, June 19. 1667. he was born in Northamptonshire, bred in Cambridge; he was
settled Minister of Hanmer in Flintshire, long before the Wars, by the means of
Sir John Hanmer, the Patron, who was a very worthy, pious Gentleman, and a
great promoter of Religion in that Parish (but dyed in the midst of his days.)
Here Mr. Porter's Ministry was blessed with wonderful acceptance and success,
both in that and the Neighboring Parishes; and a great Harvest of Souls was
there gathered in to Christ. After the Wars were over (during the Heat of which
he was forced to withdraw) he procured Mr. Steel for Hanmer, and he removed to
Whitchurch, where he continued an Instrument of much good, till the King came
in, and then he gave way to Dr. Bernard, a worthy moderate Man. He preached his
Farewel-Sermon at Whitchurch, August 28. 1660. on Col. 1. 24. and spent the
rest of his Days in Silence and Affliction. He was exercised long with pain
upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with strong pain: If this be done
to the green Tree, what shall be done to the dry? His dying Counsel to the
Lord's People, was to stick to Christ, and not to let him go, come Life come
Death.

The worthy Colonel Thomas Hunt dyed at his House in Shrewsbury, April 12.
1669. a true Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed, in whom was no Guile: One that
like Caleb, followed the Lord fully in difficult trying times; he was a Member
of the long Parliament for Shrewsbury, and very active for God in his
Generation, abounding in good Works, and his Memory is blessed. I was going to
Shrewsbury upon an appointment of his, and by the way met the sad news of his
Death, which was sudden, but not surprising, to one that was always ready. He
was twice at public Ordinances the day before, being Lord's day, worshipped
God with his Family in the Evening, went to bed well as at other times; but
about two or three a Clock in the Morning waked very ill, and before five fell
asleep in the Lord. Help, Lord, for the Godly Man cease.

Mr. George Mainwaring, a Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, and my worthy
Friend, dyed in a good old Age, March 14. 1669/70. gathered as a shock of Corn
in his Season. He was born in Wrenbury Parish in Cheshire, supported at the
University by Mr. Cotton of Cumbermere, where he had the Reputation of a good
Scholar; he was brought acquainted with the ways of Religion, by means of Mr.
Buckly his Uncle, a strict Puritan. He was first Chaplain to Sir Henry Delves,
afterward Rector of Baddely, and Chaplain to Sir Thomas Mainwaring. After the
Wars he was removed to Malpas, whence he was ejected upon the King's coming in.
His Conversation was exemplary, especially for plainness and integrity; he was
eminent for expounding Scripture. While he was at Malpas, he constantly gave
all the Milk which his Dairy yield ed on the Lord's day to the Poor.

Mr. John Adams of Northwood, was buried at Ellesmere, April 4. 1670. he was a
faithful Minister of the Gospel.

Mr. Zechariah Thomas, my worthy Friend, dyed of a Consumption at Nantwich,
September 14. 1670. in the forty first Year of his Age. He was bred up for a
Tradesman in Suffolk, but always addicted to his Book, and was ordained a
Minister after the King came in, and entertained Curate at Tilstock, under Dr.
Bernard, but by reason of his Nonconformity could not continue there long. On
the Monday before he Dyed, he said to those about him, that toward Wednesday
he should take his leave of them, and did so. He was Buried at Acton, Mr.
Kirkes Vicar of Acton, Preached, and gave him a worthy Character (and such as
he deserved) for Uprightness, Humility, Moderation, Prayer, Faithfulness in
reproving, Patience under Affliction; and in saying he was an Israelite indeed
without Guile, he said all. The Lord make me a Follower of him, and of all the
rest, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises.

Mr. Ioshuah Richardson, my truly worthy Friend and Brother, dyed at Alkinton
in Whitchurch Parish, September 1. 1671. Blessed be God for his Holy Life and
Happy Death. He was several Years Minister of Middle in Shropshire, and was
turned out thence for Nonconformity. He was a holy, loving, serious Man. Dr.
Fowler Preached his Funeral Sermon at Whitchurch, on Dan. 12. 3. highly
praising him (as he deserved) for Wisdom, Piety and Peaceableness.

Mr. Samuel Hildersham dyed near Bromicham in April 1674. the only Son of Mr.
Arthur Hildersham of Ashby (whose works praise him in the Gates) Fellow of
Emanuel College in Cambridge, Bachelor of Divinity, 1623. settled Rector of
West-Felton in Shropshire, in the Year 1628. and continued there till Silenced
by the Act of Uniformity. He was one of the Assembly of Divines; a Father to
the Sons of the Prophets in and about Shropshire. He was learned, loving, and
charitable, an excellent Preacher, an eminent Expositor, and very much a
Gentleman; he was about Fourscore Years of Age when he Dyed. He ordered by his
Will this Inscription upon his Gravestone: Samuel Hildersham, B. D. Rector of
West-Felton, in the County of Salop, 34 Years till August 24. 1662.

Mr. Richard Sadler, my worthy Friend and Fellow Labourer, dyed at Whixal in
Prees Parish, April -- 1675. He was born in Worcester; went, when young, with
his Father into New England; after the Wars he returned into England; was
Ordained at Whixal Chapel, May 16. 1648. and was removed thence to Ludlow.
Being turned out there upon the King's coming in, he spent the rest of his Days
in Privacy at Wrexal: A Man of great Piety and Moderation.

Mr. Rowland Nevet dyed at his House near Oswestry, December 8. 1675. and was
buried at Morton Chapel. I Preached his Funeral Sermon at Swinny, on 2 Pet. 1.
14. Knowing that I must shortly put off this my Tabernacle: Thence showing that
the Ministers of Christ must certainly and shortly dye. He was born in Hodnet
Parish, Anno Dom. 1609. brought up at Shrewsbury School, was afterward of
Edmund-Hall in Oxford, Commenced Master of Arts, in the Year 1634. he was
Episcopally Ordained; and Anno 1635. He was presented to the Vicaridge of
Stanton in Shropshire, where he continued many Years, with great Success in his
Ministry. While he was single, he kept House, judging that more for the
furtherance of his Work among his People, than to Table. After the War he
removed to Oswestry, where he labored abundantly in the work of the Lord; and
even after he was silenced for Nonconformity, he continued among his People
there to his dying Day, doing what he could, when he might not do what he
would. He would say, he thought most of his Converting Work was done at
Oswestry, the first Seven Years of his being there. He loved to Preach, and to
hear others Preach concerning the great things of Religion, Redemption,
Reconciliation, Regeneration, etc. for these (said he) are the main matter.
When the Plague was at Oswestry, he continued with his People, and preached to
them, and it was an opportunity of doing much good.

His Conversation from his Youth was not only blameless, but Holy and Pious; he
was exemplary for Family Religion, and great care and industry in the Education
of his Children. He was looked upon as Congregational in Judgment and Practice,
and was not satisfied to join in the Common Prayer; but he was free to
Communicate with those that did. It was his Judgment, that Ministers should be
Ordained by Ministers; and that a Minister is not only a Minister of the
particular Congregation in which he labors. He greatly bewailed the Divisions
of the Church, and the intemperate Heats of some of all Persuasions. He was
exceeding kind and loving to his Friends, very frequent in pious Ejaculations
to God. Being often distempered in Body he would say, he was never better than
in the Pulpit, and that it was the best place he could wish to dye in. He often
blessed God for a fit of Sickness which he had, which he said, he would not
have been without for a World, the Foundation of his Comfort, and Hope of
Heaven being laid then. When he was sometimes much spent with his Labors, he
would appeal to God, that though he might be wearied in his Service, he would
never be weary of it. His dying Prayer for his Children (after many sweet
Exhortations) was, That the Mediator's Blessing might be the Portion of every
one of them: adding, I charge you all, see to it, that you meet me on the right
Hand of Christ, at the great Day. A little before he Dyed he had this
Expression, Go forth (my Soul) go forth to meet thy God; adding by and by, It
is now done; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. One present saying to him, that he
was now going to receive his Reward, he replied, It is free Grace. [Mr. Henry
was much importuned to Print his Sermon at Mr. Nevet's Funeral, with some
account of his Life and Death, which he was somewhat inclined to do, but was
discouraged by the difficulties of the Times, and it was never done. But some
Materials he had for it, out of which we have Collected these hints.]

Mr. Robert Fogg, my old dear Friend, was buried at Acton near Nantwich, April
21. 1676. he dyed in a good old Age, about Eighty. He was Minister of Bangor in
Flintshire, till after the King came in, and thence forward to his Death, was a
poor silent Nonconformist, but of a bold and zealous Spirit, giving good
Counsel to those about him. A little before he dyed, he had this weighty saying
among others, Assure your selves the Spirit of God will be underling to no Sin.

[Mr. Andrew Parsons, sometimes Minister of Wem, dyed at London, October 1.
1684. He was Born in Devonshire, and was Minister there some Years before the
War; being driven thence to London, he became well known to Mr. Pym. who sent
him down to Wem, when that Town was Garrisoned for the Parliament; there he
continued in the Exercise of his Ministry, till the Year 1660. He was an
active, friendly, generous Man, and a moving, affecting Preacher. Mr. Baxter in
his Life, Part 3. Page 94. commends him for a moderate Man, and speaks of his
being in trouble, for seditious words Sworn against him, which were these:
Preaching from 2 Timothy 3. 13. he said, The Devil was like a King that courted
the Soul, and spoke fair till he was gotten into the Throne, and then played
pranks. The Witnesses deposed contrary to the Coherence of his Discourse, that
he said the King was like the Devil. He was tried at Shrewsbury before my Lord
Newport, Mr. Sergeant Turner and others, May 28. 1662. It was also charged upon
him, that he had said, there was more Sin committed now in England in a Month,
than was heretofore in seven Years: And that there had been more and better
Preaching in England for Twenty Years past, then was ever since the Apostles
days. He had Council assigned him, who pleaded that the time limited by the
Stature, in which he was Indicted was Expired: The Court yielded it was so,
allowing Twenty eight Days to a Month; but they would understand it of Thirty
Days to a Month; so he was found Guilty, and Fined Two hundred Pound; and
ordered to be Imprisoned till it should be paid.

Mr. Hugh Rogers, a worthy Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, turned out for
Nonconformity from Newtown in Montgomery-shire, was buried at Welshpool, March
17. 1679/80. he was looked upon as Congregational; but his declared Judgment
was, That Ministers ought to be Ordained by Ministers, and to give themselves
wholly to that Work; and that none but Ministers have Authority to Preach and
Govern in a Constituted Church; and that Christ's Ministers are his Ministers
in all places; and that where the word of Christ is Preached, and his
Sacraments administered, there is a true Church. He was a Man of Excellent
Converse, and whose peculiar felicity lay in pleasant and edifying Discourse.

July 2d and 3d, 1680. these two days brought tidings of the Death of Mr.
Haines, sometime Minister of Wem in Shropshire, and since at New Chapel in
Westminster; and of Mr. Richard Edwards Minister at Oswestry, both worthy
Conformists, pious, peaceable and good Men, whom I hope, through Grace to meet
shortly in Heaven. The Lord raise up others in their room to be and do better.

Mr. Robert Bosier, my dear Friend and Kinsman, having just completed the
Twenty third Year of his Age dyed, of a Fever, September 13th 1680. at Mr.
Doelittle's House in Islington, whither he was gone but a few Weeks before for
Improvement in Learning; being formerly a Commoner of Edmund-Hall in Oxford;
and since having spent some Years in my Family, and designed himself for the
Service of Christ, in the Work of the Ministry. He was a young Man of Pregnant
Parts, great Industry, and exemplary Seriousness and Piety; and likely to be an
eminent Instrument of good in his day. His Friends and Relations had promised
themselves much comfort in him, but we know who performs the thing that is
appointed for us, and gives not account of any of his Matters.

Mr. John Malden, my dear and worthy Friend, turned out from Newport in
Shropshire, for Nonconformity, dyed at Alkington near Whitchurch, May 23d,
1681. a Man of great Learning, an Excellent Hebrician, and of exemplary Piety,
and a solid Preacher; as he lived so he dyed, very low in his own Eyes;
esteeming himself good for nothing, though really good for every thing, which
was manifestly a prejudice, both to his Comfort, and to his Usefulness. He
said, he was far from repenting his being a Sufferer against Conformity. The
Relics of so much Learning, Piety, and Humility, I have not seen this great
while laid in a Grave: But blessed be God we had such a one so long.

Dr. Joshua Maddocks, a beloved Physician, our very dear Friend and Kinsman,
dyed of a Fever at Whitchurch, in the midst of his Days, July 27th, 1682. a
very pious Man, and especially eminent for Meekness; an Excellent Scholar, and
particularly learned in the Mathematics: he lived much desired, and dyed as
much lamented.

Mr. Thomas Bridge, who had been Rector of the higher Rectory of Malpas about
fifty seven Years, being aged about eighty two Years, was buried at Malpas,
October. 7. 1682. In his last sickness, which was long, he had appointed Mr.
Green, one of the Curates there, to preach his Funeral Sermon on 1 Timothy 1. 16.
Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering: And to say nothing in his Commendation, but to
give a large Account of his Repentance upon his Deathbed, etc. He was a taking
popular Preacher, preaching oft^n, and almost to the last. When old, he could
read the smallest Print without Spectacles.

Mr. William Cook, an aged, painful, faithful Minister of Jesus Christ in
Chester, finished his Course with Joy, July 4. 1684. in the midst of the cloudy
and dark Day. [See Mr. Baxter's Character of him in his Life, Part 3. Page 98.]
And an honorable Account given of him by Mr. Samuel Bold, of Steple in
Dorsetshire, in a large Preface to his Book of Man's great Duty]. He was
eminent for great Industry, both in public and private Work; great
self-denial, mortification, and contempt of the World, and a strict adherence
to his Principles in all the Turns of the Times. [He was first Minister at
Wroxal in Warwickshire; there he published two Treatises against the
Anabaptists. From thence he was by the Advice of the London Ministers, removed
to Ashby in Leicestershire, whence he was turned out for refusing the
Engagement, and afteward settled in Chester, where he was Minister of Michael
Church, 'till he was outed by the Act of Uniformity. He was an active Man for
Sir George Booth, when he made that attempt to bring in the King, in 1659. for
which he was brought up a Prisoner to London, and continued long in Confinement
in Lambeth-house; and had not the Times turned had been tried for his Life.
During the Usurpation, his frequent Prayer was; That God would pull down all
usurped Power, and restore the Banished to their Right. After he was silenced
by the Bartholomew Act, he continued to his Death, in a Pastoral Relation to a
Society of many worthy eminent Christians in Chester; though during the heat of
the Five-mile Act, he was forced to withdraw to Puddington in Wirral, where (as
in Chester, 'till King Charles's Indulgence) he constantly attended on the
public Ministry; and he himself preached in the Intervals. He would say
sometimes to his Friends, when he was in that Retirement, that he thought what
little peace and quietness there was in this World, God's People enjoyed it in
their Corners. Soon after he was silenced, he was committed to the common Goal
of Chester for preaching in his own House; by the Mayor, at the Instigation of
the then Bishop Hall. He was very indefatigable in his ministerial Labors, in
which he never sought the Assistance of any other Minister; though while he had
liberty, he constantly kept a public Fast in his Congregation every Month, as
he did also a private Fast in his own Closet and Family every Week. He usually
set apart one Afternoon every Week, to visit the Families of his Congregation,
and to Catechize their Children and Servants, and discourse with them
personally about their Souls; his Visits were short and edifying (and he
managed them as one that was a great Husband of his Time) and he seldom or
never parted without Prayer. He was not free to join in the Common Prayer, and
bore his Testimony against Prelacy and the Ceremonies with something of Zeal;
but his great Piety, Integrity, Mortification, and Charity, recommended him to
the Respects even of many that differed from him. If any asked his Advice to
any thing which might draw Suffering upon them, he would be very tender, and
desire them not to depend upon his Judgment; but since it was a matter of
suffering, to be fully persuaded in their own minds. He was a great Scholar,
and a hard Student to the last; and was far from entangling himself in the
Affairs of this Life, not knowing ought he had, save the Bread that he did eat.
In worldly Matters he was not very conversable, but in Discourse of the things
of God none more free and affable, or more ready to do Good. He lived and died
a great Example of strict and close Walking with God, and a heavenly
Conversation; and his Memory is very precious with many. He died in the Seventy
Third Year of his Age. When he lay on his Deathbed, an aged Friend of his
asking him if he had not Comfort in reflection upon his Labors in the Work of
God, he presently replied, I have nothing to boast of. He was buried in
Michael's Church in Chester; and though for some time before he died, such was
the heat of the Persecution, that he durst not show his Face in the City, yet
many considerable Persons were very forward to do him Honor at his Death.]

Mr. Jonathan Roberts of Slanvair in Denbighshire, my dear and precious Friend,
and a faithful Minister of Christ, died at Mr. Titus Thomas's House in
West-Felton, and was buried there Sept. 26. 1684. A true Nathanael, an
Israelite indeed, for Plainness and Integrity; a silent Sufferer for his
Nonconformity, for which he quitted a good Living in Denbighshire. He was a
learned Man, a Master of Arts of Oxford; he died with comfort in his
Nonconformity, and with confidence of a return of Mercy in God's due time. The
Summer before he died he had been at Oxford, Cambridge, and London, where he
heard and saw that which much confirmed him in his Dissent.

Mr. Zechariah Cawdrey, Minister of Bart^mley in Cheshire, a learned and godly
Divine, was buried December. 24. 1684. a Conformist, and formerly a great
Sufferer for the King, but in his later Times much maligned and reproached by
some People for his moderation toward Dissenters, for his Book of Preparation
for Martyrdom, and for his Zeal in keeping up the Monthly Lectures at Nantwich
and Tarvin. But he is gone to the World of Peace, and Love, and everlasting
Prai^es.

Mr. Titus Thomas, Minister of the Independent Congregation in Salop, was
buried at Felton, December. 10. 1686. He was a worthy good Man, and not so strait
laced as some others; we were six Nonconformist Ministers there at the Funeral
and the seventh dead in the midst of us, saying to us, Therefore be ye also
ready.

Mr. John Cartwright, my worthy Friend and Brother, a faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ, was buried at Audlem in Cheshire, Feb. 17. 1687/8. formerly
Minister of West-Kirby in Wirral, afterward Chaplain to the pious Lady
Wilbraham at Woodley.

Mr. Edward Greg of Chester, a worthy Gentleman, and my dear Friend, died July
9. 1689. of a Fever, in the midst of his Days. He was one that feared God above
many, of a meek and quiet Spirit, and eminently active and useful in his
Generation. The Lord is pulling our Earthen Props from under us, that we might
lean upon, and trust in himself alone, and might learn to cease from Man.

Mr. Daniel Benyon of Ash, my dear Friend and Kindsman, died June 25. 1690. a
very serious pious Gentleman, and an Israelite indeed, a true Lover, and ready
Benefactor to all good Men, especially good Ministers. He told me a little
before he died, God had made use of me (though most unworthy) as an Instrument
of his Conversion; for which I bless his Holy Name. He had a long and lingering
Sickness, which he bore with great Patience.

Mrs. Crew of Utkinton in Cheshire, an aged Servant of the Lord, was buried
July 8. 1690. She kept her Integrity, and abounded in Works of Piety and
Charity to the last, and finished well; to God be Praise.

Mrs. Hunt of Shrewsbury, the Relic of Colonel Hunt, another rare Pattern of
zealous Piety, abounding Charity, and eminent Usefulness in her place, finished
h^ Course October 23. 1690. after two days Sickness.

The Reverend, and Learned, and Holy Mr. Richard Baxter, died at London,
December 8. 1691. aged Seventy Six, and one Month; as much vili^ed by some, and
magnified by others, as most Men that ever were; but it is a small thing to be
judged of Man's Day. He was Buried at Christ Church, London, with great Honor.

Mr. John Wood, my good Friend, died September 19. 1692. at Mitton in
Shropshire, aged about Seventy; he was sometime Fellow of Magdalen College in
Cambridge, where he was outed for Nonconformity; a learned Man, but wanted the
Faculty of Communicating; one that feared God, and walked in his Integrity to
the last; had no certain Dwelling place on Earth, but I trust has one in
Heaven. Hic tandem requiescit.

Mr. Richard Steel, my old and dear Friend, and Companion in Tribulation, and
in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, died at London, November 16. 1692.
in the Sixty Fourth Year of his Age; a Man that had been greatly useful in his
Generation, both in the Country and at London.

Mr. Thomas Gilbert, died at Oxford, July 15. 1694. formerly Minister of
Edgmond in Shropshire, aged 83. a learned good Man.

Luke Lloyd, Esquire, of the Bryn in Hanmer Parish, my aged wor^hy Friend,
finished his Course with Joy, March 31. 1695. being Lord's Day. He was in the
Eighty Seventh Year of his Age, and had been Married almost Sixty Nine Years to
his pious Wife (of the same Age) who still survives him. He was the Glory of
our little Congregation, the Top branch in all respects of our small Vine, and
my Friend indeed.

[When he made his Will, under the Subscription of his Name he wrote, Job 19.
25, 26, 27. On which Text of Scripture (I know that my Redeemer lives, etc.)
Mr. Henry, at the Request of some of his Relations, preached a Sermon at the
Licensed House near Hanmer, some time after his Funeral; in which Sermon, he
bore a very honorable Testimony to that worthy Gentleman, who (as he says)
went to Heaven without a Blot, held fast his Integrity, and was lively and
zealous in the Christian Profession to the end of his Days. He was very
Exemplary for his Love to the Ordinances of God, and his Delight in attending
on them, his living upon Christ for Strength and Righteousness, his great
Humility and Condescending obliging Carriage in all his Converse. He was a Man
of great Courage and Resolution; and yet in Prayer, Tender and Self-abasing, to
admiration, often melting into Tears in the Confession of Sin; and his Charity
and Moderation were known unto all Men.

He lived and died a Pattern of Piety, and Primitive Christianity, and still
brought forth Fruit in Old Age; his Vigor, both of Body and Mind, being
wonderfully preserved to the last; and by the Grace of God he finished well,
and his Sun set under no Cloud. Such good Men are intended to be to us as the
Star that led the wise Men to Christ; and as far as they do so, we are to
follow them. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
Man is Peace.

Mr. Samuel Tailor, an aged Minister of Jesus Christ, and my true Friend, and
fellow Labourer, died at Wem, June 26. 1695. He was turned out from Edstaston
Chapel near Wem, by the Act of Uniformity; choosing rather to beg his Bread
than to wrong his Conscience. He continued in Wem ever since, and preached
there as his Strength and Liberty would permit. He had his House burnt in the
dreadful Fire that was there in 1676. and had a Child born that very Night. He
was a Man of a very tender Spirit, humble and low in his own Eyes, of approved
Integrity, and finished well. [Mr. Henry preached his Funeral Sermon at Wem, on
2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this Treasure in Earthe^ Vessels].

September 21. 1695. I heard of the Death of Two holy, aged Bartholomew
Witnesses. Mr. Richard Mayo of London, and Mr. Henry Newcome of Manchester,
Psalm. 12. 1.

Mr. Edward Lawrence of London, my dear and worthy Friend, and a faithful
Minister and Witness of the Lord Jesus, died November -- 1695. about the
Seventieth Year of his Age; born at Moston in Shropshire, of Magdalen College
in Cambridge, turned out from Baschurch in Shropshire, by the Act of
Uniformity, in 1662. was driven from Whitchurch by the violent Persecution of
the Convenricle Act, in 1670. when he removed to London, and there spent the
rest of his Days.

He had many Children, but great Affliction in some of them, which gave
occasion to his Book, Entitled, Parents Groans over their wicked Children. [It
is a very high but just Character, which Mr. Vincent has given of him in his
Sermon at his Funeral; of which, let me take leave to add some few Instances
that occur to us, which may be instructive, besides those which we have already
mentioned occasionally. At his Meals, he would often speak of using God's
Creatures as his Witnesses that he is good; and we cannot conceive how much
good our God does every moment. An Expression of his great regard to Justice,
was that common Caution he gave his Children, Tremble to borrow Twopence; and
of his Meekness and Tenderness this, Make no Man angry nor sad. He often said,
I adore the Wisdom of God, that he has not seen meet to trust me with Riches.
When he saw little Children playing in the Streets, he would often lift up his
Heart in an ejaculatory Prayer to God for them, calling them the Seed of the
next Generation. When his Friend chose to Ride the back-way into Town, he
pleasantly checked him, telling him, that his Heart had been often refreshed,
when he has looked out at the Window, and seen a good Man go along the
Streets. He used to say, That Cromwell did more real Prejudice to Religion by
his Hypocrisy, than King Charles the Second did, that never pretended to it.
As also, that he feared the Sins of the Land more than the French.

A Friend of his in the Country, writing to him not long before he died,
desired his Thoughts concerning the Differences among the London Dissenters, to
which he returned this Answer: I can say little concerning our Divisions,
which, when some men's Judgments and Tempers are healed, will be also healed.
But, When will that be? They that have most Holiness are most Peaceable, and
have most Comfort.

M. S.
PHILIPPUS HENRY, de Broad-Oak, in Comitatu Flint, A. M.
Sacri Minister Evangelii; Pastor olim Worthenburiensis;
In Aula Regia natus piis and honestis Parentibus;
Scholae Westmonasteriensis, indeque Aedis Christi Oxon.
Alumnus Regius:
Vir prisca Pietate and vere Christiana,
Judicio subacto and limato,
Memoria prastanti, magno and soecundo Ingenio,
Eruditione perpolita, summo AnimiCandore, Morum Venustate
Inprimis Spectabilis, and in Exemplum natus:
Cui Sacra semper sua Fides aliorumque Fama:
Divini Numinis Cultor assiduus;
Divini Verbi Interpres exquisitissimus;
Aliorum Affectus movere non minus pollens,
Quam suis moderari:
Concionando pariter ac Vivendo palam exhibens
Christi Legem and Exemplar Christum:
Prudens peritusque rerum; Lenis, Pacificus, Hospitalis,
Ad Pietatis omnia Charitatisque ossicia usque paratus;
Suis Jucundus; Omnibus Humanus;
Continuis Evangelii Laboribus succumbens Corpus,
Nec tantae jam par amplius Animae,
In Dormitorium hic juxta positum demisit,
Jun. 24o. Anno Dom. M DC XCVI, Aetatis LXV.
Viro opt. multumque desiderato moerens posuit Gener ejus J. T. M. D.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, Cheapside.
A Body of practical Divinity, containing 176 Sermons on the Assemblies lesser
Catechism. By Tho. Watson, formerly Minister of St. Stevens Walbrook, London.
Fol.

Sermons and Discourses on several divine Subjects, by the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime fellow of Clare-Hall Camb. Fol.

Mr. Pool's Annotations upon the Holy Bible, in two Vol. Fol. The third
Edition, with an Addition of a Concordance, and Contents to each Chapter. By
Mr. Sam. Clark.

Theological Discourses in 8 Letters and 3 Sermons, on the Sacred Trinity. Part
1st. 4to. Theological Discourses and Sermons on several occasions, Part 2d.
4to. Both by John Wallis, D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford.

Mediocria: Or the middle way between Protestant and Papist, in a Paper of
Justification. The 2d. Edit. with additions of a Letter to Mr. Williams. 4to.

Peaceable Disquisitions in some Animadversions on a Discourse, writ against
Dr. Owen's Book of the Holy Spirit. 4to.

Pacification touching the Doctrinal Dissent among our United Brethren.

The Righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel: Or, an impartial Enquiry into
the Genuine Doctrine of St. Paul, in the great, but much controverted Article
of Justification: To which are prefixed the Epistles of the right Reverend the
Bishops of Worcester, and Chester, These four by Mr. John Humfrey.

The glorious Reward of faithful Ministers declared and improved in a Sermon,
upon occasion of the Funeral of that excellent Minister of Jesus Christ Henry
Newcomb, A. M. late Pastor of a Congregation at Manchester. By John Chorlton.
4to.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that pious Gentlewoman Mrs. Judith Hammond,
late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hammand, Minister of the Gospel in London.
By Mr. John How.

A Sermon Preached at St. Mildred Poultrey, Ian. 3d, 1696, 7. by John Lord
Bishop of Chichester, and late Rector of the said Church, upon his leaving the
said Parish.

The Fountain of Life opened: Or, a display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial glory. containing 42 Sermons on various Texts. 4to.

Pneumatalogia, or a Treatise of the Soul of man. 4to. Both by Mr. John Flavel,
late Minister of the Gospel in Dartmouth.

Discourses upon the rich Man and Lazarus. By Tim. Cruso, in 8vo.

The Swearers Doom: Or, a Discourse setting forth the great sinfulness and
danger of vain and rash Swearing; By John Roast, A. M. Rector of Offwel and
Gittisham in Devon.

Scripture Light about the Gospel Ordinance of Baptism, in a Letter to some
scrupulous Friends, by a sincere lover of the Christian Community. 12ves.

The Church Catechism enlarged and explained, in an easy and familiar method;
with the Scripture Proofs annexed. 8vo.

The good and faithful Servant set forth, in a Sermon preached at Hatfield,
Broad-Oak in Essex. August 2. the day before the Funeral of Mr. John Warren,
sometime Minister of the Gospel there, with a brief Account of his Life and
Character. By Henry Lukin.

A Paraphrase on the New Testament, with Notes, Doctrinal and Practical, fitted
for the use of Religious Families, in their daily reading of the Scriptures. By
the late Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter. 2d Edition Corrected, 8vo.

Jehovah our Righteousness: Or, the Justification of Believers, by the
Righteousness of Christ only, asserted and applied in several Sermons; By Sam.
Tomlins A. M. and Minister of the Gospel. 12ves.

Prayers for the use of private Families, with Grace both before and after
Meat. 8vo.

Rules and Motives to Holy Prayer. By Daniel Burgess. 8vo.

The Golden Snuffers: Or Christian Reprovers and Reformers Characterized,
cautioned and encouraged: a Sermon preached to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners in London. By D. Burgess. 12ves.

Proofs of God's Being, and of the Scriptures Divine Original, with 20
Directions for the profitable reading of them. By D. Burgess. 12ves.

A most familiar Explanation of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, Corrected and
much amended, by Ios. Allein. 12ves.

Spiritual Songs, or Songs of Praise to Almighty God, upon several Occasions;
together with the Song of Songs which is Solomon's, first turned, then
Paraphrased in English Verse; to which may be added Penitential Cries. 8vo.

The Psalms of David in Meter, commonly called the Scots Psalms. Recommended by
diverse Ministers.

BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence. at the Angel in the Poultrey.
MR. Pool's English Annotations. Folio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter. Folio.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book, in answer to Mr. Trail's Letter
to a Minister in the Country. 4to.

An Answer of Mr. Giles Firmin to Mr. Grantham, about Infant Baptism. 4to.

Some Remarks upon two Anabaptists Pamphlets. By Giles Firmin. 4to.

Mr. Firmin's Review of Richard Davis his Vindication. 4to.

Mr. Shower's Winter Meditations: Or, a Sermon concerning Frosts and Snow, and
Winds, etc. and the wonders of God therein. 4to.

Mr. Slater's Thanksgiving Sermon, October 27th 1692. 4to.

-- His Sermons at the Funerals of Mr. John Reynolds, and Mr. Fincher,
Ministers of the Gospel. 4to.

Dr. Burton's Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and seeking first the
Kingdom of God. Published with a Preface, by Dr. John Tillotson, late
Archbishop of Canterbury. 8vo.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lordship's Admonition. By I. Boyse. 8vo.

Bishop Wilkin's Discourses of the Gifts of Prayer and Preaching; the latter
much enlarged. By the Bishop of Norwich and Bishop Williams. 8vo.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Call to Family Religion; being the substance of 18
Sermons. 8vo.

Mr. Addy's Stenographia: Or, the art of short Writing Completed, in a far
more compendious way than any yet extant. 8vo.

The London Dispensatory, reduced to the practice of the London Physicians:
Wherein are contained the Medicines both Galenical and Chemical, that are now
in use: Those out of use omitted; and those in use, and not in the Latin Copy,
here added. By John Peachy of the College of Physicians in London. 12ves.

A Sermon Preached at a public Ordination, to a Country Congregation. By Mr.
S. Clark. 4to.

Cambridge Phrases. By A. Robinson. 8vo.

Mr. Hammond's Sermon at Mr. Steel's Funeral. 8vo.

Mr. Shower's Discourse of Tempting Christ. 12ves.

-- His Discourse of Family Religion, in Three Letters. 12ves.

Mr. Daniel Burgess's Discourse of the Death, Rest, Resurrection, and blessed
Portion of the Saints. 12ves.

Mr. George Hammond's, and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the United Ministers of London. 12ves.

The Triumphs of Grace: Or the last words and edifying Death of the Lady
Margaret de la Musse, a Noble French Lady, aged but Sixteen Years, in May,
1681. 12ves.

The Map of man's Misery: Or the poor man's Pocket Book, being a perpetual
Almanac of Spiritual Meditations; containing many useful Instructions,
Meditations and Prayer, etc. 12ves.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful entreaty of him thereunto. By Mr. Daniel
Burgess. 12ves.

Advice to Parents and Children. By Mr. Daniel Burgess. 12ves.

Mr. Gibbon's Sermon of Justification. 4to.

Mr. Nathaniel Vincent's Funeral Sermon. Preached by Mr. N. Tailor. 4to.

Mr. Addy's Short Hand Bible.

Mr. Shower's Sermon on the Death of Mr. Not. Oldfield, who departed December
31, 1696. 8vo.

The Dying Man's Assistant: Or, short Instructions for those who are concerned
in the preparing of sick Persons for Death. 12ves.

Mr. Shower's Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16th, 1696. 4to.

Mr. Samuel Clark's brief Concordance to the whole Bible, of the most usual and
useful places, which one may have occasion to seek for. In a new Method. 12ves.

Mr. Stephen's Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at St. Mary le Bow,
Ian. 30. 1693. 4to.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon, April 16. 1696. 4to.

Mr. Woodhous's Sermon, Preached to the Societies for Reformation of Manners,
at Salters-Hall. 8vo.

Sir Robert Howard's free Discourse, wherein the Doctrines that make for
Tyranny are displayed; the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William
vindicated; and the unreasonableness and mischievous tendency of the odious
distinction of a King de facto and de jure, discovered. 8vo.

Mr Lorrimer's Answer to Mr. Goodwin's 4to.

Mr. Calamy's Discourse of Vows. 8vo.


