portrait of Basil Valentine (...) BASILVS VALENTINVS BENEDICTINI ORDINIS
MONACHVS ET PHILOSOPHVS (...)


BASIL VALENTINE HIS Triumphant Chariot OF ANTIMONY, WITH ANNOTATIONS OF
Theodore Kirkringius. M. D.

WITH The True Book of the Learned Synesius a Greek Abbot taken out of the
Emperor's Library, concerning the Philosopher's Stone.

LONDON. Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. 1678.

These five Books lately Published are to be sold by Dorman Newman at the Kings
Arms in the Poultry.
PHilosophical Dialogues, concerning the Princ^ples of natural Bodies, wherein
the Principles of the old and new Philosophy are stated and the new
demonstrated to be more agreeable to reason, from mechanical experience and its
usefulness to the benefit of mankind in duodecimo.

A short Essay toward the history and cure of Fevers humbly proposed to the
consideration of the Royal Society and the College of Physicians in order to
the Improvement of Physic and thereby the benefit of our Country men.

Exercitationes anatomicae in varias regiones humani co^poris, partium
structuram at que usum ostendentes recentium Medicorum, Chirurgorum, nec non
Pharmacopolarum in usum divulgata.

A Roberto Bayfield medico, in duodecimo.

A Treatise of the Gout written originally in the French tongue by Theodore
Turquet de Mayerne Knight, chief Physician to the late King and Queen of
England Englished by Thomas Sherley M. D. Physician in ordinary to his present
Majesty Charles the Second, with advice about Hypocondriacal fitts, whereunto
is added Medicinal counsels or advices by the same Author in octavo.

Medela Medicorum showing the Reasons and Ground of the Contempt of Physic and
Physicians in duodecimo.

TO THE READER.
IT is well known, that the present Subject, on which this eminent Author so
elegantly discourses, was not long since generally (though most injuriously)
branded with the detestable Name of Poison. This Odium was cast upon it (as
appears by the present Book) in the Days of the Author; and perhaps, long
before that time it might, through the Malice of idle Speculators, be
condemned. For those Men, who presume to be Masters of all Knowledge, because
Letter-learned in the Theory of this or that Art, without the least Skill or
Will to exercise themselves in the Practice thereof, must needs condemn what
they do not understand. And this they are induced to do, lest by approving what
they have no Knowledge of, they should too palpably discover their Ignorance;
because not able to evince the Reasons of their own Approbations. Therefore,
it is too too probable, that they, hating Labor, and envying the sedulous
Endeavors of others, lest thereby their own seeming Honor should be eclipsed,
would rather (according to the Old Proverb) give Antimony an ill Name, then
foul their Hands in experiencing the Virtues, with which it is endued. How ill
it has been spoken of in this our Time, is well known to many; and of how
serviceable use it has been, in the Cure of very many deplorable Diseases;
within twenty years last past, is as well understood by most of the
industriously laborious Physicians of this City; who can, and daily do,
whenever they meet with Men of like Industry, testify for the Author, that
unto ANTIMONY is not undeservedly assigned a CHARIOT TRIVMPHANT. For none were
permitted to enter Rome in a Triumphant Chariot, that had not slain at least
five thousand Enemies, and obtained an entire Victory. Wherefore, if Antimony
(through the Gift of the most HIGH insited in it) more than any one Simple of
Nature, be able to subdue and expel infinite Diseases (the Enemies of Humane
Life) as is undoubtedly known it is, and to obtain an entire Victory over them,
why should any Man envy that, by which his own, or his Neighbors, Life is or
may be so well preserved? It is true, if taken without Preparation or being ill
prepared (because of the much Evil mixed with its great Good) it is more
injurious than profitable to the Humane Body; which our Author well observes,
teaching so many and laudable Preparations of the same. Which Preparations are
in no small Measure illustrated by the present Annotations of the Learned
Kirkringius. Therefore the end of translating anew, and reprinting this Work
now a second time in the English Tongue, was partly because of the aforesaid
Annotations; and partly that so Laudable a Work might not be obliterated by
time, and by that means the pious and good Intentions of the Author be
frustrated, but more especially, that our Ingenious Country Men, intent on the
Knowledge of Natural things, might in their own native Language find whasoever
is needful and necessary for accomplishing them in the Laudable Studies of the
Works of Nature; without being necessitated to seek foreign Aids, as many
heretofore have been constrained to do: because what they desired to be
informed in, was locked up in other Languages, and could not be unlocked, but by
few; who if able, were not always willing so to do; and if not able, though
willing, could not effect the same.

For this very End, are the Works of Geber the famous Arabian Prince, and
Philosopher, now likewise translated into English, ready for the Press, and
will be speedily published. In the mean while, committing all to GOD, we
heartily wish well to all, and to every Ingenious Student in the Practice of
Chemical Physic good Success. Farewell.

The TABLE OF PARTICULARS Comprised in the WORKS OF BASIL VALENTINE.
A
ADvice after Reprehension. Page 119 Aliment, which nourishes all things,
what. Page 145 Of 2 Kinds. Page 17 Endued with the 4 first Qualities. Page 19
Compared to a Circle. ibid. Its Virtues inexhaustible. Page 20 Contains its own
Vinegar. Page 24 Compared to a Bird in the Air. Page 28 Compared to a Book.
Page 29 Contains all Colors. Page 59. 60 Its Astrum, etc. Page 40 Speaks of it
self. Page 40, 59. Its Original and Root. Page 47 Its principal Qualities. Page
51 Its 3. Fundamental Principles. Page 51 Its wonderful Virtues. Page 54. 59
The hundredth part of them not known. Page 141 No good in it for the Humane
Body, without Preparation. Page 54 Yet crude it fattens Swine, how. Page 86
Diversely prepared has diverse Effects. Page 87 Is a present help against
Wounds. Page 121 Apothecaries reprehended. Page 45 Some Arts why suppressed.
Page 136 Artist and Vulcan ought to agree. Page 16 Artists vex, wrest, and
torment Antimony. Page 18 Arcanum of Antimony. Page 121 Its use and Virtues.
ibid Authors Apology. Page 106, 107 Pilgrimage. Page 126 Prayer. Page 34. 45.
146. Why he induced rude Examples. Page 86 Why he speaks simply. Page 122 His
Balsome of Life, what. Page 134 His Parable. Page 143 His Continency. Page 152
B
BAlsom of Antimony. Page 107 Its Virtues. Page 108 Balsom, for Wounds, its
use. Page 122 Of Antimony, and other Ingredients. Page 123
C
CAlcination, Vegetable, what. Page 25 Of Antimony. Page 62 Catharticks, all
Venomus: Page 57 Expel but correct not. Page 85 Center of Art, not known by
external aspect. Page 120 Cinnabar, how made. Page 124 Chemical Medicines sold
in Shops. Page 90
D
DEspisers, of Antimony compared to an Ass. Page 55 Doctors reprehended. Page
10. 11. 12. 17. 29. 31. 33. 44. 45. 53. 54. 55. 65. 117. 121. 122. 125. No Man
made Doctor without Labor. Page 106 True Doctrine, wherein it consists. Page
12 Dose, observable. Page 22
E
EArth of Antimony. Page 147 Elixir of Antimony. Page 84 Its Virtues. Page 85
Example, of Beer, etc. Page 24 Such, why produced. Page 27 Example, of a
Blacksmith. Page 16 Of Bees. Page 42 Of an Egg. Page 38 Of Frogspawn. Page 39
Of a member Inflamed ibid. Of a member Benumbed ibid. Of Oil of Tartar and
Vinegar. Page 45 Of Soap. Page 38 Of Spirit of Wine and Aquafortis. Page 45 Of
Steel and a Flint. Page 41 Of a Toad. Page 39 Of Man and Woman. Page 150 Of
Corn. Page 154 Extract of Antimony. Page 95 Its Virtues and Use. Page 96 Of
Antimony, by a Caustic Water. Page 100 Its Virtues, and Use. Page 102
F
FErmentation, necessary, why. Page 149 Fishes dye not of Cold Page 118 Why
they die in frozen Waters. ibid. Fixation, whence. Page 148 Fire makes
Separation. Page 16 The Separator of Venoms. Page 58 Diverse Fires. Page 153
Flowers of Antimony. Page 89 Their Virtue. Page 92
G
GLass of Antimony, simple. Page 63 With Borax. Page 66. 67 Goods of GOD lent,
only for time of Life. Page 125 GOD, to be First invoked. Page 2 His End in
proposing Venoms. Page 55 Golden Color from Antimony. Page 110
H
HIstory of the Virtues of Balsom of Antemony. Page 72 Of a Dropsy cured. Page
75 Of George Castriot. Page 77 Of 3 of the Authors Brethren cured of the
Plague. Page 127 Honey, how prepared. Page 43 A Corrosive Venom of it. Page 42
Hops, the Vegetable Salt of Beer. Page 25
I
IDleness, condemned. Page 118 Influence of Superiors on inferiors. Page 144
K
KIngs, and Princes, misinformed by Doctors. Page 32. 52.
L
Labor, necessarily required. Page 81 Such as shun it do not what they ought.
Page 125 Liver of Antimony. Page 97 Its virtues. Page 100 Lead of Philosophers.
Page 138 Why the Regulus is called Lead. Page 139 Love, a Disease, etc. Page
150, 151 Its sad Effect. Page 152
M
MArs transmuted into Venus. Page 101 Matrix, peculiar to every element. Page
92 Matter, of all Metalls and Mineralls, one. Page 49 Medicine, ineffectual if
not separated from its Impurity. Page 42 Medicine, none greater than in
Antimony. Page 53 not prepared without Vulcan. Page 54 Mercury, not fixed by
Animals and Vegetables. Page 48 Within and without mere Fire. Page 49
Vnvariable after Fixation. Ibid. Made of Antimony. Page 60 Mercury, Sulphur,
and Salt in Antimony. Page 59 Mercury living extracted from Antimony Page 114
Its medicinal Preparation and Use. Page 116 Minerals how made. Page 145
N
NAture to be followed. Page 43 Absconded from Men. Page 13
O
OPerations and Vtility give Experience. Page 12 Oil of Antimony, from its
Glass. Page 71 By Distillation. Page 71 Its Preparation Enigmatically
described. ibid. Made another way. Page 78 Oil of Antimony, per se. Page 109
Another. Page 223 Another. Page 127 Another. Page 128 Another. Page 129
Another. Page 129 Another made of Regulus. Page 136 Its Effects. Page 137 Oil
of the Mercury of Antimony. Page 116 Oil of Sulphur per Campan. how made. Page
128
P
Powder of Antimony, fixed. Page 88, 89 White and fixed. Page 103 Its Virtues.
Page 105 Of Ruland. Page 04 Pouders fixed, why called Stones. Page 147 Purging
by the Inferior parts, not the way to expel fixed Diseases. Page 58
Q
QVintessence of Antimony, what. Page 43, 74 Its wonderful Virtues. Page 76
Quarian, Quotidian, and Tertian Fevers cured. Page 127
R
REmedies fixed purge not. Page 58 Riches required by all. Page 21 Root of
Diseases, how expelled. Page 57 Minded by few. Page 125 Rubies of Antimony.
Page 124
S
SAlts, endued with no Tinging Virtue Page 148 Are Keys. ibid Salt of
Antimony, and its use, when reduced to Oylor Spirit Page 113 Signate Star of
Philosophers. Page 135 Solution when necessary. Page 22 Spirits of various
Kinds. Page 13 Vivificative, and Operative. Page 14 Of the Elements. Page 15
Wanting Speech. Page 16 Of Wine, volatilize. Page 23 Of Vinegar, fix. Page 23
True Sulphur of Antimony Page 109 Otherwise prepared. Page 131 Stone of Fire.
Page 145 The difference between it and the Stone of Philosophers Page 147 Its
Preparation. Page 154 Its Use, Dose, etc. Page 157 A Stone, whether made
without Matter. Page 149
T
TIncture of Antimony, from its Glass. Page 70 Another. Page 107 True not made
of crude and melted Antimony. Page 146 Named the Stone of Fire. ibid.
Tinctures, their difference. Page 147 ought to have love to Metalls. Page 152
U
VInegar of Antimony. Page 132 Its property. Page 134 Vinegar, not transmutable
into Wine. Page 23 Venom, whence it arises. Page 56 Prepared resists Poison.
Page 30 Taken away two ways. Page 37 Virtue of Vnicorns-horn proved. Page 37
Vulcan, the Key. Page 16 A Master in his own Element. Page 41 Master and
Revealer of all Secrets. Page 54 Contemned by whom. ibid.
W
WAter of Mercury, how made. Page 102 Water of Anaxagoras, what: Page 145 Wine,
Transmutable to Vinegar, how. Page 23 Heats, Vinegar cools. Page 87 Words of
the Author all of use. Page 121
ERRATA
PAge. 4. line. 32. read Graces. p. 21. l. 11. r. Midas. p. 33. l. 12. r. him.
p. 37. l. 14. r. into it. p. 68. l. last, r. force. p. 77. l. 8. r. will not.
p. 90. l. 16. r. commodiously. p. 94. l. 3. add not. p. 107. l. 36. r. on it.
p. 109. l. 35. add in. p. ibid. l. 22. dele again. p. 124. l. 25. dele of Wine.
p. 126. l. 20. r. Praise. p. 127. l. 15. r. Extraction. p. 129. l. 5. add, you.
134. l. 4. r. his. p. 156. l. 7. r. Precipitate.

BASIL VALENTINE HIS Triumphant Chariot OF ANTIMONY.
SInce I, Basil Valentine, by Religious Vows am bound to live according to the
Order of St. Benedict, and that requires another manner of Spirit of Holiness,
then the common State of Mortals exercised in the profane business of this
World; I thought it my duty before all things, in the beginning of this little
Book, to declare what is necessary to be known by the pious Spagyrist, inflamed
with an ardent desire of this Art; as, what he ought to do, and whereuto to
direct his aim, that he may lay such Foundations of the whole matter, as may be
stable; lest his Building shaken with Winds, happen to fail, and the whole
Edifice to be involved in shameful Ruin, which otherwise, being founded on
more firm and solid Principles, might have continued for a long series of time.
Which Admonition I judged was, is, and always will be a necessary part of my
Religious Office; especially, since we must all die, and no one of us, which
now are, whether high or low, shall long be seen among the number of Men. For
it concerns me to commend these Meditations of Mortality to Posterity, leaving
them behind me, not only that honor may be given to the Divine Majesty, but
also that Men may obey him sincerely in all things.

In this my Meditation I found that there were five principal Heads, chiefly to
be considered by the wise and prudent Spectators of our Wisdom and Art. The
first of which is, Invocation of GOD. The second, Contemplation of Nature. The
third, True Preparation. The fourth, The Way of Using. The fifth, Vtility and
Fruit. For he, who regards not these, shall never obtain place among true
Chemists, or fill up the number of perfect Spagyrists. Therefore touching these
five Heads we shall here following treat, and so far declare them, as that the
general Work may be brought to light and perfected by an intent and studious
Operator.

I. Invocation of GOD must be made with a certain Heavenly Intention, drawn
from the bottom of a pure and sincere Heart, and Conscience, free from all
Ambition, Hypocrisy, and all other Vices, which have any affinity with these,
as Arrogance, Boldness, Pride, Luxury, Mundane Petulancy, Oppression of the
Poor, and other dependent evils, all which are to be eradicated out of the
Heart; that when a Man desires to prostrate himself before the Throne of Grace,
for obtaining bodily health, he may do that with a Conscience free from all
unprofitable Weeds, that his Body may be transmuted into an Holy Temple of GOD,
and be purged from every uncleanness. For GOD will not be mocked (which I
earnestly admonish) as Worldly Men, pleasing and flattering themselves with
their own Wisdom, think: GOD, I say, will not be mocked, but the Creator of all
things will be invoked with reverential fear, and acknowledged with due
Obedidience. And for this there is great Reason. For what has Man, that he
must not own to be received from this his Omnipotent Creator, whether you have
respect to the Body, or to the Soul, which operates in the Body? Has not he,
for sustentation of this, out of his mere Mercy communicated to us his Eternal
WORD, and also promised Eternal Salvation? Has not he also provided food and
clothing for the Body, and all those things, without which the Body cannot
subsist? All these, by humble Prayer a Man obtains of that most excellent
Father, who created Heaven and Earth, together with things Visible and
Invisible, as the Firmament, Elements, Vegetables, and Animals. Which is so
very true, that I am certainly assured, no Impious Man shall ever be partaker
of true Medicine, much less of the Eternal Heavenly Bread. Therefore place your
whole Intention and Trust in GOD, call upon him and pray, that he may impart
his blessing to you: let this be the beginning of your Work, that by the same
you may obtain your desired end, and at length effect what you intended. For
the Fear of the Lords is the beginning of Wisdom.

Whosoever purposes in himself to seek after that, which is the greatest of
Terrene things, especially the knowledge of every good thing, that is in the
Creatures, and GOD has liberally imparted to Men, and implanted (as to their
effective power) in Stones, Herbs, Roots, Seeds, Animals, Plants, Minerals,
Metals, yea and indeed in all things; let him cast away all Earthly thoughts,
reject all that depends on them, and hope for freeness of Heart, and pray unto
GOD with great lowlyness of mind: So doing, his hope of freeness may at length
be turned into true freedom. Which no Man will doubt, who knows, that he alone
is GOD, who delivered Israel from all his Enemies; which deliverance he did in
very deed effect, not only for Israel, but also for all Men making humble
supplications to him, and praying with brokenness of Heart. Therefore let
Prayer be the first point of our Admonition, which also is, and by us is called
Invocation of GOD, which if made, not with Hypocrisy and a feigned Heart, but
with such Faith and Trust, as that, with which the Centurion in Capernaum
prayed; with such lowliness of mind, and confession of Sins, as the Woman of
Canaan was endued with; with such Charity as the Samaritan showed to the Man
wounded in the Way to Jericho, pouring Wine and Oil into his Wounds, paying his
Charges in the Inn, and giving order he should be very carefully looked to;
Lastly, if a Man's Christian Charity extends it self so far, as if he obtain
what he prays for, he would willingly communicate of the same to his Neighbor,
then he shall undoubtedly obtain Riches and Health, the end of his Prayer. What
the Author has premised here at large, and elsewhere often inserted touching
Piety, the Worship of GOD, and Invocation of his Name, I purpose neither to
praise nor dispraise; Let them be judged signs of his own earnest Piety,
Arguments of his sincerity, and signate Impresses of his fervent zeal (by so
many Tautologies and Reiterations) often boiling up. Every Man, according to
the Opinion of his mind, and the persuasion, in which he was educated from his
Childhood, will more or less esteem of this. It was my business to translate
the Authors writings into Latin, in such a Method and Order, as I thought
would in no wise give any distaste to the delicate Palate of the Reader; also to
indicate that, which seems pertinent to the business of every Chemist and true
Spagyrist, and not to neglect the other. For since Piety is available for all
things, as divine Oracles teach, and the principal exercise of Piety is Prayer;
by which Celestial Gifts are obtained of GOD the giver of all good things; our
Author wills, that unto him the mind be lifted up, even in the midst of the
Operations of Chemistry full of labor and toil. If Prayer effected no other
thing, it certainly collects the mind (called away from all other things) into
it self and renders it apt for that, which is in hand; whence it comes to pass,
that it reflects upon many things, and considers them, which otherwise would
not enter the mind, if it set about its Work perfunctorily, and distracted with
various Conceptions: And so, by the help of Prayer we receive many things,
which we (if not ungrateful) must needs acknowledge we have obtained from GOD.
How often this is found to be of use in Spagyrick Works every Man knows, that
has any time entirely devoted himself to this business; viz. how often those
things which he long sought and could not find, have been imparted to him in a
moment, and as it were infused from above, or dictated by some good Genius.
That also is of use in dissolving all Riddles, or Aenigmatical Writings: For if
you burn with a great desire of knowing them, that is Prayer; and when you
incline your mind to this or that, variously discussing and meditating many
things, this is Cooperation; that your Prayer may not be idle, or tempting
GOD: yet this your endeavor is in vain, until you find the Solution.
Nevertheless if you despair not, but instantly persist in desire, and cease not
from labor, at length in a moment the Solution will fall in; this is
Revelation, which you cannot receive unless you pray with great desire and
labor, using your utmost endeavor; and yet you cannot perceive, how from all
those things (of which you thought) which were not the Solution of the Aenigma,
the Solution it self arose. This unfolding of the Riddle opens to you the
mystery of all great things, and shows how available Prayer is for the
obtainment of things Spiritual and Eternal, as well as Corporal and perishing
goods: and when Prayer is made with a Heart not feigned, but sincere; you will
see that there is nothing more fit for the acquiring of what you desire. Let
these suffice to be spoken of Prayer, which Basilius and all Philosophers with
him do not vainly require, as an Introduction to Chemistry. For Piety is
profitable for all Works, especially for all Great Undertakings.


2. Next in order after Prayer is Contemplation, by which I understand an
accurate attention to the business it self, under which will fall these
considerations first to be noted. As, what are the Circumstances of any thing,
what the Matter, what the Form, whence its Operations proceed, whence it is
infused and implanted, how generated by the Stars, conformed by the Elements,
produced and perfected by the three Principles. Also how the body of every
thing may be dissolved, that is, resolved into the first Matter, or first
Essence (of which I have already made mention in other of my writings) viz. how
the last Matter may be changed into the first, and the first into the last.
What are here set down, touching the true Theory of Philosophy, are Compendiums
of those things, which Philosophers have in so many Books (writ about the same
business) revealed, shall I say, or concealed. Attend to the words of the
Author, and you will see, that he perfectly knew that Spirit penetrating all
things, which presides or bears rule in all things, yet is involved and
absconded in matter and defilements on every side; from which if once freed, it
returns to the purity of its own substance, in which it produces all things,
and is all in all. To comment upon this, would be a work no less than the
produducing of all Books of Philosophers, compiled with such accurate study,
and contending with so great contention about the Theory.


This Contemplation, which absolves the second part of our Admonition, is
Celestial, and to be understood with Spiritual Reason; for the circumstances
and depth of every thing cannot be perceived any other way, then by the
Spiritual cogitation of Man: and this Contemplation is twofold. One is called
possible, the other impossible. The later consists in copious cogitations,
which never proceed to effects, nor exhibit any form of a matter, which falls
under the Touch. As if any one should endeavor to comprehend the Eternity of
the Most High, which is vain and impossible, yea a Sin against the Holy Spirit,
so arrogantly to pry into the Divinity it self, which is Immense, Infinite, and
Eternal; and to subject the incomprehensive Counsel of the Secrets of GOD, to
humane Inquisition. The other part of Contemplation, which is possible, is
called the Theory. This contemplates that, which is perceived by Touch and
Sight, and has a formed Nature in time: this considers, how that nature may be
helped and perfected by Resolution of it self; how every body may give forth
from it self, the good or evil, Venom or Medicine latent in it; how
Destruction and Confraction are to be handled, whereby under a just Title,
without Sophistical deceits, the pure may be severed and separated from the
impu^e. This Separation is instituted and made by diverse manual operations, and
various ways; Some of which are vulgarly known by experience, others remote
from vulgar experience. These are, Calcination, Sublimation, Reverberation,
Circulation, Putrefaction, Digestion, Distillation, Cohobation, Fixation, and
the like of these; all the degrees of which are found in operating, learned,
perceived and manifested by the same. Whence clearly appears what is moveable,
what is fixed, what is white, red, black, blew, or green, viz. when the
operation is rightly Instituted by the Artificer, for possibly the Operator may
err, and turn aside from the right way; but that Nature should err, when
rightly handled, is not possible. Therefore if you shall err, so that Nature
cannot be altogether free, and released from the Body, in which it is held
Captive, return again into your way, learn the Theory more perfectly, and
enquire more accurately in the method of operating, that you may find the
foundation and certainty in Separation of all things. Which is a matter of
great concern. And this is the second foundation of Philosophy, which follows
Prayer: for in that the sum of the matter lies, and is contained in these
words. Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and his Justice by Prayer, and all other
things, which Man seeks in these Temporals, and he has need of, either for the
sustentation or health of his body, shall be added to you.

3. Next to the Theory, which searches out the inmost properties of things,
follows Preparation, which is performed by Operation of the hands, that some
real work may be produced. From Preparation arises Knowledge, viz. Such, as
opens all the fundamentals of Medicine. Operation of the Hands requires a
diligent application of, it self, but the praise of Science consists in
experience, but the difference of these Anatomy distinguishes, Manual
Operation is chiefly required in this third Part, without which, every
Operation, like a Ship wanting Ballast, floats and is uncertain. It is
difficult to express this with a Pen; for more is learned by once seeing the
work done, then can be taught by the writing of many Pages; yet if it be no
offense to you, to peruse these Commentaries together with Pasilius (in this so
necessary part) will not a little help.
Operation shows how all things may be brought to light, and exposed to sight
visibly: but knowledge shows the practice; and that, whence the true
Practitioner is, and is no other then confirmation: because the operation of
the hands manifests something that is good, and draws the latent and hidden
nature outward, and brings it to light for good. For, as in Spirituals, the
way of the Lord is to be prepared; so also in these things, the way is to be
opened and prepared, that no error be from the right path, and Process may be
made, without devious errors, in the direct way to health.

4. After Preparation, and especially after separation of the good from the
evil, we are to proceed to the By Use, the Author understands what others call
Dose; for what will a good Medicine profit you, if you know not in what
quantity to administer it; that the same may rather heal, then hurt or kill. By
experience only to learn this, is a work full of perilous casualty, yet the
Discipline or knowledge of Doses was found out this way first, and afterward
easily taught by Words. Where a living Voice is wanting, it is safer to be too
timorous, then in any wise bold or adventurous, although of Antimony I can
affirm, that being duly prepared it is as harmless a Medicine as Cassia or
Manna. The whole caution is chiefly about its use, after the first
preparations; because it may still retai^ much of its own crude Venom.
Use of the Weight or dose, that neither more, nor less then is fit, may be
given. For above all things, the Physician ought well to know, whether his
Medicament will be weak or strong, also whether it will do good, or hurt,
unless he resolve to fatten the Churchyard, with the loss of his fame, and
hazard of his own Soul.

5. After the Medicament is taken into the body, and has diffused it self
through all the Members, that it may search out those defects against which it
was administered, the Vtility comes to be considered; for it is possible, that a
Medicament diligently prepared, and exhibited in due weight, may do more hurt
then good in some Diseases, and seem to be Venom rather then Medicine. Hence
an accurate reflection is to be made to those things, which profit or help; and
they are diligently to be noted, that we may be mindful to observe the same in
other cases.

Yet both in the That Indication is to be taken from things helping and
hurting, is known even to Tyro's. But what the Author subjoyns touching
internal and external curation, are not so rude, as not to deserve good
Attention: And also those things which he permixeth with his own Satirical
Reprehension, if the Reader be so wise as to believe that Basilius intermixed
them to deter the unworthy deriders of Chemistry from approaching to his sacred
Arcanums, he will be wise for himself. For whilst others rail and swell with
indignation, he gathers the fruit of the Author's Axioms, which as another
Agent he scattered among these Thorns. Whilst you, O lover of Chemistry, peruse
these, so long will I keep silence.
Use and Vtility, this one thing is necessary to be considered, viz. whether
the Disease be an external and open wound, or only an internal and latent evil:
for as the difference of these is great, so the way of curation is not the
same. Therefore the bottom of every Disease is to be known, that it may be
understood, whether the same may be cured by external remedies only, or must
from within be driven outward.

For if the Center of the Disease be within, such a Medicine must be given, as
can search out, apprehend and restore that Center: otherwise the Physician's
labor will be fruitless and in vain.

Moreover, if there be an internal Disease, which arises, and is fed from an
internal Original, it must never be driven inward by external remedies; for
great discommodity will thence ensue, and at length Death it self. Which may be
understood by the similitude of a Tree: for if any one, whilst it germinates or
flowers, repels the Humors to the Interiours, whence they proceeded to the
nutriment of the Earth; that Tree will be so far from bringing sorth the
desired Fruit by the flower, that a suffocation of the same arises from the
violent conjunction of humors not finding any outlet. Therefore there is
great difference between fresh wounds inflicted by Prick, Cut, or any other
way, and the old which derive their Original from within. For the fresh wounds
may be perfectly cured by external remedies only; but in those, which are
nourisned from within, an external application of Oils, Balsoms, Unguents, and
Plasters prosits little, unless the Internal Fountain be stopped, whence the
humors flow to the external parts. When the Fountain shall be stopped, the
Flux will cease, and the evil may easily be cured with Diet only. It is no
great point of Art to heal any fresh wound; for this every Countryman can
easily effect with crude Lard: but to remove all Symptoms which happen in
wounds, and to dry up the Fountain of the evil, this is the work, and this the
labor of the Artist.

Now come hither, you Physicians, how many soever there be of you, that
arrogate to your selves the Title of Doctor of either Medicine, viz. of
internal and external Diseases; understand ye the Title of your honor, and
consult your own Conscience, and see, whether you received that from GOD, that
is, possess it in verity, or whether you usurp it as a form, for honor sake.
For, as much as Heaven is distant from the Earth, so vastly different is the
Art of healing internal Diseases, from the Sanation of external wounds. If the
Title be given to you by GOD, the same GOD will give a Blessing, Felicity,
Health, and happy events; but if your Title be vain, and only devised and
assumed for ambition, all things will evilly succeed to you: your honor will
fail, and you will prepare for your self Hellfire, which can no more be
extinguished, then it can be expressed by words. For Christ said to his
Disciples; You call me Lord and Master, and ye do well, Therefore whosoever
assumes a Title of Honor, let him see, whether he do well, and whether he
ascribes not more to himself, than he knows and has learned, which is the real
abuse of this Title. For he, who will write himself Doctor of either Medicine,
ought to understand, know, and be well skilled in both, viz. the Internal and
External Medicine. Nor should he be ignorant of Anatomy, that he may be able to
show the Constitution of the Body, and discover from what Member every Disease
proceeds, together with its Fountain and cause. Also remedies, with which he
may cure the Disease, and circumstances of external Wounds, are to be
understood by him. Good GOD! where will the Title be found, what will become of
the Master, when an exact Trial shall be made, for discovering the ignorance of
these Doctors of either Medicine?

In times past, long before my days, the Doctors of Medicine did themselves
cure External wounds, and judged that a part of their Office; but in these our
times, they take Servants, whom they employ in these things, and this way the
noblest of Arts is become a Mechanic Operation; and some of those who exercise
it, are indeed so very rude, as they know not Letters, and scarcely know how
(according to the Proverb) to drive an Ass out of the Corn. These, I say,
profess themselves Masters in curing wounds, and Doctors of Doctors; and to
speak the truth as it is, they may by a better right glory in this Title, then
thou magnificent Doctor, umbratical Chyrurgion, and most ignorant Boaster of
Titles, why do you style your self Doctor of either Medicine. What more now
Master Doctor, what say you, most expert Chyrurgion? I pray be not offended at
this, or take it amiss; for you your self will quickly confess, if you do but
seriously consider wounds made by Prick or Cut, that you have as much knowledge
in the cure of them, as is in the Brain of a dunghill Cock, which Children
learning their A. B. C. are wont to set in the Frontispiece of their Primer.

Therefore I persuade all Men, of what state or condition soever, who are
desirous of Learning, from your Masters to search out the true Doctrine, which
consists in Preparation, and afterward in the Use; so they, or you, shall
possess the Title assumed with honor, and Men will undoubtedly have confidence
in you, and you will in very deed do them good, then will you to the Eternal
Creator give thanks cordially without feigning. But let every Man seriously
think with himself, what it is he ought to do, and what he is to omit, and
whether he does justly or unjustly use the Title assumed. For he, who assumes
any Title, ought especially to understand the condition of that Title, and why
he assumed it, or what the true foundation is. It is not sufficient, if any one
with the vulgar say (saving your reverence, let the more delicate Men pardon
us, if we intending to speak to the purpose, make mention of putrefaction) this
is egregious dung, it has a strong and grievous ill savor, and know not how
it comes to pass, that a Man, who perhaps eats food of a most grateful taste
and odor, and well accommodated to his natural Appetite, thence makes
excrement endued with qualities so contrary, and yielding an odor so very
ungrateful, and repugnant to Nature: of which there is no other reason, then
natural putrefaction and corruption. The same happens in all Aromatical well
smelling things. It is the Philosophers part to enquire, what odor is, and
whence it receives its virtues, and in what the virtue of it may be made
manifest to true profit. For the Earth is nourished and fatned by stinking
dung, and noble Fruit is produced of it. Of this matter there is not one cause
only, but our Book would swell to an huge Volume, if we should but briefly hint
at all natural Generations and mutations; yet Digestion and Putrefaction are
the principal keys of them. For the Fire and Air make a certain Maturation, by
which a Transmutation of the Earth and Water may follow; and this is also a
certain mutation, by which of evil smelling Dung a most fragrant Balsam may be
produced; and on the contrary, of most grateful Balsam ill savoured Dung. But
perhaps you will say, why do I produce examples so very rude and absurd? I do
confess the example is taken from a Cottage, rather then a Royal Court; yet a
prudent considerer of things, more accurately diving into the matter, will
easily understand, what such examples intimate to him, viz. that of the highest
things the lowest are made, and of the lowest the highest, so that, of a
Medicament is produced Venom, and of Venom Medicine; of the sweet, bitter,
acid, and corrosive; and on the contrary of the corrosive, another thing more
profitable.

O good GOD, how much is Nature absconded from Men, so that she seems to
disdain to be wholly seen by us? But since thou have ordained so very short a
time of our Life, and thou the Judge of all, reservest many things to thy self
in the Creatures, which thou have left to be admired, not known, by us, and of
which thou alone wilt be the beholder and Judge, grant unto me, that unto my
Life's end I may keep thee and my Savior in my Heart, that besides health and
necessaries of the Body, which thou have liberally bestowed, I may also acquire
the health of my Soul and Spiritual Riches; of which inestimable good I am
freed from all doubt by that thy mercy, in which, for me a miserable sinner,
thou did (on the Tree of the Cross) shed the Sulphur and Balsom of my Soul;
which is indeed a mortiferous Venom to the Devil, but to us Sinners a most
present remedy. I do certainly heal my Brethren, as far as concerns the Soul,
by Prayer, and in relation to the body, with apt Remedies; therefore I hope
they will on their parts use their endeavor, that they with me, and I with
them, may at length inhabit the Tabernacle of the Most High, and in him our GOD
enjoy Eternity.

But to return to my Philosophy of Antimony, I would have the Reader, before
all other things, to understand, that all things contain in themselves
operative and vivificative Spirits; which inhabiting in the Body feed and
nourish themselves, and are sustained by the Body. Elements themselves want not
these Spirits, which (the living GOD permitting that) whether they be good or
evil, have their Habitation in them. Men and Animals have in them a living
operating Spirit, which receding from them, nothing but a Carcass remains. In
Herbs, and all things bearing Fruit, a Spirit of Sanity exists; otherwise they
could not, by any Preparation, be reduced to Medicinal use. Metals and all
Minerals, are endued and possessed with their own incomprehensible Spirit, in
which, the power and virtue of all their possible effects, consists. For
whatsoever is without Spirit, wants Life, and contains in it self no vivifying
Virtue. Therefore, you are to know, that in Antimony also there is a Spirit,
which effects whatsoever is in it, or can proceed from it, in an invisible way
and manner, no otherwise, than as in the Magnet is absconded a certain
invisible power, as we shall more largely treat in its own place, where we
speak of the Magnet.

But there are various kinds of Spirits; What follow, seem somewhat confused,
according to the Sentiments of certain Theologicians, who have held various
opinions of Spirits residing in the Fire, Air, and other Elements; adjudging
them to the Eternal Fire of Hell, etc. All which with Basilius, we leave as
unknown, to the Judgment of the Divine Knowledge. But what he himself
subjoyns, touching the wonderful virtue and power of Antimonial and all other
Chemical Spirits, which we our selves with so great admiration have often seen,
we understand only of material Spirits; which certainly are endued with as
great virtues, and effect things no less wonderful then those Spirits, which
fantastic persons (oppressed with Melancholy) affirm they see and talk with;
yea I cannot remember that I ever found written or declared (by such, as taking
a liberty of lying, endeavor to please or terrifi^ others) any greater or more
wonderful virtues then these Spirits have.
visible to the Intellect, and endued with Spiritual knowledge, which
notwithstanding cannot (when they will) be touched or apprehended, as Natural
Men are touched; especially they, who have their fixed Residence in Elements,
as are the Spirits of Fire, Lights, and other Objects formally darting out
Light from themselves: such are Airy Spirits, who inhabit the Air; Aqueous
Spirits living in Waters; and Terrene Spirits living in the Earth, which we Men
call Earthly Men, which are chiefly found in wealthy Mines of the Earth, where
they show and discover themselves to us.

These Spirits are endued with Senses and Understanding, know Arts, and can
change themselves into diverse Forms, until the time of their Judgment; but
whether a definitory sentence ought to be pronounced against them as yet, or
no, that I leave to the Providence of the Divine Majesty, from whom nothing is
hid. There are other Spirits, wanting speech, which cannot show themselves
visibly in the very act; and they are those which live in Animals, as in Men
and the like, in Plants also and in Minerals; nevertheless they have in
themselves an occult and operative Life, and manifest and discover themselves
by their efficacious power of operating, which they contain in and bear about
themselves, and most apparently give testimony of their virtue of healing,
whenever that (by the help of Art) is extracted from them, being accurately
separated from their body. After the same manner, the efficacious Spirit, and
operative power of Antimony, manifests its gifts, and distributes them among
Men, being first loosed from its own body, and freed from all its bonds, so,
that it is able to penetrate, and rendered fit to be applied to those Uses,
which the Artificer proposed to himself in Preparation.

But the Artist and Vulcan ought to agree: the Fire gives separation for an
operative power, and the Artificer forms the matter. As a Blacksmith uses one
sort of Fire, also Iron only is his matter, which he intends for forming diverse
Instruments. For some times of it he makes a Spit, at another time Horse-shoes,
another time a Saw, and at length innumerable other things, every of which
serves for that Use, unto which the Smith intended it, although the matter is
but one, which he prepares for so many diverse uses. So of Antimony various
works may be made for different uses: in which the Artist is the Smith that
forms; Vulcan is as it were the key which opens; and Operation and Utility give
experience, and knowledge of the Use. O! if foolish and vain Men had but Ears
to hear^ and true eyes with understanding, not only for hearing what I write,
but for understanding the Arcanum and knowledge of the use; assuredly they
would not suck in those insalubrious and turbid Potions, but hasten to these
limped Fountains, and drink of the Well of Life.

Therefore let the World know, that I shall prove those pretended Doctors, who
seem to be wise, to be mere Fools and Idiots, and cause many unlearned Men (but
such as are studious Disciples of my Doctrine) to become true Doctors in very
deed. Wherefore I here solemnly cite and invite all Men; who earnestly aspire
to knowledge, with a cheerful mind, good Conscience, and certain hope, to
embrace and become Spectators of our Doctrine, and accurately to peruse my
Writings and Informations; for so, at length, they (being possessors of what
they sought) will extol and commend me after death, rendering my mortal name
immortal, with their perpetual remembrance of my praises, as long as the World
endures. But if when I am dead, any one be pleased to institute a disputation
in the Schools against me, my writings will fully answer all his Objections,
and I am assured my Disciples will never forget the benefit received from me,
by which they will obtain the Empire of Truth, which ever was to me, and always
will be to them, sufficient to suppress a Lie to the Worlds end.

Also let the well meaning and sincere observer of Art know, that there are two
kinds of Antimony very different each from other: one is fair, pure, and of a
golden property, and that contains very much Mercury, but the other which has
much Sulphur is not so friendly to gold as the first, and is distinguished by
fair long and white shining streaks. Therefore one is more fit for Medicine and
Alchimy, then the other: as when the Flesh of Fishes is compared with the Flesh
of other Animals, although both these are, and are called Flesh, yet each of
these very much differs from the Flesh of the other; even so of Antimony the
difference is the same. Many do indeed write of the Interior virtue of
Antimony, but few of them ever taught the true Foundation of the virtues with
which it is endued, or found out which way, or in what manner it receives them;
So that their Doctrine is founded upon words only, exists without any true
foundation, and they themselves lose the Fruit they hoped to receive by such
Writings. For to write truly of Antimony is a work that requires profound
Meditations, a mind largely unfolding it self, and knowledge of its manifold
Preparation, and of the true Soul of it, in which all the Utility is cited, and
which being known you may be able to give an indubitate Judgment, of what evil
or good, Venom or Medicine is latent therein. It is not a matter of small
moment by a true Examen to search into Antimony, and thereby to penetrate
fundamentally into its Essence, and through earnest study to attain the final
knowledge thereof, that the Venenosity of the same (against which unskilful Men
ignorantly exclaim) may be taken away, and it be changed and prepared into a
better State, becoming a Medicine fit for use and void of Venom.

Many Artists intending to Anatomize Antimony, have diverse ways vexed, wrested
and tormented the same, in such wise as it cannot be well described in Words,
much less believed; yet, the matter being truly examined, they effected
nothing. For they sought not its true Soul, and therefore could not sind the
feigned Soul of it, which themselves sought. By the black Colors a mist was
cast before their Eyes, so that they could neither observe the true Soul it
self, nor know it. For Antimony like unto Mercury, may fitly be compared to a
round Circle, of which there is no end; in which the more diligently any Man
seeks, the more he finds, if Process be made by him in a right way and due
order. Yet the Life of no one Man is sufficient for him to learn all the
mysteries thereof. It is Venom and a most swift poison, also it is void of
Venom and a most excellent Medicine; whether it be used outwardly or inwardly.
Which is a thing hid from most Men by reason of their own blindness, and they
judge it an incredible, foolish and vain work, because (through their
ignorance) it is unknown to them, who can no otherwise be excused, then that
they deserve the name of Stupidity: yet that is not to be suffered in them,
because they desire not to learn or be better informed, either here, or
elsewhere.

Antimony is endued with all the four first qualities; it is cold and humid,
and again it is hot and dry, and accommodates it self to the four Seasons of
the year, also it is volatile and fixed. The volatile part of it is not void of
Venom, but the fixed is free from all venenosity; which is so very strange, as
it may be reputed one of the seven Wonders of the World, of which so many
Writers have discoursed, not knowing themselves what they writ. There has been
no Here the Author speaks largely in commendation of Antimony. Read, read (I
say) O Lover of Chemistry, and you will find nothing Hyperbolical, nor any
thing Thrasonick. Basilius in speaking as he does, has not exhausted the
Praises of Antimony; because no Man unto this day could ever experience all its
Virtues. We have seen many of its Effects, and many new Effects are daily found
by curious Searchers, yet many more remain unknown. So that, as in Fire is an
inexhaustible Fountain; (for the more you take from it, the more it gives) so
in Antimony is an inestimable Treasure of new Virtues. For if from it you
extract its Acetum a thousand times, it will a thousand times yield new Acetum.
Nature seems to have made choice of this Mineral, therein to hide all her
Treasures. Therefore not without reason has Basilius made for it a Triumphant
Chariot, which is daily enriched with Spoils taken from the Camps of Ignorance.
Man before me, and at this day there is none found, who has so thoroughly
learned the power, virtue, strength, operation, and efficacy of Antimony, or so
profoundly penetrated into all the Energy thereof, as nothing more is latent in
it unfound out, or which cannot be brought to light by experience. If such a
Man could be found he would be worthy to be carried about in a Triumphant
Chariot, as in times past was granted to Monarchs, and potent Heroes, after
they had happily fought Battles, and were returned with Victory. But I fear,
that many of our Doctors will be constrained to provide a Chariot for
themselves.

For the Masters of this terrene World are so entangled with their own
Thoughts, that they seek nothing from Antimony but Riches, and forget to search
its utility for medicine, and the Health of the Body, which notwithstanding
ought above all things to be sought, that (being brought to Light) the
wonderful Works of our GOD may be made manifest, and the Glory given to him,
with great thankfulness. It is not to be denied, but that more of Riches and
Health may be found in it than either you all, or I my self, can believe: for I
profess my self no other than a Disciple in the Knowledge of Antimony, although
in it I have seen, experienced, and learned more than you, and all such as you
are (who arrogate to your selves great skill therein) either have learned, or
ever can learn. Yet no Man should therefore be troubled, or despair of his well
doing, since GOD wonderfully dispenses his Goods and Benefits; but because the
World, indulging their own Ingratitude, have neither esteemed, nor with due
Reverence acknowledged the Munificence of the Most High, but have preferred
Riches before Health, GOD has spread as it were a Spider's Webb before their
Eyes, that being blind they might not know the Secrets of Nature absconded in
the Form of this Mineral.

All men cry out Rich, Rich we would be. I confess you all aspire to Riches,
and with the Epicure say, The Body must first be provided for, the Soul may at
length also find somewhat; and with M das (as in the Fable) you desire that all
things whatsoever you touch may be turned into Gold. Hence it is, that so many
seek their desired Riches in Antimony: But because they accept not that Gift
of the Creator with a grateful Heart, which before all Things should be
procured, and cast the Love of their Neighbor behind their back, therefore
they in vain look the Horse in the Mouth; for they know his Age and Strength no
more than the Guests at the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee knew the
wonderful Work, which Christ there wrought, when he turned Water into Wine.
They knew, that Wine was Water, and that the Water was turned into Wine, they
perceived by the Taste; but how that Transmutation happened was hid from them.
For the Lord JESUS, our Savior, reserved that Supernatural Work to himself, as
a Testimony of his Omnipotency. Wherefore I say, it is every Man's duty, to
search out the Mysteries and Arcanums, which the Creator has insited in all
Creatures; for although (as we said) it is not Credible, that we Men can
thoroughly learn and penetrate all Things; yet we are not forbid to inquire into
them, since by Study and Diligence so much may be effected, as although through
some defect a Man be hindered in such wise, as he cannot attain to the desired
Riches and perfect Sanity, yet he may acquire enough to occasion him not to
repent of his Labor, but rather to minister unto him matter of Joy and
Rejoicing, that he sees himself so far an Adeptist, as he stands always obliged
to render thanks to his Creator.

Therefore, whosoever desires to become a perfect Anatomist of Antimony, the
first thing to be considered by him is Solution of the Body; and in order to
this, he must take it in a convenient place, and propose to himself the right
way, that he be not seduced into devious Paths. Secondly he must observe the
Governance of the Fire, taking Care that it be neither too much, nor too
little, or too hot, or too cold. For the sum of all is sited in an exact
Governance of the Fire; by which the vivifying Spirits of Antimony are
extracted, and loosed from their bonds, and so rendered capable to manifest
their Effects operatively. Also he must take great Care, that this Operative
Virtue be not mortifyed and perish by Adustion. Thirdly, the Use or Dose is to
be observed by him, that he may administer it in due manner, knowing the
Measure, as I above mentioned, when I spoke of the five principal Heads
requisite in the Exercise and Practice of Chemistry; but here I only hint at it
cursorily by way of a Parable.

By Resolution the sum of the Matter is proposed, but by Fire it is prepared to
profit. For a Butcher cuts out an Ox, and divides it into parts, but no Man can
profitably enjoy this Flesh, unless he first boil it by Fire, by which
Operation the Red Substance of the Flesh is changed and prepared into white
Aliment. If a Man constrained by hunger, should eat that Raw and Red Flesh, it
would be Venom to him rather than Medicine; because the natural Heat of the
Stomach is too weak to concoct and digest that crude Body. Hence, my dear
Friend, you may conclude, that since Antimony has greater Venom, and a more
gross Mineral Body than Animal Flesh (as by the above recited common Example I
have already showed) it will also prove more perilous, if used Crude, without
Preparation, Separation and Coction by Fire; yea it will be and remain Venom,
which will suddenly kill the Sick. Therefore the Venenosity of Antimony is so
to be taken away, as it may never again be converted into Venom, after the same
manner, as Wine, which being once, by putrefaction and corruption turned into
Vinegar, never afterward yields any Spirit of Wine, but always is and remains
Vinegar. But on the Contrary, if the Spirit only of the Wine be separated, and
the Aquosity left by it self, and the same Spirit afterward exalted, it will
never in any wise be changed into Vinegar, although it should be kept an
hundred Years; but will always remain Spirit of Wine, no otherwise, then as
Vinegar remains Vinegar.

This Transmutation of Wine into Vinegar is a wonderful Thing; because somewhat
is produced from Wine, which was not before in its vegetable Essence. In which
it is also to be noted, that in distillation of Wine the Spirit first comes
forth; but (on the contrary) in distilling Vinegar the Phlegm first comes,
afterward the Spirit, as I have showed above in its own place, where I also
made mention of this Example. Therefore Spirit of Wine makes Bodies volatile,
because it self is volatile; but Spirit of Vinegar fixes all Medicaments, as
well of Minerals as Vegetables, and renders them solid; so that they apprehend
things fixed, and expel fixed Diseases.

Believe not only Basilius, but me also, with the same Faith and sincerity
affirming to you; This is the first-Key, this is the principal part of the
whole Art, this opens to you the first Gate, this will also unlock the last,
which leads to the Palace of the King. But as I said, not only believe, but
also consider and observe. Here you stand in the Entrance, if you miss the
Door, all your Course will be Error, all your Have Ruin, and all your Wisdom
Foolishness. He who obteins this Key, and knows the Method (which is called
Manual Operation) by which to use it, and has strength to turn the same, will
acquire Riches, and an open Passage unto the Mysteries of Chemistry.
Consider and observe these things diligently; for this principal Key is of
great concern. Therefore Antimony, which contains in it self its own Vinegar,
ought to be so prepared, as all its Venenosity may be taken away, and he, who
uses it, conceives no Venom thereby, but rather drives away and casts out all
Poison from himself, by the use thereof.

Therefore Preparation of Antimony consists in the Key of Alchimy, by which it
is dissolved, opened, divided and separated; as in Calcination, Reverberation,
Sublimation, etc. as we declared above of it. Also in extracting its Essence,
and in vivifying its Mercury; which Mercury must afterward be precipited into
a fixed Powder. Likewise by Art and a due Method, of it may be made an Oil,
which is effectual wholly to consume that new and unknown Disease, which the
French, in their Warlike Expeditions, brought into our Regions. The same is
visible in other Preparations, derived from the Spa^y^ick Art and Alchimy; as
for Example: If any one would make Beer of Barley, Wheat, or other Corn, all
these degrees must be most perfectly known to him, before he can from those
Grains extract their most subtle Essence and virtue, and reduce the same into a
most efficacious Drink. First, the Grains must be so long steeped in Water, as
until they be able sufficiently, to open and resolve themselves (as I, when I
was a Young Man, traveling into England and Holland, diligently observed to be
done in those places) this is called Putrefaction and Corruption. This Key
being used, the Water is drawn off from the Grain, and the macerated Corn is
laid on Heaps close together, and left so for a due time, until it
spontaneously conceive heat, and by the same heat germinating, the Grains
adhere each to other: this is Digestion. This being finished, the Grains which
adhered in their Germination, are separated, and dried, either in the Air, or
by Heat of Fire, and so hardened. This is Reverberation, and Coagulation. When
the Corn is thus prepared, it is carried to the Mill, that it may be broak and
ground small; this is Vegetable Calcination. Afterward, by Heat of Fire cocting
these Grains, the more noble Spirit of them is extracted, and the Water is
imbibed with the same; which without the aforesaid Preparation could not have
been. This way the crude Water is converted into Beer, and this Operation
(though I speak but rudely) is and is called Distillation. The Hops, when added
to the Beer, is the Vegetable Salt thereof, which conserves and preserves from
all Contraries, endeavoring to corrupt the same. This way of boiling Water
into Drink, by extraction of the Spirits from the Grains, the Spaniards and
Italians know not, and in my native Soil of Germany about the Rhine, few are
found skilled in this Art.

After all these works are performed, a new Separation is made by
Clarification, viz. of the Drink, in this manner: a little Yest or Ferment is
added, which excites an internal Motion and Heat in the Beer, so that it is
clevated in it self, and (by the help of time) Separation of the dense from the
rare, and of the pure from the impure is made; and by this means the Beer
acquires a constant virtue in Operating, so that it penetrates and effects all
those Ends, for which it was made and brought into use: which before could not
have been; because the Spirit, the Operator was hindered, by its own Impurity,
from effecting its proper Work.

In Wine also does not Experience teach the same? That cannot, before the time
come, in which the Impuritys may be separated from it, so very perfectly and
efficaciously perform its own Work, as after Separation of the pure from the
impure: which by Drunkeness is manifest; for Beer or Wine unsettled, and not
purifyed, give not forth from themselves so much Spirit for inebriating, as
after Clarification. But of this no more. After all the aforesaid, a new
Operation may be instituted, by Vegetable sublimation, for separation of the
Spirit of the Wine or Beer, and for preparing it by Distillation into another
Drink of Burning Wine, which may also be made of the Lees or Dregs of Wine and
Beer. When this is done, the Operative Virtue is separated from its own Body,
and the Spirit being extracted by Fire, forsakes its own unprofitable dead
Habitation, in which it was commodiously hospited before. Now, if this Burning
Wine, or Spirit of Wine, be rectifyed, an Exaltation is made by often
distilling it, and by a certain method of Operating, the pure part (free from
all Phlegm or Aquosity, may be so concentred, and as it were condensed, as one
Measure of it may effect more, then twenty or more could have done before. For
it sooner inebriates, and is swift, volatile and subtle for penetrating and
operating.

Come hither you Traveller, stay your Journey here. Contemn not or slighty pass
over this tantological, but not impertinent, Admonition; often in your mind
have recourse to this Description of Beer, search, contemplate, and weigh all
Things, perhaps in this turbid and famous Gulf, you will find the Fish you look
not for. If in this Light you yet be blind, I know not any Collyrium will
profit you: if with so certain a manuduction you cannot pass on to the work it
self, I know not who will lend you a Staff, or what Demonstration can direct
the Journey of a stupid Man. Believe, read, meditate, labor, and spare the use
of so many Chemical Books, which distract you with the Error of various ways,
this one tells you all Things.
Here I admonish you, whosoever you are, who desire to be taught by my Writings,
and hope to obtain Riches and a true Medicine from Antimony, that you would not
carelessly peruse my Intention, in which is no letter writ in vain, and which
has not a certain singular signification for your Instruction.

Yea, I here solemnly affirm, that there are many words dispersed here and
there in my Writings, to which if the Reader give heed as he ought, and know in
what Fundamentals the principal Heads of the matter are sited, and as it were
buried, he will have no Cause to repent his often turning over the same Leaves,
but will esteem every word as much, as a piece of Gold Coin. For you know, that
although the Examples by me proposed, sound harsh, as delivered in a rude
manner, yet they contain in them somewhat that is excellent and of great
Moment. Yet I am not here ambitious to procure Authority or praise to my
Writings, which is not my Business, nor would it become me: for when the
Operation of them shall be brought to Light, they will acquire praise enough to
themselves. I purposely and willingly produce Examples so rude and common
because the power of Antimony and the true Virtue thereof, deeply and
profoundly absconded in its inmost parts, is to be searched out. I was willing,
by these gross Examples to lead you by the hand, and show you the way, that by
them you might attain to the Thing it self, and not at the very first err from
the Gate; for so doing you would long wander, and never bring your Operation to
the desired End. For Antimony is like a Bird, which is carried through the Air
and as the Wind drives it, so it turns it self which way that wills: here, in
this Case, Man acts the Part of the Air or Wind, and can drive and move
Antimony, at his pleasure, and repose it in such a place, as himself chooses:
he can imbibe it, with a yellow, red, white, or black Color, according as he
desires it should be, and as he rules and governs the Fire; because in Antimony
(as in Mercury) all Colors are found; which no Man should wonder at,
considering how many Things Nature bears absconded in her Bosom, which neither
you nor I are able to comprehend in many days.

If a Book happen to be given to a Man, that is unlearned, he knows not what is
signified by that Writing, or what that Scripture intends; for it is hid from
his Eyes, and he stands amazed, as a Cow at the sight of a new Door. But if
unto that unlearned Man, any one suggest the Explication of the Book, and teach
him not only the matter contained therein, but also the use of the same, the
Man no more admires it, as an Art; but by this means it becomes to him a Common
Thing, the Reason and Operation of which he understands, and by his own Study
he can learn, conceive, and comprehend the Utility so perfectly, as now none of
those Things, which were contained in the Book, are hid from him; because he
has learned both to read and understand what is written therein. Such a Book
is Antimony to those, who know not the Art of Reading; therefore I faithfully
admonish all, who desire to be partakers of its Utilities, to bend their mind
to know and pronounce the letters thereof, that so they may acquire the Art of
Reading that Book; and in such a manner, that (as in a School) they may be
removed from Form to Form; when he who has rightly gained Experience, shall
preside as Rector, and judge of that, which in Trial is most worthy: for One is
worthy to be preferred before another, in the Possession of that.

But here, what comes into my mind, and ought in no wise to be passed over in
Silence, I think good to mention; viz: that at this Day many are found who
exclaim, and rashly pronounce Crucifige, Crucifige, against all those, who
prepare Venoms into Medicaments, by which (as they say) many Mortals perish,
or, if they escape with Life, live miserably; such are Mercury, Arsenick,
Antimony, etc. and this Clamor is chiefly made by those, who (if it please the
GODS) are called Doctors Basilius somewhat indulgeth his own Genius, inveighing
against False-Physitians, whose ignorance (in his time) was so very great, as
they contemned every sublime Preparation of Medicine, which he himself, and
Chemists with him did profess; prescribing the same as unprofitable, perilous,
and hurtful: against whom, it is not strange, if the Chemists (on the other
hand) rose up with some small vehemence, and endeavor courageously, by
assistance of their Knowledge and Conscience, to break through that Rout of
unskilful Men; but the best Things are not allways the most prosperous.
Chemists overcame by the Justice of their Cause, but were overcome by Number:
yet, having verity and goodness on their side, they fought with so great
Confidence, as they were certainly assured they should bear away the Victory;
which our Author here shows, and Par^celsus (prophesying of the Coming of Elias
the Artist) did presage would be. And certainly unto me (seriously considering
how greatly Chymisis have in these improved their Knowledge) the Dawning of
that Day has opened it self, since I behold so many Rays of the approaching
Sun.
of Medicine, yet indeed understand not what the difference is, between Venom,
and Medicine, but are wholly ignorant how Venom may be prepared, so as to pass
into a salutary Medicament; and instead of its malignity, put on a better
Nature.

Against these I do in a special manner exclaim and protest, against these, I
say, who (ignorant of Preparation) exhibit Poison to Men: for Mercury,
Auripigment, Antimony, and such like, are venoms in their Substance, and unless
rightly prepared remain Venoms. Yet after a Legitimate Preparation, all their
Venenosity is broke, extinguished and expelled, so that no part of them
remains, but what is Medicine, which resists all internal Venoms, although most
deeply rooted, and radically destroys the same. For Venom, being in such a
manner prepared, as it can no longer hurt, resists all Poison, which is not as
yet prepared, and so very well prepares and subjugates it, as it is compelled
with the same to put off its own venomous Nature.

Here I shall raise a great Contention among the Learned; for I know they will
doubt what these my Words should signify, as whether what I affirm and write be
possible to be done or no; and they will be divided into several Opinions
thereabout. Some will judge it is in no wise possible, that from those Things,
of which we treat, the venenosity should be wholly taken away; nor do I wonder,
that they persist in that Opinion, since the Doctrine of like Preparations is
absolutely unknown to them, who have not the least thought of that, which leads
to the Knowledge of these more profound Mysteries. Yet a small part of these
Men will with me be constrained to acknowledge, it is possible a vile Thing may
be changed into a better. For you (you Doctors I mean) must confess to me, that
your purpose is to reduce that Evil, from which the Disease had its Original,
into a better State. Go to then; will you not also grant, that if any Evil be
in those Things, of which Medicine is to be made, the same Evil must be
converted into a better State, that it may so much the better perform its
operation, and more powerfully and profitably act, without any notable peril?
But since unto very few as yet is known, or by Experience found, the Way, by
which a Man ought to proceed in these Preparations, a very small part of these
will assume and contend for the Opinion I here affirm, and publicly profess:
for very many will be carried away with the greater Rout, crying, Venom, Venom!
which Voices, whilst I hear them, put me in mind of those wild Clamours, by
which the Jews required the Savior and Redeemer of the World, that he might
suffer the Punishment of the Cross, often crying out Crucify him, Crucify him,
whom they proclaimed to be the highest, most present, most pernicious, and
cursed Venom, when as indeed he was the noblest, supreme, most glorious and
most profitable Medicine of our Souls, which was to deliver us from the Death
of Simers, from the Devil, Hell and all Misfortunes. Although those proud
Pharisees and Lawyers neither could nor would understand this, nevertheless he
both then was, and will be to the end of the World, and after it to all
Eternity, the same superexcellent Medicine: and neither the Devil, nor Death,
nor the very Gates of Hell, nor any Creature, how powerful, or perverse soever,
can effect any thing at all, whereby to overthrow this Truth.

So I hope, yea doubt not (although all vagabond and circumforaneous
Medicasters, all Physicians resident in Cities, and how many soever there be,
that profess themselves Masters of any part of Medicine, do all together
contrive what they can, and exclaim against Antimony) but that the same
Antimony will triumph over the ingratitudes of all those unskilful Men (for
true Physicians and such as are always ready to learn, I touch not here) and by
its own power and virtue acquired after due preparation, will overcome and
tread under foot all its Enemies. But, on the contrary, those ignorant false
Judges, and pertinacious contemners of Antimony, because they know not the
Truth, together with the proud and blood-thirsty Jews, shall perish, and be
cast into the Abyss of Hell. How ridiculous those magnificent, and to
themselves only wise Doctors, seem to me, who deterr Emperors, Kings, Princes,
and all other Great Men, and seriously admonish them not so much as to touch
such Medicines with their Lips, because they are noxious, venomous, and every
way perilous, I will not here declare, since I see them only to judge
according to their own Opinion, without entertaining any Observations of other
things, the Knowledge of which they have not before acquired by their own
Contemplation, and therefore cannot judge of any thing else, or otherwise than
they have learned. Therefore to these I say, if there be any Man, that has
taken so strong a Poison, as present Death is necessarily expected to follow, I
will (provided the Man be left wholly to my Care) give him an Antidote by me
prepared which shall continually resist that Venom, and quickly expel it out of
the Body. But I little care, whether you Mr. Doctor, who do neither know this
Thing, nor ever would apply your mind to know it, do slight the same, and
repute it as a ridiculous, and altogether false tale; it is sufficient for me,
that I am able (but if praise worthy, let praise be given to GOD) to prove and
defend the Truth thereof. For I my self have experienced it, I have made, I
have prepared, I have prescribed this Medicine, and there wants not a
sufficient number of Witnesses to confirm it under Hand and Seal.

And whenever I shall have occasion to contend in the School with such a
Doctor, who knows not how himself to prepare his own Medicines, but commits
that Business to another, I am sure I shall obtain the Palm from her: for
indeed that good Man knows not what Medicines he prescribes to the Sick;
whether the Color of them be white, black, gray or blew, he cannot tell; nor
does this wretched man know, whether the Medicament he gives be dry or hot,
cold or humid; but he only knows, that he found it so written in his Books, and
thence pretends Possession (or as it were Possession) by Prescription of a very
long time: yet he desires no further Information. Here again let it be lawful
to exclaim, good GOD, to what a state is the matter brought! what goodness of
mind is in these men! what care do they take of the Sick! Woe, woe to them! in
the day of Judgment they will find the fruit of their ignorance and rashness;
then they will see him whom they pierced, when they neglected their Neighbor,
sought after Money and nothing else: whereas were they cordial in their
Profession, they would spend Nights and Days in Labor, that they might become
more learned in their Art, whence more certain health would accrue to the Sick
with their Estimation, and greater glory to themselves. But since Labor is
tedious to them, they commit the matter to Chance, and being secure of their
Honor and content with their Fame, they (like Brawlers) defend themselves with
a certain Garrulity, without any respect had to Conscience or Truth; Coals seem
wonderful strange, and as outlandish Wares to them, therefore they spare the
Money, that should be bestowed in them, as if they intended to lay it out to a
better use. Vulcan himself, viz. the Prepairer of Medicaments, is not found
among them; for their Fornaces stand in the Apothecaries Shop, to which they
seldom or never come. A Paper Scrol in which their usual Recipe is written,
serves their purpose to the full, which Bill being by some Apothecaries Boy or
Servant received, he with great noise thumps out of his Mortar every Medicine,
and all the Health of the Sick.

My GOD, change, change these times, and and put an end to this arrogant Pride,
overturn those Trees, lest they swell up to Heaven, throw down those Giants
lest they accumulate all Mountains; and defend those, who seriously managing
their Business, faithfully serve thee, that they may be able to stand against
these their Persecutors. I seriously admonish all those in our Monastery, bound
by the same Vows with me, that they would with my self Night and Day pray unto
GOD, that he would so illuminate these Enemies of true Medicine, as they may
execrate their own Error, and acknowledge the Glory of GOD, and his Power
insited in the Creatures, and perceive the Clearness latent in them, by
Preparation and Anatomy (as it were speaking in their Ears) which otherwise
surrounded and covered over with external Impurities, would deeply be
concealed, and never brought to Light. But I trust the Creator of all Things,
(both of those which fall under our Sense, and of those that are remote from
our Senses) will benignly hear our Prayers; that, if not whilst I and my
Brethren live, yet after our Death, such a Conversion of Things and Men ( GOD
answer these Desires) may follow, as that thick and obscure Veil may be taken
away from the Eyes of our Enemies, and they by true and infallible
Illumination, obtain a clear sight, that they may find their lost Groat: which
GOD the eternal Governor of Times and Things of his Grace and Mercy grant.

But it is sit, that I, who intended to publish a certain Discourse of
Antimony, in all its Numbers absolute, should begin with the Poets do often
posit in the midst of their Poems, Histories or Fables of Princes, that by a
continued Series of Things, they may the more easily attain their End, which is
to delight their Readers: Chemists for another end use the same Medium. For
since their purpose is to teach the Readers so, as they may only be understood
by those, who wholly devote themselves with a servent desire to the Study of
that Science, they keep not that Order, which proceeds from the beginning to
the End by Mediums. Therefore our Author, at length coming to treat of the Name
of Antimony, whence it took beginning, acts as another Man addicted to some
Scholastic Order: but by and by turning from this Distourse, he answers an
Objection, before it is made by Interiogation; viz. whether from Antimony all
its Venom may be taken away, the possibility of which he pro^es by very
profitable and significant Examples.
Name it self.

The Arabians, to whom in times past this Mineral was known, did in their
Language call it Asinat; but the Chaldeans called it Stibium; among the Latins
at this day the Name of Antimony is used, by which name they first of all
signified it. We Germans in our Language have given it a Name, which seems to
express a certain property of its Nature; for since it is seen to consist of a
certain streiked Matter, and of it may easily be made Glass endued with various
Colors, which proceed there from we have called it Spies-glass, as if we
should say streiked Glass. From which Variety of the Name, by a prudent
Judgment, a singular Collection may be made, viz. that Antimony was known, and
greatly esteemed, and its virtue and Utility observed and brought into use by
the Arabians, Chaldeans, Latins, and our Germans: but afterward, the Heresies
of various Opinions arising, the use was vitiated, and its Virtue and Glory
first obscured, and afterward wholly extinguished. Of which there is no Reason
to Doubt; for nothing is more probable, than that Truth should suffer Damage
and Shipwreck by the Oppression of Enemies. For who knows not the Malice of the
Devil, which by Reason of our Sins and Blindness is very often permitted by
GOD. The Devil is the perpetual Enemy of Mankind, who imploys all his Strength,
and all his Deceits, and omits nothing, which in himself is, to prevent the
Knowledge of the profit of true Medecin, and to exterminate its use; knowing
well enough, that by that means the power and glory of GOD is obscured, and
those Sacrifices of the praises of men are impeded, by which they gave thanks
to GOD, because he has insited as it were the Rays of his Goodness in the
Creatures, whence they may obtain Health by a natural auxiliary.

But since to discourse of the Name of Antimony, is not to our purpose, we will
desist from this Matter. For all the Praise of Antimony consists in the
Preparation thereof, which is made for perfecting the Virtues infused in it
from Nature by the Author of Nature. Therefore my discourse shall be of this,
handling it and its known Virtue, and I will endeavor to make my Name
immortal. Yet before I come to declare the Virtue of Antimony, since I above
confessed, that it is mere Venom, I would have you know and diligently note,
that Venom is able to draw Venom to it self, because like it self, much sooner
and much more than any other Thing of another Nature.

Now let any Reader consider, and observe it as a Thing worthy of Note, that
the true Vnicorns-horn, sophisticated by no fallacy, repels all Venom from it
self, nor can it assume or draw to it self any thing of Venom, as is manifest
by Experience. Let a living Spider be put in a Circle made of Vnicorns-horn,
and out of this Circle it cannot go, or pass over the Vnicorns-horn, for it
shuns whatsoever is adverse to Venom. But if the Circle be made of venomous
Matter, it is not to be doubted, but that the Spider will go out of it, and
pass over that Venom like it self. Note this Experiment, make a piece of Silver
hollow, and put it in Water, that it may float like a Boat, and put Venom to
it, then hold a piece of true Unicorns-Horn, as nigh to it as you can, but so
as you may not touch it, that Unicorns-Horn by its spiritual Virtue will drive
the Silver from it, so that it will fly away like a Duck, which swimming on
the Water flies, when it perceives the Snares of the Fowler ready to entangle
it. But on the contrary, Nature in a wonderful manner loves and follows its own
like, as appears by this Example. Put a little piece of pure and fine Bread in
a dish full of Water, so as the Bread may swim upon the Water, hold a piece of
true Unicorns-Horn close to it, yet so as it touch it not; and if you leisurely
move the Unicorns-Horn the little piece of Bread will follow it. Nature so much
loves its own like, and so much hates what is unlike it self, as this flies,
and that follows. Therefore let our Doctors consider, that Venom by a certain
Magnetic Power Attracts Venom, and those things which are void of Venom, do in
like manner draw to themselves things pure, and wanting a Venomous quality.

Therefore Venom may be taken away two ways; first, by its Contrary, which
resists Venom, as already is related of the Unicorns-Horn. Secondly, by Like,
when Venom by a certain Magnetic power draws Venom to it self. But the Venom
which must heal Venom like it self, ought first to be so prepared, as its Venom
may pass into Medicine, and by its own attractive virtue, assume the other to
and expel it with it self. Of which thing you have a most clear Example in
Soap: That is compounded of Oil and other fat ingredient Matters, which seem to
be, and in very deed are, more apt to foul, than cleanse Linen; but because in
the Boiling of the Soap, especially by the help of Salt, a certain Separation
and Preparation is made, the Soap is rendered most apt to draw to it self and
wash out all foulness and filths from Linen and other things: so indeed may
Venom in a certain manner, by Antecedent Preparation be accommodated so, as to
be no more Venom, but a Medicament, it draws to it self all other Poison, casts
it out, and restores the man to his pristine Purity and Health.

Now since our Discourse has led us so far, and we have begun to open Nature
so much; that the truly Studious of Medicine (though hitherto ignorant of this)
may clearly know, what Good or Evil is latent in Nature, what is Venom and what
is harmless; which is a thing has not as yet been found out by Doctors, by
reason of their own supine negligence; and that the Truth thereof may be
demonstrated and also confirmed, it will not be amiss to produce certain
Experimental Examples, which may discover the Truth, and refute the false
Opinions of others. Put an Egg, which in the Winter is congealed with Cold,
into very cold Water, there let it lie for a due space of time, and the Ice
will externally adhere to the Egg-shell, but the Cold be extracted from the Egg
it self, and restored to its pristine vigor and intireness. Again, if any
Member be benumbed with Cold, let not the Patient neglect himself, but apply
cold Snowwater round about, so one Cold attracts the other, and the Member is
restored. On the contrary, if any One have a Member inflamed, let him apply to
that Inflammation an hot Matter; as for Example, Spirit of Wine, which is mere
Fire, or the Quintessence of Sulphur, and he will in very deed find, that Heat
is attracted by Heat, in a certain Magnetic manner, and like to rejoice in
like, and not only to assuage the pain and heat of the inflamed Member, but
absolutely to restore the same to its pristine strength.

Yet lest this our purpose should not be fully enough confirmed by Examples, I
will also add another, by way of Supplement. Take Frog-Spawn in the Month of
March, and laying it on a Board dry it in the Sun, when dry reduce it to
Powder, and strew of this Powder, upon Wounds made by Venomous Vipers or
Serpents; by this means such Wounds will be so prepared, as they may be
perfectly healed by other Medicaments applied thereunto. Or otherwise, if Linen
clothes be often moistened in Frog-Spawn, and as often dried, and that Linen cut
into small pieces and applied to Wounds, they effect the same, as the aforesaid
Powder would have done. But that the very foundation of this Truth may more
clearly be declared; take a venomous Toad, dry him in the Sun, shut him up in
an Earthen closed Pot, and by burning reduce him to Ashes; then having taken
out the Ashes, and reduced the same to Powder, apply of that Powder to a Wound
made by Venom, and this Poison attracts the other Poison, and joins it with it
self. Why so, I pray? Because by this Burning, which is the Calcination of the
Toad, its interior Virtue is made manifest, and efficacious for operating; so,
that Like can attract like, and especially Venom Venom, to it self. Therefore
firmly persuade your self, that this Truth is infallible and immutable, which I
have here proposed to you and others by Example. If any One afflicted with the
Pest, do diligently observe this, he will find the Truth of those Things I have
here above mentioned: the Astrum of Sol, and the Spirit of Mercury, ministered
in a Pestilential Season, preserve many. For the Spirit of Mercury does also
draw to it self its own like, and has in it self the Medicament, and
attractive power of all venomous Diseases. Yet since the Astrum of Sol, from
which (as from an operative and all vivifying Sun) all things in their kinds
universally arise; therefore I determine that in the potency of Gold, more than
in all other Things, is an Operating Nature; that is, in its own Astrum, whence
both it self, and all Metals and Minerals, in the Beginning, received their
first Nativity and Propagation of Generation. Touching which more may be said,
when I shall manifest to you the Astrum of Sol, and commend the same most
religiously to your Conscience.

After the same manner process is to be made with Antimony, which has the same
Operations with corporal Gold; yet of the Astrum thereof I now speak not. For I
know (says Antimony) it behooves me, before that, to fear and tremble; although
in many principal Arcanums of Medicine, I far excel it; yet universally I am
able to effect none of those Things, which the Astrum of Sol (confirmed by the
Testimony of Celestial Verity) is able to produce. The Astrum of Mercury I
omit, because I my self have my descent from the same Original with it: but as
to a Celestial penetrating power of Operating, I give the first place of
Dominion to the Astrum of Sol.

My Writings and Books, composed by Experience, properly follow and answer each
to other; ^s one Metal (as to its virtue) is observed and esteemed by another,
and must by Fire be proved of what value it is. So these my Sayings, or
Writings, or Medicaments, ought to be brought into the Schools, as tending to
one Scope and End. Into the Schools, I say, where Riches obtain to themselves
(as it were) an Hereditary place, and instead of that take away all the Honor,
which is due to ^ulcan only, who can boast himself to be a Master in his own
Element of Fire. Which may be showed by Example, and a true and manifest Proof.
When most hard Steel is struck with an hard and solid Flint, Fire excites Fire
by vehement Commotion, and accension, drawing forth the occult Sulphur, or the
occult Fire is manifested by that vehement Commotion, and enkindled by the Air
so, as it truly and efficaciously burns; but the Salt remains in the Ashes, and
the Mercury thence takes its flight together with the burning Sulphur. You, who
read this most simple Comparison of Steel and a Flint, slack the Reins of your
Admiration, and seriously ask your self, whether there can be found out any way
or Method, by which from this Stone and Cold Iron may be extracted, a
Substance, of which one only Grain (but why do I speak of a Grain?) of which
the hundred part of a Grain can in a very short time Convert a great Mass of
some rude Matter, into the most splendid and most precious of all Things; yea,
into Fire most profitable for Mankind? This is possible, and is daily done,
when the fixed is made Volatile, and the Volatile again fixed. He that has
understanding, let him understand, and cease to defame the admirable virtues of
Chemical Works.


So here also understand, that Antimony ought in a certain Method so to be
handled, as its Mercury may be separated from the Sulphur thereof, in a Natural
Manner. Now, as Fire, which lies absconded in Matter, unless it be made
manifest, and can be demonstrated, is profitable for nothing, is not (as I may
say) tangible by the Hands, nor can it effect any thing to purpose; so Medicine
can effect nothing that is excellent, unless it be first separated from its
Grossness, rectified and so discharged of Impurities, clarified and brought to
Light by due Preparation, as is manifest in all Things: for when Separation of
the pure from the impure is made, and all that is mountanous or terrestrial is
segregated from the pure Metal, then the desired Harvest is to be expected.
Hence it is manifest, that Fire can effect nothing, before it is in a certain
manner opened and set at Liberty, that it may operate. Therefore, to comprehend
much in few Words, I say, this is the Condition of Antimony. Whatsoever is
occult and absconded from the Knowledge of the Vulgar, that in joys the Name
and Honor of Art, viz. as long as it lies hid; but so soon as it is discovered
and made manifest, Art has end, and it becomes a Mechanic Work; as I have
more than once declared in other of my Books.

A Be sucks Honey from Flowers, with such Art as the Almighty has insited in
it, in which Honey is latent a Virtue, Juice, and Corroborative Power, of which
a Medicine is made, as is obvious to the Eyes of all Men. Now, from that Honey,
of a sweet and most pleasant Taste, a violent Corrosive and present Venom may
be prepared; which perhaps no man, unless he who has learned it, will believe;
no man certainly considers this, unless he be a diligent Observer. Yet for this
Cause Honey is not to be contemned, nor is it to be said, that although it has
a most grateful Sweetness, yet it is a Corrupt Medicine; because a Corrosive
may be made of it: but it should rather be said, that Corruption proceeds from
the Physicians ignorance, who knew not how duly to prepare it. Here I am
willing to teach the ignorant Physician, to free him from the last Judgment.
For Honey is prepared of the Superfluities of Brute Animals, by which the
Grounds and Fields are fatned; in those Grounds arise Flowers, Herbs,
Fruit Trees of various kinds, from which the Bees suck a most noble
Quintessence: by this is made the Alteration and Generation of one Thing into
another, viz. into Aliment of another Form and Taste, which in no wise agrees
with the former, and that is called Honey. Of such Honey is prepared a Food
most grateful, pleasant and fit for man, and for many Things most profitable.
Of the same may be prepared a Poison most hurtful to Man and Beast.

Therefore, do you Searcher of Nature, of what Age, Sex, Fortune or Condition
soever, follow me and Nature. I will show you the Truth, without any Mixture of
falsity, drawn from the very Foundation. I will make you understand, who
proceeds rightly, and who unadvisedly. I will teach you to separate the Good
from the Evil, the Highest from the Lowest. For of Antimony, if its Venom be
first changed into Remedy, is made a Medicine, which eradicates, and like Fire
penetrates, prepares and by cocting consumes all Diseases. Wherefore Antimony
is first to be prepared into a true Stone, which is the Quintessence thereof;
and because, in its Operation it is altogether like unto Fire, (when reduced to
its Coagulation) it shall by me be named the Stone of Fire. When this Stone of
Fire is rightly prepared, as in the End of this Treatise I will further show,
its Medicinal Virtue consumes all noxious Humors, purifies the Blood in the
highest Degree, and performs all that may be effected by Aurum potabile.

Therefore, I pray you, my unexperienced Doctor, who have neither learned my
Preparation, nor conceived the Use, not to judge from a false Suspicion, and
your own ignorant Thoughts; but set about the Work it self, and learn how the
Preparation of Antimony ought to be made, how you should further proceed with
it, how its Venom is expelled and separated, and Salutary Medicine posited in
the place of it, and exalted. When I say Here again the Author waxes hot
against false Physicians; but do you read on, and after this Heat he will give
you a profitable Doctrine, which you may soon find in Aqua Fortis and Spirit of
Wine.
you shall have performed This, then at length will you be able to judge of the
difference, and understand those things, which before were very far remote from
your Knowledge.

O you wretched and to be pitied Medicasters, who painted with a Fucus, breath
out I know not what Thrasonick Brags, and pass over Mountains wanting
Foundation, walking through Clouds in your own Thoughts, and know not where at
length you shall rest your Foot: you, I say, I admonish to consider what you
will answer, in the Extreme Judgment of the Son of GOD. Seek, and when you have
found, convert what you find to use, and so performing your Office commit the
Rest to GOD, who will give success, and never leave you destitute of help. But
you infamous men, more mad than Bacchanalian Fools, who will neither learn, nor
foul your Hands with Coals, judge not lest you procure Judgment to be
pronounced against you, which your Childrens Children may write down to your
shame in an undeleble Character.

Every Physician ought above all Things to take Care, that he do neither less
nor more, than procure the Restitution of Health lost, not instituting his
Curation contrary to Nature, or deviating from her direct Intention. When
Spirit of Wine is poured upon Aqua Fortis a vehement Ebullition is made, and
these two Natures will not easily permit themselves to be together; but he,
that knows how by Distillation to conjoyn and unite them, according to the true
Intention of Philosophers, he may use them in many things for good. After the
same manner, Oil or Liquor of Tartar, and Vinegar made of Rich Wine, act each
upon other; for they hate and fly from each other, as Fire and Water, although
they proceeded from one and the same Matter. Therefore the Physician ought in a
special manner to be mindful, to understand all Circumstances from the Sick
very exactly, and confider the same being understood that in Curing he may use
such Means, as are fit to remove the Disease, lest the Patient be injured by
the Medicine. As for Example, when Iron is dissolved in Aqua fortis, if you
suddenly pour Oil of Tartar upon that Solution, you shall difficultly preserve
the Glass from breaking; for the contrary Natures, like unto Gunpowder, take
Fire, and break the Glass. Of all these Things, our Gown Doctors know nothing
at all; therefore they have no other Defense for their Ignorance, than Silence
only.

You titular Doctors, you I speak to, who write long Scroles of Receipts: you
Apothecaries, who with your Decoctions fill Pots, no less than Those (in
Princes Courts) in which Meat is boiled for the sustentation of some hundreds
of men: you, I say, who hitherto have been blind, suffer a Collyrium to be
poured into your Eyes, and permit them to be anointed with Balsom, that the
most thick skin of Blindness may fall from your Sight, and you behold the
Truth, as in a most clear Glass. GOD grant you Grace, that you may know his
wonderful Works, and the Love of your Neighbor be rooted in you, that you may
search out true Medicine, which the Ruler of the Heavens has, by his own
omnipotent hand, and his ineffable and eternal Wisdom, from above infused in,
impressed on, and communicated to his Noble Creatures, for the Good of Mankind;
whence man may find help in his greatest Necessity, and Counsel for Health in
his Diseases. Why do you, miserable Worm of the Earth, and food of Worms, look
so intently on the Rind or Shell, and neglect the Kernel, being unmindful of
your Creator, who formed you according to his Image; when as you ought to give
thanks to him, and with diligent Study to search out his Works, exceeding
Nature her self? Return and look into your self, there behold the Image of your
own Ingratitude, that you may be ashamed of your self, especially because you
have not searched out those Things, which the most wise GOD, for the Good of
Mortals; has infused in his Creatures; by knowing which, you might have
offered unto him the most acceptable Sacrifice of Praise and Gratitude.

But I will put an end to this Discourse, lest my Tears (which I can scarcely
keep in, from continually falling from mine Eyes) should blot this my Writing,
and whilst I deplore the Blindness of the World, I blemish this Lamentation,
which I would have known to all men. I am a man Religious, incorporated in a
most holy Order, in which I will persevere, as long as it shall please the
Omnipotent GOD, to animate this miserable Body with Vital Spirit: therefore I
must not write other things, or otherwise, than is agreeable to this State. But
had I the Office of a Secular Judge, I would lift up my Voice, and found a
Trumpet in their Ears, that those deaf men may hear, who hitherto would not
acknowledge the Truth, but out of Ignorance, without Cause, falsely and
slanderously persecute, calumniate, contemn, disparage, and meditate how they
may totally suppress the same.

But thou, O Lord GOD, who dwell in the Highest, who art called and truly
art the GOD of Rest, who sitting in the Supreme Throne of Majesty, governest
Heaven and Earth, which thou have created, who conservest the Stars, and
ordainest the Course of the Firmament in its Motion according to thy Command,
before whom all Creatures tremble, which are found in the Earth, or in Heaven,
and the Infernal Spirits are astonished with unexpressable dread, be pleased, I
pray to look down upon the Transactions of this most ungrateful World, and
teach them inwardly to know those Things, which thou have outwardly and visibly
proposed to the Sons of Men, that thou may be praised in thy Throne, known
in thy Verity, and adored in thy immense Majesty. As for my self, I an unworthy
and miserable man, give thanks unto thee, for thy great and infinite Gifts and
Benefits of Riches and Health bestowed on me, and laud thy Majesty for ever for
the same. More, O my Father and Lord, I neither can, nor am able to desire in
this perishing World.

Now, that we may write of Antimony, and begin our Discourse from the very
Foundation, whence Antimony acquires its Empire, Triumph and Glory, by which it
is exalted to perfect Operation, we must before all Things discover the certain
Original of its Root: how it is generated in the Earth, to the Dominion of what
Stars it is subjected, and what Elements have thoroughly digested it, and which
they be, that have brought it to Maturity. Antimony is no other than a Fume, or
(as I may otherwise call it) a Mineral Vapor, which is genited from above by
the Stars, and afterward by the Elements deduced and digested to formal
Coagulation and Maturity. Here it is to be noted, that Antimony has acquired
its Essence, Virtue, Power, Operation and Quality, from the same Principle,
Root and Essence, whence Vulgar Mercury is produced; yet with more firm
Coagulation, so that it is brought to an harder Essence, than the living or
running Mercury of the Vulgar has. The Reason of this is, because it has
assumed from the three Principles, a little more of the Substance of Salt, than
Common Mercury. For although of all the three Principles, it has the least
part of Salt, yet it has assumed more of the Essence of Salt, than common
Mercury, whence unto it has happened such a Coagulation. Hardness in every thing
is from Salt, which vulgar Mercury has not. For it has a very small part of
Salt, but in it, in a spiritual manner, is insited a certain more hot Spirit of
Sulphur; therefore it always flows, and cannot be brought to Coagulation,
unless by the help of other Metallic Spirits, which endued with very great
Virtues, are chiefly found in the Matrix of Saturn, without which it cannot be
fixed, unless by him, who possesses the Stone of Philosophers, by which its
three Principles may be brought to a concordant Equality, and then it acquires
such a Body, as will melt, flow, and abide the Hammer, like all other Metals:
otherwise Mercury is and will be fluid Mercury, until its volatility be this
way taken away. Hence it is known, that all Animals and all Vegetables are too
weak to fix Mercury into a malleable Substance (as many have in vain
endeavored) because all these have not a Metallic Nature. Mercury, within and
without, is no other than mere Fire; therefore it is not combustible by any
Fire, no Fire can apprehend it so, as to alter its Essence, but it suddenly
slies and resolves it self into an incombustible Oil Spiritually; or after its
fixation it remains so invariable, as no strength or power of men is sufficient
again to alter it. And whatsoever can now be made of Gold may then also be made
of it by Art; because after Coagulation it is altogether like Gold: for it with
Gold has one and the same Root, Stock, or Production originally.

But since I purpose not in this place to discourse more largely of Mercury,
and intend only simply (yet truly) to describe the very Foundation of Antimony,
from true and certain Principles, I will cease to speak of Mercury, and proceed
to a further Declaration of Antimony. Yet, whatsoever I have proposed by way of
Similitude touching Mercury Which so miserably perplexeth all the Students of
this Art: what our Mercury is, which is the Matter of the Stone, which is found
every where and in all Things, is here briefly and clearly manif^sted.
Therefore our Author Basilius does not in Vain in^ite your Attention. All the
Light I am able to add to this Clearness, would rather obscure, than illustrate
the same: therefore, with him, I admonish you to attend.
, for an Introduction and further Consideration, is not written in vain, or to
no purpose; but to the end, that the very Beginning of Antimony may be more
clearly understood, which (as I before showed) received its original, as it
were Mercurially, with it.

Wherefore most diligently think on this; often bear in mind, observe and
understand, that all Minerals and Metals together, in the same Time, and after
the same manner, and of one and the same principal Matter, are produced and
genited. That Matter is no other, than a mere Vapor, which is extracted from
the Elementary ^arth by the Superior Stars, as by a Sydereal Distillation of
the Macrocosm: which Sydereal hot Infusion, with an Airy-Sulphureous Property
descending upon inferiors, so acts and operates, as in those Metals and
Minerals is implanted spiritually and invisibly a certain Power and Virtue,
which Fume afterward resolves it self in the Earth, into a certain Water, from
which Mineral Water all Metals are thenceforth generated and ripened to their
Perfection; and thence proceeds this or that Metal or Mineral, according as one
of the three Principles a^quires Dominion, and they have much or little of
Sulphur and Salt, or an unequal Mixture of the weight of them, whence some
Metals are fixed; that is, some constant and stable, some volatile and easily
mutable, as is seen in Gold, Silver, Copper, (...), Tin and Lead. Besides these
Metals, other Minerals also are generated of the three Principles, according to
the Communication and Participation of the unequal weight of them: as are
Vitriol, Antimony, and many other Marchasites, or other Electrums, and
Minerals, which for brevity sake we here omit.

But Gold, in its Astrum and Beginning was imbibed with a much more perfect
Sulphur, and (...) much more perfect Mercury, than all other Meta^^ and
Minerals, and therefore its operative Virtue is much more potent and more
efficacious, than the Astrums of other Metals: Yea, all Virtues whatsoever are
dispersed in other Metals, and many more than them, are found in the Astrum of
Gold only. Moreover I say, when that one thing is brought to further Maturity
by Fire, it contains more Perfection, than all Metals and Minerals together.
There is one only Mineral, of which I have often made mention already, in which
is found a Sulphur of Sol, equally as strong and powerful, yea more potent and
more strong, than in Gold it self: so also, there are two kinds of Metals
found, in which this Predominancy powerfully Triumphs, of which at this time I
have neither will nor disposition to write; but I am willing to keep within the
Bounds I have set my self in treating of the Essence of Antimony, touching
which I purpose now to speak.

Therefore Antimony is a Mineral made of the Vapor of the Earth changed into
Water, which Spiritual Syderal Transmutation is the true Astrum of Antimony;
which Water, by the Stars first, afterward by the Element of Fire, which
resides in the Element of Air, is extracted from the Elementary Earth, and by
Coagulation formally changed into a tangible Essence, in which tangible
Essence, ( viz. whence Antimony is formally made) is found very much of Sulphur
predominant, of Mercury not so much, and of Salt the least of all three; yet it
assumes so much Salt, as it thence acquires an hard and immalleable Mass. The
principal Quality of it is dry and hot, or rather burning, of Cold and Humidity
it has very little in it, as there is in Common Mercury; in Corporal Gold also
is more Heat than Cold. These may suffice to be spoken of the Matter, and three
Fundamental Principles of Antimony, how by the Archeus in the Element of Earth
it is brought to perfection.

Yet the Lovers of Chemistry should not think this Philosophic Reason by me
alleged of absolute necessity to them, nor need they be solicitous to know,
in what Center the Astrum of Antimony rests, or from what Root it slows; but
should rather desire to learn the Utility and use thereof; viz. which way it
ought to be prepared and reduced to its State, that they may know its Virtue,
Power, and Operation, touching which in times past so many Things have been
written, and to this Day are mentioned, and spoken of by all men of all States
and Conditions. For the Learned, as well as the Unlearned hope to have their
ardent and insatiable Desire satisfied by This; therefore I will not detain the
Reader with ambiguous Discourses, or tedious Delays, but simply teach every
Thing, which I by great Study and Diligence (which I have often employed about
Antimony) could find out touching the Essence of Antimony. For no man, by
reason of the shortness of Life, can know or search out all its Arcanum's:
because in Preparation of Antimony, one new Wonder follows another perpetually;
one Degree succeeds a former Degree, Color follows Color, and one Virtue,
Power or Operation always manifests it self greater than another.

And, to begin here I say, Antimony is mere Venom, not of the kind of the least
Venoms, but such, as by which you may destroy Men and Beasts, so venomous a
power is diffused through the whole Substance of this Mineral. Hence arises
the common Exclamation of all men. For the People, unskilful Doctors, and all
Those, to whom the ground of true Medicine is unknown, do with one mouth
proclaim it Venom, Venom! Poison, say they (as I my self above confessed) lies
in Antimony. For this Cause let us dissuade all men from its use; for it
endangers the Health and Life. Therefore Doctors resident in Princes Courts,
admonish Monarchs, Princes, and other Potentates not to use Antimony. Other
Scholasticks cry out, Beware, you in no wise admit Antimony into Medicinal Use;
for it is mere Poison: these the Inhabitants of Cities and Villages follow. And
this far spread Clamor so moves the greatest part of Mortals, as Antimory in
these our Days is very ill spoken of, and no man dares put confidence in the
Medicine thereof, which in it is found so various and unexpressible. For truly
and holily I affirm (as truly as GOD is the Creator of all things visible,
which are contained in Heaven or Earth, which either have come, or in time to
come shall come unto our knowledge) that under Heaven, or by the Rays of the
Sun, with the Guidance of Experience, can be found or demonstrated no greater
Medicine, than is in this Mineral; yea, there is no Subject, in which so
fluently and abundantly can be found such most certain Remedies for Health, as
shall be declared (by sure and undeniable Experiments) to be in Antimony.

Son, attend to this my Discourse, and do thou Reader give heed to my Writings,
and do you wise men of the World diligently observe my Declaration of Antimony
founded on Experience. For my Theory arises from Nature, and my Practice
proceeds from certain Experience, which shows its manifold Utility, and
infinite Ways produces the same, not without the incredible Admiration of all
men. But I assent to you, and confess (as I have before acknowledged in my
Writings) that Antimony at first is mere Venom, and before Preparation has
nothing in or with it self, but Poison; and that I affirm to be true. But you,
whosoever you are, insignized or not insignized with the Degree of Doctor,
Master, or Batcheler, whether skilful in Art, or by some other Privilege
promoted; you, I say, who so inconsiderately and so arrogantly without Truth
exclaim, and prate against me, pause a while, and forget not your own Argument,
hear what I have here to say. Antimony is Venom, therefore every One must
beware he use it not. No, that does not follow Mr. Doctor, Bachelor, or
Master; it does not follow, I say, Mr. Doctor, although you be proud of your
Red Hat. Treacle is made of the most perilous Venom of a Viper, which is
called (...), whence also it had its Name; therefore no man must use it, for
there is poison in it. Does this Consequence please you? How does this my
Doctrine like you? You hear, that after Preparation, no Venenosity is found in
Antimony; for by the Spagyrick Art Antimony is converted from Venom into
Medicine, no otherwise than as of the Venom of a Viper is said, which is
converted into Treacle; but without Preparation you shall find no Good in it,
nor any thing of Medicinal Help, but much loss and detriment.

Now, whosoever desires to become a Disciple of Antimony, he must, after
Prayer, and an carrest Invocation of GOD, betake himself to the School of
Vulcan; for he is the Master and Revealer of all Secrets. This Master is
contemned by the Wise Men of the World, set very light by and derided; because
they, by reason of their own Negligence and Malignity, have learned nothing of
him; and all Revelation, through their own Sloth, is impeded: for no Medicine
was eyer prepared without Vulcan, whatsoever those senseless mad men shall babble
and affirm to the Contrary.

But I will proceed to the Process and Preparation of Antimony; for I little
value the Clamours of arrogant and self applauding men: let them make and bring
to light any Work that can excel Antimony. It is well known to me, that of
Antimony may be made Medicines equal to Those, which are in Gold and vulgar
Mercury (I except the Astrum of Sol) for of this may be prepared Aurum potabile
against the Leprosy, of this may be made Spirit of Mercury, the highest Remedy
against the French POX, of this other infinite Remedies may be prepared. If
those Contemners cannot perceive and understand this, what wonder is it? None,
because they have not learned it. No man can give a sound Judgment of that,
which he never learned. Let the Ass, an Animal like them in stupidity be their
Example, who cannot teach a Shepherd how to handle his Pipe, so as to play an
Harmonious Tune; because he has not learned. So, right Judgment, with a solid
Foundation cannot be given by a man, who before has not bent his Studies that
way, that from Writings he may be able to discern what, in such a Business, is
just or unjust. After the same manner in this Faculty, what can be attributed
to any of the Doctors, before he has from Writings, and by his own proper
labor acquired Knowledge?

Yet before I pass to the Process it self, some One may perhaps interrupt and
ask me, which way both Minerals and other Things receive their Venonosity? What
Venom is? Whence the Poison of every Thing has its Original? How it may be
taken away, also how such a Mineral may without peril securely be used for
Health after evacuation of that Venom? To these Questions I will briefly and
clearly answer. The Infusion of Venom falls under a twofold Consideration, viz.
Natural and Supernatural.

The first Reason, why GOD the supreme Lord of the Stars, and the Maker of
Heaven and Earth, has proposed to us open Venom, especially in Minerals, is,
that by this his Ordination he might show to us his Wonders and powerful Works,
for distinction of Good and Evil, as in the Law he prescribed to us the
Knowledge of That, which lies as a Duty on us to do, viz. to Choose the Good
and Eschew the Evil. So also the Tree of Life in Paradise was proposed; its
right use tended to Good, but its abuse brought the Fall to Evil; for by that
GOD's Command was broke, whence proceeded Destruction and all Evil. This is the
first Reason.

A Second Reason is, that by this we might comprehend and understand the
Distinction between Evil and Good, and at length learn to exterminate Malice
and reposit Goodness in its place. For GOD wills not, that man should perish
and be destroyed, but that he should depart from Evil, and come to amendment of
Life, that Destruction may be driven far away from his Soul. So, to Us his
Creatures, with wonderful Convenience has he proposed Good and Evll, which is
found both in the Precept of the Word, and in the Work of the Creature; that we
may choose what is profitable and good for Health, and shun what is evil and
pernitions.

Thirdly, Venom is also made by the Stars, when contrary Oppositions and
Conjunctions of them happen, by which the Elements are Infected so, as they
become the Cause of Pestilences, and other Venomous Diseases in this World:
which also is to be understood of Comets.

Fourthly, Venom is made from Things repugnant each to other, as when any One
inkindles a deadly Poison in himself, by Anger or Sadness; also when a man
drinks being above measure hot.

Fifthly, among Venoms may be numbered Weapons, with which any One is slain;
then the Abuse of Arms is Venom to that man. But when any One uses Arms, for
the just and unblamable desence of his Body, to which end they were invented,
then they may be accounted a certain kind of Medicine.

Lastly, the Cause of Venom may be demonstrated by Nature, in this manner:
whatsoever Nature refists is Venom, and that because it sights against Nature.
As when any one eats such Food, as his Stomach cannot bear, then that Food is
Venom to him; for it is repugnant to Nature: on the contrary, if any One eat
such Food, as is Friendly to his Stomach, to him that Food is Medicine.

But Venom is principally attracted to Bodies in the Earth, whilst they are a
certain Mercurial Essence (now I speak of the Venom of Minerals) which yet is
in an immature, crude, and not well digested Form, which is repugnant to
Nature, and difficultly digested; because such a Mercurial Essence is not yet
perfect, well digested to Maturity, therefore it passes through the whole
Body, as a crude, immature, undigestible Mineral. As if crude Corn should be
eaten by men, that would be so difficult to be digested by the Stomach, as a
notable debility of the Body would follow. For the natural Heat is too weak to
deduce that to a due Concoction and Perfection. Corn, which receives its
Maturity from the Fire of the Great World, must afterward be thoroughly cocted
by the Minor Fire, that it may be digested by the Microcosm. As before we said,
touching the boiling of Flesh to Maturity; so here the same is to be understood
of Antimony, which being yet crude, and not thoroughly cocted in the Earth to
fixedness, the Stomach of Man (as I may so speak) is too weak to bear it, or
retain the same, as by certain Experience is manifested, viz. that all
Catharticks, whether Minerals, Animals or Vegetables, are venomous, because of
a certain Mercurial volatile Matter still predominant in them; which volatile
Spirit is the Cause why other things, which are in man, are expelled: not that
by this Means the Root it self of Diseases is laid hold on, which only is
essected by the fixedness of every Medicine. For every Medicine thoroughly
fixed, searches out fixed Diseases, and eradicates them; which Purgers not
fixed cannot do, but they do only as it were carry away some Spoil from
Diseases; or they may be compared to Water, which driven by force through a
Street Penetrates not the Earth it self. Fixed Remedies purge not by the
Inferior Parts, because that is not the familiar way of Expelling fixed Venoms,
and that way they would not touch the Kernel (as I may call it) or Center of
the Disease; but by expelling Sweat, and otherways they strike at the very
inmost Root of the Disease, not contented with a certain superficial Expulsion
of Filths. Therefore we often admonish all and every One, that all venomous
Impurity is totally to be taken away from Antimony, before it can either be, or
be called such a Medicine, as may safely be given. For this Cause, the Good
must be separated from the Evil, the Fixed from the not fixed, and the Medicine
from the Venom with accurate diligence, if we hope by the Use of Antimony to
obtain true Honor, and true Utility; but Fire only can effect that. For Vulcan
is the sole and only Master of all These. Whatsoever the Vulcan in the Greater
Orb leaves crude and perfects not, that in the Lesser World must be amended by
a certain other Vulcan, ripning the Immature, and cocting the Crude by Heat,
and separating the Pure from the Impure. That this is possible no man doubts;
for daily Experience teaches the same, and it is very apparent in the Corporal
Aspect of Colors, which proceed from the Fire. For by Separation and Fire,
which perfect Fixation, Venenosity is taken away, and a Change is made of the
Evil into Good, as we have already said. Therefore Fire is the Separator of
Venom from Medicine, and of Good from Evil; which is a thing, that None of the
Physicians either dares or can truly and fundamentally own, or demonstrate to
me, unless he who has firmly contracted Friendship with Vulcan, and instituted
the siry Bath full of Love, by which the Spouse, being thoroughly purged from
all Defilement, may legitimately lie down with her Bridegroom in the Marriage
Bed.

Fie upon the Acuteness of the Worldly Wit of those, who neither understand,
nor are willing to endeavor to understand these my Writings. If you did know,
what is called fixed, and what not fixed, and what it signifies to separate the
Pure from the Impure, assuredly you would purposely forget many Things, and
omitting other vain Works, would follow me only. For in me ( Antimony speaks of
himself) you will find Mercury, Sulphur and Salt, then which Nothing is more
Conducible for the Health of men. Mercury is in the Regulus, Sulphur in the Red
Color, and Salt in the remaining black Earth. He that can separate these, and
again unite them in a due manner, according to Art, so as Fixation may bear
Rule, without Venom, he may rejoice with Honor and Truth; because he has
obtained the Stone of Fire, which may be prepared of Antimony for the Health of
Mortals, and for Temporal Sustentation with parcicular profit. For in Antimony
you may find all Colors, Black, White, Red, Green, Blew, Yellow, and more
other mixed Colors, than can be believed, all which may be separated apart, and
known particularly, and singularly applied to use; according as the Artist
intends, such an Ordination is to be instituted.

Therefore now will I distinctly declare, how Medicine is to be prepared, Venom
to be expelled, Fixation to be set about, and a true Separation to be made, by
which the Evil may be subdued and depressed, and the Good triumph and be taken
into use. In the mean while, let the Lover of Art consider, that every of the
other Metals may be compared to every of the Precious Stones; but this only
contains universally the Virtues of all Stones; which those Colors, which it
gives forth and exhibits to the Sight from it self in the Fire, do sufficiently
demonstrate. Its Transparent Redness is assigned to the Carbuncle, Ruby, and
Coral; its Whiteness, to the Diamond and Crystal; its Blew Color, to the
Sapphire; Green, to the Emrald; Yellow, to the Jacinth; its Black, to the
Granate, which Stone contains in it self a certain Blackness occultly
absconded. But as to Metals, the Black is assigned to Saturn, the Red to Iron,
the Yellow to Gold, the Green to Copper, the Blew to Silver, the White to
Mercury, and its mixture of various Colors is attributed to Jupiter. But as
all the Colors of all Metals and Precious Stones are clearly found in
Antimony; so also all the powers and Virtues of Medicine are no less showed in
it, than the Colors aforesaid: but to educe from it all these Colors is not
the Labor of one man. For our Life is circumscribed with Limits more strait,
than will permit one man by his Labor thoroughly to learn whatsoever Nature
keeps concealed and absconded in her Bosom. In one certain way of Preparation,
from Antimony by distillations is drawn forth an Humor acid and sharp, like
true perfect Vinegar. Another way is prepared a shining Red Color, sweet and
savoury, as purified Honey or Sugar. Another way, a Wormwood-liike Bitterness
proceeds therefrom; otherwise, a certain Acrimony, like some Salt-Oyl: thus
always one Nature follows another. Again, by Sublimation it is driven to the
Olympic Mountains, like a flying Eagle, red, yellow and white. Also forced
down by Descent, it yields diverse Colors and Preparations: also by
Reverberation, of it is made a Metal, like common Lead. Likewise a transparent
Glass, red, yellow, white, black, and endewed with other Colors: all which
notwithstanding, are not safe to be used in Medicine, unless they be first
proved by another Examen. Also it is resolved into rare and wonderful Oils,
which are various and manifold, some of which are made perfect with Addition,
others without mixtion of any other things; some likewise are taken inwardly,
others only outwardly applied to common Ulcers, and Wounds. It supplies us with
so many several Extractions, varied with so many Colors, as it would tire a
Delphian Apollo to describe them all; but indeed, all the Mutations of its
Nature, which are discovered through the Gate of Fire, it by its own Oracles
will best unfold. Of it is made living Mercury, and Sulphur which burns like
common Sulphur, so that of that Gunpowder might be made. Of it is made a true
and natural Salt; and many other things are prepared of the same.

Therefore we begin to speak of the Preparations thereof, as of its Essence,
Magistery, Arcanum, Elixir, and particular Tincture, in which you must employ
all diligence and Care; especially when I shall in my Writings declare to you
the Stone of Fire, and its Preparation, together with other various Secrets and
Arcanums, which indeed are scarcely at all known to the World; and which have
been little regarded, since the Egyptians, Arabians and Chaldeans dyed, who
professed these Arts: of which notwithstanding the use is very great, for
searching out the very Fountain of true Medicine, and all other Works pertinent
thereunto.

Now diligently mind, and with profound Meditation consider all the following
Preparations, one succeeding another, as I shall reveal them. For there is no
One inserted, which has not its singular Utility, but every of them is useful,
according as ordained in its State. A fixed Medicine of Antimony, expels fixed
Diseases and eradicates them; but Antimony not fixed, as when it is crude and
not prepared, opens and purges the Stomach only, but touches not the Root of
the Disease. Therefore I will set about the Preparation of all, that appertains
to Antimony, and discover all the Keys of its Preparation, which now (as by a
new Nativity) are brought to Light, and revealed by Fire, in the same state, to
which they were ordained by GOD their Creator. This unlocking and preparing of
Mineral Antimony is performed by diverse Methods and Ways, by the disposure and
governance of the Fire, with manifold labor of the Hands, whence proceeds the
Operation, Virtue, Power and Color of the Medicine it self. And since Antimony
to the Aspect presents a crude black Color, mixed with a little whiteness, I
will first speak of its destructive alteration, which consists in Calcination
and Incineration, and that is thus made.

Take Hungarian or other Antimony, the best you can get, grind it, if possible,
to an Impalpable Powder; this Powder spread Thin all over the Bottom of a
Calcining Pan, round or square, which has a Rim round about, the height of two
Fingers thickness; set this Pan into a Calcining Furnace, and administer to it
at first a very moderate Fire of Coals, which afterward increase gradually:
when you see a Fume beginning to arise from the Antimony, stir it continually
with an Iron Spatula, without ceasing, as long as it wall give forth from it
self any Fume. If in Calcining, the Antimony melt, or concrete into Clots, then
remove it from the Fire, and when cold again reduce it to a subtle Powder, and
as before calcine it, continually stirring as we said, until no more Fume will
ascend. If need be repeat this Operation so often and so long, as until that
Antimony put into the Fire, will neither fume, nor concrete into Clots, but in
Color resemble White and pure Ashes: Then is the Calcination of Antimony
rightly made.

Put this Antimony thus calcined into a Goldsmiths Crucible set in a Furnace,
and urge the Fire with Bellows, or put it into a Wind-Fornace, administering
such Fire, as the Antimony may flow, like clear and pure Water. Then, that you
may certainly and infallibly prove, whether the Glass made thereof be
sufficiently cocted, and has acquired a transparent Color, put a long rod of
Iron cold into the Crucible, and part of the Glass will stick to the Iron,
which with an Hammer strike off, and hold up against the Light, to see whether
it be clear, clean and transparent; if so, it is well, and perfectly mature.

Here let my Reader, unlearned and but a Beginner in Art, know (for I write not
to men skilled in this Art, who have often experienced the powers of the Fire,
but to Candidates, Tyro's, Rightly does Basilius say, he writes to the Tyro's
of this Art; because he begins with the Glass of Antimony, that is, from the
very Rudiments of Chemistry, and so accurately teaches to make that, as no man
how ignorant soever can be deceived therein: yet the Ancients have not seldom
experienced, how often they have erred in the Praxis, for such I have written
these Commentaries. For me, let every One please himself in his own Writings:
surely I think I have offered somewhat, which Posterity will always thankfully
accept. For although I did for several years most diligently read Basilius and
other Masters of the Art of Arts, and in Laboring followed them, as exactly as
possibly I could, yet I committed so many Errors (the remembrance of which
fills me with Horror) lost so much Money, and was so often constrained to amend
those Errors with labor, as I have compassion of all Those, who would enter
into this way, incited thereunto by their earnest desire to help their
Neighbors: for I have no respect to Others, who aim at nothing but Riches, and
would make so noble an Art subservient to Avarice, the worst of all Vices; let
them sustain the damage they deserve to suffer. But do you, who are endued
with a more noble Spirit, First seek the Kingdom of GOD, which is either
constituted or propagated by Charity to your Neighbor, and all other Things,
which other men so impiously seek, shall spontaneously (which is the Bou^ty of
GOD) be added to you. I need to use no great Arguments to persuade any man to
read those Commentaries; for every One's own Business will sufficiently
admoni^h him, when he shall see me often with one word, and a most simple
Animadversion to save him so great Charges, which he has too frequently
b^stowed in laboring without success. I do here heartily profess to thee,
studious Reader, had the Manual Operations been as sincer^ly showed to m^, as I
^^re open them, I should have saved a great Sum of Money; for I very often
erred, when I would over eagerly prosecute certain Processes of ot^^rs, and by
that vain endeavor, lost some Thousands of Florens. Yet I seldom twice
repeated any of these Operations, which our Author (most sincerely and openly,
of all that I know) has in this Book inserted. I shall not here institute a
Tyrocinium of Chemistry, as other Authors, well known to young B^ginn^rs, have
already done; but I am willing, by Admonition to help those, who long since
could loose this Subject from its Bonds, and with most fervent desire design to
arive to the Goal exposed to their Eyes and Mind, least either slippery Blood
in the Way, or Entellus now lying prostrate, should hinder them from gaining
the proposed Reward, which is Riches and Health.
and the studious Disciples of the Spagyrick Science; because to make Glass of
Antimony is a thing common, and well known to many) know, I say, that every
Glass, whether made of Metals, Minerals, or any other Matter, must be thoroughly
cocted in Fire to due Maturity, that it may have a clear and transparent
Color, and be apt for further Preparation to Medicinal use: which translucid
and pure Maturity Vulcan only effects in his secret and hidden Nature.
Therefore, let every man know, consider and retain this.

When in the Method we have taught, your Antimony is converted into Glass, take
a Platter or Dish made of Copper, which is smooth and broad, heat it hot at the
Fire, otherwise your Matter will fly out; then pour in the fluid Matter as
thin as you can, and you will have pure, yellow, transparent Glass of Antimony.
This is the best way of preparing Glass of Antimony per^^se, without addition;
and this Glass, above all others, is endewed with the greatest Virtue and
Power, which it manifests after its further Preparation. This is by me called
Pure Glass of Antimony. This is now the Common, and well known way of making
Glass of Antimony, which is profitable in many Operations: but to administer it
so to the Sick without Distinction, is a Work full of danger and peril. It
indeed succeeds happily, but this casual or accidental health of some, is not
of so great moment, as therefore to expose the Life of one man to Peril. For I
have seen a Sick man, who after he had taken but half an ounce of the Infusion,
vomited and purged above measure, and soon after died. Hence are those Tears,
hence those Clamours arise against Chemists, as if the impious rashness of some
false Chemists were to be imputed to the Art, which Pseudochymists care not how
many Houses they fill with Funerals, provided one or two that are healed will
blaze their Fame, and they can hear themselves called Doctors, and rob the
simple of their money. The reason of this great danger is, because all the
Emetick force of Antimony contained in the fixed Salt thereof, in which resides
all its Venenosity, which weak Natures cannot overcome, and therefore receive
not so much good from the Salutiferous virtue thereof, as hurt from its Venom.
But this thing should not deter sound men from the use of Antimony, since they
see it, even then when mixed with Venom, often to produce salutary Effects.
They should rather thus reason: if that salutiferous Virtue be freed from the
No^ious faculty, what Good would it not do, or what Diseases would it not heal?
Therefore, behold I here offer to you such Glass of Antimony, as I my self ^^se
often, and may be used ly every man, without any danger of a mortal
Catastrophe. Take pure Glass of Antimony, made as Basilius here teaches, m^lt
it in a Crucible, and keep it in flax so long, as until a third part be
consumed. T^^u let it cool, and grind the same to an Impalpable Powder, upon
which pour Spirit of nine highly rectified, until it stand three singers above
the Powder; close the Vessel firmly, and circulate the Matter for three
Months; then by Distillation abstract the Spirit of Wine, or if it be tinged
with Redness, (which always will be, if you have rightly operated) only pour it
off, and keep it apart, for it is an excellent Medicine. The remaining Body put
into a Crucible, permit it to flaw, and then cast it into what Forms you will.
For it can assume whatsoever Shapes you will have it, which may be set in
Rings, and worn on the Hand. But its Medicinal use is thus.

Put this Glass for one Night in two ounces of Cold Wine, and in the Morning
let the Sick drink that Wine, and you will find very good success; for it
purges kindly, and if Nature incline to bring the Matter upward, it performs
that action moderatily, causing gentle Vomits. Only Note this: the prescribed
D^se must be diminished, according to the Strength, Age and Constitution of the
Sick. Here, Reader, heartily accept of this my first Admonition offered to thy
self, and expect to find more, if you willingly and intently peruse the after
following.




For there are other Glasses prepared of Antimony, by Addition of Borax and
other things, in this manner.

Take of Crude Antimony one part, of Venetian Borax two parts; put these
together into a Crucible, which setting the Vessel in a Wind-Fornace, or urging
the Fire with Bellows, cause to flow, that they may be well and perfectly mixed
together, afterward pour out the Mixture into a Pan, or Dish of Copper made
hot, as thin as is possible, as before was said in the Superior Preparation,
and you will find your Antimony fair and transparently clear, The Caution, to
which our Author here ascribes the Success, is that you use a most strong Fire,
such as is required for melting of Gold: for without this you cannot acquire
the Redness of a Pyropus.
like a Pyropus or Ruby, provided you observe the due and accurate Method,
Operating as you ought, in Governing the Fire.

The Redness may be abstracted from this Red Glass, with Spirit of Wine Not
with common Spirit of Wine, bne with Philosophic Spirit, which for extracting
this Tineture, I thus prepare. Take of Sal-Armoniack thrice sublimed iiij.
Spirit of wine, distilled up. on Salt of Tartar so, as it may be perfectly
d^^^^genated: put them together in a Phial, which place in heat of Dig^stion
the Spirit may fully imbibe the Sulphur or Fire of the Sal-Armoniack; then
^istil the mixture by Alembick thrice, and you will have a true Menstruum,
wherewith to Extract that Redness from the Glass of Antimony.

Also the Tincture of this Glass is extracted with its proper Vinegar, and by a
further Operation is perfected, and becomes a most excellent Medicament.


and by long continued Circulation in Fire, be perfected, and rendered a most
excellent, profitable and efficacious Medicine.

But a transparent white Glass of Antimony, aster commixtion thereof, is
prepared in this manner.

Take Antimony beat or ground small one part; Venetian Borax very pure four
parts: put these, well mixed together, into a Crucible, and cause the Mixture
to flow well. At first indeed it will be yellow, but if it stand longer in
Fire, the yellowness vanishes, the Matter receives a white Color, and
thenceforth becomes a fair and white Glass. Whether this Color be brought to
perfect Maturity, you may prove with a cold Iron, as above is said. Many other
ways, of Antimony may be formed Glasses Let him who desires to prepare more
Glasses of Antimony, consult Beguinus, Hartman, Crollius, and other Authors; we
here acquiesce in these proposed by Basilius.
consisting almost of Infinite Forms.

But since my purpose here was not to describe other Glasses, then I my self
had experienced, and which manifest happy success in Healing, I judged it
unnecessary to waste Paper in describing them, or by a tedious discourse to
weary the Reader; especially since, unto you is already in part proposed the
principal Color ( viz. the Red) which is found in Glass made of Antimony. The
black Color, which Antimony had before Preparation, is now in a Spiritual
manner flown up the Chimney; because in such a Spiritual manner, very much of
the Venomous Substance had left it before, through the Expulsive force of the
Fire, as by Calcination. Yet because in this Preparation all the whole Venom is
not taken away from the Glass of Antimony, but it still retains very much
thereof; I am willing (now I have begun) further to reveal to you, which way
the Venom may wholly be removed from this Glass, and another Separation of the
Pure from the Impure, of the Venom from the Medicine, be instituted; by which
the Tongue of the Orator will be loosed, and occasion given to him of largely
expressing my Praises, and publishing the same, as with a great Sound, through
all Parts of this Inferior Orb: which will be a necessary Consequence of the
Gratitude of my Disciples, when they shall see with their Eyes, touch with
their Hands, and with their Understanding comprehend, that I to their great
profit, have declared to them the very Truth, withour Deceit, and made them the
Heirs of a memorable Testament.

Therefore the first Separation of the Sulphur from its Body, and the
Extraction of the Tincture from its Salt, is performed in this manner. Take
pure Glass of Antimony, as I taught you to make it, without the adjunction of
any other Thing, Grind it to subtle Powder What I here shall advise is short,
but very profitable, without wh^^ what the Author appoints cannot be done, nor
by beating or grinding in a Motar can you ever bring the Body to a requisite
fineness, much less upon a Porphy Stone can you grind the same. Therefore first
beat it in a Mortar, afterward mix it with distilled Vinegar, that it may have
the Consistency of a soft P^like matter, and so grind it upon a Porphyry Stone,
as Painters grind their Colors, and undoubtedly you will obtain your desire.
impalpable as Flower;

Which Powder put into a Glass with a Plain (...) bottom, called a Cucurbit,
and there pour upon (...) strong Vinegar well rectified: then set the Vessel in
a Digestive Fire, or if it be Summer, expose it to the Sun, stirring it twice
or thrice Thou art happy, if thou can be wise my Damage, O Lover of An^^^ I
exactly followed this short Ad^^^ition, stirring the Cucurbit twice or (...) a
Day, but the Matter was always coagulated like a Stone, and stuck so (...) to
the bottom, ^as it could by way ree be r^n^e^id there: but afterward, (...)
^ore wary, from the very first I begun to stir the Matter with a Wooden Spatula
five or six times a Day, or oftener; you may imitate the same, if you be wise,
not only here, but also in the Superior Preparation of Antimony, and in every
Extraction of Tincture from Antimony.
a Day, and so long digest it in that temperate heat, as until the Vinegar
contract a Yellow Color inclining to Redness, like the Color of most clean
and well purified Gold.

Then pour off this clear and pure Extraction, and pour on fresh Vinegar, and
repeat the Operation, as long as the Vinegar is tinged, and until no more
Tincture can be extracted. Filter all these. Extractions mixed together, and
put them into a Glass Body, with its Head annexed, and by B. M. distill off the
Vinegar; until in the Bottom remain a Yellow Powder, inclining to Redness. Upon
this Powder pour distilled Rainwater often times, and as often distill it off
again, still pouring on fresh distilled Rainwater. Repeat this labor so long,
as until the Powder remain Sweet and Our most sincere Author here deceives you
not, but conceals a certain manual Operation, which if you attend to me clearly
discovering the same, the Work it self will never fail to Answer your desire.
If you have much Tincture, you must have a great Cucurbit; if Little, a less
will serve. For if you take a greater Vessel, than your Tincture requires, the
Vinegar must necessarily have a greater Fire to cause it to ascend, by reason
of the height it must unavoidably rise, or it cannot be distilled; and in
sustaining so forcible a Fire, there is great danger of Corrupting the Tincture
it self. Here also is required another Caution; viz. this, after two thirds are
distilled off, you must change your Vessel, and put the remaining Matter into a
less Glass Body, and thence distill off the Vinegar, until the Remanency
acquire the just thickness of a Poultis. Also take heed, as Basilius seems to
intimate, that you distill not off the Vinegar unto dryness, lest the Tincture
by Adustion be wholly corrupted. Notwithstanding all This my own Precaution now
given, I could not choose, but labor a whole year to little purpose, often
repeating this Tincture with a v^in endeavor, whence I was almost as often
weary of Chemistry through desperation; for my Tincture was of no essicacy in
Medicine; because a mere Caput-mortuum only, unsavory and of no value. Hence
consider, how little any Process profits, whether set down in Writing, or
received from a Friend by ward of mouth, unl^^s you set to your hand, and
practically learn every parti^^lar of the Work sit to be observed in opera^ing.
Also see, how liberally I deal with you, in revealing that, the ignorance of
which has put me to great trouble and change. The manual Operation, which is
vequisite for edulcorating this Pap-like Matter remaining in the bottom, is
this. Upon this Matter pour distilled Water, and gently abstract the same by
Balneo. When you have repeated this a third time, you will find the Water to
come off sweet; which time must be observed with very great diligence. For if
you be deceived in that, your Work is at an end, all your labor lost, and you
shall get nothing, but a Caput Mortuum. For as soon as twenty, or at most
thirty drops of sweet water come forth, an Acidity appears again and distills
forth, which the unwary judging to be an Acidity of the Vinegar formerly added,
proceed in distilling, expecting the Water to come forth sweet; but this being
the Acidity of Antimony, which (the Vinegar being extracted) immediately follows
the Sweet Water, that persisting to distill destroys the whole Virtue of the
Antimony, and leaves nothing remaining but an unsavory Caput-mortuum.
Therefore be thou more wary, and as soon as this Sweet Water comes forth, cease
to distill, and take out the Pap-like Matter residing in the Bottom, and putting
that into another Glass, permit it to dry at the Solar-Heat; or else evaporate
all its moisture with most gentle Fire, that it may remain a dry Powder: and
when you have avoided this danger, then go on.


grateful.

This Powder grind upon a Marble or Glass, first made hot; then put it in a
Glass Body, and pour upon it of the best rectified Spirit of Wine, so much as
will stand above it three Fingers thickness: then set it in a Digestive heat,
as above, for extracting the Tincture of Antimony, which will be high colored
and pleasantly red to amazement; and it will deposit a certain Earth, or
feculency in the bottom.

This Extraction is sweet, grateful, and so very efficacious in Medicine, as no
man, that has not experienced the same, will give credit thereunto. The Feces
in the bottom retain the Venenosity, but the Extraction Medicine only, which
Experience has taught to be a profitable Remedy for men and Beasts. For if
three or four Granes of this Medicine be taken, it expels the Leprosy and
Gallick Lues, purifies the Blood, drives away Melancholy, and resists all
Venom: and whosoever labors with Shortness of Breath, Difficulty of Breathing,
or Prickings of the Sides, he may be cured by the Use of this Medicine: These
Medicaments, which perform their Operations, not by sensible force, as
Catharticks, Emeticks, Diaphoreticks, and the like are wont to operate, but
insensibly uniting their own more pure Universal Spirit unto our Spirits, amend
Nature and restore it to health, are not to be used, unless where the Body has
first been cleansed from the impurities af peccant Humors, otherwise you cast
these Pearls into a Dunghill, where (overwhelmed with Filths) they cannot shine
and manifest their Virtues. For although, by reason of their manifold Virtues,
they may be called Universals, yet they are to be numbered with Topics, before
which Generals are to be used, according to the Opinion of Galen, and all
Physicians. The Tincture here spoken of, performs all those Cures, which
Basilius mentions, if the use of it be continued for some time. For where that
Saying is of force, Medicines used help, continued heal, it must certainly be
applied to those especially, which insensibly operate.


which effects many other wonderful Things, if rightly administered, and in due
time.

That Yellow Powder, of which mention is made above before it is extracted with
Spirit of Wine, may be ground upon a hot Stone, and then put into Eggs Indeed
soft Eggs, according to the Saying; are always warily and softly to be handled;
but in these hard Eggs also, I have somewhat to advise you of; for it after you
have taken out the Yolk, you be not mindful to break that Pellicle, which
divides it from the White, you will wonder to see how your Balsom will intrude
it self within the White, and deprive you of a great part thereof.
boiled hard, in place of the Yolk, which is to be taken out: set these Eggs in
a moist Place, or Cellar, and the Powder will resolve into a yellow Liquor.

This admirable Liquor heals all green Wounds, if soon after a Wound is made,
it be put therein with a soft Feather, and the Wound well covered with a
Styptick, or other Preservative Plaster. All fresh Wounds inflicted either by
Prick or Cut, are healed by this Liquor, without Putrefaction, Inflammation, or
any superfluity of Filth, so perfectly; as unto Him, who created Heaven and
Earth, and in them insited such a Medicine, due Thanks and Praise deservedly
ought to be given. In all old, malignant and corrosive Wounds, use this
Extraction or Balsom of Antimony, and it will never fail Thee in thy necessity.
And thou thy self, after me wilt write an Encomium of its Praises and publish
the Virtues thereof, by which externally applied miserable Mortals may be made
happy: for the Wolf and If Chirurgions would h^re give credit to our Author,
with how great Care would they prepare this Balsom for themselves, and with how
great Fruit, and how frequently might they we the same? For I interposing my
Judgment must say, that Basilius here comes far short, in expressing its due
Praises; for it performs more, than he declares of it. One short History, drawn
from the Centuries of my Medicinal Observations, will confirm the truth of what
I I have said. A certain Woman, about forty Years of Age, for seven years
together suffered great dolours in her left Breast, which were accompanied with
a Tumor and Hardness. Those Surgeons and Physicians, whom she advised with,
did all with one Consent judge her Disease to be a Cancer; and she was also
judged to labor with a Cancer, by the Censure of that famous Practitioner, who
at Orscotus (a Village about the Duk^s-Wood) very laudably and happily
practiced Chirurgy, and drew to himself a vast number of People: for after he
had, for three Month together, in vain endeavored to heal this Disease, he
severely pronounced her Breast was to be cut off, or the Disease could not be
extirpated. The Woman, resolving rather to suffer all Dolours of the Disease,
then to sustain so cruel and inhumane a R^^^d^, c^^^ to me. I^ beholding her
Breast, found it wholly infl^^ed, and twi^^ as bigg as the other, and an
abundance of thin Humors flowing to the Wound. I purposed to try all I could
do, rather than suffer this miserable Woman to peri^h; and thinking of this
Balsom resolved to try, whether That, which in other Diseases had justified the
promises of its Author, would sail me here. Therefore, to the Diseased Woman
waiting my Answer, I said; in eight days time I would resolve her, whether
there was any hopes of Cure or no, without Cutting off; and thereupon gave her
this Remedy to anoint her Breast therewith: and which is very strange, in the
Space of two Days the Matter came to Ripeness, and a just Consistency.
Therefore, I then filled with good hope, adjoined inward and outward Remedies,
which seemed convenient for the purpose, and in two Months Space the Woman's
Breast was perfectly healed. Upon this I, not without a peculiar Joy, blessed
and praised the Lord, that had conferred so great virtue on this Balsom.
Cancer yield to it; Rottenness in the Benes, malignant Ulcers corroded and
perforate with Worms fly from it, and it restores to pristine Health, and
provides Entertainment for that with it self, when its fixedness shall be duly
used inwardly, and other Convenient Means duly applied outwardly.

Also Glass of Antimony is by me two ways reduced to an Oil, in distillation
(as they call it) by Alembeck.

Take Glass of Antimony; as it is made of the Minera of Antimony, subtily
pulverized, and extract its Tincture with distilled Vinegar; afterward abstract
the Vinegar thence, and edulcorate the remaining Powder. Then pour on Spirit of
Wine, with which extract the Tincture, and circulate it in a Pelican well
closed, for an entire Month. Afterward, distill it per se, without any
Addition, with a certain singular This is the Work, this the Labor, very few
true Sons of Art (whom Apollo loves) could extract this Tincture by Alembeck.
There is need (as Basilius says) of a cereain peculiar manual Operation. This
Tincture I sought many years, and at length ( GOD favoring me) found the same.
Will thou have me discover it to Thee by an Aenigma? I see thou desire I
should, therefore take this Mystery, thus. Alciatus, painting a Dolphin
wreathed a^^^ an Anchor, writ these words: Make not too much have. Esteem of
this A^monition, not only in all your Life, but also in this very matter, as
very profitable to you: for the hasty Bitch (as the saying is) brings forth
blind Whelps. Therefore I again and again admoni^h you, to cause wings to be
prepared for your Matter, by Juno, Bacchus and Vulcan; but, as you love your
Life, permit it not suddenly to sl^^, rather deliver it to Mercury to be
instructed by him gradually to accustom it self to flying; yea, bind it with a
Cord, lest (as a Bird got out of a Cage, and past your Reach) it through
Ignorance approach too ^^^r the Se^, and with Icarus, having its Feathers
burnt, fall headlong into the Sea. But after you have detained it for its due
time, loose its Bonds, that it may fly, and come to those fortunate Islands,
unto which all Sons of Art direct their Sight, and whereunto all Adeptists aim
to arrive, as unto their desired and long sought Harbor. Here, O Lover of Art,
you should not be offended, or angry with me, as if I deluded you (desirous of
the Knowledge of this Secret) by a Tantalick. Apple shown. What should I do? I
in this Case give you advice. Would you have me cast Pearls before Swine? and
unto all men expose the Mystery, which the Ancient kept so holily, and might
not reveal it, unless to the worthy Sons of Art only? Thou thy self would
bewail nothing more, and would even execrate me, for doing so. They, who
understand me, understand Art: and unto such as are Chemists, have I opened the
way, which if they diligently travel in, they may arrive, where they desire to
be. No man did ever so clearly reveal this to me; but by reading the Writings
of Authors, strenuously laboring, and trusting in GOD without fainting or
desperation (which is a most efficatious kind of Prayer) I at length attained
to what I have. Do thou study, and be diligent, that thou may comprehend:
for he, who, knows how to render Tinctures volatile, is already admitted into
the very Penetrale and Conclave of the Chemical Art; because of all other
Mysteries the Method is the same. Peruse the Fables, search into the Riddles,
and consider the Parables of all wise men; they all tend hither, and all say
the same. Compare the Parables of others, with this my Aenigma, and this with
them, that you may understand how much Light I have added in all, and how Easy
I have made the Way to those serene Temples of Wisdom.
Dexterity; and you will thence receive a wonderful grateful and sweet
Medicine, in the form of a Red Oil, of which afterward may be formed the Stone
of Fire.

This Oil is the Quintescence, and the highest, that can be written of
Antimony; as you may find in my former Writings, wherein I have made a short
Declaration of Antimony, and in which I showed also, that there are four
Instruments required for its Preparation, and the fifth is that, in which
Vulcan has fixed his Residence. Understand thus: four Preparations must be
made before it can be perfected; and the fifth is the Utility, and effect of
the Work in the Body of man. The first Labor is Calcinatian and Liquefaction
into Glass. The second is Digestion, by which Extraction is performed. The
third is Coagulation. The fourth is Distillation into Oil, and after that
Separation follows Fixation, by the ultimate Coagulation, through which the
Matter is deduced to a perlucid Ficry Stone: which that it may operate upon
Metals, must be fermented, for acquiring its penetrative Property; but not so
much, as that Ancient Stone of Philosophers, because it is not Universal, but
only tingeth particularly. Touching which, about the End of this Book, more
shall be spoken when we treat of the Stone of Fire.

This distilled Oil Had I not known Basilius, I should have thought him, in
this place to have dealt like a Deceiver, or Vagabond Medicaster with you: but
the Matter it self unto me, so often speaks for him, as I religiously scruple
even in the least to doubt his Promises. For whatsoever I have experienced (but
there are very few Processes contained in this Book, which I have not tried:
for He, from the very first, was my Teacher, Friend and Patron) I have found so
very efficacious beyond the Author's Promises, that it seems to me, he has
been sparing in declaring the virtues of his Medicaments, least in praising
them, he should be thought too much to commend himself. Yet I shall not here in
his stead, undertake to comment much on their laudable Virtues. Let him who
believes not, make trial, that he may know. Whosoever shall by his own
incredulity be deterred from experiencing the Truth hereof, he will suffer
punishmtnt enough for his Offense, by the Want of the fruit of the same. For
this Oil, if rightly used in its time, is a Medicine truly universal. Consider,
I pray, what I say, if rightly used in its time, that is, the Body being first
purged from gross and crnde Humors, and general Medicines used (as you may
remember I did before admonish) this Oil is an Universal Medicine, for healing
all Diseases Curable. For Chemists are not so mad, or conceited, by reason of
the Goodness and Virtue of their Medicaments, as not to judge some Diseases to
be Unsanable. Who can restore any of the Principal Members absumed by
putridness? yet I would not have all Diseases judged unsanable, by these our
Chemical Remedies, which are every where vulgarly condemned as such. As for
Example, how often have I restored the Cryst^lline Humor taken away; which who
judges not impossible to be reduced? But, of these and the like, another place
will be more fit to write. Only of tllis Medicament I say, that it heals
Fevers of every kind; yea, even the Quartan it self (that ancient Reproach of
Physicians) and in Chronical Distempers manifests wonderful Effects. Here among
many of my Observations I will give you one only Experiment. In the Year 1665.
A young Maid, aged twenty one Years, swollen to an enormous Grossness with the
Dropsy, came to me for help. I took this only for her Medicine. For I gave her
no other thing, then this very Medicament twice a Day, to which I daily added a
Clister: and in twenty days she had sweat so much, as her Body was lessened
half an Ell. Within that space of twenty Days, as I said, she also voyded of
urine (provoked by the same Medicament) not a little, but her Sweat was
wonderful. Note: my Friend, and Lover of Art, thac this Oil, whether you
prepare it. your self, or receive it from another prepared by him, does not
imitate other Diaphoreticks in operating, which being used, will in their first
Dose provoke Sweats. For if this be given to a Patient whose Body is obstructed
with Humors, the first Dose acts nothing, but gently opens the Passages, that
Sweats may be procured; the next day it causes a gentle and kindly breathing
of Sweats only; the third Day it Sweats moderately; but the fourth Day, and
thence forward, it causes such an abundance of Sweat, as the Waters proceeding
thence run through the Bed upon the Floor. Here is need of a true Physician;
Hercules Club will profit little, if not in che Hand of Hercules himself.


of which we have now spoken, effects all things, that are necessary to be
known by a Physician, and which he has need of, in his Cures.

The Dose of it before Coagulation is eight Grains taken in Wine. It makes a
man very young again, delivers him from all Melancholy, and whatsoever in the
Body of man grows and increases, as the Hairs and Nayls, falls off, and the
whole man is renewed as a Phoenix (if such a feigned Bird, which is only here
for Example sake named by me, can any where be found upon the Earth) is renewed
by Fire. And this Medicine can no more be burned by the Fire, than the Feathers
of that unknown Salamander: for it consumes all Symptoms in the Body, like
consuming Fire, to which it is deservedly likened; it drives away every Evil,
and expels all That, which Aurum-Potabile is capable to expel. The Let no man
here prodigally or rashly wast his own Gold, now he hears of the Astrum of Sol,
nor expose himself to so great Hazard, as to enter a perilous Combat with
vulgar Mercury. In the Chemical World another Sol shines, and another Mercury
attends on Jupiter. Yet the Chemical Sol, or Mercury here, is not Gold, but
more excellent than all Gold; yea, more potent than every Mercury, although
fabulous, and feigned to be capable to restore the Dead to Life: it is the
Gold, and Argent-vive of Philosophers, which Basilius here hints at. But we
have treated, and must treat of Antimony only.
Astrum of Sol only excels every Medicine of the World when rightly prepared to
perfect Fixation: for the Astrum of Sol, and the Astrum of Mercury arise almost
from the very same Blood of their Mother, and from one Original of vivisick
Sanity.

Now, no man has cause to fear, that this Oil of Antimony Extracted first with
distilled Vinegar, and afterward with most pure and subtle Spirit of Wine, and
then further exalted (as highly as possible) by Vulcan, will in any wise purge,
or excite frequent Stools, or make any Alterations: for it effects nothing of
all this, but by Sweat, Urine, and Spittle, expels the very Root of the Disease
to amazement, and restores whatsoever is corrupted by any Symptom.

But Common Glass of Antimony, being ground to Powder, put into a little Wine (
viz. six Grains or more of the Glass, according to the strength of Nature) and
that mixture set in heat for one Night, and in the Morning the Wine This is a
Common Vomitory, or Emetick Wine, well known, which all wandering Empiricks now
use in all Places, sometimes with a prosperous, sometimes the Contrary, always
ambiguous Success; which proceeds partly from the Physician, and partly from
the Medicine. This is a Thing to be bewailed; for as histories relate^ that
George Castriot King of the Epirots, when the Emperor of the Turks had often
asked him, how his Sword, which he had sent, when Peace was made, according to
his agreement with the Turk, could perpetrate such wonders as he spoke of,
saying he saw not any thing singular in it, made this Answer: I did indeed und
the Sword of Scanderbeg but not Scanderbeg's Arm, with which that Sword was
managed, so as to perform so great Miracles: so, very many Chemical Medicines,
are either dead, or (which is more to be deplored) oftentimes the Causes of
Death, when not managed by the hand of a skilful Doctor. Which Unhappy Success
of this Medicine is caused from the Mercurial Properties, with which it is too
much impregnated (as Basilius well notes in this Place) and which I am wont to
correct in this manner. Take Glass of Antimony, most pure, iiij. Venetian Borax
ss. melt them together. This being artificially done, you will have a Green
Glass transparent as an Emrald. Grind this to a subtle Power, upon which pour
French-Wine, and permit the mixture to sland for several days in a Moderate
Heat.

Of this Wine give to the Sick, from j. to ij, according to the Age, Habit of
Body, Strength, and other Things either Natural, or not Natural, which the
Prudence of the Physician (when he sits as Judge, whether the Life of any One
is likely to be continued or not) ought always well to consider. That this
Emetick Wine may be given to the Sick without peril, Exprience the most certain
Mistress of Physicians has taught me, and yet more than this: for when the
Wine poured in the Powder shall be all exhausted, if you pour on more French
Wine, that will also be imbibed with the same Virtues. For here Antimony
discovers in it self to be somewhat, that is of all wonderful Things the most
admirable: because it contains in it self inexhaustible Treasures, and although
you take from it, yet you diminish not the Virtues thereof. A like stupendous
Miracle also is in extracting the Vinegar of the same, and in other Works fit
to be kept under the Seal of Harpocrates.


poured off clear from the remaining Powder, and so drunk by the Patient,
purges downward exciting several Stools, and oftentimes also provokes
Vomiting, by reason of the Mercurial immature Property, which is yet inherent
in the Glass, as every intelligent Physician will easily judge, and indeed he
ought further to Examine how this Glass, when he would purge with it, ought to
be proved, and administered in a due Dose.

Many men are required for the Searching out the Powers and Virtues of this
Subject. For I alone, by reason of the shortness of my Time, could not dive
into and search out all things, do thou thy self set about the Work, and after
me, yea with me, thou will praise me and I thee: if you find out any more; I
praise you by these my Writings, and shall commend you out of the Sepulcher to
which I am destinated, although in Body thou art to me unknown, nor ever had I
any discourse with thee, because perhaps not yet born.

Common Glass of Antimony is also by Addition distilled into a laudable and
salutary oil, which may be used without peril, with very great profit in the
Epilepsie; as here following I shall teach.

Grind the Glass of Antimony to as subtle a Powder as possibly you can, then
put it into a Glass-Vessel with a flat Bottom, and pour upon the Powder the
Juice of unripe Grapes, then having well luted the Vessel digest it for certain
Days. This being done abstract all the Juice; afterward, grind it well moystned
with Spirit of Vinegar, and a double Weight of clarified Sugar. Then, having
put it into a Retort, in the Name of the Most High begin to distill, and at last
administer a vehement Fire, and you will acquire a most Red Oil; which must be
clarified unto Transparency with When the Author says, it must be clarified
with Spirit of Wine unto Transparency; the Admonition is short indeed, but of
great weight. For he wills, that this Oil should be driven over by Alembeck;
the signification and manual Operation of which, I have already above taught.
Spirit of Wine.

The Use of this, given in a small Quantity, is found to be most profitable.
With this Oil Spirit of Salt may be joined, and the Mixture poured upon a
subtle prepared Calx of Gold, (which how it should be made I have already
taught in other of my Writings) which has before, together with its Water,
passed by Alembeck. If this be done, this Menstruum takes to its self the
Tincture Do you think, O Lover of Chemistry, you understand what you read? You
cannot understand, unless either divinely Philip, or humanely Oedipus, appear
to you, and clearly teach you the way of preparing this Tincture. The
difficulty of the Aenigma consists in this; viz. that all Menstruums, with
which Tinctures are extracted, must necessarily be void of Color; otherwise
how can you know: whether you obtain the Tincture you would extract, or only
retract the same you poured on? I will not detain you with a tedious Discourse
full of ambiguities, but lead you as it were by the hand, showing you how I
instituted this Process in the Year 1665. If you thence, by your attention, and
comparing the precedent with the present, and these with those that follow,
reap any profit, open the Bosom of your Heart, that no part of this may fall to
the Earth. I took that Red Oil, thus far prepared as is already showed, and
rectified it by Retort; and then acquired a white Oil, of an acid but grateful
Taste. Upon this I powered half so much Spirit of Salt: the Mixture I digested
in (...) Phial for a full Month, that these two Spirits might be mell
conjoined; afterward, for the better conjunction of them, I distilled them
thrice by Retort. Then I poured them upon the Calx of Gold (the Method of
preparing which you will find in other Writings of Basilius) and set them
together in Digestion for a Month; which being elapsed, the Menstruum was
tinged with a d^^y Yellow Color inclining to redness. I leisurely poured off
the Tincture, and having put it into a Retort, with gentle Fire abstracted the
Humidity, that a red Powder might remain in the Bottom. This Powder I
edulcorated with distilled Water, and again extracted the Tincture with Spirit
of Wine; then I rendered this Dragon volatile, and gave him his own Tail to be
devoured for six whole Months, and obtained a Tincture most pleasant and
grateful; ten or twelve Grains of which given to the Sick, provoke Sweat,
comfort the Natural Powers, and (not to amuse the Intelligent with words) i^
all Diseases both of Humane and other Bodies, it is an Universal Medicine.

Since it has happened to me here to make mention of the most excellent of all
Tinctures, I will once teach the Chemist what will be of use to him for the
future. That is to say, it is of great concern to know, with what Menstruum
every Tincture should be extracted, For it is not sufficient (according to the
erreneous Opinion of many) that Menstruums be sweet and void of Corosion; but
it is also behooful, that there be in them a peculiar Amity and Convenience
with the Mercury of the Body, on which they are poured, that from the same they
may extract its true and sincere Sulphur. By Example, I shall teach you
somewhat more clearly. Distilled Water extracts the Tincture from Sulphur, made
of the Glass of Antimony by distilled Vinegar. But if in this Operation you
persuade your self you have separated the Pure from the Impure, you will be
deceived: for this Water imbibes a certain Salt, which infects the Tincture;
but Spirit of Wine rectified is its proper Menstruum: because that only assumes
(...) volatile Sulphur thereof, and has no Commerce with the Salt.

The same happens in Tincture of Corals, which is extracted with Spirit of Wine
distilled upon Grange Pills: for here you obtain not the sincere Tincture of
Corals; because, by this Menstruum, the pure Sulphur is not separated from the
Body of the Corals. The like Error to be committed in many other Things, I have
observed by Experience, which should be esteemed the best Mistress, unl^^s we
take it for granted that chargeable and fruitless Processes are necessarily
required in this Art. But that I may conclude with the Tincture, whence all
this Discourse has proceeded; I would have no man to think this to be the
Aurum potabile of Philosophers: for this would be a very great Error in
Philosophy, and give occasion to Sophisters (as their manner is) to prefer
their Sophisms before the Truth it self. Although this Tincture is most
precious, and a Tincture of Gold, yet it has only ass^med the Color of Gold:
but the weight thereof, which is proper to Aurum potabile, adheres not
thereunto.

Touching the potable Medicine here is not place of speaking, unless I would
transgress the limits, which I have at this time prescribed my self, of
Commenting upon the Triumphant Chariot of Antimony, which our Basil Valentine
has made for it so truly magnificent. Otherwise, I should declare, how Sol
might be prepared by Venus and Vulcan, so as in the space of two hours to
resolve it self into Mercury united with Bacchus, leaving very few feces; which
Mercurial Menstruum may again be separated from the resolved Gold; and so you
might acquire a most grateful Liquor very ponderous, which can never afterward
be reduced to its former Consistence. This very Operation I have showed to some
Curious Lovers of Chemistry. But of these elsewhere another Occasion of Writing
will be given.


of Gold only, and leaves the Body untouched.

When the Fermentation is made, I shall have need of a vast Quantity of Paper
to declare all the Arcanum's of Nature, which by this Medicine are effected
beyond the Opinion of all men. I urge this so much the more earnestly to the
Physician, that he may consider those things which I propose Philosophically,
betake himself to labor, perform this. Preparation of Antimony, and deduce it
to Use; then, he himself will daily find more Praise, and learn from it more
Operations than any of the other Physicians could have prescribed him.

When you shall have brought Antimony so far; and duly perfected your Work, in
which you are to act prudently, and the matter is to be largely and profoundly
weighed, that by Labor you may acquire Experience; then may you boast that you
have obtained the Magistery, which is known or communicated to few. This
Magistery mixed with a Solution or Tincture of Corals, and exhibited with
Cordial Water effects Wonders in Diseases, that are to be cured by purifying
the Blood! And whatsoever Distemper is offered to you, in which the Blood is
corrupted by any Accident, this Magistery heals it, exhilarates the Heart,
promotes Chastity and Honesty, and renders man apt and ^it for every thing he
takes in hand.

For all these Benefits to the Creator and Conserver of all Things, thanks is
always to be given from the bottom of our Heart; because he has with so great
Compassion respected his Creatures, Infirm both in Body and Mind, and supplied
us with Means, by which the Diseases of either may be healed, and we in every
necessity obtain solace, assistance and perfect Help.

Now my Intention is to proceed, and speak somewhat of the Arcanum of Antimony,
but with very great Brevity.

Take of Antimony most subtiely pulverized 1. Part, of Sal-Armoniack Of
Antimony and Sal-Armoniack equal parts are to be taken, which Basilius seems to
intend, but I know not how he forgot to mention it.
, so called, which is brought from Armenia, also pulverized; mix these, and
putting them into a Retort distill them together, That with one and the same
labor, the Sal-Armoniack together with the Antimony, may be distilled and
sublimed, such an Instrument as this I but show you, describing all its Parts,
may be made.


Here place the Figure in the 82 Page.

A. is the Furnace. B. the Retort. C. the Recipient. D. the Aperture with a
Pipe of a Moderate bigness, on which may be set the Alembeck E. The other
Furnace is F, which containing a moderate Fire, sublimes what falls into the
receiving Vessel up into the Alembeck E. And so the Matter which is distilled
from the Retort B, by the Fire of the Furnace F, is presently sublimed; Which
may not only be useful in this Case, but also in every Sublimation of other
Matters.



and upon that which comes forth in the Distillation pour common distilled
Rainwater, but let it first be made hot, and so by edulcorating remove all the
Salt, that no Acrimony may remain, and the Antimony will appear like pure,
white shining Feathers. Dry them with subtle Heat, and having put them in a
Glass circulatory or Pelican, pour on them good and perfectly rectified Spirit
of Vitriol, and Circulate the Mixture till both be well conjoined This Union
must be so firm, as in distilling one may not be separated from the other;
otherwise you will lose your Labor and Cost. Of how great moment this Union is
in Chemistry, they best know, who only by confounding two things together,
think they shall effect Wonders; but afterward (their Experience failing them)
they learn how great difference there is between Union and Confusion: for
Things confounded receive no Virtue, that was not in them before; but by Union,
I know not what Spirit is ingested, which performs such things as the Mind of
man could never perceive to have their being thence. Hence consider in the
Generation of Animals (who would believe it!) how from the Union of Elements is
generated Sight, Taste, Touching, and so many Powers of Animals, which are
insited in none of the Elements, and yet arise from them united. Whenever it
happens, that any Tincture seems to have united it self with its Menstruum, and
afterward may be separated therefrom, that therefore is because Matrimony is
not legitimately Celebrated, nor the Union in a due manner perfect; Which you
shall more than once see to happen in the Tincture of Sol and Antimony. The
Instrument, by which I conjoyn my Tinctures, and am wont to copulate them in an
undissolvible Copulation, you shall find described hereafter in this ^very
Book. That in Spirit of Wine is to be noted, which happens not in other
Menstruums; because it is most easily united to Things, and again with a slight
artifice separated from the same.


and united, then distill the whole, and pour on Spirit of Wine, circulate
again; then let separation be made, and remove the Feces settling to the Bottom,
but keep the Arcanum which remains mixed with the Spirit of Wine and Vitriol.

Now when you again rectify this Arcanum, one drop of it exhibited with Rose
water, is more available than a Pot full of the Decoction of Herbs; for it
causes a good Appetite, corrects the Stomach, and concocts all malignity in
it, drives away Sadness and Melancholy, makes good Blood and a good Digestion;
in the Suffocation of the Matrix and Cholick Passion (both which it wonderfully
appeaseth) it is instead of a Treasure of inestimable price and deserves
Commendation, not easily expressible by Words.

After the Arcanum of Antimony next in order follows the Elixir This Process as
it is easy to perform, so it may by us be easily passed over, lest we should
seem to take Pen in hand, rather from an itching desire of Writing, then for
illaminating Things obscure.
of the same, which you may prepare in this manner.

Take, in the name of the Lord, good Minera of Antimony, grind it subtlely, and
sublime it with half so much Sal-Armoniack. Whatsoever shall be sublimed put
into a Glass Retort, and thrice distill it, separating the Feces every time.
Afterward remove from it the Sal-Armoniack by edulcoration, and reverberate the
Matter of Antimony in a Vessel well closed, with moderate Fire (not forcing too
much) until it become like the Earth of Cinnabar. This being done, pour on it
strong distilled Wine Vinegar, and extract its Redness; afterward abstract the
Vinegar, until a Powder remain. This Abstraction must be made in Balnco. Then,
extract this Powder with Spirit of Wine, that the Feces may be separated, and
you will have a pure and clear Extraction. Having finished this Operation, put
this Spirit of Wine together with the Extraction into a Cucurbit, and add
thereto a little of the Tincture of Corals, and of the Quintessence o^ Rubarb,
and then administer the Dose of three or four Grains.

It causes gentle Stools, and purges without Gripings of the Belly; and
indeed if you have proceeded well in preparing, it renders the Blood agil^, and
is a Medicine apt for those who desire Gentle Purgations.

Here perhaps some Physician may wonder, how it is possible, that this Medicine
should cause moderate and easy Purgations, when as Antimony is a Matter
vehement and forcible, and to it is joined Rubarb, which of it self also has a
Purging Property. But let him cease his admiration, and know that the venomous
purging power of Antimony is by this Preparation so mortified, as it can
apprehend or expel nothing; but as soon as some purging Simple is adjoined to
it, it then according to the powers of its own Nature performs the Office of
opening and purging. But Antimony prepared has no action upon the Note here
very seriously, that Galenick Catharticks have power of expelling, but not of
Correcting Humors; but Chemical Purgers are endued with either Faculty; and
certainly it should not be minded how much is expelled, but how much is healed,
which the occult power of Medicaments prepared Chymically does much better
effect, than that common and public violence of purging forcibly.
Stomach, thence to expel its impurities; but by the purging Medicine, its
adjunct, acquires a more open Field, and therein can operate without Impediment
any other way, and discern, yea search ont the way of Effecting that better, to
which it was ordained and prepared, without hindrance.

I would have all men to credit these my words, since I have no necessity to
write other than the Truth. This Elixir in such manner prepared, as I have
taught, penetrates and purges the Body, as Antimony purges Gold, and frees it
from all Impurity: So that if I would at large commemorate all the powers and
virtues thereof, I must put up my Supplications to the GOD of Heaven, and
entreat him to vouchsafe me a longer Life, that I might laud his wonderful
Works, and search out further, and according to Verity communicate to others
what I have found, thac they with me excited to admiration, may publicly
render thanks to their Creator, for his so great Blessings.

But to proceed in my purpose, having once begun, I here describe the Virtues
of Antimony, as far as I have experienced them; yet what is hid from my
knowledge, I ought to pass over in silence. For it becomes me not to give my
Judgment of things unknown, and which I have not my self experimented, but I
leave them, commending the same to other Judges, who with study and labor in
this Subject, have made some good progress. No one man can be so expert in
knowing the Virtues of Antimony, as nothing shall remain unknown by him, not
only by reason of the shortness of his Life (as I before said) but also, and
chiefly because some new thing is daily found in it.

Therefore, let men know, that Antimony not onle purges Gold, cleanses and
frees it from every peregrine Matter, and from all other Metals, but also (by a
power innate in it self) effects the same in Men and Beasts. If a Farmer
purpose in himself to keep up and fatten any of his Cattle, as for Example an
Hog; two or three days before, let him give to the Swine a convenient Dose of
crude Antimany, about half a dram mixed with his Food, that by it he may be
purged; through which Purgation he will not only acquire an Appetite to his
Meat, but the sooner increase and be fatned. And if any Swine labor with a
Disease about his Liver or other Parts, or else be Leprous, Antimony causes
the Leprosy to be dried up and expelled.

This Example seems indeed to sound somewhat gross and rustical, to the Ears of
Great men especially; but my purpose in proposing it only was to the end, that
private Men and Laics, whose Brains were not by Nature fabricated to the most
subtle Philosophy of the Learned, may see the Truth hereof, in the very
Operation it self, with their own Eyes; also that by this rude Proposal, they
might give greater credit to my other Writings, in which I have spoken a little
more subtely of these Things. Yet I would have no man, following me as his
Author, to give a Medicine of Crude Antimony to men; for mute Animals can in
their Stomach concoct much more hard Foods, than the tender Complexion of Men
is able to digest. Wherefore, he who would rightly and with profit use
Antimony, he must learn the Preparation thereof first, and afterward know the
Dose, as what is convenient for the Young, and what for the Old; how much may
be given to robust Bodies, and how much to the weak, in which no small Mystery
of this Art consists, the ignorance of which will do more hurt than an
imprudent Physician can do good.

Should I confirm all things by Examples, that would be the Cause of a very
Prolix Writing; therefore I will break off this Discourse, and pass on to
another Preparation of Antimony, and describe its fixedness; which acts like
Wine, from which its Spirit is subtracted and separated from its Body. This
Spirit heals the Body internally, and if externally applied, draws to it self
all the Heat of a part inflamed: but, on the contrary, when of the Wine,
Vinegar is made, it cools, either inwardly or outwardly applied; although the
Wine and Vinegar have their Original from the same Root, and proceed from the
same Stock. The Reason of this diversity is, because Vinegar is made through
digestion only, by which Putrefaction of the Wine follows, together with a
Vegetable Fixation: but on the contrary, Spirit of Wine is made with Separation
by distilling, or vegetable subliming, which renders the Spirit volatile. By
like reason Antimony is prepared, and according to its diverse Preparations has
diverse Effects, and diversely communicates its Gifts to us, which are scarcely
comprehensible by the humane Intellect. But the Fixedness thereof, touching
which I here treat, is thus prepared.

Take of Antimony as much as you will, grind it to a subtle Powder, which put
into a Cucurbit, and pour on it of Aqua fortis so much as will stand above it
the breadth of six Fingers; and having well and firmly closed the Vessel, place
it in a subtle heat for ten Days, that the Matter may be extracted. Decant off
this Extraction pure and clear, and filter it, that it may be free from all
feculencies and Impurities; then put this Extraction into a Glass-Body, and
abstract all the Aqua fortis by Distillation in Ashes or Sand, and in the
bottom the Powder of Antimony will remain yellow and dry. Upon this pour
distilled Rainwater, and put it in a like Glass in moderate heat, and you will
have a Red Extraction. This again filter, and gently distill off the Rainwater
by B. M. and the Powder will remain red in the Bottom. Upon this red Powder
pour strong distilled Vinegar: this Vinegar will in some time draw to it self
the Color red as Blood, and put down Feces. Afterward distill off the Vinegar,
and there will again remain a red Powder. This Powder reverberate continually
for three days together without ceasing in an open Fire; This being done,
abstract the Tincture from it by Spirit of Wine, and separate the Feces
remaining from the Tincture. All these Works being with so great labor
performed, again separate the Spirit of Wine by distillation in Balneo, and a
fixed Diaphoretick Antimony is sold in Shops, but what here the Author shows
us, by the name of Fixed Powder of Antimony, is not to be bought for Silver or
Gold; the Virtues of which so far exceed all that, of which the Common Sort are
Partakers: In vain with so great attention and study (of which in preparing
this Powder, there is very great need) did our Philosopher intend this Work, if
these Mysteries of so great Effects must come to the handling of the Vulgar, or
be publicly sold for Money. Let him who attains to this fixed Powder use it in
Chronical Diseases, especially where Sweats are to be excited, and he will see
Effects causing him to rejoice, if he use it in himself; and by which he will
be glorified, if he use it in others.
Red Powder will remain, which operates wonderfully.

Half a dram of this being taken thrice a day, viz. Morning, Noon, and Night,
or oftener, hurts no man; for it expels all clotted Blood out of the Body, and
being long taken securely opens all perilous Imposthums, and expels them;
radically cures the French Disease, causes new Hairs to grow, and notably
renovates the whole man.

Now, since I have taught to make a fixed Powder of Antimony, and the
Extraction thereof very commodious for Use, leaving this Discourse, I purpose
briefly to treat of the Flowers of Antimony, which may be many ways prepared.
But the greatest part How much Chemistry was impeached by Calumnies, in the
times of Basilius, is manifest by the very many Relics of Writers, with which
some Theologicians, imprudently judging what they understood not, and
Politicians (not much more prudent than them) have defamed their own Books; and
in the mean while also given occasion to Others, more thoroughly searching into
the matter, of judging those very Authors, with no greater circumspection to
have likewise bespattered other innocent Persons with their Censure. I do not
here speak of those Writers, who sharply reprehend certain Vagabond Sophisters,
that covering their own Wickedness, under the Pretext of a most noble Art, do
by a great Name impose great Frauds upon the People. For this kind of men are
not only worthy of severe Reprehension, but also of due Punishment. But, what
Evil do they deserve, if under their Denomination the Good be abused? Why is
the most certain and so salutary and profitable an Art proscribed? Because
there are men found, which use not the Art it self, but the Name and Shadow of
this Art. Yet I am unwilling to prolong this Apology, lest Envy, which has
been the greatest Cause of Calumny, fall upon me in this manner lamenting,
whilst I hear Basilius encouraging his, and have reason to applaud our own
Times, in which some part of that most thick Cloud, which cast out so many
Thunders, is already vanished. In Shops they now sell Medicaments, Chymically
prepared (as they say) and those very Persons, who are willing mostly to be
esteemed Hippocratick Disciples, scarcely dare to condemn Chemistry, and since
they call into use what are made by the Chemical Art, they cannot deny it. Are
not those Times at hand, in which Elias the Artist, the Revealer of greater
Mysteries is to come? Of whose Coming Paracelsus so clearly prophesied in
various places of his Writings? Perhaps it will be worth our while, for the
Solace of the oppressed Disciples of Basilius, to quote certain places, in
which he predicts the coming of Elias not then born: which if any One
cammodiously interpret, as all other Sayings of that man are to be taken, he
will find nothing of absurdity in them, unless he resolve to discover his own
absurd Stupidity, or wicked Envy. In the Book of Minerals, Chap. 8. Paracelsus
thus writes: What is most vile, GOD suffers to be discovered, but what is of
greater moment is yet hid from the Vulgar, until the coming of Elias the
Artist; others read, until the Art of Elias, when he comes. And again, in his
Book of Minerals, Treatise the first. It is indeed true (says he) that many
things lie hid in the Earth, which I, as well as others am ignorant of. For
this I know, GOD, in time to come will manifest his Wonders, and bring to light
many more of them, then unto this Day have been known by us. Also this is true;
there is nothing absconded, which shall not he revealed; therefore there comes
One, whose Magnale lives not yet, who shall reveal many Things. Therefore be
comforted, be comforted, O Lover of Chemistry, and prepare the way of that
Elias, who brings happy times, and will reveal more Secrets than our Ancestors,
by reason of Envy, and the Iniquity of their Days durst discover. Whosoever
thou art, conversing in this Art, confer some small matter to this felicity;
and let us give the World that Medicine, which by reason of evil Humors
predominant, it cannot take all at once, by degrees, that it may gradually
recover of its Disease, and the Times of Elias come (for Arts also, as well as
is understood of other things, have their Elias, says Theophrastus) where it
will be lawful for us to speak freely of these things, and openly to do good to
our Neighbors, without persecution of the Impious. Read, understand, and
comfort your self with these.


of men neither can discourse of, nor answer to these; because they have not
learned the Processes of such Operations: but the least part, viz. the
Disciples, Apostles, and Followers of the Spagyrick Art, will more esteem my
Writings, more diligently read them, and more prudently give Judgment of the
same.

But, my Disciple and Follower, if you will imitate me, my advice is, that you
take up your Cross, at first, and suffer as I have suffered; learn to bear
Persecution, as I have already born it, labor, as all our Predecessors with me
have done; with continual Prayers seek unto the Lord GOD, and be thou patient,
and laborious without weariness, and then the Most High, who has mercifully
heard me, will not forsake Thee: for this Cause I every hour give thanks to
GOD, as my Eyes filled with Tears can and do witness.

Now, to proceed in my Instruction, touching the Flowers of Antimony, it is to
be understood, that the true Flores of Antimony, may be prepared, not one, but
various ways, as is known to every Spagyrist. There are some who drive them,
mixed with Sal-Armoniack, over by Retort; then they edulcorate them, by washing
away the Sal-Armoniack, and these they greatly esteem; for these Flowers are of
a fair and white Color. Others have peculiar Instruments for this Work,
prepared with windy Caverns, through which the Antimony may receive the Air,
and be sublimed. Others, setting three Alembecks one upon another sublime them
with strong Fire, and with one and the same labor make white, yellow, and Red
Flores; all which ways I have tried, and found no Error in them: But the
Process, by which I make Flowers of Antimony, most profitable for Medicine, and
more efficacious in their Operations is this.

I mixed the red Flowers of Antimony with Colcothar of Vitriol, and sublimed
them together thrice. So, the Essence of Vitriol ascends with them, and the
Flores are more strong: which being done, I extract the same Flowers with
Spirit of Wine. The F^ces settle to the bottom, and separate themselves from
the Spirit. These the Artificer lays aside, and distills off the Spirit of Wine
in B. M. until the Powder remains dry.

These are my prepared Flowers of Antimony, which I administered to my Brethren,
and others, who in there Necessities, required help of me, for their Souls
spiritual, in respect of my Ecclesiastical State, and for their Bodies
temporal, by reason of the Trust they reposed in my Art. These Flores purge
gently, without frequent, or excessive Stools, and have cured many Tertian and
Quartan Fevers, also very many other Diseases; so that I purposed, by the help
of our Savior Jesus, and his most Holy Mother Mary, to ordain in my Testament
a perpetual Monument upon my Altar, of all the Cures which I have performed by
his grace; that I might so doing, not only give thanks to GOD, but also make my
Gratitude known to Posterity, that they likewise may acknowledge the wonderful
works of the Most High, which I (by my diligence) have extracted from the
Bowels of Nature, and which he himself had hid and absconded in her profound
and most secret Recesses.

But touching the Sublimations of Antimony, which are afterward called Flowers;
let the Reader further observe, viz. that they are like Waters, which break out
in high Mountains. Now, of the difference of waters, which arise in the highest
Mountains, yea in higher than they, if such can be found; for even unto them
would the waters ascend; since it is known, that in the tops of the highest
Mountains, Springs do very often issue it; and of other waters which are found
by digging deep in the Earth, and by following their Springs must be searched
out: any man may judge that the Matrix of waters in the Earth, is on one part
more abundantly replenished with the Riches of waters, then on another; since
every Element has a peculiar Matrix, either strong or weak, according as it is
produced by the Sydus, whence Elements derive their Original and have being
Now, when such a Matrix is strong and potent in the Earth, it can drive forth
its Seed strongly and efficaciously from it self, by a vehement Pressure, even
up to the Snowy Mountains of the Alps, or to the very top of the Babylonish
This Parable is of very great moment, but so very clear to those, from whose
Eyes the Cataract is taken away, as to explain it to them, would be to hold a
Candle to the Light of the Sun: to others, from whose sight the Cataract is not
took off, this place gives no occasion of detracting the same. Therefore read,
peruse, and meditate; Day is an Instructor to the Day; the later Reading
explains the former, and the former the later.
Tower.

If any fatuate man hear this my Discourse, he will say, I am either mad or
drunk with Wine; but this will be no other than a Reproach, like to that, which
was cast upon the Disciples of our Savior. Of Sublimation, the Reason is the
same; for as Waters, which are many times found in the highest Mountains, are
more salubrious, and more cool than those, which by digging deep into the Earth
are found in Plains; so, if the Matter by pressure and force of sire be driven
upwards to the Mountains of the Ancient Wise men, who died long before my time,
the Earth, which for the most part is unprofitable, remains until its Salt
shall be extracted from it for its proper use. Thus is made Separation, by
which the Evil may be distinguished from the Good, the Pure from the Impure,
the thick from the thin, the subtle from that which is not subtle, and the
Venom from the Medicament. We miserable Mortals, by Death which we have
deserved for our Sins are put into the Earth, until we putresie by time, and be
reduced to silths; and afterward by the Heavenly Fire and Heat raised,
clarified, and exalted to a Celestial Sublimation, where all our Feces, all
Sins, and every Impurity shall be separated, and we made the Sons of GOD, and
of Eternal Life, unto which the Lord of his Mercy and Goodness bring me with
you. But I hope no Man will take amiss this Comparation of the Mundane with the
Spiritual, viz. the Heavenly Exaltation with the Earthly Sublimation. For no
man should suppose what I have done, to be done without Reason, but rather
know, that I am ignorant what is white or black, how much the tenebrous and
dismal Air differs from the serene and clear Heaven. Therefore let us break off
this Discourse, and produce another Preparation of Antmony.

Let the Disciple, Apostle, and faithful Imitator of Art, understand this
Instruction, and according to the true Philosophic Doctrine faithfully
consider, that every Extraction from Antimony (as also from all other Things)
has great difference in Operation, which neither consists in the Matter, nor
is known by the Matter, from which it is drawn; but consists and remains in the
Preparation, and in the Addition, by which the Virtue is extracted from the
Matter, as is known by Experience; as for Example. Whatsoever is Extracted from
Antimony, or any other thing with Spirit of Wine, has a far other virtue of
Operating, than those, which are extracted with good and sharp Vinegar. The
Causes of this I have already hinted in my other Writings; but the principal
Cause is, because all Extractions made with Spirit of Wine, from Antimony, or
any purging Herbs, Roots, or Seeds (understand of the first Extraction)
powerfully expel by Seidge: but on the contrary, whatsoever is extracted with
Vinegar, purges not downward, but rather prevents that, and retains in a
certain peculiar manner, by which the Volatile is changed into fixed.

This is a singular Secret, and an Arcanum of great price; but there are none,
or very few found, who mind such things; because many things are hidden, and
lie deeply buried in this Arcanum, which no One, either Master or Servant, nor
any Wise man of this World has unto this Day observed or considered.

Therefore the Extraction of Antimony is made two ways, viz. with Vinegar, and
with Spirit of Wine. Vinegar obstructs, and Spirit of Wine, of it self
powerfully expels and causes Urine, as also Stools; as elsewhere in another
manner is showed, and especially where I speak of my Twelve Keys, as namely,
that the Extraction of Glass of Antimony moderately purges; but on the
contrary the Extraction of the same Glass, which is made with Vinegar purges
not: which is true and not permixt with any falsity. But this Experience gives
occasion of thinking and reflecting, by which way of Reasoning, Nature gives
promotion and production to a true Philosopher. But it is a thing much to be
admired, that every Subject, which is first of all extracted with Spirit of
Wine, should have a Purging Property. Yet when Glass of Antimony is from the
beginning extracted with distilled Vinegar, and that Vinegar again abstracted,
and theu the Antemony extracted with Spirit of Wine, all its venomous purging
virtue passes away, and no sign thereof remains, nor assumes it to it self any
power of provoking Stools; but it performs its Operations by Sweat, and other
ways, chiefly by Salivation and Ejection by the Mouth; it searches out all
hurtful Evils in the Body, purges the Blood, heals the Diseases of the Lungs,
and profits those who are strait-breasted, and troubled with a frequent Cough.
In a word it Cures very many Diseases, also asswageth a Malignant Cough, and
whatsoever is of that Disposition, and is a Medicine very admirable.

Moreover, there is another Extraction of Antimony made in this manner. Grind
crude Antimony to powder, and pour upon it strong Vinegar, not of Wine, but
made of its proper Minera, and expose the Mixture in a Vessel well closed to
the Solar heat; then, after some time the Vinegar will be tinged with a
Blood-like Color, pour off this Extraction clear, filter it, and distill by
Alembick in Sand: then again, in distilling, it shows admirable Colors,
pleasant to the Sight, and wonderful in Aspect. This Oil Here thy Sincerity,
Valentine, is suspected. Who can by this thy Prescription make this
Quintessence, which Petrus the Spaniard, in his Book Of the Quintessenc of all
Things, destrvedly extols, as the greatest Secret of Philosophy? What shall I
say? Malice makes thee, not a perverse, but timorous man, fearing, least if
Arcanum's should be communicated openly to the wicked, they would do more hurt
with them then good. This Process seems to me to be purposely described
obscurely by this Religious Man (why else should he not have written
otherwise!) because he knew the Sons of Art would understand it by his
Prescript. But that you, Reader, may understand, you have not in vain spent
your Money in buying, or time in reading these Commentaries, I will clearly and
nakedly discover to you, how I my self have oftentimes performed this very
Work: do you give good heed to all Things, that you may not at all be
deficient; for the Operations are so concatinated, or co-linked together, as
one being omitted, or negligently performed, all the other are spoiled, and
your labor cannot answer your Desires. Take of the best Minera of Antimony,
which is friable (for if you take crude Antimony, as Basilius seems to
indicate, you can effect nothing; because it has already lost its most subtle
Sulphur in the first Distillation) grind it to so subtle a Powder, as it may
pass through a Tiffany Seive: put it into a Cucurbit, and pour upon it Vinegar,
which according to Art is distilled from its proper Minera. Set it in Digestion
for forty Days, and (if you have exactly observed all things, which are
hereunto required) your Vinegar will be tinged with a Color red as Blood. This
red Tincture poured off by Inclination, put into a Retort, and gently abstract
the Vinegar. The Powder remaining extract with spirit of Wine, that it also may
contract a blood-like Color. Put this Extraction into a Circulatory Vessel,
like to this, the Figure of which I here expose; because I never found any more
apt to render the Spirits volatile: Then place this double Vessel in B. M. to
be digested so long, as until you see the Tincture raise it self upwards and
passover volatile by Alembeck; seeing this, cool your Vessel, and put all the
Matter into a Cucurbit, and distill the Spirit according to Art, which will
passover the Helm as red as Blood. Then again abstract the Spirit, and you will
have a most ponderous thick Oil.

How this Oil should after this be joined with its own Salt, and united, we
elsewhere speak; the use of which in amending Metals is very great. Here we
have described it, and brought it so far, as it becomes a most excellent
Medicine in grievous Diseases, which are in all places accounted uncurable. It
performs its whole Operation by Sweats. And since there is no Disease, which it
helps not; what need is there to name any? It is better to be altogether
Silent, then to detract from its praises, by reciting a few. There is no man
who has made any Progress in Chemistry, that knows not what the Quintessence
of Antimony is.


at length becomes Red as Blood, and leaves many Feces and prevails against
many Infirmities: for its singular Virtue and Use is commanded in the Leprosy;
the New Disease lately risen amongst the Soldiers is by it consumed and dried
up, and indeed it effects Wonders.

depiction of an alembic Here place the Figure in the 96 Page.



The Physician before all Things, should diligently contemplate its use,
according to his own Experience and Knowledge; but especially completing its
Preparation in a due manner, without being weary of his labor, or forgetting
any of those Things which are prescribed to be performed.

Again, another Extraction of Antimony, is thus instituted. (Take, in the Name
of the Lord, of Antimony and crude Tartar, of each equal parts; put these well
mixed together in Powders, into a strong Crucible, which will not suffer the
Spirits to penetrate it, and burn this Matter in the Fire, until the Tartar be
wholly combust: this work must be done in a Wind-Fornace. Grind this burnt
Matter to a subtle Powder, and pour on that Common Water first made hot, and so
edulcorate the Matter by Lixiviating. And so it becomes a Liver The Liver is a
Cause of much Discourse in Banquets, and the Liver of Anttimony will be to us
no small Occasion of the like in Chemical Operations. But in the first place
consider, than instead of Crude Tartar, it is better to take Salt of Tartar,
not only for decelerating the Operation (for otherwise it must be melted so
long, as until the Tartar be changed into Salt) but chiefly, that you may have
Glass of a far better Color. Also Basilius forgot, or for some Reasons did
omit, to appoint the Glass first to be poured into a Platter made hot, and then
beaten to powder in an hot Mortar: otherwise the Glass, by reason of the Salt
of Tartar, as soon as it takes the cold Air is changed into a certain Pulse or
Pap. Besides, he omitted to determine the Quanticy of Water, in which this
Powder should be dissolved, that we may have a more fair and deep Color; in
which Exaltation of Color very much is sited. Also the Precipitation of the
Liver from the Water, which must be made with Vinegar, he involved in Silence;
although this, and the above mentioned, are necessary in this Operation. Here I
am unwilling to forbear to admonish, that not only in this, but in every
Melting of Antimony, the Artist ought to observe the Face of Heaven, and begin
his Work when the same is clear and serene. If you do otherwise, you will in
vain deplore the Obscurity of the Color in your Liver of Antimony. For if you
laugh at me, attributing much Virtue to the Influences of the Stars, I shall
deride you, deploring the unluckie Success of many Processes. But I would not
digress so far, as to take on me to prove the Virtues of Celestial Influences,
against men, either knowing so little, as they cannot understand, or having
experienced somewhat do not discern; but in the mean while are so obstinate, as
they will not believe those things which they see, have tried, and in very deed
found to be so. I would no more urge Reasons against these men, then against
these, who deny even the Mutation of Metals by the Stone of Philosophers. We
judge such men more worthy of Contempt than Refutation, who say that is not
possible, which they have beheld with their Eyes, and done with their hands:
for it is very rude to say, I deny, I deny, who proves? These perverse men by
their thus acting, do sometimes-provoke the patience of good ingenious Artists,
judging that they, with a certain Zeal of confirming what they assert, will
proceed so far, as to discover to them their Experiment of so excellent an Art.
But I do not think that any of them, who have obtained the Mystery will be so
imprudent, as unadvisedly to cast Pearls before Swine, and to discover to the
unworthy, what GOD has revealed to him; or give them of the Bread he Eats,
which is not to be cast to Dogs.

Therefore, returning to the Matter from whence I digressed, I affirm, that
there are some times of the year, in which if Liver if Antimony be made, and
precipitated with a due Menstruum, it will be imbibed with altogether another
Color, and be endued with other Virtues than that, which is made at another
time; and that, both for Metals, and for healing the Infirmities of men, as I
my self have experienced in many grievous Diseases, and Symptoms of Diseases. I
will also add this: from the Liver of Antimony may be extracted a Redness with
Spirit of Wine, which Redness is made volatile, and passes over the Helm,
which also may be exhibited to all without danger. Nor is there any great need
of that Caution of Basilius (even before the Redness is volatilized) that it
must be given in a small Quantity. For being given from thirty to forty, or
fifty Drops, it sweats very moderately, and does not Purge or Vomit: but it
effects wonders in purging the Blood, extirpating the Roots of a Disease; and
rendering the Patient vigorous, by insensible Expiration, and its occult
Virtues. This Vendible Wine needs not the Bush of Eloquence to commend it to
the Sick; who once having experienced its Virtues, know what it can do, and
that it as much answers their Desires, as they esteem their Money.


, so called by many of our Ancestors, who lived long before us.

Put this Liver dried into a Cucurbit, pour thereon most pure Spirit of Wine;
abstract the Spirit by distilling in B. M. so that a third part only may
remain. But before Distillation, the Spirit of Wine together with the
Extraction must be filtred through Paper. This Extraction may indeed be
profitably used; but in a small Dose, and with great Caution. What happens in
this Operation is very admirable. For the Spirit of Wine abstracted, can no
more be united with the red Extraction, whence it was distilled; but one sloats
above the other, as Water and Oil, which cannot be mixed. But if the abstracted
Spirit of Wine be poured upon other Liver of Antimony, it again attracts the
Color to it self; yet this, although poured upon the former Extraction, cannot
be mixed therewith. Which is a Thing so strange, as it may be numbered among
Wonders. But who can declare all the Wonders of GOD? or who will worthily
esteem the Gifts of the Creator, which he has implanted in his Creatures? by
us scarcely perscrutable with deep Meditation.

I before made mention of the Extraction of Antimony, from its Glass Here our
Author acts as a Teacher careful, and full of Affection, who not satisfied once
to mention, does often inculcate the principal Precepts of his Doctrine. But,
what it is, that sp^^ially moves him to repeat the Virtues of the Sulphur of
Antimony, I see not: he says, he repeats nothing in vain; therefore do thou,
Reader, if thou judge it of Concern, more attently consider, whether you may
not here find somewhat that is not mentioned, or the Reason why it is again
spoken of. I, who pros^ss my self to write to the Intelligent, reiterate
nothing here. He that comprehends, let him comprehend; he that has not there
understood, I fear will not here understand.
by Vinegar, and also by Spirit of Wine: but now I say, when such an Extraction
is made by Vinegar, and the Vinegar is again abstracted by B. M. and the Powder
which remains is resolved in a moist place, into Oil or Liquor of a Yellow
Color; it effects such Wonders in Wounds, new and old, as I neither can, nor
dare to commit them all to writing.

For it represseth all Symptoms of what kind so ever, suffers none to take
Root, and admits no Putrefaction in fresh Wounds. Also the Extraction of this
Powder, before Solution is made by Spirit of Wine, effects the same, and yields
not us inferior to other Medicaments, which are administered against internal
Affects.

I have often made mention of this Preparation in other of my Writings, also in
this Treatise of Antimony, very largely; because I know how great Benefits and
how great Secrets are latent in it. Therefore I hope, no Disciple will be
affected with tediousness, by Reason of Repetitions in my Writings, which I
faithfully open and bring to Light. For whatsoever I write is not without
Reason; and my words are Short, but require much Consideration, although often
repeated. To the Ignorant my Discourses contribute little understanding, to
Children and the unexperieneed little Profit; but to my Disciples and Apostles,
much health and prosperity.

There remains another Extraction by a Caustic Water, which Experience has
taught me in this manner.

Take of Vitriol and Common Salt, equal parts; from these by Retort distill a
Water, Here I will teach you the Manual Operation, O Lover of Chemistry, which
undoubtedly you will greatly esteem of, when you shall find the great commodity
thereof in operating. Lest, as it often bappens, when you distill the Spirits of
Metals, your Vessels should be broken.


which being forced out by vehement fire, comes forth a matter like thin
Butter, or the Sediment of Oil Olive; which keep apart for use.

depiction of an alembic Here place the Figure in the 101 Page.

Of your Earthen Retort A. open the upper hole B. into which put your Ma^^^^ by
Parts, lest all together senting the heat, should act too forcibly; and
presently Close the Hole with its proper Cover. To the Spirits received in the
Vess^l C. exit is given by the hole D. into the other opposite Receiver E. to
which again is applied the other Receiver F. So, the more subtle Spirits
ascending through the Hole D, settle in the Recipient F. But the more gross
remain in the bottom G. of the Receiver C. This Instrument will be most apt for
your use here; not only, as I said, lest a most strong Spirit passing out break
the Glasses, but also for other Works, as by an easy speculation you will
hence gather.



Subtly grind the Caput-mortuum, and in a Cellar permit it to resolve into
Water, this Water keep and filter it through Paper. Afterward take Hungarian
Antimony, grind it to a sine Powder, and having put it in a Cucurbit with a
slat bottom, pour this Water thereon, and set the Vessel in Heat. When it has
stood there for a due time, the Matter will be like an Amethyst, with a
blackish Violet-Colour. Then augment the Fire much, and you will have a
transparent Color, like unto a blew Saphyr. From this Color precipitate a
white Powder, by pouring on Common Water. This Powder taken, has the same
Operation, as the Red Extraction of Glass of Antimony, by Seidge, and it also
excites Vomiting. In that Solution made from the Caput-mortuum, and kept in a
Cellar, if thin Plates of Iron be digested, Mars will be truly transmuted into
Venus, as Experience will teach.

Now further consider. Take that distilled Oil or Water, as is spoken of above
in this process, and pour it upon Crocus Martis, with Sulphur reverberated to a
Redness; set the Mixture in Heat, and you will have an extracted Tincture of
Mars, red as blood. Take of this Extraction one part; of the Red Extraction of
Antimony, which is prepared with fixed Salt Nitre and Spirit of Wine, three
Parts; of the Water of Mercury Chemists, that they may whet the Ingenuities of
their Readers; and more, left any but the true Students of Art should penetrate
into their Secrets, deliver not all Things in one place, but scatter their
D^^ments, that by the Diligent Collection of them, they may judge of their
Aptness, as the Eagle proves her Young, erposing them to the Solar Rays: so you
see Basilius here proposes the use of the Water of Mercury, which he taught to
be made in his Treatise, which is Called a Supplement, or rather gave a rude
Draught of that Pro^ess. For neither there, nor here dath he make mention of an
hole, that must be open, in the superior part of the Retort, and thereinto a
long Pipe sitted, through which the Mercury may be put in, in very small
Parcels. For if you include a very small part of Mercury in a Retort, first
made very hot with a vehement Fire, as this must be, if you would excract the
Spirit, that Mercury, with its own vehement and untamable violence, would not
only burst the Retort, but overthrow the Furnace also; unless you give it a
larger space, and greater liberty of Flying; so that, after it has visited
many Retorts, it may rest, and being as it were tired, settle. But since it is
well known to all true Chemists, of how great Virtue this Mercury is, in the
Resolution of Metals, I will here make no further mention thereof.
leisurely injected through a long Pipe, one Part; and of the Calx of Gold
dissolved in this Caustic Water, half a part. Mix all these together, and
after they are canted off clear, distill the Mixture with a Moderate Fire in
Sand. All will not pass over by Distillation, but a sair clear Solution remains
sixed This Solution is not yet fixed, but if you be not already wearied with
labor, by a further Operation you may fix it. The principal use of this is, in
the Emendation of Metals, which Basilius does does not so much as mention. Now
the Genius of all Chemists will understand me, here heartily discovering this
Secret to all. Do thou, Lover of Chimistry, in mind and thought swiftly follow
me expounding the Oracle; but the Operation cannot be so swiftly performed.
This Powder must first be Extracted wi^h strong Vinegar, which afterward
abstract, and what remains in the bottom edulcorate with distilled water: again
Extract it with Spirit of Wine, and abstract the Spirit, and in the bottom will
remain a Red Powder. Join this with the fixed Salt, which is made of the Feces,
which remained after the Vinegar was used for Extraction. And deliver it to
Vulcan for three Months space, that it way no more fly from the Fire, but most
pleasingly sport with and in the same. If you perform this, you have Two
conjoined in an inseparable Matrimony: and you have separated the pure from the
impure, have rendered the Volatile fixed, and fixed the Volatile, and are not
far from that Fel^^^^^ which will answer all your Desires.


in the Bottom; which we may use in old open Wounds, wherein it lays a
Foundation for Healing to Amazement.

The Caput. mortuum w^^ch is left, being resolved in an Humid place, yields a
Liquor so sharp, as no Aqua fortis may be compared with it in Sharpness. But of
these enough at this time. For I must now speak of a White Powder, which may
also be prepared of Antimony in this manner.

Take pure Antimony, which is brought from Hungaria, or found in like
Mountainous Places; grind it to a subtle Powder: take also the same measure of
pure Sal^itre, which has been the third time diligently cleansed. This
Composition burn in a new glazed Pot (which was never infected with any
Fatness) in a Circulatory Fire; not all together, but by parts, and at diverse
times. This way of Operating, Ancient Spagyrists called Detonation, a Term of
Art to be learned by the Disciple of Art, as being not Common to every Rustic,
in his Artifice and Experience.

This Operation being performed, grind the hard Matter, which remained in the
Pot, to a sine Powder, and upon it in another Glazed Pot pour common Water
warm; which when the Matter is settled again repeat the pouring on of Water
several times, until all the Salnitre be extracted; Lastly, dry the remaining
Matter, and with fresh Salnitre Basilius does not misguide or delude you, O
Lover of Chemistry, whilst he so heartily discovers most Secret Mysteries, and
so sincerely and faithfully presents their wonderful Effects. As by this very
Operation you have an Example: For after the first Detonation with Nitre, and
so soon as you shall have separated the Salnitre from the Powder with pure
Water, you have the Powder of Ruland, with which that man effected so many
Medicinal Wonders, whereby he got to himself so great a Name, and so much
Wealth. Which, if you prepare under a certain Constitution of Heaven (as I
advised, in preparing the Liver of Antimony) you will have so much the better,
by how much the more Red: for the Color is the Soul thereof, the Effect of
which in Medicine, Ruland proved and commended; but he, neither exhausted its
praises, nor did he persuade the Unexperienced, that so great Virtues were
latent in this Medicament. This Crocus of Metals (for so it is called) is not
that, which is publicly sold in Shops, upon eight Grains of which they pour
Zij. of Wine, and although the Sick only drink that wine, without any other
Powder, it oftentimes works so forcibly, upwards and downwards, as either way,
sometimes both ways, the life it self issues out. But the use of this is thus.
Take eight, nine, ten, or eleven Granes of this our Author's preparing the
first Time, according to the strength of the Sick, and all other Things
co-indicating; pour on them three or four ounces of Wine; for it matters not
much, whether you take more or lose of the Wine. Set the Mixture in B. M. for
the space of four or five hours, and so extract a most Red Tincture from this
Crocus of Metals (which in an Infusion of the Crocus of the S^^s cannot be
extracted) this Wine, now impregnated with the Sulphur of the Crocus, togethor
with the more subtle part of the Powder, which i^ cauting off comes out, I give
to the Sick, and it purges kindly upwards and downwards without molestation.
Nor does this Medicament only expel Humors, but (as is proper to Antimonials
rightly prepared) it strikes at the very Root of the Dis^ase, and whatsoever in
the Body is corrupted and declined from its due state, that it amends and
restores. What wonderful Effects, this only Tincture has discoverad to me, I
forhear to mention, lest I should be compelled to bring their Credit in
Question, who have experienced them. In this only believe me, whosoever thou
art, that would use Chemical Medicaments, always be sure to take the true
Tinctures of Things, in which their volatile Sulphur is absconded; if you
neglect this, you neglect your own Fame and Gain, and the Health of the Sick.
as much as its own weight is, burn it again, and repeat the same Operation the
third time.

What remains after this third Operation grind to a subtle Powder, and on that
pour the best Spirit of Wine; circulate the Mixture for one Month, in a
Cucurbit or Circulatory diligently nine or ten times, so often pouring on fresh
Spirit. This being done, dry the Powder with gentle heat, and for one whole Day
keep it red-hot in a Crucible, such as Goldsmiths use to melt their Metals in.
Afterward resolve this Powder (in a moist Place, upon a Stone or Glass Table,
or in Eggs boiled to an hardness) into a Liquor, which set in heat, again dry,
and reduce to Powder. This Powder effects many egregious and wonderful Things,
which cannot easily be believed by Those, who have not proved the same. If you
have believed, or experienced the Virtues of this Powder once detonated, you
will not be a Thomas in this third Detonation. Set to your hand, touch and use
this, and it will perform the same, which true Diaphoretick Antimony can, but
with greater Security aod Efficacy.


But it operates not suddenly, it must have time to exercise its Powers, and
show its own Virtue, by the Testimony of Experience, very admirable.

Whosoever labors with internal Imposthumes, let him take of this white fixed
Powder of Antimony in the Spirit of Wine, or any other rich Wine, the fourth
part of a Dram, five or six times a Day, and he will find his internal
Imposthume opened, and all the Coagulated Blood to be expelled by degrees,
without any peril of Life or Health. He, who is afflicted in his Body with the
New Disease of Soldiers, if he use this Powder in the aforesaid manner, will
also find this Evil consumed throughout the whole Body, and by the same
expelled. Moreover, it produces new Hairs, and renovates a man to the
admiration of all men; it gives new, sound, and pure Blood, and is the Effecter
of so much Good, as even the least part of it (although Equity seems to require
this) cannot by me be described or declared. It is not fit I should here
manifest all things clearly, and in such manner, as any man, without Labor and
Toil, by reading my Writings, may become a perfect Doctor; no more than it is
fit, that a Young Country Man Valentine has so clearly detected all Things, as
no man, either before or after him, has done it more clearly. All that came
after him seem to have conspired, and agreed together to spread Clouds over
that Light, which he brought into the World. Hence it is, that they do not
Publicly extol his Praises, according to the high Esteem every man Privately
has of him; nor have they translated his Books into other Tongues, although
He, of all Authors, is the most worthy, Who speaks in the Languages of all
Nations, that he may be a comfort to the Lovers of Chemistry, erring in the
Labyrinths of others, and always produce a new Offspring of Philosophers. But
no man should think, that he could so clearly speak, as every man, handling
Chemistry (according to the Saying) with unwashed Hands, might presently
understand him; that is, as himself says, not possible to be done, nor is it
expedient that the Son of a vile Clown should eat of the finest Flower, in
preparing which he took no Pains; yet (as below he confesses) our Author has
used plain, simple and clear Words.
should be fed with the whitest and best baked Bread, which he has not
prepared with his own Labor, or the Corn of which himself thrashed not out.

But I make too large a Progress in this open Field of Doctrine, in which the
Ancient Hunters take their Larks, and the Young Ones presently follow them with
their Nets. For my Style (as all my Writings witness) has a certain singular
purposed Method, like that of all Philosopers before me. If any one think it
strange, that I here propose certain singular Processes, in which my Philosophy
dissers from other, let him be answered with this, rhat Philosophic Speech
much differs from the Method of other men's Discourses, who nakedly and
sincerely declare some Process, without any Ambiguities or Cloudings of
Aenigma's. Therefore, consider the difference, and accuse not me, as if I had
deviated from Order, in my Style of Philosophy, and of Preparations and
Processes. For in a Philosophic Discourse, it is behooful to learn and judge
of what appertains to the Theory, but the Practice teaches you the Instruction
of Processes; therefore in them, true, simple, clear and well grounded Words
are to be used.

Also, of Antimony is made a Balsom, against grievous Diseases very profitable;
yet not of Crude Antimony, but of the Regulus thereof, whence may be made
living Mercury, in the following manner.

Take of the best Hungarian Antimony, and crude What I advised to in the
Preparation of Liver of Antimony is here to be repeated; instead of Crude
Tartar take Salt of Tartar, by which the Operation will sooner and better
proceed. Salnitre here is unprofitable. Therefore, take of Antimony and Salt of
Tartar, of each equal parts, melt them and make a Regulus, according to the
Rule here given by Basilius. If you cast away the Glass (as all men for the
most part do) you will do ill. For I, of that prepare a very profitable
Medicament in this manner. I grind this Glass in an hot Mortar, taking heed it
contract no Humidity from the Air, which may easily be prevented, and having
put it in a Phial, pour Alcohol of Wine thereon, and thence extract a most
beautiful Tincture, in Color red like Blood. This Tincture is a most excellent
Cordial, if thirty, forty or fifty Drops of it be taken in convenient Liquor,
and that, if you will, twice or thrice a day; for it is taken with safety, and
recreates the whole Man.
Tartar equal parts, and of Salnitre half a part; grind them well together, and
afterward flux them in a Wind-Fornace; pour out the flowing Matter into a Cone,
and there let it cool; then you will find the Regulus, which thrice or oftener
purge by Fire, with Tartar and Nitre, and it will be bright and white, shining
like Cupellate Silver, which has fulminated and overcome all its Lead.

Grind this Regulus to a subtle Powder, and having put it into a Glass, pour it
on Oil of Juniper, or Spirit of Turpentine, which comes forth in the first
Distillation, and is pure as Fountain Water; keep the Vessel well closed, in a
subtle heat of B. M. and the Oil of Juniper, or Spirit of Turpentine, will
become red as Blood, which pour off, and rectify with Spirit of Wine. This is
endued with the same Virtues, as Balsom of Sulphur, as I shall then show, when
I write of Sulphur, because they require one and the same Preparation.

Of this Balsom only three or four Drops, taken thrice in a Week with hot Wine,
heal the Diseases of the Lungs, cure the frequent Cough, and Asthma, also they
are conducent in the Vertigo, prickings of the Sides and in diuturnal Coughs.

Also many Oils may be prepared of Antimony, some per se and without Addition,
and many others by Addition. Yet they are not endued with the same Virtues, but
each enjoys its own, according to the Diversity of its Preparation. Of which I
now give you this Similitude. There are many kinds of Animals, which live only
in the Earth, as are many Creeping Things, Worms and Serpents; also others,
some of which are new kinds, which before were not, and these also proceed from
Putrefaction of the Earth. Some inhabit the Waters, as all kinds of Fishes;
others sly through the Air, as every kind of Flying Things, and Birds; some
also are nourished in the Fire, as the Salamander. And besides these, in the
more hot Regions and Islands, are found many other Animals, which to these
Nations are unknown, which prolong their Life by the Solar Heat, and which die
so soon as brought into another Air. So Antimony, when prepared by the Addition
of Water, assumes another Nature and Complexion for operating, then when
prepared by Fire only. And although every Preparation of it ought to be made by
Fire, without which the Virtue of it cannot not be manifested: yet consider,
that the Addition of Earth gives it wholly another Nature, than the Addition of
Water. So also when Antimony is sublimed in Fire through the Air, and further
prepared, another Virtue, other Powers, and another Operation follow, than in
the Preparations already described. Therefore the Oil of Antimony, per se,
without addition, and the true Sulphur thereof are prepared after this Method.

Take crude Hungarian Antimony, put that ground to a subtle Powder, into a
Glass Cucurbit with a flat bottom: and pour thereon the true Vinegar of
Philosophers rendered more acid with its own Salt. Then set the Cucurbit firmly
closed in Horse-dung, or B. M. to putrefie the matter for forty Days, in which
time the Body resolves it self, and the Vinegar contracts a Color red as
Blood. Pour off the Vinegar, and pour on fresh, and do this so often, as until
the Vinegar can no more be tinged. This being done, filtre all the Vinegar
through Paper, and again set it, put into a clean Glass firmly closed again in
Horse-dung, or B. M. as before, that it may putrefie for forty Days; in which
time the Body again resolves it self, and the Matter in the Glass becomes as
black as Calcanthum, or Shoomakers Ink. When you have this Sign, then true
Solution is made, by which the further Separation of Elements is procured. Put
this black matter into another Cucurbit, to which apply an Alembick, and distill
off the Vinegar with moderate Fire; then the Vinegar passes out clear, and in
the bottom a sordid matter remains; grind that to a subtle Powder, and
edulcorate it with distilled Rain Water, then dry it with gentle heat, and put
it a Circulatory with a long Neck (the Circulatory must have three Cavities or
Bellies, as if three Globes were set one above another, yet distinct or apart
each from other, as Sublimatories; with their Aludel [or Head] are wont to be
made, and it must have a long Neck like a Phial, (or Bolthead and pour on it
Spirit of Wine highly rectified, till it rises three Fingers above the Matter,
and having well closed the Vessel, set it in a moderate heat for two Months.
Then follows another new Extraction, and the Spirit of Wine becomes
transparently red as a Ruby, or as was the first Extraction of the Vinegar, yea
more fair. Pour off the Spirit of Wine thus tinged, filtre it through Paper,
and put it into a Cucurbit (the black Matter which remains set aside, and
separate from this Work; for it is not profitable therein) to which apply an
Head and Receiver, and having firmly closed all Junctures, begin to distill in
Ashes with moderate Fire: then the Spirit of wine carries over the Tincture of
Antimony with it self, the Elements separate themselves each from other, and
the Alembeck and Recipient seem to resemble the form of pure Gold transparent
in Aspect. In the end some few Feces remain, and the Golden Color in the Glass
altogether fayls. The red Matter, which in distilling passed over into the
Receiver, put into a Circulatory for ten Days, and as many Nights. By that
Circulation Separation is made; for the Oil thereby acquires Gravity, and
separates it self to the bottom from the Spirit of Wine; and the Spirit of Wine
is again Clear, as it was at first, and swims upon the Oil. Which admirable
Separation is like a Miracle in Nature: Separate this Oil Here you have not
only whatsoever can be made of Antimony, but also almost all that can be
promised by a Chemist. This is that with which all the Books of all Chemists
are filled, which is involved in so many Fables, complicated in so many
Riddles, and explicated with so many obscure Commentaries, that is, which in
all the World is desired by Fools, sought by the Sons of Art, and sound by the
Wise. This Basilius reveals, this he repeats, this he inculcates; this is his
Triumphant Chariot, which he as it were carries about, and often shows in the
various Parts of his Writings. Before in this Treatise, he presents it under
the Name of an Extraction of Crude Antimony, here it is Oil of Antimony, soon
after it is converted into a Stone, which is called the Stone of Fire. Thus
this Proteus often offers it self, always various, yet always the same in
Substance. Compare all these Processes, which are so often diversely propounded,
with these my Commentaries made upon the Extraction of Crude Antimony, and you
will have the Work complete in all its Numbers; you will have a Treasure, in
which, if you know not what you have, I remit you to Aesop's Dunghil-Cock, who
found a Gem in the Dunghill, but knew not what he had. Consider diligently, O
Lover of Chemistry, and you will find that no man has dealt more clearly and
sincerely with Thee, than Basilius, and me after him, who show thee where the
Hare^lies, which so many Others have hunted in vain. If now you be not here
wise, you will not be healed with three Anticyra's. Therefore I will add
nothing, lest I make Fools man, who now indeed are wise.
from the Spirit of Wine by a Separatory.

This Oil is of a singular and incredible Sweetness, with which no other thing
may be compared, it is grateful in the Use, and all Corrosiveness is separated
from it. No man can by Cogitation judge, by Understanding comprehend, what
incredible Effects, potent Powers, and profitable Virtues are in this Royal
Oil. Therefore, to this Sulphur of Antimony, I have given no other Name, than
my Balsom of Life; because it effects very much, by the Grace of GOD, in those,
in whom was no help to be hoped for, but by the Mercy of GOD, and nothing
remained but a most certain expectation of changing Life with Death; as my
Brethren can witness has been often done. It refreshes a man so, as if he
were new born; it purifies the Blood; mixed and exhibited with the Tincture of
Corals, it cleanses the Leprosy, and expels every Scab, which through
impurity of the Blood takes Root in man. It drives away Melancholy and sadness
of Heart, it confirms the Junctures, and above all strengthens the Heart, when
given with the Magistery of Pearls. Also it helps the Memory, and in Swouning a
more noble Medicine is not found, if six drops of it mixed with equal parts of
Oil of Cinnamon be put upon the Tongue, and the Nostrils and Arteries be
anointed with a little of the Essence of Saffron.

Ah Good GOD, what moves me to speak, write, and invent many Things! For I
suppose I shall find few among the Doctors, who will give absolute Credit to
these my Writings, which I have declared faithfully, instead of a Testament, to
my Disciples, Apostles, and Followers; but Others, who before knew these
wonderful Effects, and have often in Truth experienced these Virtues, will more
accurately attend, and more easily believe, and for this bounty of mine ( viz.
because I have opened, by the permission of GOD, the Powers and Virtues which
are infused in the Creatures, and have as it were freed them from Prison,
brought them to Light, and unto free Operation) give me thanks, and speak
honorably of me, after I am reduced to Dust in the Grave.

Another way to drive Antimony, without Addition, over by Alembeck is this.

Make a Regulus of Antimony, by Tartar and Salnitre, as I above taught, grind
this subtily, put it in a great round Glass, and place it in a moderate heat of
Sand. This way the Antimony will be sublimed: whatsoever shall be sublimed,
that daily put down with a Feather, that at length it may remain in the Bottom,
and there persist until nothing more of it can be sublimed, but the whole
remains fixed in the Bottom. Then is your Regulus fixed and precipitated per
se. But consider, here is required a sufficient time, and reperition of the
Labor often, before you can obtain. that. This Red Precipitate take out, grind
it to a subtle Powder, which spread upon a flat and clean Stone, set in a cold
moist Place and there let it remain for six Months; at length the Precipitate
begins to resolve it self into a red and pure Liquor, and the Feces or Earth is
separated from it. The Salt of Antimony, I say, only resolves it self into
Liquor, which filter, and put into a Cucurbit, that it may be condensed by
extraction of the phlegm; and again set it in a moist place, then will it yield
you fair Crystals. Separate these from their phlegm, and they will be pellucid,
mixed wiith a red Color; but when again purified become white. Then is made the
true Salt (...). or like with like, is a Proverh among the Greeks, and is here
manifest in our Chemical Work. For this Salt acuates all Menstruum's, for their
more easy extraction of Metals; but those Extractions most, which are made of
Antimony, as of a Mineral to it of affinity and like.
of Antimony, as I have often prepared it.

This Salt dry, and mix with it Venenian Earth (which is called Tripel) three
Parts, and in strong Fire distill it. First a white Spirit comes off, afterward
a red Spirit, which also resolves it self into white. Rectify this Spirit
gently and subtily in a dry or moist Balneo, and so you will have another white
Oil distilled from the Salt of Antimony. This Oil, but why do I call it Oil?
this Spirit, I should rather say, since the Salt is distilled in a Spiritual
manner, in Quartans and other Fevers often manifests its Virtues, and is very
conducent in breaking the Stone of the Bladder; it provokes Urine, and is
profitable in the Gout. Outwardly applied to old corrosive Wounds, which have
their Operation from Mars, it purifies them. Also, this Spirit of the Salt of
Antimony purifies the whole Blood, as the Salt of Gold does. And although, in
healing very many other Diseases it may be prositably applied, yet it is not so
perfect, as the above described red Oil of Antimony, in which its Sulphur is
deduced to the highest, purified and separated, as I said; therefore I forbear
to speak more of this.

Now, since I have treated of the Sulphur and Salt of Antimony, and showed how
they may be reduced Medicine; I here treating further, purpose to speak of its
Mercury also, and to manifest what Medicine lies absconded, and as it were
buried in it.

Take the Regulus of Antimony, made in such manner, as I above taught, eight
Parts. Salt of Humane Urine clarified and sublimed, one Part. Sal-Armoniack one
Part: and one Part of Salt of Tartar. Mix all the Salts together in a Glass,
and having poured on strong Wine-Vinegar, lute it with the Luting of Sapience,
and digest the Salts with the Vinegar for an entire Month in convenient Heat;
afterward put all into a Cucurbit, and in Ashes distill off the Vinegar, that
the Salts may remain dry. These dry Salts mix with three Parts of Venetian
Earth, and by Retort distill the Mixture with strong Fire, and you will have a
wonderful Spirit. This Spirit pour upon the aforesaid Regulus of Antimony
reduced to Powder, and set the whole in putrefaction for two Months. Then
gently distill the Vinegar from it, and with what remains mix a fourfold weight
of the filings of Steel, and with violent Fire distill by Retort: then, the
Spirit of Salt, which passes out, carries over with it self the Mercury of
Antimony in the Species of Fume. Wherefore in this Operation you must apply a
great Recipient with a large quantity of Water in it, so doing, the Spirit of
Salt will be mixed with the Water, but the Mercury collected in the Bottom of
the Glass into, true Living Mercury. What were Arcanum's in the times of
Basilius, are now in our times but vulgar Chemical Works. How often shall we
find any One, who numbers himself among true Chemists, that is ignorant of the
Way of making Mercury of Antimony? either in this manner, as Basilius teaches,
or in another. For various Artificers have now invented various Methods, and
every One ^sith that, he best approves of.


Behold, O Lover of Art, I have showed you, how of Antimony may be made Running
Mercury, which very many have so long, and in so many Parts of the World
sought; and how we may use this Mercury with praise in Medicine, I will here
discover and set down in Writing.

Take in the Name of the Lord, of this Mercury one Part, express it through a
Skin, and pour on it of red Oil of Vitriol highly rectified, four Parts:
Extract the Oil, and the Spirits of the Oil will remain with the Mercury: Force
it with vehement Pire, and somewhat will be sublimed. This Sublimate again put
down upon the Earth in the Bottom. Then pour on other Oil, of the same weight
as before, and repeat this labor a third time. The fourth time, put the
Sublimate which ascends with the Earth, and grind both together, and the whole
will be clear and pure, like a Speculum or Crystal. Put this into a
Circulatory, and pour on it a like weight of Oil of Vitriol, and thrice so much
Spirit of Wine. Circulate until Separation be made, and at length the Mercury
resolve it self into Oil, and float about like Oil Olive. When you see this,
separate this Oil from the other Liquor, and put it into a Circulatory, and
there pour on strong distilled Vinegar, and permit it so to rest for about
twenty Days. Then this Oil again acquires its own Gravity, and settles to the
Bottom; and whatsoever Venenosity was in it, remains in the Vinegar, which will
be tenebrous and altogether confused. There is no need of Torches at Noon Day,
nor of Commentaries in so perspicuous a Description, by which Basilius teaches
to make the Mercury of Antimony. Begin leisurely, give heed to all particulars,
and your Work shall never deceive you. Lest I should darken the Author, I
desist from Commenting; but add, that I doubt not, but that this Mercury will
manifest wonderful Effects in the Humane Body: Yet I have not experienced its
Virtues for the health of Animals, therefore my Commentaries must not exceed my
Experience. But in the Emendation of Metals, it shows it self to be endued with
sing^^^^ Virtues. For I say, and clearly affirm, he that can bring this Oil
here de^^^^^^ (...) Basilius, to the state of a fixed Stone, may glory that be
has a fixed (...) inferior to the one only King of Kings, the Great stone of
Phi^^^^^ (...) when thou have proceeded thus far, O Lover of Chemistry, go not
(...) take off thy band from the Plough: but go on cheerfully, perhaps in so
(...) Grove.

The Golden Branch, with Leaves and Twigs of Gold
Will show it self to Thee --



This is a great Arcanum, and seems repugnant to Nature, that this Oil should
first swim, and afterward being rendered more ponderous, settle to the Bottom.
But consider, the Oil of Vitriol is also heavy, yet when the Mercury in its
Separation is not altogether pure, it stands above it; but when the impure
Lightness is taken from it by Vinegar, because the Vinegar assumes that, then
the Oil receives its just weight, becomes compact, and settles to the Bottom.
This is the Oil of the Mercury of Antimony, which is the fourth Column of
Medicine.

Now come hither you Lepers! where be you? I will supply you with Means for
Health. This Oil is prositable against the Apoplexy, comforts the Brain, makes
a man industrious, and cherishes the vital Spirits of the Head. If any one
has labored long with grievous Diseases, and will for some time daily use
this Oil, his Hairs and Nayls will fall off, and he will be renovated, as a man
newborn. All the Blood in the Humane Body is by it so purified, as every Evil
is taken off from it, and expelled. This heals the French Disease, which we
have lately inherited; for by this Medicine it is radically extirpated. And, to
comprehend much in few words, the praise of this Oil is greater in Medicine,
than can be expressed by Speech or Writing.

Why do we, miserable Mortals, taken from the Earth, and ready to return into
Earth, stick here? Why do we not hasten to give Thanks to GOD our Creator, for
this Medicine so mercifully granted to Us? You Doctors (if it please the Gods)
of either Medicine, come to me a religious man and Servant of GOD, I will
manifest to you what your Eyes never saw, and will show you the way of Health
and Sanity, which before you never knew. Yet if any one be found among you, who
understands my Processes, and the way of Preparation, better than I; let him, I
pray, not be silent, or set a Seal to his Lips: for here I stand ready to
learn, nor am I ashamed further to inquire, and desire that Light, which before
I knew not. For I have often said, that this our Life is circumscribed with
more strait Limits, then that one man should be able to search out all Things,
which Nature bears absconded in her Bosom. But on the contrary, I being the
Author, let them be silent, who have experienced less than I, and if they have
not attained to a solid Understanding of my Writings, let them not attempt to
amend them, or (like Brawlers) with inconsiderate Words reprehend, what they
never learned in the Schools, and the Processes of which they never received
from men skilled in the Law. For my Terms otherwise sound, and signify other
than theirs, who oppose themselves against me, and who are ashamed of the
Labor of Planting Trees, and of Grafting fruitful Sprouts thereon; therefore
they always abide among dry and withered Wild Trees, and can never attain to
any Branch of green, sappy, and well manured Fruit Trees.

Hasten not, I say, O man experienced in our Art, to pass your Sentence of
Judging, and be not willing to condemn, what you have not yet your self
acquired by Thoughts, or gained by Discipline. Many imprudent men frequently
say, Fishes are frozen in Waters; but these discover their own imprudence and
want of Knowledge. For it will never be proved, that a Fish, even in the
bitterest Winter will ever be frozen in Waters, as long as the Ice of those
Waters is daily broken by the diligence of Mortals. But the reason why Fishes
dye, is because, when the Ice is not opened, their respiration is hindered, and
they thence are are suffocated. For it may easily be proved, that no Animal can
live, when to it the use of Air is denied. Whence it may well be concluded,
that those Fishes, which are found dead under the Water, in an extreme Cold
Season, die not of Cold (as men of little understanding think) but because they
are deprived of Air. By like Reason (that we may apply this Example) I say;
since Antimony, is to produce such admirable Fruits, it is to be taken out of
the Mountains; but first, by the Care of the Miners spiracles, or breathing
places, are to be made for it, and afterward it must be prepared with Water,
Air and Fire, as with auxiliary Mediums, lest its fruitfulness be suffocated in
the Earth. But with many and laborious Preparations of Artifice, it must be
manifested and brought to Light, for the expected Sanation of Diseases, by
reason of which it has been so long sought into.

Where now, O Wretch! who contemnest Antimony, and among all men accusest it as
mere Venom, where is thy Rhetoric, or Dialect, wherewith to defend thy self?
But since thou understandest neither White, nor Black, nor Green, nor Red, nor
Yellow; nor know which way to go about to justify Antimony, its Virtue,
Power and Utility, being unknown to thee, thou do well, if thou keep
Silence, and permittest this Reprehension of thy Ignorance, as a Wave driven
with vehement wind to fly over thy Head; fearing, that if those Winds and Waves
should be predominant, thy own weak and frail Bark would be sunk and submerged.
To avoid this peril, seasonably call upon thy Sleeping Master, as the Disciples
of our Savior Jesus Christ did, when they feared they should perish. Yet this
must not be done with a dissembled and feigned, but with a true and pure Heart,
without all Hypocrisy; then your Redemption and Help will undoubtedly follow,
so that in all Verity you will see and find the Winds and the Sea to obey you,
and all Things to be brought to the desired End.

I wish man were but so disposed, as he would study to obtain somewhat with
labor and Diligence, then certainly the Gods, the Presidents of Prosperity and
Art would give Success, by which such a Disciple and Follower of Art might be
assured, that in the wished School of Art, and desired Domicil of Grace,
Felicity and Health should not be denied him, but that he himself should
certainly see and find the Foundation of the Corner Stone, upon which he might
commodiously build up all the other Orders of Stones. Then would cease the so
many evilly founded Impertinencies of Bablers, which in the Schools stun the
Ears of Disciples, and in Houses the Ears of the Sick; and the Master it self
would speak, as it were with open Mouth, and by certain Experience confirm,
that a Castle or Palace of Stone cannot so easily be set on Fire and burnt, as
a Pidgeon-House, or the old Nest of a Stork composed of rotten Wood, and daily
dried more and more by the Sun.

But my Auditor and Disciple, do thou with sharp Judgment weigh this my sincere
Information, and with fervent desire strive to penetrate the inmost Center of
Art, which by the external Face can be known by no man; prosecute and press
after the Virtue and Power thereof, no otherwise, than as a Hunter pursues a
Wild Beast; search out its Footsteps through the Snow, that you may rightly
distinguish, and not take an Heart instead of an Hind, or an Hare instead of a
Fox, or give a false estimate thereof, by erring from its Footsteps. Well, cast
out your Nets, and take a multitude of Fishes, according to your own Wish or
Desire. Place your Threads as is behooful, and dispose of the Birds, which
allure others to their place, and by this way of Fowling you will fulfill your
desire with prosit. That by these, to every Searcher I may briefly propose my
Admonition and Advice, I say: My Friend the Hunter, dispose rightly your Nets
and Instruments for Hunting as behooves; and you Mariner, who Night and Day say
through the vast Seas, and are often driven hither and thither by the Winds,
give heed to the Point of your Compass, and undoubtedly you will reap prosit,
and not bring home your Ship, swiftly returning, without great Gain of
Merchandise.

But why do I treat of many things, or spend time unprositably (as tatling
Sophisters are wont to do) in beating out the empty Chaff? I am deceived; I do
not unprofitably spend my time; for all the Words in my Writings are of use,
and in them are found few empty Letters, which contain not some Utility
together with a profitable Instruction, so that the time I spend in Writing
will rather be a Recreation, than a Burden to me. Therefore now, after the
manner of Fencers, I will step back one pace, and into the Chemical Laboratory
infer a new Doctrine of External Things; viz. show, that Antimony is of such a
Nature, as may be prepared so, as to yield present help in Medicine pertinent
to External Wounds, which manifoldly offer themselves to us, and are declared
by Chirurgy. Therefore I will begin and briefly explain my Processes, viz. how
that is to be used in Medicine, and how it may profitably be prepared.

Whosoever thou art, among Junior Students, that desire to search out the
Occult things of Nature, and to bring her hidden Secrets to Light, attend to
what I say, that thou may be able to distinguish Day from Night, and what is
clear from the Obscure.

Take of Hungarian Antimony one part, Common Salt half a part, and six parts of
Argilla not burnt, grind all together, and distill vehemently with a continual
Fire without Intermission and at length an Oil will come forth: from this
abstract its Phlegm by Distillation, that a red dry Powder may remain in the
bottom of the Cucurbit. This Powder grind subtily, and resolve it into a
Liquor, upon a Marble Stone; and you will have a red shining Balsom for Wounds,
which far excels very many other Balsoms. Its Use A wise General of an Army so
disposes his Soldiers in time of Fighting, that in the beginning of the
Battle, the good and strong Soldiers sight, and in the End of the same the
best and most strong come to deal with the Enemy; but such as are not powerful
enough, for the first and last Encounter, in Arms or strength, lare by him
placed in the midst, that they may take Example of fighting from the Former,
and hope of help and Victory from the Later. The Emperor is imitated by the
Orator, in placing his Arguments so, as he may overcome the minds^ of men.
Basilius imitates the Orator, in disposing his Processes so, as be may lead his
Disciple to Sapience, and the Fruit of wisdom. We have already had famous
Processes, and in explaining them have used our Endeavor, and contribated some
Light. Now follow those, that are in themselves clear enough, and not of so
great moment as the former; therefore we shall not insist upon them.
is principally in Wounds, which have been a long time open, and in the Cure of
which the Doctors with their Plasters, Unguents, Oils and Ligaments could
effect nothing: but with very great Disgrace they at length take off the
Horse's Bridle and Saddle, and return him to the Stable, whence they had him.

My Form of Speaking Savours of Simplicity; for I am a man Religious, to whom
the Method of Secular Men is unknown; therefore cannot so clearly detect and
describe all Things, as the Matter it self seems to require. Such a man as I,
as to the Terms, because he cannot so formally use them, desires to be pardoned
in this, and if he neglect any thing therein, he craves the candid Acceptance
of all men, and in respect of his State offers himself willing and ready to
serve all Christians Day and Night, and by his Prayers to GOD, to recompense
this their Benevolence.

This Oil is salutary in many grievous Accidents, and especially in old wounds,
so that few Medicines are found, which must not give place to this. Only that
Oil, which is prepared with the Vulgar Sublimate of Apothecaries, is equal unto
it in Effects, and is oftentimes by Experience found to be better, especially
in the Wolf and Cancer, and in the Noli me tangere. But in ordinary Fistula's,
and the Herpes the superior Oil effects wonders, which were they not confirmed
by Experience, could not be believed, and all which I recite not, lest some one
or other should judge me to do it from Ambition, or that thence I hunt after
Fame, which was never by me either sought or desired; nor at this time, as I
can holily affirm, is it aimed at by me.

Now I will give you the Preparation of another Oil.

Take Mercury mortified (which is sublimed to clearness and Splendour, and sold
by Apothecaries) and Antimony, of each equal parts. Grind them together, and
distill them by such a Retort, as will retain the Spirits thrice, and afterward
rectify this Oil with Spirit of Wine. Then the Operation is absolved, and the
Oil becomes red as Blood; but at first it is White, and like Ice or congealed
Butter. This Oil effects wonders in many Affects, where Nature gave no hope of
Amendment, and it always mostly shows its force, virtue, power, and efficacy,
in the perfect Emendation of Evil into Good.

By Addition may be prepared another Oil very profitable in external Wounds.

Take of Antimony one part, Sulphur one part, Sal-Armoniack, or Salt of Urine
purified half a part, and Calx-Vive two parts. Expel the Oil strongly:
whatsoever is sublimed, that grind with the Caput-mortuum, and thereon again
pour the Oil distilled off, and thrice distill it; then the Oil is prepared.

When old Wounds can in no wise be healed, then use this Oil. For it is strong,
potent and penetrative: and lays a good Ground (even as Oil of Vitriol does)
for future Sanation.

An admirable Balsom of diverse Ingredients (among which is Antimony) very
useful in old Wounds, is thus prepared.

Take of Sulphur iiij. set it over a moderate Fire to melt, and put into it
half a pound of Mercury, and stir the Mixture so long together, as until both
become one Mass. This Mass grind to Powder (for it is made as Cinnabar is wont
to be prepared) then grind with it iiij. of Antimony, of red Arsenick iiij. of
Crocus Martis ij. and of Powder of Tiles viij. Put all these into a Glass
Cucurbit, and sublime them, as such things are wont to be sublimed; and in this
Sublimation you will have Rubies in Color not inferior to the Oriental, but
they are not fixed; for they are volatile, and fly from the Fire. Let the
Artificer separate these Rubies from the Cinnabar, which ascends in the
Sublimation, grind them to Powder and extract them with strong Vinegar. This
being done. let him abstract the Vinegar leasurely in B. M. and a Powder will
remain; this Powder grind small as before, and having put it into another
Glass, extract its Tincture with Spirit of Wine, and separate the remaining
Feces. This Extraction with Spirit of Wine digest in B. M. well closed for one
Month. Then abstract the Spirit of Wine, as you abstracted the Vinegar, and put
the remaining, Powder of Wine into a flat Glass Dish, and set that Dish in a
Cellar into a Pail full of Water, that it may Swim upon the Water, as a Boat.
So doing. the Powder which is in the Glass will in a few days resolve it self
into a clear and perlucid Liquor.

This Liquor is salutary in old open Wounds, and is a vulnerary Balsom in like
Accidents, if put into them, and they covered round with a common Stiptick
Plaster. In diuturnal open Wounds, it leaves no man destitute of help,
although such, as in the Cure of which all other Remedies have been tried in
vain. Of open Ulcers, which have their Original from within, I speak not here;
for they cannot perfectly be healed without internal Remedies, which dry up
all Fluxions, and radically extirpate the Disease: although at this time few
are found, who bend their thoughts this way, or take any Course to touch the
Root it self of those Diseases, of which I now treat.

If Men would in their Minds well consider the Calamities of Life, into which
the Fall of our first Parents precipited us, and seriously weigh that Original
Sin, and the great troop of Evils thence issuing, Viz: of Sadness, Anguish,
Diseases and Miseries, they certainly would spend their time better, and employ
more labor to search out the health of their neighbors, so strictly commended
to them by the Supreme Ruler of Heaven, and by him commanded as their proper
Duty. But how many (with grief be it spoken!) shunning labor, consume their
time unprofitably, and do not what was to be done by them, but what they
formerly have done, and still have a lust to do, being affrayd to do so much,
as will soil their Fingers Ends; as if they did envy the Tradesman, who perhaps
gets a small Gain by selling Soap, which they would not willingly buy, to wash
their delicate hands. Are not all we miserable Mortals, that live here*
Strangers in the Earth, possessing nothing, that we can call ours? Are not all
Things we here use, the Goods of our Lord, lent to us, whilst we live and no
longer? Therefore we ought so to behave our Selves in using them, that
supported with a good Conscience we may be able to stand in that Day, in which
an Account is to be given for them; and be not for our Ingratitude cast into
Prison, and utter Darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. If
this were the Meditation, and this the Intention of every Man, he would be like
a Monster, if he should think of admitting Sin in himself, or of neglecting his
Office; and all Men would, with a certain Emulation strive to pleasure their
Neighbors, with the Gifts received from GOD. But these things are remote from
the thoughts of the World, and Wordly Men; Money, Money, is the Scope of all
their Intentions; this the Potent seek directly or indirectly, and for this the
Poor are subservient to them, that they also may participate of the Mammon of
Iniquity.

Yet take heed, I advise you to take heed, lest the Bones of that Flesh,
sticking in your Throat, Suffocate you, or the Back-bones of Fishes pierce your
Heart. But what does Admonition help which the World little esteems of and
derides? Hear, I pray you an History; or learn a Parable. When I, according to
my Vow, undertook a Pilgrimage to St. James, to visit that holy Place as a
Stranger, I prayed to GOD, and bound myself with a Vow, that if the granted me
an happy Return to my Monastery, I would render him due Prayers. He granted my
Request, and I daily return Thanks to him. But I thought many more would have
rejoiced with me, and have given thanks to the same GOD, for the famous
Relics, which at that time I brought with me to our Monastery, (for
Consolation of the Poor, and many Others) that it might procure to it self a
Name, in this perishing Valley of Tears, that could not be wiped out by any
Oblivion. Yet hence few were rendered either better, or more grateful to GOD,
for so great a benefit; but persevered in Derision and Contempt of that, which
GOD will vindicate in the last Day.

But of these enough at this time, let us proceed in our Instruction of
Antimony, whence yet another Medicine may be prepared, which I my self have
experienced to be very salutary; and effectual in every kind of Fevers, and in
the Pestilence.

Grind Antimony subtily, put it into a Glass Retort, and distill it with a
strong fire, without any Addition, 3. or 4. times, and always with a large
Receiving Vessel; at length of it is made a Red Powder, which extract with
Vinegar, and circulate the Extraction with a gentle fire for ten whole Days;
abstract the Vinegar by Distilling, and that which remains, by a singular This
Extaction may be rendered volatile with Spirit of Wine, after the sam^ manner,
as I taught yuu in the former Operations.
Artifice in distilling will be changed into an Oil. Let this Oil be further
Circulated until all Humidity be drawn off therefrom, and it again be reduced
to Powder, as it was; when the Vinegar is abstracted and separated by
Distillation, then gather the Oil in a new Receiver.

Four Grains of this Oil taken with water of Carduus Benedictas, if the Sick be
well covered and Sweated, heal Quotidian, Tertian and Quartan Fevers. The same
Dose is very available for expelling the Pest, either given with Spirit of
Wine, or with distilled Vinegar, according as the Paroxysm of the Pest first
invades, either with Heat, or with Cold. Which is witnessed by three Brethren
in our Monastery, who recovered of the Plague by this Arcanum, when they
expected no other but Death, and had made their Wills. This so reconciled their
Minds to this my Art, as they helped me, with greater Zeal then before, both by
their Prayers and Labor, and spent the leisure time they had exempt from
Religious Duties, in serving me daily; and in a short time attained to so great
Experience, that by their own Industry, and the Industry of their Brethren,
they gained more true Knowledge in searching out the Arcanums of Nature, then
they could before obtain in alonger series of time. Therefore, for these Men, I
give them thanks, even unto my very old Age; and in very deed I return them
thanks, because they deserved so well of me, and of others, by their so
faithful Labor; but they finished their Course of this Life before me, and
entered the way of all Flesh, wherefore I recommend their Reward to the Supreme
Physician, who dwells in the highest Heavens, and there will refresh them with
sufficient Joy, and make up in Heaven that Just Recompense, which here on Earth
was denied them by ignorant, and ungrateful Men.

Another Oil of Antimony for wounds, is prepared with Addition in the following
Manner.

Take of Antimony, Sulphur, Saltnitre, of each equal parts; Fulminate those
under a Bell, as Oil of Sulphur per Campan. is made; which way of preparing
has long since been known to the Ancients. But Consider, you will have a
better way, if instead of a Bell, you take an Alembeck I now, O Lover of
Chemistry, Speak to you by Pictures, not in words only that by a Compendium of
Speech, you may also have this Compendium of Labor, and Charge. Behold this
Instrument, and provide for yourself such an One, that you may follow Basilius,
in making Oil of Sulphur per Campan. For this Way j. will yield you as much
Oil, as a Pound will make in the Common Method. From Sixteen ounces of Sulphur
you may ^^tract half an Ounce of Oil, which others, in their way, do scarcely
expect from Sixteen pounds.
, and apply to it a Recipient; so you will obtain more Oil, which will indeed
be of the same Color, as that which is made of Common Sulphur, but in powers
and virtues not a little more excellent, then it.

depiction of an alembic Here place the Figure in page. 128.



We use 3 or 4. Drops of this inwardly taken with Spirit of Wine against the
Phthisick of the Lungs; but outwardly, if it first be anointed, and a Stiptick
Plaster applied, against all Wounds stinking, and tending to putrefaction, and
so will find it to be the most certain Remedy of all Wounds.

Again another Oil of Antimony against all corroding Wounds very profitable, is
this way made.

Take of Antimony lb. j. Common Salt dried, lb. ss. Tiles broken; lb. v. Grind
all together, and put them into a Retort, whence distill a Yellow Oil. When all
the Spirits are come forth, put the Matter in another Glass. and from it
extract the Plegm, and a Powder will remain; which in an humid place spread
upon a stone, and you will have an Humid Balsom, which is a singular Remedy in
all Verminant Wounds, and in the Cancer, which has being chiefly in the Face
of a Man, and in the Breasts of a Woman. Much more might be written of this
Balsom, did I not fear, that every unskillful Man, and the Rabble of Sophisters
would fall foul on me, and say I speak too largely, and commit more to writing,
then Experience has taught me; and so that I boast only of Speculations, and
mere Imaginations.

Morcover, another Oil is made in this mann^^.

Sublime one part of Antimony, with a fourth part of Sal Armoniack, with
subtle Fire. The (...) carries up the Sulphur of Antimony, red as B^^^^. Grind
this Sublimate to a fine Powder, and (...) took at first lb.j. of Antimony,
grind with it aga^^ v. of Sal Armoniack, and Sublime as before. (...) Sublimate
dissolve in a moist place. Or otherwi^^ take the Sublimate, and edulcorate it
from the Sa^^ added, gently dry it, and you will have Sulph^^* which burns like
Common Sulphur, which is sold at the Apothecaries. From this Sulpur extract its
Tincture with distilled Vinegar, and when you have abstracted the Vinegar by
gentle Heat of B. M. and by a subtle Operation again distilled the remaining
Powder, you will have (if in this Operation you err not) a most Excellent This
is another Repetition of the Process, by which the Balsom of Antimony is made,
as our Author calls it in this Treatise, or the Quintessence of Antimony, of
which often above. Yet in the process there is this difference, that here the
Sulphur is s^parated by the Sal Armoniack from the Antimony, and then extracted
from the Vinegar; whereas, in the other Process, the Sulphur is extracted by
the Vinegar, whilst it is yet united with the Antimony. But these are not
things of so great a Moment, as to frustrate the Effect of Operations.
Therefore this Variety giv^s the greater Liberty to the Operator, that he may
not be Scrupulous in tho^ Things, in which he understands the Reason of what he
does, and of the Method by which he acts.
Oil grateful, Sweet, and pleasant in its use, without any Corrosiveness or
peril.

It heals the Phthisick, remedies the Priekings of the Sides; and if any One
labors with difficulty of Breathing, let him take too Granes in the morning,
and as many at Night going to Bed. in the Elixir or Spirit of Wine, and he
shall be healed, For it dilates the Passages of the Breast, expells all
Impurities, and Phlegmes out of the Breast; and to me it has often produced
many unlooked for Effects. But since in other Preparations of Antimony, I have
described such Virtues, as with this are common to them, I Judge it needless to
repeat them all, lest in the Sectators of Art I should create tediousness
through multiplicity of Words. or alien thoughts by an impertinent Tantolooy.

In the mean while, the Liquor, which, as I above said, was resolved in an
Humid Place, is an external Medicine, and very profitable; for it cleanses the
Impurities of the Skin, and if a little Oil of Tartar be mixed therewith, it
heals the Phagedena of the Fingers; and if often anointed therewith, it
purisyes the Skin and cures Scrophulaes.

Also, Sulphur of Antimony is prepared in another Manner.

Grind Antimony to a fine Powder, which boil for two hours or a little longer,
in a sharp Lixivium made of the Ashes of Beech-wood. When boiled, filter the
Antimony clear, and poor Vinegar upon the filtred Liquor, and then the Sulphur
will settle to the bottom wholly red. Pour off the Phlegm and gently dry the
Powder. Distill this Powder with the Vinegar of Wine; extract the Tincture, and
do as you did with the former Sulphur. To reduce the same into an Oil by
Distilling, is worth your while: Although the Oil above mentioned has greater
Virtues, because its Body, by the Sal Armoniack, in the beginning of the
Sublimation was better dissolved and opened.

There yet remain many things to be written of Antimony, and especially Three,
necessary to be known by the Spagyrick Physician and Philosopher, viz. the
Preparation of Vinegar, which is made of its Minera; and then the Philosophic
Signate Star, which is not to be omitted; and lastly the Lead of Philosophers,
of which we shall speak somewhat; touching which Many have imagined Great
Things, and thought (in their way of Reasoning, and Speculation) to prepare the
true and sincere Mercury of Philosophers of it; which indeed cannot be done,
since so great Efficacy is not from above insited in Antimony, as that in it
can exist that Mercury, or of it be prepared. That Mercury is the first Ens, or
first Water of Metalls, which is perfect, otherwise the Great Stone of the
ancient Wise Men could not be made of it. That first Ens, I say, and the Seeds
thereof, are found in another Mineral, in which the Operation (according to the
Genius of Metalls) is greater, then in Antimony. Yet this supplies us with a
certain Particular, and most profitable Operation; and besides in it you may
find whatsoever appertains to internal and external Medicine. For it is the
Column of ever Shop of Apothecaries, if duly prepared, as I often admonish;
nor is any thing wanting in it, provided the Artist has learned well to
distinguish the Disposition of Metalls and Mineralls, and diligently observes
both the Preparation and Use of Antimony; because then, and not before, follows
a perfect Judgment of it. Therefore I will stand to my Promise, and comfort my
Disciples, according to their Wish, by satisfying and instructing them, which
way the Separation of Good from Evil may be known to them, and giving
Information touching the Vinegar of Philosophers, which is made of Antimony.

M^lt the Minera of Antimony, and purify it, grind it to a Subtle Powder, this
Matter put into a Round Glass, which is called a Phiall, having a long Ne^k,
pour upon it distilled Water, that the Vessel may be half full. Then having
well closed the Vessel, set it to putrefy in Horsedung, until the Minera begin
to wax hot, and cast out a Froath to the Superficies: then it is time to take it
out; for that is a Sign the Body is opened. This digested Matter put into a
Cucurbit, which well close, and extract the Water, which will have an acid
Taste. When all the Water is come off, intend the Fire, and a Sublimate will
ascend; this again grind with the Feces, and again pour on the same Water, and
a second time abstract it, then it will be more Sharp. This Operation must be
repeated, until the Water be made as Acid, as any other Sharp distilled Vinegar
of Wine. But the Sublimate, the oftener the Operation is repeated, the more it
is diminished. When you have obtained this Acid Vinegar, take fresh Minera as
before and pour this Vinegar on it, so as it may stand above it three Fingers;
put it into a Pelican, and digest it two days in Heat, then the Vinegar
becomes red, and much more sharp then before. Cant this clean off, and distill
it without Addition in B. M. The Vinegar comes off white, and the Redness
remains in the Bottom, which extracted with Spirit of Wine is an excellent
Medicine. Again rectify the Vinegar in B. M. that it may be freed from its
Phlegm; lastly dissolve in it its proper Salt, viz: in iiij. of it, j. of the
Salt, and force it strongly by Ashes; then the This Vinegar also is numbered
among the chief of those things, which are prepared of Antimony, therefore I
thought it worth while to illustrate this with some Commentaries. For although
it may be made in the way Basilius prescribes, yet there are still some things
wanting to render the Work both more easy and more perfect, which I here
subjoyn; For six pounds of Antimony are required sixteen pounds of Distilled
Water, and when (after Digestion) we would distill it, a certain manual
Operation must be observed, on which depends the Success of the whole Work
almost. For the Alembeck must be so placed, as his Pipe or Beak may be covered
with Water, which either must be put into the Recipient, or pass out by
distilling into the same; otherwise the Spirit's of the Antimony will be lost,
and more then half part of the same perish, or the Work require much more time
for its perfection. I have expressed this by a Figure here placed; that if any
by hearing do not sufficiently perceive this, they may by seeing understand.
When the whole Water has passed over by Alembeck, the Fire (as the Author
admonishes) is to be incresed, and three Days, and as many Nights continued
without intermission. Then let all cool, and the Sublimate, as he teaches, must
again be mixed with the Antimony; this Labor for three Days and Nights must
be reassumed, and afterward repeated to the third time. Then your Water will
be acid, as common Vinggar. If you tinge this Vinegar with now Minera of
Antimony, you will have a Tincture, which Basilius names this Balsome of Life,
so often described, but never sufficiently commended. O, did Mortals know what
Mysteries lie absconded in this Tincture, I question whether they would be
desirous to set about any other Preparation of Antimony. All things are in this
One. I have spoken, O Lover of Chemistry, do thou act.
Vinegar becomes more sharp, and acquires greater Strength, and virtue.

depiction of an alembic Here place the Figure in the 133. Page.



This Vinegar Cools vehemently, not as common Vinegar, but with great
Admiration, and certain Experience, especially for asswaging the Gangraene,
produced from Gunpouder; also it heals other enraged Wounds and Members, when
joined with the Soul of Saturn, wrought up into an Unguent, and applied
outwardly. And mixed with Water of Endive, to which Salt prunella is added, it
consumes the Squinancy, and extinguiseth its great Heat: besides, it asswageth
the Motion of the Blood inflamed. In time of the Pestilence, taken inwardly,
the Dose of one Spoonful, several times, and outwardly applied to the Swellings
by Linen Clothes moystned therein, extracts the Venom, and most excellently
cools: But consider, when you would use it in this manner outwardly, it must be
mixed with a third part of Water distilled from Frogspawn.

Many highly esteem the Signate Star of Amimony, and very many have endeavored
to prepare it, sparing no labor to attain the same. Which some have acquired
with good success, others have lost all their labor and Cost, Many have
assumed an Opinion, that this Star is the true Matter, whence the Stone of
Philosophers may be made, induced hereunto, by this thought or Imagination,
viz. because Nature here self has signed it into a Star, therefore they could
not choose but esteem of it, and by these Cogitations were led into the Way of
Error, But I syncerely denounce, that it is nothing so. For these kind of
Searchers err from the Kings highway, and kill themselves in clambering up
Rocks and Cliffs, in which wild Goats inhabit, and Birds of Prey build their
nests. It is not given to this Star to contain in it self so great Potency, or
from it self to form so precious a Stone. Yet I affirm, that in it lies
absconded a famous Medicine, which may be made of it. The Star is thus made.

Take of Hungarian Antimony 3. parts: Of Steel 1. part. melt these together
with 4. parts of burnt Tartar, when melted pour out the whole into a Cone, when
cold take out the Regulus, and separate it from all impurity, and the Scoria.
Grind this Regulus to Powder and weigh it, then add thereto thrice so much of
burnt Tartar, and pour it out as before. Repeat this labor the third time;
then the Regulus purges it self, and becomes pure and clear. Note, when you
have rightly completed the Fusion, and have used a manual Operation, as is fit
(which is of principal concern in this Work) you will obtain a fair Star Here
it is to be noted. In the third fusion of the Regulus, the Fire must be
vehemently heightened, that if any Impurity remain with the Regulus, it may by
that intense heat be taken away. By this means you will have a Regulus in
beauty and whiteness comparable to Silver, but in Virtut and Price far Superior.
bright and shining like Cupellate Silver, no less artificially formed, then if
some Painter had with his Compasses diligently divided the same.

This Star with Sal Armoniack is reduced to a red This Sublimate, before it is
set in a Cellar to be there resolved, should be purged from the Sal Armoniack
with distilled Water. They are sew Things which I admonish, but by the
ignornace of these or those, great Errors are committed, and the Work with all
its Costs and Charges perishes, or at least yields not sufficient to pay what
the Materials cost.
Sublimate; for the Tincture of Mars ascends. Such a Sublimate may be resolved
in a moist place into a Liquor, which discovers wonderful Virtues in Chirurgy.

This Regulus, or Signate Star, melted often with the Stony Serpent, is brought
to such a state, as at length it consumes it self in it, and wholly unites it
self with the Serpent. Of a Snake or Serpent the Nature is such, if you slacken
your hold he rises up, if you gripe him hard he bursts, the same I fear here:
Therefore the Author calls that a Serpent, which he mixeth with this Regulus.
But it is the Serpent of a Sto^e, or a Stony-Serpent; because the Salt, as a
Snake willingly licks a Stone.
This being done, the Sectator of Art has a Matter altogether hot and fiery in
which very much of Art is latent. This prepared Matter resolves it self into an
Oil; this very Oil ought to be brought over the Helm by Distillation, and then
rectifyed, that it may be pure and clear,

This Oil may commodiously and securely be taken inwardly; but with great
Prudence and Caution, and not oftener then twice or thrice in a Week, and no
more at one time, then three Drops in ij. of Wine, or other Water distilled
from Herbs, according to the Exigency of the Disease. For this Reason, it is
the Physicians part to know the Causes of Diseases, together with the
Complexion of the Sick, that he may the more securely use his Remedies.

This is a famous Acrimony They, who understand of how great Utility it is to
extract the Essences from Metals, are not ignorant of the Virtues of this sharp
Oil. For this is the only Menstruum for this purpose. How many are they who
have spent their whole Life in Chemical Operations, and never could arrive to
the knowledge of a true Menstruum? To thee it is here revealed, if Health be
your aim, you may safely use it in the Body; if you attempt somewhat more
sublime, and have already conceived good hope you shall compound it, this is
the principal help of all, for ascending to the Throne of the Chemical Kingdom.
containing in it self many Arcanums; but there is no need to reveal all things
together and at once to unskillful men. Some Arts are to be suppressed, that
some Secrets and Arcanums may remain proper to the Philosopher, who in
searching them out has daily sustained grievous Toil.

But let him, who resolves to tread in my Footsteps not be weary of Searching;
but what I have done, let him do, and what I have so often desired, and what
with so earnest Wishes I have sought, let him seek. These Principles, which I
have prescribed you, are sufficient for to search out the End by. Many have
failed, yea many have been cut off by Death, before they could in their
Learning attain to the Principles only; that is, they were deprived of Life,
before they could acquire the Magistery of Art. Therefore, I at first set forth
a Book of Rudiments, that the Studious follower of Art (who in his first
Experiences had need of so much time) might the sooner attain his desired end,
and wished Scope, and next unto GOD give me thanks.

Moreover, in this Oil a wonderful Effect is latent. For if this Oil be
circulated with Crystals for some time, viz. for three Days and Nights (the
Crystals being first Calcined) it from them extracts a Salt: which being done,
the Oil may again be distilled off by Retort. Thus you will have a Medicine,
which admirably breaks the Stone in the Bladder, and expels it, and also
effects many other Things, by a certain famous virtue in it.

But that we may also say something of the Lead of Philosophers, let the
curious searchers of Nature know, that between Antimony and common Lead, there
is a certain near affinity, and they hold a strict friendship each with other.
As a Tree casts out of it is side it is superfluous Rosin, which is the Sulphur
of that Tree; as the Cherry-tree, and other Trees, which give forth such Gums:
there are other kinds of Trees also, which by reason of their abundance of
Mercury, produce and cast forth from themselves a certain Excrescency, which
neither in Form, nor Virtue is in any wise like to their Fruit; but has wholly
other properties, as in Oaks and Apple Trees is apparent, which produce like
bastard Fruits, or Monsters: So the Earth also has like abortive Fruits, which
in Separation from the pure Metals, are severed and cast out.

Now, although there is so strict an affinity between Antimony, and Saturn; yet
by reason of the too much Sulphur, which Antimony has in it self, it is cast
out from it: because its viscous Body (in it is Nativity) could not come to
perfection; and therefore it was constrained necessarily to consist among
Minerals: because it is abundance of hot Sulphur was the Cause, that hindered
it is Mercury, that through defect of Cold it could neither come to Coagulation,
nor into a Malleable Body. Moreover, I say, the Lead in Antimony is no other,
then it is Regulus, which has not as yet obtained Malleableness. And, as above
I said, when the Regulus and Steel by Liquefaction are united, and deduced to a
Star, there are many, who would thence make the ancient stone of Philosophers;
which I before denied to be possible. Yet what Medicines may be prepared of it,
you have already briefly heard; therefore touching them, I shall not add a Word
more.

But the Reason, why the Regulus is called and accounted Lead, is this. When
that Regulus is taken, which Antimony gives forth from it self in making Glass,
and put into a Crucible well closed, which can resist the fire, with the Salt
of Saturn (having been first Cemented with the Salt for three hours) and these
permitted to melt together, in a Wind Furnace, the I not enviously, as many
Chemists do, but affectionately deal with Surgeons: wishing that they would
in their mind, as according to their faculty they may and ought, endeavor to
prepare such helps, for their miserably afflicted Patients, and such
Compendiums of Sanity, as may be prepared of this Regulus. Would you, have me
discover to you the Mystery? Hear^ with pleasure, and use it. This Regulus, by
the Salt of Saturn rendered Malleable, must be mixed with equal parts of Mercury
condensed by Saturn, and in a vehement fire fluxed, and so well mixed. The
Matter comes forth, in it is external Face like unto Silver, but in its internal
Virtues is more noble, and more precious then any Silver. But you Chyrurgeon;
studious of your own Art, and by Art covetous of Glory, deduce that into thin
Plates, and externally apply it to Wounds, and Malignane Fistula's. So doing,
you will be amazed, when you shall see Nature, helped by this Art, to perform
more, in a very short time, then you could have hoped for in a longer time, by
so many unguents and Plasters. The Rusticks (to use the Words of Basilius)
will no more deride and upbraid you, saying, they can effect more with a piece
of crude and stinking Lard, then you are able to do with the laborious Process
of your whole Chirurgick Art.
Regulus, when taken out, is found to be rendered soft, and more ponderous, then
it was before. For it receives it is ponderosity from the Spirit of the Salt,
which also gave it softness, so that it is Body now is compact and heavy.

Therefore I say, there is not much difference between the Signate Star, and
Lead of Antimony; which notwithstanding are every where distinguished as two
diverse things. For either of them is made of the Glass of Antimony, and
prepared into to one and the same Medicine, as is already by me sufficiently
declared. Here therefore I break off my Discourse, that I may explain what the
stone of fire is, after I shall have declared the Appendix which follows.

O GOD grant thy Grace, and open the Hearts and Ears of Men unwilling to hear,
and to them impart thy Blessing, that they may acknowledge Thee in thy
Omnipotency, and wonderful Works of Nature, to thy Praise, Honor and Glory, and
for the Health, Solace, and Confirmation of the Strength of their Neighbor, and
also for Restoring the Sick to their pristine Health. Amen.

THE APPENDIX.
FOr a Conclusion you are further to know, that Antimony may be applied to many
other Uses, then as above expressed; as to Scripture or Printing, for which
Printers use it. Also under a certain Constellation and Concourse of the
Planets, a Mixture of Metals is made with Antimony, of which Artists form
Signatures and Characters endued with singular Virtues. Of the same Mixture
also are made Speculums, of many and wonderful Aspects and Properties. Also
Bells and other Instruments may be made thereof, of admirable sound. Likewise
Images of Men, and many other Things The Virtues and powers of Antimony which
the Author here in this Appendix so lightly touches, and passes over, are so
many and so various, as indeed the hundredth part of them is not yet known to
Men. Which Ignorance undoubtedly redounds to the Reproach und Ignominy of our
kind; because We Men, among so many other Animals, only endued with Reason, and
a Faculty of Discoursing, are hurryed with so great impetuousness, to that
wicked and abominable Desire of Gain, as scarcely any Man has leisure to
search out the Wonders, which the Author of Nature has insited in his
Creatures. But I am unwilling to repeat this Reprehension so often spoken of by
Valentine; I do only call it to mind. This Mineral, in which lies hid so
admirable a Spirit, that by Exhausting it cannot be exhausted, has also
Virtues, which by no man studying can be sufficiently known. What I have tried,
out of the way of Chemistry and Medicine, are sew; yet Experience has taught
me so much, as I judge Antimony in other things will show it self no less
admirable, then in Chemistry and Medicine. Yet what I think of Characters and
Signatures, which the Author says may be made under a Concourse of certain
Constellations, I shall not here discover. It suffices me, that I can say,
that among all Metals and Minerals, there is not any Substance known, which
contains so much of a Celestial Spirit, and has so great Sympathy with the
Stars, as Antimony. Weigh this, with all that I have before said of Antimony,
but not negligently, and Hasten to the Stone, which is called the Stone of Fire.


.

But since these things concern not Medicine, nor appertain to my Order, Rule,
and Calling, I rest well satisfied in my Vocation, and commend them to the
Handling of Others, who know them better.

OF THE Triumphant Chariot OF ANTIMONY, AND What the STONE of FIRE is.
WHen, at a certain time an abundance of Thoughts (which my internal and
fervent Prayer to GOD suggested) had set me loose and wholly free from all
terrene Businesses, I purposed in my self to attend to Spiritual Inspirations,
of which we have need, for the more accurate scrutiny of Nature. Therefore I
resolved to make my self Wings, that I might ascend on high, and inspect the
stars This Leave is to be given to all, who treat of Sacred Things, Viz. to
declare those Things, which they are willing to discover (not to the unlearned
ignorant Deriders, but only to Men, worthy, and to such as sincerely desire,
and aspire to the knowledge of the same) in a certain singular and Parabolical
kind of Writing. In which our Author is the more to be excused, because when he
comes to the greatest of Mysteries, which he intended to explain in this Book,
he betakes himself to certain hiding Places of Parables, and with the Heaven of
Piety, which is wont to cover all things (yea even the most wicked) he so veils
his Secrets, as None but Pious and sincere Disciples of Art can with the
acuteness of their sight penetrate these Clouds. do thou therefore, Dum sugit
ad Salices, and se cupit ante videri, with a certain intellectual Luxury sport
with him, he will not delude Thee.
themselves, as Icarus, and his Father Daedalus in times past did, if credit
may be given to the Ancient Writings of Poets.

But when I soared too near the Sun, my Feathers with it is vehement heat were
consumed, and burnt, I fell headlong into the depth of the Sea: yet to me, in
this my extreme Necessity invoking GOD, help was sent from Heaven, which freed
me from all peril and the present Destruction. For an Angel hastened to my
assistance, who commanded the Waters they should be still, and instantly, in
that deep Abyss appeared a most high Mountain, upon which at length I ascended,
that I might thereon examine, whether (as Men had affirmed) there was any
Friendship There has been no Man, who had darted his sight but as it were
through a Lattice, into the Penetrals of Chemistry, who did ever deny this
Influence of Superiors upon Inseriors. Therefore let Basilius so holily
affirming, and so often openly declaring it to Men, be credited by those, who,
the true Light being not yet risen upon them, do by feeling without sight
practice Chemistry.
and Familiarity between Superiors and Inferiors, and whether the Superior
Stars have acquired power from GOD, their Creator, to produce any one Thing
like themselves in the Earth.

And having searched into Things, I found, that whatsoever the Ancient Masters
had so many Ages since committed to Writing, and delivered to their Disciples,
who earnestly desired to be the true Imitators of them, was (as I may say) more
true than Truth it self. Wherefore, as is fit, I give praise and thanks to my
Lord and Heavenly Father, for his incomprehensible Works.

In very deed (that I may expound the matter in few Words) I found all Things,
which are generated in the Bowels of Mountains, to be infused from the Superior
Stars, and take their beginning from them, in the form of an aqueous Cloud,
Fume or Vapor, which for a very long time fed and nourished by the Stars, is
at length educted to a tangible form by the Elements. Moreover, this Vapor is
dried, that the Watriness may lose its Dominion, and the Fire next, by help of
the Air, retain the Ruling Power. Of Water Fire, and of Fire and Air Earth is
produced: which notwithstanding are found in all things consisting of body,
before the Separation of them. Therefore this, viz. Water is the first Matter
This is an old Song, this is the Sum of Art; from this Imitation of Nature is
found the lesser Stone of Fire, from this it is made, Whenever it is
prepared, from the Same also the great Philosophic Stone derives its Original.
This is the Water of Anaxagoras, the Fire of Empedocles, and Aristotle's first
Matter, of which all things have been, and to this Day are made. Which is
clearly evident in the Nutrition of Man, the Growth of a Tree, and in the
Generation of Metalls, For that, which constitutes Flesh, Woods, and Metalls,
is not taken from Food, Rain or Earth, but is infused into them from elsewhere.
That very Thing is the Aliment, which nourishes all things, but that it may be
so variously specificate, it must be separated from that Body, in which it
dwells, and be joined to another, which by the Chemical Art is performed.
of all things, which by the Dryness of Fire and Air is formed into Earth.

But now since my Intention is to describe the Stone of Fire, how it is made of
Antimony, together with the Process of its Preparation, which not only heals
Men, but Metalls also particularly; it will be necessary before all Things, to
speak somewhat of these following Heads. What properly the Stone of Fire is;
what is its Minera; whether a Stone can be made without Matter or no; what is
the extreme difference of Stones, and how many Species of them are found, and
lastly of their use.

In this my purpose, I pray, O Spirit of Heaven illuminate me, that I may give
a true and sincere Instruction, viz. according as is fit for me, and the matter
it self permits. Indeed I have hopes of Eternal Absolution from this my Supreme
confessor, who from Eternity possesses the Throne of Mercy, and will give
Testimony of all Things, when the Decretory Sentence shall be pronounced upon
all Men, in the last Judgment, without any appeal.

Therefore first know and consider, that the True Tincture of Antimony, which
is the Medicine of Men and Metalls, is not made of crude and melted Antimony,
as it is sold by Merchants and Apothecaries; but extracted from the Minera, as
it is taken out of the Mountains, and before it is formed into Glass. But how
that Extraction should be made, is the principal Work in which the whole Art
consists: Health and Riches attend him, who rightly attains to that. But, my
Reader, you must diligently mind this, viz. that the Tincture of Antimony
prepared fixed and solid, or the Stone of Fire (as I name it is a certain pure,
penetrative spiritual and fiery Essence, which is reduced into a coagulated
Matter, like the Salamander, which in Fire is not consumed, but purified and
conserved.

Yet the Stone of Fire tingeth not universally, as the Stone As much as Heaven
is elevated above the Earth, so much does the true Stone of Philosophers differ
from this Stone of Fire. I my self do heartily confess, that although I have
found this, yet I am very far distant from the other. And this, whatsoever it
is, I own to be received from the Wisdom of Basilius. Do you take ^eed you be
not deluded by your own fantasy, and that others deceive you not.
of Philosophers, which is made of the Essence of Gold it self. To this no such
power is given, as that it should perform such things, but it tingeth
particularly; viz, Silver into Gold, Tin also and Lead; but Mars and Venus it
touches not, nor do they yield more, then from them by Separation may be
effected.

Moreover, one part of it can tinge no more, then five parts of Metal, so as
to persist in the Trial of Saturn and Antimony; whereas, on the contrary, the
Great Stone of Philosophers can transmute to infinity. Also in augmentation it
cannot be so far exalted; yet the Gold is pure and solid.

The Minera, out of which this Stone or Tincture is made, is no other then (as
I above mentioned) the very Earth of Antimony; from which, I say, it is made:
but how or with what virtue, force, and power it is endued, you shall hear anon.

Let the Reader consider, that there are many kinds of Stones found, which
tinge particularly; but all fixed Pouders, which tinge, I here signify by the
name of Stones; yet one tingeth more highly then another, as especially the
Stone of Philosophers, which obtains the principal place; the next is the
Tincture of Sol; and of Luna, etc. For the White: after these, the Tincture of
Vitriol or Venus; likewise the Tincture of Mars; either of which has in it
self the Tincture of Sol, when reduced to Fixation. Next to these follow the
Tinctures of Jupiter and Saturn for Coagulation of Mercury; and lastly, the
Tincture of Mercury it self. This is the difference and multiplicity of Stones
and Tinctures, all which notwithstanding are generated from Seed, and from one
original Matrix, from which the true Universal Stone proceeds, but out of these
no other Metallic Tincture is to be found. But all other Things, by what name
soever called, all Stones (whether precious or common) I touch not now, nor
have I any Intention to write or speak any thing of them at this time; because
they contain in themselves no other Virtues, then what appertain to Medicine.
Nor shall I here make mention of Animal or Vegetable Stones; because they are
only conducent to Medicine; but for Metallic Works unprofitable and void of
all Virtue. Yet all the Virtues of all Things, Mineral, Animal and Vegetable,
collected into one, are found in the Stone of Philosophers.

Salts are endued with no tinging Virtue, but are only Keys Salts, as here is
rightly said, are Keys; they open the Chest wherein the Treasure lies. But you
must be sure to take the true Key; otherwise you may spoil the Lock, and not
open the Chest. It is not safe in this Case to take Quid for Quo, as
Apothecaries are wont. You must have a Philosophic Key and proper Salts fit
for opening must be taken. Nor contemn that Distinction, which is intimated,
between Salts opening, which the Author here calls (as they are) Keys, and
Salts fixing, which enter the Treasure it self; as is sufficiently manifest by
the Text.
for the Preparation of Stones; otherwise of themselves they effect nothing.

Yet, as for Metallic Salts (I now speak to the purpose if you rightly
understand, what distinction I put between Mineral Salts) they are not to be
slightly esteemed, nor to be rejected in Tinctures, since we can in no wise be
without them, in their Composition, For in them lies that most precious
Treasure, from which every Fixation derives its Original.

Here some may ask, and indeed very properly; whether such a Stone can be made
without matter? I answer, No. For every Thing must have its own Matter; but not
without Distinction. Animals require their Matter, Vegetables theirs, and
Mineralls theirs. Only consider and before all things observe this; viz. that
no Body can be profitable for any Stone, without Fermentation, which I find in
the end of the Work (I mean as to the Preparation of the Great Stone) cannot be
omitted, if I would convert Metalls with gain; for although in the Beginning a
Corporal form, and corporal Entity, visible and tangible is taken; yet from
that formal Body must be extracted a certain Spiritual and Celestial Entity
(shall I call it) or Apparency; for I find no other more fit name to give it:
which Entity was by the Stars, before infused into that Body, and by the
Elements concocted and made perfect. Yet this Spiritual Entity must again by a
lesser Fire, and by the Regimen and Direction of the Microcosm, be reduced to a
tangible, fixed, Solid and inconsumptible Matter.

But what do I, or what do I speak? I act as if I were deprived of my Reason,
Art thou well in thy Wits, Basilius, who do thus prostitude the Arcanum of
the Stone, which has unto this day been so diligently absconded by all
Philosophers? Surely, if thou had not labored with I know not what
Intemperance of Mind, thou would have closed thy Lips, and not have so
clearly opened, what it is is to separate the Pure from the Impure, what to
render the fixed volatile, and again to fix that; how the Inferior becomes
Superior, and that again plunged into the Deep Abyss, from which it had
ascended. To discover so many Mysteries, in so few Words, as here thou do,
assuredly if ^it be not Madness, it is a certain very great benevolence to
Posterity. This is that which moved him. Valentine seems to have burned with
this Affection, and could not overcome that Inclination of Well-doing to many,
by the Obligation (imposed on all Philosophers) of concealing that Secret
Mystery of Nature, which by the Author thereof, that is, by Nature naturating
with Intellectual Revelation, is communicated only to the Sons of Art worthy
and chosen. The Secret of Secrets has fallen from Basilius, do thou Reader
attend, if you find the Pearl, be not like Aesop's Cock.
in uttering words so openly. For if I had either Reason or Judgment, I should
not discover so great Things with my Tongue, or command my hand to proceed in
writing them.

All Tinctures of Metalls ought to be separated, as that they may be moved with
a certain principal Love and Affection to Metalls, and have a propensity and
desire of uniting themselves with them, and of reducing them to a better State.
Will you have an Emblem, or Example? Behold here it is of Man and Woman. If
they two be inflamed with Mutual Love, neither Delay, nor Rest is admitted,
until they be united, and their Desire is satisfied: after this Union they
rest, and are multiplied, according to the good pleasure of GOD, and the
promise of his Blessing.

Man lives obnoxious to many and perilous Diseases, some of which debilitate
and consume the powers of Nature so, as the Man can by no Remedies be perfectly
restored to Health and his former Strength. But Love is a disease, with which
no other Disease may be compared, which is not healed unless by Production of
its own like, which either Sex desires, and that Desire is not satisfied,
unless by fulfilling this will of the enkindled affection. How many Testimonies
of this violence, which is in Love, are daily found? for it not only inflames
the Younger Sort, but it so exagitates some Persons far gone in years, as
through the burning Heat thereof, they are almost mad. Natural Diseases are for
the most part governed by the Complexion of Man, and therefore invade some more
fiercely, others more gently; but Love, without distinction of poor or rich,
young or old, siezeth All, and having seized so blinds them, as forgetting all
Rules of Reason, they neither see or fear any Snare. Peculiar Members are
infected with the Singular Symptoms of other Diseases, all the other parts
remaining sound and free from that Dolor. Whom Love infects, it invades all
over, penetrates the Body and its whole Substance, Form, and Essence, and
leaves nothing unoffended. For taking place in the Heart there it kindles a
Fire, the burning heat of which is diffused through the Veins, Arteries, and
all the Members of the Body, and in a word I say, where Love once has fixed
its Root, the man is so deprived of all sense, reason and understanding, as he
forgets all things, seriously minds nothing; he is unmindful of GOD and his
Law, his promises and threats he little regards; the torments of Hell and
rewards of Eternal Life he contemns. I speak of inordinate and unlawful Love,
to which, if a man be once addicted, he adheres so pertinaciously, as nothing
can reclaim, nothing can restrain him; he forgets his Duty, Calling and
Condition; derides all admonition, despises the Counsels of Parents,
Superiors, and others who wish him well; briefly I say, he is so blind with
Love, as he cannot see his own Misery; so deaf, as he cannot hear those, who by
their faithful Advice, endeavor to turn and avert from him, the damage and
evil, which would befall him. Love leaves nothing entire, or sound in the Man;
it impedes his Sleep, he cannot rest either Night or Day; it takes off his
Appetite, that he has no disposition either to Meat or Drink, by reason of the
continual Torments of his Heart and Mind. It deprives him of all Providence;
hence he neglects his Affairs, Vocation, and Business; he minds neither Labor,
Study nor Prayer; casts away all thoughts of any Thing but the Body beloved;
this is his study, this his most vain Occupation. If to Lovers the Success be
not answerable to their Wish, or so soon and prosperously as they desire, how
many Melancholies hence arise, with griefs and sadnesses, with which they pine
away and wax so lean, as they have scarcely any Flesh cleaving to the Bones;
yea, at length they loose the Life it self, as may be proved by many Examples!
For such Men (which is an horrible thing to think of) slight and neglect all
perils and detriments, both of the Body and Life, and of the Soul and Eternal
Salvation.

But of these enough; for it becomes not a Religious Man to insist too long
upon these Cogitations, or to give place to such a flame in his heart. Hitherto
(without Boasting I speak it) I have throughout the whole course of my Life
kept my self safe and free from it, and I pray and invoke GOD to vouchsafe me
his Grace, that I may keep holy and inviolate the Faith, which I have Sworn,
and live contented with my Spiritual Spouse, the Holy Catholic Church. For no
other Reason have I alleged these, then that I might express the Love, with
which all Tinctures ought to be moved toward Metalls, if ever they be admitted
by them into true Friendship, and by Love, which penetrates the inmost parts,
be converted into a better State.

Now let us proceed to the Preparation of the Stone, and leave its use to the
Close of this Discourse. This Stone is of a penetrable and fiery Nature, is
cocted and brought to Maturity by fire, no otherwise, then all other Things,
which are found in this Orb; which notwithstanding as they are of a diverse
Nature, so they in diverse manners obtain that, according as the Nature of
Things supplies with diverse Fires.

The first Fire is Celestial, by GOD kindled in our Hearts, by which being
inflamed we are moved with Love and a certain confidence in and of GOD our
Creator, of the Most Holy and Incomprehensible Trinity, and of the Mercy, Grace
of our Savior JESUS CHRIST; which Confidence kindled in Us by Love, never
fails, never deserts us in our Necessities, but will most certainly deliver our
Souls from everlasting destruction. The second Fire is Elemental, produced by
the Sun, and tends to the Ripening of all things in the Macrocosm. The third
Fire is corporal, with which all Foods and Medicines are cocted and prepared,
without which Men can neither obtain Health of Body, nor sustentation of Life.
Of a fourth Fire mention is made in the Sacred Scriptures, viz. that, which
before the Supreme Judgment of GOD shall consume this visible World: but what
Fire is, and how it shall operate, that (if we be wise) we must leave to be
judged of by his own Supreme Majesty. A fifth Fire is also spoken of in
Holy-Writ, viz. Eternal Fire, in which never to have end, the Devils shall
never be set at liberty from their Infernal Prison, and wicked Men, their
Companions, adjudged to those Eternal Fires, shall be vexed, punished and
miserably tormented for ever: from which I pray the Omnipotent and merciful
Lord to preserve us. Here I would admonish all and every Creature endued with
Reason, by their Prayers to beg that Grace and Mercy from the Omnipotent, that
they may so conform their Life to the Divine Precepts, and their own Duty, as
that they may escape this Fire, and it is Eternal Torments.

Our stone of Fire (which is to be noted) must be cocted and ripened with
Corporal Fire in the Microcosm, as all other Medicines and Foods are prepared
by the same. For where the great Fire of the Macrocosm cease from it is
Operation, there the Microcosm begins to produce a new Generation; therefore
this Concoction should seem strange to no Man. Corn is augmented and ripened by
the Elementary Fire of the Macrocosm; but by the Corporal Fire of the Microcosm
a new Coction and maturation is effected, that man may use and enjoy that
Divine Gift for his sustentation, and by the same perfect the Last and the
Least, which is produced of the First and the Greatest.

The true Oil of Antimony, of which the said stone of Fire is made, is above
measure sweet, and from it is earth is in such wise purged and separated, as if
a Glass full of it be exposed to the Sun, it casts forth various and wonderful
Rays (as if many fiery Speculums were there present) resembling a Ruby, and
other Colors. Now attend O Lover of Art and Truth, and hear what I shall teach.

Take in the Name of the Lord, of the Minera of Antimony, which grew after the
Rising of the Sun, and Salt Nitre, of each equal Parts; grind them subtily and
mix them; burn them together with a moderate Fire very artificially and warily;
for in this the principal Part of the Work consists. Then you will have a
matter inclining to Blackness. Of this matter make Glass, grind that Glass to a
subtle Powder, and extract from it an high red Tincture with sharp distilled
Vinegar, which is made of it is proper Minera. Abstract the Vinegar in B. M. and
a Powder Take heed, take heed, O Lover of Chemistry, leest by this Fire, you
burn the wings of your Bird, which has now raised it self to the top of
Mountains. Few words are sufficient to the Intelligent, there is no need to
inculcate the same things often, our careful Father Basilius does that often
enough.
will remain, which again extract with Spirit of Wine highly rectifyed, then
some feces will be put down, and you will have a fair, red, sweet Extraction,
which is of great Use in Medicine. This is the pure Sulphur of Antimony, which
must be separated as exactly as is possible.

If of this Extraction you have lb. ij. take of the Salt of Antimony, as I
taught you to prepare it, iiij. and on them pour the Extraction, and circulate
them, for a whole Month at least, in a Vessel well closed, and the Salt will
unite it self with the Extracted Sulphur. If Faeces be put down, separate them,
and again abstract the Spirit of Wine by B. M. The Powder which remains urge
with vehement Fire, and not without admiration will come forth a varicoloured
sweet Oil, grateful, pellucid and red. Rectify this Oil again in B. M. So that
a fourth part of it may be distilled, and then it is prepared.

This Operation being completed, take living The word, Our Mercury, which has
so often rendered Thee ambiguous, is also here to be understood: for if you take
not the true Mercury of Philosophers, you do nothing. Whosoever he be, that
shall oandidly tell you this, he will be to you Pylades, and you to him
Orestes, and nothing will be more pleasant to me in Life, then to join my self
to you, as a third Sociate in Friendship.
Mercury of Antimony, which I taught you how you should make, and pour upon it
red Oil of Vitriol made upon Iron, and highly rectifyed. By Distillation in
Sand remove the Phlegm from the Mercury; then you will have a precious
Precipitate, in Color such, as never was any more grateful to the Sight; and
in Chronical Diseases and open Wounds, it may profitably be used for recovering
the pristine Sanity* For it vehemently dryes up all Symptomatical Humors,
whence Martial-Diseases proceed; in which the Spirit of the Oil, which remains
with the Mercury, and conjoyns and unites it self thereto, powerfully helps.

Take of this precipitate, and of the Superior Sweet Oil of Antimony, equal
parts pour these together into a Phial, which well closed set in convenient
heat, and the Principitate will in time resolve and fix it self in the Oil.
Also the Phlegm by the Fire will be consumed, and what remains become a Red,
dry, fixed and fluid Far hence, far hence ye Profane, and you that are
initiated in the Sacred Mysteries of Chemistry keep silence. Let the King enter
into his Bedchamber, that he may consummate his Marriage. O tua te quantis
attollet Gloria rebus,
Connubio tali! --
Yet make not too much have to enter, or disturb this Matrimonial Conjunction,
let them for many Months delight themselves with their mutual Embraces, and not
go forth, until from their mutual Love they be changed into an Hermaphroditick
Body, and have produced that Son desired by all, if not a King of Kings, yet at
least a Regulus or Ruler, which delivers his Subjects from Diseases and
Necessity.
Powder which will not in the least give forth from it self any Fume.

Now my Follower. and Disciple of Arcanums, I will speak after a Prophetic
manner. When you have brought your Philosophic Studies (in the Method by me
prescribed) to this end, you have the Medicine of Men and Metals; which is
grateful and Sweet in use, without all peril, it is penetrative, yet causes
not Stools, it induces Emendation, and expells Evil. Use it as is fit; and it
will yield you many Commodities, both for health, and temporal necessity; by
which means you will be freed from want in this World; which is a thing of so
great Moment, as no Sacrifice of Gratitude can be found sufficient to answer
this favor of GOD showed to you.

Here, O my GOD, I as a Religious Man am troubled in Mind; and know not whether
I do well or ill, whether in Our Author judges himself to have spoken too
much, if you also think the same, you will rejoice in his Sadness. Yet it is
strange, that no Man can contribute a little Light to this Philosophy, but he
presently repents.
speaking I have exceeded or not reached the due Bounds; whilst I propose, and
show to every One, as it were, his proper House. Do thou, that art a young
Follower of Art, inquire, search and try, as I have done; if you attain your
End, give greatest thanks to GOD, and after him to me your Master. But if you
turn aside into devious and bypath, blame your self, not me; for I am not
guilty of your Error.

Now I have said enough, and writ enough, and taught so clearly and openly, and
plainly, as more manifestly or clearly cannot be done by Writing, unless some
lost and rash Man, knowing and willingly would cast himself into Hell, to be
there Submerged and Perish: Because, by the Creator of all Things we are most
severely prohibited further to unlock these Mysteries, or to eat of the Tree
which was planted in the midst of Paradise. Therefore here I will desist, until
Others show, what is here to be done by Me, and what they judge is to be
omitted, and say no more of this, but pass to its Use.

Therefore know, that the Use consists in Observation of the Person and his
Complexion, with relation to what appertains to Humane Health, that Nature be
not overpowered with two great a Quantity, or not helped by too small. Yet too
much is not so Religiously to be feared; for it will not readily hurt; because
it helps to recover the pristine Sanity, and sights against Venom, if any be in
the Body. This I only add, three or four grains of it, given in one only Dose,
are sufficient for evpelling every Evil, if taken in Spirit of Wine. For this
Stone or Tincture passes through all the Members of the Body, and contains in
it self the Virtues of many Arcanums. It remedies the Giddiness of the Head,
and all Diseases, which have their Original from the Lungs. It cures difficulty
of Breathing, and the Cough; the Leprosy and French Disease are amended by it,
in a wonderful manner. The Pest, Jaundies, Dropsies and all kinds of Fevers,
are often cured by it, Likewise it expells Venom taken. It profits those, who
have drunk a Philtrum or Love-potion: it confirms all the Members, Brain, Head,
and all things depending thereon. It helps the Stomach and Liver; heals all
Diseases, which proceed from the Reins; cleanses the impurity of the Blood.
Also this Tincture of Antimony, breaks the Stone of the Bladder to Powder; and
expells it; it provokes Urine, when stopped by Flatus's. It restores the vital
Spirits, cures Suffocation of the Matrix, makes the Menstrues flow if stopped,
and stays them if inordinate. It causes Fruitfulness, and makes the Seed
sound, and avaylable for Generation, both in Women and Men. Lastly, this Stone
of Fire inwardly taken (convenient Plasters being also outwardly applied)
heals the Cancer, Fistula's, Rotteness in the Bones, and all corroding Ulcers,
and whatsoever takes beginning from the Impurity of the Blood, also the Disease
it self called Noli me tangere. And that I may comprehend all in few Words,
this Stone, like a Particular Tincture, is a Here the Medicinal Virtues are
spoken of at large. For Basillus supp^seth Thee not to be defiled with the
Filths of Avarice, but splendid in the Light of Charity, and burning with a
Desire of helping thy Neighbor, following him discovering these Secrets. Now
farewell O Lover of Chemistry, and if thou, have gained any Light, either from
the Interpretation of Basillus, or my Commentaries, enjoy it, and communicate
the same to the Sons of Art, that Philosophy oppressed for so many Years with
the intolerable Yoke of Avarice, may at length be revived, and a return be of
those times of the Egyptians, in which Trismegistus and so many wise Magi,
Philosophized not with empty denominations, but with wonderful Works.
Remedy against all Symptoms, which can happen to the Humane Body. All which
Experience will very clearly demonstrate to you, and open the way further to
you, if you be a Physician, called by GOD to that Office.

In these, I think I have done my part, and writ more then sufficiently of
Antimony. If any One follows me, he may add his own Experiences to these, that
(with the singular favor of GOD) before the consummation of the World, the
Mysteries of the most High may be revealed, to his Glory and honor, and the
Conservation of health. Having finished this Discourse, I intend for a time to
be silent and return to my Monastery, there to learn Philosophy further, that I
may be able to comment of other Things and as I have already promised, I shall
( GOD willing) write of Vitriol, common Sulphur, and the Loadstone, and open
their Principle, Powers, Operations and Virtues.

Let GOD the Lord of Heaven and Earth grant to us temporal Health here, and
hereafter Eternal Salvation for the Refreshment of our Souls, in the Seats of
Joy and Gladness, never to be limited within any Bounds of time. Amen.

Thus I conclude this Treatise of Antimony, and all whatsoever I have written
of the Red Oil of Antimony, which is made of its Sulphur highly purified, and
of the Spirit, which is prepared of its Salt. Incline your Mind to those, and
with them compare these last, which I have prescribed you touching the Stone of
Fire. If you acutely consider them, you may easily find their Union unto the
End, by this Comparation. For the Foundation is the same, the Reason the same,
the Friendship the same, by which Health is required, and the Stag long sought
taken with a pleasant Hunting.

FINIS.

