THE TRIUMPHANT CHARIOT OF ANTIMONY; BEING A Conscientious Discovery of the
many Real Transcendent Excellencies included in that Mineral, WRITTEN By
BASIL VALENTINE A Benedictine MONK.

Faithfully Englished and published for the Common Good.

By I. H. Oxon.

Printed for Thomas Bruster, and are to be sold at the three Bibles near the
West end of Paul's Churchyard in London, 1660.

Reader,
IN this Book are contained many excellent and precious Antimoniall Medcines
both Physical and Chyrurgicall: Some of them, even a mean Capacity may
attain unto, othersome are more mysterious; and therefore it is very probable
that the selfe-conceited man (who sticks not to vilify any thing that
surmounts his reach) will call them Figments, hopeing by his malicious subtilty
to shun that deserved Reproach which his proud insulting Demeanor exposes him
unto: We have in these days many pretenders to great Mysteries, but by their
Fruits you may know them; were there but any spark of modesty left in the
hearts of such Impudent Ignorant persons, they would not thus blemish so noble
a Science, which forsooth they would be accounted Masters of: For if it be an
unseemly thing for the authorized Traditionalists to pretend a Mastership in
this Faculty which concerns the Life of man, (and God knows how much it is
hazarded by the Wilfulness and Rawnesse of many of them;) how much more
blameworthy are those Fantastical hare-brain'd Vpstarts, that (without
either the fear of God, or any Respect to the good of their distressed
Neighbor) Attempt, by the subtilest ways they can Imagine, to beguile the
Unwary, and to abuse the necessities of their afflicted Patients, and yet
highly pretend to I know not what sublime Knowledge: I am persuaded that such
as these have much injured many well disposed, tender-Ingenuities, and have
retarded the Endeavors of such as pity the deplorable Estate of Mankind: This
piece therefore may serve to quicken the Slow, and to settle the Wavering Mind.
The Object of it is Antimony, It Is easy to be had at a mean price, the Medcines
thence educeable are of great value; but yet such of them as are so, have a
suitable covering, the which remove by thy diligence and twill recompense thy
pains. Labor therefore, and humbly implore the Searcher of all hearts to
vouchsafe a Blessing upon thy handy work; and whatsoever thou receivest
through his mercy, be careful to improve it to his Glory and thy Neighbors
Comfort. For, Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy: Farewell,

Thy Friend, J. H.

The most material Errata's, are to be Corrected as follows.
Page 52. l. 3. r. it Cease. p. 53. l. 2. r. Alteration. p. 58. l. 10. r.
restrain. l. 11. r. least. p. 80. l. 3. It first describes. p. 158. l. 2. r.
thereinto.

THE Triumphant Chariot of ANTIMONY.
THE Fiery Stone of Antimony, its fixed tincture, and most red Oil, shall in
this work be briefly, but thoroughly taught, after an easy way and Method
without any ridles or doubtful shadows. I therefore Basil Valentine, a
professed Monk, and Brother of the order of St. Benedict, will fundamentally
propound to the friendly Reader, a brief admonition concerning some
Praecognita, which a Spagirist (carefully inquiring into the verity of Art)
ought to be acquainted with: Very profoundly therefore, and heartily, let these
directions be ruminated on, by him who has a desire after a certain enjoyment
of this Hermetical Science: For if any slightly value these my Proposals,
doubtless his labor shall be in vain, for these things following are very
worthy of due consideration. Now before I attempt the main work of this little
Tract, I conceive it requisite to admonish the Spagirist, of those things which
are worth his knowledge; on what Basis he ought to erect his Structure, and
what Foundation trusting too, his Fabric may resist impetuous storms, without
declining: Therefore, as a Monk, I hold it fitting, and as a thing expedient,
that when my self and thy self, Titius and Sejus, Sempronius and Cajus, shall
be tributaries to death, we may leave behind us in the World, an honorable
memory to the praise of God, that his Divine Majesty may be adored: By a due
preparation we address our selves unto the Journey: My stare and calling,
forsooth, requires a different spirit from the vulgar.

In this my consideration, I have noted five Observations for the diligent
searcher.

1. An Invocation on the name of God, 2. A Contemplation on the Essentiality of
things. 3. Their true and incorrupt preparation. 4. Their use. 5. Their benefit
or proficuousness. All which, a true Chemist must remember, and without which
he cannot be, nor be called a true Chemist: Briefly therefore and severally
these Heads shall be treated of, that a particular and the universal entire
Work may thereby be brought to light, and appear perfect.

1. First therefore, The Name of God ought to be called on religiously, with a
pure heart, a sound conscience, without ambition, hypocrisy, and other abuses,
such as are Disdain, Pride, Arrogance, worldly Boasting, oppression of our
Neighbors, and other Tyrannies and Enormities of that kind; all which, ought
to be totally eradicated out of the heart, that, when it would prevail at the
Throne of Mercy for the health of its Body, it may be found a pure and well
prepared Temple (the Chaff being separated from the uncommix'd and undefiled
Corn) For verily, verily, verily, God will not be mocked, as Sophisters, and
the Wiselings of this Age imagine; nor will he be sued unto as a Creator,
without a true fear, a due obedience, and most humble supplication: For seeing
man has nothing, but what his most bounteous Creator bestows upon him, he
having given him a Body, Life, an operating Spirit, and a most noble Soul, and
freely vouchsafed his own holy Word for the support and nourishment of the Soul
to eternal Life; and having for Bodily necessaries provided him Food and
Raiment, and such other things as none can possibly want. It is just, that
above all other things, his first Father (who has created the Heaven and the
Earth, things visible and invisible, the Firmament, the Elements, Vegetable
things, and all Creatures) be with most inward humble Prayers sought unto for
the obtaining of them. Most certain it is, that a wicked man shall never be
acquainted with true medicine, and much less taste the truly immutable, and
true celestial bread of Eternity. Primarily, and chiefly therefore, follow
this Doctrine, placing all thy hope and confidence in God, humbly implore his
blessing, that thy search may begin in the fear of the Lord, and so shall thou
obtain desired Wisdom; for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom:
Whosoever then has resolved in himself to seek the top of Terrestrials (that
is, the knowleege of the Good, lodging in all Creatures, (which the most high
has bestowed upon man) lying dormant or covered in Stones, Herbs, Roots,
Seeds, living Creatures, Plants, Minerals, Metals, and the like) let him cast
behind him all worldly cares, and their appurtenances, and expect release with
his whole heart, by humble Prayers, and his hope shall not fail, but he shall
become worthy of the last Redemption: Of this let none doubt or despair, for he
alone redeemeth Israel from all their enemies, and will truly and faithfully
perform the same to such as truly and humbly call upon his name: So that the
first Admonition cannot be more rightly and better practiced, then by Prayers,
seeing it is an invoking of God; but beware you do it not from an Hypocritical
and Deceitful heart, but cordially, after the rule of the Capernaites; with
firmness of Faith and Hope, as the Woman of Canaan, thereby procuring her
Daughters health; and with a Christian Charity, as the Samaritan poured in Wine
and Oil into the wounds of the poor man near Jericho, and, on his own cost,
took the care of him: Whosoever uses this invocation, and intends with a
Christian charity the benefit of his Neighbor thereby, without doubt, shall
obtain what he so earnestly seeks for, viz. His wished for end, and proposed
hope of health and richness.

2. Next to Prayer, follows a Contemplation of all things (that is) before all
other things, chiefly consider their Circumstances, Matter, Form, Original
Virtues, Influence, Conjunction, the secret force of the Stars, the Elementary
composure, the Generation and Forming (out of the three Principles) the things
that are; Then also that every thing is reducible, and may be brought back into
its first Matter and first Essentiality, which, mention is made of in my
writing; that of the first Matter, the last; and out of the last, the first may
be made. This consideration (next to seeking of God) is chief, Celestial, and
Spiritually to be understood. The understanding of the Condition and Quality of
every thing, is found out by the spiritual thoughts of man, from an out-flowing
speculation; and this speculating is twofold, Possible, and Impossible.

1. The Impossible consists in superfluous Cogitations of things without or
beyond Natures limits, wherein no form of Essentiality is manifest; as if a man
attempted to search out the Eternity of God, which cannot be done: But it is an
absolute, crazy, wicked sin against the Holy Spirit, to set upon the inquiry of
his immeasureable, infinite, and eternal Deity, and to examine the unfathomable
Mysteries of his Counsel and Wisdom.

2. Now the Possible Consideration admits the Theory of examining the nature of
things visibLe, manifest, and having a created Form or Essence, how by help of
separation each Body may be understood, that they may become profitable, the
good may be segregated from the bad, and the Medicine from the lurking Poison,
in an Anatomical manner, by separation and rectification, that the pure may be
divided from the impure, without deceit; which separation may be accomplished
sundry ways, (some whereof are known to the vulgar, others not so common) as
are Calcination, Sublimation, Reverberation, Circulation, Putrefaction,
Digestion, Cohobation, Destillation, Fixation, and other ways; all which
degrees are in their order found out, learned, practiced, and manifested by
labor; and by which appears what is fix, what volatile, white, black, or red,
and the like, helping the Artificer to discern and walk rightly in his Art with
mature consideration; for consideration may trust too, or lean on a false
foundation, and err, if the Kingly path be not attained too: But contrarily,
Nature knows not how to err, if rightly governed by a faithful steward, to
whose care she is committed: If thou (therefore) err, because thou have not
loosned Nature, and freed her from the Body whereto she is Captive; learn the
Theory better, and more accurately attend thy work, that thou may be
acquainted with the true fundamental knowledge of separating all things; and
this is a chief, and the most principal thing. So then, the second Basis of
Philosophy is the speculating of all things and Essences, and is called the
consideration of nature, for its written First seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness etc. viz, by calling on his name, and the other things shall be
added thereunto, viz. the understanding of things temporal, and enjoyment of
necessaries for food and health.

(...) Having circumspectly accomplished the consideration of all things.
(which in the precedent we called the Theory) follows in order a due
preparation, which is completed by manual Operation, that some thing both
profitable and active may be obtained, by means of which preparation is
purchased the Knowledge of medicinal virtues: Now manual operations must with
diligence and pains be carefully prosecuted; experienced Knowledge is praise
worthy. But Anatomy does judge and demonstrate the difference both of the good
and the bad and their virtues. Handy Labor gives evidence that all things may
be brought to the light, and be made visible: The theorical knowledge of the
virtues of any subject is a good forerunner of practice, and proves a truly
solid foundation, whereby one may become a true practioner, and is nothing else
than a confirmation of the good that is discovered by manual labor, whereby
the secrets of Nature may be educed for profitable ends. For as in the
reasonable soul the way is to be prepared by the Lord, so here an harmonious
and legitimate path is to be cut out, that a progress may be made for bodily
health without doubtfulness and error.

And this is Preparation.

4. The Preparation or Separation of the hurtful and profitable, being (by
Resolution) accomplished, We come to the Use or Administration thereof: and
here beware lest thou either increase or diminish the true Weight, which in the
operation thou must observe [ viz.] Whether or no thy remedy be weak or
strong, which a Physician ought before hand to know, as whether it be injurious
and hurtful, or beneficial, lest by the detriment and death of his neighbor,
he exposes his own soul to hazard.

5. After that the Operation begins to be dilated and diffused through the
parts of the body, searching for the disease for which it was administered, The
Profitablenesse or Benefit comes under consideration, by which, as the main
End, is discernable, what Good the operation has induced; for it may happen
that a Medicine may hurt, and not help the diseased, which may be contrary to,
or improper for the diseased; and so is rather a Poison, than a Medicine for
restoring health. Let every one on this account warily heed and aim at the
public good, that he may observe, and them so observed commit to writing; let
them not perish by oblivion, but be manifested for the use of others.

Moreover in the Use, as also in the Benefit of Medicine, it is observable,
whether or no a disease be a solution of continuity, or has only an internal
seat; for the Exterior differ from the Interior, and so are their Remedies
various. Diseases therefore are to be distinguished, whether or no they are
curable by only outward Remedies, or to be expelled by inward Medicines: On
which account when the center of a disease lodges inwardly, and is to be
thoroughly found out, there ought to be admitted such convenient remedies as may
search unto, suddenly set upon, and divide it with the restoration of
strength: otherwise the Physician labors in vain, if the center be not reached
unto.

Every Physician ought to know, that no External disease, having his original
and residence within, can be destroyed by outward medicines; but death and
destruction would ensue thereupon. For example, if a man should endeavor to
repel the out-breaking flowers of a tree, back into their center, he would not
only thereby destroy the fruit of the flower, but the juice being forced back
to the center (against the Law of Nature) from whence it had its afflux to the
tree, would not only be unprofitable by this violent Reunition, but also
totally suffocate it; because the moist nutriment of the earth which it
desires, could not have admittance. Great therefore is the difference between
new wounds made with Iron, and old Ulcers begotten from an inward distemper.
New Wounds are curable by outward remedies, old Ulcers are not so: But besides
the Application of Ointments, Oils, Balsoms, and Cataplasms, they require an
inward cure, that the Fountain may be destroyed, and the thence-flowing River
may be dried up, by which (observing a right diet) the disease shall be easily
helped. It Is no Art or Skill to cure a green wound, which even the Countryman
with a piece of salted Hogs fat easily does: It Is a piece of Art to remove the
symptoms that happen to wounds, and to dry up the original of diseases.

All ye Physicians throughout the universe, all ye Doctors who practice
Physic, ye Masters, and learned in Medicine of both sorts, External and
Internal, come hither, and examine your honorable Title, and consider in your
consciences, whether you received it from God or not, or proudly usurp it in
formality or not: Verily there is as vast a difference between an outward, and
inward curing, as is betwixt the Heaven and the Earth.

If you have received your Title from God, he will help, bless, and prosper
you. But if you faign it, or assume it to your self, without such a Call, ye,
though Great, shall greatly fall; by which you prepare for your selves the
unquenchable fire of hell. Truly our Savior said to his Disciples, Ye call me
Lord and Master, and ye do well; so let every one that will take to himself
this honorable Title, consider that he does what is right; that is, that he
abuses not his Title, and boast not of more than he has learned. He that will
be a Doctor of both Medicines, ought well to understand both Medicines, that he
may discover inwardly the disposition of the body by Anatomy, and in what
member the disease has his original, and by what means he may succor it; he
also ought to understand outwardly the circumstances of Wounds and Ulcers.

Good God! what would become of the Master of both Medicines, and his Title,
where will it be found, if many of such as use it were exposed to an exact
trial. Heretofore the Physicians themselves wrought with their own hands,
especially in outward diseases, this belonging to the Physicians office; But
now in our Age, they have brought up their Servants to exercise Surgery, and
thus is this most noble Art become a base Trade, which even the most illiterate
blush not to practice: Yea even such also as know not how to drive an Ass out
of the Corn, are Doctors of Surgery (yet even the Physical Doctors are their
Disciples) and frequently exercise it with more success, and a better
conscience (that I may speak the truth) than thou, O Ambitious, titled only,
unlearned Physicall-Chyrurgeon, that boastest of both names or titles, do.

But pray Master Doctor, and Master Physician be not angry, I beseech you, with
my speech and opinion; for thou would be forced to acknowledge, should I
examine thee of Cuts and Stabs, etc. that thy judgment concerning such things
is as large, and as much knowledge lies in thy pate, as in the head of a Hen
painted on a Table. It Is my faithful advice to all such as are Learned (both
of high and low estate) to consider judiciously and conscientiously those
things that are required in Doctors and Masters, viz. the true manner of the
Preparation, and the use of Medicine; then may you justly assume to your selves
this honorable Title, and you will be able to succor the distressed, and with a
pure heart praise your Creator.

By what has been spoken, let every one examine himself, and see whether (with
right) he may assume this Title; for whoever will lay claim to any Title, it is
behoovefull that he exactly understand it, and be able perfectly to give an
account why he assumed it: For it is not sufficient to say with the vulgar,
Behold! a great deal of stinking ordure (with honor to your ears) and to be
ignorant of the cause of the stinch. Although a man often feeds on the most
sweet smelling food, yet presently he casts out most fetid dung; But you are to
know the cause why fragrant fruit transmutes into stinch, the ground of which
is natural Putrefaction. And on the other hand (in Spices) the Odor is not
solely to be respected, but a Genuine Philosopher must search into the Essence
and Original of that smell, and what good virtues lie therein. From stinking
dung (with which the Earth is dung'd and nourished, grows sweet smelling fruit;
for which are many reasons, and a large Book might be written of the various
Transmutations of Nature; but the chief cause of this change is Putrefaction
and Digestion, and they are its chief Keys; because the Fire and the Air bring
or cause Maturity, so that the Earth and Water are transmuted into each other;
for it is a certain alteration, that, of Dung, a Balsome be made, and
contrariwise, of Balsome, Dung. But you will object and say, that I bring very
Rural and plain examples; I confess they are homely, but the Wise man will by
his own industry consider my intention herein, how from the most low, the most
high may be made, and from the high the most humble or low; how out of a Remedy
a Poison, and out of a Poison a Remedy; out of a Sweet thing a Corrosive, and
from thence a thing profitable may be produced. Good God! Nature will not be
thoroughly searched by us all; for our Life is short, and thou most just Judge
have kept to thy self many things, that Man may admire thy Creatures, of which
thy self wilt be the Judge; Give me grace, that I may firmly retain my Savior
in my heart, even to my ultimate end, that besides my bodily health and food
which in abundance thou have bestowed upon me, I may also obtain the riches and
health of my soul, of which I make no scruple, since thou have shed on the
wooden Cross, out of thy ardent Love and Mercy, the true Sulphur of the soul
for me; which heavenly Sulphur of the soul proves a poison to the Devil; but
to us, the greatest Medicine. I cure my Brethren by Prayers, spiritually; by
Appropriate remedies, bodily; and hope that they will watch spiritually for me,
that we may all become co-inhabitants in the Tabernacles of the most high God.

But, to return to my Antimonial Philosophy.

Be it therefore known unto the Reader, that every thing has in it self a
quickening and operating Spirit which dwells in bodies, nourishes and preserves
them: In the Elements also are living Spirits, by Gods permission be they good
or evil. Men and other living creatures have a living operating spirit in
themselves, the which departing, a carcass only remains.

Herbs and Plants contain in them a healthy spirit, otherwise they would be
unfit for medicinal preparation and use. So both Metals and Minerals have in
them their Impalpable spirit, wherein lies contained all their force and
efficacy; without a spirit the body is dead, nor can it discover any lively
operation: Know then rhat in Antimony lies a spirit, which effects all such
things as lie hid therein, and are* thence educible, but invisibly, not unlike
the invisible virtue that lies hid in the Loadstone, whereof in my ^ract of the
Magnet I shall speak more largely. Now there is a twofold spirit; Intelligent,
and not Intelligent. The Intelligent spirits are endowed with Reason (and can
become when they list, impalpable, and without bodies) like us natural men; of
which kind are the Elementary inhabitants, viz. fiery, as walking and wandering
lights, and other bright phantasines: also inhabitants in the Air, and
dwellers in, and governors over the Waters, and lastly, the Earthy
inhabitants, of which Rank are those that frequently appear in Metallic
Mines, and are thence denominated Mine-Pit men: Now these are understanding
Spirits, and skilled in Art, and are able to alter their shape, of whom I dare
not determine any thing, but leave it to the all knowing God, whether it be
expedient to deliver my judgment concerning them or not. The other spirits of
the universe, and which do not operate after the before said manner by their
own innate power, are such as ly hid in man, Animals, Brutes, Plants, and
Minerals, which notwithstanding have in them an operative life, which they by
their works discover, evidencing that there lies an healing power in them, when
they are separated from their bodies by the benefit of Art. Thus also the
Spirit of Antimony manifests its virtue, and communicates it to mankind, when
by a freedom from the chains and bonds of its body (that its penetrative and
operating force may be awakened) it be used to that intent for which by the
Artist it is ordained. Truly it is expedient that the master or artist and
Vulcan entertain familiarity, for the fire separates the operative force and
virtue; But the artificer forms and fashioneth the matter, as a blacksmith by
the help of one and the same fire, and of one and the same metal viz. Iron,
forms (out of that one matter) sundry and several utensils, as spits, Iron
shoes, forkes, plowshares etc. So also out of Antimony, many artificial
things, and of diverse uses may be made: The artificer is the blacksmith
forming the matter, the fire is the unlocking key, the operation and utility
confirms the preparation and brings experience. O good God! Would but the
foolish and unwise world see and hear rightly and discreetly, and truly
understand, that a sight and hearing only of what I write, may not satisfy
them, without the obtaining of a truly inward useful knowledge, It would not
lick up the purulent dregs, but go unto those living fountains where it may
drink of the water of life. And let all know that I shall indeed make fools of
many learned Masters; and on the contrary Doctors of many poor, despised,
searching and inquiring scholars; all such breathing and longing spirits I
invite to follow my doctrine, to observe my writings and admonitions with a
cheerful heart, a faithful companion and good conscience (to whom thus enjoying
I promise many things) and so shall they be effectors of their desire, and
speak honorably of me, when I shall ly in my sepulcher, prolonging my fame
with a lasting memorial even to the worlds end.

Now if any surviving me shall dispute in my School against me, when dead, my
writings will answer abundantly for me, and I certainly know that my disciples
will not be unmindfull of the benefit they have reaped, but preserve the
majesty of truth, which hitherto we have always obtained, to the confusion of
falsity and lying, and always shall obtain it to the worlds end.

The sorts of Antimony.
Moreover the courteous and favorable student of Art, ought to know the several
sorts and kinds of Antimony.

One sort is pure, fair, of a golden nature, and abounds with Mercury. Another
abounds with Sulphur, and largely differs from that of the golden property, and
temperature: For in the former sort are fair, long, shining Radii, or Lines,
whereby it is distinguishable from the latter; For the difference of the
goodness of the sorts of Antimony is as much as is betwixt the flesh of four
footed beasts, and of fishes, which have some agreement and affinity, as to the
name, and (if you will) essence, but in goodness are different. The ingenuous
student must also know that a great many men have written of the inward virtues
of Antimony, but most few are they, who have learned the basis of its virtue,
or found how they might possess it, and since they only talk and speak
groundlesly, they loose their honor in that, for which intent (of honor) they
betook themselves to writing.

He that will write of Antimony, needs a great consideration and most ample
mind, and various rules of its preparation and assured end; wherein it may
with profit be used, that so he may give a certain undoubtful testimony of what
is good or what is evil, what helpful and what poisonous.

It Is no small thing truly to search out Antimony, thereby to know its essence
and at length by diligence and experience, to obtain the knowledge of it, to
take away its poison, (so much cried out against by the clamours of the vulgar)
and by a better omen to transmute it into wholesome medicine. Many inquirers or
Anatomists have hunted some here, some there, and miserably handled, tormented,
and crucified Antimony, in so much that it is both unexpressible and incredible.
But (really) they have not found out, or accomplished any profitable operation,
wandering from the true end, propounding to themselves things that are false,
and thereby shadowing their sight, from being able to discern the mark.

Antimony may deservedly be compared (and so also Mercury) to an infinite
Circle, and painted with all sorts of colors, and by how much the more it is
sought into, so much the more is found out and learned, (so that your progress
therein be right and true;) In a word, one man's life is too too short,
perfectly to be acquainted with all its mysteries.

It is the worst of poisons, the which being separated therefrom, it becomes
the supremest medicine, and is to be administered for inward and outward
diseases. Which to many moles will seem incredible, and will be adjudged vanity
and folly, but yet may be pardonable in them, because of their ignorance and
want of judgment: but verily they are exceedingly to be blamed, who not
knowing, have no desire after knowledge nor any will to learn.

Antimony has four qualities, it is hot and cold, moist and dry, and imitates
the four seasons of the year: it is also fixed and volatile: the volatile part
is not void of poison, but the fixed part is altogether free there from.

Hence comes it to pass, that many unskilful men write what they neither know,
nor understand, which may (for that reason) be adjudged monstrous, and one of
the seven wonders of the world: there being none that either hitherto has bin
found or is at present to be found, who has fundamentally learned all its
faculties, virtues, and powerful operations, or has so far tried its force and
efficacy, that nothing more may be therein seen, then he by his own experience
knows. If any such can be met withal, he is well worthy to be drawn in the
Triumphant Glorious Chariot of the ancient Emperors, when they had gotten some
notable victories: But in my opinion the chariot Smiths are likely of but light
employment about chariots of this kind: many artificers in this age being
overwhelmed with their thoughts, have sought after Riches only in Antimony, and
have neglected the benefit that its wont to bring to such as are diseased, the
which utility ought notwithstanding first of all to be sought after, that the
wonders of the Lord may be manifested, and due thanks given to him. It cannot
indeed be denied, but that in Antimony Riches may be found, although neither
thou nor I may believe it, since both of us are but Scholars and Disciples in
its search; although happily I have seen more therein, and experimented more,
then either thou or such as thou art (that boast exceedingly much, and arrogate
a large portion of Learning to themselves) are able to learn to morrow or next
day; yet let none greive at his fortune, nor despair, for God does wonderfully
distribute his merciful rewards; but yet the World abounds with such as are
ungrateful, who contemn the blessings of God, esteeming Wealth better then
true riches, and therefore God has set a Cloud before their eyes, that such
being blinded, may not know those secrets that lie hid under a Metallic Form.
All people, even in these days, cry out, Riches, riches, and imitate the saying
of the Epicurean, If our Bodies would enjoy anything, our Souls must willingly
search after it; frequently repeating the foolish wish of Midas, so often
spoken of by the Poets: Many therefore do here consult with themselves, how
from Antimony they may obtain their hoped for riches: But because in their
Commentaries and devices they mind not their Creator, nor render a sacrifice
of praise, and neglect that charity due to their Neighbor, they in vain feel in
the horses mouth, whose age, force and strength, they remain ignorant of: So in
the Wedding at Cana of Galilee, they indeed tasted and drank of the Wine, and
knew it to be made of Water; but the manner of its Transmutation they were not
acquainted with, for our Savior kept that Miracle to himself alone, for the
confirmation of his Omnipotency. I do therefore affirm, that the Mysteries of
all things, and those secrecies that are implanted in the Creatures by the
Creator, ought to be inquired into, and sought after from him: Although it is
incredible and unlikely, that a man should attain to a perfect knowledge, any
more then they aforementioned could understand our Saviors Miracles; yet it is
not forbidden us to seek, because by study and diligence we may come to learn,
so much as to prevent the causes of complaining of the loss of our health and
riches; and also may find cause enough to rejoice in such things, as by search
we find out, for which, let God, who is well worthy, be for ever praised.

Whosoever therefore will be a true Antimonial Anatomist, let him first
consider the division or opening of its body, that after a due manner, and in
due season, and in its own seat, he make his attempts, without erroneous
deviations.

Secondly, Let the Regiment or Governance of the Fire be observed, that it be
not too great nor too little, that it grows not too cold nor too hot (for in
the fire lies the very Art) that its living Spirits may be forced out,
released, and set at liberty, to perform their operating virtues.

Thirdly, let the use be observed, together with the certain measure and
quantity, as before in my five necessary Chemical Heads or Observations I have
denoted, yet I Will repeat them parabolically.

By the Division or Anatomical part, the chief thing receives its preparation;
but in and by the fire is it adduced to profit and use: Even as a Butcher cuts
an Ox, (which he has killed) into several pieces; but yet it is not fit for use
being crude; but must be concocted by the fires heat, which takes away the
rawness of the flesh, and prepares it for useful nutriment, (for if an
householder should eat crude flesh, it would be rather a Poison then Food;
because the heat of man's stomach is too weak for concocting such a crude gross
body.) Even so also, (my friend) may thou conclude concerning Antimony, which
seeing it is a crude gross Poison, and being Mineral, has a more hard
indigestible Body, then living Creatures have; it cannot be digested in the
stomach, without a precedent preparation and concoction, but death would soon
follow so strong a Medicine. Above all things (as to Antimony) let its poison
be taken away, and let it be so handled and ordered that it may never be
reducible into poison any more, even to eternity: even as Vinegar can never
more be reduced into wine, out of which it was made by Putrefaction, not from
thence ( viz. Vinegar) can a Spirit of Wine be extracted, but it is Vinegar,
and so it will remain.

But contrarily if by distillation the spirit of Wine be separated from its
aquosity, and be elevated into its own exaltation, twill never be changed into
vinegar in a whole age, but will always remain spirit of Wine, as Spirit of
Vinegar will still continue to be Spirit of Vinegar: But the manner of the
generation of this Wine-Vinegar is wonderful; for of it, is made a thing
different from what it was before in its vegetative Essence; for in the
destillation of Wine, the spirit of the Wine comes first, the watery part
residing in the bottom; but in the distillation of Vinegar, the spirit rises
last, as elsewhere has been treated of. The Spirit of Wine therefore makes
things votatile, because it self is volatile; but the fixed Spirit of Vinegar
fixes them, viz. The Mineral and vegetable Medicines that they are enabled to
operate upon fixed things, and heal fixed diseases, which things observe very
diligently, for therein lies an an entrance of great concernment.

Antimony ought therefore so to be prepared (which its own proper Vinegar is
able to do) that its poison may be taken away, and transmuted into Medicine,
which never more for the future retains any poison, but rather is sufficient
to expel all sorts of poisons. The preparation of Antimony consists in the
Keys of Alchymy only, by which it is opened, divided and separated; such are
Calcination, Reverberation, and Sublimation: Also in the Extraction of its
Essence, which is vivified into Mercury, which Mercury is to be precipitated
into a fixed Powder: moreover by art may an Oil be thence made, which is most
exceedingly profitable for the healing of the French disease: and so other
preparations are found out by the benefit of Chemistry.

For Example, A workman intending to make Ale out of Barley, Wheat, or other
Fruits, it is needful that he passes through all these degrees before he
extracts its Essence, and convert it into a noble drink. First of all, he must
macerate it in water, until the fruit be broken, (as I exactly observed, when
being a young man I was in Holland and England) and this is nothing else but
putrefaction; This being done let the water run therefrom; and the corn thus
macerated, gather up into an heap, and leave it so for some season, that (of
its own accord) it may grow warm, and this is called digestion, which being
finished, dry the corn thus prepared in the Air, or at the heat of a fire,
which is Reverberation or coagulation; being dried, let it be ground in a Mill
like Meal, and this is its Vegetable calcination; all these things being
performed, it is to be boiled with water, that so the most noble spirit of the
grain may be extracted by, and joined unto the Water, which before its
preparation could not have been done: Thus then is the crude water changed
into Ale, and this is distillation after a gross manner: The little leaves of
the Hops that are at last mingled with it, are the Vegetable and preservative
salt, keeping the Ale from perishing by a new putrefaction: The Italians and
Spaniards have but a small Knowledge of this process: in the upper Germany,
also in the country of Rhine (being my country) few there are that are herewith
acquainted: All the aforesaid degrees being completed, then by clarification
is a new separation made, and a little ferment or Yest added to the boiled Ale,
which stirs it up to motion, that it lifts up it self of its own accord, and by
that Ebullition is the troubled separated from the clear, the impure from the
pure, by convenient standing and time, from whence the Ale attaines its due
perfection, and can operatively penetrate and accomplish that for which intent
it is given. As long as the operative spirit is hindered by impurity, it cannot
perform its Office and Work, which is apparent in Wine, which before its
settling and standing, it cannot perform its operation; but only after the
separation of the pure from the impure; which is hereby discernable, because
that neither wine nor ale will inebriate, as long as they are new and
unpurified, and are not capable of then emitting their operating spirits, but
of this enough.

Now after all this, a new separation may be instituted by a vegetable
sublimation, whereby the spirits of Wine or Ale may be reduced to another
Drink, viz. ( Aquavitae) which also is extractable out of either of their
feces, which being done, and the operating spiritual virtue separated from its
body, and abstracted by fire, there remains nothing behind but only a warrish
and dead Sediment, and by rectification, this Aquavitae may be so exalted, that
by a frequent and artificial abstraction it may become most pure, without any
phlegm or water accompanying it, and then one pound is more efficacious then
twenty pounds or more were before, for it speedily penitrates and inebriates,
being reduced to this high Degree of Volatile virtue.

Thou therefore that art desirous of art, if thou would obtain Knowledge
from my Writings, and Wealth, Riches, and true Medicine from Antimony, consider
well what I have before said, for therein the least Letter has its
signification, and there is not a word writ in vain, verily in my writings all
about, are many words variously placed, which if the artificer did consider and
understand what the true intent is, and in what the Mark lies, it would not
greive him to read over every Leaf several times, and to engrave every word
in a Table of Gold, and take notice, that although I have made use of Rusticall
and Gross Examples, yet are they of great concernment; I will not praise my
own Books, it being too unbe-seeming; but let trial be made, and they shall be
found truly praiseworthy: I have the rather used such gross examples, that
(because the virtue of Antimony lies most profoundly hid, and is to be drawn
out of most secret places) by such Examples, a way may be opened for thee, that
thou may sooner obtain thy end, and begin in a convenient manner, and bring
thy diligent search to an happy issue. Antimony may be compared to a Bird
flying in the air, which turns herself sometime here, sometimes there, even
as the air drives her: so here a man or artist is the Wind, who drives
Antimony where it pleases him, and brings it under a constellation in that
place which he has assigned it, for he can make it red, yellow, white or
black, even as it seems him best, (having good respect to the governance of
his Fire) wherein he shall assuredly discern that Antimony passes all the
colors which are wont to be found in Mercury, at which do not make such great
admiration, for Nature permits many things which neither I nor thou shall be
able totally* and thoroughly to learn to day, to morrow, or next day: When an
illiterate man takes up any book he knows not what the writing thereof
contains, and is totally ignorant of the signification of the Letters therein,
which he gazeth on as a Heifer on a new door; but when that unskilful man
shall be informed as to the signification and use of those Letters, he then
cease to esteem it any science more, but counts it a thing common and very
facile, the use and intent whereof he perfectly understands, so that nothing
seems to him secret or obscure in that book, when both the reading and true
apprehension of its Contents are discovered and well conceived by him.

In like manner Antimony is as it were a book for unexperienced men to read,
whom I faithfully admonish with all my heart, (if they would participate of the
benefit of that book) that they first consider its Letters, know and pronounce
them, that to read, may be familiar unto them, (the which by practicing) they
may deservedly be advanced unto a higher Form or Classis in the School, in
which School, truly experience is the master, which by the Trial discovers
who shall obtain the Garland, and be worthy its Enjoyment before another.

Moreover, I will not that thou be ignorant, how many men daily, but foolishly,
and very inconsiderately, cry out Crucify, Crucify, against all that
administer poisons unto men, and prepare their accustomed Medicine thereof,
whereby so many men are miserably destroyed, of which Nature, are Mercury,
Arsenick, and Antimony, and with these unseasoned clamours do the unlearned
Physicians most of all cry out, themselves being absolutely ignorant what real
poison, and what a true remedy is, how a separation is to be begun and
perfected, that so out of Poison the evil of its Nature may be removed, and a
better substituted: I do therefore my self also speak and cry out against all
such as dangerously administer to man such poisonous things, not versed in
their due preparations, for Mercury, Arsenick, Antimony and the like, (in their
substance without preparation) are plainly venomous and so remain; But yet
after a necessary Preparation, Extraction, Mortification, and Victory over
their poison, they verily become a Medicine sufficient to resist all other
internal poisons, and fundamentally to Eradicate them. And certainly when that
which is poisonous shall by due preparation be so ordered, that it is no more
noxious for the time to come, it then resists all such poisons as it finds
unprepared, and prepares them in such manner, that they also lay aside their
venenosity, and become conformable unto it, although both were hurtful and
poisonous at first.

Here I shall stir up amongst the learned a great contention, as to the true
meaning of this my writing, whether or no what I now mention be possible or not
concerning which many a censure will be past: Some suppose that from the
aforesaid things, their venomous qualities can not be altogether removed by any
means, no wonder indeed, that the knowledge of this thing is hid from their
eyes, and that they do not at all think of Learning the wonders of this
Universe. Othersome, but a very few will readily confirm my Doctrine of the
Transmutation of evil into what is better. Consider, that even Physicians will
confess, that the evil wherein a Disease does lodge, may be converted into
good, and if they allow so far, it may not be unlawful for me also to affirm,
that the evil which lies hid in a physical or Medicinal subject, may be
transmuted into better, that it may be administered with safety, rightly and
wholsomely. But whereas Experience, and the manner of proceeding is known to,
but a very few, there will be but a very small number that will with constancy,
adhere to the defense of my proposed opinion, without yiedling up to the
clamours of the Multitude, whose cries are Poison, Poison, Poison, as those
impious Jews throated it out against our ever blessed Savior, Crucify him,
and avowing him the readiest and worst of poisons, when as he was, and is
indeed the Panacea of our Souls, redeeming of us from sin, death, the Devil
and Hell, although the proud insulting Scribes and Pharisees denied him, yet
assuredly it both was and will remain a certain truth (let the Enemies of truth
be broken to pieces) even to Eternity; nor shall be ever convicted of falsity,
by either Death, Devils, or the Gates of Hell.

So I know that many trifling wanderers, lazy Doctors, Empericks, and many
other Intruders into Physic, will clamor out against Antimony, crying, A
Crucifige; but yet it will endure, when those ignorant Medicasters shall be
broken to pieces (I speak not here of those honest Physicians, who adjudge it
no shame to receive instruction) it will, I say, remain, and by the virtue of
it is due preparation, potently subdue and conquer its enemies, when as the
wicked haters and deriders of Antimony shall perish, together with the
blood-thirsty enemies of Christ.

I tend my speech to you skillful Doctors, who persuade Kings and Princes, etc.
yea, and warn them to beware of this or that Medicine, as being hurtful,
poisonous, and dangerous; how rediculous you appear in my eye, I forbear to
mention, for I well perceive and find, that though in their own esteem they
are most learned men, yet they speak only according to opinion, ignorantly,
and without any true observation, on which account they cannot either judge or
speak otherwise; and if it should happen that a man should have drunk such a
Poison, and be even burst assunder, even there, by the help of God, would I
administer such an Antidote of my own preparation (which, out of mere charity,
I always am careful of having ready by me) which should timely expel all the
Poison, and cast it out: Although thou, Mr. Doctor, who neither observest or
understandest, wilt say it is false and a lie; it matters not, I know how to
defend my own, and by approved experience to confirm it; I have tried it,
prepared it, and (if so liked me) could produce testimony of its operation from
the hands of many. And if I were to dispute in a methodical legitimate order
with that Doctor, as prepares not any of his Medicines, nor knows how to do it,
but commits the charge and care thereof to another: I am confident that I
should outstrip him in his function of administering suitable remedies, and
tumble him down to a place more low, with shame enough, he being ignorant of
what he administers to his Patients, and unacquainted with the Qualities of his
Medicines, whether white, black, red, caeruleous, yellow, hot, cold, moist, or
dry, or what they be: He reads of them only in Books, and by length of time
obtains a possession of them, (or, as it were, a possession) nor endeavors he
after any more acquaintance with them: Most righteous God! what will these do?
what care do these men take of their consciences? how will they succor the
sick? Woe, woe, In the last day they will find the end thereof, and deservedly
find whom it is that they have pierced. Their thoughts are altogether after
money, when as if they rightly minded their Vocation, they would night and day
think how to obtain farther for the augmentation of their renown: But labor
being burdensome unto them, they let that pass, and run on, and defend their
Cure with prating, but yet with a checking Conscience, and without any
foundation: And let thus much suffice them.

Coals, to such men, are out of use, nor do they want them, but keep their
money to bestow it on better uses: Vulcan has but small familiarity with them,
their Furnaces for destillation are only in the Apothecaries Shop, and thither
also they rarely come: A little piece of Paper, stufft with a Recipe, compleats
all things; the which, a servant with his Pestle and Mortar, composeth: Most
bounteous God! change the time, put a period to their pride, lop off the Trees
least they grow up to Heaven; crush the Giants, least they heap up mountain
upon mountain, and be assistant to those that trust upon thee, that they may
stand before their hateful enemies.

I do therefore admonish all my Brethren, who live with me in this Cloister,
that they constantly help me in their Prayers for more plenty of true Medicine,
and that God would enlighten its hateful deriders, and reclaim them from their
errors, whereby they may come to acknowledge the power of the Creator placed in
his Creatures, and may hear it apparently and perspicuously, and may understand
the very inward secrets (by their endeavors and Anatomy) which lie most deeply
hid under the outward form; and I hope that the Almighty Creator will hear our
Prayers, which if he please not, during mine and my Brethrens lives, yet happily
after our decease some may repent them, to whom so much Grace may be given,
that their darksome, blind, and dimmed eyes, may receive sight, and by a true
enlightening, find the lost Groat, the which God grant. Amen.

Now therefore, having decreed to deliver a perfect, and my absolute opinion of
Antimony, I think convenient to speak a few words touching its name: Observe
therefore, It was formerly called by the Arabians, Asinat; by the Chaldeans,
Stibium; by the Latins it is to this day called Antimonium; but the Germans,
(studious in their own proper Language) call it Spisglasse, i. e. speared or
radiated Glass, because its substance is in such a form, and out of it may be
made Glass (either apart, or by addition) of diverse colors, lying hid therein,
and educible therefrom. Let every one on that account consider, that the
Observations of the Chaldeans, Arabians, Latins, Germans, and other People,
about Antimony, were not in vain, but that both its virtue and use might
equally and deservedly be taken notice of, and it is very likely and credible,
that by succeeding Heresy its praise and virtue died, for truth may be oppressed
by the enemies violence, the Devil being by God permitted to act many things,
because of our Transgressions and blindness.

Satan, you know, is man's enemy, and now that the verity of sincere Medicine
may be impeded and totally drowned, he makes use of all his Art and endeavors,
that the power of God may be eclipsed, and no thanks ascribed to him for his
implanted Blessings, and that natural remedies and redresses may be removed
from man.

But seeing it is not so much requisite to dispute and discourse much of the
name of Antimony, because its Title neither helps nor hinders, and because all
the praise consists in its preparation, and in that power which by nature is
given to it, and by the Creator bestowed on it: I shall omit to mention more of
its name, and come to describe its efficacy and operation, by which its virtues
may be laid open, and immortal praise may be obtained. Yet before I come to
rehearse the virtues of Antimony, seeing (by my own acknowledgement) that it is
a mere Poison: I will propound an Example, how one Poison attracts another like
to it self, more effectually then any other thing whatsoever. For (friendly
Reader) observe that the true and inadulterate Unicorns horn, casts from it
self all sorts of Poison, which is thus evidenced: Draw a circle with the said
Horn about a Spider, and he will never get out, because he flies from what is
contrary to him; but if another Poison be put thereto, he would not fly or run
from it, but passing through it, would go out of the Circle.

Moreover, if a little piece of Silver, hollowed, be made swim in a vessel full
of water ( wherein put some poison) place the said Horn thereunto, and let
there not be any bodily or corporal touch, and yet you shall see it to repel the
said piece far from it, which will fly upon the Water, even as a Duck
foreseeing the Fowler: But if it be placed, viz. the Horn nigh to a piece of
pure unadulterated Bread, swimming upon the Water, it will presently attract
the Bread unto it self, without any corporeal touch, and the Bread will follow
the Horn round about, according as you move it, which is most miraculously
wonderful in nature, that each thing should attract its like, and contrarily
hate and abandon what is opposite unto it: From whence, the Physicians have
taken occasion to consider how to attract Poison by Poison, and things not
Venomous, by things void of Poison, after a Magnetical manner. And thus Poisons
is expelled two several ways.

First, By its contrary, which opposes and resists the Venom, as I have
spoken of the Unicorns ^orns.

Secondly, By its like, that one Poison may extract the other Magnetically; yet
so, that the attractive Poison be first prepared, that its venenosity may be
transmuted into Medicine, sufficiently able to destroy the Poison by its
attractive power: So Soap washes Grease out of cloth, though it self was at
first a fatness; but when it is prepared of Lime, Oil, and other things, by
boiling and separation (chiefly by the help of salt) it cease to defile of to
spot, but rather takes them away; so (by the help of God) in like manner Poison
by precedent preparation, may cease to be poisonous, extracting it, dissipating
it, and restore to former health: But that I may give thee, and the Students of
Art, opportunity of being acquainted with the gifts of Nature, and what Poison
is, or how to be adjudged, whether good or bad, or what it is, I shall make use
of some Examples for confirmation of the truth, and the discovery of falsity
and error; which proudly arrogant Medicasters or Physicians, by reason of their
sluggish and droanish laziness are unacquainted with.

Take an Egg frozen with cold in the Winter season, put it into exceeding cold
Water for a little while, and then the frigidity of the Water will extract the
coldness of the Egg, and reduce it to its pristine estate; So, whosoever shall
have any member benumbed with cold, let him speedily apply cold Snow water
thereunto, and so one cold will extract another, and the Member shall be
heated: So to any member possessed with a fervent burning heat, let be applied
some warm, hot matter (to wit, Spirit of Wine rectified, or the Quintessence of
Sulphur, both which are fiery in the supreamest degree) and you shall see that
the one heat attracts the other, by the force of magnetism from the member
whereto it is applied, and administers not only rest, but perfect health. I
could confirm my sayings with many undeniable Examples; Take the Sperm of
Frogs, appearing in the Spring, put them upon a Tile, dry them at the Sun and
powder them; insperge of this Powder on the venomous bitings of Snakes and
water-Serpents, and 'twill induce a good basis for their healing, insomuch that
other Medicines will complete the cure (...) a linen cloth oftentimes
moistened with the said Frogspawn, dried, cut in p^^ces, and applied, will
perform the same.

I ^ill also lead thee to the fundamentals of truth, by another ensample* viz.
Take a living Toad, dry him first at the Sun, then in a covered Pot well luted,
bring him to ashes, pound him, and lay the powder on venomous bitings, or such
accidents, and you shall see one Venom attracting the other; and the reason
is, because by burning or calcination, the virtue of the Toad is opened, and
rendered effectually powerful to attract its like Poison.

Let this certain, indubious, and directory example, of Poison attracting its
like, serve thee instead of the rest: If therefore any one be infected with the
Plague, and shall cautiously and diligently observe this thing, he shall find
that I have written most true; now the best preservatives in the Plague are,
the Star of the Sun, and the Spirit of Mercury administered together, now the
Spirit of Mercury operates, by attracting to it self Poisons of a like nature,
as a true cure of all venomous accidents: But because the Star of the Sun (by
whom (as an operating vivifying Sun) all things are generated) does after a
manner conquer universally every thing, I have placed the supreamest active
power in the virtue of the Sun; that is, in its Star, from whence all Metals
and Minerals do principally obtain the original of their Generation and
Increase, of which I shall treat more at large, when I shall come to make
manifest the Star of the Sun unto thee, thine own conscience bearing me witness.

Under the which Solar nature, Antimony is contained, and deserves observation,
for it produces the self same effects as Gold does, and acts as much as
corporeal Gold can do; but it has not attained the virtue of the Star of the
Sun, but fears and trembles before him; and although Antimony may well boast of
his vast surpassing of the most fundamental medicines, yet falls he short of
universally accomplishing that, which the Star of the ^un has (by testimony of
a Celestial virtue) in it self, and is able to perform.

I omit to speak of the Star of Mercury, although it springs from the same
matter as the aforementioned do, yet because of the penetrative force of the
Star of the Sun, it yields to it as its superior.

All my Books do harmoniously follow experience, even as links in a chain, or
as Brass stamps Brass: Let the virtues of what is therein mentioned, be exactly
considered, and judiciously experimented by the Fire; for thus these writings
of mine, my business, my proposals and medicines are to be brought to a certain
end and conclusion, and ought (if only a right Judge be present) to obtain the
true Hereditary seat, and by means of that attempted way, bear away the Honor
and Renown: Now Vulcan, a glorious Artificer, as to the Fire (his own Element)
is the only Judge; concerning which, hear an Example of a certain and
indubitable Experiment: When a Flintstone is smitten against a Steel, a Fire is
stirred up by their mutual collision and violent motion; the hidden Sulphur or
occult Fire is discovered by that striking, and is by the Air enkindled, so
that it burns actually and sensibly; the Salt remains in the Ashes, and the
Mercury flies away like combustible Sulphur. From hence you may understand a
certain manner how to proceed with Antimony, viz. That his Mercury be separated
from his Sulphur and Salt, by Medium's, granted us by nature. As the Fire
(whilst lying in its matter) operates nothing, either profitable or permanent,
unless it be made manifest; so all remedies, except they are separated from
their more gross parts, and are rectified, loosned, clarified, and artificially
prepared (by which all men may acknowledge that there is a separation made of
the pure from the impure) and except the Metallic: arth be removed from the
rich, pure Metal, there is no ground of any certain and infallible hope; all
which transites cannot be done without the true manner of opening and loosening
the Body by the Regiment of Fire.

In a word, I thus unfold the Nature of Antimony.

All secret things (whilst hidden) are esteemed arts, the secret being revealed
cease to be an art, and becoms a Trade, as I have elsewhere taught.

The Be sucks Honey from the Flowers by an art which God has given him,
wherein the Virtue, Juice, and comforting faculty of Medicines is contained,
and out of which is openly or every where a Medicine made; and contrarily, from
the sweetest Honey may a Corrosive be made, and the worst of poison, which
experienced men only know, and (after Observation) believe: Yet Honey is not to
be rejected or despised, which, (notwithstanding its most excellent sweetness)
becomes destructive to its own medicinal faculties, if a corrisive be prepared
therefrom, but, that the unvers'd and unexperienced Physician knows not its
preparation: here therefore will I fix a Cross even to the judgment day, for
ignorant and unlearned Physicians.

Now Honey is thus prepared, Out of the Excrements of bruit beasts, the Meadows
and dunged fields produce several Flowers, Herbs, and Plants, (the Earths
young ones) from these Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, the Bees extract a Juice or
Quintessence, of which an Alteration is made, or a Generation of one thing from
another, viz. a meat or Honey differing from the first savor and form; out of
honey is prepared for man a most commodious, sweet, and most profitable food
for many things: Out of the same Honey may be prepared an intoxicating Essence,
most destructive to man and beast.

Consider therefore O Physician, whatsoever thou art, young or old, learned or
unlearned, rich or poor, a Workman or Artificer, or whatever thou art, follow
me and Nature, I will fundamentally teach thee the truth without any lie; In
what thing profit, and that which is good and right is, and in what injury is,
and how thou shall be able to separate the good from the evil, the lowest from
the highest. Verily out of Antimony may be prepared a Medicine, (but all its
venenosity must be first changed into Medicine) which may be able to blot out
and consume all Diseases, and to penetrate, in the manner of fire. Know
therefore that Antimony ought to be prepared into a true Stone like to fire, as
to its virtue, as I have said; on which account the Quintessence of Antimony is
by me called the Stone of Fire; for if it shall have been first brought to its
own coagulation; and if our stone of fire shall be truly prepared (of which, at
the end of this Tract I shall write more largely) its Operation is not unlike
those things, which consume malign Humors, and purify the blood even to the
utmost degree, performing all such things as are found in potable gold. Be
therefore entreated my Doctor, (and yet no Doctor, when as to this day thou
have learned no due preparation, and much less, Cognizance of the use of my
Medicines) that thou judge me not by thy opinion only, having no other
Witnesses then the unexperienced imaginations of thine own brains. But rather
address thy self to labor, learn the way of preparing Antimony, how it is to
be proceeded withal, how its poison is to be rejected and separated, and a
salubrious wholesome Remedy introduced in its room; which if thou have done,
thou may truly judge of those things which formerly were, and at present are
to thee unknown.

O miserable worldly Sophisters, who are laden, and with child as it were, of
false Wisdom, ye lean on a deceitful Foundation, ye fly in the ayry
imaginations of your own fancies, and are altogether ignorant of the place of
your rest: I do therefore admonish you, as you will give an account at the
dreadful day of Judgment to the Son of God, that you seek and learn what
things you must use, that you may perform your duty, leaving the remainder unto
God, who will bless you, and afford his help unto you.

O slow asses and drones, who care not to make any progress in Learning, and
fear to black your hands with coals, be not hasty to judge, neither give any
farther occasion of pulling that Sentence upon your selves, which your
childrens children may write against you in a book incorruptible,

Above all things let every Physician be cautious, that he prescribe nothing
averse to Nature or to his cure, least his hope of restoring Health deceive
him. As if spirit of Wine should be poured into the water of separation, a
great conflict and burning would suddenly follow, because one nature cannot
brook the other: But he that knows how to unite and conjoyne them
Philosophically in distillation, will be able by the help thereof to make
things momentary. So the Oil or Liquor of Tartar, and Vinegar cannot be united
by reason of their mutual hatred (although they both sprang from the same
Fountain) differing from each other, as much as fire and water; so then the
Physician in his undertaking a cure, ought heedfully to inquire into all
circumstances that respect his patient, and having so examined, let him
consider and use such right Mediums as may remove the evil, lest destruction
arises from that which should have remedied the Disease.

As when a red hot iron is quenched in Aquafortis, and oil of Tartar forthwith
poured thereunto, thou shall scarce preserve thy glass from breaking, but
those contrary Natures, will cast out fire from themselves in the manner of
Gunpowder, concerning which, our Doctor with his Gown being ignorant, is
forced to hold his peace.

Ah wretched men, unlearned Doctors, unexperienced Physicians, who write
tedious Receipts in a long paper: O ye Apothecaries that set over the fire
great cauldrons sufficient to boil the meat of noble men's houses, and to hold
enough for an hundred persons, how long will ye be blind, anoint your eyes with
a Collyrium and Balsom, that the scales may be taken off, and your Eyes may
obtain a true sight, which the Lord vouchsafe unto you, that you may
acknowledge his wonders, and consider his works, let Love and Charity to your
Neighbor take root within you, that you may be searchers after true Medicine,
which the King and Heavenly Prince of all, has formed by his own omnipotent
arm, and eternal Wisdom, and freely given for the benefit of the most noble
creature, Man, viz. For his help and health in the greatest necessity.

O deplorable, putrid, and stinking bag of Worms,, ah poor little Worm and
vilest of creatures, what think thou that thus feel after the Husks, and
leavest the kernells, nor ever thankest thy Creator for them, after whose
image thou were created, nor ever give praise unto him for all his wondrous
works?

Return, Return unto thy self delineate or paint thy self out, and make a
Resemblance of thy Effigies, that it may shame thee of all thy ingratitude,
because tho^ have not hitherto sought that which Go^ has hidden in those good
things he hat^ granted unto us, and infused into hi^ creatures, that a
Sacrifice of Praise man be returned unto him. But I shall hold my peace, and
from bewailing this misery, blindness, and error, (wherein the world is
drowned) I shall restain^ my self, left by the trickling down of tears my
writings should receive defilement, from which I can hardly abstain. I am an
Ecclesiastical man, implanted into: Church Order, whereto I shall subject my
self with my heart and mouth as long as my Soul lives in this miserable body:
I am on that account compelled to refrain, nor dare I write any thing of my
self* unless it be suitable to my Order, else I would lift up my voice like a
Trumpet, and were I but a Temporal Judge, I would have audience at the hands
of those contumacious men, who as yet not knowing the truth (but are ignorant)
do slanderously persecute it, calumniate, reproach, and oppress it with all
their strength. Most good God, most high Lord of hosts, that sit in thy
Glorious Throne, governest the Heavens and the earth which thou have created,
conservest the stars, disposest the elements, and the firmament, that they may
run their course, before whom all the World trembles, the internal Spirits
fear; Look down for once upon the vanity of this unthankful World: Teach the
Sons of men inwardly to acknowledge what thou have outwardly set before their
Eyes, that thou may be glorified in thy Throne, truly known in thy power, and
worthily praised in thy infinite government and rule.

Truly I (wretched and worthless man do give all thanks to thy most glorious
mjesty for those great miracles and blessings, of health and riches which thou
have vouchsafed me, I cannot give thee any more in this World, which is but
temporary and corruptible.

But now in my writing of Antimony, I shall discover its beginning truly, of
what original, and how it obtaines superiority and government; how it may be
elevated into its perfect operation: I will propound its root and its
generation in the bowels of the Earth, to what predominating star it is
subject, what Elements they are which have concocted it. Let therefore the
studious artist know that Antimony is nothing else but a fum^ or mineral
vapor, produced above by the stars, and then digested by the Elements into a
coagulated form. Let all know, that Antimony receives its Essence, Virtue,
Faculty, Operation, and all qualities, as to its initium, o^ birth, and root,
as the Mercury of the Vulgar does; but with an harder coagulation. Seeing that
it is reduced to a more hard confirmation or coagulum, then common running
mercury, which wants this induration, and the reason is, because it
participates of a more thick salt, (out of the three principles) although with
respect to its three principies, the salt obtains in it the smallest room, yet
it has more thereof then common mercury has; from which means it obtains its
coagulation; because it is salt that gives hardness in all things, which
hardness common Mercury wants, because of its small portion of salt: In which
mercury, a combustible sulphur is invisibly implanted, always keeping it in
flux, prohibiting its coagulation, nor can it be coagulated without the
addition of other metallic Spirits, which in the matrix of Saturn are most
potently effused, and to be there had beyond all the other metals, and
otherwise it cannot be accomplished without the stone of the Wise men, by which
its three principles are made harmonious, and threby it obtaines a fusil
malleable, soluble, and conjugable body like to the other metalls, otherwise
mercury is running mercury still, and so remains until this quality be taken
from it. And on that account all animal and vegetable things are too too weak
to bring mercury unto a fix, permanent and malleable hardness (though some
imagine the contrary) because they are not of a metallic kind: for mercury is
a mere fire, whence it is, that he can not be burnt by any fire, there is no fire
touches him, at least so, as totally to destroy, for he either suddenly flies
away, and is spiritually resolved into an Oil incombustible, or else after
fixation he abides constant that none can abstract from him any thing more; and
by this it appears also, because of him may be made whatsoever can by art be
made of gold, for after a due coagulation he is in all things like to gold,
because he enjoyes the same root, stock, and original, as gold does: But
seeing it is not my purposed aim to speak more prolixly of mercury here, and
by speaking to introduce disputations, but simply and heartily to describe the
true fundamental Original of Antimony, farewell mercury, that the discourse
of Antimony may be continued, but yet that which I have spoken of mercury;
parabollically, for your farther meditation, is not mentioned in vain, but
that Antimony may thereby be the more rightly understood, it also being endowed
with a Mercuriall Orignall.

Observe, mark and understand this, commit it to thy memory, viz. That all
mineralls, as also all metalls are born of one Principium or beginning, to wit,
of a vapor, which the superior stars do as it were extract from the Element
of the Earth, by a certain distillation of the Macrocosme or greater world, the
influx of which upper astrall heat, operates upon things below, by an aereall
fiery p^operty, infu^^ing it in, spiritually and invisibly. Which vapor is
resolved in the Earth, and flows, as it were, into water; from which mineral
water, all mettalls are seasonably brought to their maturity and perfection,
and of it is made this or that metal or mineral, according to the
predominating power of one of the three principles, or that which it abounds
withal, be it one, or two, or all, equally tempered together, from whence it is
that some metalls are fixed, othersome not fixed, as are Gold, Silver, Copper,
Iron, Tin, and Lead; moreover besides those known metalls, out of the same
three principles (according to the various commixion of them) are sundry and
diverse mineralls generated and produced, such are Vitrioll, Antimony,
Marcasits, and other like Flectrams, and Mineralls, all which to reckon up,
would be superfluous; Now whe^e^s Gold in its own Asterisme and Generation
becomes suddenly impregnated with, and receives a portion of a more pure and
perfect Sulphur and mercury then the other mineralls and metalls have,
therefore its operative power and virtue is more large and effectual in acting
then the ^tars of the other metalls, and mineralls are, and on that account, in
the star of the Sun all things appear more perfectly (if at least it shall be,
by the benefit of the fire, reduced to its maturity) then are to be found in
the rest of the metalls and mineralls. And yet notwithstanding is there one
only mineral, (frequently mentioned by me) wherein the Sulphur of the Sun is
found to be as strong (yea and stronger) then in the Sun it self, even as also
there are two sorts of metalls found, wherein those dominations do abundantly
triumph of which this is no place to treat: but I shall go on to finish the
description of the Nature of Antimony. Antimony therefore is a mineral having
its mineral vapor turned into water, which spiritual Emanation of the stars,
is the true star of Antimony; which water in the Element of the Earth, by the
strength of the stars, and also of the Fire dwelling in the air, being dried,
became by coagulation a palpable thing; out of which, Antimony is generated and
brought forth in a form, wherein sulphur bears the sway. Mercury has the
next portion, and salt the least; although it has received salt enough to
become an hard unmalleable form. As to its quality it is dry and cold, its
cold and moisture are not much, even as common Mercury and corporeal gold it
self, has more of heat then cold: Let these things suffice concerning the
matter and the 3 Principles of Antimony, and how by the Archeus in the Element
of the Earth, It became perfect. But because such a narrow, Philosophical
search is not of so much concernment to the Students of Art, and most men value
not in what center the star of Antimony Resides, and from whence it is sprung,
but would rather learn what good lies in it, and would understand its
preparation and reduction to a due state, that the virtues and operations
thereof; so much every where, by all, spoken of, may not be to them unknown: I
shall therefore omit to delay them with long doubtings, but will briefly and
sincerely write those things which in my private labor I have observed to be
in Antimony: Although, for the shortness of life none can perfectly learn all,
because in its preparations, miraculous accidents do follow each other, degree
following degree, color following color. One virtue, faculty, and operation
succeds another.

Antimony therefore is no light or trivial poison, but a chief one, and most
high, being deadly both to man and beast; from whence the common Physicians,
and ignorant plebeians (having no true knowledge of Medicine) reject the use of
Antimony as Poisonous; and Physicians forbid it to noble men, as dangerous; and
the Academical Professors do bark out and howl (even to madness) to their
disciples, a Caveto: O beware of Antimony for its a merely absolute poison: Now
the inhabitants of Towns, or Cities on these clamours forbid the use of
Antimony, and with those out cries have most men bin stird up, that even to my
Age or time, they will not hear of Antimony, nor give any trust unto his
medicines, although immense and unspeakable things are found therein: Well, be
it so, verily I speak the truth and my writings are void of falsity: I call God
my Creator to witness, that there is not a more noble medicine under the
heavens, wherein a capital rich-pillar may be placed, then is in Antimony, and
deservedly on that account ought there to be fixed and erected.

My Son; mark my sayings; Reader, observe my writings, wise men, Consider the
Antimonial experiments which I do mention; My theory is founded upon nature,
and my practick on experience, most frequently demonstrated and producing its
effect to the admiration of many incredulous people; I do confess as formorly
I have done, that Antimony at first before its preparation is a mere poison.
But good M. Doctor, or Batchelour, or Physician, (but yet without any true
degree,) since thou art buried as to Art, and Only beatest the bush, what do
thou talk for, let me also speak too, remember what thou say and consider
that doctrine which I propound unto thee; Antimony (say thou) is poison.
Ergo, none ought to use it; a miserable conclusion good M. Doctor and
Bachelour or M. Physician with your red cap: The best Triacle is made of poison
or of (...), from whence it has its denomination. And therefore none may take
it into their bodies, because a poison is therein: what? does this doctrine
please you? is this voice acceptable to your ears? Antimony after preparation
cease to be a poison, and the whole of it being by Spagyrick Art transmuted,
becomes medicinal, even as Triacle is made of the venomous viper; But before
its preparation thou shall not receive any profit or benefit from Antimony, but
rather discommodity and danger.

Now if thou intendest to become an Antimonial disciple (having first prayed)
frequent the School of Vulcan beyond all other things, who is the master and
teacher of all secrets, (which the meanly learned men do deride, and by their
sloathful laziness never come to be acquainted with any secret from him,
putting off the manifestation of any Arcanum by their own sluggishnesse,) nor
is there any remedy in the world to be prepared without fire, let them cry out
as they list, though never so madly.

But what shall we speak of these haters of Antimony, let us not value them,
unless they can bring to the light something better and more excellent then
Antimony is; seeing that especially out of Antimony, may like remedies be had
as ly hid in Gold and the Mercury of the vulgar, (the star of the sun only
excepted) from both which may an Aurum Potabile be made to heal the Leprosy,
and the spirit of Mercury is the chief Top remedy of the french disease and
many others. Although those contemning fellows neither know nor are able to
search it out. An ignorant man can no more judge, then the Ass (being ignorant
of symphony) can instruct the shepherd how to handle his pipe. He therefore
that would truly judge, ought before to learn all such things as he intends to
deliver his judgment about, and to know as well from experience as from books
that which is true and that which is false, that so he may judge aright.

But before I address my self to the manner of proceeding, I may perchance meet
with some who will inquire whence minerals and other venomous subjects attract
their poison, what the essentiality of poison is, and from whence generated in
all things; how (the poison being removed) that thing may be converted unto
medicine and safely administered without danger. I shall therefore inform you,
concerning the influence of poison, the which may be considered, naturally and
supernaturally.

Therefore the first reason why God (the supreme guide, and governor of the
stars, the Creator of Heaven and Earth,) has thought good to set before us
sensible poisons, especially in minerals, is that by their first constitution,
miraculous and powerful operation there planted by God, a man might see that
his intent of thus exposing them to view, was, that there might be a
distinction between good and evil, even as in his law, he has prescribed us
the knowledge of things to be done and to be left undone, viz. of good to be
embraced and of evil to be avoided; After the same manner as the tree in
Paradise was placed before our first parents, the use whereof tended to good,
but the abuse to evil, which command of God being violated misery and
destruction step't in.

2. Another cause is that the good and the evil being known, the evil might be
avoided and reduced unto a better state; for its not the will and pleasure of
God that men drowned in destruction should totally perish, but that returning
from evil, they proceed to what is better, and avoid the loss of their souls;
On that account has he by similitudes placed before us good and evil, which in
like manner is to be found in the command of his mouth verbally, and in the
work of creation, that we may choose things tending to health, and avoid things
tending to destruction.

3. Thirdly, poison is also produced by the stars, wherein are malevolent and
contrary conjunctions and oppositions of the Planets, whence it falls out that
the planets become infected and then cause in this inferior world and
microcosme plagues and other venomous diseases; The like may you conceive of
the comets.

4. Fourthly, Poison is also Produced by the fighting of two contraries, as for
example, if a man exceedingly angry, or sad, or boiling with rage should drink,
a deadly poison would thereby be enkindled.

5. Fifthly; For illustrations sake, weapons may be ranked under the form of
poisons, if by them, any one receive a mortal wound, (in which the abuse of
weapons consists;) But if they be employed for defense and preservation of
life, therein, their use is lawful and converted unto medicine.

6. Sixthly and lastly, The cause of poison becomes apparent from considering
nature. Whatsoever fights against her is a poison to her, as in some men, they
being not able to bear some meats, those meats being contrary to nature,
become a poison, but to such as love them, a medicine; But principally,
venenosity is extracted from an earth of a Mercurial substance (I speak of
mineral poisons) which being immature, indigested, of a form contrary to
nature, and of hard concoction (which hinders maturity and perfection,) the
whole body becomes thereby as it were a Crude mineral; As if a man should
devour crude or raw wheat, his stomach would hardly concoct it, but weakness
and inconveniences would seize upon the whole body, because of the deficiency
and weakness of natural heat to digest it.

But the wheat being maturated by the fire of the Macrocosme, ought to be
again boiled or concocted by a lesser fire that it may be digested by the
Microcosme, as I have aforesaid concerning the eating of flesh; hence it is
evident that seeing Antimony is crude, volatile and not maturated in the Earth,
or enough decocted, it cannot be born by the stomach without terrible torment
of the body, and destruction, because of the debility of natural heat, too
insufficient thoroughly to digest it; experience teaches thus much, that all
purging medicines (be they mineral, animal, or vegetable) are of a poisonous
substance, because of the predominating, Mercurial, volatile essence that is in
them, which volatile spirit is the cause of casting out those things that are
found in man, yet they do not set upon the root of that disease which is fixed,
because fixed remedies only do thoroughly search out and radically expel fixed
diseases, which to unfixt purgations is not granted, they, being like a
violent torrent, sweep away what lies in their compass, but do not work upon
the fixed earth. Now fixed and prepared Purgatives do not operate by stool,
but show themselves only by sweat and and other means, and hunt out the very
kernel and not the husk or shell and chafe of the disease, as volatile,
unfixt and unprepared purges do, they only expel the crust as it were, and
cover of what is excrementitious, but as to the center of the disease, that
they reach not unto.

Be it on that account known to every one, of what state, age, or title soever,
that the venomous Essence must be totally removed out of Antimony, before it
can be transmitted into Medicine, and be entitled with the name of a Remedy.
Hearken therefore to the separation of Antimony, of the good from the bad, of
the fixed from the volatile, of distinguishing what is helpful from what is
poisonous, if at least we would obtain profit with honor, and verity, which
cannot be accomplished without the separation of Vulcan or fire, who is the
artificer, as to all such things. For whatsoever Vulcan leaves imperfect in the
Macrocosme, that the Microcosme repairs and amends by a new Vulcan, which
maturates what is crude, and perfectly concocts it, making separation of the
pure from the impure; And let it not seem strange that the pure and the
wholesome can be segregated from the impure and unwholesome, and that a remedy
can (by the benefit of fire) be made out of that which is hurtful; Because it is
evidenced by daily experience in the probation and inspection of colors
discovered by the fire: for separation, and fire making a fixation, take away
the venom and in its room substitute a Salubrious remedy. It Is the fire then,
that separates the poison from the medicine, the good from the evil, which
thing none of the Physicians either can or dare set their seals unto, unless
they have contracted a most intimate familiarity with Vulcan, and obtained that
infernal Bath of Amity, wherein the bride being washed from all her uncleanesse
may enter with her bridegroom into a legitimate bed; O worldly subtilty that
despisest or do not understand my writings, did thou but know what I have
now said unto thee, what may be called fixed, and what volatile, what the
separation of the Pure from the impure means, thou would turn off many
things to Lethes Lake, and contemn those trifles wherein thou trustest and
follow me. For in me (these are the words of Antimony) shall thou find a
Mercury, Sulphur, and salt, most useful remedies for the health of man; the
Mercurial part lies hid in the Regulus, the Sulphur in the redness, and the
Salt in the Black Earth which remains in the bottom. These three rightly
separated and again co-united by a due artificial manner, that a fixation
without any poison may be accomplished, give just cause of bo^sting to the
Artist, that he has obtained the stone of fire, which may be made of Antimony
both for man's health, his food and raiment. For in Antimony may thou find all
the colors of the universe, as white, black, red, green, blew, ashcolour,
yellow, and colors innumerable, diversely preparable by incredible mixtures,
diversely to be known and several ways to be administered in sundry cases, every
sort to be orderly disposed according to an appointed method; I will therefore
in several particles make manifest how medicine is to be prepared, how poison
is to be ejected, fixation to be instituted, things that are to be separated
how to be begun withal, that the evil may be conquered and the good may
overcome. It Is well known to studious Artists, that Antimony does not contain
the virtue of one only Gemme in it self, as the other metals which (in their
kind) are attributed but to one; But universally contains the virtues of all
stones, which appears by the various colors, which by the regiment of fire it
does yield forth; of this color some, othersome of another sort etc.

Its pellucid shining redness is attributed to a Carbuncle, Rubine, and
Corals; Its whiteness to the Diamond and Crystal: Its blew and sky color to
the Saphyr; Its green to a Smaragdine; Its yellow to a Hyacinth; Its black to a
Granate, which naturally carries in it an Occult hidden blackness; But in
relation to metals; Its black is ascribed to Saturn, Its redness to Mars,
yellow to the Sun, Green to Venus, sky color to the Moon, white to Mercury,
its various mixed color to Jupiter; But as all the colors expressed in stones
and metals are found in Antimony, so therein also all the virtues and faculties
of remedies are to be found according to the Reason of the colors, which
though they are all found in Antimony, it is notwithstanding impossible that one
man alone should be thoroughly acquainted with them all, for the shortness of
life prohibits one man alone to learn all those Arcanums which nature Carries
with it; Sometimes in its preparation, a most acid vinegar is extracted by
destillation; After another way and manner is prepared from it a perfect and
transparent Redness, sweet and pleasant as Honey or the purest Sugar; Then
again of a sudded it is prepared into the bitterness of Wormwood; Another while
it imitates the Acrimony of the Oil of salt, and so one nature succeeds
another: Sometimes again it is elevated by sublimation into the Olympian
Mountains in the manner of a flying Eagle, red, yellow and white, being forced
down per descensum it yields various particular colors and preparations, as
also by reverberation, It Is also converted into a metal like to lead and into
pellucid glass, white, red, yellow, or black or of any other color, but all
the sorts of this glass are not with safety to be used in medicine, unless
tried by a previous examen.

Antimony may also be resolved into various and several wonderful oiles, either
alone by it self, or else with the addition and commixtion of other things, of
which oiles some are only to be outwardly used, and anointed on wounds or
ulcers, othersome may be taken inwardly and drunken; It yields also marvelous
extractions which discover themselves so various in color, that the oracle of
Apollo can hardly divine and reckon up the wondrous mutations of its nature
manifested and opened by the help of fire; There Is also made thereof
Quicksilver, and Sulphur Combustible, like to the common Sulphur, whereof
Gunpowder may be made; as also a true and natural Salt and many other things.
I Will therefore now begin to treat of the preparation of Antimony, to wit of Its
essence, magistery, Arcanum and Elixir, and its particular Tincture, which
studiously observe: where (toward the latter end) I shall rehearse somewhat of
the preparation of the stone of fire, I Will also recite many other secrets, but
little known, or else neglected in the world, because the Egyptians, Arabians
and Chaldeans are long since dead, who exercised this Art, which may abundantly
serve as the head and fountain of true and inadulterate medicine.

Observe therefore diligently and orderly all my preparations, as I shall lay
them open unto thee, of which not one is without fruit and profit, Its due
state being observed; for the fixd medicines of Antimony heal fixed diseases,
and unfixd, heal diseases not fixed: so crude Antimony (not its prepared
glass) does unload and purge the ventricle only, but suffers the cause of the
disease to remain. I now therefore begin at the several sorts of the ordering
of Antimony and make evidence of all the keys of its preparation, which by
fire only is manifested, as a new birth, in that vocation or calling
prescribed by God: The solution or preparation of the mineral of Antimony is
done by sundry sorts of fire and regiments of Art, by which its medicinal force
and operation is extracted by heat, and seeing that Antimony is of a mixed
color, of a dull reddish black with a little shining whiteness. I Will first
describe its first destruction, or calcination, which is thus brought to pass.

Take Hungarian Antimony, or any other, (the best) grind it upon a marble into
most subtle powder, lay this powder thin and sparingly in a plain Earthen
vessel, round or square, which let be made with rims about the height of two
fingers breadth; Place this vessel on a calcining furnace, administer at first
a Gentle fire of coals, and when the stibium begins to fume, stir it with a
little iron rod to and again, without ceasing, until it cease to emit any
Vapor; but if in the calcination the Antimony chances to melt and run into
balls, Take off the vessel from the fire and let the stibium cool, and grind it
again, and do as before, which must be so often don, until it neither fumes nor
runs together any more, but remains in the form of white Ashes, for then is
your Calcination perfect.

Take now this stibium thus calcined put it into a goldsmiths Crucible, Place
it at a violent fire, that the Antimony may flow like pure clear Water, and
that you may know when the glass of stibium has attained a perfect and
pellucid color, put into the crucible a long cold iron, and the glass will
stick thereunto, which strike of with an hammer, and so separate it, and hold
it up against the light, which if it be transparent it is good and perfect glass.

But the Reader and Tyro in this Art, (for I write not to experienced Artists,
who have a long time endured the heat of the fire, and so its a slight and easy
thing to them to make Glass of Antimony, but to young followers of Pyrotechny)
ought to know that all glass be it made of what it will, either of a mineral,
or a metal, or other things, ought to have its due perfection, that it may
shine througly, may operate and be moreover further prepared for medicine.

The Antimony thus melted in the Crucible, Take a plain and broad dish or
platter of Laton, which (first) well warm, lest it break; pour in the stibium
by little and little, and very thinly, and thou shall have a yellow transparent
fair glass. And this way of preparing the glass of Antimony without any
adition is the best, which in its operation discovers a greater virtue, and
this is that which I call pure Glass, the other sorts being made by the
addition of Borax, and other such things, for example.

Take Antimony one part, Venice Borax two parts, grind them together, put them
in a crucible, and place them at a most violent fire, until they melt
together, pour them out into a Dish of Latton warmed, by little and little,
and let it run thin, and thou shall have (if thou have rightly proceeded) a red
transparent Glass like to a Rubine, the redness or which glass may be
extracted with spirit of Wine by a long circulation in the fire, and
administered with very great success, for a most noble Medicine.

There may be also made of Antimony a white Glass after this manner, Take
Antimony one part, Venice Borax four parts, grind them together, and flux or
melt them in a crucible as aforesaid, first twill become yellow, but by a
longer continuance in the fire, it will become most white, which you may try by
putting thereinto a cold Iron, and examine if the color be perfect or not, and
proceed as above.

There may be prepared also out of Antimony, glass of several other colors,
but I have only set before you such as I have learned by experience, and know
their Tendency to health, nor do I judge it necessary to fill up paper with too
much talking, and by unprofitable verbal circuits to prove irksome to the
Reader, and the rather, for that there has been declared unto thee (as to the
glass made of Antimony) the chiefest color, viz. A transparant Redness: The
blackness which at first was its associate fled away with the fume after a
spiritual manner, because according to that spiritual kind, by the violence
of fire the poison is blotted out, and taken away by calcination, although the
Glass be not absolutely destitute of poison, but holds (as yel) a great
portion thereof in it self.

I will go on therefore to acquaint thee, how the poison may be altogether
taken away from the glass, the pure from the impure, and a new separation of
that which is hurfull, from what is helpful may be instituted; that the Tongue
of the Eloquent may be loosned, and cause given him of propagating my praise to
the Worlds end, which without all question my Disciples will cheerfully
perform, when they come to see and perceive with their eyes, and feel with
their hands, that I have written the naked truth for their profit and renoun,
and have left behind me as it were a memorable Testament.

Now the first separation of the Sulphur from its own body and extraction of
the Tincture from the Salt is thus brought to pass.

Take pure glass of Antimony made without any addition, as I have taught thee,
grind it to the consistency of meal or slower, put it into a glass bolt head
having a broad bottom, whereto pour strong, rectified, distilled Vinegar, set
it at a gentle heat, or in the summer time in the Sun, stirring or shaking it
twcie every day; until the Vinegar resemble the color of molten gold, which
separate from the Glass, and reaffuse new distilled Vinegar, do as before, and
as soon as that is colored, take it out, viz. the tinged Liquor, which change
so often and extract until the Vinegar will not be colored any more; conjoyne
all these extractions, filtre them, and abstract the Vinegar by an Alembeck in
B. M. and a dark-red or yellowish powder will remain at the bottom; to which
powder, pour pure distilled Rain Water, and take it again off, pouring more
new thereupon, and do so several times; by which means the sharpness will be
taken away, and the powder will remain sweet and pleasant. Grind this powder
upon a Marble or Glass first heated, and place it in a new Alimbeck, whereon
pour Spirit of Wine rectified to the very supreamest perfection, three fingers
high, and so a Tincture of Antimony most pleasantly red, is extracted, some
feces residing at the bottom; This extraction is sweet* and profitable, and
such a remedy as (without experience) is scarcely to be believed.

The Feces left behind hold the poison, and the Extraction receives the
Medicine only, which Medicine may successefully be administered to men and
beasts, both inwardly and outwardly.

For if four grains of this extraction be administered, and several times
repeated, it expels the Leprosy and the Lues Venerea, purifies the corrupt
blood, resists melancholy: opposes poisons, heales the Asthmatick, and most
other diseases, if it be rightly and orderly used.

But if the before mentioned yellow powder, before its Extraction with the
Spirit of Wine, be ground on a warmed stone, and if Eggs be boiled to an
hardness and divided long ways, and the Yelke taken out, and the Cavity
filled with this yellowish powder, and placed in a cold moist place or Wine
cellar for some days, it will be resolved into a yellow Liquor, which Liquor
heales all new wounds and solutions of continuity, if presently at the
beginning it be administered and anointed upon the Wounds, with a fine feather,
strengthening and defending the Wound by superposition of a Wound plaster, it
hinders corruption and Putrefaction, heales new Wounds with suppuration and
tumor, so that Praise and Thanks ought deservedly to be ascribed to the only
Creator, for these merciful Gifts, In old Ulcers and Gangrenes, use this
Extraction or Balsom of Antimony, it will not leave thee or forsake thee in thy
necessity, but thou will sing of its Praise, and the Virtues which its endowed
with, as I have done, and of its successful use in External Greifs: The
Gangrene, Cancer, Polypus, Woolfe, Ulcers of the Legs, and all such like eating
and creeping diseases, fly before this remedy, and leave the house at Liberty
for former health to re-enter. if well fixed Medicines be discreetly taken
inwardly, and other convenient Remedies applied outwardly. I am wont to reduce
the Glass of Antimony into at Oil by an Alembick two ways, thus. Take the
Glass made out of the Mineral of Antimony, grind it most exceeding small,
extract it with distilled Vinegar, which Extraction being made, abstract the
Vinegar by B.M. and to the remaining matter, pour on spirit of Wine, and again
extract it, put this Extraction, thus, twice dulcorated by the Spirit of Wine
into a vessel Luted, and exceedingly well shut, circulate or pelicane it for a
whole Month, then by a singular artifice let it be distilled by it self
without any addition, and so shall thou have a sweet, pleasant, and wonderful
Medicine in the form of a clear red Oil, out of which is the stone of fire
made. This Oil is the supreme Quintessence which can possibly be written of
Antimony, as may be seen in my admonition, where I have briefly spoken thereof,
where I said that four instruments were requisite as to its preparation, and a
fifth which Vulcan dwells in, that is, four preparations are to precede its
perfection, and the fifth is the benefit, and right application of the work in
man's body. For example,

The first Labor is calcination or melting into Glass.

The second is digestion, by which the Extraction attaines perfection.

The third is coagulation.

The fourth is distillation into an Oil, by which distillation the thin is
separated from the thick, after which separation succeeds fixation, by the
ultimate and last coagulation by which the matter is reduced into a transparent
stone of fire, which after all these Operations, may be fermented in Metalls,
because it has a very penetrative faculty, but much inferior to the virtues
of the ancient and true stone of the Philosophers, because it tingeth not
universally but only particularly as I shall in the end demonstrate, when I
come to treat particularly of the stone of fire.

The before described Oil does (before its coagulation) operate whatsoever is
beneficially useful for a Physician to know, in curing distempers, eight
grains (before coagulation) being taken in pure Wine, makes a man young, frees
him from the Asthma, and causes that whatsoever Excrescenscies grow on man, as
Nails hair, etc. fall away, and new to be generated in their room; so
renovating as if a m^n were but newly born, as the Phoenix (which fabulous story
I mention for Examples sake) is renewed by the fire, and this Medicine is much
less combustible then the wings of the unknown Salamander.

Moreover it consumes all the Symptoms of man's body in the manner of a
consuming fire, whereunto it may be compared; it expels and casts out all that
evil which Aurum Potabile is able to do; but the star of the Sun only,
overcomes all the medicines in the World, if being rightly prepared, it be
brought to a due fixation; for the Star of the Sun, and the star of Mercury
(which even of it self is very potent) are generated and spring from the blood
of their own mother, and from the living overflowing channel of health.

Nor let it trouble thee that this extraction with distilled Vinegar, and
Spirit of wine has thus been reduced to a most subtle purity, and exalted to
the very height by Vulcan, for it neither purges by stool, nor yet by vomit;
but by Sweat, Urine, and spittle. it casts out the cause of every Disease, and
restores whatsoever became co^rupted, by means of accidental Symptoms.

The common glass of Antimony most smally ground or beaten, and six grains or
thereabouts, (according to the strength of the sick) being administsed, having
been first infused in a little Wine in a warm place over night, and purely
streined in the morning, and the infusion drunk provokes to stool, and
oftentimes stirs up Vomit, because of the crude mercuriall quality which
remains in the Glass, on which account let every wise and prudent Physician,
consider with himself, and look well how he uses the glass as to Purgations,
and let him rightly examine, and in due manner administer it, Now I, being
hindered by the shortness of time, it cannot be expected that I should
thoroughly search every thing, and the rather, for that many more men there are
in the World, who have abilities to search, which if rhou wilt do, thou shall
receive the largest portion of praise next my self, and I will also in these
Writings of mine, commend thee even when I am buried in my assigned Sepulcher,
for thy diligence in finding more Experiments. Although I never saw thy face,
and should have happily a little controverted with thee, were thou at present
borne or brought forth into the world.

The common glass of Antimony may be also converted into an Oil, praise
worthy, by the addition of something, which may without danger be given to the
Epileptick, and is thus prepared.

Take the glass of Antimony, grind or beat it exceeding well, pour upon it the
juice of unripe Grapes. Digest them in a Glass bolt head with a plain bottom,
excellently well Luted, then abstract the juice, and dry the powder, and grind
it with twice its weight of clarified Sugar, moisten it with distilled Vinegar,
distill it in the name of God through a Retort, and at the end augment the
fire, and so thou shall extract a Red Oil, which clarify with the Spirit of
Wine eve^ to transparency; a Dose of which administered in a little Quantity, is
found to be very profitable. To this Oil may be added some Spirit of Salt, and
both projected on the Subtle Calx of Gold prepared by its own water, extracted
by an Alembeck, which I have else where taught in my Writings, and 'twil
extract the Tincture of Gold only, without seizing upon its body, this
Fermentation being made, enough paper would not be procured to describe all the
mysteries which appear therein, far beyond the thoughts of man: But I advise
the Physician that he listen unto, and mark my philosophical proposals, that
he labor and bring the preparation unto use, so shall he daily obtain honor,
and be thoroughly acqu^inted with more Operations then any Physician is able to
prescribe unto him.

When thou have proceeded with Antimony thus far, and rightly obtained this
process (wherein 'twil be expedient, that thou behave thy self very
discreetly, and learn the things with diligent cogitations, and try it by
Labor and working) thou may boast of that magistery thus by thee obtained,
and discern the vast ignorance wherein most men lie enthralled.

This Magistry mixed with a solution or Tincture of corals, and given in drink
with some comforting water, operates even to admiration in dysenterian diseases
and stops all infirmities proceeding of impure blood, makes glad the heart,
excites chastity and honesty, and in a word makes a man quick and ready in all
his undertakings. For all which benefits let us ascribe most humble thanks to
the creator and conservator of all things, who has bounteously vouchsafed unto
us miserable in body, and sick in Soul, remedies for both diseases; supplying
us with refreshment and help or succor, in all our necessities, I will also in
few words deliver an arcanum of Antimony.

Take Antimony and salt Armoniack subtly ground or beaten, of each equal
parts, mingle them and distill them by a Retort, dulcorate that which comes over
with distilled Rain Water heated, and put upon it, which being abstracted, and
together with it, viz. ^he Water, all the acrimony and taste of the Salt, the
Glass of Antimony will remain in the bottom like white shining small,
feathers, which subtly dry in a very gentle heat; this done, put them into a
Pelican, or circulatory glass, whereto pour the best rectified Spirit of white
Vitriol, both which let be circulated until they shall be well united, distill
them, and being distilled, pour Spirit of Wine upon them, which circulate as
before, and so will there be a separation, and some Feces will stay in the
bottom, but the Arcanum remains united to the Spirits of Wine, and Vitriol.
Which Arcanum if it be yet once more rectified, one drop thereof drunk with a
ltitle Rose Water, operates more potently then a whole kettlefull of their
boiled pottage; It quickens the Appetite, corrects the Stomach, drives out
Melancholy, generates good Moud, helps Concoction, and is the best Treasure
for allaying the Risings of the Matrix, and for the Colic that can be. Which
most Laudable Arcanum cannot be bought for, and valued by any silver.

Having spoken of the Arcanum of Antimony, I shall now speak of its Elixir
which is thus made.

Take (with the Help of God) of Antimony ground, or beaten, two parts, of Salt
Armoniack one part, sublime them, that which it sublimed drive over by a Retort
into a Recipient three times, every time separating the Faeces, then by
dulcoration evaporate the Sal Armoniack, which matter of Antimony being well
shut in a vessel, reverberate at a gentle Fire, by little and little, until
it becomes like to the Mineral of Cinaber, then pour upon it distilled
Vinegar, and extract its redness, separate the Vinegar, and pour upon the
powder, the Spirit of Wine, which extract in B. M. and this Extraction will be
most pure, some Feces being left in the bottom; put now this Spirit of Wine,
or this Extraction into a bolt head, pour thereon a little Quintessence of
Rhubarb and Coralls, three or four drops, whereof being given to a man, do
gently provoke to Stool, and purges without any Gripings, if thou have
rightly prepared it, it lightens the Blood, and is a most profitable and
pleasant Remedy for those who desire gentle purges; But perhaps some Physician
or other will wonder how it is possible that this Medicine can purge so mildly,
seeing that Antimony is of it self, most exceedingly penetrative, and is here
commixt with Rhubarb, which of it self is likewise a purgative Medicine; But
desist from wondering, for Antimony is by this means destroyed, that his
poisonous and purging Quality, cannot operate upon any thing, as long as it is
mixed with another simple, purging Medicine; for this simple has only a
Natural opening power. But prepared Antimony by this means, fleed from it is
Labor of the Expulsion of any thing from the Vent^i^le, can leasurely find
out some other way, whereby to operate and perform that Office for which it
was appointed.

Believe me (for I have no Reason to falsify or to lie) this Elixir thus
prepared, can in the same manner-purge and penetrate the body, as Antimony
purges Gold, and if I were to account, and number up all its Virtues, I
suppose it necessary to entreat at the hands of God, a longer life, that so I
might more plentifully understand and try the wonders of his divine Majesty,
and having experienced them communicate them to others that they, together with
me, acknowledging and observing those wondrous things may give all praise and
thanks to God their Creator.

But that I may go through with my purposed intention, which is so far to
describe the virtues of Antimony, as I have experimentally Learned, I shall be
silent as to things hidden from and not composed by me; nor would it be
handsome for me, to judge of other men's actions and things unknown unto my
experience, but leave them to another judge, who has by his own industry made
trial: it being impossible for one man fundamentally to learn all, because of
the shortness of life, and the new accidents that daily happen in operations
about the said Antimony.

Moreover be it known to all, that Antimony does not only purge Gold and
separate all extraneous additions therefrom, but performs the same operation in
the bodies of men, and other living creatures, which I shall prove by an homely
example. If a householder intends to fatten a beast, but especially an hog, let
him give him in his meat (three days before he shuts him up) half a dragme of
crude Antimony, by which means his appetite to his meat will be, whetted, and
stird up within him, and heel soon grow fat; and if he has any hurtful
quality or disease in his liver, or be leaprous, he shall be healed: This
example will seem somewhat gross to the ears of delicate men; but I intended
it for illiterate men, or country people, in whose brains the more subtle
Philosophy is a mere stranger, that they may discern that experimentally,
which for examples sake I have made use of, that so they may the sooner credit
my other writings, wherein I speak more abstrusely: But because there is a great
difference between the bodies of men and beasts, I have no intent (by this
example here induced) that crude Antimony should be given to men also; because
that the beasts are able to bear and concoct much crude meats; which is not
permitted to the tender nature and complexion of man to do.

He therefore that will succesfully and with profit make use of Antimony ought
above all things to be experienced, and exactly to know the preparation
thereof, and furthermore to consider the nature of his patient, whether he be
old or young, strong or weak, lest through the Physicians error, the patient be
destroyed in steed of being cured: I now speak as to the weight of the dose
wherein the supreme magistry is contained; But if I should make use of
circumstances and tedious ensamples for the further illustration of every
thing, I should be to long: I will therefore omit to speak any more thereto,
and address my self to another preparation or fixation of Antimony: for as the
spirit of wine separated from its body heats and warms a man, if it be drunk;
but if outwardly applied, it extracts all the causes of inflamed members: on
the contrary vinegar, cooles and refrigerates both inwardly and outwardly,
although it be of the same original and kind, and merely for this reason,
because vinegar is made by digestion alone, whence follows the putrefaction of
the wine with a vegetable fixation; But the spirit of wine is made by the
separation of destillation, or by a vegetable sublimation, by which the spirit
of wine is made volatile. Even so Antimony (according to this or that manner of
preparation) does wonderfully display his gifts, and that, even beyond man's
apprehension.

It is thus fixed.

Take of Antimony most subtily powdered, as much as you please, put it into a
bolt head, pour upon it as much Aquafortis as will cover it 6 inches, or half
a foot high, place it at a most gentle fire to extract for ten days, filtre the
extraction that it may be free from the feces; Then draw off the Aquafortis by
ashes or sand, even to a dryness, and there will remain a yellow powder at
the botrome, whereto pour destilled rain water, place it at a continual heat,
and you shall have a red extraction, filtre it, abstract the water per B. Even
to a dryness, and a red powder will reside behind: Hereto pour destilled
vinegar, which, in the heat, will by little and little grow red, and leave some
whitish feces, destil this vinegar by ashes, and reverberate that red powder
which stays behind three days in a constant open fire, and then extract its
tincture with spirit of wine, and separat the remaining feces. All which things
being accomplished abstract the spirit of wine per B. and there will remain a
red powder, fixed, and constant, which does wonderfully perform its office: for
if half a dragme be taken three times in a day (morning, noon and evening) or
oftener (which you may do without any injury) it drives forth coagulated blood
out of the body, and in time opens dangerous apostems, radically cures the Lues
venerea, produces new hayr, and notably renews a man.

Now having sufficiently spoken of the fixed powder and extraction of Antimony,
I shall forbear to speak more about it, and come now to treat of its flores,
which may be made sundry ways: And here most men can neither tell what to
speak, or what to answer, as being altogether ignorant of this artifice and
such like, there will be some (but an exceeding small number) of my disciples,
who are earnestly desirous of the Spagyrick Art, that will give heed unto my
sayings, and will censure otherwise then the most will do; To you therefore
(my disciples) I have to say, if ye will follow me take up my cross; suffer
even as I have suffered, learn to undergo persecutions as I have done, waver
not as to your intended labor, pray uncessantly, work without Jrksomenesse;
and thus doing, God who heard my prayers, will not forsake you in yours, whose
goodness I thankfully acknowledge with hearty sighs, and ocular tears. Now as
to my admonition touching the flores of Antimony. I do declare that they admit
of sundry and various preparations, as is known to all Spagyrists; Some by the
admixtion of salt Armoniack drive them downward per descensum, out of a retort,
and dulcorate them by extracting the salt Armoniack, and these flores being of
a most white color, do much: Others make use of some particular appropriated
instruments, having little pipes or necks, that the Antimony enjoying the
liberty of the air may ascend.

Others perform their sublimation in a strong fire, over which they place
three convenient pots, and extract white, yellow and red flores together, which
I have also attempted without any error; But when I would rightly use the
flores in medicine, I am wont to mingle Colcotha of Vitriol with the red
flores, and to sublime them together three several times, for thereby the
essence of the vitriol Co-ascends, and the flores become the stronger; which
having done, I extract the flores with spirit of wine, and separate the
remaining feces and destil off the spirit of wine per B. M. Until a dry powder
is left.

And these are my prepared flores, which I administer to my brethren, and other
sick persons addressing themselves unto me, whose souls I administer spiritual
comfort unto by virtue of my office; and whose bodies I succor by virtue of
faith and confidence. These flores purge gently, without excess of stools,
and have taken away many Tertians and Quartanes, and consumed other diseases;
But I have decreed by the help of God and the blessed Virgin Mary, to compose a
memorable Testament and leave behind me, in my old age, a catalogue of all such
cures as I have happily perfected, that I may openly ascribe thanks due to God;
and my successors may know my hearty good will, and together with me, admire
and acknowledge those wonders of God, which he has hid in nature, and which by
my labor I have extracted: It Is worth the readers knowledge, to understand,
concerning the sublimation of Antimony and its flores, that as to its
condition, it is not unlike to that water which flows down from the most high
Towering Mountains; Thus therefore may a man judge of the difference of water;
some break forth even in the loftiest mountains, and were there far higher
mountains, yet would the water climb up thither, (for in truth there are
plentiful fountains in the tops of the stateliest hills) othersome ly hidden in
the bowels of the earth, and by tedious and hard digging are found out. Now as
to their difference I say, that the Matrix of the terrestrial water is, in many
places, more potently furnished with the rich treasures of water, then in
others, because all the Elements have a proper and own Matrix of begetting
easily, or more difficultly, by the force and virtue of the stars, from which
the elements themselves are generated and procreated. Now if that Matrix be
strong in the Earth, it potently casts forth its seed by a strong expulsion,
even unto the highest of the European Alps, or the top of the Babilonian
Tower: They that are not very wise, hearing me so to speak will lay madness to
my charge, or cry out that I am drunken with new wine, even as the Jews dealt
with the Apostles in the feast of Pentecost. As is the elevation of the waters,
so is the sublimation of flores, whereof ( viz. of the waters,) those that
appear in the highest mountains are more wholesome and cool then the well waters
and such as are obtained by digging; so, if the matter be lifted up, by the
force and violence of fire, into the mountain of the ancient wise men, long
since deceased, the earth will stay behind in the bottom, out of which a salt
may be extracted for its proper use. And by sublimation is made a separation of
the good from the bad, of the pure from the impure, of the thin from the thick,
and medicine becomes thereby distinguishable from poison.

We poor, wretched, miserable men, being after death (which for our iniquities
we have deserved) buried in the earth, are seasoned with salt until we putrify,
and at length are raised up by the heavenly fires heat, are clarified and
listed up to a celestial sublimation and exaltation, where being purged from
all the impure dregs, and feces of sin, we become the sons of God and heirs of
eternal life, which our merciful God grant unto us. But I hope that none will
reprove me, because of my comparing things corporeal, with things spiritual,
and heavenly sublimation with the earthly in this my example. For I have not
done it (causelessly, understanding by mine own experience what is white, or
what is black, whether it be a cloudy or clear heaven; I Will therefore pass to
another preparation of Antimony.

It Is expedient that my Art-desiring disciple do understand, and remember by my
Philosophical teaching, that the extractions of Antimony and of all other
things do differ exceedingly among themselves in their operations, which
difference is not either in the matter, nor known from the matter, out of which
it is extracted, but depends upon the preparation, and addition, whereby the
whole virtue is extracted, experience being witness. And this I shall
illustrate and confirm by an example, thus; whatsoever is extracted either
from Antimony or from other things by the spirit of wine, obtains an operation
far different from that which is extracted with strong vinegar. The chief cause
whereof I have already mentioned, for all extractions with spirit of wine do
provoke to stool most powerfully, whether they be made of Antimony or other
purging things, as herbs, roots, seeds, and the like. (I speak as to the first
extraction) Contrariwise whatsoever is extracted with vinegar does not provoke
to siege, as does the other, but rather constipates and binds by a singular
medium. Whereby the volatile is made fixed.

This secret or Arcanum ought very carefully to be looked unto, but a very few
do consider it; for many things ly hid and profoundly shut up in this mystery,
which many masters, and servants, yea and many knowledge-pretending Sophisters
have not seen unto this day:

The extraction of Antimony is performed two several ways, to wit, with
vinegar and spirit of wine, the vinegar does condense, but the spirit of wine
does of it self provoke urine and siege, as I have frequently mentioned, and
especially in my twelve keys, that the extraction of the glass of Antimony is
a gentle Purge, but the extraction of Antimony with vinegar, does not purge at
all, which is most certainly true, which experiment is a cause of more mature
consideration and further-reaching thoughts, by which considerations nature
gives and produces a true Philosopher. And it is altogether miraculous, that
those things which at first have bin extracted with spirit of wine should
retain a purging quality, when as, on the contrary, if the glass of Antimony
be at first extracted with vinegar, and the vinegar being separated it be
again extracted with spirit of wine, there is no such poisonous and purging
faculty then left, but it is totally taken away, and not a footstep thereof,
remaining, so as to cause siege, yet it can operate by sweat, and other ways;
especially by spitle and vomit, it can perform its office, and seeks about, if
it can find out any thing unfitting, It purges the blood, heales the
Peripneumonia, is profitable for the Asthmatick, and conduces to other
diseases; It allayes any violent cough of what sort soever, and it is a divine
remedy:

And this extraction is perfected by common vinegar. There is also another
extraction viz.

Take powdered Antimony: Pour thereupon destil'd vinegar, not common vinegar,
but that which is extracted from its own mineral, close it up well, and place
it at the heat of the Sun, and so in time the vinegar will become as red as
blood, separate this extraction, and filtre it, destil it in sand by an
Alembick, and in its drawing over it will represent wonderful colors most
delectable to the fight, This oil at length comes to be bloud-like, and leaves
many Feces, and may be profitably used in most Diseases.

For in the Leprosy its Glory appears, and its, virtue becomes manifest, the
French Pox lately brought into our country is consumed and dried up thereby,
and it operates several other miraculous things, if that the Physician has
regard to its right use, and observes a true Preparation; let him diligently
consult with Experience, and remember without forgetfulness.

Antimony is also prepared after this ensuing manner.

Take of Antimony and red Tartar of each equal parts, grind them exceeding
well together, and burn them in a pot well luted, (least the Spirits exhale)
until the Tartar be burnt, which you must do in a wind Furnace, beat or grind
the matter thus combust very small, whereto pour common warm water, strain
it as you would a Lixivium; by which means a Liver will be made, (for that
Title our ancient predecessors put upon it) dry this Liver, put it into a
Cucurbit, and pour Spirit of Wine thereon, filter it through a thick paper, and
abstract it in B.M. to a third part; this extraction may be used, but very
sparingly, and with very great discretion, wherein is to be observed a notable
miracle, viz. That the Spirit of Wine once abstracted will not be united to the
Red extraction any more from whence it was separated, but swims on the top
thereof* as Oil swims on the surface of water. But if this Spirit of Wine be
again poured upon new Liver, it extracts as before; but this second Extraction
poured on the former, will not at any rate commix, which really is greatly to
be admired at, but who can declare all the great wonders of God, or observe
those gifts which the Creator has implanted in his Creatures, most profoundly
to be considered.

I have a little before mentioned an Extraction of Antimony with Vinegar and
Spirit of Wine; now if the Vinegar be separated from that Extraction by B.M.
and the powder remaining be put in a moist place, it will resolve into a
wound-Liquor or yellow Oil, which in new wounds acts wonders ineffable, and in
like manner in old, it hinders, and absolutely prevents any Symptoms from
taking root, and resists putrefaction.

The other or second extraction out of this powder before its solution with
Spirit of Wine, does also show its effect, and in inward diseases gives place
to no other remedy.

I have in my precedent writings most frequently propounded the way of its
preparation, and in this Antimoniall admonition, abundantly repeated it,
because I know how much utility and how great secrets ly hid therein, and
therefore hope that those Repetitions in my Writings will not be tedious or
troublesome to the Learner; for what I write, is not causelessly written; But my
speakings are short, and contain a large extent within them; and albeit they
are manifold and frequently rementioned, yet are they most obscure to such as
are unexperienced and unprofitable to children and Infants, and most
beneficial to the Disciple of Art only.

There Is also gotten another Extraction by a Caustic water, and it is thus:
Grind equal parts of Vitrioll and common Salt together, and distill from them
a water Per Latus, or retortwise: Increase and urge the fire, and so shall you
extract a Liquor like unto melted Butter or Oil, which keep for its proper use.

Powder the Caput mortuum, and dissolve it in a Cellar into water which gather
apatt, and filter through Paper: Then take Hungarian Antimony most finely
ground or powdered, put it into a broad bottomed Glass, and pour upon it that
water, set it at a gentle warmth, where if you let it abide its season, it will
at the beginning resemble the violet color of the ^methyst; which when it is
brought to this Pass, augment the fire, and thou shall have the color of a
Transparent Saphyr, and from this Saphyrick color will precipitate a white
powder by the help of common water poured thereon, which inwardly taken,
operates by stool and Vomit like as the Extraction of Crude Vitrioll does.

The solution in the Cellar which was extracted from the Caput mortuum, does
truly transmute the thin leaves of Mars, if boiled therein, into Copper,
Experience being witness: now hearken to me, and consider somewhat further.

Pour the Oil, or the aforesaid water spoken of in the process, upon Crocus
Martis, being first reverberated with Sulphur to a Redness, place it in some
heat, and extract the blood red Tincture of Mars, then take of this Extraction
one part, of the red Extraction of Antimony burnt with Salt Petre, and prepared
with spirit of wine three parts, of the water of Mercury made apart by
injection into an hollow pipe, one part; of the Calx of the Sun dissolved in
this Caustic water, half a part, mix them, and by effusion, out of one Vessel
into another, purge them, then forthwith abstract them by ashes in a fire
meanly strong, but the whole will not come over, for there will reside in the
bottom a fair, red, fixed solution very profitable for old Ulcers. The remaining
Caput Mortuum begets by resolution in a dark place so sharp a Liquor that
scarce any Aqua fortis can compare with it in acrimony or sharpness, but of
this enough.

Out of Antimony may also be prepared a white powder thus.

Take of Hungarian Antimony and Salt Petre thrice depurated and ground
together, equal parts, burn them in a new pot wherein has been no grease, in
a fire of circulation, you must not cast in all at once, but by little and
little, and apart, which the ancient Spagyrists call by the name of puffing
(for it is necessary that the Students in Art be acquainted with their strange
Terms, which as to country Language is unknown) that puffation or injection
being accomplished, powder that hard remaining matter in the pot, put it into a
vessel of Glass, and pour thereunto common water warmed, and when the matter
shall have settled, separate it, and pour on more, which do sometimes, that the
Salt Petre may be extracted; dry and powder the matter, and mix it again with
an equal part of Salt petre, proceed as before, and do thus three times, then
grind the matter which remains, and pour thereunto the best spirit of Wine,
and circulate it for a month in Cucurbit or Circulatory well shut, then burn on
it new spirit of Wine, nine or ten times, which labor being done; dry the
powder leisurely, and in a melting Crucible, let it be well heated red hot, for
an whole day at the fire.

Out of this powder, being resolved in a moist place, either upon a Table of
Glass, or Stone, or in the Whites of Eggs, is made a Liquor, which by the heat
may be again dried into a powder; Verily this powder operates many very gallant
things, scarce credible without Experience. It works not of a sudden, but by
little and little, and time must be granted for the production and discovery of
its force and virtue.

Let any one who is afflicted with an inward Aposteme, take constantly of this
powder, five or six times every day, in spirit of Wine, or mere Wine, fifteen
grains at a time, and he shall be healed, and the blood shall by little and
little be ejected, and the Patient be come perfectly well.

He that is afflicted with the French Disease within his body, let him use this
powder, and he shall be radically cured. It produces new Hair, purges the
blood, and does many other good things which we omit for brevities sake. For I
cannot expound every thing with that plainness, and so perspicuously, as that
every one should become a great Physician, by the bare reading of my Writings,
without any pains or labor, no, let them endure the burden, (as is
reasonable) and let him know that the country man that thresheth and works on
the Corn will eat the best bread.

But now I proceed too much into the open Field, in which the ancient Fowlers
catch their Larks, whom the younger will speedily follow with their Nets, for
my style (as all my Writings witness) has a peculiar method, even as other
Philosophers have likewise done before me; But now that my Philosophy is
changed by the process therein immixed, let not any Reader wonder at it; for
my Philosophical speech having description of the processes therein, is
different from another bare speech that has no manifestation; Mark this
difference, neither accuse me of being changeable in my intention, in my
philosophical style, preparation and process: for in my philosophical speech,
thou shall learn and observe the Theory, but the process together with
admonition sufficient, does teach the practice, and on that account, are
perspicuous and sufficient words to be made use of thereabouts.

A Balsom may also be prepared out of Antimony (not crude, but out of its
Regulus) profitable for very many diseases, from which the Mercury of Antimony
may be vivified, viz.

Take of Hungarian Antimony, and crude Tartar, of each equal parts, Salt Petre
half a part; grind them and flux them in a wind Furnace, pour them forth
into a Cone, and let them cool; Let the Regulus thus made be in like sort
purified in the fire by Tartar, and Salt Petre, three or four times, and so it
will become white like to silver (that has passed the fulmination) and the
Examen of Lead. Grind this Regulus, pour unto it (in a Glass) the Oil of
Juniper or Spirit of Turpentine, (which ascends first in distillation, and is
clear like to Water) shut your Glass well, place it in B.M. at a moderate
heat, and that Spirit or Oil will grow red in the manner of Blood, pour it off,
and rectify it with Spirit of Wine. It has the same Virtues as the Balsom of
Sulphur has, as I shall advise thee when I come to speak of Sulphur; for the
preparation of both is in a manner alike: Three drops of this Balsome taken in
warm Wine only thrice in a week, heales the Diseases of the Lungs, the Astmah,
Ptysick, Pleuritick, and such as are afflicted with an old Cough.

There are also made of Antimony several Oils, some by themselves, others by
addition, and have not the same Virtues, but diverse from each other, according
to the manner of the preparation; I will speak a parable unto thee, many living
Creatures live only in the Earth, as Worms, Serpents, and other kinds, and
sometimes new sorts are generated by corruption, formerly unknown. Others live
in the water, as Fishes; Others in the Air, as Birds; others in the fire, as
the Salamander, and there are found in the hot Islands and burning Countries,
other wonderful Creatures, of which we are ignorant, who conserve their Life
by the solary heat, and presently dye at being brought into another air.

So Antimony prepared with a watery addition, operates otherwise then if
prepared with a fiery one; and although every preparation thereof be done with
fire, without which its virtue is not detected, or opened; yet note and
consider that an Earthy addition works diverse from a watery one; and so
suitably, if Antimony be by the fire elevated Per se into the air, and further
prepared, it obtains a several virtue, according to its several preparations.

The chiefest Oil and Sulphur of Antimony is thus made, without any addition of
ought else.

Take Ungarian Antimony, beat it grossly, put it into a glass cucurbit, with a
plain bottom, pour thereto the true Vinegar of the Philosophers, viz. The
Vinegar with its own Salt, Lute up the Glass, Putrefie it in Horse Dung, or in
B. M. for forty days, and the body becomes again opened, and is made more
black then Ink, which is a sign of a perfect solution.

Put this black matter into an Alembeck, and abstract the vinegar with a gentle
Fire, and an unshapen matter will remain in the bottom, which grind, and wash
with distilled Rain water, even to a sweetness, dry it, place it in a
circulatory with a long neck, (which must have three bellies, as if three
Spheres were distinctly counited, after that manner as sublimatories are with
their Alludels or heads, and having along neck like a Violl or bolt head) leave
it in a moderate Heat for two months, with Spirit of Wine, rectified to the
highest degree so that it may swim oover it three fingers breadth; and let it
be well luted; The Spirit will be tinged with a pellucid redness in the manner
of a Rubie, pour it off, filtre it, and separate the black earth, as
unprofitable for this thing, distill the Spirit of Wine in a Glass Alembick
well luted by sand, with a gentle fire, and twill bring over with it the
Tincture of Antimony, the Elements will separate themselves, and thou shall see
thy Alembick to be so wonderful, as if it were made of the purest Gold, and at
the bottom a very few Feces will reside, and the golden color of the Glass
will vanish. Pour the distilled matter into a circulatory, and leave it so for
ten days, and the Oil of Antimony will grow weighty, and separate from the
Spirit of Wine, and descend unto the bottom, and the Spirit of Wine will
return to its first clarity and brightness, and swim on the top of the Oil:
separate it with a separating Glass. This is a most sweet Oil, without any
corrosivenesse, whose virtues cannot be credited by any one, and therefore I
call the Sulphur of Antimony, the Balsome of life; for it has much profited by
the help of God, even there where all hope has failed, and certain Death
supposed to be at hand, as my Brethren can sufficiently testify. It renovates
a man, purges the Blood, mixed with the Tincture of Corals, cures the Leprosy,
heales scabs proceeding from impure blood, expels Melancholy and sadness,
Corroborates the heart and members, especially if it be taken with Magistry of
Margarits; In the Lipothymia it is the top-Remedy, for being mixed with the Oil
of Cinamome, each equal weight, and six drops thereof put upon the Tongue (the
Nostrills and Arteries, being anointed with the Essence of Saffron) presently
brings a man to himself.

But good God, why do I speak or write, I suppose that I shall meet with most
few that will credit this Testament which I leave unto my disciples: yet some
few will be found, who acknowledging these wonders, and acquainted by
Experience with them, will more circumspectly consider them, and give me
honorable thanks when I lie rotting in my Tomb, because I have by the gift of
God, set free from prison that Virtue which is united to the Creature, and made
it operative.

Another way of bringing Antimony over the Helm, without any addition, is
this: Make Regulus of Antimony, Tartar, and Salt nitre, as I have before spoken,
powder that Regulus, put it into a great round glass, in a gentle fire in
Sand, and the Antimony will sublime; but every day brush down with a feather,
whatsoever is sublimed, into the bottom of the glass, and thus do until it
will sublime no more, but a fixed precipitate Regulus remains in the bottom:
but know that this work will require time ere the work appear; grind this
precipitate, and leave it in a Cellar upon a polisht stone, for half a year,
and then twill be resolved into a red Liquor, and some Feces will remain, for
the Salt of Antimony will only melt, filtre this Liquor, and abstract the
Phlegm in an Alembeck, till a thick Liquor be left, which lay aside in the
Cellar, and twill be congealed into Chrystalls of a reddish white, and if they
be again purged, they will be altogether white: this is the true Salt of
Antimony, which I have frequently made; dry it: mix one part of this Salt, with
three parts of Venetian Earth, destill it with a strong fire, and there will
come, first white Spirits, then red, the which do also resolve into white,
rectify this spirit Gently in a dry Bath, and thou shall have another Oil of
Antimony, but much inferior to the former, and it is rather a Spirit then an
Oil, because this Salt is spiritually forced out. It has frequently deserved
praise in quartane Fevers and others; it breaks the Stone of the Bladder,
provokes Urine, cleanses filthy Serpentine or creeping Ulcers, (which have
their Operation from Mars) being outwardly applied. It purges the blood like
to the Salt of Gold, and may be used in many other Diseases, but it is not so
perfect as the red Oil of Antimony is, whose Sulphur has been separated,
purged, and brought to the highest degree.

The Sulphur and the Salt of Antimony having been described, together with
their preparation and medicinal use, I will pass to the description of its
Mercury, and its medicinal virtue.

Take therefore the Regulus of Antimony eight parts, the Salt of man's urin,
clarified, and sublimed; salt armoniack, and salt of Tartar, of each one part,
mix the Salts, and thereto pour strong vinegar, Lute it with the Lute of
Wisdom, and digest the salts for a month in a continual heat, then distill
off the Vinegar by Ashes until the Salts remain dry, which being done, mix
with them three parts of Venetian Earth, urge them by a Retort with a strong
fire, and thou shall have a wonderful spirit, pour this Spirit upon the
powdered Regulus, and putrify them together two months, then abstract the
Vinegar, and to the Remainder add four times as much fileings of Mars, and
distill it by the force of fire in a Retort, the spirits of the Salts will
bring the Mercury over with them in the manner of a fume, but thou must place
instead of the Recipient, a large glass full of Water, thar the spirits of the
salt may mix therewith; but the Mercury will come together, and be converted
into true quick Mercury in the bottom of the vessel. Thus may the Artificer
extract living and running Mercury out of Antimony, which has been by many a
one every where studiously sought after, now therefore will I come to make
known its use in medicine.

Take (with the help of God) one part of this Mercury, press it through a skin
of Leather, pour thereunto four parts of the red Oil of Vitriol, rectified to
the supreamest height, abstract the Oil, and the spirits of the Oil will
remain with the Mercury, urge the fire, and somewhat will sublime, throw back
the sublimate upon the Earth remaining in the bottom, and pour again thereupon
as much new Oil, sublime it as formerly, and iterate it three times: The
fourth time cast back your sublimate again upon its own Earth, grind it
together, and it will be pure like Crystal, put it in a Circulatory, and pour
thereon as much Oil of Vitriol, and thrice the quantity of the spirit of Wine,
circulate it even to separation, and so the Mercury resolved into Oil will
swim at the top in the manner of Oil Olive; separate this Oil, and put it
into another Circulatory Glass, and pour thereunto sharp distilled Vinegar,
and by this means the Oil will recover its weight within twenty days, or
thereabouts, and will settle to the bottom, and whatsoever is poisonous
remains in the vinegar, the which will be cloudy and blackish, and this is a
miracle contrary to Nature, that an Oil at first swimming, should in the end
settle to the bottom: But note, that even the Oil of Vitriol is heavy, and
therefore bears up the Mercury, which in its separation is not as yet
altogether pure; but when that light impurity is received by the Vinegar, then
does the Oil recover its own weight, and being made compact goes to the
bottom, and this is the oil of the Mercury of Antimony, And is the fourth
Pillar of all Remedies. Now where ever thou art who be Leprous, I will
procure for thee a means of health; This Oil heales the Apoplexy, comforts
the Brain and Reason, excites the vital spirits of the Brain; and whosoever
shall use this oil daily, for some time, and is afflicted with any Distemper,
he shall loose both his Nails and Hair, and become young again: the Blood is
thereby purged, and every Evil expelled: the French Disease is but a spot to
this Medicine, which in a very little white radically ejects it; the praise of
this Remedy cannot be described with either Tongue or Pen: Ah miserable clod of
earth, and bag of worms why do thou delay to offer a sacrifice of Praise to
thy Creator, for those Remedies which he has granted unto thee? O ye bragging
boasters of both medicines! come unto me, a Monk, and servant of God, I will
lay open to your Eyes, what you never saw before, and will show you the way of
health, which as yet you have not observed; Now if any one knows better
preparations, let him not be silent, but speak: I am desirous to learn, nor is
it a shame unto me to make further enquiry, and to search out that light which
as yet I have not seen; for I have often said, no one is able because of the
brevity of Life, to perceive all the secrecies of nature.

But whatsoever Artificer has less experience then I have, and does not
thoroughly understand my Writings, I shall advise him to be silent, and nor
presume to correct or disgrace them with unseemly prating, and many
unprofitable words; because he has not heard them in the School, nor rightly
understands the processes; my Terms are different from those which are in use
with my adversaries, who are ashamed of Labor, the which is necessary as to
the planting of good Trees, and ingraffing of wholesome fruits; whence it
happens that relying on a wild Tree they never come to any sweet bough of a
gentle Garden Tree Unskilful man! do not at the very first word judge the
things thou do not know, nor condemn that which neither by knowledge or
study, thou have attained unto.

Many Country people indeed, say that the Fishes die in the water by reason of
cold, but whoever affirm it, speak ignorantly and indiscreetly, and what cannot
be proved, for if in the Winter Season, when the Superficies of the Water is
mightily congealed and frozen, there be little holes made by breaking the Ice,
not a Fish will perish by reason of the cold, but if the Ice of Ponds or other
waters be not broken, the Fish will certainly dye, not because of the
Frigidity, but the want of the air which cannot penetrate through all the Ice;
For it is clearly evident, that no living Creature can live without the use of
Air; whence it is, that the Fishes are choked under the Ice, and are not killed
with cold; I apply this Example thus.

It is necessary in Antimony, that (because of its manifold use) holes be made
by the miner in the mountain, that it may enjoy the Air, and then it is
behovefull that it be prepared with Water, Air, and Fire, least its
fruitfullnesse be choked in the Earth, instead of its being manifested by the
various preparation of the Physician, for the hoped-for correcting and
qualifying of distempers, which was the ground of its searching after.

Most miserable man that art an hater, and despiser of Antimony, and cryest out
that it is a mere poison, where is thy Eloquence and Rhetoric to defend thy
self withal?

And seeing thou do not understand, neither white, black, nor any other
Color in this business, as to the preparation of Antimony, and art a stranger
to its virtue and benefits, thou may justly hold thy peace, and suffer these
speeches and writings to pass by thy Ears, (because of thy unskilfullnesse)
like an impetuous Torrent, agitated by the wind; But beware lest the wind and
the waves increasing, thy broken little Ship be totally drowned. Now to avoid
this danger, do as the Apostles did; seasonably imploring help by thy prayers
unto thy sleeping master, not hypocritically, but with a pure and sincere
heart, and so thou shall be saved, and really find, that the sea and the winds
will be tractable unto thee, and thou shall bring all things to the desired end.

Good God! were but this the mind of man, in following after somewhat with
study and labor, without doubt the Muses and Fortune would be propitious unto
him; and that Disciple of Art would find, that health and prosperity would
attend him in his Closet of Art, and habitation of Grace, so as that he should
perceive a sure Foundation, a full unspotted and constant Corner stone, whereon
he may with safety rest, and found his own Conscience, and so the unprofitable
tatling of Disputers, with the sick would be omitted, and cast out of the
Schools, and the silent man would take his Turn also, and publicly assert
and prove that a Castle built of stone is not so easily combustible as a
pigeon-house, or a thatch't roof, or an old wooden neast of a stork, that is
dried every year in the sun.

My Disciples attend rightly with the utmost of your understanding to my simple
plain admonition, studiously and diligently seek the Center which is scarce or
never known by the outward face; search thoroughly its virtue with a careful
expectation, even as an Hunter does after a wild Beast, Mark the print of the
footsteps in the snow, that you take not a Stag instead of a Do, or an Hare
for a Fox, through their footsteps ill-understood, and worse judged of: cast
forth your Net, but rightly, and then you shall have it well stored with the
best Fishes, spread open your Nets discreetly and carefully, bind on your
snares and intrapments, and so shall the Fowler effectually and succesfully
satisfy his own desire. In a word, that I may give my ultimate Admonition unto
the curious Seeker, I do advise thus; Dear Fowler, expose thy Nets and thy
voluble feathers deliberately unto the Wind, and thou Mariner attend well on thy
Compass when thou saylest in the deep Sea, night and day, and art frequently
tossed with tempestuous storms, now here, now there; For thus observing, thou
shall not fail in thy hopeful Expectations, but in the end shall take
something with profit; and arrive with my ^hip to its Port, from the remotest
Countries, with augmentation of thy wares and adventures.

But why do I spend time in speaking or comparing; I do but tread and thresh
the empty stalks and strawes, in the manner of Tatling Sophisters, for my
Writings are so born, that but few Letters in them will pass by, without some
fruit, and be extinguished without the sparks of some benefit; But verily,
they do contain in them a certain Doctrine and Instruction, that the Labor of
writing is to me a kind of Recreation and Delight.

Well! I will retire or go back, one pass in the manner of a Fencer, and
induce into the Laboratory a new school or Learning, viz. of external things,
that I may declare and manifest the Reason or Cause, and Preparation of
Antimony, that it may be approved as most profitable for outward Distempers (as
indeed it is) I Will therefore give you the process in a very few words.

My Disciple and Lover of Art, who desire thoroughly to search into Natures
secrets, and to find out the most hidden mysteries, that thou may distinguish
betwixt day and night, light and darkness I say unto thee.

Take one part of the best Ungarian Antimony, and half a part of common, or of
fosile salt, of potters Earths not baked six parts, grind and mix them well
together; distill them with a strong fire, and a red Oil will forthwith flow
or distill forth, from which abstract the Phlegm by distillation, that a red
powder may remain dry in the bottom, grind it, and let it be resolved upon a
Marble stone, and thence will issue a red Pellucid Balsome, far more noble then
other vulnerary Balsomes, most profitable in old Wounds, which the common
Physicians with their Plasters, Unguents, Oils, and Ligaments, do esteem as
dangerous and to be suspected, and are with derision compelled to take off the
bridle and Trappings from the Horse, and lay them aside, and lead him back
again into the stable from whence they brought him. My Custom of speaking now
contains no other thing; for a Monk cannot write all things so clearly, as the
reason and necessity of the work requires, because he is not versed in the
circumstances of such business; he is (I say) ignorant of their Terms, that
he cannot illustrate them formally or orderly enough; and he entreats pardon
for any Transgession of that kind committed by him, and in like manner will he
show his forward readiness to serve all Christians night and day in his
spiritual Office, and he will reward the kindness of the Reader with his
daily Prayers. This Oil is found to be most wholesome in old Ulcers and Wounds,
of the greatest moment, nor are there many remedies above it or equal
thereunto, except an Oil of Antimony prepared with common Mercury sublimate,
which in healing of Cancers, Gangreens, Wolfes, Noli me tangere, is more potent
and noble; But in Fistulaes and creeping Ulcers, the before prescribed Oil,
does experimentally show its force in many incredible accidents, even to
admiration, which I forbear to rehearse, lest I should be thought to be
ambitious and greedy after Honor, which vice I have always fled from, do
fly from, and will fly from, by the help of God, and the Blessed Virgin Mary.

It Is thus prepared.

Take of common Mercury well mortified and most purely sublimed, and of
Antimony, of each equal parts, grind them, mix them, and distill them by a
Retort (which can hold the Spirits) three times, rectify this Oil with spirit
of Wine, and it is prepared, being of a bloud-like color; at the beginning it
was white and resembled Ice, or molten Butter: This Oil performs many
wonders, which without it, 'twould be impossible in Nature to believe, could be
amended, but yet notwithstanding its virtue, faculty, and operation, herein
appears in making good out of evil.

Another most profitable for external wounds, may also be prepared, with
addition.

Take of Antimony and Sulphur, of each one part, Salarmoniack and Salt of Urine
clarified, of each half a part, Calx vive or Quicklime two parts. Grind, mix,
and distill them, if any thing sublimes, scrape it off, and grind it again
with the Caput mortuum, pour thereunto the Oil which thou abstractedst,
distill it as before, and thus do three times, and it is prepared: old malign and
contumacious Ulcers, refusing every remedy, do not despise this Oil, it is
most strong, most penetrative, and lays a foundation of most certain healing,
even as the Oil of Vitriol does.

There Is also prepared a wonderful Vulnerary Balsome composed of many things,
whereof Antimony is one.

Receive of sulphur four Ounces, melt it in the fire very gently, mix thereto
half a pound of Quick silver, stir it with a stick until it comes into a
Mass, which grind or beat, because it is prepared, as Cinaber is wont to be
prepared; grind with it of Antimony four Ounces, Red Arsenick four ounces,
Crocus martis two ounces, powdered Bricks eight ounces, let them be sublimed
together according to art, in a glass vessel, and thou shall have Rubies not
unlike the Oriental ones, (as to the color) (for they are volatile, and have
nothing fix in them.) Let these Rubies be most neately separated from the
Cinaber, which in the subliming did co-ascend with them, grind them, and
extract them with Vinegar, which done, abstract the Vinegar in B. M. by little
and little, and the remaining powder grind most finely small, and extract it
with spirit of Wine in another vessel, separate the remaining feces, and
digest this extraction with spirit of wine, in a vessel well luted, in B. M.
for a month, Then abstract the spirit of wine (as you did formerly the
vinegar,) put the remaining powder into a Cucurbit with a round bottom, and
put it into a vessel full of water in a pit, that it may therein swim like a
boat, and so in a few days it will resolve into a fair transparent liquour,
most profitable for old ulcers and wounds, if they be anointed with a feather
dipped therein, and a common vulnerary plaster laid thereupon; It will not leave
thee destitute of help, especially in those outward wounds which are old and
incapable of any other remedy.

But those solutions of continuity which depend upon some inward cause, are not
to be understood or meant in this place; but for the healing of such, somewhat
more is requried; which verily cannot be recovered without inward Remedies,
which dry up and radically put out the Symptoms and center of the disease,
although there are but few masters in the world at this day, who circumspectly
and exactly think of, and consider the thing which at present I do write.
Would man but consider the miserable state and positure of our life, whereinto
we are slipped by the fall of our first parents; (which lapse or fall, original
sin and all kinds of calamities have followed, yea many and grievous diseases
frequently too, wherewith we are oppressed,) he would spend his time more
rightly and profitably, that so he might (out of Christian charity) find out a
means for his neighbors health, which is laid upon him as a duty, by the
prince of heaven; But because most men do trifle away and loose their time
about toys and trifles, and refuse labor as being troublesome, they remain
in their old opinion, and are good stewards of their flesh, fearing the wearing
out their hands with the washing them, and the anointing of them with oil,
fearing also that by buying much soap to purge and wash themselves, they should
increase the merchants price; Poor miserable men, what have we in this world
whereof we may boast, strangers we are in our conduct, having our dwelling with
God, who has given us all things for our use whilst we live here, without
pledge; we ought on that acount bodily and spiritually so to behave our selves
unto him, as faithful stewards toward their masters, that we may with a good
conscience stand in that day, when all these bestowed goods shall return unto
him, and that heavenly householder shall require an account from all his
servants; left through means of our sins and unthankfulness, we be cast out
into the utter prison of torment, where shall be gnashing of teeth. Did but a
man always think thereupon, it would not be strange for his heart, never to
think of committing any evil, but would most diligently perform his office,
that he might serve his neighbor; But the world very little or nothing at all
gives respect hereunto, but grasps up money right or wrong; the Potentates care
not, the commons help them forward; they defend force by the name of equity,
that themselves may also enjoy a portion of ill gotten goods, and may as 'twere
rightly devour like Lords and Masters, the goods of their servants. Beware, I
say, lest the bones stick in your throat, and the fish bones pierce and adhere
to your heart.

But these Admonitions are but in vain; ridiculous and contemptible unto the
world, for when a while since I went on Pilgrimage to S. James of Compostella
according to a vow, it being a difficult journey, and returned back unto my
convent (for which I bless God even to this day) I did believe that many would
both rejoice and praise God together with me, for those holy relics which for
the help and comfort of our convent, and all the poor I brought with me; But
few amend their lives, and but few testify their thankfulness to God for so
large a benefit; but have rather increased their derisions, their contumelies,
and their blasphemies: But the just judge well knows how to punish them at the
last day: But of this enough. I return to Antimony, Out of which is another
remedy prepared most profitable for all fevers, and also in time of the plague.

Take of Antimony excellently well ground or beaten, without any addition,
destil it with a strong fire in a Retort, whereto let be united a large glass
recipient. Iterate it three or four times, for so at length will be produced a
red powder, which extract with destilled vinegar, Circulate the extraction in a
gentle fire for ten days, then forthwith destil it to the Abstraction of the
vinegar; urge the remainder by a peculiar Artifice that it may pass into an
oil, which yet circulate and pellicane it, until the Phlegm be gone, and it be
again reduced into a powder: the vinegar must at first be separated in the
destillation, and the oil (comeing last) must be gathered in a new receiver.
This oil cures Quotidians, Tertians, and Quartain fevers, four grains being
given with the destill'd water of carduus benedictus, and the sick covered so
that he may sweat.

The same dose with Spirit of wine or destill'd vinegar (according as the
plague at first seized on the patient, either with burning or cold) does most
potently expel the plague, as three of my brethren can testify, who were, taken
with the plague and having made their wills and given up themselves to death,
were delivered by this Arcanum, and from that time forward did more highly
esteem my medicine then before, and did assist me, both with their Prayers, and
manual labor, (after performing the worship and service of God) so carefully,
that at length, together with me, they attained to many secrecyes and
experiments, whence, by the industry of them, and other my brethren, more
secrets of nature were detected and opened in one year, then in a long time
before, for which I gave them thanks (even to my last age) and moreover will be
heartily thankful, because they well deserved it both of me, and other honest
Christians. But because they dyed before me, I do supplicate the Heavenly
Cheiftain for their Reward, who without doubt has paid unto my btethren a
sufficient Premium in Heaven, that they may be joyfully supplied with a
Celestial recompense, in the stead of that which is taken from them in this
Life, and which could not have been paid them by unskilful and ungrateful men.

There Is also another Vulnerary Oil made of Antimony, by an Addition, Thus.

Receive of Antimony, sulphur, and salt Petre, of each equal parts, shut them
under a Campane, according as is customary; but you will do better if you use an
Alembick with a Recipient, and you shall gather more Oil then Per Campanam, as
to its color it resembles common oil of sulphur, but it is much stronger,
because of the addition, and operates more potently then the common vulnerary
oil of sulphur does, it is inwardly administered for diseased Lungs, and
outwardly administered to putrid filthy Ulcers, the Dose inwardly is three drops
with spirit of Wine, outwardly it is used only with a wound plaster laid
thereon, thou shall find it an excellent Remedy in all evils.

Another profitable oil for Gangrenous Diseases and old Ulcers is thus
prepared.

Receive of Antimony ground or powdered, one pound, of common salt, half a
pound, of Potters Earth unbaked five pounds, mix them, grind them, and distill
them in a Retort, and a yellow Oil will come forth, all the spirits being come
forth, put the matter into another Glass, abstract the Phlegm, put the
remaining powder in a Cave upon a Marble, and twill resolve into a liquid
Balsome, most profitable for serpentine creeping, and Gangrenous evils,
especially in the face of a man, or breasts of a woman: I could write more
things of this Balsome, but that I fear, that the unskilful and tatling
sophister, will say that (in his opinion) I write too much, and teach many
things in Paper, which I never found by use, but only conceived in my
imagination.

Another Oil, may also be thus made.

Receive of Antimony four parts, salt Armoniack one part, grind them together
and sublime them with a gentle fire, and so the salt will lift up with it self
the blood-like sulphur of Antimony, grind this sublimate well, and for every
pound of the crude Antimony that you sublime, add five ounces mo^e of Antimony
to the sublimate, and su^li^^^^ it as before. This sublimate will be excellently
well dissolved in a moist place, or else separate the salt therefrom, and dry it
by little and little, and thou shall have a sulphur combustible, like the
common sulphur sold every where. Extract this sulphur (in time) with distilled
Vinegar, and separate the Vinegar in B. M. by a gentle heat, extract or draw
out its Tincture, and the remaining Powder draw over or distill into a Recipient
by a subtle Artifice; if the studious Artist does rightly proceed in this way,
he shall find a sweet excelling oil, without any Corrosion or danger; It
heales the Peripneumonia, expels the dolor of the sides and let the Asthmatick
take thereof in the morning, and at evening going to bed two grains, with the
Elixir or spirit of Wine; it heales pectorall Diseases and casts forth all
impurities from the breast, and it has been useful to me, and helpful to many
a one, even beyond hope. But seeing that in other preparations I have
sufficiently described the virtues of Antimony, I suppose it needless to
repeat them again in this place, least I become tedious to the studious, and
excite in them I know not what suspicions. The Liquor, made of this sulphur (as
I have already said) is most profitably used in outward Remedies, it takes away
all the filth of the skin, and if a little Oil be thereto admixt, it takes
away the Pimples and spots of the hands, if anointed therewithal. It makes the
skin bright, and heales the Alopecia or head scab.

The sulphur of Antimony is also prepared yet another way.

Boil Antimony beaten or ground, two hours or more in a strong Lixivium made
of Ashes, filtre the Antimony and pour thereunto most strong Vinegar, and a red
sulphur will settle to the bottom, pour away the Phlegm and dry the powder;
extract the Tincture with distilled Vinegar, as in the former sulphur, bring it
into an oil by distillation, which is not unprofitable, but yet weaker then the
other precedent, where by the benefit of sublimation with salt Armoniack, the
body of Antimony is opened and realeased.

Now follows three preparations of Antimony chiefly necessary for a Spagirist,
viz. The preparation of a vinegar out of its proper Mineral: The signed star
of the Philosophers, and Philosophical Lead, much esteemed of by many, who have
believed that out of it might be made the true Mercury of the Philosophers, but
it is impossible, neither is there so much granted by God thereunto, that in,
or from Antimony, the Mercury of the Philosophers should be found; or the first
Ers, Argent vive, and first water of perfect metalls, out of which is made the
great stone of the Ancient Philosophers. But this Primum Ens is found in
another Mineral, in which (having Relation to metals) the operation is higher
then that of Stibium, although that this has its particular profit. Note well,
That the Pillar as twere of internal and external Medicine is to be had in
every shop or place of vendible things, were it but rightly prepared; which I
have oftentimes said, and there wants nothing but that the Artificer learn to
discern the Nature of Mineralls and metals, and with exactness observe the
preparation and use of Antimony, whereupon a right Judgment will follow, and
not before. I will therefore accomplish my promise, and satisfy the wishes of
my Disciples, and perfectly teach the Knowledge of the ultimate and true
separation of the good from the bad, beginning at the preparation of the
Philosophical Vinacre of Antimony.

The Aes or Mineral out of which Antimony is melted and purged, beat or grind
exceedingly small, put it into a glass Phyal with a most long Neck, pour
thereunto destilled rain water, that the glass may be half full, Lute it and
putrefie it in Horse Dung until the Aes or Mineral begin to boil, and to
froth, or spume, and ascend or work up, then take it out, because this is a
sign that the body is opened; put this digested matter into a Cucurbit well
Luted, and abstract the water which will be a little Acid, which being drawn
off, increase the sire and somewhat will sublime, this sublimate being commixt
with the Faeces, let it be again moistened with the water which was extracted
from it, and distill it as before, and iterate this Labor so often until it
has purchased the Acrimony of the strongest distilled vinegar, but the
sublimate does decrease in every distillation. pour this vinegar thus prepared
upon new Aes or Antimony-minerall in a pelican, that it may swim three singers
over it, let it stand in a gentle heat twelve days, so the vinegar will become
red and be more acid, separate this most purely, and distill it per B.
abstracting the Vinegar, and a redness will remain at the bottom, which
extract with spirit of Wine, and twill be a supreme medicine, rectify the
Vinegar again in B. that the Phlegm may be separated, and then dissolve
therein its own proper salt, viz. one ounce of salt to four ounces of vinegar,
distill it strongly in Ashes, and so the vinegar will be more fortified, it
refrigerates in a wonderful manner beyond the force of common Vinegar, it
allayes the gangrene that is enkindled by gunpowder, and such other burning
accidents, if it be ground with the soul of Saturn into an Ointment, and
applied like a Cataplasme: Being mixed with the water of Endive, and with the
fixed part of salt petre, burnt and prepared with sulphur, it divides and cures
the squinancy, and extinguisheth heat.

In the Plague a full Spooneful drunk at a time, and outwardly also applied
upon the Bubo, with a third part of the distilled water of the combust sperme
of Frogs, extracts the poison and refrigerates

The signed stone of Antimony is by many a one much esteemed of, and most men
have earnestly attempted its preparation; some have enjoyed their wishes, the
intent and purpose of others has come to nothing, many have believed that this
star is the true matter of the philosophers stone; imagining it so
over-hastily, because Nature has freely formed this star of its own accord,
but I deny it: (These men leave the Kings high way; and do journey through
unfrequented rocky places where the wild goats do live and the birds of prey do
build their nests) It Is not given to this star to be the matter of so noble a
stone though the chiefest of Medicines lie therein. It is thus made.

Take of Ungarian Antimony two parts, fileings of Sttele one part, burnt Tartar
four parts, melt them together and pour them out into a Goldsmiths Crucible,
wherein they are wont to purge Gold Let it cool, separate the Regulus from the
Scoria and Faeces, grind it or beat it, and again add of burnt Tartar three
times its weight, and melt it as before, separate, grind it, and again add
thrice its weight of burnt Tartar, melt it, and so the Regulus shall be purged;
If thou have proceeded aright (which is here the maine thing) thou shall have a
white star shining like to pure silver, and divided, as if the most accurate
Painter had described it with its Radij or Beams. This Star sublimed with salt
Armoniack; grows red, for the Tincture of Mars ascends, this sublimate may be
resolved (in a Cellar) into an Oil profitable for wounds.

This Regulus or Star may be often destilled by the fire, with the stony
Serpents, so that in the end being totally consumed, he associates himself to
the serpent; the which being finished, the Artist will have a most burning
matter, and altogether fiery, wherein many artificial things lie hidden, and
this matter is also resolved into an Oil, which ought to be brought over by
destillation, and then rectified until it be pure and clear* Its use in the
body, and to be administered inwardly, is thus. Mix no more then three drops
only with some convenient Liquor, as two Ounces of Wine or some distilled
water, according to the Nature of the disease, and so give it, and but twice
only in a week: It Is expedient therefore that the Physician respects the causes
of Diseases, and the complexion of the sick, that he may with safety use his
Remedies. But this Oil is of a most great Acrimony, wherein lie many things,
not fit to be revealed unto the common people, but to be reserved as certain
secrets for Philosophers, who have daily sustained most bitter Labors: Well
then, whoever thou art that followest my steps, be not dejected in so doing,
thou shall find as I have found by my hard pains, which I wish unto thee withal
my heart.

I have prescribed unto thee things enough even from the beginning, whereby
thou may find the end, but many dye, who (as yet) have not attained the
beginning, and perish before the obtaining of the magistry, I will on that
account leave behind a book of Rudiments or Principles, that my Disciples being
acquainted with the first experiments, may the sooner arrive to the wished end,
and give God and me thanks. In this oil is this wonderful thing observable,
that it operates upon Chrystals calcined for three days, and extracts their
salt, which done, the oil is yet once more to be distilled by a Retort, and so
have thou a Remedy so potent, that it breaks and expels the stone of the
bladder, and perfects many other things.

Now concerning the Philosophers Lead.
Let the searcher into Art, know, that Antimony is of kin to common Lead: For
even as some trees expel and drives out from themselves their too much Rosin
(which is their Sulphur) (as is seen in the Cherry tree, and other trees)
ejecting and casting out their Gum; but othersome (abounding with over much
Mercury) produce out of themselves, other heterogeneous plants, as appears in
the Oak and Apple, which bring forth Bastards and Monsters, etc. Even so the
Earth has its abortives that are rejected from the pure metals in the
separation. Now seeing Antimony being of affinity to Saturn, is thrown out
from him, by reason of his too much Sulphur, neither (in his Nativity) cold
arrive to the perfection of a fusil body, he remained a Mineral, for his over
abounding quantity of hot sulphur has overcome, and hindered the Mercury
(through the want and defect of cold) from coagulation into a fusible body.

But the Lead of Antimony is no other thing then its Regulus, which is not as
yet malleable, and as I have said, is produced by the copulating and fuseing of
Regulus and steel in the fire, whereby the star is made, out of which many have
erroneously sought for, the stone of the ancient Philosophers, but in vain: But
as for the remedies, thence educible by preparation, I have already
demonstrated, and will not repeat them.

But on this account does the Regulus admit of the name of Lead, because that
that which Stibium gives of it self from its own glass, if it be melted for
three hours, (being first cemented) in a wind Furnace, in a well shut Crucible
with the salt of Saturn, and then taken out it becomes malleable, and more
weighty then before, because it has received malleability and increase from
the salt, that it is become a compact and ponderous body. Nor is there much
difference betwixt the signed star, and Lead of Antimony, although many
Artificers propose a difference, for both are made of Regulus, and may be
prepared into the same Medicine as I have said, and Here I Will cease, and next
to the following Appendix, manifest the stone of fire.

Let God be favorable, and open the Ears and Hearts of such as are stubborn,
and bless them, that knowing the miracles of Nature they may praise his
omnipotence and be assistant to their Neighbors, Amen.

The Appendix
FINALLY note, That there are other uses of Stibium, as in Typographicall
Characters: also Sigills and characters, (of wonderful virtue) are made with
metals mixed, under certain constellations and planetary Conjunctions, and by a
certain commixion are made looking glasses, or speculums of diverse faces or
shapes and proprieties, also little tingling Bells and statues, which for that
they appertain not unto medicine, nor belong unto my calling, I will here
desist, and leave their handling to other Artificers.

ACROSTICHON.
AT the Beginning when the Earth conceived me,
No Parent had I but the Heaven alone,
Then a faithful helper (that so I might he borne)
Jason the duplicate was chosen for to be,
My Virtue is the gift of solar heat,
Of Fire debarred, I sweat not any blood;
Now don't neglect Pluto thy mate to make
In fighting let him also be the heater,
Vulcan does show the way to honor true
Methusalem, unto thee gives thanks.
OF THE Triumphant Chariot OF ANTIMONY, AND WHAT THE STONE Of Fire is.
ON a time by serious Prayers powered out before God, (being absolved and
quitted from superfluous thoughts, and wordly affairs I decreed to meditate on
such spiritual cases, as might be useful for a more thorough search into the
condition of Nature, I therefore resolved with my self to get me some wings
that so I might fly unto the superior stars, and make inspection thereunto,
as (by the Testimony of the Poets) Icarus and Dedalus have done. But when I
approached overneer to the Sun, my wings were burnt by his heat, and down I
tumble headlong into the deepest sea; But because I called upon God in my
necessity; he sent me aid and help from Heaven, whereby I was reedeemed from
destruction and danger. For an Angel from Heaven came unto my succor who
Commanded the water to stand still, and there was opened a great Abyss, like a
most high mountain, where walking up and down, I would needs search whether or
no it were possible (as the sons of men speak) that there should be a
familiarity between things most high, and things most low, and whethet or no,
the supreme stars have received from the Creator, force and virtue, sufficient
for the production of things in the earth like unto themselves, and having
searched through all, I found it certainly true, which our ancient Teachers
have long since left behind them for our Instruction, and Information (if we
are desirous Disciples after truth and verity) and have set down as
fundamental, for which I gave most cordial thanks to the omnipotent God, and
author of all wonderful things.

Briefly, I find that all minerals flow from the Celestial Stars, and have
their original out of an Aqueous Vapor, which having bin a long time
nourished by the stars, is reduced by the Elements into a palpable form;
whence, that vapor is dried, and the waterishnesse loses its dominion, and
the fire (after or next to the water) by the benefit of Air bears the sway,
that out of the water the fire may be made, and out of the fire and the Air,
the earth may be made, which notwithstanding are found inseparable in all the
corporeal things of the world before their resolution. The first matter
therefore of all bodies is water, which by the dryness of the fire and the air
is changed into earth.

But because I have determined to teach, how the stone of fire is to be
prepared out of Antimony, and because it does not only cure men, but
particularly cures even Metals also. It is convenient to advise what the stone
of fire is; what its mineral is; whether or no a stone can be made without
matter, and also of the ultimate difference, kinds and use of stones.

Let the Holy Spirit be assisting in this my determination, that I may truly
explain this art as far as is lawful, from whence* I hope for an eternal
absolution from my chief Confessor, who eternally sits in the throne of grace,
and that from eternity, and will bear witness of all things, when the last
sentence and decretory Judgment shall pass upon all men, without protestation
or Appellation.

In the first place, and above all other things know that the true Tincture of
Antimony, which is a medicine both for men and metals, is not to be made of
crude melted Antimony, such as the drugsters and the merchants sell, But out of
its mineral or Aes, as it is dig'd out of the Mountains, and that too, made into
glass: But how to perform that extraction is all the art, and workmanship; and
whosoever finds it shall be thereby enriched with health and wealth. Know also
(friendly Reader) that the prepared, fixed, and permanent Tincture of Antimony
(which I call the stone of fire) is a penetrating, spiritual, fiery essence
reduced into a coagulated matter, and may be compared to the Salamander which
cannot be burnt, but is purged and conserved in the fire. But our stone of fire
does not ting universally as the stone of the Philosophers does, which is made
of the essence of Gold, nor has it so much virtue granted it: But it
tinctureth particularly viz. Luna, Jupiter, and Saturn into Gold; It touches
not Mars and Venus, but only as to what may by this separation be in part
produced from them. Also one part of this Tincture can transmute but five
parts, so as to remain constant in the trial, color, and weight, In Saturn and
Antimony it self; when as contrariwise the true, ancient, and great stone of
the Philosophers does perfect innumerably. But yet this can be yet exalted it
its own augmentation. And its Gold is pure, and constant.

The Mineral of the stone of fire or of the Tincture is the Mineral or Aes of
Stibium out of which (as I have before mentioned) it is made, but how it is
done, and what virtues and operations are therein I will presently declare.

Moreover the Reader may observe that many stones tinge particularly, (for all
fixed tinging powders are by me called stones) but yet one tingeth deeper then
another; as first; The stone of the Philosophers which far transcends all
others. Next which are the Tinctures of the Sun, and of the Moon etc. As to the
white. Then the Tincture of Vitriol or Venus, and the Tincture of Mars, both
which contein in them the Tincture of the Sun, if they have bin formerly
brought unto fixation; next to these follow the Tincture of Jupiter and Saturn
for the Coagulation of Mercury and then finally the Tincture of Mercury itself,
this is the difference and multiplicity of Stones and Tinctures, which
notwithstanding are all generated out of one seed and one principal Matrix,
from whence also flows the true Universal one, and without these no metallic
Tincture can be given.

And verily it is not in other things of what name soever; I value not stones and
Gems as to my present purpose, for I will speak not of such now, since that
they contain in them a medicinal virtue only; I will also omit animal and
vegetable stones, as appartaining to medicine solely, being unprofitable in
metallic operations; As the virtues of which Mineral vegetable and animal
stones, are contained in the Philosophers stone together, and at once. Salts
cannot ting, but are only a Key to the preparation of stones, otherwise, they
are impotent of themselves; (At least, as to what belongs to metallic and
mineral Salts) and now I speak to the purpose if thou rightly understandst me,
as to what difference I suppose to be between mineral Salts) they ought not to
be rejected, (neither can they) in Tinctures, in whose composition none can be
wtthout them; for in them is found an excellent treasure by which every
fixation and constancy has its original and foundation.

Some body will now happily enquire (who^ I do not upon this account reprehend)
whether or no without matter such a stone can be made; I say, No. For every
thing necessarily has its own matter, but diversely. The animals, theirs; The
minerals, theirs, and vegetables their matter: Yet consider exactly, that no
body without fermentation; (of which in the end of the work of the preparation
of the great stone where I consider the transmutation of other metals with
profit;) which cannot be wanting, is profitable or fit for any stone. Although
at the beginning a bodily form and corporeal essence, visible and palpable be
taken, yet out of such a bodily essence the heavenly and spiritual vision (for
I cannot otherways call it) ought to be extracted, which was at first infused
into that body by the stars, and also begotten and concocted by the Elements,
which spiritual essence ought in like manner palpably and formally to be again
changed with a little fire by the regiment and disposing of the Microcosme into
a Palpable, fixed and constant matter. I speak without any imagination into an
openfield, if I were wise I should not so much as whisper, and would refrain my
hands from writing. Therefore all Tinctures of metals ought so to be prepared,
that they may singularly love the metals, and earnestly and solely desire to be
united to them, and to perfect them, just like two lovers who burning with love
cannot rest until they are united and accomplish their desires; then at last,
they rest and are multiplied by the will of God; man lies subject to many and
wonderful deseases, which in some, do debilitate and take away the strength of
nature; Those diseases may be dealt withal by antidotes; and that man may be
restored to his former health.

But love it is, that overcomes all other diseases, for which is no redress, or
help but by a reciprocal love, and because that the desire of both sex is
mutual, it is only extinguished by satisfaction of the inflamed and hungry
longing; many things may be testified of the power of love, which does not
only seize upon the younger sort, but the elder also, who in their extreme
age, do not only dote, but even grow mad by the fury of love. There are other
diseases which imitate or follow the natural complexions of men, and so assualt
one more then another; But love sets upon all without distinction, rich and
poor, old and young, nor fears it any net that may be laid to trap it; In other
natural diseases the grief possesses only some certain members, the others
being peaceable and quiet; But love captivates the whole body, all its essence,
form, and substance, not the least part escaping; for the heart is so filled
with heat, that it is dispersed through out all the veins and sinews. And (as I
may so speak) love reigning in its power, seizes upon the sense, reason, and
thoughts, and withdraws a man from his mind, that he forgets, omits and
dis-estems every thing; he contemnes God; Gods word, promises, wrath, threats
and punishment (I speak of inordinate and forbidden love) nor can any thing
recall him from that love, he is unmindful of his office, of his condition and
vocation; he tramples upon admonitions, despises the adhortations of his well
wishing neighbor, yea he shuts his eyes from most things, that he sees not his
own destruction; stopping his ears to the faithful advise of such as do
admonish him. It deprives many a one of sleep, takes away the appetite to food,
procures a neglect of labor and arts, that so love may be followed and waited
on. Many fall into a melancholy sadness, because of love, especially if things
do not presently succeed according to desire, and they consume away like a
candle, yea some loose both life and soul, as is apparent by examples. But such
a one cares not, he contemnes the dangers both of soul and body, which indeed
is a dreadful thing, let this suffice, for it is unseemely for me who am an
Ecclesiastical man, to give place to such things in my heart, even as (be not
offended with the word) hitherto all my life time I have forborne it, and
moreover will supplicate my God and Lord that I may conserve my self for my
bride (the Christian Church) to which by a faithful vow I have devoted my self.
But this I induce for examples sake only, that so I might discover and
evidence, that al Tinctures ought to have a love to the metals, (else they
cannot enter into true friendship) and by a true penetrative love attain to
Melioration or a better condition.

Let us now come to the preparation of the stone reserving its use to the
latter end; And since this stone is of a most penetrative and mere fiery
property, let it be boiled with fire and ripened as other things of the world;
but yet differently according to the different natures of things, even as there
are diverse fires.

1. The first fire is celestial, instituted by God, whereby charity is kindled
and faith toward the most high God, most holy Trinity, and our most merciful
Savior Jesus Christ, which faith will never deceive us, nor forsake us in any
necessity, but will deliver our souls from eternal destruction.

2. The second fire is the Sun, or Elementary fire produced from the Sun, which
brings all things in the Macrocosme to maturity.

3. The third is corporeal, whereby all meats and medicines are boiled and
prepared, which men cannot want either for health or nourishment.

We also find in the Holy Scripture, that before the last judgment, God will
consume this visible world with fire, but what fire this will be, let us refer
it to the judgment of the most high.

There Is also mention made in the word of God of another, or an eternal fire,
which is reserved in hell for the eternal punishment of the damned; (being
infinite and without ceasing, God permitting it; and not only for them, but
for the devils also, from which fire I pray the almighty God to preserve us;
whence I do faithfully admonish all, that they pray uncessantly that the call
and life of every one, may have an harmony betwixt them, for thereby shall he
conserve himself and be delivered by God from that infinite punishment.

Now let all know, that our stone of fire ought to be boiled and maturated with
the corporeal fire of the Microcosme, even as other meats and medicines are;
for at the farewell of the operative fire of the Macrocosme, does the fire of
the Microcosme begin the production of a new generation, and therefore let no
man wonder at this coction.

Wheat grew and ripened by the elementary fire of the Macrocosme, and a new
coction and maturation is again produced by the corporeal fire of the
Microcosme, that so man may further use that blessing for his own conservation,
and that he may enjoy even the utmost, and the least thing, which (by the first
and great world, was under operation and working on.

The true Oil of Antimony out of which the stone of fire is prepared, is of a
most sweetly pleasant property, and is thus purged and separated from its own
Earth, place a glass filled therewithal in the Sun, and it emits from it self
sundry and admirable beams like to the reddy Rubine, shining with a fiery
brightness, resembling other wonderful Colors and shapes, like to manifold
Speculums exposed unto the solar brightness.

But hear me, thou studious Lover of art and truth, if thou desire to make a
farther progress in experience, Take in the name of the most high, the Aes or
mineral of Antimony born after the Rising of the Sun, one part, of the purest
and best mundified salt petre, as much, grind them, and mix them exceedingly
well, place them in a gentle fire, burn or fire them together according to
art, (this is the work, and this is the Labor) then shall thou find a dark,
dusky, colored matter remaining behind, of which make glass, out of which
being powdered, extract a most red Tincture with a most strong vinegar,
distilled and made out of its own proper Mineral, abstract the vinegar in B.
M. and there will remain a powder which yet again extract with spirit of Wine
rectified unto the height, and some feces will remain, and thou shall have a
most red extraction, profitable in medicine.

This is a most pure sulphur of Antimony separated to the utmost, which if thou
have two pounds of, add four ounces of the salt of Antimony (made as I have
before taught thee) thereto, mix them, and circulate them in a vessel well shut
for a month at least, so will the salt be united to the extraction, if any feces
remain let them be separated, then first of all destil off the spirit of Wine
in B. M. and that being abstracted, augment the fire, and there will come forth
the most sweet, pellucid red oil, with many miraculous colors, rectify this
oil in B. that a fourth part may remain, and it is good. Which being done, take
of the quick mercury of Antimony already spoken of, and pour thereto a red oil
of Vitriol made out of Iron, and supreamly rectified, distill the phlegm in
sand, from the mercury, and thou shall have a precipitate, a fairer then which
cannot be seen, nor a more profitable in old wounds and ulcers, for it dryes up
accidental humors, from whence martial diseases have their Rise, where (also)
the united spirit of the oil assists him.

Take of this precipitate, and of the aforesaid dulcorated oil of Antimony
equal parts, mix them, put them into a glass well shut, in a gentle continual
heat, and the precipitate will be dissolved in the oil and be fixed, consume all
the phlegm in the fire, and then shall you have a fix, dry, red, fusible
powder, emitting no fume; My disciple, I will now speak in the manner of the
Prophets, foretelling things to come: When thy studies have guided thee thus
far in Philosophy, and thou have perfected the Labor of Antimony, which I have
prescribed thee, thou have a medicine both for men and metals, it is sweet and
safe, it penetrates, it moves not the belly, it corrects and expels what is
evil; If thy progress has been right, this medicine will reward thee in thy
health and food, that nothing in the world shall be wanting unto thee, for which
thou owe unto God a sacrifice of praise.

My God! I now speak with a sadned mind, being an Ecclesiastical man, for I do
not know whether I have done right or otherwise, whether too much or too little:
I leave it to every ones judgment: ye that are my disciples make trial as I
have done, if you attain to your end, give praise to God, and thank me who am
your master, if ye err from the way, blame your selves, for I am not the cause
of your errors.

I have spoken enough, I have written enough, yea so clearly that none can
teach more clear, unless a man would purposely run into Hell, and there drown
himself, uttering things prohibited by the Creator, and eating of the tree
placed in the middle of Paradise: but what I have done, shall suffice me, until
I can more largely judge of what is lawful as to this thing, and now I Will speak
a few words of its use.

The use consists in the view of the person and observation of his complexion,
as to humane health, see thou give neither too much nor too little, that thou
neither burden nature nor deny her what is sufficient. Albeit it hurts not,
although too much be given, for it helps lost health and resists poisons.

Yet know that three or four grains at a dose, is sufficient for the expulsion
of all diseases, being given with spirit of wine; This stone or Tincture
penetrates all the joints of the body, and far transcends other Arcanums, it
does most readily take away the Pthisis, and all diseases arising from the
Lungs, the Asthma, the Cough, Lepry, and Lues venerea; the Plague, Jaundise,
dropsy, and all Fevers, it expels any poisonous drink, it is profitable for
such as are infected by a philtre or love potion; it comforts the head, the
brain, and what is of affinity to them, the stomach, the Liver; it heales the
diseases of the Reins, it purges corrupt blood, expels malign humors,
lessens the stone of the bladdet, and drives it forth, heales the windy Dysury,
etc. It brings back the vital spirits, compresseth the suffocatian of the
Matrix, provokes the Menstrues, and allayes their overflowings, it begets
fruitfulness, and sound seed in both sexes.

Outwardly. This stone of fire (but yet it must be be also taken into the body
and a suitable wound plaster externally applied) heales the Gangrene, and all
other corroding diseases, the scab, and infirmities arising from the corruption
of the blood, and the Noli me tangere: In a word, this stone (as a particular
Tincture) is a remedy, for almost all the diseases whereto man is subject,
which experience shows, together with the way, if only thou be a true
Physician sent and called by God.

I will write no more of Antimony, I have acted my part, let another also act
his, that the mysteries of God may be laid open (before the worlds end) to the
glory of him, and for the health of men; I Will hold my peace, and return to my
monastic order, until I shall have made larger progress in my Philosophy, that
I may also write those things which I have a long time decreed, viz. of
Vitriol, common sulphur, and the Magnet, their beginnings and virtues, may it
please the Prince of Heaven to bestow upon us health of body, and eternal
welfare of our souls in the unsearchable joys of his celestial delight, Amen.

I conclude this Tract of Antimony, those things, which I have written of the
red oil of Antimony made of its purified sulphur, and of its spirit which is
prepared of its salt, observe, and therewith compare this last Doctrine of the
stone of sire, wherein if thou whettest thy wit and mind, from this comparing
will thou find their conjunction, for the Basis and Foundation is one and the
same, and the Amiry and Freindship is the same, by which health is attained
unto, and the lamenting Stag caught by a pleasant cheerful hunting.

The Water, Fire, Air, Earth, yea all things shall be reduced into powder and
Ashes, whatsoever is borne of them, does also in time perish: The mercy of God
only endures to all Eternity, which alone Man enjoyes, for which let us be
thankful.

FINIS.

