THE WAY TO True HAPPINESS In a Serious TREATISE, SHOWING I. What Conversion is
not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. II. What Conversion is, and wherein
it consists. III. The Necessity of Conversion. IV. The Marks of the
Unconverted. V. The Miseries of the Unconverted. VI. Directions for Conversion.
VII. Motives to Conversion.


By Joseph Alleine, late Preacher of the Gospel at Taunton in Somersetshire.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Nevil Simmons at the Princes Arms in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1678.

TO THE READER.
He that has an Ear to hear let him hear.
Precious Souls,
THere is that Life and Light and Love in every true Believer, but especially
in every Faithful Minister of Christ, which engages them to long and labor
for your Salvation. Life is communicative and active. It makes us sensible
that Faith is not a Fantasy, nor true Religion a Stage Play, nor our hopes of
our Eternal Happiness a Dream. And as we desire nothing more for our selves,
than to have more of the Holy Life whic^^ we have, alas in so small a measure;
so what is it that we should more desire for others? With the eye of an
infallible (though too weak) faith, we see the Heaven which you neglect, and
the blessed Souls in Glory with Christ, whose companions you might be for ever:
we see the multitudes of Souls in Hell, who came thither by the same way that
you are going in: who are shut out of the glorious presence of God, and are now
among those Devils that deceived them, remembering that they had their good
things here, Luke 16. 25. And how they spent the Day of their Visitation, and
how light they once set by God, by Christ, by Heaven, by Mercy, whilst Mercy
was an earnest solicitour for their Hearts: And with our bodily eyes we see at
the same time, abundance of poor sinners living about us, as if there were no
God, no Christ, no Heaven, no Hell, no Judgment, no nor Death to be expected;
as if a man were but a master beact, to rule the rest, and feed upon them, and
perish with them. And if it were your own case, to see what Souls do in Heaven
and Hell, and at once to see how unbelievingly, carelessly and senselesly most
men live on earth, as if there were no such difference in another World, would
it not seem a pitiful sight to you? If you had once seen the five Brethren of
Dives on Earth, eating, drinking, laughing and merry, clothed and faring daily
with the best, and at the same time seen their Brothers Soul in Hell, begging
in vain for a little ^ase, and wishing in vain that one from the dead might go
warn his Brethren, that they come not to that place of Torment, would it not
seem to you a pitiful sight? would not pity have made you think, [Is there no
way to open these Gentlemen's eyes? No way to acquaint t^em what is become of
their Brother, and where Lazarus is, and whither they themselves are going? No
one drives or forces them to Hell, and will they go thither of themselves?
and is there no way to stop them or keep them back?] Did you but see your
selves what we see by faith (believing God) and at once beheld the Saints in
Heaven, the lost despairing Souls in Hell, and the senseless sensual sinners on
earth, that yet will lay none of this to heart, sure it would make you wonder
at the stupidity of mankind. Would you not say, O what a deceiver is the Devil
that can thus lead on souls to their own damnation? Oh what a cheater is this
transitory World, that can make men so forget the World where they must live
for ever! O what an enemy is this flesh, that thus draws down men's Souls from
God! O what a besotting thing is sin that turns a reasonable soul into worse
than a beast! what a bedlam is this wicked world, when thousands are so busily
laboring to undo themselves and others, and gratifying^ the Devil, against the
God and Savior, who would give them everlasting blessed life.

And as we have such a sight as this by Faith to make us pity you, so have we
so much taste of the goodness of God, the sweetness of his ways, and the
happiness of believers, as must needs make us wish that you had but once tried
the same delights, which would turn the pleasures of sin into detestation. God
knows that we desire nothing more for our selves, than the Perfection and
Eternity of this Holiness and Happiness which we believe and taste. And should
we not desire the same for you?

And being thus moved with necessary pity, we ask of God, what he would have us
to do for your Salvation. And he has told us in Scripture that the preaching
of his Gospel, to acquaint you plainly^ with the truth, and earnestly and
frequently entreat you to turn from the Flesh and World to God by Jesus Christ,
is the means with which his grace is ready to concur for your Salvation; when
obstinate resistance causes the Holy Spirit to forsake the Sinner and leave
him to himself, to follow his own Counsels, Lusts and Wills.

In this hope we undertook the Sacred Ministry, and gave up our selves to this
great and most important work: in the great sense of our unworthiness, but yet
in the sense of your Souls Necessity. We were not such Fools at our first
setting out, as not to know it muct be a life of labor, self-denial and
patience, and the Devil would do his worst to hinder us, and that all sorts of
his instruments would be ready to serve him against our Labors, and against
your Souls. Christ our Captain saved us by Patient Conquest, and so must we
save ^^r selves and you: And so must you save your ^^^ives under Christ, if
ever you be saved. It was no strange thing to Paul that bonds and afflictions
did every where abide him, nor did he account his life dear that he might
finish his course with joy, and the Ministry committed to him by the Lord, Acts
20. 23, 24. It was no strange thing to him to be forbidden to preach to the
Gentiles that they might be saved, by such as were filling up the measure of
their sins, and were under Gods uttermost wrath on Earth, 1 These. 2. 15, 16.
Devils and Pharisees, and most where they came, both high and low, were against
the Apostles preaching of the Gospel, and yet they would not sacrilegiously and
cruelly break their Covenant with Christ, and perfidiously desert the Souls of
Men, even as their Lord for the Love of Souls, did call Peter Satan, that would
have tempted him to save his life and flesh, instead of making it ^ sacrifice
for our sins, Mat. 16. 23.

What think you should move us to undertake a calling so contrary to our
fleshly ease and interests? Do we not know the way of Ease and Honor; of
Wealth and Pleasures, as well as others? and have we not flesh as well as
others? Could we not be content that the Cup of reproach and scorn and slander
and poverty and labors, might pass from us, if it were not for the will of God
and your salvation? Why should we love to be the lowest, and trodden down by
malignant Pride, and counted as the filth of the World and the Offscouring of
all things, and represented to Rulers, wh^m w^ honor, as scismaticks,
disobedient, turbulent, unruly, by every Church-usurper, whom we refuse to make
a God of? Why give you not over this preaching of the Gospel, at the will of
Satan, that is for the everlasting suffering of your souls, under the pretense
of making us suffer? Is not all this that you may be converted and saved? If we
be herein besides our selves, it is for you. Could the words of the ignorant or
proud, have persuaded us, that either your wants and dangers are so
inconsiderable, or your other supplies and helps sufficient, that our labors
had been unnecessary to you, God knows we should have readily obeyed the
silencing sorts of Pastors, and have betaken us to some other land where our
service had been more necessary. Let shame be the hypocrites reward, who takes
not the saving of souls, and the pleasing of God, for a sufficient reward,
without Ecclesiastical Dignities, preferments, or worldly wealth.

I have told you our motives: I have told you our business and^ the terms of
our undertaking. It is God and you sinners that next must tell us what our
entertainment and success shall be. Shall it be still neglect, and unthankful
contempt, and turning away your ear and heart, and saying, we have somewhat
else to mind? Will you still be cheated by this deceiving World? And spend all
your days in pampering your guts, and providing for your flesh that must lie
rotting very shortly in a Grave? Were you made for no better work than this?
May not we bring you to some sober thoughts of your condition, nor one hour
seriously to think whither you are going? What! not to one awakened look into
the World where you must be for ever? Nor one heart-raising thought of the
everlasting Glory? Not one heart-piercing thought of all your Saviors love,
nor one ^ear for all your sinful lives? O God forbid: Let not our labor be so
despised. Let not your God, your Savior, and your souls be set so light by. O
let there be no profane person among you like Esau, who for one morsel sold his
birthright.

Poor sinners! We talk not to you as on a stage, in customary words, and
because that talking thus is our trade. We are in as good earnest with you as
if we saw you all murdering your selves, and we are persuading you to save your
lives. Can any man be in jest with you who believes God? who by Faith
foreseeth whither you are going, and what you lose, and where the game of sin
will end? It is little better to jest with you now in Pulpit or in private,
than to stand jesting over your departing souls, when at death you are
breathing out your l^st.

Alas, with shame and grief^ we do confess, that we never, speak to you of
these things as their truth and weight deserve, nor with the skill and wisdom,
the affection and fervency which beseems men engaged in the saving of poor
souls. But yet you may perceive that we are in good sadness with you. (For God
is so.) What else do we study for, labor for, suffer for, live for? Why else
do we so much trouble our selves, and trouble you with all this ado, and anger
them that would have had us silent? For my own part, I will make my free
Confession to you to my shame: that I never grow cold and dull and pittiless to
the Souls of others, till I first grow too cold and careless of my own (unless
when weakness or speculative studies cool me, which I must confess they often
do.) We never cease pitying you, till we are growing too like you, and so have
need of pity our selves.

When through the mercy of my Lord, the prospect of the ^^^rld of souls which I
am going to, has any po^^^ful operation on my self. O then I could spend and
be spent for others. No words are too earnest, no labor too great, no cost too
dear, the frowns and wrath of malignant opposers of the preaching of Christ's
Gospel are nothing to me. But when the World of Spirits do disappear, or my
Soul is clouded, and receives not the vi^al illuminating influences of Heaven,
I grow cold first to my self, and then to others.

Come then poor sinners, and help us who are willing at any rate to be your
helpers. As we first crave Gods help, so we next crave yours. Help us, for we
cannot save you against your wills, nor save you without your consent and help.
God himself will not save you without you; and how should we? know that the
Devil is against us, and will do his worst to hinder us; and so will all his
Ministers by what names or titles soever dignified or distinguished. But all
this is nothing, if you will but take our parts your selves: I mean if you will
take Christ's part, and your own, and will not be against your selves. Men and
Devils cannot either help or hinder us in saving you as you may do your selves.
If God and you be for us, who shall be against us?

And if you will help us, give over striving against God, and Conscience, give
over fighting against Christ and his Spirit: take part no more with the World
and the flesh which in your Baptism you renounced: set your hearts to the
message which we bring you. Allow it your manlike sober thoughts; search the
Scriptures, and see whether the things which we speak be so or no. We offer you
nothing but what we have resolvedly c^^^en our selves: and that after the most
serious d^^^ation that we can make. We have many a tim^ looked round about us,
to know what is the happiness of man: And had we found better for our selves,
we had offered better to you. If the World would have served our turns, it
should have served yours also; and we would not have troubled you with the talk
of another world; but it will not; I am sure it will not serve your turns, to
make you happy, nor shall you long make that sorry self-deceiving shift with it
as now you do.

But if you will not think of these things; if you will not use the reason of
men, alas what can we do to save your souls? O pity them Lord, that they may
pity themselves. Have mercy on them, that they may have some more mercy on
themselves. Help them that they may help themselves and us. If you still
r^fuse, will not your loss be more than ours: If we lose our Labor (which to
our selves we shall not;) if we lose our hopes of your Salvation: what is this
to your everlasting loss of Salvation it self? And what is our suffering for
your sakes, in comparison of your endless sufferings.

But, O, this is it that breaks our hearts, that we leave you under more
guilt than we found you; and when we have laid out life and labor to save you,
the impenitent souls must have their pains increased, for the refusing of these
Calls. And that it will be part of your Hell, to think for ever how madly you
refused our Counsel, and what pains and cost and patience were used to have
saved you, and all in vain. It will be so: it must needs be so: Christ says it
shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for the
rejectors of his Gospel-calls. The Nature of the thing, and the nature of
Justice certainly tell you, that it must be so.

O turn not our complaints to God against you: Turn us not from beseeching you
to be reconciled to God, to tell him you will not be reconciled. Force us not
to say, that we earnestly invited you to the Heavenly Feast, and you would not
come. Force us not to bear this Witness against you, Lord, we could have born
all our labor and sufferings for them, much easilier, if they would but have
yielded to thy grace. But it was they themselves that broke our hearts, that
lost our labor, that made us preach and entreat in vain: It was easier to
preach without maintenance, than without success. It was they that were worse
to us than all the Persecutors in the World. How often would we have gathered
them, but they would not, but are ungathered still? How many Holy, Faithful
Ministers have I known these eleven years last past, who have lived in pining
poverty and want, and hardly by Charity got Bread and Clothing; and yet if they
could but have truly said [Lord the Sermons, which I preach privately and in
danger, have won many Souls to thee] it would have made all this burden easy.
But I tell thee senseless and impenitent Sinner, thou that deniedst God thy
Heart, and thou that deniedst them thy Conversion, which was the end of all
their labors have dealt much more cruelly with them, than they that denied the
Levites Bread.

Poor Sinners! I know that I am speaking all this to those that are dead in
sin: but it is a death consisting with a natural life, which has a capacity of
spiritual life: Or else I would no more speak to you than to a stone. And I
know that you are blind in sin: but it is a blindness consisting with a
reasonable faculty, which is capable of spiritual illumination: Or else I would
no more persuade you than I would do a beast. And I know that you are in the
fetters of your own lusts: your wills, your love, your hearts are turned away
from God, and strongly bewitched with the dreams and dalliances with the flesh
and world: But your wills are not forced to this Captivity: Surely those wills
may be changed by Gods Grace, when you clearly see sufficient reason for to
change them: Else I would as soon preach (were I capable) to Devils and damned
souls. Your case is not yet desperate, O make it not desperate: There is just
the same hope of your Salvation as there is of your Conversion and
perseverance, and no more. Without it there is no hope: and with it you are
safe, and have no cause to doubt and fear. Heaven may be yet yours if you will.
Nothing but your own Wills, refusing Christ and a holy life, can keep you out.
And shall that do it? Shall Hell be your own choice? And will you, I say will
you not be saved.

O think better what you do! Gods terms are reasonable: His Word and Ways are
good and equal: Christ's Yoke is easy and his Burden light, and his
Commandments are not grievous to any, but so far as blindness and a bad and
backward heart does make them so. You have no true reason to be unwilling: God
and Conscience shall one^ day tell you and all the World that you had no reason
for it. You may as wisely pretend reason to cut your throats, to torment your
selves, as plead reason against a true Conversion unto God. Were I persuading
you not to kill your selves, I would make no question, but you would be
persuaded. And yet must I be hopeless when I persuade you from everlasting
misery, and not to prefer the world and flesh before your Savior and your God,
and before a sure everlasting joy? God forbid!

Reader, I take it for a great mercy of God, that before my head lies down in
the duct, and I go to give up my account unto my Judge, I have this opportunity
once more, earnestly to bespeak thee for thy own Salvation. I beg it of thee,
as one that must shortly be called away, and speak to thee no more, till we
come unto our endless state, that thou would but sometimes retire into thy
self, and use the reason of a man, and look before thee whither thou art going;
and look behind thee how thou have lived, and what thou have been doing in the
World till now; and look within thee, what a case thy soul is in, and whether
it be ready to enter upon Eternity, and look above thee what a Heaven of Glory
thou do neglect, and what a God thou have to be thine everlasting Friend or
Enemy, as thou choosest and as thou live, and that thou art always in his
sight: Yea and look below thee, and think where they are, that died
unconverted. And when thou have soberly thought of all these things, then do as
God and true Reason shall direct thee. And is this an unreasonable request? I
appeal to God, and to all Wise Men, and to thy own Conscience when it shall be
awakened. If I speak against thee, or if all this be not for thy good, or if it
be not true and sure, then regard not what I say: If I speak not that message
which God has commanded his Ministers to speak, then let it be refused as
contemptuously as thou will. But if I do but in Christ's name and stead, beseech
thee to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. refuse it at thy peril: And if
Gods beseeching thee shall not prevail against thy sloth, thy lust, thy
appetite, against the desires of thy flesh, against the dust and shadows of the
World, remember it when with fruitless cries and horror, thou art beseeching
him too late.

I know, poor Sinner, that Flesh is brutish, and lust and appetite have no
reason: But I know that thou have reason thy self which was given thee to
overruled them; and that he that will not be a Man cannot be a Saint, nor a
Happy man. I know that thou live in a tempting and a wicked world, where
things or persons will be daily hindering this. But I know that this is no more
to a man, that by Faith sees Heaven and Hell before him, than a Grain of Sand
is to a Kingdom, or a blast of Wind, to one that is fighting or flying for his
life, Luke 12. 4. O man! that thou did but know the difference between that
which the Devil and sin will give thee, if thou will sell thy soul and Heaven,
and that which God has promised and sworn to give thee, if thou will heartily
give up thy self to him.

I know that thou may possibly fall into Company (at least among some sots
and drunkards) that will tell thee, all this is but troublesome preciseness,
and making more ado than needs: But I know withal what that Man deserves, who
will believe a Fool before his Maker: (for he can be no better than a Miserable
Fool, that will contradict and revile the Word of God, even the Word of Grace
that would save Men's Souls.)

And, alas, it is possible thou may hear some of the Tribe of Levi, (or
rather of Cain,) deriding this Serious Godliness as mere Hypocrisy, and
Fanaticism, and Self-conceitedness: As if you must be no better than the Devils
slaves, lest you be Proud in thinking that you are better than they; That is,
you must go with them to Hell, lest in Heaven you be Proud Hypocrites for
thinking your selves happier than they.

It may be they will tell you, that this talk of Conversion is fitter for
Pagans and Infidels to hear, than Christians and Protestants. Because such men's
big Looks or Coats may make the poison the easilier taken down, I will entreat
thee but as before God to answer these following questions, or to get them
answered, and then judge whether it be they or we that would deceive thee? and
whether as men use to talk against Learning that have none themselves, so such
men prate not against Conversion and the Spirit of God, because they have no
such thing themselves?

Quest. 1. I pray ask these men, whether it be a Puritan or Fanatic Opinion
that men must dye? and what all the Pomp, and Wealth, and Pleasure of the World
will signify to a departing Soul? Ask them whether they will live on Earth for
ever, and their merry hours, and Lordly looks will have no end? And whether it
be but the conceit of Hypocrites and Schismatics, that their Carcases must be
rotting in a dark-some Grave?

Quest. 2. Ask them whether man have not an Immortal Soul, and a longer life to
live when this is ended? Luke 12. 41.

Quest. 3. Ask them whether reason require not every man, to think more
seriously of the place or state where he must be for ever, than of that where
he must be for a little while, and from whence he is posting day and night. And
whether it be not wiser to lay up our treasure where we must stay, than where
we must not stay, but daily look to be called away and never more to be seen on
earth? Mat. 6. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. and 5. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8.

Quest. 4. Ask them whether God should not be loved with all our heart, and
soul, and might? Mat. 22. 27. And whether it be not the mark of an ungodly
miscreant, to be a lover of pleasure more than God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. and a lover of
this World above him? 1 John 2. 15, 16. And whether we must not seek first Gods
Kingdom and his Righteousness, Mat. 6. 33. and labor most for the meat that
never perishes, Ioh. 6. 27. and strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke
13. 24. and give all diligence to make our calling and election sure? 2 Pet. 1.
10.

Quest. 5. Ask them whether without. Holiness any shall see God? Heb. 12. 14
Mat. 5. 8. Tit. 2. 14. And whether the carnal mind is not enmity to God, and to
be carnally minded is not death, and to be spiritually minded, life and peace?
And whether if you live after the flesh you shall not die, and be condemned?
and they shall live and be saved that walk after the spirit? and whether any
man be Christ's that has not his spirit. Romans 8. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13.

Quest. 6. Ask them whether any man have a Treasure in Heaven, whose heart is
not there? Mat. 6. 21. And whether this be not the difference between the
wicked and the Godly, that the first do make their bellies their Gods, and mind
earthly things, and are Enemies to the Cross of Christ (though perhaps not his
name^) and the latter have their conversation in Heaven, and being risen with
Christ do seek and set their affections on things above, and not on the things
that are on earth, to which they are as dead, and their life is hid (or out of
sight,) with Christ in God, till Christ appear, and then they shall appear,
(eve^ openly to all the world) with him in Glory. Phil. 3. 18, 19, 20. Col. 4.
1, 2, 3^ 4. 5.

Quest. 7. Ask them whether it be cre^^ble or suitable to Gods word or
workings^ that he that will not give them the fruits of the earth without their
labor, nor feed and cloth them without themselves; will yet bring them to
Heaven without any care, desire, or labor of their own? When he has bid him^
Care not for the one, and called for their greatest diligence for the other,
Mat. 6. 25. 33. Joh. 6^ 27. Yea, ask them whether these be not the two first
articles of all Faith and Religion, 1. That God is; 2. That he is the rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

Quest. 8. Ask them, yea ask your eyes, your ears, your daily experience in the
World, whether all or most that call themselves Christians, do in good sadness
thus live to God in the Spirit, and mortify the flesh with its affections and
iusts, and seek first Gods Kingdom and Righteousness, and love him above all,
and lay up treasure and heart in Heaven? or rather whether most be not lovers
of the World, and lovers of pleasure more than God, and live not after the
flesh, and mind not most the things of the flesh? I mention not now the
drunkards, the flesh pleasing Gentlemen, that live in Pride, Fullness and
Idleness, and Sport, and Play away their precious time; nor the filthy
Fornicator nor the merciless Oppressors^ nor the malignant Haters of a Godly
life, nor the perjured and perfidious betrayers of men's souls and of the Gospel
or their Countries Good; nor such other men of seared Conscience, whose misery
none questioneth, but such as are as blind and miserable. It Is not these only I
am speaking of; but the common, worldly, fleshly and ungodly ones.

Quest. 9. Ask them whether the name of a Christian will save any of these
ungodly persons? And whether God will like men the better for lying and calling
themselves Christians when they are none indeed? and whether they dare preach
to the people that a Christian Drunkard, or a Christian Fornicator, or
Oppressor, or a Christian worldling, needs no Conversion?

Quest. 10. Ask them whether they say not themselves that Hypocrisy is a great
aggravation of all other sin? and whether God has not made the Hypocrites and
Unbelievers to be the standards in Hell? Luke 25. 51. And whether seeking to
abuse God by a Mock Religion, do make such false Christians better than the
poor Heathens and Infidels, or much worse? and whether he be not an Hypocrite
that professes to be a Christian, and a servant of God, when he is none, nor
will be? And whether he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall
not have the sorest stripes, or punishment. Luke 12. 47.

Quest. 11, Ask them whether in their baptism (which is their Christening, as a
Covenant,) they did not renounce the flesh, the World, and the Devil, and vow
and deliver up themselves to God, their Father, their Savior and their
Sanctifier? And whether all or most men perform this vow? And whether a
perjured Covenant-breaker against God, is fitter for Salvation, than one that
never was baptized.

Quest. 12. Ask them whether the holy nature of God be not so contrary to sin,
as that it is blasphemy to say that he will take into Heav^n, and into the
bosom of his eternal delights, any unholy unrenewed Soul, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.

Quest. 13. Ask them why it was that Christ came into the World? whether it was
not to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. And to destroy the works of
the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. and to purify to himself, a peculiar people zealous of
good works, Tit. 2. 14. And to bring home straying souls to God, Luke 15. and
to be the way to the Father, John 14. 6. And whether Christ save that soul that
is not converted by him and saved from his sins? Or whether it be the dead
Image only of a Crucified Jesus, that is all their Savior, while they will
have no more of him?

Quest. 14. Ask them why they believe, and were baptized into the Holy Ghost,
and whether a man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is not born of the
Spirit as well as of Water, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6. and that is not converted, and
begins not the world as it were anew, in a teachable, tractable newness of
life, like a little child? Mat. 18. 3. And whether it be not a certain truth;
that, If any man have not the spirit of Christ the same is none of his, Romans 8.
9.

Quest. 15. Ask them why Christ gave the world so many warnings of the
damnableness of the Pharisees Hypocrisy; if Hypocritical Christians may be
saved. And what were these Pharisees? They were the Masters of the Jewish
Church? The Rabbis that must have high places, high titles, and ceremonies,
formal garments, and must be reverenced of all: That gave God lip-service
without the heart, and made void his commands, and worshipped him in vain,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, and strictly ^^the Mint and
Cummin, while love mercy, and Justice were past by? Who worshipped God with
abundance of Ceremonies and built the Tombs, and garnished the Sepulchers of
the Saints; while they killed and persecuted those that did imitate them, and
hated the living Saints, and honored the dead. They were the bitterest enemies
and murderers of Christ, on pretense that he was a blasphemer, and a seditious
enemy to Caesar and the common peace, and one that spoke against the Temple:
They were the greatest Enemies of the Apostles. And silencers of those that
preached Christ's Gospel, and persecuted them that called on his name. And had
these no need of Conversion, because they could say, God is our Father (when
the Devil was their Father, Joh. 8. 44.) and that they were Abraham's Seed? and
are not Hypocritical Christians, Drunken Christians, Fornicating Christians,
Carnal, Worldly, Infidel-Christians, (the contradiction is your own)
Persecuting Christians, Falsenamed Hypocritical Christians, as bad, yea worse,
as they abuse a more excellent profession? Mat. 15. 7, 8. and 23. and 22. 18.
and 6. 2. etc. Luke 12. 1.

Quest. 16. Does not the Holy State of Heaven require Holiness in all that
shall possess it? Can an unholy soul there see and love and praise and delight
in God for ever, and in the holy society and employment of the Saints? Rev. 21.
27. Is he not liker a Mehometan than a Christian, that looks for a sensual
and unholy Heaven?

Quest. 17. What is the difference between the Church and the World? Is not the
Church a holy Society of regenerate souls? Yea the Church visible, is only
those that in baptism vow Holiness and profess it. Look those hypocrites in the
face and see whether they do not blush, when they repeat in the Creed, I
believe in the Holy Ghost, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church, and the
communion of Saints, who shall have the forgiveness of sins, and live
ever-lasting. Ask them whether they mean, Holy Adulterers, holy worldlings,
holy perjured persons? Ask them whether they mean a Communion of Saints in a
Tavern, in a Playhouse, in a Gaming-house, in a Whore-house ^or a jesting,
canting stage play Communion? If the Church be holy, be holy if you will be of
the Church: If it be a Communion of Saints, make it not a Communion of Swine,
and make not Saints and their Communion seem odious either for their
infirmities, or their crossness to your carnal interests or conceits.

Quest. 18. Ask them whether there be a Heaven and a Hell, or not? If not, why
are they pretended Christians? If there be, will God send one man to Heaven,
and another to Hell, to so vast, so amazing a difference of states, if there be
no great difference between them here? If Holiness no more differenced
Christians from others, than saying a Sermon, or saying over a Prayer, does
difference one from an Infidel, where were the Justice of God in saving some
and damning others? and what were Christianity better than the Religion of
Antonine, Plato, Socrates, Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, if not much worse? Go into
London streets, and when you have talked with living prudent men, then go to the
Painters shop and see a comely picture, and to the Looking-glass and see the
appearances of each passenger in a Glass, and to the Periwig-shops, and set a
wodden-head with a periwig upon the Bulk, and you have seen somewhat like the
difference of a Holy Soul, and of a dead and dressed formal hypocrite, Psalm.
23. 27.

Quest. 19. Ask them whether Kings and all men make not a great difference
between man and man; the loyal and perfidious, the obedient and the
disobedient? And whether they difference not themselves between a friend and a
so, one that loves them, and one that robs, beats, or would kill them.
And shall not the most Holy God more difference between the righteous and the
wicked? Mal. 3. 17, 18.

Quest. 20. But if they are deaed in every point save carnal interests, ask
them why they are Preachers or Priests? And if Conversion and holiness be a
needless thing, what use they themselves are of? and why the Country must be
troubled with them, and pay them Tithes, and owe them reverence? When these
twenty Questions are well answered, conclude that you may be saved without
Conversion.

But if poor soul, thou art fully convinced, and ask, What should I do to be
Converted? The Lord make thee willing and save thee from hypocrisy and I will
quickly tell thee in a few words.

1. Give not over sober thinking of these things, till thy heart be changed,
Psalm. 119. 59. 2. Come to Christ, and take him for thy Savior, thy Teacher,
thy King, and he will pardon all that is past and save thee, Joh. 1. 12. and 3.
16. and 5. 40. 1 John 5. 11, 12. 3. Believe Gods love, and the pardon of sin,
and the everlasting Joys of Heaven, that thou may feel that all the
pleasures of the World and flesh, are dung in comparison of the Heavenly
delights, of Faith and Hope, and holy Love, and peace of Conscience and sincere
obedience. 4. Sin no more wilfully, but forbear that which thou may forbear,
Isa. 55. 7. 5. Away from temptations, occasions of sin and evil company, and be
a companion of the humble, holy, heavenly, and sincere, Psalm. 119. 115, 63. 6.
Wait on Gods spirit in the diligent, constant use of his own means, Read, hear,
meditate, pray: Pray hard for that grace that must convert thee: wait thus, and
thou shall not wait in vain, Psalm. 25. and 37. 34. and 69. 6.
Pity O Lord and persuade these Souls: Let not Christ's Blood, his Doctrine, his
Example, his Spirit, be lost unto them, and they lost for ever. Let not Heaven
be as no Heaven to them, while they dream and dote on the shadows in this
world. And O save this Land from the greater dectruction, than all our late
plagues, and flames, and divisions, which our sins and thy threatenings, make us
f^ar. O Lord in thee have we trusted, Let us never be confounded.

Having thus contributed my endeavor in this Preface to the furtherance of the
design of this excellent Book. I must tell thee, Reader, that I take it for an
honor to commend so masculine a birth unto the World: The Midwife of Alexander
or Aristotle need not be ashamed of her office. Who the Author of this Treatise
was, how h^ preached, how he lived, how he suffered (and for what) and how he
died, his Life and Letters lately printed fully tell you: and I earnestly
commend the reading of them to all, but especially to Ministers, not to tell
them what men have been here forbidden to preach Christ's Gospel, and for what,
nor what men they are that so many years have done it: but to tell you what men
Christ's Ministers should be: But say not he killed himself with excessive
Labor, and therefore I will take warning, and take my ease. For, 1. He lived
in perfect health all his days, notwithstanding his labors, till after his
hard and long imprisonment. 2. It was not the greatest labors of his times of
liberty that hurt him, but his preaching 6 or 7 or 8 times a weak after that he
was silenced, because he could not speak to all his people at once. O make not
an ill use of so excellent an example. Say not like Judas, what needs this
waste? His labor, his life, his sufferings, his death were not in vain. The
ages to come that read his Life, and read this little popular treatise, and his
Call to Archippus shall say, they were not in vain. And though he was cut off
in the midst of his age, and his longer labors, and more elaborate writings
thus prevented, take thank fully this small but methodical, warm, and serious
tractate: Read it seriously, and it cannot be but it must do thee good.

I am one that have looked into Books and Sciences, and Speculations of many
sorts, and seriously tell thee as a dying man, that after all my searches and
experience, I have found that Philosophical enquiries into the Divine Artifices
and the Nature of things, has among a greater number of uncertainties, a great
many pretty pleasant probabilities, which a holy Soul can make good use of in
admiring God, and may find us a lawful kind of sport; but in the moralities
which Atheists count uncertainties, the knowledge of God, and our duty, and our
hopes, the doctrine and practice of Holiness, Temperance, and Charity, and
Justice, and the diligent seeking and joyful hopes of life everlasting, is all
the true Wisdom, the goodness, the Rest and Comfort of a soul: whatever be our
plea, this is the satisfying certainty, the Business, and the beautifying
improvement of our lives.

I have done, when I have sought to remove a little scandal, which I foresaw;
that I should my self write the Preface to his life, where himself and two of
his friends make such a mention of my name, which I cannot own; which will seem
a praising him for praising me. I confess it looks ill favouredly in me: But
I had not the power of other men's writings, and durst not therefore forbear
that which was his due. Had I directed their pens they should have gone a
middle way, and only esteemed me [a very unworthy servant of Christ, who yet
longs to see the peace and prosperity of his Church] and should have forborne
their undeserved praise, as other men should have done their slanderous libels.
But if the Reader get no harm by it, I assure him the use I made of it was, to
lament that I am really so much worse than they esteemed me; and fear lest I
should prove yet worse than I discern my self, who see so much sin and
weakness, in my betters, and much more in my self, as to make it the constant
sentiment of my soul, that PRIDE of men's GREATNESS, WISDOM, and GOODNESS, is
the first part of the DEVILS IMAGE on man's soul, and DARKNESS is the second,
and MALIGNITY the third.

Richard Baxter.

READER,
HOW well were it if there were no more Unconverted ones among us, than those
to whom this is directed? Unconverted persons how many are there, but how few
Unconverted Readers especially of such Books as this before thee? A Play or a
Romance better suits the lusts, and therefore must have more of the eye of
such; what will cherish the evil heart is only grateful, not what will change
it.

How many are there to whom this is directed, who will not know, that they are
the men? and how little hope is there that this Excellent Treatise should reach
its end, with those who apprehend not themselves concerned in it? Art not thou
one of them? Art thou a Convert, or art thou yet in thy Sins? What is Sin? What
is Conversion? It may be, thou can tell me neither, and yet a Convert thou
say thou art. But to what purpose is it then like to be, for the Servant of
God to treat with thee about this matter? Let him bid thee believe, thou art a
believer already; let him bid thee repent and turn to the Lord, that work thou
say is not now to do. What can there be said to this man, that is like to
b^ing him to good? Friend, know thy self better, or thou perishest without
remedy. Thou may pray, but what hope is there in thy praying? Thou may
read, but what hope is there in thy reading. Yet read on, this little hope
there is; in this Book there is Eye Salve that may heal thee of thy blindness.
In this Book there is a Glass that will show thee thy face. Do thou know
thine own face when thou see it? Behold thy very Image in those marks that
are given of an Unconverted Person; Read and consider them, and then say, if
thou be not the man.

Be willing to know thy self, and to know the worst of thy case? wink not at
the light, hide not thy self from thine own soul. Will thou never know thy
disease, till it be past remedy.

Much of our hardest Work would be over, if we could see the sinners to whom we
are sent, to be convinced sinners. If we could but open the blind eyes, there
were hope we should shortly raise the dead.

Sinner, of a truth, thou art in evil case whether thou know it or not; thou
art among the dead, and there is but a step betwixt thee and Hell. Thou will
not believe it though it be told thee, yet once again let me beseech thee, come
to the Glass that is here presented to thee, and narrowly observe whether the
very marks of the dead be not found upon thee.

If there be a miscarriage in this first work, if thou will not understand thy
misery and thy danger, there is an end of all hopes concerning thee. Whilst
self-ignorance abides upon thee, all the Counsels, that are necessary to a man
in thy case, will do thee no good; they are never like to prosper with thee,
because thou will not count them proper for thee. Who will be persuaded to do
that, which he believes is already done? Who will take the Counsel of the
Physician that does not think himself sick? The man of God may spare his pains
of persuading thee to Conversion, whilst thou art confident thou art converted
already. Who will be at the pains of repentance that concludes he has
repented? Who will bear the labor and the pangs of the new birth that is
confident he is already passed from death to life?

But Friend, let me a little reason with thee; thou art confident it is well
with thee, yet why will thou not yield to thus much at least, to put it to the
question, am I not mistaken? Thou art worse than mad, if thou think such a
question may not be put. Do thou know that thy heart is false and deceitful,
and yet because it speaks good concerning thee, must it not be questioned
whether it speak truth or no? Be so wise as to conclude I may be mistaken, and
thus come to the trial whether thou art mistaken or not.

And if upon trial by the marks that are before thee, thou come to be
undeceived, and see thy self wrapped up in that misery which hitherto thou
would not suspect, the next news I expect to hear from thee is, What must I
do to be saved? O were it come to that once! Then thou have an answer at hand
in those Means thou will find prescribed thee: And because they are such as
thou will hardly be persuaded to use, take in the Motives that follow, and
these will help down the means. Consider both the one and the other, and if
thou do not find the Means proper, and the Motives weighty, I think I shall
do thee no wrong if I tell thee, thou art still of a blind mind, and an harder
heart.

Friend, the matter which this little Book comes to treat with thee about, is
of highest importance; it is a matter of Life or Death. If thou say, The
Terms upon which Life is offered, are hard; consider, is it not harder to dye?
He is worthy to dye who will lose his Soul to save his Labor. If thou could
step down into the Deep, and take a turn or two with those Damned Souls, who
are drenched with Fire and Brimstone, and bound in Everlasting Chains of
Vengeance, and should ask them, Now what do you think of the terms upon which
life was offered? Now what think you of that Repentance, of that Obedience, of
that Circumspection, Self-denial, and the greatest Severity which by the Gospel
were imposed upon you? if you might once again have the same terms granted you
for your Redemption from this place of Torment, would you yet say, hard terms!
Let me rather dye this death for ever, than live such a life! let me broil in
this Furnace, rather than escape with such difficulty! should thou ask them
thus that have felt what it is to be damned, what answer do thou think they
would make? O friend, never again groan under the difficulties of Conversion,
till thou believe them to be worse than Hell. But I will not farther anticipate
my worthy Author.

Nor is there much need I should commend either himself or his works; for the
Author himself, thou may at a small charge get ^^quaintance with him in that
History of his life and death, which is extant; concerning which I shall only
say,

Sic mihi contingat vivere sicque mori.
And for this work of his, what commendation I shall give of it, would be
needed no longer than till thou have read it over. Thou will find such wine in
it as needs no Bush. This only I shall say, as far as my credit will go, it is
exceedingly well worth thy most serious perusal. O may thou hear that voice,
(such a voice from Heaven there is whether thou hear it or no) Toll and lege,
take up and read. Read Friend, and read over again. Read and understand,
understand and pray, pray and consider, and consent unto him, who by the Pen of
his servant calls to thee from Heaven, Why will thou die? Turn and live. O
suffer this word of instruction and exhortation, to open thy blind eyes, to
turn thee from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God, that thou
may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified. Et cum tal^s fueris memento mei. When it is thus with thee, then
pray for

The Friend and Servant of thy Soul, Richard Alleine.

Mr. JOSEPH ALLEINE'S CALL TO THE UNCONVERTED.
DEarly Beloved, and longed for, I gladly acknowledge my self a debtor to you
all, and am concerned, as I would be found a good steward to the Household of
God, to give to every one his Portion. But the Physician is most solicitous for
those Patients, whose case is most doubtful and hazardous, and the Fathers
bowels are especially turned toward his dying child. The numbers of the
unconverted souls among you, call for my most earnest compassions, and hasty
diligence to pluck them out of the burning, Iud. 23. and therefore to these
first I shall apply my self in these lines.

But whence shall I fetch my arguments, or how shall I choose my words? Lord,
wherewith shall I woo them? whereby shall I win them? Oh that I could but
tell! I would write unto them in tears, I would weep out every argument, I
would empty my veins for Ink, I would petition them on my knees; verily (were I
able) I would, (O how thankfully I would!) if they would be prevailed with to
repent and turn.

How long have I traveled in birth with you? how frequently have I made suit
to you? how often would I have gathered you? how instant have I been with you?
this is that I have prayed for, and studied for, for many years, that I might
bring you to God: O that I might but do it! Will you yet be entreated? O what a
happy man might you make me, if you would but hearken to me, and suffer me to
carry you over to Jesus Christ.

But, Lord, how insufficient am I for this work! I have been many a year woing
for thee, but the Damsel would not go with me. Lord, what a task have thou set
me to do! Alas, wherewith shall I pierce the scales of Leviathan, or make the
heart to feel that is hard as a stone; hard as a piece of the nether millstone!
Shall I go and lay my mouth to the grave, and look when the dead will obey me
and come forth? shall I make an Oration to the Rocks? or declaim to the
Mountains, and think to move them with arguments? shall I give the blind to
see? From the beginning of the world was it not heard that a man opened the
eyes of the blind. But thou, O Lord, can pierce the scales, and prick the
heart of the Sinner. I can but shoot at rovers and draw the ^ow at a venture,
and do thou direct the arrow between the joints of the harness, and kill the
sin, and save the Soul of the sinner, that casts hi^ eyes into these labors.

But I must apply my self to you, to whom I am sent: yet I am at a great loss.
Would to God I knew how to go to work with you! would I stick at the pains? God
knows, you your selves are my witnesses, how I have followed you in private,
as well as in public, and have brought the Gospel to your doors, testifying to
you the necessity of the new birth, and persuading you to look in time after a
sound and through change. Beloved, I have not acted a part among you, to serve
my own advantage; our Gospel is not yea, and nay. Have not you heard the same
truths, from the Pulpit, by public labors, and by private letters, by
personal instructions? Brethren, I am of the same mind as ever, that holiness
is the best choice, that there is no entering into Heaven, but by the straight
passages of the second birth: that without holiness you shall never see God,
Heb. 12. 14. Ah my beloved! refresh my bowels in the Lord. If there be any
consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any fellowship of the spirit, any
bowels and mercies, fulfill you my joy. Now give your selves unto the Lord: 2
Cor. 8. 5. Now set your faces to seek him. Now set up the Lord Jesus in your
hearts, and set him up in your houses. Now come in and kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.
12. and embrace the tenders of his mercy. Touch his Scepter, and live: why will
you die? I beg not for my self; but fain I would have you happy: This is the
prize I run for, and the white I aim at^ My souls desire and prayer for you is,
that you may be saved, Romans 10. 1.

The famous Lycurgus, having instituted most strict and whole^^m L^ws for his
people, told them he was necessitated to go a journey from them, and got them
to bind themselves in an oath, that his laws should be observed, till his
return. This done, he went into a voluntary banishment, and never returned
more, that they might, by virtue of their oath, be engaged to the perpetual
observing of his laws. Methinks I should be glad of the hard conditions which
he endured (though I love you tenderly) so I might but hereby engage you
througly to the Lord Jesus Christ

Dearly beloved, would you rejoice the heart of your Minister? Why then,
embrace the counsels of the Lord by me: forgo your sins: set to prayer: up with
the worship of God in your families: keep at a distance from the corruptions of
the times. What greater joy to a Minister, than to hear of souls born unto
Christ by him, and that his Children walk in the truth? 2 John 4.

Brethren, I beseech you suffer a friendly plainness and freedom with you in
your deepest concernments. I am not playing the orator, to make a learned
speech to you, nor dressing my dish with eloquence, wherewith to please you.
These lines are upon a weighty errand indeed, viz. to convince, and convert,
and save you. I am not baiting my hook with Rhetoric, nor fishing for your
applause, b^t for your souls. My work is not to please you, but to save you;
nor is my business with your fancies, but your hearts. If I have not your
hearts, I have nothing. If I were to please your ears, I could sing another
song. If I were to preach my self, I would steer another course; I could then
tell you a smoother tale: I would make you pillows, and speak you peace; for
how can Ahab love this Micaiah, that always prophesies ^vil concerning him? 1
Kings 22. 8. But how much better are the woun^s of a Friend, than the fair
speeches of the Ha^lot, who flattereth with her lips, till the Dart strike
through the liver, and hunteth for the precious life? Prove. 7. 21, 22, 23. and
Prove. 6. 26. If I were to quiet a crying Infant, I might sing him to a pleasant
mood, or rock him asleep: but when the child is fallen into the Fire, the
parent takes another course; he will not now go to still him with a song or
trifle. I know, if we speed not with you, you are lost: if we cannot get your
consent to arise, and come away, you perish for ever. No Conversion, and no
Salvation: I must get your good will, or leave you miserable.

But here the difficulty of my work again recurs upon me. Lord choose my stones
out of the rock. 1 Samuel 17. 40, 45. I come in the name of the Lord of Hosts,
the God of the Armies of Israel. I come forth like the stripling against
Goliath, to wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with Principalities and
Powers, and the Rulers of the darkness of this World. Ephesians. 6. 12. This day let
the Lord smite the Philistine, and spoil the strong man of his Armor, and give
me to fetch off the captives out of his hand. Lord choose my words, choose my
weapons for me, and when I put my hand into the bag, and take thence a stone,
and sling it, do thou carry it to the mark and make it sink, not into the
forehead, 1 Samuel 17. 40. but the heart of the unconverted sinner, and smite him
to the ground, with Saul in his so happy fall, Acts 9. 4. Thou have sent me, as
Abraham did Eliezer, to take a wife unto my master thy son. Genesis 24. 4. But my
discouraged soul is ready to fear, the woman will not be willing to follow me.
O Lord God of my Master, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and show
kindness to my Master, and send thine Angel before me and prosper my way, that
I may take a wife unto thy son, Genesis 24. 12. That as the servant rested not,
till he had brought Isaac and Rebeckah together, so I may be succesful to bring
Christ and the souls of my people together, before we part

But I turn me unto you. Some of you do not know what I mean by conversion, and
in vain shall I persuade you to that which you do not understand; and therefore
for your sakes, I shall show what this Conversion is. Others do cherish secret
hopes of mercy, though they continue as they be; and for them I must show the
necessity of Conversion. Others are like to harden themselves with a vain
conceit, that they are converted already; unto them I must show the marks of
the Unconverted. Others, because they feel no harm, fear none, and so sleep
upon the top of the mast; to them I shall show the misery of the unconverted.
Others sit still, because they see not their way out; to them I shall show the
means of Conversion. And finally for the quickening of all, I shall close with
the motives of Conversion.

CHAP. I. Showing the Negative, what Conversion is not, and correcting some
mistakes about it.
LEt the blind Samaritans worship they know not what, Ioh. 4. 22. Let the
Heathen Athenians superscribe their Altar to the unknown God, Acts 17. 23. Let
the guileful Papists commend the mother of destruction, Hos. 4. 6. for the
mother of devotion: they that know man's constitution, and the nature of the
reasonable souls operation, cannot but know, that the understanding having the
Empire in the Soul, he that will go rationally to work, must labor to let in
the light here. Ignorantis non est consensus. And therefore that you may not
mistake me, I shall show you what I mean by the conversion I persuade you to
endeavor after.

It is storied, that when Jupiter let down the golden Chaplets from Heaven, all
of them but one were stolen: Whereupon (lest they should lose a relic of so
great esteem) they made five others so like it, that if any were so wickedly
minded, as to steal that also, they should not be able to discern which was it.
And truly my beloved the Devil has made many counterfeits of this Conversion,
and cheats one with this, and another with that; and such a craft and artifice
he has, in this mystery of deceits, that (if it were possible) he would
deceive the very Elect. Now that I may cure the damnable mistakes of some, who
think they are converted when they are not; as well as remove the troubles, and
fears of others, that think they are not converted, when they are; I shall show
you the nature of conversion, both negatively, or what it is not; and
positively, what it is.

We will begin with the negative.

1. It is not the taking on us the Profession of Christianity. Doubtless
Christianity is more than a name. If we will hear Paul, it lies not in word,
but in power, 1 Cor. 4. 20. If to cease to be Jews and Pagans, and to put on
the Christian profession had been true conversion, (as this is all, that some
would have to be understood by it) who better Christians than they of Sardis
and Laodicea? These were all Christians by profession, and had a name to live,
but because they had but a name, are condemned by Christ, and threatened to be
spewed out, Rev. 3. 1, 16. Are there not many that name the name of the Lord
Jesus, that yet depart not from iniquity? 2 Timothy 2. 19. and profess they know
God, but in works deny him? Tim. 1. 16. And will God receive these for true
converts, because turned to the Christian Religion? What, converts from sin,
when yet they do live in sin! It Is a visible contradiction. Surely if the lamp
of profession would have served the turn, the foolish Virgins had never been
shut out, Mat. 25. 3, 12. We find not only professors but Preachers of Christ,
and Wonder-workers turned off, because evil workers, Mat. 7. 22. 23.

2. It is not the being washed in the laver of Regeneration, or putting on the
badge of Christ in baptism. Many take the press-money, and wear the Livery of
Christ, that yet never stand to their colors, nor follow their leader. Ananias
and Saphira, and Magus were baptized as well as the rest. How fondly do many
mistake here, deceiving, and being deceived! dreaming, that effectual grace is
necessarily tied to the external administration of Baptsim, (which what is it,
but to revive the Popish ^enent, of the Sacraments working grace, ex opere
operato?) and so every Infant should be regenerated, not only (Sacramento
tenens) sacramentally, but really and properly. Hence men do fancy, that being
regenerated already, when baptized, they need no further work.

But if this were so, then all that were baptized (in their infancy) must
necessarily be saved: because the promise of pardon and salvation is made to
conversion and regeneration. Acts 3. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Mat. 19. 28. Our
Calling, Sanctification, (as to the beginnings of it) or Conversion (which are
but the same thing, under different conceptions and expressions;) is but a
middle link in the golden chain, fastened to election at the one end, and
glorification at the other, Romans 8. 30. 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. The silver
cord may not be broken, nor the connection between Sanctification and Salvation,
between grace and glory, impiously violated, Mat. 5. 8. If we are indeed
begotten again, it is to an inheritance incorruptible reserved in Heaven for
us, and the divine power is engaged to keep us for it, 1 Pet. 1. 5. And if the
very regenerate may perish at last in their sins. we will no more say, that he
that is born of God, his seed remains in him, and that he cannot sin, 1 Ioh.
3 9. i.e. unto death, now that it is impossible to deceive the very elect, Mat.
24. 24.

And indeed were this true, then we need look no farther to see our names
written in Heaven, than only to search the Register, and see whether we were
baptized: then I would keep the certificate of my baptism, as my fairest
evidence for Heaven, and should come by assurance of my gracious state, with a
wet finger: then men should do well to carry but a certificate of their baptism
under the Registers hand, when they dyed (as the Philosopher would be buried
with the bishops bond in his hand, which he had given him for the receiving his
alms in another world:) and upon sight of this, there were no doubt of their
admission into Heaven.

In short, if there be no more necessary to conversion or regeneration, than to
be turned to the Christian Religion, or to be baptized in infancy, this will
fly directly in the face of that Scripture, Mat. 7. 14. as well as multitudes
of others. For first, we will then no more say, strait is the gate and narrow
is the way: for if all that are baptized, and of the true Religion, are saved,
the door is become heavenly wide, and we will henceforth say, wide is the gate,
and broad is the way, that leads unto life; for if this be true, whole
Parishes, yea whole Countries, and whole Kingdoms may go in a breast, and we
will no more teach, that the righteous is scarcely saved, or that there is need
of such a stir in taking the Kingdom of Heaven by violence and striving to
enter in. Surely if the way be so easy as many make it, that there is little
more necessary, than to be regenerated in our baptism, and cry God mercy, and
be absolved by the Minister at our end, it is more ado than needs, to put our
selves to such running, and seeking, and knocking, and fighting, and wrestling,
as the word requires, as necessary to salvation. Secondly, if this be true, we
will no more say, few there be that find it: yea we will rather say, few there
be that miss it: we will no more say, that of the many that are called, but few
are chosen Mat. 22. 14. and that even of the professing Israel, but a remnant
shall be saved, Romans 11. 5. If this Doctrine be true, we will not say any more
with the Disciples, Who then shall be saved? but rather who then shall not be
saved? Then if a man be called a brother (that is, a Christian) and be
baptized, though he be a fornicator, or a railer, or covetous, or a drunkard,
yet he shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

But the Arminian will reply; such as these though they did receive
regenerating grace in Baptism, are since fallen away, and must be renewed
again, or else they cannot be saved.

I answer, 1. That there is an infallible connection between regeneration and
salvation, as we have already showed, and I itch to be farther evidencing, but
that it is against designed brevity. 2. Then men must be again born again, which
carries a great deal of absurdity in its very face. And why may not men be
twice born in nature, as well as in grace? Why not as great an absurdity to be
twice regenerated as to be twice generated? But 3. and above all, This grants
however the thing I contend for, that whatever men do, or pretend to receive in
baptism, if they be found afterward to be grossly ignorant or profane, or
formal, without the power of godliness, they must be born again, or else be
shut out of the Kingdom of God. So then, they must have more to plead for
themselves, than their baptismal regeneration.

Well, in this you see all are agreed, that be it more or less that is received
in baptism, if (when men come to years) they are evidently unsanctified, they
must be renewed again by a through and powerful change, or else they cannot
escape the damnation of Hell: Friends and Brethren be not deceived, God is not
mocked; Gal. 6. 7. Whether it be your baptism or what ever else that you
pretend, I tell you from the living God, that if any of you be a prayerless
person, Job. 15. 14. or unclean, or malicious, or covetous, or riotous, or a
scoffer, or a lover of evil company, Prove. 13. 20. In a word, if you are not
holy, strict, and self-denying Christians, Heb. 12. 14. Mat. 16. 24. you cannot
be saved, except you be transformed by a further work upon you, and renewed
again by repentance.

Thus I have showed, that it is not enough to evidence a man to be regenerate,
that he has been baptized; effectual grace not necessarily accompanying
baptism, as some have vainly asserted. But I must answer one Objection before I
pass.

Obj. The Sacraments do certainly attain their ends, where man does not ponere
obicem, or lay some obstruction, which Infants do not.

Sol. I answer, it is not the end of Baptism to regenerate, 1. Because then
there would be no reason, why it should be confined only to the seed of
Believers: for both the law of God, and the nature of Charity, requires us to
use the means of conversion for all, as far as we can have opportunity. Were
this true, no such charity as to catch the children of Turks and Heathens, and
baptize them, and dispatch them to Heaven out of hand; like the bloody
Wretches, that made the poor Protestants (to save their lives) to swear they
would come to Mass, and that they would never depart from it, and then put them
forthwith to death, saying, They would hang them while in a good mind. 2.
Because it presupposes regeneration, and therefore cannot be intended to
confer it. In all the express instances in Scripture, we find that baptism does
suppose their repenting, believing, receiving the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 37. Acts
2. 38. Acts 10. 47. Mark 16. 16. And to imagine, that baptism was instituted
for an end of which not one of the first subjects was capable (for they were
all adult persons and supposed to have faith and repentance according as they
professed, and their children were not baptized till after them, in their
right,) were no little absurdity. Were this Doctrine true, baptism would make
Disciples, but we find it does bespeak them such before hand, Mat. 28. 19. 3.
Because Baptism, being but a Seal of the Covenant, cannot convey the benefits,
but according to the tenor of the Covenant, to which it is set. Now the
Covenant is conditional, therefere the Seal conveys conditionally. The Covenant
requires faith and repentance, as the condition of the grand benefits, pardon,
and life, Act. 16. 31. Acts 3. 19. And what the Covenant does not convey but
upon these conditions, the Seal cannot. So that Baptism does presuppose faith
and repentance in the subject, without which it neither does, nor can convey
the saving benefits: otherwise the Seal should convey contrary to the tenor of
the Covenant to which it is affixed.

3. It lies not in a moral righteousness. This exceeds not the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and therefore cannot bring us to the Kingdom of God,
Mat. 5. 20. Paul, while unconverted, was touching the righteousness which is in
the Law blameless, Phil. 3. 6. None could say black is thine eye. The
selfjusticiary could say, I am no Extortioner, Adulterer, Unjust, etc. Luke 18.
11. Thou must have something more than all this to show, or else (however thou
may justify thy self) God will condemn thee. I condemn not morality, but
warn you not to rest here. Piety includes morality, as Christianity does
humanity, and grace reason. But we must not divide the tables.

4. It consists not in an external conformity to the rules of Piety. It Is too
manifest, men may have a form of godliness, without the power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Men
may pray long, Mat. 23. 14. and fast often, Luke 18. 12. and hear gladly Mat.
12. 20. and be very forward in the service of God, though costly and expensive,
Esaias 1. 11. and yet be strangers to Conversion. They must have more to plead
for themselves, than that they keep their Church, and give alms, and make use
of prayer, to prove themselves sound Converts. No outward service but an
hypocrite may do it; even to the giving all his goods to the poor, and his
members to the fire, 1 Cor. 13. 3.

5. It lies not in the chaining up of corruption, by education, humane laws, or
the force of incumbent affliction. It Is too common and easy, to mistake
education for grace; but if this were enough, who a better man than Iehoasb?
While Iehojadah his uncle lived, he was very forward in Gods service, and calls
upon him to repair the house of the Lord, 2 Kings 12. 2, 7. But here was
nothing more than good education all this while: for when his good Tutor was
taken out of the way, he appears to have been but a wolf chained up; and falls
off to Idolatry.

6. In short, it consists only in illumination, or conviction, in a superficial
change, or partial reformation. An Apostate may be a man enlightened, Heb. 6. 4.
and a Felix tremble under convictions, Acts 24. 23. and a Herod amend many
things, ^ar. 6. 20. It Is one thing to have sin alarmed only by convictions, and
another to have it captivated and crucified by converting grace. Many, because
they have been troubled in conscience for their sins, think well of their case;
miserably mistaking conviction for Conversion. With these Cain might have
passed for a Convert, who ran up and down the World, like a man distracted
under the rage of a guilty conscience, till with building and business he had
worn it away, Genesis 4. 13, 14. Others think, that because they have given off
their riotous courses, and are broken off from evil company, or some particular
lust, and reduced to sobriety and civility, they are now no other than real
Converts; forgetting that there is a vast difference between being sanctified,
and civilized; and that many seek to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 13.
24. and are not far from it, Mark 12. 34. and arrive to the almost of
Christianity, Acts 26. 28. and yet fall short at last. While conscience holds
the whip over them, many will pray, hear, read, and forbear their delightful
sins: but no sooner is this Lion asleep, but they are at their vomit again. Who
more religious than the Jews, when Gods hand was upon them? Psalm. 78. 34, 35.
but no sooner was the affliction over, but they forgot God, and showed their
Religion to be but a fit, v. 36, 37. Thou may have disgorged a troublesome
sin, that will not sit in thy stomach, and have escaped the gross pollutions of
the World, and yet not have changed thy swinish nature all the while 2 Pet. 2.
20, 22.

You may cast the lead, out of the rude mass, into the more comely proportion
of a plant, and then into the shape of a beast, and thence into the form and
features of a man: but all the while it is but lead still. So a man may pass
through diverse transmutations, from ignorance to knowledge, from profaneness
to civility, thence to a form of Religion, and all this while he is but carnal
and unregenerate, while his nature remains unchanged.

Application. Hear then, O sinners hear; as you would live, so come and hear;
Esaias. 55. 3. Why would you so wilfully deceive your selves, or build your hopes
upon the sand? I know he shall find hard work of it, that goes to pluck away
your hopes. It cannot but be ungrateful to you, and truly it is not pleasing to
me. I set about it, as a Surgeon, when to cut off a pu^rified Member from his
well-beloved friend; which of force he must do, but with an aching heart, a
pitiful eye, a trembling hand. But understand me, Brethren, I am only taking
down the ruinous house, (which will otherwise speedily fall of it self, and
bury you in the rubbish,) that I may build fair, and strong and firm for ever.
The hope of the wicked shall perish, if God be true of his word. Prove. 11. 7.
And were not thou better, O sinner, to let the word convince thee now in time,
and let go thy false and self-deluding hopes, than to have death too late to
open thine eyes, and find thy self in hell, before thou art awa^e? I should be
a false and faithless Shepherd, if I should not tell you, that you who have
built your hopes upon no better grounds, (...) these ^orementioned, are yet in
your (...). Let your conscience speak; what is it, that you have to plead for
your selves? Is it that you wear Christ's livery? that you bear his name? that
you are of the visible Church? that you have knowledge in the points of
Relig^^^, are civilized, perform religious duties, are just in your dealings,
have been troubled in conscience for your sins? I tell you from the Lord, these
pleas will never be accepted at Gods Bar. All this though good in it self, will
not prove you converted, and so will not suffice to your salvation. Oh look
about you, and bethink your selves of turning speedily and soundly. Set to
praying and to reading, and studying your own hearts; rest not, till God has
made through work with you: for you must be other men, or else you are lost men.

But if these be short of Conversion, what shall I say of the profane sinner?
It may be, he will scarce cast his eyes, or lend his ears to this discourse:
but if there be any such reading, or within hearing, he must know from the Lord
that made him, that he is far from the Kingdom of God. May a man be civilized
and not converted, where then shall the Drunkard, and Glutton appear? May a man
keep company with the wise Virgins, and yet be shut out? Shall not a companion
of fools much more be destroyed? Prove. 13. 20. May a man be true and just in
his dealing, and yet not be justified of God? What then will become of thee, O
wretched man, whose conscience tells thee thou art false in thy trade, and
false of thy word, and make thine advantage by a lying tongue? If men may be
enlightened, and brought to the performance of holy duties, and yet go down to
perdition, for resting in them, and sitting down on this side of Conversion:
what will become of you, O miserable families, that live as without God in the
World? And of you, O wretchless sinners, with whom God is scarce in all your
thoughts: that are so ignorant, that you cannot, or so careless, that you will
not pray? O repent and be converted; break off your sins by righteousness: away
to Christ for pardoning and renewing grace: give up your selves to him, to walk
with him in holiness, or else you shall never see God. Oh that you would take
the warnings of God! In his name I once more admonish you. Turn you at my
reproof. Prove. 1. 2. 3. Forsake the foolish and live, Prove. 9. 6. Be sober,
righteous, godly. Tit. 2. 12. Wash your hands you sinners, purify your hearts
ye double minded. James 4. 8. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Esaias. 1. 16,
17. But if you will on, you must die. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

CHAP. II. Showing positively what Conversion is.
I May not leave you with your eyes half open, as he that saw men as trees
walking. Mar. 8. 24. The word is profitable for doctrine, as well as reproof; 2 Timothy 3. 16. And therefore having thus far conducted you by the shelves and
rocks of so many dangerous mistakes, I would guide you at length into the
harbor of truth.

Conversion then (in short) lies, in the through change both of the heart, and
life. I shall briefly describe it in its nature and causes.

1. The author it is the spirit of God; and therefore it is called, the
sanctification of the spirit; 2 These. 213. and the renewing of the holy Ghost.
Tit. 3. 5. Yet not excluding the other persons in the Trinity: For the Apostle
teaches us, to bless the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that he has
begotten us again: 1 Pet. 1. 3. and Christ is said to give repentance to
Israel; Acts 5. 31. and is called the everlasting Father, Esaias. 9. 6. and we
his seed, and the Children which God has given him, Heb. 2. 13. Esaias. 53. 10.
O blessed birth! Seven Cities coutended for the birth of Homer: but the whole
Trinity Fathers the new creature. Yet is this work principally ascribed to the
Holy Ghost, and so we are said to be born of the spirit. Ioh. 3. 8.

So then it is a work above man's power. We are born, not of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man; but of God. John 1. 31. Never think thou can
convert thy self. If ever thou would be savingly converted, thou must despair
of doing it in thine own strength. Ier. 31. 18. It is a Resurrection from the
dead, Rev. 20. 5. Ephesians. 1. 2. a new creation, Gal. 6. 15. Ephesians. 2. 10. a work of
absolute omnipotency: Ephesians. 1. 19. Are these out of the reach of humane power?
If thou have no more than thou had by thy first birth, a good nature, a meek
and chaste temper, etc. thou art a very stranger to true conversion. This is a
supernatural work.

2. The moving cause is Internal, or External.

The Internal mover is only free grace. Not by works of righteousness which we
have done: but of his own mercy he saved us -- by the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Of his own will begat he us, Iam. 1. We are chosen and called
unto Sanctification, not for it. Ephesians. 1. 4.

God finds nothing in man to turn his heart, but to turn his stomach: enough to
provoke his loathing, nothing to provoke his love. Look back upon thy self, O
Christian. Take up thy verminous rags: Look upon thy self in thy blood. Ez. 16.
6. O reflect upon thy swinish nature, thy filthy swill, thy once beloved mire.
2 Pet. 2. Can thou think without loathing of thy trough and draugh? Open thy
sepulcher, Mat. 23. 27. Art not thou almost struck dead with the hellish damp?
behold thy putrid soul, thy loathsome members. O stench unsufferable, if thou
do but sense thine own putrefaction! Psalm. 14. 3. Behold thy ghastly vissage,
thy crawling lusts, thy slime and corruption. Do not thine own clothes abhor
thee? Job. 9. 31. How then should holiness and purity love thee. Be astonished
O Heavens at this, be moved O Earth. Ier. 2. 12. Who but must needs cry. Grace!
Grace! Zech 4. 7. Hear and blush you Children of the most high. O you
unthankful generation! that free grace is no more in your mouths, in your
thoughts; no more adored, admired, commended by such as you. One would think
you should be nothing but praising and admiring God, whatever you are. How can
you make a shift to forget such grace, or to pass it over with a slight and
seldom mention? What but free grace should move God to love you, unless enmity
could do it, or deformity could do it, unless vomit, or rottonness could do it?
How affectionately does Peter lift up his hands? Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy has begotten us again. 1
Pet. 1. 3. How feelingly does Paul magnify the free mercy of God in it? God
who is rich in mer^^ for his great love wherewith he loved us; has quickened us
together with Christ; by Grace are ye saved, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

The external mover is the merit and intercession of the blessed Jesus. He has
obtained gifts for the rebe^^ious; Psalm 68. 18. and through him it is, that God
works in us, what is well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13. 21. Through him are
all spiritual blessings bestowed upon us in ^^^venly things, Ephesians. 1. 3. He
intercedeth for the Elect, that believe not. Ioh. 17. 20. Every Convert is the
fruit of his travel. Esai, 53. 11. O never was infant born into the world with
that difficulty, that Christ endured for us. How emphatically he groaneth in
his travel? All the pains that he suffered on his Cross they were our birth
pains, Act. 2. 24. (...) the pulls and throws that Christ endured for us. He is
made sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He sanctified himself (that is set
apart himself as a sacrifice) that we may be sanctified. John 17. 19. We are
sanctified through the offering of his body once for all, Heb. 10. 10.

It Is nothing then without his own bowels, but the merit and intercession of
Christ, that prevails with God to bestow upon us converting grace. If thou art
a new creature, thou know to whom thou owe it, to Christ's pangs and
prayers. Hence the natural affection of a believer to Christ. The ^oal does not
more naturally run after the Dam, nor the suckling to the dugs, than a believer
to Jesus Christ. And whither else should thou go? If any in the World can
show that for thy heart, that Christ can, let them carry it. Does Satan put in,
does the World court thee, does sin sue for thy heart? Why, were these
crucified for thee? 1 Cor. 1. 13. O Christian, love and serve the Lord while
thou have a being. Do not even the Publicans love those that love them? And
show kindness to them that are kind to them? Mat. 5. 46, 47.

3. The Instrument is either Personal, or Real.

The personal is the Ministry. I have begotten you to Christ through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 15. Christ's Ministers are they that are sent to open men's
eyes, and to turn them to God. Acts 26. 18.

O unthankful World, little do you know what you are doing, while you are
persecuting the Messengers of the Lord. These are they whose business is (under
Christ) to save you. Whom have you reproached and blasphemed? Against whom have
you exalted your voice, and lifted your eyes on high? Esaias. 37. 23. These are
the servants of the most high God, that show unto you the way of salvation,
Acts 16. 17. and do you thus requite them, O foolish and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. O
sons of ingratitude, against whom do you sport your selves? against whom make
ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Esaias. 57. 3. These are the
Instruments that God uses to convert and save you: and do you spit in the face
of your Physicians, and throw your Pilots overboard? Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

The Instrument Real is the word. We were begotten by the word of truth. This
is it that enlightens the eyes, that converteth the soul, Psa, 19. 7, 8. that
makes wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. This is the incorruptible seed, by
which we are born again. 1 Pet. 1. 33. If we are washed, it is by the word, Ephesians.
5. 26. ^f we are sanctified, it is through the truth, Ioh. 17. 17. This
generates faith, and regenerates us. Romans 10. 17. Iam. 1. 18.

O ye Saints, how should you love the word? for by this you have been
converted. O ye sinners, how should you ply the word? for by this you must be
converted. No other ordinary means but this. You that have felt its renewing
power, make much of it while you live, be for ever thankful for it. Tie it
about your necks, write it upon your hands, lay it in your bosoms. Prove. 6. 21,
22. When you go let it lead you, when you sleep let it keep you, when you wake
let it talk with you. Say with holy David, I will never forget thy precepts,
for by them have thou quickened me. Psalm. 119, 93. You that are unconverted,
read the word with diligence, flock to it, where powerfully preached; fill the
porches, as the multitude of the impotent, blind, halt, withered, waiting for
the moving of the water. John 5. 3. Pray for the coming of the spirit in the
word. Come off thy knees to the sermon: and come to thy knees from the sermon.
The seed does not prosper because not warred by prayers and tears, nor covered
by meditation.

4. The final cause is man's salvation, and Gods glory. We are chosen through
sanctification to Salvation, 2 These. 2. 13. Called that we might be glorified,
Romans 8. 30. but especially, that God might be glorified, Esaias. 60. 21. that we
should show forth his praises, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and be fruitful in good works, Col.
1. 10.

O Christian, do not forget the end of thy calling, let thy light shine, Mat.
5. 16. Let thy Lamp burn, let thy Fruits be good, and many, and in season,
Psalm. 1. 3. Let all thy designs fall in with Gods, that he may be magnified in
thee, Phil. 1. 20. Why should God repent that he has made thee a Christian, as
in the time of the old world, that he made them men? Genesis 6. 6. Why should
thou be an eye sore in his Orchard, Luke 7. by thy unfruitfulness? or a son
that causes shame, as it were a grief to thy father, and a bitterness to her
that bare thee, Prove. 17. 25. Prove. 10. 5. O let the womb bless thee that bare
thee, Prove. 17. 21. He that begets a fool does it to his sorrow; and the father
of a fool has no joy.

5. The subject is the elect sinner, and that in all his parts and powers,
members and mind. Whom God predestinates, them only he calls. Romans 8. 30, None
are drawn to Christ by their calling, nor come to him by believing, but his
sheep, those whom the father has given him, 1 John 6. 37, 44. Effectual
calling runs parallel with eternal election. 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Thou beginnest at the wrong end, if thou disputest first about thine election.
Prove thy conversion, and then never doubt of thine election. Or can thou not
yet prove it? Set upon a present and through turning. Whatever Gods purposes be
(which are secret) I am sure his promises are plain. How desperately do rebels
argue? If I am elected I shall be saved, do what I will: If not, I shall be
damned, do what I can. Perverse sinner, will thou begin where thou should
end? Is not the word before thee? What says it? Repent and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, Acts. 3. 19. If you mortify the deeds of the
body, you shall live, Romans 8. 13. Believe and be saved, Act. 16. 31. What can
be plainer? Do not stand still, disputing about thine election, but set to
repenting and believing. Cry to God for converting grace. Revealed things
belong to thee, in these busy thy self. It Is just (as one well) that they that
will not feed on the plain food of the word, should be choked with the bones.
What ever Gods purposes be, I am sure his promises be true. Whatever the
decrees of Heaven be, I am sure, that if I repent and believe I shall be saved;
and that if I repent not, I shall be damned. Is not here plain ground for thee:
and will thou yet run upon the rocks.

More particularly, this change of conversion passes thorowout in the whole
subject. A carnal person may have some shreds of good morality, a little near
the list, but he is never good throughont the whole cloth, the whole body of
Holiness and Christianity; Feel him a little further near the ridge, and you
shall see him to be but a deceitful piece. Conversion is not a repairing of the
old building, but it takes all down and erects a new structure: it is not the
putting in a patch or sowing on a list of holiness; but with the true convert,
holiness is woven into all his powers, principles, and practice. The sincere
Christian is quite a new fabric, from the foundation to the top-stone all
fire-new. He is a new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. a new creature. All things are become
new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Conversion is a deep work, a heart work; Acts 2. 37, and 16.
14. it turns all upside down, and makes a man begin a new world. It goes
throughout with men, throughout the Mind, throughout the Members, throughout
the motions of the whole life.

1. Throughout the mind. It makes an universal change within. First it turns
the balance of the judgment, so that God and his Glory do weigh down all
carnal and worldly interests. Acts 20. 24. Phil. 1. 20. Psalm. 73. 25. It opens
the eye of the mind, and makes the scales of its native ignorance to fall off,
and turns men from darkness to light. Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9. The
man that before saw no danger in his condition, now concludes himself lost, and
for ever undone, Acts 2. 37. except renewed by the power of Grace. He that
formerly thought there was little hurt in sin, now comes to see it to be the
chief of evils; he sees the unreasonableness, unrighteousness, the deformity
and the filthiness that is in sin, so that he is affrighted with it, loathes it,
dreads it, flies it, and even abhors himself for it, Romans 7. 15. Job 42. 6.
Ezekiel. 36. 31. He that could see little sin in himself, and could find no matter
for confession (as it was said of that learned Ignoramus Bellarmine (who it
seems while he knew so much abroad, was a miserable stranger to himself,) that
when he was to be confessed by the Priest, could not remember any thing to
confess but was fain to run back to the sins of his youth) I say he that could
not find matter for confession, unless it were some few gross and staring
evils, now sin reviveth with him, Romans 7. 9. he sees the rottenness of his
heart, and desperate and deep pollution of his whole nature: he cries, unclean,
unclean, Lev. 13. 4. 5. Lord purge me with Hysop, wash me thoroughly, create in
me a new heart, Psalm. 51. 2, 7, 10. He sees himself altogether become filthy,
Psalm. 14. 3. corrupt both root and tree, Mat. 7. 17, 18. he writes unclean upon
all his parts, and powers, and performances, Esaias. 63. 6. Romans 7. 18. He
discovers the nasty corners that he was never aware of, and sees the blasphemy,
and theft, and murder, and adultery that is in his heart, which before he was
ignorant of. Heretofore he saw no form nor comeliness in Christ, no beauty that
he should desire him; but now he finds the hid treasure, and will sell all to
buy this field. Christ is the pearl he seeks, sin the puddle he loathes.

Now according to this new light, the man is of another mind, another judgment,
than before he was: Now God is all with him: he has none in Heaven nor in
Earth like him, Ps. 73. 25. He prefers him truly before all the World: his
favor is his life: the light of his Countenance is more than Corn and Wine and
Oil, (the good that he formerly enquired after, and set his heart upon, Psalm.
4. 6, 7.) Now let all the World be set on one side, and God alone on the other?
Let the Harlot put on her paint, and gallantry, and present her self to the
soul (as when Satan would have tempted our Savior with her) in all the glory
of her Kingdoms, yet the soul will not fall down and worship her; but will
prefer a naked, yea a crucified, persecuted Christ before her, Phil. 3. 8. 1
Cor, 22. Not but that a Hypocrite may come to yield a general assent to this,
that God is the chief good: yea the wiser Heathens (some few of them) have at
last stumbled upon this: but there is a difference between the absolute, and
comparative judgment of the understanding. No Hypocrite comes so far, as to
look upon God, as the most desirable and suitable good to him, and thereupon to
acquiesce in him. This was the converts voice; The Lord is my portion says my
soul Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I
desire besides thee. God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever,
Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Lam. 3. 24.

Secondly, it turns the bias of the Will, both as to means and end (1.) The
intension of the wist is altered, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ier. 31. 33. Esaias 26. 8, 9. Now
the man has new ends and designs. Now he intends God above all, and desires
and designs nothing in all the world so much, as that Christ may be magnified
in him, Phil. 1. 20. He accounts himself more happy in this, than in all that
the earth could yield, that he may be serviceable to Christ, and bring him
glory in his generation. This is the Mark he aims at, that the name of Jesus
may be great in the world, and that all the sheaves of his brethren may bow to
this sheaf.

Reader, do thou view this and never ask thy self, whether it be thus with
thee? Pause a while, and breathe on this great concernment.

2. The election also is changed, so that he chooses another way, Psalm. 119.
30. He pitches upon ^od as his blessedness, and upon Christ as the principal,
and holiness as the subordinate means, to bring him to God. Ioh. 14. 6. Romans 2.
7. He chooses Jesus for his Lord. Col. 2. 6. He is not merely forced into
Christ by the storm, nor does he take Christ for bare necessity, as the man
begged from the gallows, when he takes the wife, rather than the halter: but he
comes off freely in the choice. This match is not made in a fright, as with the
terrified conscience, or dying sinner, that will seemingly do any thing for
Christ, but does only take Christ, rather than hell: but he deliberately
resolves, that Christ is his best choice, Phil. 1. 23. and would rather have
him to choose, than all the good of this world, might he enjoy it while he
would. Again, he takes holiness for his path. He does not out of mere necessity
submit to it: but he likes and loves it. I have chosen the way of thy Precepts,
Psalm. 119. 173. He takes Gods testimonies not as his bondage, but as his
heritage, yea his heritage for ever: v. 111. he counts them not his burden, but
his bliss, not his cords but his cordials. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Psalm. 119. 14, 16, 47.
He does not only bear, but take up Christ's yoke. He takes not holiness, as the
stomach does the loathed potion, (which it will down with rather than dye) but
as the hungry does his beloved food. No time passes so sweetly with him (when
he is himself) as that he spends in the exercises of holiness; these are both
his aliment, and his element, the desire of his eyes, and the joy of his heart.
Job. 23. 12. Psalm. 119. 82, 131, 162, 174. Psalm. 63. 5.

Put thy conscience to it as thou go, whether thou art the man. O hapy man,
if this be thy case! But see thou be through and partial in the search.

Thirdly, it turns the bent of the affection. 2. Cor. 7. 11. These run all in a
new chanel. The Jordan is now driven back, and the water runs upward against
its natural course.

Christ is his Hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. this is his prize Phil. 3. 8. here his eye
is, here his heart is. He is contented to cast all over board (as the merchant
in the storm, ready to perish) so he may but keep this Jewel.

The thirst of his Desires is, not after gold, but grace, Phil. 3. 13. He
hungers after it, he seeks it as silver, he digs for it as for hid treasure: he
had rather be gracious, than be great; he had rather be the holiest man on
earth, than the most learned, the most famous, most prosperous. While carnal,
he said: Oh! If I were but in great esteem, and rolled in wealth, and swim'd in
pleasure, if my debts were paid, and I and mine provided for, then I were a
happy man: but now the tune is changed. Oh, says the Convert, if I had but my
corruptions subdued; if I had such measures of grace, such fellowship with God,
though I were poor and despised, I should not care, I should account my self a
blessed man. Reader, is this the language of thy soul?

His Ioys are changed. He rejoices in the ways of Gods testimonies, as much
as in all riches, Psa. 119. 14. He delights in the Law of the Lord, wherein
once he had little favor. He has no such Joy, as in the thoughts of Christ,
the fruition of his company, the prospirity of his people.

His Cares are quite altered. He was once set for the World, and any scraps of
by-time, nothing (too often) was enough for his soul. Now he gives over caring
for the Asses, and sets his heart on the Kingdom. Now all the cry is, What
shall I do to be saved? Acts. 16. 30. His great solicitude is, how to secure
his soul. Oh! how he would bless you, if you could but put him out of doubt of
this!

His Fears are not so much of suffering, but of sinning, Heb. 11. 25, 27. Once
he was afraid of nothing so much as the loss of his estate, or esteem, the
displeasure of friends, the srowns of the great: nothing sounded so terrible to
him, as pain, or poverty, or disgrace. Now these are little to him, in
comparison of Gods dishonor, or displeasure. How warily does he walk, left he
should tread on a snare? He fears always, he looks before and behind; he has
his eye upon his heart, and is often casting over his shoulder, left he should
be ^vertaken with sin, Psalm. 39. 1. Prove. 28. 14. Eccles. 2. 14. It kills his
heart to think of losing Gods favor; this he dreads as his only undoing, Psalm.
51. 11, 12. Psalm. 119. 8. No thought in the world does pinch him and pain him
so much, as to think of parting with Christ.

His Love runs a new course. My Love was crucified (said holy Ignatius) that
is, my Christ. This is my beloved, says the Spouse Cant. 5. 16. How does
Augustine often pour his loves upon Christ.

He can find no words sweet enough. Let me see thee, O Light of mine eyes.
Come, O thou joy of my spirit; Let me behold thee, O the gladness of my heart.
Let me love thee, O life of my soul. Appear unto me, O my great delight, my
sweet comfort, O my God, my life, and the whole glory of my soul. Let me find
thee, O desire of my heart: Let me hold thee, O love of my soul. Let me embrace
thee, O heavenly Bridegroom. Let me possess thee, O eternal blessedness, etc.

His Sorrows have now a new vent. 2 Cor. 7. 9. 10. The view of his sins, the
sight of a Christ crucified, that would scarce stir him before, now how much do
they affect his heart?

His Hatred boils, his Anger burns against sin, Psalm. 119. 104. He has no
patience with himself: he calls himself fool, and beast, and thinks any name
too good for himself, when his indignation is stirred up against sin, Psalm. 73.
22. Prove. 30. 2. He could once swill in it, with too much pleasure; now he
loathes the thought of returning to it, as much as of licking up the filthiest
vomit.

Commune then with thine own heart, and attend the common and general current
of thine affections, whether it be toward God in Christ, above all other
concernments. Indeed sudden and strong commotions of the affections and
sensitive part, are oft-times found in hypocrites; especially where the natural
constitution leads thereunto: and contrariwise, the sanctified themselves are
many times without sensible stirrings of the affections, where the temper is
more slow, dry and dull. The great inquiry is, whether the judgment and will be
standingly determined for God, above all other good, real or apparent: and if
the affections do sincerely follow their choice, and conduct, though it be not
so strongly and sensibly, as is to be desired, there is no doubt, but the
change is saving.

2. Thorowout the Members. These that were before the instruments of sin, are
now become the holy utensils of Christ's living Temple, Romans 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3.
16. He that before made, as it were, a band or a barrel of his body, now
possesses his vessel in sanctification, and honor, in temperance, chastity,
and sobriety, as dedicated to the Lord, 1 These. 44. Gal. 5. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 6.
19, 20.

The Eye that was once a wandering eye, a wanton eye, a haughty, a covetous eye,
is now employed, as Mary, in weeping over her sins, Luke 7. 38. in beholding
God in his works Psalm. 8. 3. in reading his word, Acts 8. 30. in looking up and
down for objects of mercy, and opportunities for his service.

The Ear that was once open to Satan's call, and that (like a vitiated palate)
did relish nothing so much as filthy, or at least frothy talk, and the fools
laughter, is now bored to the door of Christ's house, and open to his
discipline. It says, speak Lord for thy servant hears. It cries with him,
veniat verbum Domini, and waits for his word as the rain, and relishes them
more than the appointed food, Job 23. 12. than the honey and the honey comb,
Psalm. 19. 10.

The Head, that was the shop of worldly, designs, is now filled with other
matters, and set on the study of Gods will, Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 119. 97. and the
man beats his head, not so much about his gain, but about his duty. The
thoughts and cares that now ^ill his head are principally, how he may please
God, and fly sin.

His Heart, that was a sty of filthy Insts, is now become an altar of Incense,
where the fire of divine love is ever kept in, and whence the daily sacrifice
of prayer and praises, and sweet incense of holy desires, ejaculations, and
anhelations are continually ascending, Psalm. 108. 1. Psalm. 119. 20. Psalm. 139.
17, 18.

The Mouth is become a well of life, his Tongue as choice silver, and his Lips
feed many: Now the salt of grace has seasoned his speech, and eat out the
corruption, Col. 4. 6. and cleanses the man from his filthy communication,
flattery, boasting, railing, lying, swearing, backbiting, that once came like
the flashes proceeding from the hell that was in the heart. James 3. 6. 7. The
Throat, that was once an open sepulcher, Romans 3. 13. now sends forth the sweet
breath of prayer, and holy discourse, and the man speaks in another Tongue, in
the Language of Canaan, and is never so well, as when talking of God, and
Christ, and the matters of another World. His Mouth brings forth wisdom, his
Tongue is become the silver Trumpet of his makers praise, his glory and the
best member that he has.

Now here you shall have the hypocrite halting. He speaks it may be like an
Angel, but he has a covetous eye, or the gain of unrighteousness in his hand.
Or the hand is white, but his heart is full of rottenness, Mat. 13. 27. full of
unmortified cares, a very oven of lust, a shop of pride, the seat of malice. It
may be with Nebuchadnezzar's Image, he has a Golden head, a great deal of
knowledge: but he has feet of clay, his affections are worldly, he minds
earthly things, and his way and walk are sensual, and carnal, you may trace him
in his secret haunts, and his footsteps will be found in some bypath of sin.
The work is thorowout with him.

3. Thorowout the motives, or the life, and practice. The new man takes a new
course, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. His Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. No sooner
does Christ call by effectual grace, but he strait way becomes a follower of
him, Mat. 4. 20. When God has given the new heart and writ his law in his
mind, he forthwith walks in his statutes and keeps his judgments, Ezekiel. 36. 26,
27.

Though sin may dwell (God knows a wearisome and unwelcome guest) in him, yet
it has no more dominion over him. Romans 6. 14, 7. He has his fruit unto
holiness, Romans 6. 22. and though he makes many a blot, yet the law and life of
Jesus is that he eyes, as his copy, Psalm. 119. 30. Heb. 12. 2. and has an
unfeigned respect to all Gods commandments, Ps. 119. 6. He makes conscience
even of little sins and little duties, Psalm. 119. 113. His very infirmities
which he cannot help, though he would, are his souls burden, and are like the
dust in a man's eye, which though but little, yet are not a little troublesome.
[O man, Do thou read this, and never turn in upon thy soul by
self-examination?] The sincere Convert is not one man at Church, and another at
home: he is not a Saint on his knees, and a Cheat in his shop: he will not
tithe mint and cummin, and neglect mercy and judgment, and the weighty matters
of the Law: he does not pretend piety and neglect morality, Mat. 23. 14. but he
turns from all his sins and keeps all Gods Statutes, Ezekiel. 18. 21. though not
perfectly (except in desire and endeavor) yet sincerely, not allowing himself
in the breach of any, Romans 7. 15, Now he delights in thy word, and sets himself
to prayer, and opens his hand, (if able) and draws out his soul to the hungry,
Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 109. 4 Esaias. 58. 10. He breaks off his sins by
righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27. and
has a good conscience willing in all things to live honestly, H^b. 13. 18. and
to keep without offense toward God and men.

Here again you shall find the unsoundness of many professors, that take
themselves for good Christians. They are partial in the law, Mat. 2. 9. and
take up with the cheap and easy duties of religion, but they go not through
with the work. They are as a cake not turned, half roasted, and half raw. It
may be you shall have them exact in their words, punctual in their dealings,
but then they do not exercise themselves unto godliness; and for examining
themselves, and governing their hearts, to this they are strangers. You may
have them duly at the Church, but follow them to their families, and there you
shall see little but the world minded, or if they have a road of family duties,
follow them to their closets, and there you shall find their souls are little
looked after. It may be they seem otherwise religious, but bridle not their
tongues, and so all their religion is in vain, Iam. 1. 26. It may be they come
up to closet and family prayer; but follow them to their shops, and there you
shall find them in a trade of lying, or some covert and cleanly way of deceit.
Thus the hypocrite goes not thorowout in the course of his obedience.

And thus much for the subject of Conversion.

6. The terms are either from which, or to which.

1. The terms from which we turn in this motion of Conversion, are sin, Satan,
the world, and our own righteousness.

first, Sin. When a man is converted, he is for ever out with sin: yea with all
sin. Psalm. 119. 128. but most of all with his own sins, and especially with his
bosom sin, Psalm. 18. 23. Sin is now the But of his indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
he thirsts to bathe his hands in the blood of his sins. His sins set abroach in
sorrows. It is sin that pierces him and wounds him: he feels it like a thorn in
his side, like a prick in his eyes, he groans and struggles under it, and not
formally, but feelingly cries out, O wretched man: he is not impatient of any
burden so much as of his sin, Psalm. 40. 12. If God should give him his choice,
he would choose any affliction, so he might be rid of sin. He feels it like the
cutting gravel in his shoes, pricking, and paining him as he goes.

Before Conversion he had light thoughts of sin: he cherished it in his bosom,
as Vriah his lamb: he nourished it up, and it grew up together with him; it did
eat as it were of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom,
and was to him as a daughter: but when God opens his eyes by conversion, he
throws it away with abhorrence, Esaias. 30. 22. as a man would a loathsome toad,
which in the dark he had hugged fast in his bosom, and thought it had been
some pretty and harmless bird. When a man is savingly changed, he is not only
deeply converted of the danger, but defilement of sin: and O how earnest is he
with God to be purified? He loathes himself for his sins, Ezekiel. 36. 31. He runs
to Christ, and casts himself into the fountain opened for sin and for
uncleanness, Zec^. 13. 31. If he fall what a stir is there to get all clean
again? He flies to the word, and washes, and rubs, and rinches, laboring to
cleanse himself from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit: He abhors his
once beloved sin, Psalm. 18. 23. as a cleanly nature does the trough, and mire,
wherein he sees the swine delight.

The sound Convert is heartily engaged against sin. He wrestles with it, he
wars against it. He is too often foiled, but he never yields the cause, nor
lays down the weapons; but he will up, and to it again, while he has breath in
his body. He will never give quiet possession, he will make no peace; he will
give no quarter, he falls upon it, and fires upon it, and is still disquieting
of it with continual alarms. He can forgive his other enemies; he can pity
them, and pray for them, Acts 7. 60. but here he is implacable, here he is set
upon revenge: he hunteth, as it were, for the precious life; his eye shall not
pity, his hand shall not spare, though it be a right hand or a right eye: Be it
a gainful sin, most delightful to his nature, a support to his esteem with
carnal friends; yet he will rather throw his gain down the kennel, see his
credit fall, or the flower of pleasure whither in his hand, than he will allow
himself in any known way of sin, Luke 19. 8. He will grant no indulgence, he
will give no toleration, but he draws upon sin where ever he meets it, and
frowns upon it with his unwelcome salute, Have I found thee, O mine enemy!

Reader, has conscience been at work, while thou have been looking over these
lines? Have thou pondered these things in thine heart? Have thou searched the
book within, to see if these things be so? If not, read it again, and make thy
conscience to speak whether or no it be thus with thee.

Have thou crucified thy flesh with its affections and lusts; and not only
confessed, but forsaken thy sins; all sin in thy servent desires, and the
ordinary practice of every deliberate and wilful sin in thy life? If not, thou
art yet unconverted. Does not conscience fly in thy face, as thou read, and
tell thee that thou live in away of lying for thy advantage, that thou usest
deceit in thy calling, that there is some way of secret wantonness that thou
live in? why then, do not deceive thy self, thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Does not thy unbridled tongue, thy brutish intemperance, thy wicked company,
thy neglect of prayer, of hearing and reading the word, now witness against
the, and say, We are thy works and we will follow thee? Or if I have not hit
the right, does not the bird within tell them, there is such or such a way,
that thou know to be evil, that yet for some carnal respect thou do
tolerate thy self in, and art willing to spare? If this be the case, thou art
to this day unregenerate, and must be changed or condemned.

Secondly, Satan. Conversion binds the strong man, spoils his armor, casts out
his goods, turns men from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. Before, the
Devil could no sooner hold up his finger to the sinner, to call him to his
wicked company, sinful games, filthy delights, but presently he follows, like
an Ox to the slaughter, and a fool to the correction of the stocks, as the bird
that hastes to the prey, and koweth not that it is for his life. No sooner
could Satan bid him lie, but presently he had it upon the top of his tongue,
Act. 5. 3. no sooner could Satan offer a wanton object, but he was stung with
lust. The Devil could do more with him than God could. If the Devil say, away
with these family duties, be sure they shall be rarely enough performed in his
house. If the Devil say, away with this strictness, this preciseness, he will
keep far enough from it. If he tells him there is no need of these closet
duties, he shall go from day to day and scarce perform them. But now he is
converted, he serves another master, and takes quite another course, 1 Pet. 4.
4. he goes and comes at Christ's beck. Col. 3. 24. Satan may sometimes catch his
foot in his trap; but he will no longer be a willing captive. He watches
against the snares and baits of Satan, and studies to be acquainted with his
devices. He is very suspicious of his plots, and is very jealous, in what comes
athwart him, lest Satan should have some design upon him. He wrestles against
principalities and powers, Ephesians. 6. He entertains the messenger of Satan as men
do the messenger of death. He keeps his eye upon his enemy. 1 Pet. 5. 8. and
watches in his duties, lest Satan should put in his foot.

Thirdly, the World. Before sound faith, a man is overcome of the world. Either
he bows down to Mammon, or idolizes his reputation, or is a lover of pleasure,
more than a lover of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Here Is the root of man's misery by the
fall; he is turned aside to the creature, instead of God, and gives that
esteem, confidence, affection to the creature, that is due to him alone, Romans
1. 25. Mat. 10. 37. Prove. 18. 11. Ier. 17. 5.

O miserable man! What a deformed monster has sin made thee. God made thee
little lower than the Angels, sin little better than the devils, Ioh. 6. 70.
and 8. 44. a monster that has his head and heart, where his feet should be,
and his feet kicking against Heaven, and every thing out of place, the world,
that was formed to serve thee, is come to rule thee; and the deceitful harlot
has bewitched thee with her enchantments, and made thee bow down and serve her.

But converting grace sets all in order again, and puts God in the Throne, and
the world at his footstool, Psalm. 73. 25. Christ in the heart, and the world
under feet, Ephesians. 3. 17. Rev. 12. 1. So Paul, I am crucified to the world, and
the world to me, Gal. 6. 14. Before this change all the cry was who will show
us any (worldly) good: but now he sings another tune. Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon me, and take the corn and wine whose will, Psalm.
4. 6. 7. Before, his hearts delight and content was in the world; then the Song
was, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, thou have much goods laid
up for many years: but now all this is withered, and there is no comeliness that
he should desire it, and he tunes up with the sweet Psalmist of Israel, The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance; the lines are fallen to me in a fair
place, and I have a goodly heritage. He blesses himself, and boasts himself in
God, Psalm. 34. 2. Lam. 3. 24. nothing else can give him content. He has
written vanity and vexation upon all his worldly enjoyments, Ec. 1. 2. and loss
and dung upon all humane excellencies, Phil. 3. 7, 8. He has life and
immortality now in chase, Romans 2. 7. he trades for grace and glory, and has
the Crown incorruptible in pursuit, 1 Cor. 9. 25. His heart is set in him to
seek the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. and 2 Chronicles. 15. 15. He first seeks the Kingdom
of Heaven and the righteousness thereof, and religion is no longer a matter by
the by with him, but the main of his care, Mat. 6. 33. Psalm. 27. 4. Now the
gaudy idol is become Nehushtan; 2 Kings 18. 4. and he up and treads upon it, as
Diogenes trampling on Plato's hangings, and saying Calco Platonis fastum.
Before the world had the swaying interest with him: He would do more for gain
than godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 5. more to pleasure his friend, or his flesh, than to
please the God that made him, and God must stand by till the world were first
served; but now all must stand by: he hates father and mother and life and all
in comparison of Christ, Luke 14. 26.

Well then, pause a little, and look within. Does not this nearly concern thee?
Thou pretendest for Christ; but does not the world sway thee? Do thou not
take more real delight and content in the world, than in him? Do not thou
find thy self better at case when the World goes to thy mind, and thou art
encompassed with carnal delights, than when retired to prayer and meditation in
thy closet, or attending upon Gods Word and Worship? No surer evidence of an
unconverted estate, than to have the things of the world uppermost in our aims,
love, and estimations, Ioh. 2. 15. Iam. 4. 4.

With the sound convert Christ has the supremacy. How dear is this name to
him? How precious is its savor? Cant. 1. 3. Psalm. 45. 8. The name of Jesus is
engraven upon his heart, Gal. 4. 19. and lies as a bundle of mirth between his
breasts, Cant. 1. 13. 14. Honor is but air, and laughter is but madness, and
Mammon is fallen like Dagon before the Ark, with hands and head broken off on
the threshold, when once Christ is savingly revealed. Here is the pearl of
great price to the true Convert; here is his treasure, here is his hope, Mat.
13. 44. 45. This is his glory: My beloved is mine, and I am his, Gal. 6. 14.
Cant. 2. 16. O it is sweeter to him to be able to say, Christ is mine, than if
he could say, the Kingdom is mine, the Indies are mine.

Fourthly, your own Righteousness. Before conversion, man seeks to cover
himself with his own sig-leaves, Phil. 3. 6, 7. and to lick himself whole with
his own duties, Mic. 6. 6, 7. He is apt to trust in himself, Luke 16. 15. and
18. 9. and set his own righteousness, and to reckon his Counters for Gold, and
not submit to the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. But Conversion changes his
mind; now he casts away his filthy rags, and counts his own righteousness, but
a menstruous cloth: he casts it off, as a man would the verminous tatters of a
nasty beggar, Esaias. 64. 6. Now he is brought to poverty of spirit. Mat. 5. 3.
complains of and condemns himself, Romans 7. and all his inventory is, poor, and
miserable, and wretched, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. he sees a world of
iniquity in his holy things, and calls his once idolized righteousness, but
flesh, and loss, and dogsmeat, and would not for a thousand worlds be found in
himself, Phil. 3. 4, 7, 8, 9. His finger is ever upon his sores, Psalm. 51. 3.
his sins, his wants. Now he begins to set a high price upon Christ's
righteousness: he sees the need of a Christ in every duty, to justify his
person, and justify his performances: he cannot live without him, he cannot
pray without him; Christ must go with him, or else he cannot come into the
presence of God; he leans upon the hand of Christ and so he bows himself in the
house of his God. He sets himself down for a lost undone man without him. His
life is hid in Christ, as the life of a man in the heart. He is fixed in
Christ, as the roots of the tree spread in the earth for stability and
nutriment. Before, the news of a Christ was a stale and sapless thing: but now
how sweet is a Christ? Augustine could not relish his before so much admired
Cicero, because he could not find the name of Christ, How pathetically cries
he? Dulcissime, amantisbenignis. Caris. etc. quando te videbo? quando satiabor
de pulcritudine tua? Medit. c. 37. O most sweet, most loving, most kind, most
dear, most precious, most desired, most lovely, most fair, etc. all in a
breath, when he speaks of and to his Christ. In a word, the voice of the
Convert is, with the Martyr, None but Christ.

2. The terms which are either Vltimate, or Subordinate and Mediate.

The Vltimate is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whom the true Convert
takes, as his All-sufficient and eternal blessedness. A man is never truly
sanctified, till his very heart be in truth set upon God, above all things, as
his portion and chief good. These are the natural breathings of a believers
heart, Thou art my portion O Lord, Psalm. 1. 9. 57. My soul shall make her boast
in the Lord, Psalm. 34. 2. My expectation is from him: he only is my rock, and
my salvation, he is my defense: in God is my salvation, and my glory, the rock
my strength, and my refuge is in God, Psalm. 62. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 18. 1, 2.

Would you put it to an issue, whether you be converted or not, now then let
thy soul and all that is within thee attend.

Have thou taken God for thy happiness? Where does the content of thy heart
lie? Whence does thy choicest comfort come in? Come then, and with Abraham lift
up thine eyes, Eastward, and Westward, and Northward, and Southward, and cast
about thee what it is, that thou would have in Heaven or earth to make thee
happy. If God should give thee thy choice, as he did to Solomon, or should say
to thee, as Ahashuerus to Esther, What is thy petition, and what is thy
request, and it shall be granted thee; Esther 5. 3. What would thou ask? go
into the gardens of pleasure, and gather all the fragrant flowers from thence:
would these content thee? Go to the treasures of Mammon, suppose thou might
lade thy self, while thou would from hence: go to the towers, to the trophies
of honor; what think thou of being a man of renown, and having a name like
the name of the great men of the earth? Would any of this, all this suffice
thee, and make thee count thy self a happy man, if so then certainly thou art
carnal and unconverted. If not, go further; wade into the divine excellencies,
the store of his mercies, the hiding of his power, the deeps unfathomable of
his All Sufficiency. Does this suit thee best, and please thee most? Do thou
say, It Is good to be here. Mat. 17. 4. Here I will pitch, here I will live and
dye? Will thou let all the world go, rather than this? Then it is well between
God and thee: Happy art thou, O man, happy art thou, that ever thou wast born.
If a God can make thee happy, thou must needs be happy: for thou have avouched
the Lord to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Do thou say to Christ, as he to us, Thy
father shall be my father, and thy God my God, Ioh. 20. 17. Here is the turning
point. An unsound professor never takes up his rest in God; but converting
grace does the work, and so cures the fatal misery of the fall, by turning the
heart from its idols, to the living God, 1 These. 1. 9. Now says the soul,
Lord, whither should I go? Thou have the words of eternal life, Ioh. 6. 68.
Here he centers, here he settles. Oh it is as the entrance of Heaven to him, to
see his interest in God. When he discovers this, he says, Return unto thy
rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. Psalm. 116. 7.
and it is even ready to breath out Simeons song, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, Luke 2. 29. and says, with Jacob, when his old heart
revived at the welcome tidings, It is enough, Genesis 45. 28. When he sees he has
a God in Covenant to go to; this is all his salvation and all his desire, 2 Samuel 23. 5.

Man, is this thy case? Have thou experienced this? Why, then blessed art thou
of the Lord. God has been at work with thee, he has laid hold on thine heart
by the power of converting grace, or else thou could never have done this.

The Mediate term of Conversion is either Principal, or less Principal.

The Principal is Christ, the only mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
His work is to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. he is the way to the Father, Ioh.
14. 6. the only plank on which we may escape, the only door by which we may
enter, Ioh. 10. 9. Conversion brings over the soul to Christ, to accept of him,
Col. 2. 6. as the only means to life, as the only way, the only name given
under Heaven, Acts 4. 12. He looks not for salvation in any other, but him; nor
in any other with him; but throws himself on Christ alone; as one that should
cast himself with spread arms upon the Sea.

Here (says the convinced sinner) here I will venture, and if I perish, I
perish: If I die, I will die here. But Lord suffer me not to perish under the
pitiful eyes of thy mercy. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to turn away from
following after thee, Ruth 1. 16. Here I will throw my self. If thou kick me,
if thou kill me, Job 13. 15. I will not go from thy door.

Thus the poor soul does venture on Christ, and resolvedly adhere to him.
Before Conversion, the man made light of Christ, minded the Farm, Friends,
Merchandise, more than Christ: Mat. 22. 5. now Christ is to him as his
necessary food, his daily bread, the life of his heart, the staff of his life,
Phil. 3. 9. His great desig^ is, that Christ may be magnified in him, Phil^ 1.
20. His heart once said, as they to the Spouse, What is thy beloved, more than
another? Cant. 5. 9. He found more sweetness in his merry company, wicked
g^mes, earthly delights, than in Christ. He took Religion for a fancy, and the
talk of great enjoyments for an idle dream. But now to him to live is Christ.
He sets light by all that he accounted precious for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8.

All of Christ is accepted by the sincere Convert. He loves not only the wages,
but work of Christ, Romans 7. 22. not only the benefits, but the burden of
Christ. He is willing not only to tread out the corn, but to draw under the
yoke: he takes up the commands of Christ, yea and the Cross of Christ, Mat. 11.
Mat. 16. 24.

The unsound closes by the halves with Christ: he is all for the salvation of
Christ, but he is not for sanctification: he is for the privileges, but
appretiates not the person of Christ. He divides the offices and benefits of
Christ. This is an error in the foundation. Who so loves life, let him beware
here. It Is an undoing mistake, of which you have been often warned, and yet
none more common. Jesus is a sweet name, but men love not the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. They will not have him, as God offers, To be a Prince
and a Savior, Acts 5. 3^. They divide what God has joined, the King, and the
Priest. Yea they will not accept the salvation of Christ, as he intends it;
they divide here. Every man's vo^e is for salvation from suffering; but they
desire not to be saved from sinning. They would have their lives saved; but
withal they would have their l^^ts saved. Yea many divide here again, they
would be content to have some of their sins destroyed; but they cannot leave
the lap of Dalilah, or divorce the beloved Herodias. They cannot be cruel to
the right eye, or right hand: the Lord must pardon them in this thing, 2 Kings
5. 18. Oh be infinitely tender here: your souls lie upon it. The sound Convert
takes a whole Christ, and takes him for all intents and purposes, without
exceptions, without limitations, without reserves. He is willing to have
Christ, upon his terms, upon any terms. He is willing of the dominion of
Christ, as well as deliverance by Christ; he says with Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. Any thing Lord. He sends the blank to Christ to
set down his own Conditions, Acts 2. 37. Acts 16. 30.

The less Principal is the Laws, Ordinances, and ways of Christ. The heart that
was once set against these, and could not endure the strictness of these bonds,
the severity of these ways, now falls in love with them, and chooses them as its
rule and guide for ever, Psalm. 119. 111, 112.

Four things (I observe) God does work in every sound Convert, with reference
to the Laws and ways of Christ, by which you may come to know your estates, if
you will be faithful to your own souls; and therefore keep your eyes upon your
hearts, as you go along.

1. The Judgment is brought to approve of them, and subscribe to them, as most
righteous, and most reasonable, Psalm. 119. 128, 137, 138. The mind is brought
to like the ways of God, and the corrupt prejudices that were once against
them, as unreasonable, and intolerable, are now removed. The understanding
assents to them all, as holy, just, and good. Romans 7. 12. How is David taken up
with the excellencies of Gods Laws? How Does he expatiate in their praises,
both from their inherent qualities, and admirable effects, Psalm. 19. 8, 9, 10,
etc.

There is a twofold judgment of the understanding, Iudicum absolutum, and
comparatum. The absolute judgment is, when a man thinks such a course best in
the general, but not for him, or not under the present circumstances he is in,
pro hic and nunc. Now a Godly man's judgment is for the ways of God, and that
not only the absolute, but comparative judgment: he thinks them not only best
in general, but best for him. He looks upon the rules of Religion, not only as
tolerable, but desirable, yea more desirable than gold, fine gold, yea much
fine gold, Psalm. 19. 10. His judgment is setledly determined, that it is best to
be holy, that it is best to be strict: that it is in it self the most eligible
course; and that it is for him the wisest and most rational, and desirable
choice. Hear the godly man's Judgment; I know O Lord that thy judgments are
right. I love thy Commandments above Gold, Yea above fine gold. I esteem all
thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way,
Psalm. 119. 127, 128. Mark, he did approve of all that God required, and
disallowed of all that he forbad, Righteous are thou O Lord, and upright are
thy judgments. Thy testimonies that thou have commanded are righteous, and very
faithful. Thy word is true from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous
judgments endures for ever, Psalm. 119. 86. 160. 102, 163. See how readily and
fully he ^ubcribes; he declares his assent, and consent to it, and all and
every thing therein contained.

2. The desire of the heart is to know the whole mind of Christ, Psalm. 119.
125. 124. 169. Psalm. 25. 4, 5. He would not have one sin discovered, nor be
ignorant of one duty required. It Is the natural and earnest breathing of a
sanctified heart, Lord if there be any way of wickedness in me, do thou
discover it. What I know not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity, I
will do it no more. The unsound is ^ willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. loves not
to come to the light, Ioh. 3. 20. He is willing to keep such or such a sin, and
therefore is loath to know it to be a sin, and will not let in the light at that
Window. Now the gracious heart is willing to know the whole latitude and
compass of his makers Law. Psalm. 119. 18, 19, 27, 33, 64, 66, 68, 73, 108, 124^
He receives with all acceptance the word that convinces him of any duty that
he knew not, or minded not before; or discovers any sin that lay hid before,
Psalm. 19. 11.

3. The free and resolved choice of the will is determined for the ways of
Christ, before all the pleasures of sin and prosperity of the World, Psalm. 119.
127, 103, 162. His consent is not extorted by some extremity of anguish, nor is
it only a sudden and hasty resolve: but he is deliberately purposed, and comes
off freely in the choice, Psalm. 17. 3. Psalm. 119. 30. True, the flesh will
rebel, yet the prevailing part of his Will is for Christ's Laws and Government;
so that he takes them not up as his toil or burden, but his bliss, 1 John 5. 3.
Psalm. 119. 60, 72. When the unsanctified goes in Christ's ways, as in Gy^es and
Fetters, he does them naturally, Psalm. 40. 8. Ier. 31. 33. and counts Christ's
Law, his liberty, Psalm. 119. 32, 45. James 1. 25. He is willing in the beauties
of holiness, Psalm. 110. 3. and has this inseparable mark, That he had rather
(if he might have his choice) live a strict and holy life, than the most
prosperous and flourishing life in the world, 1 Samuel 10. 26. There went with
Saul a band of men whose hearts God had touched. When God touches the hearts of
his chosen, they presently follow Christ, Mat. 4. 22. and (though drawn) do
freely run after him, Can. 1. 4. and willingly offer themselves to the service
of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7. 16. seeking him with their whole desire. 2 Chronicles. 15.
15. Fear has its use, but this is not the main spring of motion with a
sanctified heart. Christ keeps not his subjects in by ^orce, but is King of a
willing people. They are (through his grace) freely resolved for his service,
and do it out of choice, not as slaves, but as the Son or Spouse, from a spring
of love, and a loyal mind. In a Word, the laws of Christ are the Converts love.
Psalm. 119. 159, 163, 167. desire, v. 5, 20, 40. delight, v. 77^ 92, 103, 111,
143. and continual study, v. 99. 79. Psalm. 2. 2.

4. The bent of his course is directed to keep Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119. 4, 8,
167, 168. It Is the daily care of his life to walk with God. He seeks great
things: he has noble designs, though he fall too short. He aims at nothing
less than perfection; he desires it, he reaches after it, he would not rest in
any pitch of grace, till he were quite rid of sin, and had perfected holiness,
Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Here the hypocrites rottenness may be discovered. He desires holiness (as one
well) only as a Bridge to Heaven, and enquires earnestly, what is the least
that will serve his turn; and if he can get but so much as may just bring him
to Heaven, this is all he cares for. But the sound Convert desires holiness for
holiness sake, Psalm. 119. 97. Matt. 5. 6. and not only for Heaven sake. He
would not be satisfied with so much as might save him from Hell; but desires
the highest pitch. Yet desires are not enough. What is thy way and thy course?
Is the drift and scope of thy life altered? Is holiness thy trade, and religion
thy business, Romans 8. 1. Mat. 25. 16. Phil. 3. 20. If not, thou art short of
sound Conversion.

Application. And is this, that we have described, the Conversion that is of
absolute necessity to salvation? then be informed, 1. That strait is the gate,
and narrow the way that leads unto life. 2. That there be but few that find
it. 3. That there is need of a Divine power savingly to convert a sinner to
Jesus Christ.

Again, then be exhorted, O man, that read, to turn in upon thine own self.
What says conscience? Does it not begin to bite? Does it not twitch thee as
thou go? Is this thy judgment, and this thy choice, and this thy way? that
we have described? If so, then it is well. But does not thy heart condemn thee,
and tell thee, there is such a sin thou live in against thy Conscience? Does
it not tell thee, there is such and such a secret way of wickedness, that thou
make no bones of? Such or such a duty, that thou make no conscience of?

Does not conscience carry thee to thy closet, and tell thee how seldom prayer,
and reading is performed there? Does it not carry thee to thy family, and show
thee the charge of God, and the souls of thy children and servants, that be
neglected there? Does not conscience lead thee to thy shop, thy trade, and tell
thee of some mystery of iniquity there? Does it not carry thee to the Ale-shop,
or to the Sack-shop, and round thee in thine ear for the loose company thou
keep there, the precious time thou mispendest there, for the talents of God
which thou throwest down this sink, for thy gaming, and thy swilling, etc. Does
it not carry thee into the secret chamber, and read thee a Curtain Lecture?

O Conscience do thy duty. In the name of the living God I command thee,
discharge thine office. Lay hold upon this sinner. Fall upon him, arrest him,
apprehend him, undeceive him. What, will thou slatter and sooth him, while he
lives in his sins? Awake, O conscience: What meanest thou, O sleeper? What have
thou never a reproof in thy mouth? What, shall this soul die in his careless
neglect of God and eternity, and thou altogether hold thy peace? What, shall he
go on still in his trespasses, and yet have peace? O rouse up thy self: and do
thy work. Now let the Preacher in the bosom speak. Cry aloud and spare not,
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet; let not the blood of this soul be required at
thy hands.

CHAP. III. Of the Necessity of Conversion.
IT may be you are ready to say, what means this stir? And are apt to wonder,
why I follow you with such earnestness, still ringing one lesson in your ears,
That you should repent and be converted, Acts 3. 19. But I must say unto you,
as Ruth to Naomi, entreat me not to leave you, nor to turn aside from following
after you, Ruth 1. 16. Were it a matter of indifferency, I would never keep so
much ado. Might you be saved as you be, I would gladly let you alone. But would
you not have me solicitous for you? when I see you ready to perish? As the Lord
lives, before whom I am, I have not the least hopes to see ever a one of your
faces in Heaven, except you be converted. I utterly despair of your salvation,
except you will be prevailed with to turn thoroughly, and give up your selves to
God in holiness and newness of life. Has God said, Except you be born again,
you cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. and yet do you wonder, why your
Ministers do so painfully travel in birth with you? Think it not strange, that
I am earnest with you to follow after holiness, and long to see the Image of
God upon you. Never did any, nor shall any enter into Heaven, by any other way
but this. The Conversion described, is not an high pitch of some taller
Christians, but every soul, that is saved, passes this universal change.

It was a passage of the Noble Roman, when he was hasting with Corn to the City
in the (...) mine, and the Mariners were loath to set sail in the foul weather,
Necessarium est navigare, non est necessarium vivere. Our voyage is of more
necessity than our lives. What is it that thou do account necessary? Is thy
Bread necessary? Is thy breath necessary? Then thy Conve^sion is much more
necessary. Indeed, this is the Vnum necessarium, the one thing necessary. Thine
estate is not necessary: thou may sell all for the Pearl of great price, and
yet be a gainer by the purchase. Mat. 13. 45. Thy life is not necessary: thou
may part with it for Christ to infinite advantage. Thine esteem is not
necessary: thou may be reproached for the name of Christ, and yet happy, yea
much more happy in reproach, than in repute. 1 Pet. 4. 4. Mat. 5. 10, 11. But
thy Conversion is necessary, thy damnation lies upon it, and is it not needful
in so important a case to look about? Upon this one point depends thy making,
or marring to all eternity.

But I shall more particularly show the necessity of Conversion in five things:
for without this,

1. Thy being is in vain. Is it not pity thou should be good for nothing, an
unprofitable burden of the earth, a wart, or wen in the body of the universe.
Thus thou art, while unconverted, for thou can not answer the end of thy
being. Is it not for the divine pleasure thou art and were created, Rev. 4. 11.
Did not he make thee for himself, Prove. 16. 4. Art thou a man, and have thou
reason? Why then bethink thy self, why, and whence thy being is. Behold Gods
workmanship in thy body, and ask thy self, to what end did God rear this
fabric? Consider the noble faculties of thy Heaven-born soul: to what end did
God bestow these excellencies? To no other, than that thou should please thy
self, and gratify thy senses. Did God send men like the swallows, into the
world, only to gather a few sticks and dirt, and build their nests, and breed
up their young, and then away? The very heathens could see further than this.
Art thou so fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. 14. and do thou not
yet think with thy self, surely it was for some noble and raised end?

O man, set thy reason a little in the chair. Is it not pity such a goodly
fabric should be raised in vain? Verily thou art in vain, except thou art for
God. Better thou had no being, than not be for him. Would thou serve thy
end? Thou must repent, and be converted.

without this thou art to no purpose, yea to bad purpose.

First, to No purpose. Man unconverted, is like a choice instrument, that has
every string broke, or out of tune. The spirit of the living God must repair,
and tun^ it, by the grace of regeneration, and sweetly move it by the power of
actuating grace, or else thy prayers will be but howlings^ and all thy services
will make no music in the ears of the most holy. Ephesians. 2. 10. Phil. 2. 13. Hos.
7. 14. Esaias. 1. 15. All thy powers and faculties are so corrupt in thy natural
state, that except thou be purged from dead works, thou can not serve the
living God, Heb. 9. 14. Tit. 1. 15.

An unsanctified man, cannot work the work of God. 1. He has no skill in it.
He is altogether as unskilful in the work, as in the word of righteousness,
Heb. 5. 13. There are great mysteries as well in the practices, as principles
of godliness: now the unregenerate knows not the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 13. 11. 1 Timothy 3. 10. You may as well expect him that never
learned the Alphabet to read, or look for goodly music on the Lute, from one
that never set his hand to an instrument, as that a natural man should do the
Lord any pleasing service. He must be first taught of God, Ioh. 6. 45. taught
to pray, Luke 11. 1. taught to profit, Esaias 48. 17. taught to go, Hos. 11. ^.
or else he will be utterly at a loss.] 2. He has no strength for it. How weak
is his heart? Ezekiel. 16. 30. He is presently tired: the Sabbath^ what a
weariness it it? Mal. 1. 13. He is without strength, Romans 5. 6. yea stark dead
in sin, Ephesians. 2. 5.] 3. He has no mind to it: he desires not the knowledge of
Gods ways, Job 21. 14. He does not know them, and he does not care to know
them, Psalm. 82. 5. He knows not, neither will he understand.] 4. He has
neither due instruments, nor materials for it. A man may as well hew the marble
without tools; or limn without colors or instruments, or build without
mat^rials, as perform any acceptible service without the graces of the Spirit,
which are both the materials, and instruments in the work. Almsgiving is not a
service of God, but of vain glory, unless dealt forth by the hand of divine
love. What is the prayer of the lips, without grace in the heart, but the
carcass without the life? What are all our con^essions, unless they be the
exercises of godly sorrow and unfeigned repentance? What our petitions, unless
animated all along with holy desires, and faith in the divine attributes and
promises? What our praises and thanks-givings, unless from the Love of God, and
a holy gratitude, and sense of Gods mercies in the heart? So that a man may as
well expect the trees should speak, or look for Logic from the bruits, or
motion from the dead, as for any service holy and acceptable to God, from the
unconverted. When the tree is evil, how can the fruit be good? Mat. 7. 18.

Secondly, to bad purpose. The unconverted soul is a very cage of unclean
birds, Rev. 18. 2. a sepulcher full of corruption and rottenness, Mat. 23. 27.
a loathsome carcass full of crawling worms, and sending forth a hellish and most
noisome savor in the nostrils of God. Psalm. 14. 3. O dreadful case! Do thou
not yet see a change to be needful? Would it not have grieved one, to have seen
the golden conseciated Vessels of Gods Temple turned into quaffing bowls for
drunkenness, and polluted with the idols service, Dan. 5. 2, 3. Was it such an
abomination to the Jews, when An^us set up the picture of a swine at the
entrance of the Temple? How much more abominable then would it have been, to
have had the very Temple it self turned into a stable, or a stye, and to have
the holy of holies served like the house of Baal, to have the Image of God
taken down, and be turned into a draught-house, 2 Kings 10. 27. This is the
very case of the unregenerate: all thy members are turned into instruments of
unrighteousness, Romans 6. 19. servants of Satan; and thy inmost powers into the
receptacles of uncleanness, Ephesians. 2. 2. Tit. 2. 15. You may see the goodly
guests within, by what comes out. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies, etc.
This black guard discovers what a Hell there is therein.

Oh abuse unsufferable! to see a heavenborn soul abased to the filthiest
drudgery, to see the glory of Gods creation, the chief of the ways of God, the
Lord of the Universe, a lapping with the prodigal at the trough, or licking up
with greediness the most loathsome vomit. Was it such a lamentation to see those
that did feed delicately, to sit desolate in the streets? and the precious sons
of Sion comparable to fine gold, to be esteemed as earthen pitchers; and those
that were clothed in scarlet to embrace dunghils? Lam. 4. 2, 5. And is it not
fearful much more, to see the only thing that has immortality in this lower
world, and carried the stamp of God, to become as a vessel wherein there is no
pleasure? (which is but the modest expression of the vessel, men put to the
most sordid use.) Oh indignity intolerable! Better thou were dashed in a
thousand pieces, than continue to be abused to so filthy a service.

II. Not only man, but the whole visible creation is in vain, without this.
Beloved, God has made all the visible creatures in Heaven and earth for the
service of man, Ier. 22. 28. and man only is the spokesman for all the rest.
Man is in the universe, like the tongue in the body, (which speaks for all the
members.) The other creatures cannot praise their maker, but by dumb signs and
hints to man, that he should speak for them. Man is, as it were, the
High Priest of Gods creation, to offer the Sacrifice of praise, for all his
fellow creatures, Psalm. 147, and 148. and 150. The Lord God expects a tribute
of praise from all his works, Psalm. 10^. 22. now all the rest do bring in their
tributo to man, and pay it in by his hand. So then, if man be false, and
faithless, and selfish, God is wronged of all, and shall have no active glory
from his works.

Oh dreadful thought to think of! That God should build such a world as this,
and lay out such infinite power, and wisdom and goodness thereupon, and all in
vain; and man should be guilty at last, of robbing, and spoiling him of the
glory of all. Oh think of this, while thou art unconverted, all the offices of
the creatures to thee are in vain: thy meat nourishes thee in vain, the Sun
holds forth his light to thee in vain, the Stars, that serve thee in their
courses by their most powerful, though hidden influence, Judges 5. 20. Hos. 2.
21, 22. do it in vain; thy Clothes warm thee in vain; thy Beast carries thee in
vain: in a word, the labor unwearied, and continual travel of the whole
creation (as to thee) is in vain. The service of all the creatures, that drudge
for thee, and yield forth their strength unto thee (that therewith thou
should serve their maker) is all but lost labor. Hence the whole Creation
groaneth under the abuse of the unsanctified world, Romans 8. 22. that pervert
them to the service of their lusts, quite contrary to the very end of their
being.

III. Without this thy Religion is in vain. Jam. 1. 26. All thy religious
performances will be but lost; for they can neither please God, Romans 8. 8. nor
save thy soul, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. which are the very ends of Religion. Be thy
services never so specious, yet God has no pleasure in them. Esaias. 1. 14. Mal.
1. 10. Is not that man's case dreadful, whose Sacrifices are as murder, and
whose prayers are a breath of abomination? Esaias 66. 3. Prove. 28. 9. Many under
convictions think they will set upon mending, and that a few prayers and alms
will salve all again: but alas, sirs, while your hearts remain unsanctified,
your duties will not pass. How punctual was Iehu? and yet all was rejected,
because his heart was not upright, 2 Kings 10. with Hos. 1. 4. How blameless
was Paul? and yet being unconverted all was but loss, Phil. 3. 6, 7. Men think
they do much in attending Gods service, and are ready to twit him with it, Esaias
58. 3. Mat. 7. 22. and set him down so much their debtor, when as their persons
being unsanctified) their duties cannot be accepted.

O soul, do not think when thy sins pursue thee, a little praying and reforming
thy course will pacify God: thou must begin with thine heart: if that be not
renewed, thou can no more please God, than one that having unspeakably
offended thee, should bring thee his vomit in a dish to pacify thee, or having
fallen into the mire, should think with his loathed embraces to reconcile thee.

It is a great misery to labor in the fire. The Poets could not invent a
worser Hell for Sys^phus than to be getting the barrel still up the hill, and
then that it should presently fall down again and renew his labor. God
threatens it, as the greatest of temporal judgments, that they should build and
not inhabit, plant and not gather, and their labors shall be eat up by
strangers, Deuteronomy. 28. 30, 38, 39, 41. Is it so great a misery to lose our common
labors, to ^ow^^ in vain, and build in vain? how much more to^ lose our pains
in Religion, to pray, and hear, and fast in vain? This is an undoing and
eternal loss. Be not deceived, if thou go on in thy sinful estate, though
thou should spread forth thine hands, God will hide his eyes; though thou
make many prayers, he will not hear, Esaias 1. 15. If a man without skill, set
about our work, and m^rr it in the doing, though he take much pains, we give
him but small thanks. God will be worshipped after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.
13. If a servant do our work, but quite contrary to our order, he shall have
rather stripes than praise. Gods work must be done according to Gods mind, or
he will not be pleased; and this cannot be, except it be done with a holy
heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2.

IV. Without this, thy hopes are in vain, Job 8. 12, 13. The Lord has rejected
thy confidence, Ier. 2. 37.

First, thy hopes of comfort here are in vain. It Is not only necessary to the
safety, but comfort of your condition, that you be converted. Without this, you
shall ^ot know peace, Esaias 49. 8. Without the fear of God, ^ou cannot have the
comforts of the Holy Ghost. Acts 9. 31. God speaks peace only to his people,
and to his Saints, Psalm. 85. 8. If you have a false peace, continuing in your
sins, it is not of Gods speaking; and then you may guess the Author. Sin is a
real Sickness, Esaias 1. 5. yea the worst of sickness, it is a leprosy in the
head, Levit. 13. 44. the plague in the heart, 1 Kings 8. 32. it is brokenness in
the bones, Psalm. 51. 8. it pierces, it wounds, it racketh, it tormenteth, 1 Timothy 6. 10. A man may as well expect ease, when his diseases are in their
strength, or his bones out of joint, as true comfort, while in his sins.

O wretched man, that can have no ^ase in this case, but what comes from the
deadliness of thy disease! You shall have the poor sick man, saying in his
lightness, he is well; when you see death in his face. He will needs up and
about his business, when the very next step is like to be into the grave. The
unsanctified often feel nothing amiss, they think themselves whole, and cry not
out for the Physician, but this shows the danger of their case.

Sin does naturally breed distempers and disturbance in the soul. What a
continual tempest and commotion is there in a discontented mind? What an eating
evil is inordinate care? What is passion, but a very fever in the mind? What
is lust but a fire in the bones? What is Pride, but a deadly tympany? or
covetousness, but an unsatiabl^ and unsufferable thirst? or malice and envy,
but venom in the very heart? spiritual sloth is but a scurvy in the mind, and
carnal security a mortal lethargy; and how can that soul have true comfort that
is under so many diseases? But converting grace cures, and so eases the mind,
and prepares the soul for a settled, standing, immortal peace. Great peace have
they that love thy commandments, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165.
They are the ways of wisdom that afford pleasure and peace. Prove. 3. 17. David
had infinitely more pleasure in the word, than in all the delights of his
Court, Psalm. 119. 103, 127. The Conscience cannot be truly pacified, till
soundly purified. Heb. 10. 22. Cursed is that peace, that is maintained in a
way of sin, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. Two sorts of peace are more to be dreaded, than
all the troubles in the world; peace with sin, and peace in sin.

Secondly, Thy hopes of Salvation hereafter are in vain: yea worse than in
vain, they are most injurious to God, most pernicious to thy self; there is
death, desperation, blasphemy in the bowels of this hope. 1. T^ is death in it.
Thy confidence shall be rooted out of thy tabernacles, (God will up with it
root and branch) it shall bring thee to the King of terrors, Job 18. 14. Though
thou may lean upon this house it will not stand, Job 8. 15. but will prove
like a ruinous building, which when a man trusts to, it falls down about his
ears. 2. There is desperation in it. Where is the hope of the hypocrite, when
God takes away his soul? Job 27. 8. Then there is an end for ever of his hope.
Indeed, the hope of the righteous has an end, but then it is not a destructive,
but a perfective end; his hope ends in ^ruition, others in frustration, Prove.
10. 28. The godly must say at death, it is finished; but the wicked, it is
perished; and in too sad earnest bemoan himself, (as he in a mistake) Where now
is my hope? He has destroyed me, I am gone, and my hope is removed like a
tree, Job 19. The righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32. When nature
is dying, his hopes are living: when his body is languishing, his hopes are
flourishing, his hope is a living hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. (...), but others are
dying, yea a damning, soul-undoing hope. When a wicked man dies his
expectation shall perish; and the hope of unjust men perishes, Prove. 11. 7. It
shall be cut off, and prove like the spiders web, Job 8. 14. which he spins out
of his own bowels, but then comes death with the broom, and takes down all, and
so there is an eternal end of his confidence, wherein he trusted. For the eyes
of the wicked shall sail, and their hope sh^^^ be as the giving up of the
Ghost; Job 11. 2. ^cked men are settled in their carnal hope and will not be
beaten out of it. They hold it fast, they will not let it go. Yea but death
will knock off their fingers. Though we cannot undeceive them, death and
judgment will. When death strikes his dart through thy liver, it will let out
thy soul, and thy hopes together. The unsanctified have hope only in this life,
1 Cor. 15. 19. and therefore are of all men most miserable. When death comes,
it lets them out into the amazing gulf of endless desperation. 3. There is
blasphemy in it. To hope we shall be saved, though continuing unconverted, is
to hope, we shall prove God a lier. He has told you, that so merciful and
pitiful as he is, he will never save you notwithstanding, if you go on in
ignorance, or a course of unrighteousness, Esa. 27. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 9. in a word,
he has told you, that whatever you be, or do, nothing shall avail you to
salvation, without you be new creatures, Gal. 6. 15. Now to say, God is
merciful, and we hope he will save us nevertheless, is to say in effect, we
hope God will not do as he says. We may not set Gods attributes at variance.
God is resolved to glorify mercy, but not with the prejudice of truth, as the
presumptuous sinner will find to his everlasting sorrow.

Object. Why, but we hope in Jesus Christ, we put our whole trust in God, and
therefore doubt not, but we shall be saved.

Answ. 1. This is not to hope in Christ, but against Christ. To hope to see the
Kingdom of God, without being born again, to hope to find eternal life in the
broad way, is to hope Christ will prove a false Prophet. It Is David's plea, I
hope in thy word, Psalm. 119. 81. but this hope is against the word. Show me a
word of Christ for thy hope, that he will save thee in thine ignorance, or
profane neglects of his service, and I will never go to shake thy confidence.

2. God does with abhorrency reject this hope. Those condemned in the Prophet,
went on in their sins, yet (says the Text) they will lean upon the Lord, Mic.
3. 11. God will not endure to be made a prop to men in their sins. The Lord
rejects those presumpt^ous sinners, that went^ on still in their tresposses,
and yet would stay themselves upon the God of Israel, Esaias 48. 1, 2. as a man
would shake off the briars (as one well) that cleave to his garment.

3. If thy hope were any thing worth, it would purify thee from thy sins, 1
Ioh. 3. 3. but cursed is that hope, which does cherish men in their sins.

Obj. Would you have us to despair?

Ans. You must despair of ever coming to Heaven as you are, Act. 2. 37. that
is, while you remain unconverted. You must despair ever to see the face of God
without holiness: but you must by no means despair of finding mercy, upon your
thorough repentance and conversion: neither may you despair of attaining to
repentance and conversion, in the use of Gods means.

V. Without this all that Christ has done and suffered will be (as to you) in
vain; Ioh. 13. 8. Tit. 2. 14. that is, it will no way avail to your salvation.
Many urge this as sufficient ground for their hopes, that Christ died for
sinners: but I must tell you, Christ never died to save impenitent and
unconverted sinners (so continuing.) 2 Timothy 2. 19. A great divine was wont, in
his private dealings with souls, to ask two questions, 1. What has Christ done
for you? 2. What has Christ wrought in you? Without the application of the
spirit in Regeneration, we can have no saving interest in the benefits of
Redemption. I tell you from the Lord, Christ himself cannot save you, if you go
on in this estate.

I. It were against his trust. The Mediator is the servant of the Father, Esaias
42. 1. shows his commission from him, acts in his name, and pleads his command
for his justification: John 10. 18, 36. John 6. 38, 40. And God has committed
all things to him, entrusted his own glory, and the salvation of his elect with
him, Mat. 11. 27. Ioh. 17. 2. Accordingly, Christ gives his Father an account
of both parts of his trust, before he leaves the world. Ioh. 17. 4, 6, 12. Now
Christ should quite cross his fathers glory, his greatest trust, if he should
save men in their sins; for this were to overturn all his counsels, and offer
violence to all his attributes.

First, To overturn all his counsels; of which this is the order, that men
should be brought through sanctification, to salvation, 2 These. 2. 13. He has
chosen them that they should be holy. Ephesians. 1. 4. They are elected to pardon and
life, through sanctification, 1 Pet. 1. 2. If thou can repeal the Law of Gods
immutable counsel, or corrupt him, whom the Father has sealed, to go directly
against his Commission, then, and not otherwise, may thou get to Heaven in
this condition. To hope that Christ will save thee while unconverted, is to
hope that Christ will falsify his trust. He never did, nor will, save one soul,
but whom the Father had given him in election, and drawn to him in effectual
calling, John 6. 37, 44. Be assured, Christ will save none, in a way contrary
to his Fathers will, who came on purpose to do his will, John 6. 38.

Secondly, To offer violence to all his attributes 1. To his Justice. For the
righteousness of Gods Judgment lies, in rendering to all according to their
work, Romans 2. 5, 6. Now, should men sow to the flesh, and yet of the spirit
reap everlasting life, Gal. 6. 7, 8. where were the glory of Divine Justice,
since it should be given to the wicked, according to the work of the righteous?
2. To his holiness. If God should not only save sinners, but save them in their
sins, his most pure and strict holiness would be exceedingly defaced. The
unsanctified, is in the eyes of Gods holiness, worse than a swine or viper,
Mat. 23. 33. 2 Pet. 2. 22. Now what cleanly nature could endure to have the
filthy swine bed and board with him in his parlour, or bed chamber? It would
offer extremest violence to the infinite purity of the divine nature, to have
such to dwell with him. They cannot stand in his judgment, they cannot abide
in his presence, Psalm. 1. 5. Psalm. 5. 4, 5. If holy David would not endure such
in his house, no nor in his sight, Psalm. 101. 3, 7. shall we think God will?
Should he take men as they be, from the trough to the table, from the Harlots
lips, from the stye and draught to the glory of Heaven, the world would think
God were at no such a distance from sin, nor had such dislike of it, as we are
told he has: they would conclude, God were altogether such a one as themselves
(as they wickedly did, but from the very forbearance of God, Psalm. 50. 21.) 3.
To his veracity. For God has declared from Heaven, That if any shall say they
shall have peace, though he should go on in the imagination of his heart: his
wrath shall smoke against that man, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. That they (only,) that
confess, and for sake their sins, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. That they
that shall enter into his hill, must be of clean hands, and a pure heart, Psalm.
24. 3, 4. Where were Gods truth, if notwithstanding all this, he should bring
men to salvation without Conversion? O desperate sinner, that dare to hope,
that Christ will put the lie upon his Father, and nullify his word to save
thee! 4. To his wisdom. For this were to throw away the choicest mercies, on
them that would not value them, nor were any way suited to them. First, they
would not value them. The unsanctified sinner puts but little price upon Gods
great Salvation, Mat. 22. 5. He sets no more by Christ, than the whole by the
Physician, Mat. 9. 12. he prises not his balm, values not his cure, tramples
upon his blood, Heb. 10. 29. Now, would it stand with wisdom, to force pardon
and life, upon them that would give him no thanks for them? Will the all-wise
God (when he has forbidden us to do it) throw his holy things to dogs, and his
pearls to swine, that would (as it were) but turn again and rent him, Mat. 7.
6. This would make mercy to be despised indeed. Wisdom requires, that life be
given, in a way suitable to Gods honor; and that God provide for the securing
his own glory, as well as man's felicity. It would be dishonorable to God, to
set his Jewels in the snouts of swine (continuing such) and to bestow his
choicest riches on them, that have more pleasure in their swill, than the
Heavenly delights that he does offer. God should lose the praise and glory of
his grace, if he should cast it away on them, that were not only unworthy, but
unwilling. Secondly, they are no way suited to them. The Divine Wisdom is seen
in suiting things each to other, the means to the end, the object to the
faculty, the quality of the gift to the capacity of the receiver Now, if Christ
should bring the unregenerate sinner to Heaven, he could take no more felicity
there, than a Beast if you should bring him into a beautiful room, to the
society of learned men, and a well furnished table; when as the poor thing had
much rather be grazing with his fellow bruits. Alas, what should an
unsanctified creature do in Heaven! He could take no content, because nothing
suits him. The place does not suit him, he would be but piscis in arido, quite
out of his element, as a swine in the parlour, or a fish out of water. The
company does not suit him. What communion has darkness with light, corruption
with perfection? Filth and rottenness, with glory and immortality? The
employment does not suit him. The anthems of Heaven fit not his mouth, suit not
his ear. Can thou charm thy Beast with Music? or will thou bring him to thy
Organ, and expect that he should make thee melody, or keep time with the
skilful Quire? Or had he skill, he would have no will, and so could find no
pleasure, no more than the nauseous stomach in the meat, on which it has newly
sur^eited. Spread thy table with delicates before a languishing patient, and it
will be but a very offense. Alas, if the poor man think a Sermon long, and say
of a Sabbath, What a weariness is it? Mal. 1. 13. how miserable would he think
it, to be held to it to all eternity? 5. To his Immutability, or else to his
Omnisciency, or Omnipotency. For this is enacted in the Conclave of Heaven, and
enrolled in the degrees of the Court above, that none but the pure in heart
shall ever see God, Mat. 5. 8. This is laid up with him, and sealed among his
treasures. Now if Christ, yet, bring any to Heaven unconverted, either he must
get them in without his Fathers knowledge, and then where is his Omnisciency?
or against his will, and then where were his Omnipotency? or he must change his
will, and then where were his Immutability?

Sinner, will thou not yet give up thy vain hope of being saved in this
condition? Says Bildad, shall the earth be forsaken for thee? or the rocks
removed out of their place? Job 18. 4. May not I much more reason so with thee?
Shall the Laws of Heaven be reversed for thee? Shall the everlasting
foundations be overturned for thee? Shall Christ put out the eye of his Fathers
Omnisciency, or shorten the arm of his eternal power for thee? Shall divine
justice be violated for thee? or the brightness of the glory of his holiness be
blemished for thee? Oh the impossibility, absurdity, blasphemy, that is in such
a confidence! To think Christ will ever save thee in this condition, is to make
thy Savior to become a sinner, and to do more wrong to the infinite Majesty,
than all the Wicked on Earth, or Devils in Hell ever did, or could. And yet
will thou not give up such a blasphemous hope?

II. Against his Word. We need not say, who shall ascend into Heaven to bring
down Christ from above? Or who shall descend into the deep to bring up Christ
from beneath? The word is nigh us. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Are you agreed, that Chrst
shall end the controversy? Hear then his own words: Except you be converted
you s^all in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 3. You must be
born again, Ioh. 3. 7. If I wash thee not thou have no part in me, Ioh. 13. 8.
Repent or perish, Luke 13. 3. One word, one would think, were enough from
Christ; but how often and earnestly does he reiterate it, verily, verily,
verily, verily except a man be born again he shall not see the Kingdom of God,
Ioh. 3. 3, 5. Yea he does not only assert, but prove the necessity of the new
birth, viz. from the fleshliness and filthiness of man's first birth, Ioh. 3. 6.
by reason of which, man is no more fit for Heaven than the beast is for the
Chamber of the Kings presence. And will thou yet believe thine own presumptuous
confidence, directly against Christ's word? He must go quite against the Law of
his Kingdom, and Rule of his Judgment, to save thee in this estate.

III. Against his Oath. He has lifted up his hand to Heaven, he has sworn,
that those that remain in unbelief, and know not his ways (that is, are
ignorant of them, or disobedient to them) shall not enter into his rest, Psalm.
95. 11. Heb. 3. 18. and will thou not yet believe, O sinner, that he is in
earnest? Can thou hope he will be forsworn for thee? The Covenant of Grace is
confirmed by an oath, and sealed by blood, Heb. 6. 17. Heb. 9. 16, 18, 19. Mat.
26. 28. But all must be made void, and another way to Heaven found out, if thou
be saved, living and dying unsanctified. God is come to his lowest and last
terms with man, and has condescended as far as with honor he could, has set
up his pillars, (...) a Ne plus ultra. Men cannot be saved, while unconverted,
except they could get another Covenant made, and the whole frame of the Gospel
(which was established for ever, with such dreadful solemnities) quite altered,
and would not this be a distracted hope?

IV. Against his Honor. Christ will so show his love to the sinner, as withal
to show his hatred to sin. Therefore he that names the name of Jesus must
depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and deny all ungodliness; and he that has
hope of life by Christ must purify himself as he is pure, 1 Ioh. 3. 3. Tit. 2.
12. otherwise Christ would be thought a fautor of sin. The Lord Jesus would
have all the world to know, though he pardon sin, he will not protect it. If
holy David shall say, depart from me all you workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6. 8.
and shall shut the doors against them, Psalm. 101. 7. shall not such much more
expect it from Christ's holiness? Would it be for his honor, to have the dogs
to the table? or to lodge the swine with his children? or to have Abraham's
bosom, to be a nest of Vipers.

V. Against his Offices. God has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior,
Acts. 5. 31. he should act against both, should he save men in their sins. It
is the Office of a King. Parcere subjectis, and d^bellare sup^rbos. To be a
terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well, Romans 13. 3, 4. He is a
Minister of God, a revenger to ^ecute wrath on him that does evil. Now should
Christ favor the ungodly (so continuing) and take those to reign with him,
that would not that he should reign over them, Luke 19. 27. this were quite
against his office. He therefore reigns, that he may put his enemies under his
feet: 1 Cor. 15. 25. now should he lay them in his bosom he should cross the
end of his regal power. It belongs to Christ, as King, to subdue the hearts,
and slay the lusts of his chosen, Psalm. 45. 5. Psalm. 110. 3. What King would
take the rebels, in open hostility, into his Court? What were this but to
betray Life, Kingdom, Government and all together? If Christ be a King, he must
have homage, honor, subjection, etc. Mal. 1. 6. now to save men while in their
natural enmity, were to obscure his dignity, lose his authority, bring contempt
on his Government, and sell his dear-bought rights for naught.

Again, as Christ should not be a Prince, so neither a Savior, if he should do
this. For his Salvation is spiritual, he is called Jesus, because he saves his
people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. So that should he save them in their sins,
he should be neither Lord nor Jesus. To save men from the punishment, and not
from the power of sin, were to do his work by halves, and be an imperfect
Savior. His office, as the Deliverer, is, to turn away ungodliness from Jacob,
Romans 11. 26. He is sent to bless men in turning form them their iniquities,
Acts 3. 26. to make an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24. so that he should destroy his
own designs, and nullify his offices, to save men abiding in their unconverted
estate.

Application. Arise then, what meanest thou O sleeper? Awake, O secure sinner,
left thou be consumed in thine iniquities. Say as the Lepers, if we sit here we
shall die, 2 King. 7. 3, 4. Verily, it is not more certain thou art now out of
hell, than that thou shall speedily be in it, except thou repent and be
converted: there is but this one door for thee to escape by. Arise then, O
sluggard, and shake off thine excuses. How long will thou slumber, and fold
thine hands to sleep? Prove. 6. 10, 11. Will thou lie down in the midst of the
Sea, or sleep on the top of the mast, Prove. 23. 24. There is no remedy; but
thou must either turn or burn. There is an unchangeable necessity of the change
of thy condition, except thou art resolved to bide the worst of it, and try it
out with the Almighty. If thou love thy life, O man, arise, and come away.
Methinks I see the Lord Jesus laying the merciful hands of an holy violence
upon thee: methinks he carries it like the Angels to Lot, Genesis 19. 15. etc.
Then the Angels hastened Lot, saying arise, lest thou be consumed. And while he
lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, the Lord being merciful unto him, and
they brought him without the City and said, Escape for thy life, stay not in
all the plain, escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.

Oh how wilful will thy destruction be, if thou should yet harden thy self
in thy sinful state! But none of you can say, but you have had fair warning.
Yet methinks I cannot tell how to leave you so. It is not enough to me to have
delivered my own soul. What, shall I go away without my errand? Will none of
you arise, and follow me? Have I been all this while speaking in the wind? Have
I been charming the deaf adder, or allaying the tumbling Ocean with arguments?
Do I speak to the trees or rocks, or to men? to the tombs and monuments of the
dead, or to a living auditory? If you be men, and not senseless stocks, stand
still, and consider whither you be going, If you have the reason and
understanding of men, dare not to run into the flames, and fall into hell with
your eyes open: but bethink your selves, and set to the work of repentance.
What, men, and yet run into the pit, when the very beasts will not be forced
in! What, endowed with reason, and yet dally with death and hell, and the
vengeance of the Almighty! Are men herein distinguished from the very bruits,
that they have no foresight of, and a care to provide for the things to come;
and will you not hasten your escape from eternal torments? O show your selves
men, and let reason prevail with you: is it a reasonable thing for you to
contend against the Lord your maker? Esaias 45. 9. or to harden your selves
against his word? Job 9. 4. as though the strength of Israel would lie? 1 Samuel
15. 29. Is it reasonable that an understanding creature should lose, yea live
quiet against the very end of his being, and be as a broken pitcher, only fit
for the dunghill? Is it tolerable, that the only thing in this world that God
has made capable of knowing his will, and bringing him glory, should yet live
in ignorance of his maker, and be unserviceable to his use, yea should be
engaged against him, and spit his venom in the face of his creator? Hear, O
Heavens, and give ear, O earth, and let the creatures without sense be judge,
if this be reason, that man, when God has nourished and brought him up, should
rebel agninst him, Esaias. 1. 2. Judge in your own selves: Is it a reasonable
undertaking, for briars and thorns, to set themselves in battle against the
devouring fire? Esaias 27. 4. or for the potsherd of the earth to strive with his
maker? If you will say, this is reason, surely the eye of reason is quite put
out. And, If this be not reason, then there is no reason that you should
continue as you be, but it is all the reason in the world, you should forth with
repent and turn.

What shall I say; I could spend my self in this argument. Oh that you would
but hearken to me! that you would presently set upon a new course! will you not
be made clean? When shall it once be? What, will no body be persuaded? Reader,
shall I prevail with thee for one? Will thou sit down and consider the
forementioned arguments, and debate it, whether it be not best to turn? Come
and let us reason together. Is it good for thee to be here? Will thou sit
still, till the tide come in upon thee? Is it good for thee to try whether God
will be so good as his word? and to harden thy self in a conceit, that all is
well with thee, while thou remainest unsanctified?

But I know you will not be persuaded, but the greatest part will be as they
have been, and do as they have done. I know the drunkard will to his vomit
again, and the deceiver will to his deceit again, and the lustful wanton to his
dalliance again. Alas, that I must leave you where you were! in your ignorance
or looseness, or in your lifeless formality and customary devotions! However, I
will sit down and bemoan my fruitless labors, and spend some sighs over my
perishing hearers.

O distracted sinners! What will their end be? What will they do in the day of
visitation? Whither will they flee for help? Where will they leave their glory?
Esaias, 10. 3. How powerfully has sin bewitched them? How effectually has the
God of this world blinded them? How strong is their delusion? How uncircumcised
their ears? How obdurate their hearts? Satan has them at his beck: but how
long may I call, and can get no answer? I may dispute with them year after
year, and they will give me the hearing, and that is all. They must and will
have their sins, say what I will. Though I tell them there is death in the cup,
yet they will take it up. Though I tell them it is the broad way and ends in
destruction, yet they will on in it. I warn them, yet cannot win them.
Sometimes I think, the mercies of God will melt them, and his winning
invitations will overcome them: but I find them as they were. Sometimes that
the terror of the Lord will persuade them: yet neither this will do it. They
will approve the word, like the Sermon, commend the Preacher: but they will yet
live as they did. They will not deny me, yet they will not obey me. They will
flock to the word of God, and sit before me as his people, and hear my words:
but they will not do them. They value and will plead for Ministers; and I am to
them as the lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice: yet I cannot get
them to come under Christ's yoke. They love me, and will be ready to say they
will do any thing for me: but for my life I cannot persuade them to leave their
sins, to forgo their evil company, their intemperance, their unjust gains, etc.
I cannot prevail with them, to set up prayer in their families and closets: yet
they will promise me, like the forward son, that said, I go sir, but went not,
Mat. 21. 30. I cannot persuade them to learn the principles of Religion, though
else they will die without knowledge, Job 36. 12. I tell them their misery; but
they will not believe, but it is well enough. If I tell them particularly, I
fear for such reasons their state is bad, they will judge me censorious: or, if
they be at present a little awakened, are quickly lulled asleep by Satan again,
and have lost the sense of all.

Alas for my poor hearers! Must they perish at last by the hundreds, when
Ministers would so fain save them? What course shall I use with them that I
have not tried? What shall I do for the daughter of my people? Jer. 9. 7. O
Lord God help. Alas, shall I leave them thus! If they will not hear me, yet do
thou hear me. Oh that they might yet live in thy sight! Lord save them, or else
they perish. My heart would melt to see their houses on fire about their ears,
when they were fast in their beds: and shall not my soul be moved within me to
see them falling into endless perdition? Lord have compassion, and save them
out of the burning. Put forth thy divine power, and the work will be done: but
as for me, I cannot prevail.

CHAP. IV. Showing the Marks of the Unconverted.
WHile we keep aloof in generals, there is little fruit to be expected. It is
the hand-fight that does execution. David. is not awakened by the Prophets
hovering at a distance, in parabolical insinuations: he is forced to close with
him, and tell him home, Thou art the man. Few will in words deny the necessity
of the new birth; but they have a self deluding confidence, that the work is
not now to do. And because they know themselves free from that gross
hypocrisy, that does take up Religion merely for a color to deceive others,
and for the covering of wicked designs, they are confident of their sincerity,
and suspect not that more close hypocrisy (where the greatest danger lies) by
which man deceives his own soul, James 1. 26. But man's deceitful heart is such
a matchless cheat, and self delusion so reigning and so fatal a disease, that I
know not whether be the greater, the difficulty, or the displicency, or the
necessity of the undeceiving work that I am now upon. Alas for my unconverted
hearers! They must be undeceived, or undone. But how shall this be effected?
Hic labor, hoc opus est.

Help, O all searching light, and let thy discerning eye discover the rotten
foundation of the selfdeceiver; and lead me, O Lord God, as thou did thy
Prophet, into the chambers of Imagery, and dig through the wall of sinners
hearts, and discover the hidden abominations that are lurking out, of sight in
the dark. O send thine Angel before me; to open the sundry Wards of their
hearts, as thou did before Peter, and make even the Iron gates to fly open of
their own accord. And as Jonathan no sooner tasted the Honey, but his eyes were
enlightened: so grant, O Lord, that when the poor deceived souls, with whom I
have to do, shall cast their eyes into these lines, their minds may be
illuminated, and their consciences convinced and awakened, that they may see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and be converted, and thou may
heal them.

This must be premised, before we proceed to the discovery, that it is most
certain men may have a confident persuasion, that their hearts and states be
good, and yet be unsound. Hear the Truth himself, who shows in Laodicea's case,
that men may be wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and yet
know it not; yea they may be confident they are rich and increased in grace.
Rev. 3. 17. There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, and yet is
not washed from their filthiness, Prove. 30. 12. who better persuaded of his
case, than Paul, while yet he remained unconverted? Romans 7. 9. So that they are
miserably deceived, that take a strong confidence, for a sufficient evidence.
They that have no better proof, than barely a strong persuasion, that they are
converted, are certainly, as yet, strangers to Conversion.

But to come more close: as it was said of the adherents of Antichrist, so
here; some of the unconverted carry their marks in their foreheads, more
openly; and some in their hands, more covertly. The Apostle reckons up some,
upon whom he writes the sentence of death, as in these dreadful catalogues,
which I beseech you to attend with all diligence, Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. For this ye
know that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an
idolater, has an inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man
deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience, Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be
not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolators, and adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, or extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
See Gall. 5. 19, 20, 21. Woe to them that have their names written in these
bedrolls: such may know, as certainly, as if God had told it them from Heaven,
that they are unsanctified, and under an impossibility of being saved in this
condition.

There are then these several sorts, that, past all dispute, are unconverted,
they carry their marks in their foreheads.

1. The unclean. These are ever reckoned among the goats, and have their names,
whoever be left out, in all the forementioned catalogues, Ephesians. 5. 5. Rev. 21.
8. 1. Cor. 5. 9, 10. 2. The Covetous. These are ever branded for idolaters, and
the doors of the Kingdom are shut against them by name. Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. 3. Drunkards, not only such as drink away their reason, but
withal, yea above all, such as are too strong for strong drink. The Lord fills
his mouth with woes against these, and declares them to have no inheritance in
the Kingdom of God, Esaias. 5. 11, 12, 22. Gal. 5. 21. 4. Liars. The God that
cannot lie has told them, that there is no place for them in his Kingdom, no
entrance into his hill; but their portion is with the Father of lies (whose
children they are) in the lake of burnings, Psalm. 15. 1, 2, Rev. 21. 8, 27.
Ioh. 8. 44. Prove. 6. 17. 5. Swearers. The end of these men without deep and
speedy repentance, is swift destruction, and most certain and unavoidable
condemnation, Iam. 5. 12. Zech. 5. 1, 2, 3.

Railers and Back-biters, that love to take up a reproach against their
Neighbor, and fling all the dirt they can in his face, or else wound him
secretly behind his back; Psalm. 15. 1. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 11.

7. Thieves, Extortioners, Oppressors, that grind the poor, overreach their
brethren, when they have them at an advantage, these must know, that God is the
avenger of all such, 1 These. 4. 6. Hear O ye false and purloining and wasteful
servants: Hear, O ye deceitful tradesmen, hear your sentence. God will
certainly hold his door against you, and turn your treasures of unrighteousness
into treasures of wrath, and make your ill-gotten^ silver and gold, to torment
you like burning Metal in your bowels, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Iam. 5. 2, 3. 8. All
that do ordinarily live in the profane neglect of Gods worship, that hear not
his word, that call not on his name, that restrain prayer before God, that mind
not their own nor their families souls, but live without God in the world, Ioh.
8. 47. Job. 15. 4. Psalm. 14. 4. Psalm. 79. 6. Ephesians. 2. 12. and 4. 18. 9. Those
that are frequenters and lovers of evil company. God has declared, he will be
the destruction of all such, and that they shall never enter into the hill of
his rest, Prove. 13. 20. Psalm. 15. 4. Prove. 9. 6. 10. Scoffers at Religion, that
make a scorn of precise walking, and mock at the messengers and diligent
servants of the Lord, and at their holy profession, and make themselves merry
with the weaknesses and failings of professors. Hear ye despisers, hear your
dreadful doom, Prove. 19. 29. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Prove. 3. 34.
Sinner, consider diligently, whether thou art not to be found in one of these
ranks: for if this be thy case, thou art in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity; for all these do carry their marks in their foreheads, and are
undoubtedly the sons of death.

And if so, the Lord pity our poor Congregations; Oh how little a number will
be left, when these ten sorts are set out! Alas on how many doors, on how many
faces must we write, Lord have mercy upon us! Sirs, what shift do you make to
keep up your confidence of your good estate, when God from heaven declares
against you, and pronounces, you in a state of damnation? I would reason with
you, as God with them; How can thou say I am not polluted? Ier. 2. 23. See
thy way in the valley, know what thou have done. Man, is not thy conscience
privy to thy tricks of deceit, to thy chamber pranks, to thy way of lying? Yea
are not thy friends, thy family, thy neighbors, witnesses to thy profane
neglects of Gods worship, to thy covetous practices, to thy envious and
malicious carriage? may not they point at thee as thou go, there goes a
gaming Prodigal; there goes a drunken Nabal, a companion of evildoers; there
goes a railer, or a scoffer, a loose liver? Beloved, God has written it as
with a Sun beam, in the book out of which you must be judged, that these are
not the spots of his Children, and that none such (except renewed by converting
grace) shall ever escape the damnation of Hell.

Oh that such of you would now be persuaded to repent and turn from all your
transgressions, or else iniquity will be your ruin! Ezekiel. 18. 30. Alas for
poor hardened sinners! Must I leave you at last where you were? Must I leave the
tipler still at the Ale-bench? Must I leave the wanton still at his dalliance?
Must I leave the malicious still in his venom? And the drunkard still at his
vomit? However you must know, that you have been warned, and that I am clear of
your blood. And whether men will hear, or whether they will forbear, I will
leave these three scriptures with them, either as thunderbolts to awaken them,
or as ^earing Irons to harden them to a reprobate sense, Psalm. 68. 21. God
shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one, as
goes on still in his trespasses, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved
hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove.
1. 24, etc. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded. etc. I will mock at your calamity -- when your
destruction comes as a whirlwind.

And now I imagine, many will begin to bless themselves, and think all is well,
because they cannot be spotted with the grosser evils above mentioned. But I
must further tell you, that there are another sort of unsanctified persons,
that carry not their marks in their foreheads, but more secretly and covertly
in their hands. These do frequently deceive themselves and others, and pass for
good Christians, when they are all the while unsound at bottom. Many pass
undiscovered, till death and judgment bring all to light. Those self-deceivers
seem to come even to Heaven gate with confidence of their admission^ and yet
are turned off at last, Mat. 7. 22. Brethren, Beloved, I beseech you deeply to
lay to heart, and firmly to retain this awakening consideration: That
Multitudes miscarry by the hand of some secret sin, that is not only hidden
from others, but (for want of observing their own hearts) even from themselves.
A man may be free from open pollutions, and yet die at last by the fatal hand
of some unobserved iniquity: And there be these eleven hidden sins, by which
souls go down by numbers into the chambers of death. These you must search
carefully for, and take them as black marks (wherever they be found)
discovering a graceless and unconverted estate. As you love your lives read
them carefully, with a holy jealousy of your selves, lest you should be the
persons concerned.

1. Gross Ignorance. Ah how many poor souls does this sin kill in the dark,
Hos. 4. 6. while they think verily they have good hearts, and are in the ready
way to Heaven! This is the murderer that dispatches thousands in a silent
manner, when (poor hearts!) they suspect nothing, and see not the hand that
mischiefs them. You shall find whatever excuses you have for ignorance, that
it is a soul^ undoing evil, Esaias. 27. 11. 2 These. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 3. Ah would it
not have pitied a man's heart to have seen that woeful spectacle, when the poor
Pro^estants were shut up a multitude together in a b^rn, and a butcher comes
with his inhumane hands warm in humane blood, and leads them one by one
blindfold to a block, where he slew them (poor Innocents!) one after another by
the scores in cold blood? But how much more should our hearts bleed, to think
of the hundreds in great Congregations, that ignorance does butcher in secret,
and lead them blindfold to the block? Beware this be none of your case. Make no
pleas for ignorance. If you spare that sin, know that that will not spare you.
Will a man keep a murderer in his bosom?

2. Secret reserves in closing with Christ. To forsake all for Christ, to hate
father and mother, yea and a man's own life for him, this is a hard saying, Luke
14. 26. Some will do much, but they will not be of the religion that will undo
them; they never come to be entirely devoted to Christ, nor fully to resign to
him. They must have the sweet sin. They mean to do themselves no harm. They
have secret exceptions for life, liberty, or estate. Many take Christ thus hand
over head, and never consider his self-denying terms, nor cast up the cost; and
this error in the foundation marrs all, and secretly ruins them for ever, Luke
14. 28. Mat. 13. 21.

3. Formality in Religion. Many stick in the bark, and rest in the outside of
Religion, and in the external performances of holy duties; Mat. 23. 25. and
this oft-times does most effectually deceive men, and does more certainly undo
them, than open looseness; as it was in the Pharisees case, Mat. 21. 31. They
hear, they fast, they pray, they give alms, and therefore will not believe but
their case is good, Luke 18. 11. whereas resting in the work done, and coming
short of the heart-work, and the inward power and vitals of Religion, they f^ll
at last into the burning, from the flattering hopes, and confident persuasions,
of their being in the ready way to Heaven, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Oh dreadful case,
when a man's Religion shall serve only to harden him, and effectually to delude
and deceive his own Soul!

4. The prevalency of false ends in holy duties. Mat 23. 25. This was the bane
of the Pharisees Oh how many a poor soul is undone by this, and drops into
hell, before he discerns his mistake! He performs good duties, and so thinks
all is well, and perceives not that he is acted by carnal motives all the
while. It is too true, that even with the truly sanctified, many carnal ends
will often times creep in; but they are the matter of his hatred and humiliation,
and never come to be habitually prevalent with him, and to bear the greatest
sway, Romans 14. 7. But now when the main thing that does ordinarily carry a man
out to religious duties, shall be some carnal end, as to satisfy his
conscience, to get the repute of being religious, to be seen of men, to show
his own gifts and parts, to avoid the reproach of a profane and irreligious
person, or the like, this discovers an un^ound heart, Hos. 10. 1. Zech. 7. 5,
6. O Christians, if you would avoid self-deceit, see that you mind, not only
your acts, but withal, yea above all, your ends,

5. Trusting on their own righteousness, Luke 18. 9. This is a soul undoing
mischief, Romans 10. 3. When men do trust in their own righteousness, they do
indeed reject Christ's. Beloved, you had need be watchful on every hand, for
not only your sins, but your duties may undo you. It may be you never thought
of this, but so it is, that a man may as certainly miscarry by his seeming
righteousness, and supposed graces, as by gross sins; and that is, when a man
does trust to these as his righteousness before God, for the satisfying his
justice, appeasing his wrath, procuring his favor, and obtaining of his own
pardon: for this is to put Christ out of office and make a Savior of our own
duties and graces. Beware of this, O professors; you are much in duties, but
this one fly will spoil all the ointment. When you have done most, and best, be
sure to go out of your selves to Christ, reckon your own righteousness but
rags, Psalm. 143. 2. Phil. 3. 8. Esaias 64. 6. Neh. 13. 22.

6. A secret enmity against the strictness of religion. Many moral persons,
punctual in their formal devotion, have yet a bitter enmity against
preciseness, and hate the life and power of religion, Phil. 3. 6. compared with
Act. 9. 1. They like not this forwardness, nor that men should keep such a stir
in religion. They condemn the strictness of Religion, as singularity,
indiscretion, and intemperate zeal; and with them a lively preacher, or lively
christian, is but a heady fellow. These men love not holiness, as holiness,
(for then they would love the height of holiness) and therefore are undoubtedly
rotten at heart, whatever good opinion they have of themselves.

7. The resting in a certain pitch of Religion. When they have so much as will
save them (as they suppose,) they look no further, and so show themselves short
of true Grace, which will ever put men upon aspiring to further perfection.
Phil. 3. 12, 13. Prove. 4. 18.

8. The predominant love of the World. This is the sure evidence of an
unsanctified heart. Mar. 10. 37. 1 Ioh. 2. 15. But how close does this sin lurk
oft-times under a fair covert of forward profession? Luke 8. 14. Yea such a
power of deceit is there in this sin, that many times when every body else can
see the man's worldliness and covetousness, he cannot see it himself, but has
so many colors, and excuses, and pretenses for his eagerness on the world,
that he does blind his own eyes, and perish in his self deceit. How many
professors be there, with whom the world has more of their heart and
affections than Christ? Who mind earthly things, and thereby are evidently
after the flesh, and like to end in destruction? Romans 8. 25.. Phil. 3. 19. Yet
ask these men; and they will tell you confidently, they prize Christ above all,
God forbid else! and see not their own earthly mindedness for want of a narrow
observation of the workings of their own hearts. Did they but carefully search,
they would quickly find that their greatest content is in the world, Luke 12.
19. and their greatest care and main endeavor to get and secure the world,
which are the certain discoveries of an unconverted sinner. May the professing
part of the world take earnest heed, that they perish not by the hand of this
sin unobserved. Men may be and often are kept off from Christ, as effectually
by the inordinate love of lawful comforts, as by the most unlawful courses,
Mat. 22. 5. Luke 14. 18, 19, 20, 24.

9. Reigning malice and envy against those that disrespect them, or are
injurious to them, 1 Ioh. 2. 9, 11. O how do many that seem to be religious
remember injuries, and carry grudges, and will return men as good as they
bring, rendering evil for evil, loving to take revenge, wishing evil to them
that wrong them, directly against the rule of the Gospel, the pattern of
Christ, and the nature of God, Romans 12. 14, 17. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. Neh. 6. 17.
Doubtless where this evil is kept boiling in the heart, and is not hated,
resisted, mortified, but does habitually prevail, that person is in the very
gall of bitterness, and in a state of death. Mat. 18. 34, 35. 1 John 3. 14, 15.

Reader does nothing of this touch thee? art thou in none of the forementioned
ranks? O search, and search again; take thy heart solemnly to task. Woe unto
thee, if after all thy profession, thou should be found under the power of
ignorance, lost in formality, drowned in earthly mindedness, envenomed with
malice, exalted in an opinion of thine own righteousness, levened with
hypocrisy, and carnal ends in Gods service, imbittered against strictness:
this would be a sad discovery that all thy Religion were in vain. But I must
proceed.

10. Unmortified Pride. When men love the praise of men, more than the praise
of God; and set their hearts upon men's esteem, applause and approbation, it is
most certain, they are yet in their sins, and strangers to true conversion.
John 12. 43. Gal. 1. 10. When men see not, nor complain of, nor groan under the
pride of their own hearts, it is a sign they are stark dead in sin. O how
secretly does this sin live and reign in many hearts, and they know it not, but
are very strangers to themselves! Ioh. 9. 40.

11. The prevailing love of pleasure, 2 Timothy 3. 4. This is a black mark. When
men give the flesh the liberty that it craves, and pamper, and please it, and
do not deny and restrain it: when their great delight is in gratifying their
bellies, and pleasing their senses; whatever appearance they may have of
Religion, all is un^ound. Romans 16. 18. Tit. 3. 3. A flesh-pleasing life cannot
be pleasing to God, They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, and are
careful to cross it, and keep it under, as their enemy, Gal. 5. 24. 1 Cor. 9.
25. 26, 27.

12. Carnal se^^rity, or a presumptuous and ungrounded confidence, that their
condition is already good. Rev. 3. 17. Many cry peace and safety, when sudden
destruction is coming upon them, 1 These. 5. 3. This was that which kept the
foolish Virgins sleeping, when they should have been working; upon their beds,
when they should have been at the markets. Mat. 25. 5, 10. Prove. 10. 5. They
perceived not their want of Oil, till the bridegroom was come; and while they
went to buy, the door was shut. And oh that these foolish Virgins had no
successors! where is the place, yea where is the house almost, where these do
not dwell? Men are willing to cherish in themselves, upon never so s^ght
grounds, a hope that their condition is good, and so look not out after a
change, and by this means perish in their sins. Are you at peace? Show me upon
what grounds your peace is maintained. Is it a Scripture peace? Can you show
the distinguishing marks of a sound believer? Can you evidence that you have
something more than any Hypocrite in the world ever had? If not, fear this
peace, more than any trouble; and know, that a carnal peace does commonly prove
the most mortal enemy of the poor soul, and while it smiles and kisses, and
speaks it fair, does fatally smite it as it were under the fifth rib.

By this time methinks I hear my reader crying out with the Disciples, who then
shall be saved? Set out from among our Congregations all those ten ranks of the
profane on the one hand; and then besides take out all these twelve sorts of
close and self-deceiving Hypocrites on the other hand, and tell me then whether
it be not a remnant that shall be saved. How few will be the sheep that shall
be left, when all these shall be separated, and set among the Goats? For my
part, of all my numerous hearers, I have no hope to see any of them in Heaven,
that are to be found among these two and twenty sorts that are here mentioned,
except by found conversion they be brought into another condition.

Application. And now Conscience do thine office. Speak out, and speak home to
him that hears or reads these lines. If thou find any of these marks upon
him, thou must pronounce him utterly unclean. Levit. 13. 44. Take not up a lie
into thy mouth: speak not peace to him, to whom God speaks no peace. Let not
lust bribe thee, or self-love, or carnal prejudice blind thee. I subpoena thee
from the Court of Heaven, to come and give in evidence. I require thee in the
name of God to go with me to the search of the suspected house. As thou will
answer it at thy peril, give in a true report of the state and case of him that
reads this book. Conscience will thou altogether hold thy peace at such a
time as this? I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us the truth.
Mat. 26. 63. Is the man converted or is he not? Does he allow himself in any
way of sin, or does he not? Does he truly love, and please, and prize and
delight in God above all other things, or not? Come, put it to an issue. How
long shall this soul lie at uncertainties? Oh Conscience bring in the verdict.
Is this man a new man, or is he ^iot? How do thou find it? has there passed
a through and mighty change upon him, or not? When was the time, where was the
place, or what was the means, by which this through change of the new birth was
wrought in this soul? Speak Conscience. Or if thou can not tell time and
place, Can thou show scripture evidence, that the work is done? Has the man
been ever taken off from his false bottom, from the false hopes, and false
peace wherein once he trusted? Has he been deeply convinced of sin, and of his
lost and undone condition, and brought out of himself, and off from his sins,
to give up himself entirely to Jesus Christ? Or do thou not find him to this
day under the power of ignorance, or in the mire of profaneness? Have not thou
taken upon him the gains of unrighteousness? Do not thou find him a stranger
to prayer, a neglecter of the word, a lover of this present world? Do not
thou often catch him in a lie? Do not thou find his heart fermented with
malice, or burning with lust, or going after his covetousness? Speak plainly to
all the forementioned particulars: can thou acquit this man, this woman, from
being any of the two and twenty sorts here described? If he be found with any
of them, set him aside, his portion is not with the Saints. He must be
converted and made a new creature, or else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God.

Beloved, be not your own betrayers, do not deceive your own hearts, nor set
your hands to your own ruin, by a wilful blinding of your selves. Set up a
tribunal in your own breasts. Bring the word and conscience together. To the
Law and to the Testimony. Isa. 8. 20. Hear what the word concludes of your
estates. O follow the search, till you have found how the case stands. Mistake
here, and perish. And such is the treachery of the Heart, the subtilty of the
temper, and the deceitfulness of sin, Ier. 17. 9. 2 Cor. 11. 3. Heb. 3. 13. all
conspire to fla^^er and deceive the poor soul, and withal so common and easy
it is to be mistaken, that it is a thousand to one, but you will be deceived,
unless you be very careful, and through, and impartial in the enquiry into your
spiritual conditions. Oh therefore ply your work: go to the bottom: search as
with candles: weigh you in the balance; come to the standard of the Sanctuary:
bring your coin to the touch stone. You have the archest cheats in the world to
deal with: a world of counterfeit Coin is going: happy is he, that takes no
Counters for Gold. Satan is master of deceits: he can draw to the life: he is
perfect in the trade: there is nothing but he can imitate. You cannot wish for
any Grace, but he can fit you to a hair with a Counterfeit. Trade warily: look
on every piece you take: be jealous: trust not so much as your own hearts. Run
to God to search you and try you, to examine you and prove your reins. Psalm.
26. 2. Psalm. 139. 23, 24. If other helps suffice not to bring all to an issue,
but you are still at a loss, open your cases faithfully to some Godly and
faithful Minister. Mal. 2. 7. Rest not, till you have put the business of your
eternal welfare out of question. Pet. 2. 10. O searcher of hearts, put thou
this soul upon and help him in the search.

CHAP. V. Showing the Miseries of the Unconverted.
SO unspeakably dreadful is the case of every unconverted soul, that I have
sometimes thought, if we could but convince men, that they are yet
unregenerate, the work were upon the mattter done. But I sadly experience, that
such a spirit of sloth and slumber ( Romans 11. 8. Mat. 13. 15) possesses the
unsanctified, that though they be convinced, that they are yet unconverted; yet
they oft-times carelessly sit still: and what through the avocation of sensual
pleasures, or hurry of worldly business, or noise and clamor of earthly cares,
and lusts, and affections, Luke 8. 14. the voice of Conscience is drowned, and
men go no farther than some cold wishes, and general purposes of repenting and
amending. Acts 24. 25.

It Is therefore of high necessity, that I do not only convince men that they
are unconverted; but that I also endeavor, to bring them to a sense of the
fearful misery of this estate.

But here I find my self aground at first putting forth. What Tongue can tell
the heirs of Hell sufficiently of their misery, unless 'twere Dives his that
was tormented in that flame? Luke 16. 24. Where is the ready Writer, whose pen
can decipher their misery, that are without God in the world? Ephesians. 2. 12. This
cannot fully be done, unless we knew the infinite ocean of that bliss and
perfection which is in that God, which a state of sin does exclude men from.
Who knows (says Moses) the power of thine anger? Psalm. 90. 11. And how shall
I tell men, that which I do not know? Yet so much we know, as one would think
would shake the heart of that man, that had the least degree of spiritual life
and sense.

But this is yet the more posing difficulty, that I am to speak to them that
are without sense. Alas, this is not the least part of man's misery upon him,
that he is dead, stark dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2. 1.

Could I bring Paradise into view, or represent the Kingdom of Heaven to as
much advantage, as the tempter did the Kingdoms of the world and all the glory
thereof to our Savior: or could I uncover the face of the deep and devouring
gulf of Tophet in all its terrors, and open the gates of the infernal furnace,
alas he has no eyes to see it, Mat. 13. 14, 15. Could I paint out the beauties
of holiness, or glory of the Gospel to the life; or could I bring above^ board
the more than diabolical deformity and ugliness of sin, he can no more judge of
the loveliness and beauty of the one, nor the filthiness and hatefulness of the
other, than the blind of colors. He is alienated from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in him, because of the blindness of his heart. Ephesians. 4.
18. He neither does nor can know the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2. 14. His eyes cannot be savingly opened, but by
converting grace, Acts 26. 18. he is a child of darkness, and walks in
darkness, 1 John 1. 6. yea the light in him is darkness. Mat. 6. 2, 3.

Shall I ring his knell, or read his sentence, or sound in his ear, the
terrible trump of Gods judgments, that one would think should make both his
ears to tingle, and strike him into Belshazer's fit, even to appall his
countenance, and loose his joints, and make his knees smite one against
another? Yet alas! he perceives me not: he has no ears to hear. Or shall I
call up all the daughters of music, and sing the song of Moses, and of the
Lamb^ yet he will not be stirred. Shall I allure him with the joyful sound, and
the lovely song and glad-tidings of the Gospel? with the most sweet and
inviting calls, comforts, cordials, of the divine promises, so exceeding great
and precious? it will not affect him savingly, unless I could find him ears,
Mat. 13. 15. as well as tell him the news.

Shall I set before him the feast of fat things, the wine of wisdom, the bread
of God, the tree of life, the hidden Manna? he has no appetite for them, no
mind to them. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Mat. 22. 5. Should I press the choicest grapes, the
heavenly closters of Gospel-priviledges, and drink to him in the richest wine
of Gods own cellar, yea of his own side, of set before him the delicious
honeycomb of Gods Testimonies, Psalm. 19. 10. alas he has no taste to discern
them. Shall I invite the dead to arise and eat the banquet of their funerals?
No more can the dead in sin, savor the holy food wherewith the Lord of life
has spread his table.

What then shall I do? shall I burn the brimstone of hell at his nostrils? or
shall I open the box of Spikenard, very precious, that fills the whole house
of this universe with its perfume, Mark 14. 3. Ioh. 12. 8. and hope that the
savor of Christ's ointments, and the smell of his garments will attract him?
Psalm. 45. 8. Alas! dead sinners are like the dumb Idols, they have mouths, but
they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; they have ears, but they hear
not; noses have they, but they smell not; they have hands, but they handle not;
feet have they, but they walk not, neither speak they through their throat.
Psalm. 1. 5, 6, 7. They are destitute of all spiritual sense and motion.

But let me try the sense that does last leave us, and draw the Sword of the
word: yet lay at him while I will, yea though I choose mine arrows out of Gods
quiver, and direct them to the heart, nevertheless he feels it not; for how
should he, being past feeling? Ephesians. 4. 19. So that though the wrath of God
abides on him, and the mountainous weight of so many thousand sins, yet he
goes up and down as light, as if nothing ailed him. Romans 7. 9. In a word, he
carries a dead soul in a living body, and his flesh is but the walking Cossin
of a corrupted mind, this is twice dead, Jude 12. rotting in the slime and
putre^action of noisome lusts, Mat 23. 27, 28.

Which way then shall I come at the miserable objects that I have to deal with?
who shall make the heart of stone to relent, Zech. 7. 12. or the lifeless
carcass to feel and move? That God that is able of Stones to raise up Children
unto Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. that raises the Dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. and melts the
Mountains, Nah. 1. 5. and strikes water out of the flints, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. that
loves to work like himself, beyond the hopes and belief of man, that peopleth
his Church with dry bones, and planteth his Orchard with dry sticks; he is able
to do this. Therefore I bow my knee to the most high God, Ephesians. 3. 14. and as
our Savior prayed at the Sepulcher of Lazarus, Ioh. 11. 38, 41. and the
Shunamite ran to the man of God, for her dead Child, 2 Kings 4. 25. so does
your mourning Minister kneel about your graves, and carry you in the arms of
prayer to that God, in whom your help is found.

Oh thou all powerful Jehovah, that workest, and none can let thee; that has
the keys of hell and of death, pity thou the dead souls that lie here
intombed, and roll away the gravestone, and say, as to Lazarus when already
stinking, Come forth. Lighten thou this darkness, O inaccessible light, and let
the day spring from on high, visit the darksome region of the dead to whom I
speak: for thou can open the eyes that death it self has closed. Thou that
formedst the ear, can restore the hearing. Say thou to these ears, Ephatah,
and they shall be opened. Give thou eyes to see thine excellencies; a taste
that may relish thy sweetness; a scent that may savor thine ointments; a
feeling that may sense the privilege of thy favor, the burden of thy wrat^,
the weight intolerable of unpardoned sin: and give thy servant command to
prophecy to the dry bones, and let the effect of t^is prophecy be, as of thy
Prophet, when he prophesied the valley of dry bones into a living army,
exceeding great, Ezekiel. 37. 1. etc. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and
carried me out in the spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the
valley, which was full of bones. He said unto me, prophecy upon these bones,
and say unto them; O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord: Thus says the
Lord God unto these bones; Behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye
shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up fles^ upon you,
and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded; and as I
prophesied, there was a noise and behold a shaking, and the bones came together
bone to his bone. And when I beheld, Lo the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them, and covered them above, but there was no breath in them. Then said he
unto me; prophecy unto the wind, prophesi^ son of man, and say to the wind:
thus says the Lord God, come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon
these slain, that they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the
breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an
exceeding great army.

But I must proceed, as I am able, to unfold that misery, which I confess no
tongue can unfold, no heart can sufficiently comprehend. Know therefore, that
while thou art unconverted.

1. The infinite God is engaged against thee.

It is no small part of thy misery, that thou art without God. Ephesians. 2. 12. How
does Micah run crying after the Danites, You have taken away my Gods, and what
have I more? Judges. 18. 23, 24. O what a mourning then must thou lift up, that
art without God, that can lay no claim to him, without daring usurpation!
Thou must say of God, as Sheba of David; We have no part in David, neither have
we inheritance in the son of Jesse. 2 Samuel 20. 1. How pitiful and piercing a
moan is that of Saul in his extremity; The Philistians are upon me, and God is
departed from me? 1 Samuel 28. 15. Sinners what will you do in the day of your
visitation? whither will you flee for help? where will you leave your glory?
Esaias 10. 3. What will you do when the Philistines are upon you? When the World
shall take its eternal leave of you, when you must bid your friends, houses,
lands, farewell for evermore? What will you do then, I say, that have never a
God to go to? Will you call on him, will you cry to him for help? alas he will
not own you, Prove. 1. 28, 29. he will not take any knowledge of you, but send
you packing, with an I never knew you. Mat. 7. 23. They that know what it is to
have a God to go to, a God to live upon, they know a little what a fearful
misery it is to be without God. This made that holy man cry out, Let me have a
God, or nothing. Let me know him and his will, and what will please him, and
how I may come to enjoy him, or would I had never had an understanding to know
any thing, etc.

But thou art not only without God, but God is against thee, Ezekiel. 5. 8, 9.
Nah. 2. 13. Oh if God will but stand a neuter, though he did not own, nor help
the poor sinner, his case were not so deeply miserable. Though God should give
up the poor creature to the will of all his enemies, to do their worst with
him; though he should deliver him over to the tormentors, Mat. 18. 34. that
devils should tear and torture him to their utmost power and skill; yet this
were not half so fearful. But God himself will set against the sinner; and
believe it, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb.
10. 31. There Is no friend like him, no enemy like him. As much as Heaven is
above the Earth, Omnipotency above Impotency, Infinity above Nullity, so much
more horrible is it, to fall into the hands of the living God, than into the
paws of Bears, or Lions, yea furies, or devils. God himself will be thy
tormentor; thy destruction shall come from the presence of the Lord. 2 These. 1.
9. Tophet is deep and large, and the wrath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone does kindle it. Esaias 30. 33. If God be against thee, who shall be for
thee; If one man sin against another, the Judge shall Judge him: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. Thou, even thou,
art to be feared; and who shall stand in thy sight, when ^^ce thou art angry?
Psalm. 76. 7. Who is that God, that shall deliver you out of his hands? Dan. 3.
15. Can Mammon? Riches profit not in the day of wrath, Prove 11. 14. Can Kings,
or Warriors? No, they shall cry to the Mountains and rocks, fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.

Sinner, methinks this should go like a dagger to thine heart, to know that God
is thine enemy. Oh whither will thou go, where will thou shelter thee? There is
no hope for thee unless thou lay down thy weapons, and sue out thy pardon, and
get Christ to stand thy friend, and make thy peace. If it were not for this,
thou might go into some howling wilderness, and there pine in sorrow, and
run mad for anguish of heart and horrible despair. But in Christ there is a
possibility of mercy for thee, yea a proffer of mercy to thee, that thou may
have God to be more for thee, than he is now against thee. But if thou will not
forsake thy sins, nor turn thoroughly and to purpose unto God, by a sound
Conversion, the wrath of God abides on thee, and he proclaims himself to be
against thee, as in the Prophet Ezekiel. 5. 8. Therefore thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I even I am against thee.

I. His face is against thee, Psalm. 34. 16. The face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them. Woe unto them whom God
shall set his face against. When he did but look upon the host of the
Egyptians, how terrible was the consequence? Ezekiel. 14. 8. I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign, and a proverb, and will cut him off
from the midst of my people, and you shall know that I am the Lord. 2. His
heart is against thee: He hates all the workers of iniquity. Man, does not
thine heart tremble to think of thy being an object of Gods hatred? Ier. 15. 1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this
people, cast them out of my sight. Zech. 7. 8. My soul loathed them, and their
souls also abhorred me. 3. His hand is against thee. 1 Samuel 12. 14, 15. All his
attributes are against thee.

First, His Justice is like a flaming sword unsheathed against thee. If I whet
my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, I will render vengeance
to mine adversaries, and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows
drunk with blood, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 40, 41. So exact is Justice, that 'twill by no
means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. God will not discharge thee, he will not
hold thee guiltless, Exodus 20. 7. but will require the whole debt in person of
thee, unless thou can make a Scripture claim to Christ and his satisfaction.
When the enlightened sinner looks on justice, and sees the balance in which he
must be weighed, and the sword by which he must be executed, he feels an earth
quake in his breast. But Satan keeps this out of sight, and persuades the soul
while he can; that the Lord is all made up of mercy, and so ^ulls it asleep in
sin. Divine Justice is very strict; it must have satisfaction to the utmost
farthing; it denounces indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, to
every soul that does evil, Romans 2. 8, 9. It curses every one that continues
not in every thing that is written in the law to do it. Gal. 3. 19. The justice
of God to the unpardoned sinner, that has a sense of his misery, is more
terrible, than the sight of the Bailiff or creditor to the bank^rupt debtor, or
than the sight of the Judge and Bench to the robber, or of the Irons and gibbet
to the guilty murderer. When justice sits upon life and death, Oh what dreadful
work does it make with the wretched sinner? Bind him hand and foot, cast him
into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22. 13.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. Mat. 25. 41. This is the
terrible sentence that justice pronounces. Why sinner, by this severe justice
must thou be tried; and as God lives, this killing sentence shall thou hear,
unless thou repent and be converted.

Secondly, The holiness of God is full of antipathy against thee. Psalm. 5. 4,
5. He is not only angry with thee (so he may be with his own children) but he
has a fixed, rooted, habitual displeasure against thee: he loathes thee, Zech.
11. 8. and what is done by thee, though for substance commanded by him: Esaias.
1. 14. Mal. 1. 10. As if a man should give his servant never so good meat to
dress; yet if he should mingle filth, or poison with it, he would not touch it.
Gods nature is infinitely contrary to sin, and so he cannot but hate a sinner
out of Christ.

O what a misery is this, to be out of the favor, yea under the hatred of God!
Eccles. 5. 4. Hos. 9. 15. that God can as easily lay aside his nature and cease
to be God, as not to be contrary to thee, and detest thee, except thou be
changed and renewed by grace! O sinner, how dare thou to think of the bright
and radiant Sun of purity, upon the beauties, the glory of holiness that is in
God! The Stars are not pure in thy sight; Job 25. He humbles himself to behold
the things that are done in Heaven. Psalm. 113. Oh those light and sparkling
eyes of his! What do they espy in thee? and thou have no interest in Christ
neither, that he should plead for thee. Methinks I should hear thee crying out
astonished, with the Bethshemites, Who shall stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 20.

Thirdly, The power of God is mounted like a mighty Cannon against thee. The
glory of Gods power is to be displayed, in the wonderful confusion and
destruction of them that obey not the Gospel. 2 These. 1. 8, 9. He will make his
power known in them, Romans 9. 22. How mightily he can torment them. For this end
he raises them up, that he might make his power known. Romans 9. 17. O man, art
thou able to make thy party good with thy maker? No more than a silly reed,
against the Cedars of God, or a little cock-boat, against the tumbling ocean;
or the childrens bubbles, against the blustering winds. Sinner, the power of
Gods anger is against thee: Psalm. 90. 11. and power and anger together, make
fearful work. 'Twere better thou had all the world in arms against thee, than
to have thee power of God against thee. There is no escaping his hands, no
breaking his prison. The thunder of his power who can understand? Job 26. 14.
Unhappy man that shall understand it by feeling it! If he will contend with
him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand. He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength; who has hardened himself against him, and prospered? Which removes
the Mountains and they know it not, which overturneth them in his anger. Which
shakes the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. Which
commands the Sun, and it rises not; and seals up the stars. Behold he
takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, what do thou? If God
will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him. Job 9. 3, 4,
5, 6. etc. And art thou a fit match for such an antagonist? Oh consider this,
you that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. Ps. 50. 22. Submit to mercy. Let not dust and stubble stand it out against
the Almighty. Set not briars and thorns against him in battle, lest he go
through them, and consume them together: but lay hold on his strength, that you
may make peace with him, Esaias 27. 4, 5. We to him that striveth with his maker.
Esaias 45. 9.

Fourthly, The wisdom of God is set to ruin thee. He has ordained his arrows
and prepared the instruments of death and made all things ready. Psalm. 11. 12,
13. His counsels are against thee, to contrive thy destruction. Ier. 18. 11. He
laughs in himself, to see, how thou will be taken and ensnared in the evil day.
Ps. 37. 13. The Lord shall la^gh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.
He sees how thou will come down mightily in a moment; how thou will wring t^^ne
hands, and tear thine hair, and eat thy flesh, and gnas^ thy teeth for anguish
and astonishment of heart, when thou see how thou art fallen remedilesly into
the pit of destruction.

Fifthly, The truth of God is sworn against thee. Psalm. 95. 11. If he be true
and faithful, thou must perish if thou go on. Luke 13. 3. Unl^ss he be false
of his word, thou must die, except thou repent. Ezekiel. 33. 11. If we believe not
yet, he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy 2. 13. That is, he is
faithful to his threatenings; as well as promises, and will show his
faithfulness in our confusion, if we believe not. God has told thee, as plain
as it can be spoken, That if he wash thee not, thou have no part in him. John
13. 8. that if thou live after the flesh, thou shall die, Romans 8. 13. That,
except thou be converted thou shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; Mat. 18. 3. and he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. Beloved,
as the immutable faithfulness of God in his promise and oath, afford believers
strong consolation; Heb. 6. 18. so they are to unbelievers, for strong
consternation and confusion. O sinner tell me what shift do thou make to
think of all the threatenings of Gods word, that stand upon record against thee?
Do thou believe their truth, or not? If not, thou art a wretched in^idel, and
not a Christian; and therefore give over the name and hopes of a Christian. But
if thou do believe them, O heart of steel that thou have, that can walk up
and down in quiet, when the truth and Faithfulness of God is engaged to destroy
thee: that if God Almighty can do it, thou shall surely perish, and be damned.
Why man, the whole book of God does testify against thee, while thou remainest
unsanctified: it condemns thee in every leaf, and is to thee, like Ezekiel's
roll, written within and without with lamentation, and mourning, and woe: Ezekiel.
2. 10. and all this shall surely come upon thee and overtake thee, Deuteronomy. 28.
15. except thou repent. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but one jot, or
tittle of this word shall never pass away. Mat. 5. 18.

Now put all this together, and tell me, if the case of the Unconverted be not
deplorably miserable. As we read of some persons, that had bound themselves in
an oath, and in a curse to kill Paul: so thou must know, O sinner, to thy
terror, that all the attributes of the infinite God are bound in an oath to
destroy thee, Heb. 3. 18. O man what will thou do? whither will thou fly? If
Gods omnisciency can find thee, thou shall not escape. If the true and faithful
God will save his oath, perish thou must, except thou believe and repent. If
the Almighty has power to torment thee, thou shall be perfectly miserable in
soul and body to all eternity, unless it be prevented by thy speedy Conversion.

II. The whole creation of God is against thee. The whole creation (says Paul)
groaneth and travelleth in pain. Romans 8. 22. But what is it that the creation
groaneth under? why, the fearful abuse that it is subject to, in serving the
lusts of unsanctified men. And what is it that the creation groaneth for? why,
for freedom and liberty from this abuse; for the creature is very unwillingly
subject to this bondage. Romans 8. 19, 20, 21. If the unreasonable and inanimate
creatures had speech and reason, they would cry out under it, as bondage
unsufferable, to be abused by the ungodly, contrary to their natures, and the
ends that the great Creator made them for. It is a passage of an eminent
Divine; The liquor that the drunkard drinks, if it had reason as well as a
man, to know how shamefully it is abused and spoiled, it would groan in the
barrels against him, it would groan in the Cup against him, it would groan in
his throat, in his belly against him. It would fly in his face, if it could
speak. And if God should open the mouth of the Creatures, as he did the mouth
o^ Balaam's Ass, the proud man's garments on his back would groan again^d him.
There is never a creature but if it h^ reason to know how it is abused, till a
man ^ converted, it would groan against him. This land would groan to bear him,
the air would groan to give him breathing, their houses would groan to lodge
them, their beds would groan to ease them, their food to nourish them, their
clothes to cover them, and the creature would groan to give them any help and
comfort, so long as they live in sin against God. Thus far he. Methinks this
should be a terror to an unconverted soul, to think that he is a burden to the
Creation. Luke 13. 7. Cut it down why cumbreth it the Ground. If the poor
inanimate creatures could but speak, they would say to the ungodly, as Moses to
Israel; Must we fetch you water out of the rock, ye rebels? Numb. 2. 10. Thy
food would say, Lord, must I nourish such a wretch as this, and yield forth my
strength for him, to dishonor thee withal? No, I will choke him rather, if
thou will give me commission: The very air will say, Lord, Must I give this man
breath, to set his tongue against He^ven, and scorn thy people, and vent his
pride and wrath, and filthy communication, and belch out oaths and blasphemy
against thee? No, if thou but say the word: he shall be breathless for me. His
poor beast would say, Lord, must I carry him upon his wicked designs? No, I
will break his bones, I will end his days rather, if I may have but leave from
thee. A wicked man the earth groans under him, and Hell groans for him, till
death satisfies both, and unburdens the earth, and stops the mouth of Hell with
him. While the Lord of Hosts is against thee, be sure the Hosts of the Lord are
against thee, and all the creatures as it were up in arms, till upon a man's
conversion, the controversy being taken up between God and him, he makes a
covenant of peace with the creatures for him. Job 5. 22, 23, 24. Hos. 2. 18,
19, 20.

III. The roaring Lion has his full power upon thee, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Thou art
fast in the paw of that Lion, that is greedy to devour; in the snare of the
Devil, led captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. This is the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. His drudges they are, and
his lusts they do. He is the ruler of the darkness of this world: Ephesians. 6. 12.
that is of ignorant sinners, that live in darkness. You pity the poor Indians,
that worship the Devil for their God, but little think that it is your own case.
Why, it is the common misery of all the unsanctified, that the Devil is their
God. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Not that they do intend to do him homage and worship, they
will be ready to defy him, and him that should say so by them; but all this
while they serve him, and come and go at his beck, and live under his
Government. His servants you are, to whom you yield your selves to obey. Romans
6. 16. O how many then will be found the real servants of the Devil, that take
themselves for no other than the children of God? he can no sooner offer a
sinful delight or opportunity for your unlawful advantage, but you embrace it.
If he suggest a lie, or prompt you to revenge, you readily obey. If he forbid
you to read, or pray, you hearken to him, and therefore his servants you are.
Indeed he lies behind the curtain, he acts in the dark and sinners see not who
sets them on work: but all the while he leads them in a string. Doubtless
the liar intends not a service to Satan but his own advantage: yet it is he that
stands in the corner unobserved, and puts the thing into his heart. Act. 5.
3. John 8. 44. Questionless Judas when he sold his Master for money, and the
Caldeans and Sabeans when they plundered Job, intended not to do the Devil a
pleasure, but to satisfy their own covetous thirst: yet 'twas he that acted
them in their wickedness. John. 13. 27. Job 1. 12, 15, 17. Men may be very
slaves and common drudges for the Devil, and never know it, nay they may please
themselves in the thoughts of a happy liberty, 2 Pet. 2. 19.

Art thou yet in ignorance, and not turned from darkness to light? why thou art
under the power of Satan. Act. 26. 18. Do thou live in the ordinary and
wilful practice of any known sin? Know that thou art of the Devil. 1 John 3. 8.
Do thou live in strife, or envy, or malice? verily he is thy Father. Ioh. 8.
40, 41. O dreadful case! How ever Satan may provide his slaves with diverse
pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. yet it is but to toll them into endless perdition. The
Serpent comes with the apple in his mouth, O but (with Eve) thou see not the
deadly sting in his tail. He that is now thy tempter, will be one day thy
tormentor. O that I could but give thee to see how black a master thou servest,
how filthy a drudgery thou do, how merciless a Tyrant thou gratifiest, all
whose pleasure is, to set thee on work to make thy perdition and damnation
sure, and to heat the furnace hotter and hotter, in which thou must burn for
millions of millions of ages.

IV. The guilt of all thy sins lies like a mountain upon thee. Poor soul! Thou
feel it not, but this is that which seals thy misery upon thee. While
unconverted, none of thy sins are blotted out: Act. 3. 19. they are all upon
the score against thee. Regeneration and remission are never separated: the
unsanctified are unquestionably unjustified, and unpardoned. 1 Cor. 6. 11. ^
Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 9. 14. Beloved, it is a fearful thing to be in debt, but above
all in Gods debt: for there is no arrest so formidable as his, no prison so
horrible as his. Look upon an enlightened sinner, who feels the weight of his
own guilt, and oh how frightful are his looks, how fearful are his complaints!
His comforts are turned into wormwood, and his moisture into drought, and his
sleep departs from his eyes. He is a terror to himself and all that are
about him, and is ready to envy the very stones that lie in the street, because
they are senseless, and feel not his misery; and wishes he had been a dog, or a
toad, or serpent rather than a man, because then death had put an end to his
misery, whereas now it will be but the biginning of that which will know no
ending.

How light soever you may make of it now, you will one day find the guilt of
unpardoned sin to be a heavy burden. This is a millstone that whosoever falls
upon it shall be broken, but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him
to powder. Mat. 21. 44. What work did it make with our Savior? It pressed the
very blood (to a wonder) out of his veins, and broke all his bones: and if it
did this in the green tree, what will it do in the dry?

Oh think of thy case in time. Can thou think of that threat without
trembling, Ye shall die in your sins, Ioh. 8. 24. Oh better were it for thee to
die in a goal, die in a ditch, in a dungeon, than die in thy sins. If death, as
it will take away all thy other comforts, would take away thy sins too, it were
some mitigation. But thy sins will follow thee, when thy friends leave thee,
and all worldly enjoyments shake hands with thee. Thy sins will not die with
thee, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 20. 12. as a prisoners others debts will; but they
will to judgment with thee, there to be thine accusers; and they will to hell
with thee, there to be thy tormentors. Better to have so many fiends and furies
about thee, than thy sins to fall upon thee and fasten in thee. Oh the work
thot these will make with thee! Oh look over thy debts in time! How much art
thou in the books of every one of Gods laws? How is every one of Gods
commandments ready to arrest thee, and take thee by the throat for innumerable
bonds that it has upon thee? What will thou then do, when they shall
altogether lay it in against thee? Hold open the eyes of conscience to consider
this, that thou may despair of thy self, and be driven to Christ, and fly for
refuge, to lay hold upon the hope that is set before thee. Heb. 6. 18.

V. Thy raginglusts do miserably enslave thee. While unconverted, thou art a
very servant to sin: it reigns over thee, and holds thee under its dominion,
till thou art brought within the bond of Gods covenant. John 8. 34, 36. Tit. 3.
3. Romans 6. 12, 14. Romans 6. 16, 17. Now there is no such Tyrant as sin. Oh the
filthy and fearful work, that it does engage its servants in! would it not
pierce a man's heart to see a company of poor creatures drudging and toiling,
and all to carry together faggots and fuel for their own burning? Why, this is
the employment of sins drudges. Even while they bless themselves in their
unrighteous gains, while they sing and swill in pleasures, they are but
treasuring up wrath and vengeance for their eternal burning; they are but
laying in powder and bullets, and adding to the pile of Tophet, and flinging in
Oil to make the flame rage the fiercer. Who would serve such a master, whose
work is drudgery, and whose wages is death? Romans 6. 23.

What a woeful spectacle was that poor wretch possessed with the legion? Would
it not have pitied thine heart to have seen him among the tombs, cutting, and
wounding of himself? Mark 5. 5. This is thy case, such is thy work. Every
stroke is a thrust at thine heart. 1 Timothy 6. 10. Conscience indeed is now
asleep; but when death and judgment shall bring thee to thy senses, then thou will feel the raging smart and anguish of every wound. The convinced sinner is
a sensible instance of the miserable bondage of sin. Conscience flies upon him,
and tells him what the end of these things will be^ and yet such a slave is he
to his lusts, that on he must, though he see it will be his endless perdition:
and when the temptation comes, lust gets the bit in his mouth, breaks all the
cords of his vows and promises, and carries him headlong to his own
destruction.

VI. The furnace of eternal Vengeance is heated ready for thee. Esaias. 30. 33.
Hell and destruction open their mouths upon thee, they gape for thee, they
groan for thee, Esaias. 5. 14. waiting as it were with a greedy eye, as thou
stand upon the brink, when thou will drop in. If the wrath of a man may be,
as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19. 12. more heavy than the sand; Prove. 27. 3.
What is the wrath of the infinite God? If the burning furnace heated in
Nebuchadnezars fiery rage, when he commanded it to be made yet seven times
hotter, were so fierce as to burn up even those that drew near it, to throw the
three children in: Dan. 3. 19, 22. How hot is that burning oven of the
Almighty's fury? Mal. 4. 1. Surely this is seventy times seven more fierce.
What think thou, O man, of being a faggot in hell to all eternity? Can thine
heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with
thee, says the Lord of hosts? Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thou dwell with everlasting
burnings? Can thou abide the consuming fire? Esaias. 33. 4. When thou shall be
as a glowing Iron in hell, and thy whole body and soul shall be as perfectly
possessed by Gods burning vengeance, as the fiery sparkling iron, when heated
in the fiercest forge? Thou can not bear Gods whip: how then will thou endure
his scorpions? Thou art even crushed, and ready to wish thy self dead, under
the weight of his finger: how then will thou bear the Weight of his loins? The
most patient man that ever was, did curse the day that ever he was born, Job 3.
1. and even woo death to come and end his misery, Job 7. 15, 16. when God did
but let out one little drop of his wrath. How then will thou endure, when God
shall pour out all his vials, and set himself against thee to torment thee?
when he shall make thy conscience the tunnel, by which he will be pouring his
burning wrath into thy soul for ever; and when he shall fill all thy powers as
full of torment, as they be now full of sin? When immortality shall be thy
misery, and to die the death of a bruit, and be swallowed into the gulf of
annihilation, shall be such a felicity, as a whole eternity of wishes, and an
Ocean of tears shall never purchase? Now thou can put off the evil day, and
can laugh and be merry, and forget the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor 5. 11. but
how will thou hold out, or hold up, when God shall cast thee into a bed of
torments, Rev. 2. 22. and make thee to lie down in sorrows? Esaias. 50. 11. When
roarings and blasphemy shall be thine only music, and the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation, shall
be thine only drink? Rev. 14. 10. When thou shall draw in flames for thy
breath, and the horrid stench of sulphur shall be thine only perfume? In a
word, when the smoke of thy torment shall ascend for ever and ever, and thou
shall have no rest night nor day, no rest in thy conscience, no ease in thy
bones, but thou shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a
reproach for evermore? Ier. 42. 18.

O sinner, stop here; and consider. If thou art a man, and not a senseless
block, consider. Bethink thy self where thou stand: why upon the very brim
of this furnace. As the Lord lives and thy soul lives, there is but a step
between thee and this, 1 Samuel 20. 3. Thou know not, when thou lie down,
but thou may be in before the morning: thou know not when thou risest, but
thou may drop in before the night. Dare thou make light of this? Will thou
go on in such a dreadful condition, as if nothing ailed thee? If thou putt^st
it off, and say, this does not belong to thee; look again over the foregoing
Chapter, and tell me the truth, are none of those black marks found upon thee?
Do not blind thine eyes, do not deceive thy self: see thy misery while thou
may prevent it. Think what it is to be a vile cast-out, a damned reprobate, a
vessel of wrath, into which the Lord will be pouring out his tormenting fury,
while he has a being, Romans 9. 22.

Divine wrath is a fierce, Deuteronomy. 32. 22. devouring, Esaias 33. 14. everlasting,
Mat. 25. 41. unquenchable fire; Mat. 3. 12. and thy soul and body must be the
fuel upon which it will be feeding for ever, unless thou consider thy ways,
and speedily turn to the Lord by a found conversion. They that have been only
singed by this fire, and had no more but the smell thereof passing upon them;
Oh what amazing spectacles have they been. Whose heart would not have melted,
to have heard Spira's outcries, to have seen Chaloner that monument of Justice,
worn to skin and bones, blaspheming the God of Heaven, cursing himself, and
continually crying out, O torture, torture, torture, O torture, torture, as if
the flames of wrath had already took hold on him? To have heard Rogers crying
out, I have had a little pleasure, and now I must to Hell for evermore; wishing
but for this mitigation, that God would but let him lie burning for ever behind
the bac^ of that fire (on the hearth) and bringing in this sad conclusion
still, at the end of whatever was spoken to him, to afford him some hope, I
must to Hell, I must to the furnace of Hell, for millions of millions of Ages.
O If the fears and forethoughts of the wrath to come be so terrible, so
intolerable, what is the feeling of it!

Sinner, it is but in vain to flatter you: this would be but to toll you into the
unquenchable fire: know ye from the living God, that here you must lie, with
these burnings must you dwell, till immortality die, and immutability change,
till Eternity run out, and omnipotency is no longer able to torment, except you
be in good earnest renewed throughout by sanctifying grace.

VII. The Law discharges all its threats and curses at thee. Gal. 3. 10. Romans
7. Oh how dreadfully does it thunder? It spits fire and brimstone in thy face.
Its words are as drawn swords, and as the sharp arrows of the mighty, it
demands satisfaction to the uttermost, and cries, Justice, Justice. It speaks
blood, and war, and wounds, and death against thee. Oh the execrations, and
plagues and deaths, that this murdering^ piece is loaded with (read Deuteronomy. 28.
15, 16. etc.) and thou art the mark at which this shot is levelled. Oh man,
away to the strong hold, Zech. 9. 12. away from thy sins: haste to the
sanctuary, the City of refuge, Heb. 6. 18. even the Lord Jesus Christ; hide
thee in him, or else thou art lost without any hope of recovery.

VIII. The Gospel it self binds the sentence of eternal damnation upon thee.
Mark 16. 16. If thou continuest in thine impenitent and unconverted estate,
know that the Gospel denounces a much sorer condemnation, than ever would have
been for the transgression only of the first Covenant. Is it not a dreadful
case, to have the Gospel it self fill its mouth with threat^ and thunder, and
damnation? To have the Lord to roar from Mount Sion against thee? Joel 3. 16.
Hear the terror of the Lord. He that believes not shall be damned. Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish. Luke 13. 3. This is the condemnation that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light. John 3. 19. He
that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36. If the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward: how shall we escape, if we neglect so
great salvation? Heb. 2. 2, 3. He that despised Moses law, died without mercy:
Of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy^ that has trampled
under foot the sons of God^ Heb. 10. 28, 29.

Application. And is it true indeed? Is this thy misery? yea it is as true as
God is. Better open thine eyes and see it now, while thou may remedy it, than
blind and harden thy self, till to thine eternal sorrow, thou shall feel what
thou would not believe: and if it be true, what do thou mean to loyter, and
linger in such a case as this?

Alas for thee poor man, how effectually has sin undone thee, and depraved
thee, and despoiled thee even of the reason to look after thine own everlasting
good! Oh miserable Caitiff, what stupidity and senselesness has surprised
thee! Oh let me knock up and awake this sleeper. Who dwells within the walls of
this flash? Is there ever a soul here, a rational understanding soul? Or art
thou only a walking Ghost, a senseless lump? Art thou a reasonable foul, and yet
so far brutified, as to forget thy self immortal, and to think thy self to be
as the beasts that perish? Art thou turned into flesh, that thou favourest
nothing but gratifying the sense, and making provision for the flesh? Or else
having reason to understand the eternity of thy future state, do thou yet
make light of being everlastingly miserable? which is to be so much below a
bruit, as it is worse to act against reason, than to act without it. O unhappy
soul, that wast the glory of man, the mate of Angels, and the image of God!
that wast Gods representative in the world, and had the supremacy amongst the
creatures, and the dominion over thy makers works! Art thou now become a slave
to sense, a servant to so base an Idol, as thy belly? for no higher felicity,
than to fill thee with the wind of man's applause, or heaping together a little
refined earth, no more suitable to thy spiritual, immortal nature, than the
dirt, and sticks? Oh why do thou not bethink thee where thou shall be for
ever? Death is at hand, the Judge is even at the door. Iam. 5. 9. Yet a little
while, and time shall be no longer. Rev. 10. 5, 6. And will thou run the hazard
of continuing in such a state, in which if thou be overtaken, thou art
irrecoverably miserable.

Come then, arise, and intend thy nearest concernments. Tell me whither art
thou going? What, will thou live in such a course, wherein every act is a step
to perdition? And thou do not know, but the next night, thou may make thy
bed in hell? Oh! If thou have a spark of reason, consider, and turn, and
hearken to thy very friend, who would therefore show thee thy present misery,
that thou might in time make thine escape, and be eternally happy.

Hear what the Lord says; Fear ye not m^ says the Lord? Will ye not tremble
at my presence? Ier. 5. 22. O sinners, do you make light of the wrath to come?
Mat. 3. 7. I am sure there is a time coming, when you will not make light of
it. Why, the very Devils do believe and tremble, James 2. 19. What, you more
hardened than they? Will you run upon the edge of the Rock? will you play at the
hole of the Asp! will you put your hand upon the Cockatrice den? Will you dance
about the fire, till you are burnt? or dally with devouring wrath, as if you
were at a point of indifferency, whether you did escape it, or endure it? O
madness of folly! Solomon's mad man, that casts firebrarnds, and arrows and
death, and says, am I not in jest? Prove. 26. 18. is nothing so distracted as
the wilful sinner, Luke 15. 17. that goes on in his unconverted estate without
sense, as if nothing ailed him. The man that runs on the cannons mouth, that
sports with his blood, or lets out his life in a frolic, is sensible, sober,
and serious, to him that goes on still in his trespasses. Psalm 68. 21. For he
stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
ALMIGHTY. He runs upon him, even upon his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
Buckler. Job 15. 25, 26. Is it wisdom to delay with the second death, or to
venture into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. as if
thou were but going to wash thee or swim for thy recreation? Will thou as it
were fetch thy vieze, and jump into eternal flames, as the children through the
bonfire? What shall I say? I can find out no expression, no comparison whereby
to set forth the dreadful distraction of that soul, that shall go on in sin.

Awake, awake, Ephesians. 5. 14. Oh sinner, arise and take thy flight. There is but
one door that thou may fly by, and that is the strait door of conversion and
the new birth. Unless thou turn unfeignedly from all thy sins, and come into
Jesus Christ, and take him for the Lord thy righteousness, and walk in him in
Holiness and newness of life, as the Lord lives, it is not more certain that
thou art now out of Hell, than that thou shall without fail be in it, but a few
days and nights from hence. Oh set thine heart to think of thy case^ Is not
thine everlasting misery or welfare that which does deserve a little
consideration? Look again over the miseries of the unconverted. If the Lord
has not spoken by me, regard me not, But if it be the very word of God, that
all this misery lies upon thee, what a case art thou in? Is it for one that
has his senses to live in such a condition, and not to make all possible
expedition for preventing his utter ruin? O man, who has bewitched thee, Gal.
3. 1. that in the matters of the present life thou should be wise enough to
forecast thy business, foresee thy danger, and prevent the mischief; but in
matters of everlasting consequence should be slight and careless, as if they
little concerned thee? Why is it nothing to thee to have all the attributes of
God engaged against thee? Can thou do well without his favor? Can thou
escape his hands, or endure his vengeance? Do thou hear the creation groaning
under thee, and hell groaning for thee, and yet think thy case good enough? Art
thou in the paw of the Lion, under the power of corruption, in the dark and
noysom prison, fettered with thy lusts, working out thine own damnation, and is
not this worth the considering? Will thou make light of all the terrors of the
law, of all its curses, and thunderbolts, as if they were but the report of the
Childrens pot-guns, or thou were to war with their paper pellets? do thou
laugh at hell and destruction, or can drink the envenomed cup of the
Almighties fury, as if it were but a common potion?

Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou
me. Job 40. 7. Art thou such a Leviathan, as that the scales of thy pride
should keep thee from thy makers coming at thee? Will thou esteem his arrows as
straw, and the instruments of death as rotten wood? Art thou chief of all the
children of pride, even that thou should count his darts as stubble, and
laugh at the shaking of his spear? Art thou made without fear, and contemnest
his barbed irons? Job 41. Art thou like the horse, that paweth in the valley,
and rejoices in his strength: he goes out to meet the armed men? Do thou
mock at fear and art not affrighted, neither turnest back from Gods sword? When
his quiver ratleth against thee, the glittering Spear and the shield? Job 39.
21, 22, 23. Well, if the threats and calls of the word will not fear thee, nor
awaken thee, I am sure death and judgment will. Oh what will thou do when the
Lord comes forth against thee, and in his fury falls upon thee, and thou
shall feel what thou read? If when Daniels enemies were cast into the den of
Lions both they and their wives and their children, the Lions had the Mastery
of them, and brake all their bones in pieces, ere ever they came at the bottom
of the den, Dan. 6. 24. what shall be done with thee, when thou fallest into
the hands of the living God? When he shall gripe thee in his Iron arms, and
grind and crush thee to a thousand pieces in his wrath?

Oh do not then contend with God. Repent and be converted, so none of this
shall come upon thee. Esaias. 55. 6, 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
call ye upon him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will have
mercy on him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon.

CHAP VI. Containing DIRECTIONS for Conversion.
Mark 10. 17. And there came one, and kneeled to him, and asked him; Good
Master, what shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life?

BEfore thou read these Directions, I advise thee, yea I charge thee before
God, and his holy Angels, to resolve to follow them, (as far as conscience
shall be convinced of their agreeableness to Gods word, and thy estate,) and
call in his assistance, and blessing that they may succeed. And as I have
sought the Lord, and consuited his oracles, what advice to give thee; so must
thou entertain it, with that awe, reverence, and purpose of obedience, that the
word of the living God does require.

Now then attend. Set thine heart unto all that I shall testify unto thee this
day; for it is not a vain thing, it is your life, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. 6. This is the
end of all that has been spoken hitherto, to bring you to set upon turning,
and making use of Gods means for your Conversion. I would not trouble you, nor
torment you before the time with the forethoughts of your eternal misery, but
in order to your making your escape. Were you shut up under your present
misery, without remedy, it were but mercy (as one speaks) to let you alone,
that you might take in that little poor comfort, that you are capable of, here
in this world. But you may yet be happy: if you do not wilfully refuse the
means of your recovery. Behold, I hold open the door unto you: arise and take
your flight. I set the way of life before you, walk in it, and you shall live,
and not die. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Ier. 9. 16. It pities me to think, you should be
your own murderers, and throw your selves headlong, when God and men cry out to
you, as Peter in another case to his master, Spare thy self. A noble Virgin,
that attended the Court of Spain, was wickedly ravished by the King; and
hereupon exciting the Duke her Father to revenge, he called in the Moors to his
help, who when they had executed his design, miserably wasted and spoiled the
Country: which this Virgin laying so exceedingly to heart, shut her self up in
a Tower belonging to her Fathers house, and desired her Father and Mother might
be called forth: and bewailing to them her own wretchedness, that she should
have occasioned so much misery and desolation to her Country, for the
satisfying of her revenge, she told them she was resolved to be avenged upon
her self. Her Father and Mother besought her to pity her self and them: but
nothing would prevail, but she took her leave of them, and threw her self off
the battlements, and so perished before their faces.

Just thus is the wilful destruction of ungodly men. The God that made them
beseeches them, and cries out to them, as Paul to the distracted Jailer, when
about to murder himself, Do thy self no harm. The Ministers of Christ forewarn
them and follow them, and fain would hold them back. But alas! No
expostulations, nor obtestations will prevail; but men will hurl themselves
into perdition, while pity it self looks on.

What shall I say? Would it not grieve a person of any humanity, if in the time
of a reigning plague he should have a receipt (as one well) that would
infallibly cure all the Country, and recover the most hopeless patients, and
yet his friends and neighbors should die by the hundreds about him, because
they would not use it? Men and Brethren, though you carry the certain symptoms
of death in your faces, yet I have a receipt that will cure you all, that will
cure infallibly. Follow but these few directions, and if you do not then win
Heaven, I will be content to lose it.

Hear then, Oh sinner, and as ever thou would be converted and saved, embrace
this following counsel.

Dir. I. Set it down with thy self as an undoubted truth, that it is impossible
for thee ever to get to Heaven, in this thine unconverted state. Can any other
but Christ save thee? And he tells thee he will never do it, except thou be
regenerated and converted. Mat. 18. 3. John 3. 3. Does he not keep the keys of
Heaven? And can thou get in without his leave, as thou must, if ever thou
come thither in thy natural condition, without a sound and through renovation?

Dir. II. Labor to get a through sight and lively sense and feeling of thy
sins. Till men are weary and heavy laden, and pricked at the heart, and stark
sick of sin, they will not come to Christ in his way, for ease and cure, nor to
purpose enquire, What shall we do? Mat. 11. 28. Acts 2. 37. Mat. 9. 12. They
must set themselves down for dead men, before they will come unto Christ, that
they may have life, John 5. 40. Labor therefore to set all thy sins in order
before thee. Never be afraid to look upon them, but let thy spirit make
diligent search, Psalm. 77. 6. Enquire into thine heart, and into thy life,
Enter into a through examination of thy self, and of all thy ways, Psalm. 119.
59. that thou may make a full discovery; and call in the help of Gods spirit,
in the sense of thine own inability hereunto: for it is his proper work to
convince of sin. John 16. 8. Spread all before the face of thy conscience, till
thine heart and eyes be set abroach. Leave not striving with God, and thine own
soul, till it cry out under the sense of thy sins, as the enlightened Jailer,
What must I do to be saved? Acts 16. 30. To this porpose

Meditate of the numerousness of thy sins. David's heart failed when he thought
of this, and considered that he had more sins than hairs, Ps. 40. 12. This made
him to cry out upon the multitudes of Gods tender-mercies. Psalm. 51. 1. The
loathsome carcass does not more hatefully swarm with crawling worms, than an
unsanctified soul with filthy lusts. They fill the head, the heart, the eyes
and mouth of him. Look backward, where was ever the place, what was ever the
time, in which thou did not sin? Look inward, what part or power can thou
find in soul or body, but it is poisoned with sin? What duty do thou ever
perform into which this poison is not shed? Oh how great is the sum of thy
debts, who have been all thy life long running upon the hooks, and never did,
nor can pay off one penny? Look over the sin of thy nature, and all its
cursed brood, the sins of thy life. Call to mind thy Omissions, Commissions,
the sins of thy thoughts, of thy words, of thine actions; the sins of thy
youth, the sins of thy years, etc. Be not like a desperate Bankrupt, that is
afraid to look over his books. Read the records of conscience carefully. These
books must be opened sooner, or later. Rev. 20. 12.

Meditate upon the aggravations of thy sin, as they are the grand enemies
against the God of thy life, against the life of thy soul; in a word they are
the public enemies of all mankind. How do David, Ezra, Daniel and the good
Levites aggravate their sins, from the consideration of their injuriousness to
God, their opposition to his good and righteous Laws, the mercies, the warnings
that they were committed against. Nehem. 9. Dan. 9. Ezra. 9. O the work that
sin has made in the world! This is the enemy that has brought in death, that
has robbed and enslaved man, that has blacked the devil, that has dug
hell; Romans 5. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 4. John 8. 34. This is the enemy that has turned
the creation upside down, and sown dissension between man and the creatures,
between man and man, yea between man and himself, seting the sensitive part
against the rational, will against judgment, lust against conscience? yea worst
of all, between God and man, making the lapsed sinner, both hateful to God, and
a hater of him. Zec. 11. 8. O man, how can thou make so light of sin? This is
the traitor that sucked the blood of the Son of God, that sold him, that mocked
him, that scourged him, that spat in his face, that dug his hands, that
pierced his side, that pressed his soul, that mangled his body, that never
left, till it had bound him, condemned him, nailed him, crucified him, and put
him to open shame. Esaias. 53. 4, 5, 6. This is that deadly poison, so powerful
of operation, as that one drop of it, shed upon the root of mankind, has
corrupted, spoiled, and poisoned, and undone his whole race at once. Romans 5.
18, 19. This is the common butcher, the bloody executioner, that has killed
the Prophets, that has burnt the Martyrs, that has murdered all the Apostles,
all the Patriarchs, all the Kings and Potentates, that has destroyed Cities,
swallowed Empires, butchered and devoured whole Nations. What ever was the
weapon that 'twas done by, sin was it that did the execution. Romans 6. 23. do
thou yet think it but a small thing? If Adam and all his children could be
dug out of their graves, and their bodies piled up to Heaven, and an inquest
were made, what matchless murderer were guilty of all this blood: it would be
all found in the skirts of sin. Study the nature of sin, till thy heart be
brought to fear and loath it. And meditate on the aggravations of thy
particular sins, how thou have sinned against all Gods warnings, against thine
own prayers, against mercies, against corrections, against clearest light,
against freest love, against thine own resolutions, against promises, vows,
covenants of better obedience, etc. charge thy heart home with these things,
till it blush for shame, and be brought out of all good opinion of it self,
Ezra. 9. 6.

Meditate upon the desert of sin. It cries up to Heaven: It calls for
vengeance, Genesis 18. 24. Its due wages is death, damnation. It pulls the curse
of God upon the soul and body. Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 28. The least sinful word or
thought, ^aies thee under the infinite wrath of God Almighty, Romans 2. 8, 9.
Mat. 12. 36. Oh what a load of wrath, what a weight of curses, what treasure of
vengeance have all the millions of thy sins then deserved! Romans 2. 5. John. 3.
36. Oh judge thy self that the Lord may not judge thee. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

Meditate upon the deformity, and defilement of sin, It Is as black as hell, the
very image and likeness of the Devil drawn upon thy soul, 1 John 3. 8, 10. It
would more affright thee, to see thy self the hateful deformity of thy nature,
than to see the devil. There is no mire so unclean, no vomit so loathsome, no
carcass or carrion so offensive, no plague or leprosy so noisome as sin, in
which thou art all enrolled, and covered with its odious filth, whereby thou
art rendered more displeasing to the pure and holy nature of the glorious God,
than the most filthy object, composed of whatever is hateful to all thy senses,
can be to thee. Job 15. 15, 16. Could thou take up a toad into thy bosom?
Could thou cherish it and take delight in it? Why, thou art as contrary to
the pure and perfect holiness of the divine nature, and as loathsome as that is
to thee, Mat. 23. 33. till thou art purified by the blood of Jesus, and the
power of renewing grace.

Above all other sins, fix the eye of Consideration on these two. 1. The sin of
thy nature. It Is to little purpose to lop the branches, while the root of
original corruption remains untouched. In vain do men lave out the streams,
when the fountain is running, that fills up all again. Let the axe of thy
repentance (with David's) go to the root of sin, Psalm. 51. 5. Study how deep,
how close, how permanent it is, thy natural pollution; how universal it is,
till thou do cry out with Paul's feeling, upon thy body of death. Romans 7. 24.
Look into all thy parts and powers, and see what u^clean vessels, what styes,
what dunghills, what sinks they are become. Heu miser, quid sum? vas
sterquilinii, concha putredinis; plenus faetore and horrore. August. Solil. c.
2. The heart is never soundly broken, till thoroughly convinced of the
heynousness of original sin. Here fix thy thoughts. This is that that makes
thee backward to all good, prone to all evil; Romans 7. 15. that sheds blindness,
pride, prejudices, unbelief into thy mind; enmity, unconstancy, obstinacy, into
thy will; inordinate heats and colds into thy affectious; insensibleness,
benummedness, unfaithfulness into thy conscience, slipperiness into thy memory,
and in a word, has put every wheel of thy soul out of order, and made it of an
habitation of holiness, to become a very hell of iniquity. James 3. 6. This is
that that has defiled, corrupted, perverted all thy members, and turned them
into weapons of unrighteousness, and servants of sin; Romans 6. 19. that has
filled the head with carnal and corrupt designs, Mic. 2. 1. the hands with
sinful practices, Esaias 1. 15. the eyes with wandering and wantonness, 2 Pet. 2.
14. the tongue with deadly poison; Iam. 3. 8. that has opened the ears to
tales, flattery, and filthy communication, and shut them against the
instruction of life; Zech. 7. 11, 12. and has rendered thy heart a very mint
and forge of sin, and the cursed womb of all deadly conceptions; Mat. 15. 16.
So that it pours forth its wickedness without ceasing, 2 Pet. 2. 14. even as
naturally freely, unweariedly, as a fountain does pour forth its waters, Ier.
6. 7. or the raging Sea does cast forth mire and dirt. Esaias 57. 20. And will thou yet be in love with thy self, and tell us any longer of thy good heart? O
never leave meditating on this desperate contagion of original corruption, till
with Ephraim thou bemoan thy self, Ier. 31. 8. and with deepest shame and
sorrow smite on thy breast as the Publican, Luke 18. 13. and with Job abhor thy
self and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42. 6, 2. The particular evil that thou
art most addicted to. Find out all its aggravations. Set home upon thy heart
all Gods threatenings against it. Repentance drives before it the whole herd,
but especially sticks the arrow in the beloved sin, and singles this out, above
the rest, to run it down, Psalm. 18. 23. O labor (...) make this sin odious to
thy soul, and double thy guards, and thy resolutions against it, because this
has, and does, most dishonor God, and endanger thee.

Dir. III. Strive to affect thy heart with deep sense of thy present misery.
Read over the foregoing Chapter again and again, and get it out of the book
into thine heart. Remember when thou lie down, that for ought thou know,
thou may awake in flames, and when thou risest up, that by the next night
thou may make thy bed in hell. Is it a just matter to live in such a fearful
ease? to stand tottering upon the brink of the bottomless pit, and to live at
the mercy of every disease, that if it will but fall upon thee; will send thee
forthwith into the burnings? Suppose thou saw a condemned wretch hanging
over Nebuchadne^ar's burning fiery furnace, by nothing but a twine thread,
which were ready to break every moment, would not thine heart tremble for such
an one? Why thou art the man. This is thy very case, O man, woman, that read
this, if thou be yet unconverted. What if the thread of thy life should break?
(Why, thou know not but it may be the next night, yea the next moment) where
would thou be then? whither would thou drop? Verily, upon the crack but of
this thread, thou fallest into the lake, that burns with fire and Brimstone,
where thou must lie scalding and sweltering in a fiery Ocean, while God has a
being, if thou die in thy present case. And does not thy soul tremble as thou
read? Do not thy tears bedew the paper, and thy heart throb in thy bosom?
Do thou not yet begin to smite on thy breast, and bethink thy self what need
thou have of a change? O what is thy heart made of! Have thou not only lost all
regard to God, but art without any love and pity to thy self?

Oh study thy misery, till thy heart do cry out for Christ, as earnestly, as
ever a drowning man did for a boat, or the wounded for a Surgeon. Men must
come to see the danger, and feel the smart of their deadly sores and sickness,
or else Christ will be to them a Physician of no value, Mat. 9. 12. Then the
manslayer hastens to the City of r^fuge, when pursued by the avenger of blood.
Men must be even forced, and fired out of themselves, or else they will not
come to Christ. 'Twas distress and extremity, that made the Prodigal think of
returning, Luke 15. 16, 17. While Laodicea thinks her self rich, increased in
goods, in need of nothing, there is little hope. She must be deeply convinced
of her wretchedness, blindness, poverty, nakedness, before she will come to
Christ for his Gold, raiment, eyesalve, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Therefore hold the eyes
of conscience open, amplify thy misery, as much as possible. Do not fly the
sight of it, for fear it should fill thee with terror. The sense of thy misery
is but as it were the suppuration of the wound, which is necessary to the cure.
Better fear the torments that abide thee now, than feel them hereafter.

Dir. IV. Settle it upon thine heart, that thou ar^ under an everlasting
inability ever to recover thy self. Never think thy praying, reading, hearing,
confessing, amending will do the cure. These must be attended; bu^ thou art
undone if thou restest in them, Romans 10. 3. Thou art a lost man, if thou hopest
to escape drowning upon any other plank, but Jesus Christ, Act. 4. 1^. Thou
must unlearn thyself, and renounce thine own wisdom, thine own righteousness;
thine own strength, and throw thy self wholly upon Christ, as a man that
swimmeth casts himself upon the water, or else thou can not ^scape. While
men trust in themselves, and establish their own righteousness, and have
confidence in the flesh^ they will not come savingly to Christ, Luke 18. 19.
Phil. 3. 3. Thou must know thy gain to be but loss and dung, thy strength but
weakness, thy right^ousness rag's and rotteness, before (...) will be on
effectual closure between Christ and ^hee, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Esaias.
64 6. Can the liveless carcass shake off his grave cloths, and loose the bonds
of death? Then may thou recover thy self, who (...) dead in trespasses and
sins, and under an impossibility of serving thy maker (acceptably) in this
condition, Romans 8. 8. Heb. 11. 6. Therefore, when thou go to pray, or
meditate, or to do any of the duties, to which thou art here directed: go out
of thy self, call in the help of the spirit, as despairing to do any thing
pleasing to God, in thine own strength. Yet neglect not thy duty, but lie at
the pool, and wait in the way of the spirit. While the Eunuch was reading, then
the Holy Ghost sent Philip to him, Act. 8. 28, 29. when the Disciples were
praying, Act. 4. 31. when Cornelius and his friends were hearing, Acts 10. 44.
then the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and filled them all. Strive to give up thy
self to Christ. Strive to pray, strive to meditate, strive an hundred and an
hundred times, try to do it as well as thou can, and while thou art
endeavoring in the way of thy duty, the Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee, and help thee to do, what of thy self thou art utterly unable unto, Prove.
1. 23.

Dir. V. Forthwith renounce all thy sins. If thou yield thy self to the
contrary practice of any sin, thou art undone, Romans 6. 16. In vain do thou
hope for life by Christ, except thou depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Forsake thy sins, or else thou can not find mercy: Prove. 28. 13. Thou can
not be married to Christ, except divorsed from sin. Give up the traitor, or you
can have no peace with Heaven. Cast the head of Sheba over the wall. Keep not
Dalila^ in thy lap. Thou must part with thy sins, or with thy soul. Spare but
one sin, and God will not spare thee. Never make excuses: thy sins must die, or
thou must die for them, Psalm. 68. 21. If thou allow of one sin, though but a
little, a secret one, though thou may plead necessity, and have a hundred
shifts and excuses, for it, the life of thy soul must go for the life of that
sin; Ezekiel. 18. 21. and will it not be dearly bought?

Oh sinner, hear and consider. If thou will part with thy sins, God will give
thee his Christ: Is not this a fair exchange? I testify unto thee this day,
that if thou perish, it is not because there was never a Savior provided, nor
life tendered: but because thou preferredst (with the Jews) the Murderer before
thy Savior, sin before Christ, and lovedst darkness rather than light, John 3.
19. Search thy heart therefore with candles, as the Jews did their houses for
Leven, before the Passover: Labor to find out thy sins. Enter into thy
Closet, and consider, what evil have I lived in? what duty have I neglected
toward God! what sin have I lived in against my brother? and now strike the
darts through the heart of thy sin, as Ioab did through Absalom's, 2 Samuel 18.
14. Never stand looking upon thy sin, nor rolling the morsel under thy tongue,
Job 20. 12. but spit it out as poison, with fear and detestation. Alas, what
will thy sins do for thee, that thou should stick at parting with them? They
will flatter thee, but they will undo thee, and cut thy throat while they smile
upon thee, and poison thee while they please thee, and arm the justice and
wrath of the infinite God against thee. They will open hell for thee, and pile
up fuel to burn thee. Behold the gibbet that they have prepared for thee. Oh
serve them like Haman, and do upon them the execution, they would else have
done upon thee. Away with them, crucify them, and let Christ only be Lord over
thee.

Dir. VI. Make a solemn choice of God for thy portion and blessedness, Deuteronomy.
26. 17. With all possible devotion and veneration avouch the Lord for thy God.
Set the world with all its glory, and paint, and gallantry, with all its
pleasures and promotions on the one hand, and set God with all his infinite
excellencies and perfections on the other, and see that thou do deliberately
make thy choice, Josh. 24. 15. Take up thy rest in God, Ioh. 6. 68. Set thee
down under his shadow, Cant. 2. 3. Let his promises and perfections turn the
scale against all the world. Settle it upon thy heart, that the Lord is an
all-sufficient portion, that thou can not be miserable, while thou have a God
to live upon. Take him for thy shield and exceeding great reward. God alone is
more than all the world. Content thy self with him. Let others carry the
preferments and glory of the world, place thou thy happiness in his favor, and
the light of his countenance, Psalm. 5. 6, 7.

Poor sinner, thou art fallen off from God, and have engaged his power, and
wrath against thee. Yet know that of his abundant grace, he does offer to be
thy God again in Christ. 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18. What say thou man? Will thou have
the Lord for thy God? Why take this counsel, and thou shall have him. Come to
him by his Christ, Ioh. 14. 6. Renounce the idols of thine own pleasure, gain,
Reputation ^ 1 These. 1. 9. Let these be pulled out of the Throne, and set Gods
interest upermost in thine heart. Take him as God, to be chief in thine
affection, estimations, intentions; for he will not endure to have any set
above him, Romans 1. 25. Psalm. 73. 25. In a word, thou must take him in all his
Personal relations, and in all his essential perfections.

First, In all his personal relations. God the Father must be taken for thy
Father, Ier. 3. 4. 19. 22. O come to him with the Prodigal, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am not worthy to be called thy
Son: but since of thy wonderful mercy, thou art pleased to take me, that am of
my self a dog, a swine, a devil, to be thy child, I solemnly take thee for my
Father, I commend my self to thy care, and trust to thy providence, and cast my
burden on thy shoulders. I depend on thy provision, and submit to thy
corrections, and trust under the shadow of thy wings, and hide in thy chambers,
and fly to thy name. I renounce all confidence in my self, I repose my
confidence in thee, I depose my concernments with thee. I will be with thee,
and for no other. Again, God the Son must be taken for thy Savior, for thy
redeemer, and righteousness, John 1. 2. He must be accepted, as the only way to
the Father, and the only means of life, Heb. 7. 25. O then put off the raiment
of thy captivity, on with the wedding garment, and go and marry thy self to
Jesus Christ. Lord I am thine, and all that I have, my body, my soul, my name,
my estate. I send a bill of divorse to my other lovers, I give my heart to
thee. I will be ^hine undividedly, thine everlastingly. I will set thy name on
all I have, and use it only as thy goods, as thy loan, during thy leave,
resigning all to thee. I will have no King but thee: reign thou over me. Other
Lords have had dominion over me: but now I will make mention of thy name only,
and do here take an oath of fealty to thee, promising and vowing to serve, and
love, and fear thee, above all competitors. I disavow mine own righteousness,
and despair of ever being pardoned and saved for mine own duties, or graces,
and lean only on thine all-sufficient sacrifice and intercession, for pardon,
and life, and acceptance before God. I take thee for mine only guide and
instruction, resolving to be led and directed by thee, and to wait for thy
counsel, and that thine, shall be the casting voice with me. Lastly, God the
Spirit must be taken for thy sanctifier, Romans 8. 9, 14. Gal. 5. 16, 18. for
thine Advocate, thy Counselor, thy Comforter, the teacher of thine ignorance,
the pledge and earnest of thine inheritance, Romans 8. 26. Psalm. 73. 24. John 14.
16. Ephesians. 1. 14. John 14. 26. Ephesians. 4. 30. Awake thou Northwind, and come thou
South, and blow upon my Garden, Cant. 4. 16. Come thou Spirit of the most high;
here is a house for thee, here is a Temple for thee. Here do thou rest for
ever; dwell here, and rest here. Lo I give up the possession to thee, full
possession. I send thee the keys of my heart, that all may be for thy use, that
thou may put thy goods thy graces into every room. I give up the use of all
to thee, that every faculty, and every member may be thine instrument, to work
righteousness, and do the will of my Father, which is in Heaven.

Secondly, In all his essential perfections. Consider how the Lord has
revealed himself to you in his word: will you take him as such a God? O sinner,
here is the blessedst news that ever came to the sons of men. The Lord will be
thy God, Genesis 7. 17. Rev. 21. 3. if thou will but close with him in his
excellencies. Will thou have the merciful, the gracious, the sinpardoning God,
to be thy God? O yes (says the sinner) I am undone else. But he further tells
thee, I am the holy, and sin-hating God. If thou will be owned as one of my
people, thou must be holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. holy in heart, holy in life. Thou must
put away all thine iniquities, be they never so near, never so natural, never
so necessary to the maintaining thy fleshly interest. Unless thou will be at
defiance with sin, I cannot be thy God. Cast out the leven: put away the evil
of thy doings: cease to do evil, learn to do well, or else I can have nothing
to do with thee, Esaias. 1. 16, 17, 18. Bring forth mine enemies, or there is no
peace to be had with me. What does thine heart answer? Lord, I desire to have
thee as such a God. I desire to be holy, as thou are holy, to be made partaker
of thy holiness. I love thee, not only for thy goodness and mercy, but for thy
holiness and thy purity. I take thy holiness for my happiness. Oh! be to me a
fountain of holiness: set on me the stamp and impress of thy holiness. I will
thankfully part with all my sins at thy command. My willful sins I do forthwith
forsake; and for my infirmities, that I cannot get rid of, though I would, I
will strive against them in the use of thy means. I detest them, and will pray
and war against them, and never let them have quiet rest in my soul. Beloved,
whosoever of you will thus accept the Lord for his God, he shall have him.

Again, he tells you; I am the All-sufficient God, Genesis 17. 1. Will you lay all
at my feet, and give it up to my dispose, and take me for your only portion?
Will you own and honor mine All Sufficiency? Will you take me as your
happiness and Treasure, your hope and bliss? I am a Sun and Shield, all in one:
will you have me for your all? Genesis 1. 15. Psalm. 84. 11. Now what do thou say
to this? Does thy mouth water after the onions and fleshpots of Egypt? art
thou loath to exchange thy earthly happiness, for a part in God: and though
thou would be glad to have God and the world too, yet thou can not think
of having him, and nothing but him, but had rather take up with the earth
below, if God would but let thee keep it, as long as thou would? This is a
fearful sign. But now if thou art willing to sell all for the Pearl of great
price; Mat. 12. 46. If thine heart answer, Lord I desire no other portion but
thee. Take the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil whosoever will, so I may have the
light of thy countenance. I pitch upon thee for my happiness. I gladly venture
my self on thee, and trust my self with thee. I set my hopes in thee, I take up
my rest with thee. Let me hear thee say, I am thy God, thy salvation, and I
have enough, all I wish for. I will make no terms with thee, but for thy self.
Let me but have thee sure, let me be able to make my claim, and see my title to
thy self, and for other things, I leave them to thee. Give me more, or less,
any thing or nothing, I will be satisfied in my God. Take him thus and he is
thine own.

Again, he tells you; I am the Sovereign Lord. If you will have me for your
God, you must give me the supremacy, Mat. 6. 24. I will not be an underling.
You must not make me a second to sin, or any worldly interest. If you will be
my people, I must have the rule over you. You must not live at your own list.
Will you come under my yoke? Will you bow to my Government? Will you submit to
my discipline? to my word, to my rod? Sinner, what say thou to this? Lord I
had rather be at thy command, than live at mine own list. I had rather have thy
will to be done, than mine. I approve of and consent to thy laws, and account
it my privilege to lie under them. And though the flesh rebel, and often break
over bounds, I am resolved to take no other Lord but thee. I willingly take the
Oath of thy supremacy and acknowledge thee for my liege Sovereign, and resolve
all my days to pay the tribute of worship, obedience, and love, and service to
thee, and to live to thee as the end of my life. This is a right accepting of
God.

To be short, he tells you; I am the true and faithful God. If you will have me
for your God, you must be content to trust me, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Prove. 3. 5. Will
you venture your selves upon my word, and depend on my faithfulness, and take
my bond for your security? Will you be content to follow me, in poverty, and
reproach, and affliction here, and to see much going out, and little coming in,
and to tarry till the next world for your preferment? Mat. 9. 21. I deal much
upon trust, will you be content to labor, and suffer, and to tarry for your
returns till the Resurrection of the just? Luke 14. 14. The womb of my Promise
will not presently bring forth; will you have the patience to wait? Heb. 10.
36. Now beloved, what say you to this? Will you have this God for your God?
Will you be content to live by faith, and trust him for an unseen happiness, an
unseen Heaven, an unseen Glory? Do your hearts answer, Lord, we will venture
our souls upon thee, we commit our selves to thee: we roll upon thee, we know
whom we have trusted: we are willing to take thy word: we will prefer thy
promises, before our own possessions; and the hopes of Heaven, before all the
enjoyments of the Earth. We will wait thy leisure. What thou will here, so that
we may have but thy faithful promise for Heaven hereafter? If you can in truth,
and upon deliberation, thus accept of God, he will be yours. Thus there must
be, in a right Conversion to God, a closing with him suitable to his
excellencies. But when men close with his mercy, but not with his sinhating
holiness and purity; or will take him for their benefactor, but not for their
Sovereign; or for their Patron, but not for their Portion, this is no through,
and so no sound Conversion.

Dir. VII. Accept of the Lord Jesus, in all his Offices, with all his
inconveniences, as thine. Upon these terms Christ may be had. Sinner, thou have
und one thy self, and art plunged into the ditch of most deplorable misery, out
of which thou art never able to climb up. But Jesus Christ is able and ready to
help thee, and he freely tenders himself to thee, Heb. 7. 25. John. 7. 37. Be
thy sins never so many, never so great, of never so long continuance, yet thou
shall be most certainly pardoned and saved, if thou do not wretchedly neglect
the offer, that in the name of God is here made unto thee. The Lord Jesus
calls to thee, to look unto him and be saved, Esaias 45. 22. to come unto him,
and he will in no wise cast thee out, John 6. 37. Yea he is a suitor to thee,
and beseeches thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 20. he cries in the streets,
he knocks at thy door, he wooeth thee to except of him, and live with him:
Prove. 1. 20. Rev. 3. 20. if thou die, it is because thou would not come to
him for life, John 5. 40. Now accept of an offered Christ, and thou art made
for ever. Now give up thy consent to him, and the match is made, all the world
cannot hinder. Do not stand off because of thine unworthiness. Man, I tell
thee, nothing in all the world can undo thee, but thine unwillingness. Speak
man, art thou willing of the match? Will thou have Christ in all his relations
to be thine; thy King, thy Priest, thy Prophet? Will thou have him with all his
inconveniences? Take not Christ hand over head, but sit down first, and count
the cost. Will thou lay all at his feet? Will thou be content to run all
hazards with him? Will thou take thy lot with him, fall where it will? Will thou deny thy self, take up thy Cross, and follow him? Art thou deliberately,
understandingly, freely, fixedly, determined to cleave to him in all times, and
conditions? If so, my soul for thine, thou shall never perish, John 3. 16. but
art passed from death to life. Here lies the main point of thy salvation, that
thou be found in thy covenant-closure with Jesus Christ, and therefore if thou
love thy life, see that thou be faithful to God and thy soul here.

Dir. VIII. Resign up all thy powers and faculties, and thy whole interest to
be his. They gave their own selves unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Present your
bodies as a living Sacrifice, Romans 12. 1. The Lord seeks not yours, But you.
Resign therefore thy body with all its members to him, and thy soul with all
its powers, that he may be glorified in thy body and in thy spirit, which are
his, 1 Cor. 6. 20. In a right closure with Christ, all the faculties give up to
him. The Judgment subscribes, Lord thou art worthy of all acceptance, chief of
ten thousand. Happy is the man that find^th the^. All the things that are to be
desired, are not to be compared with thee, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. The
understanding lays aside ^s corrupt reasonings and cavils, and its projudices
against Christ and his ways. It is now past questioning and disputing, and
casts it for Christ against all the World. It concludes, it is good to be here,
and sees such a treasure in this field, such value in this pearl, as is worth
all. Mat. 13. 44. Oh here is the richest bargain that ever I made: here is the
richest prize that ever man was offered: here is the soveraignst remedy that
ever mercy prepared: he is worthy of my esteem, worthy of my choice, worthy of
my love, worthy to be embraced, adored, admired for evermore, Rev. 5. 12. I
approve of his Articles: his terms are righteous and reasonable, full of equity
and mercy. Again, the will resigns. It stands no longer wavering, nor wishing
and woulding, but is pe^emptorily determined. Lord, thy love has overcome me:
thou have won me, and thou shall have me. Come in Lord, to thee I freely open,
I consent to be saved in thine own way, thou shall have any thing, thou shall
have all, let me have but thee. The memory gives up to Christ: Lord, here is a
storehouse for thee. Out with this trash; lay in thy treasure. Let me be a
granary, a repository of thy truths, thy promises, thy Providence, The
Conscience comes in; Lord I will ever side with thee. I will be thy faithful
register. I will warn when the sinner is tempted, and smite when thou art
offended. I will witness for thee, and judge for thee, and guide into thy ways,
and will never let sin have quiet in this soul. The affections also come in to
Christ. O faith Love, I am sick of thee. O says Desire, now I have my longing.
Here Is the satisfastion I sought for. Here Is the desire of nations. Here Is
bread for me, and balm for me, all that I want. Fear bows the knee with awe and
veneration. Welcome Lord, to thee will I pay my homage. Thy word and thy rod
shall command my motions. Thee will I reverence and adore, before thee will I
fall down and worship. Grief likewise puts in, Lord thy displeasure and thy
dishonor, peoples calamities, and mine own iniquities shall be that, that
shall set me abroach. I will mourn when thou art offended, I will weep when thy
cause is wounded. Anger likewise comes in for Christ: Lord nothing so enrages
me, as my folly against thee, that I should be so befooled and bewitched, as to
hearken to the flatteries of sin, and temptations of Satan against thee. Hatred
too will side with Christ. I protest mortal enmity with thine enemies, that I
will never be friends with thy foes. I vow an immortal quarrel with every sin.
I will give no quarter, I will make no peace. Thus let all thy powers give up
to Jesus Christ.

Again, thou must give up thy whole interest to him. If there be any thing,
that thou keep back from Christ, it will be thine undoing. Luke 14. 33.
Unless thou will forsake all (in preparation and resolution of thy heart) thou
can not be his Disciple. Thou must hate Father and Mother, yea and thine own
life also in comparison of him, and as far as it stands in competition with
him, Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26, 27, etc. In a word, thou must give him thy self,
and all that thou have, without reservation, or else thou can have no part in
him.

Dir. IX. Make choice of the Laws of Christ as the rule of thy words, thoughts
and actions, Psalm. 119. 30. This is the true Converts choice. But here remember
these three rules. 1. Thou must choose them all. There is no coming to Heaven
by a partial obedience. Read Psalm. 119. 6, 128, 160. Ezekiel, 18. 21. None may
think it enough to take up with the cheap and easy part of Religion, and let
alone the duties that are costly, and self-denying, and grate upon the interest
of the flesh. You must take all, or none. A sincere Convert, though he makes
most conscience of the greatest sins and weightiest duties; yet he makes true
conscience of little sins, and of all duties, Psalm. 119. 6. 113. Mat. 23. 23.
2. For all times, for prosperity, and for adversity; whether it rain, or shine.
A true Convert is resolved in his way: he will stand to his choice, and will
not set his back to wind, and be of the religion of the times. I have stuck to
thy testimonies, I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes always, even
to the end. Thy testimonies have I taken, as an heritage for ever, Psalm. 119.
31, 111, 117, 44, 93. I will have respect unto thy statutes continually. 3.
This must be done, not hand over head, but deliberately and understandingly.
That disobedient son said, I go sir, but he went not Mat. 24. 30. How fairly
did they promise: All that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, we will do
it; and it is like they speak as they meant, but when it came to trial, it was
found that there was not such a heart in them, as to do what they had promised,
Deuteronomy. 5. 27, 29. If you would be sincere in closing with the laws and ways of
Christ, First, Study the meaning, and the latitude and compass of them.
Remember, that they are very spiritual: they reach the very thoughts and
inclinations of the heart; so that if you will walk by this rule, your very
thoughts, and inward motions must be under government. Again, that they are
very strict and self-denying, quite contrary to the grain of your natural
inclinations, Mat. 16. 24. You must take the strait gate, the narrow way, and
be content to have the flesh curbed from the liberty that it desires, Mat. 7.
14. In a word, that they are very large: for the Commandment is exceeding
broad, Psalm. 119. 66. Secondly, rest not in generals, (for there is much deceit
in that) but bring down thy heart to the particular commands of Christ. Those
Jews in the Prophet seemed as well resolved as any in the world, and call God
to witness, that they meant, as they said. But they stuck in generals. When
Gods command crosses their inclination, they will not obey, Ier. 42. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. compared with chapter 43. v. 2. Take the Assemblies larger Ca^echism, and
see their excellent and most compendious exposition of the commandments, and
put thy heart to it. Art thou resolved, in the strength of Christ, to set upon
the conscientious practice of every duty that thou find to be there required
of thee, and to set against every sin that thou find there forbidden? This
is the way to be sound in Gods statutes, that thou may never be ashamed,
Psalm. 119. 80. Thirdly, Observe the special duties that thy heart is most
against, and the special sins that it is most inclined unto and see whether it
be truly resolved to perform the one. and forego the other. What say thou to
thy bosom sin, thy gainful sin? What say thou to costly and hazardous and
flesh displeasing duties? If thou hal^est here, and do not resolve by the
grace of God to cross thy flesh, and put to it, thou art unsound, Psalm. 18. 23.
Psalm. 119. 6.

Dir. X. Let all this be completed in a solemn Covenant between God and thy
soul. Psalm. 119. 106. Neh. 10. 29. For thy better help therein, take these few
directions.

First, set apart some time, more than once to be spent in secret before the
Lord.

1. In seeking earnestly his special assistance, and gracious acceptance of
thee. 2. In considering distinctly all the terms or conditions of the Covenant,
expressed in the form hereafter proposed. 3. In searching thine heart, whether
thou art sincerely willing to forsake all thy sins, and to resign up thy self,
body and soul unto God, and his service, to serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of thy life
Secondly, Compose thy Spirit into the most serious frame possible, suitable to
transaction of so high importance.

Thirdly, Lay hold on the Covenant of God, and rely upon his promise of giving
grace and strength, whereby thou may be enabled to perform thy promise. Trust
not to thine own strength to, the strength of thine own resolutions, but take
hold on his strength.

Fourthly, Resolve to he faithful, having engaged thine heart, opened thy
mouth, and subscribed with thy hand unto the Lord, resolve in his strength
never to go back.

Lastly, Being thus prepared, on some convenient time set apart for the
purpose, set upon the work, and in the most solemn manner possible, as if the
Lord were visibly present before thine eyes, fall down on thy knees, and
spreading forth thine hands toward Heaven, open thine heart to the Lord in
these, or the like words.

O Most dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee accept of thy
poor Prodigal now prostrating himself at thy Door: I have fallen from thee by
mine iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a thousandfold more the
Child of Hell by my wicked practice: But of thine infinite Grace thou have
promised Mercy to me in Christ, The terms of our Communion, are either from
which, or to which.
if I will but turn to Thee with all my Heart: Therefore upon the Call of thy
Gospel, I am now come in, and throwing down my weapons, submit my self to thy
Mercy.

And because thou requirest, The terms from which we must turn, are sin, Satan,
the World and our own Righteousness, which must be ^husrenounced.
as the Condition of my Peace with Thee, that I should put away mine Idols and
be at defiance with all thine Enemies, which I acknowledge I have wickedly
sided with against Thee, I here from the bottom of my heart renounce them all,
firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known sin, but
conscientiously to use all the means that I know thou have prescribed, for the
death and utter destruction of all my corruptions. And whereas I have formerly
inordinately and idolatrously let out my affections upon the World, I do here
resign up my heart to Thee that madst it, humbly protesting before thy Glorious
Majesty, that is the firm resolution of my heart, and that I do unfeinedly
desire Grace from Thee, that when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice
this my resolution through thy assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me
in this world, rather than to turn from thee to the ways of sin; and that I
will watch against all its temptations, whether of Prosperity, or Adversity,
lest they should withdraw my heart from thee: beseeching thee also to help me
against the temptations of Satan, to whose wicked Suggestions I resolve by thy
grace never to yield my self a Servant. And because my own righteousness is but
menstruous rags, I renounce all confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am
of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone creature, without righteousness or
strength.

And forasmuch as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most graciously to
me wretched sinner, The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate or
mediate.
to be again my God through Christ, if I would accept of thee: I call Heaven
and Earth to record this day, that I do here solemnly avouch the for the Lord
my God and with all possible veneration, The ultimate is God, the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, who must be thus accepted.
bowing the neck of thy Soul under the feet of thy most Sacred Majesty, I do
here take thy the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my portion,
and chief good, and do give up my self, Body and Soul for thy Servant,
promising and vowing to serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the days
of my life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, The mediate terms are
either principal, or less principal.
the only means of coming unto thee, The principal is Christ the Mediator, who
must thus be embraced.
I do here upon the bended knees of my Soul accept of him as the only new and
living way, by which sinners may have access to thee, and do here solemnly join
my self in a Marriage Covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor and wretched,
and miserable, and blind, and naked; a most loathsome polluted wretch, a guilty
condemned Malefactor unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the servants of my
Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: but (...) such is
thine unparalleled love, I do here with all my power accept thee, and do take
thee for my Head and Husband, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer,
for all times and conditions, to love, and honor, and obey thee before all
others, and this to the death. I embrace thee in all thine Offices: I renounce
mine own worthiness, and do here avow thee to be the Lord my Righteousness: I
renounce mine own wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only Guide: I renounce
mine own Will; and take thy Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
Covenant with thee to take my Lot, as it falls, with thee, and by thy Grace
assisting to run all hazards with thee, verily supposing that neither life nor
death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy Holy Laws, The less
principal are the Laws of Christ which must be thus observed.
as the rule of my Life, and the way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom, I
do here willingly put my Neck under thy Yoke, and set my shoulder to thy
burden; and subscribing to all thy Laws, as holy, just, and good, I solemnly
take them as the rule of my words, thoughts and actions; promising that though
my flesh contradict and rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my
whole life according to thy direction; and will not allow my self in the
neglect of any thing that I know to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings; I
am bold humbly to protest, That unallowed miscarriages, contrary to the settled
bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant, for so thou
have said.

Now Almighty God, searcher of hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known guile, or reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any flaw or falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now Glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this day
forward, to look upon as my God and Father; that ever thou should find out
such a way for the recovery of undone sinners. Glory be to thee, O God the Son,
who have loved me and washed me from my sins in thine own Blood, and art now
become my Savior and Redeemer: Glory be to thee O God the Holy Ghost, who by
the finger of thine Almighty Power have turned about my Heart from Sin to God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou
art now become my Covenant-friend, and I through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant-servant, Amen, So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

The Authors advice.
THis Covenant I advise you to make, not only in Heart, but in Word; not only
in Word, but in Writing; and that you would with all possible reverence spread
the Writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him as your Act and
Deed. And when you have done this, set your hand to it. Keep it as a Memorial
of the Solemn Transactions that have passed between God and you, that you may
have recourse to it in Doubts and Temptations.

Dir. XI. Take heed of delaying thy Conversion, and set upon a speedy and
present turning. I made haste, and delayed not, Psalm. 119. 59. Remember, and
tremble at the sad instance of the foolish Virgins, that came not till the door
of mercy was shut; Mat. 25. and of a convinced Felix; that put of Paul, to
another season, and we never find that he had such a season more, Acts 24. 25.
O come in while it is called to day, le^t thou should be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin; lest thy day of Grace should be over, and the things that
belong to thy peace should be hid from thine eyes. Now mercy is wooing of thee:
Now Christ is waiting to be gracious to thee, and the Spirit of God is striving
with th^e. Now Ministers are calling: now Conscience is stirring; now the
Market is open, and Oil may be had, thou have opportunity for the buying. Now
Christ is to be had for the taking. Oh! strike in with the offers of Grace. Oh!
now, or never. If thou make light of this offer, God may swear in his wrath,
thou shall never taste of his Supper, Luke 14. 24.

Dir. XII. Attend conscientiously upon the word as the means appointed for thy
Conversion, James 1. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 4. 15. Attend, I say, not customarily, but
conscientiously; with this desire design, hope and expectation, that thou may
be converted by it. Every Sermon thou hear, come with this thought: Oh, I
hope God will now come in. I hope this day may be the time, this may be the man
by whom God will bring me home. When thou art coming to the Ordinances, lift up
thine heart thus to God: Lord let this be the Sabbath, let this be the season
wherein I may receive renewing Grace. Oh let it be said, that to day such a one
was born unto thee.

Object. Thou will say, I have been long a hearer of the word, and yet it has
not been effectual to my conversion. Ans. Yea, but thou have not attended upon
it in this manner, as a means of thy Conversion, nor with this design, nor
praying for, and expecting of this happy effect of it

Dir. XIII. Strike in with the Spirit, when he begins to work upon thy heart.
When he works convictions, O do not stifle them, but join in with him, and beg
the Lord to carry on convictions to Conversion. Quench not the Spirit: do not
out-strive him: do not resist him. Beware of putting out convictions by evil
company, or worldly business. When thou find any troubles for sin, and fears
about thine eternal State, b^g of God, that they may never leave thee till,
they have wrought off thy heart thoroughly from sin, and wrought it over to
Jesus Christ. Say to him, Strike home Lord: leave not the work in the midst. If
thou see, that I am not yet wounded enough, that I am not troubled enough,
wound me yet deeper, Lord. O go to the bottom of my corruptions: let out the
life blood of my sins, Thus yield up thy self to the workings of the Spirit,
and hoise thy sails to his gusts.

Dir. XIV. Set upon the constant and diligent use of serious and fervent
prayer. He that neglects prayer, is a profane and unsanctified sinner, Job.
15. 4. He that is not constant in prayer, is but an hypocrite, Job 27. 10.
(unless the omission be contrary to his ordinary course, under the force of
some instant temptation.) This is one of the first things Conversion appears
in, that it sets men on praying, Acts 9. 11. Therefore set to this duty. Let
never a day pass over thee, wherein thou have not morning and evening set apart
some time for set and solemn prayer in secret. Call thy family also together
daily and duly, to worship God with thee. Woe be unto thee if thine be found
amongst the families that call not on Gods name, Ier. 10. 25. But cold and
lifeless devotions will not reach half way to Heaven. Be servent, and
importunate. Importunity will carry it. But without violence the Kingdom of
Heaven will not be taken, Mat. 11. 12. Thou must strive to enter, Luke 13. 24.
and wrestle with tears and supplications, as Jacob, if thou meanest to carry
the blessing, Genesis 32. 24. comp. with Hos. 12. 4. Thou art undone for ever
without grace: and therefore thou must put to it, and resolve to take no
denial. That man that is fixed in this resolution, Well I must have Grace, and
I will never give over, till I have a grace, and I wi^^ never leave seeking,
and waiting, and striving with God, and mine own heart, till he do renew me by
the power of his Grace; this man is in the likeliest way to win Grace.

Obj. But God hears not sinners: their prayer is an abomination.

Ans. Distinguish between sinners: 1. There are resolved sinners: their prayers
God abhors. 2 returning sinners: these God will come forth to, and meet with
mercy though yet afar off, Luke 15. 20. Though the prayers of the unsanctified
cannot have full acceptance; yet God has done much at the request of such, as
at Ahabs humiliation, and Ninevehs fast, 1^ Kings 21. 26. Jonah 3. ^, 9, 10.
Surely thou may go as far as these^ though thou have no Grace: and how do
thou know but thou may speed in thy suit, as they did in theirs? Yea, is he
not far more likely to Grant thee, than them; since thou ask in the name of
Christ, and that not for temporal blessings: as they; but for things much more
pleasing to him, viz. for Christ, Grace, Pardon, that thou may be justified,
sanctified, renewed, and fitted to serve him? Turn to those soul encouraging
Scriptures, Prove. 2. 1. to 6. Luke. 11. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Prove. 8. 34, 35.

Is it not good comfort, that he calls thee? Mark 10. 49. Does he set thee on
the use of means, and do thou think he will mock thee? Doubtless, he will not
fail thee, if thou be not wanting to thy self. O pray and faint not, Luke 18.
1. A person of great Quality, having offended the Duke of Buckingham, the
King's great Favorite, being admitted into her presence after long waiting,
prostrates himself at his feet, saying, I am resolved never to ^is^ more, till
I have obtained your Grace's favor, with which carriage he did overcome him.
With such a resolution do thou throw thy self at thee feet of God. It Is for thy
life and therefore follow him, and give not over. Resolve thou will not be put
off with bones, with common mercies. What though God do not presently open to
thee? Is not grace worth the waiting for? Knock, and wait, and no doubt but
sooner or later, mercy will come.

And this know, that thou have the very same encouragement to seek and wait,
that the Saints now in glory once had: for they were once in thy very case. And
have they sped so well, and will thou not go to the same door, and wait upon
God in the same course?

Dir. XV. Forsake thy evil company, Prove. 9. 6. and forbear the occasions of
sin, Prove. 23. 31. Thou will never be turned from sin, till thou will decline
and forgo the temptations to sin.

I never expect thy Conversion from sin, unless thou art brought to some
self-denial, as to fly the occasions. If thou will be nibling at the bait, and
playing on the brink, and tampering and meddling with the share, thy soul will
surely be taken. Where God does expose men in his providence, unavovidably, to
temptations, and the occasions are such as we cannot remove, we may expect
special assistance in the use of his means. But when we tempt God by running
into danger, he will not engage to support us, when we are tempted. And of all
temptation, one of the most fatal and perniclous, is evil company. Oh what
hopeful beginnings have these often stisled! Oh the souls, the estates, the
families, the Towns, that these have ruined! How many a poor sinner has been
enlightened, and convinced, and has been just ready to give the Devil the slip,
and has even escaped his snare, and yet wicked company have pulled him back at
last, and made him sevenfold more the child of Hell. In one word, I have no
hopes of thee, except thou will snake off thy evil company. Christ speaks to
thee, as to them, in another case. If thou seek me, then let these go their
way, Job. 18. 8. Thy life lies upon it: Forsake these, or else thou can not
live, Prove. 9. 6. Will thou be worse than the beast, to run on, when thou see
the Lord with a drawn sword in thy way? Number. 22. 33. Let this sentence be
written in Capitals upon thy conscience, A COMPANION OF FOOLS SHALL BE
DESTROYED, Pro. 13. 20. The Lord has spoken it, and who shall reverse it? And
will thou run upon destruction, when God himself does forwarn thee? If God do
ever change thy heart, it will appear in the change of thy company. Oh fear,
and fly this Gulf, by which so many thousand souls have been swallowed into
perdition. It will be hard for thee indeed, to make thine escape. Thy
Companions will be mocking thee out of thy Religion, and will study to fill
thee with prejudices against strictness, as ridiculous and comfortless. They
will be flattering thee, and alluring thee; but remember the warnings of the
Holy Ghost, My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If they say, come
with us: cast in thy lot among us: Walk not thou in the way with them, re^rain
thy foot from their path. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away. For the way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they
stumble. They lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for their own
lives, Prove. 1. 10. to the 18. Prove. 4. 14. to the 19. My soul is moved within
me, to see how many of my hearers a^e like to perish, both they, and their
houses, by this wretched mischief, even the haunting of such places, and
company, whereby they are drawn into sin. Once more I admonish you, as Moses
did Israel, Number. 16. 26. And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart, I
pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men. Oh! fly them as you would those
that had the Plague sores running in their foreheads. These are the Devils
Panders, and decoys; and if thou do not make thine escape, they will toll
thee into perdition, and will prove thine eternal ruin.

Dir. XVI. Lastly, Set apart a day to humble thy soul in secret, by fasting and
prayer, and to work the sense of thy sins and miseries upon thy heart. Read
over the Assemblies Exposition of the Commandments, and write down the duties
omitted, and sins committed by thee against every Commandment, and so make a
Catalogue of thy sins, and with shame and sorrow spread them before the Lord.
And if thy heart be truly willing to the terms, join thy self solemnly to the
Lord in that Covenant set down in the 9. Direction, and the Lord grant thee
mercy in his sight.

Thus I have told thee, what thou must do to be saved. Will thou not now obey
the voice of the Lord? Will thou arise and set to thy work? Oh man, what answer
will thou m^ke, what excuse will thou have, if thou should ^st perish at last
through very wilfulness, when thou have known the way of life? I do not fear
thy miscarrying, if thine own idleness do not at last undo thee, in neglecting
the use of the means, that are so plainly here prescribed. Rouse up oh sluggard
and ply thy work. Be doing and the Lord will be with thee.

A short Soliloqui for an unregenerate sinner.
Ah wretched man that I am! what a condition have I brought my self into by
sin! Oh! I see my heart has but deceived me all this while, in flattering me,
that my condition was good. I see, I see, I am but a lost, and undone man; for
ever undone, unless the Lord help me out of this condition. My sins! My sins!
Lord, what an unclean, polluted wretch and I! more loathsome and odious to
thee, than the most hateful Venom, or noisome carcass, can be to me. Oh! what
a Hell of sin is in this heart of mine, which I have flattered my self to be a
good heart? Lord, how universally am I corrupted, in all my parts, powers,
performances? All the imaginations of the thoughts of my heart, are only evil,
continually. I am under an inability to, averseness from, and enmity against
any thing that is good; and am prone to all that is evil. My heart is a very
sink of all sin: and oh the innumerable hosts, and swarms of sinful thoughts,
words, and actions, that have flown from thence! Oh the load of guilt that is
on my soul! my head is (...) and my heart full; my mind and my mem^ers, they
are all full of sin. Oh my sins! How do they stare upon me! How do they witness
against me! Woe is me, my Creditors are upon me: every commandment takes hold
upon me, for more than ten thousand Talents, yea ten thousand times ten
thousand. How endless then is the sum of all my debts! If this whole world were
filled up from earth to Heaven with paper, and all this paper written over
within and without by Arithmeticians: yet when all were cast up together, it
would come unconceivably short of what I owe to the least of Gods Commandments.
Woe unto me for my debts are infinite, and my sins are increased. They are
wrongs to an infinite Majesty: and if he that commits Treason against a
silken mortal, is worthy to be tacked, drawn and quartered: what have I
deserved, that have so often lifted up my hand against Heaven, and have struck
at the Crown and dignity of the Almighty?

Oh my sins! my sins! Behold a troop comes! Multitudes! multitudes! there is
no number of their Armies. Innumerable evils have compassed me about; mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me; they have set themselves in array against
me. Oh! it were better to have all the Regiments of Hell come against me, than
to have my sins to fall upon me, to the spoiling of my Soul. Lord, how am I
surrounded! How many are they that rise up against me! They have beset me
behind and before: they swarm within me and without me: they have possessed all
my powers, and have ^ortified mine unhappy soul, as a Garrison, which this
brood of Hell does man, and maintain, against the God that made me.

And they are as mighty, as they be many. The sands are many, but then they are
not great: the mountains great, but then they are not many. But woe is me, my
sins are as many as the sands, sand as mighty as the Mountains. Their weight is
greater than their number. It were better that the Rocks and the Mountains
should fall upon them, than the crushing and unsupportable load of my own sins.
Lord, I am heavy laden: let mercy help, or I am gone. Unload me of this heavy
guilt, this sinking load, or I am crushed without hope, and must be pressed
down to Hell. If my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my sins laid in the
balances together, they would be heavier than the sand of the Sea, therefore
my words are swallowed up: they would weigh down all the rocks and the hills,
and turn the balance against all the Isles of the Earth. O Lord, thou know
my manifold transgressions, and my mighty sins.

Ah my soul! Alas my Glory! Whither art thou humdled! Once the Glory of the
Creation, and the Image of God: now, a lump of filthiness, a Coffin of
rottenness, replenished with stench and loathsomness. Oh what wor^ has sin
made with thee! Thou shall be term^ Forsaken, and all the rooms of thy
faculties ^^solate, and the name that thou shall be called (...) is Icabod, or
where is the Glory? How (...) thou come down mightily! My beauty is turned into
deformity, and my Glory into shame Lord, what a loathsome Leper am I! The
ulcerous bodies of Job or Lazarus were not more offensive to the eyes and
nostrils of men, than I must needs be to the most holy ^od, whose eyes cannot
behold Iniquity.

And what misery has my sins brought upon me! Lord, what a case am I in! Sold
under sin, cast out of Gods favor, accursed from the Lord, cursed in my body,
cursed in my soul, cursed in my name, in my estate, my relations, and all that
I have. My sins are unpardoned, and my soul within a step of death. Alas! what
shall I do? Whither shall I go? Which way shall I look? God is frowning on me
from above? Hell gaping for me beneath; Conscience imiting me within,
temptations and dangers surrounding me without. Oh, whither shall I fly? What
place can hide me from Omnisciency? What power can secure me from Omnipotency?

What meanest thou O my soul to go on thus? Art thou in league with Hell? Have
thou made a Covenant with death? Art thou in love with thy misery? Is it good
for thee to be here? Alas what shall I do! Shall I go on in my sinful ways? Why
then certain damnation will be mine end: and shall I be so besotted and
bemadded, as to go and sell my soul to the flames, for a little Ale, and a
little ease; for a little pleasure, or gain, or content to my flesh? shall I
linger any longer in this wretched estate? No: If I tarry here, I shall die.
What then, is there no help? no hope? None, except I turn. Why, but is there
any remedy for such woeful misery? any mercy, after such provoking iniquity?
Yes, as sure as Gods Oath is true, I shall have pardon, and mercy, yet, if I
presently, unfeignedly, and unreservedly turn by Christ to him.

Why then ^^hank thee upon the bended knees of my soul, O most merciful
Jehovah, that thy patience has waited for me hitherto: for had thou took me
away in this estate, I had perished for ever. And now I adore thy Grace, and
accept the offers of thy mercy. I renounce all my sins and resolve by thy grace
to set my self against them, and to follow thee in holiness and righteousness
all the days of my life,

Who am I, Lord, that I should make any claim unto thee, or have any part or
portion in thee, who am not worthy to lick up the dust of thy feet? Yet since
thou hold forth the golden Scepter, I am bold to come, and touch. To
despair, would be to disparage thy mercy; and to stand off when thou biddest me
come, would be at once to undo my self, and rebel against thee, under pretense
of humility. Therefore I bow my soul unto thee, and with all possible
thankfulness accept thee, as mine, and give up my self to thee, as thine. Thou
shall be Sovereign over me, my King, and my God. Thou shall be in the Throne,
and all my powers shall bow to thee, they shall come, and worship before thy
feet. Thou shall be my portion, O Lord, and I will rest in thee.

Thou call for my heart. Oh that it were any way fit for thine acceptance! I
am unworthy, O Lord, everlastingly unworthy to be thine. But since thou will
have it so, I freely give up my heart to thee. Take it, it is thine. Oh that it
were better! But Lord, I put it into thine hand, who alone can mend it. Mould
it after thine own heart; make it as thou would have it, holy, humble,
heavenly, soft, tender, flexible, and write thy Law upon it.

Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly: enter in triumphantly: take me up for thy self
for ever. I give up to thee, I come to thee, as the only way to the Father, as
the only Mediator, the means ordained to bring me to God. I have dostroyed my
self, but in thee is my help. Save, Lord, or else I perish. I come to thee,
with the rope about my neck. I am worthy to die, and to be damned. Never was
the hire more due to the servant, never was penny more due to the labourer,
than Death and Hell, my j^st wages, is due to me for my sins. But I fly to the
merits; I trust alone to the value and virtue of thy Sacrifice; and prevalency
of thine intercession. I submit to thy teaching, I make choice of thy
Government. Stand open ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may come in.

O thou spirit of the most high, the comforter and sanctifier of thy chosen;
come in with all thy glorious train, all thy Courtly attendants, thy fruits,
and graces. Let me be thine habitation. I can give thee, but what is thine own
already: but here with the poor Widow, I cast my two mites, my soul, and my
body, in to thy treasury; fully resigning them up to thee, to be sanctified by
thee, to be servants to thee, They shall be thy patients; cure thou their
maladies: they shall be thy agents; govern thou their motions. Too long have I
served the world; too long have I hearkened to Satan: but now I renounce them
all, and will be ruled by thy dictates, and directions, and guided by thy
counsel.

O blessed Trinity, O glorious Unity, I deliver up my self to thee: receive me:
write thy name, O Lord, upon me, and upon all that I have, as thy proper goods.
Set thy mark upon me, upon every member of my body, and every faculty of my
soul. I have chosen thy precepts. Thy Law will I lay before me: this shall be
the copy, which I will keep in my eye, and study to write after. According to
this rule do I resolve, by thy Grace, to walk: after this law shall my whole
man be governed. And though I cannot per^ectly keep one of thy Commandments,
yet I will allow my self in the breach of none. I know my flesh will hang back:
but I resolve, in the power of thy Grace, to cleave to thee, and thy holy ways,
what ever it cost me. I am sure I cannot come off a loser by thee: and
therefore I will be content with reproach, and difficulties and hardships here,
and will deny my self, and take up my Cross, and follow thee. Lord Jesus thy
Yoke is easy, thy Cross is welcome, as it is the way to thee. I lay aside all
hopes of a worldly happiness. I will be content to tarry till I come to thee.
Let me be poor and low, little and despised here, so I may but be admitted to
live, and reign with thee hereafter. Lord, thou have my heart and hand to this
agreement. Be it as the laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reversed.
To this I will stand: in this resolution, by Grace, I will live and die. I have
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. I have
given my free consent, I have made my everlasting choice. Lord, Jesus confirm
the contract.

Amen.
CHAP. VII. Containing the Motives to Conversion.
THough what is already said of the Necessity of Conversion, and of the
Miseries of the unconverted, might be sufficient to induce any considering mind
to resolve upon a present turning, or Conversion unto God: yet knowing what a
piece of desperate obstinacy and untractableness the heart of man naturally is,
I have thought it necessary, to add to the means of Conversion, and Directions
for a Covenant-closure with God in Christ, some Motives to persuade you
hereunto.

O Lord, fail me not now at my last attempts. If any soul has read hitherto,
and be yet untouched, now Lord fasten in him, and do thy work: Now take him by
the heart, overcome him, persuade him, till he say, Thou have prevailed, for
thou wast stronger than I Lord, did thou not make me a fisher of men? And
have I toyled all this while and caught nothing? Alas, that I should have spent
my strength for naught! And now I am casting my last: Lord Jesus stand thou
upon the shore, and direct, how, and where I shall spread my net; and let me so
enclose with arguments the souls I seek for, that they may not be able to get
out. Now Lord for a multitude of souls! now for a full draught! O Lord God,
remember me I pray thee, and strengthen me this once, O God.

But I turn me unto you.

Men and Brethren, Heaven and Earth do call upon you, yea Hell it self does
preach the Doctrine of repentance unto you. The Angels of the Churches travel
with you, Gal. 4. 19. the Angels of Heaven wait for you, for your repenting and
turning unto God. O sinner, why should the Devils make merry with thee? why
should thou be a morsel for that devouring Leviathan? Why should harpies and
hell hounds tear thee, and make a feast upon thee, and when they have got thee
into the snare, and have fastened their talons in thee, laugh at thy
destruction, and deride thy misery, and sport themselves with thy damnable
folly? This must be thy case, except thou turn. And were it not better thou
should be a joy to Angels, than a laughing stock and sport for devils? Verily
if thou would but come in, the Heavenly Host would take up their anthems, and
sing, Glory be to God in the highest; the morning Stars would sing together,
and all the sons of God shout for joy, and celebrate this new creation as they
did the first. Thy repentance would as it were make holy day in heaven, and the
glorious spirits would rejoice, in that there is a new brother added to their
society Rev. 22. 9. another heir born to their Lord, and the lost son received
safe and sound. The true penitents tears are indeed the wine that cheereth both
God and man.

If it be little, that men and Angels would rejoice at thy Conversion, know
that God himself would rejoice over thee, even with singing, and rest in his
love, Luke 15. 9. Esaias. 62. 5. Never did old Jacob with such joy weep over the
neck of his Joseph, as thy heavenly Father would rejoice over thee, upon thy
coming in to him. Look over the story of the Prodigal. Methinks I see how the
aged Fathers lays aside his state, and forgets his years: behold how he
runs! Luke 15. 20. Oh the have that mercy makes! The sinner makes not half
that speed. Methinks I see how his bowels turn, how his compassions yearn. (How
quick sighted is love!) Mercy spies him a great way off, forgets his rigorous
courses, unnatural rebellion, horrid unthankfulness, debauched practices, (not
a word of those) but receives him with open arms, clasps about his neck,
forgets the nastiness of his rags, kisses the lips that deserve to be loathed,
the lips that had been joined to harlots, that had been commoners with the
swine, calls for the fatted Calf, the best Robe, the ring, the shoos, the best
cheer in Heavens store, the best attire in Heavens Wardrobe, etc. yea the joy
cannot be held in one breast; Luke 15. 6, 9, 23. others must be called to
participate, the friends must meet and make merry. Angels must wait, but the
Prodigal must be set at the Table under his Fathers wing. He is the joy of the
feast: he is the sweet subject of the Fathers delight. The friends sympathize,
but none knows the felicity the father takes in his new born son; whom he has
received from the dead. Methinks I hear the musik and the dancing, at a
distance. Oh the melody of the Heavenly Choristers! I cannot learn the song,
Rev. 14. 3. but methinks I over-hear the burden, at which all the harmonious
quire with one consent strikes sweetly in, for thus goes the round at Heavens
table, For this my son was dead, and is alive again; was lost and is found,
Luke 15. 23, 24, 32. I need not farther explain the parable. God is the Father,
Christ the cheer, his righteousness the robe, his graces the ornaments,
Ministers, Saints, Angels the friends and servants, and thou that read (if
thou will but unfeignedly repent and turn) the welcome Prodigal, the happy
instance of all this grace, and the blessed subject of this joy and love.

Oh Rock! Oh Adamant! What not moved yet! not yet resolved to turn forthwith
and to close with mercy! I will try thee yet once again: If one were sent to
thee from the dead, would thou be persuaded? Why hear the voice from the
dead, from the damned, crying to thee that thou should repent. I pray thee
that thou would send him to my fathers house: for I have five brethren, that
he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment. If
one went unto them from the dead, they will repent, Luke 16. 27, 28. etc. Hear
O man, thy Predecessors in impenitence Preach to thee from the infernal
gibbets, from the flames, from the rack, that thou should repent. O look down
into the bottomless pit. See thou how the smoke of their torment ascends
for ever and ever, Rev. 14. 11. How black are the ^iends? How furious are their
torments? It Is their only music to hear how their miserable patients roar, to
hear their bones crack. It Is their meat and drink, to see how their flesh
frieth and their fat droppeth, to drench them with burning metal, and to rip
open their bodies, and to pour in the fierce burning brass into their bowels,
and the recesses and ventricles of their hearts. What think thou of those
chains of darkness, of those instruments of cruelty? Can thou be content to
burn? See thou how the worm gnaweth, how the oven gloweth? how the fire
rages? what say thou to that river of brimstone, that dark and horrible
vault, that gulf of perdition? will thou take up thine habitation here? O lay
thine ^ar to the door of Hell. Hear thou the curses and the blasphemies, the
weepings and the wailings, how they lament their folly, and curse their day?
Mat. 22. 13. Rev. 16. 9. How do they roar and yell, and gnash their teeth? how
deep are their groans? how feeling are their moans? how unconceivable their
miseries? If the shrieks of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, were so terrible (when
the earth clave asunder, and opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and all
that appertained to them,) that all Israel ^led at the cry of them, Numb. 16.
33, 34. Oh how fearful would the cry be, if God should take off the covering
from the month of hell, and let the cry of the damned ascend in all its terror
among the children of men? And of all their moans and miseries, this is the
piercing, killing ^mphasis and burden, for ever, for ever. Why, as God lives,
that made thy soul, thou art but a few hours distant from all this, except thou
repent and be converted.

Oh! I am even lost and swallowed up in the ab^^dance of those arguments that I
might suggest. If there be any point of wisdom in all the world, it is to
repent and come in: if there be any thing righteous, any thing reasonable, this
is it. If there be any thing in the world that may be called madness, and
folly, any thing that may be counted sottish, absurd, brutish, unreasonable, it
is this, to go on in thine unconverted estate. Let me beg thee, as thou would
not wilfully destroy thy self, to sit down and weigh, besides what has been
said, these following Motives, and let conscience speak, if it be not reason,
that thou should repent and turn.

1. The God that made thee does most graciously invite thee.

First, his most sweet and merciful nature does invite thee; Oh the kindness of
God, his working bowels, his tender mercies! they are infinitely above our
thoughts, higher than Heaven, what can we do? deeper than hell, what can we
know? Job 11. 7, 8, 9. He is full of compassion, and gracious, long suffering,
and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86. 15. This is a great argument to persuade
sinners to come in. Turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and
merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. If
God would not repent of the evil, it were some discouragement to us, why we
should not repent. If there were no hope of mercy, it were no such wonder if
the rebel did stand out: but never had subjects such a gracious Prince, such
Piety, patience, clemency, pity to deal with, as you have. Who is a God like
unto thee that pardons iniquity etc. Mic. 7. 18. Oh sinners! see what a God
you have to deal with; if you will but turn. He will turn again, and have
compassion upon you, he will subdue your iniquities, and cast all your sins
into the depths of the Sea, v. 19. Return unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and
I will return unto you, Mal^ 3. 7. Zech. 1. 3. Sinners do not fail in that they
have too high thoughts of Gods mercies, but in that 1. They overlook his
justice. 2. They promise themselves mercy out of Gods way. His mercy is beyond
all imagination, Esaias. 55. 9. great mercies, 1 Chronicles. 21. 13. manifold mercies,
Neh. 9. 19. tender mercies, Psalm. 25. 6. sure mercies, Esaias. 55. 3. everlasting
mercies, Psalm. 103. 17. Esaias. 54. 8. and all thine own, if thou will but turn.
Art thou willing to come in? Why the Lord has laid aside his terror, er^cted a
Throne of Grace, holds forth the golden Scepter: Touch and live. Would a
merciful man slay his enemy, when prostrate at his feet, acknowledging his
wrong, begging pardon, and offering to enter with him into a Covenant of peace?
Much less will the merciful God. Study his name, Exodus 34. 7. Read their
experience, Neh. 9. 17.

Secondly, his soul-encouraging calls and promises do invite thee. Ah what an
earnest suitor is mercy to thee! how lovingly, how instantly it calls after
thee! how passionately it wooeth thee! Return thou backsliding Israel, says
the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine
iniquity. Turn O backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto
you: return and I will heal your backslidings. Thou have played the harlot with
many lovers, yet return unto me says the Lord, Jer. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 22. As
I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33. 11. If the wicked will
turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him; in
his righteousness that he has done shall ^e live. Repent, and turn your selves
from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. Cast away
from you all your transgressions, and make you a clean heart, and a new spirit,
for why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dies, says the Lord God; wherefore turn your selves, and live ye,
Ezekiel. 18. 21, 23, 30, 31, 32.

Oh melting gracious words! The voice of a God and not of a man! This is not
the manner of men, for the offended Sovereign, to sue to the offending
traitorous varlet. Oh how does mercy follow thee, and plead with thee! Is not
thy heart broken yet? Oh that to day ye would hear his voice!

2. The doors of heaven are thrown open to thee. The everlasting gates are set
wide for thee, and an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven administered
to thee. Christ now bespeaks thee, (as she her husband) Arise and take
possession, 1 Kings 21. 15. View the glory of the other world as set forth in
the map of the Gospel. Get thee up into the Pisgah of the Promises, and lift up
thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and see the
good land that is beyond Jordan, and that goodly mountain. Behold the Paradise
of God, watered with the streams of glory. Arise and walk through the land, in
the length of it, and in the breadth of it, for all the land which thou see;
the Lord will give it to thee for ever, if thou will but return, Genesis 13. 14,
15, 17. Let me say to thee as Paul to Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? If
thou believe indeed, do but view what glorious things are spoken of the City
of God; Psalm. 87. 3. and know, that all this is here tendered in the name of
God to thee. As verily as God is true it shall be for ever thine, if thou will
but thoroughly turn.

Behold the City of pure transparent Gold, whose foundations are garnished with
all manner of precious stones, whose gates are pearls, whose light is glory,
whose temple is God. Believe thou this? If thou do, art thou not worse than
distracted, that wilt not take possession, when the gates are flung open to
thee, and thou art bid to enter? O ye sons of ^olly, will ye embrace the
dunghils, and refuse the Kingdom? Behold, the Lord God t^keth you up into the
mountain, shows you the Kingdom of Heaven, and all the glory thereof, and tells
you, All this will I give you, if you will fall down and worship me ^ If you
will submit to mercy, accept my Son, and serve me in righteousness ness and
holiness. O fools, and slow of heart (...) believe, will you court the harlot,
will you seek and serve the world, and neglect the eternal glory? What not
enter into Paradise, when the flaming sword, that was once set to keep you out,
is now used to drive you in? But you will say, I am uncharitable, to think you
infidels and unbelievers. Why, what shall I think you? either you are desperate
unbelievers, that do not credit it, or stark distracted, that you know and
believe the excellency and eternity of his glory, and yet do so fearfully
neglect it. Surely you have no faith, or no reason; and I had almost said,
conscience should tell you so, before I leave you.

Do but attend what is offered you, Oh blessed Kingdom! A Kingdom of glory. 1
These. 2. 12. a Kingdom of righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. a Kingdom of peace, Romans
14. 17. an everlasting Kingdom. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Here thou sha^t dwell, here thou
sha^t ^eign for ever: and the Lord shall set thee in a throne of glory, Mat.
19. 28. and with his own hand shall set the Royal Diad^m upon thine head, and
give thee a Crown, not of thorns (for there shall be no s^nning, nor suffering
there. Rev. 21. 27. 22. 3, 4, 5.) not of Gold, (for this shall be viler than
the dirt in that day) but a Crown of life, James 1. 12. a Crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. a Crown of glory. 1 Pet. 5. 4. Yea thou shall put
on glory as a robe, 1 Cor. 15. 53. and shale shine like the Sun in the
^irmament in the glory of thy Father, Mat. 13. 43. Look now upon thy dirty
flesh, thy clay, thy worms-meat: this very flesh, this lump, this carcass shall
be brighter than the Stars, Dan. 12. 3. In short, thou shall be made like unto
the Angels of God, Luke 20. 36. and behold his face in righteousness, Psalm. 17.
15. Look in now and tell me: do thou yet believe? If not, conscience must
pronounce thee an infidel, for it is the very word of God that I speak.

But if thou say, thou believe, let me next know thy resolutions. Will thou
embrace this for thy happiness? Will thou forgo thy sinful gains, thy forbidden
pleasures? Will thou trample on the worlds esteem, and spit in the harlots
face, and stop thine ears at her flareries, and wrest thee out of her embraces?
Will thou be content to take up with present reproach and poverty, if it lie in
thy way to Heaven, and to follow the Lord with humble self-denial, in a
mortified and flesh-displeasing life? if so, all is thine, and that for ever.
And art not thou fairly offered? Is it not pity but he should be damned, that
will needs go on and perish, when all this may be had for the taking? In a
word, will thou now close with these proffers? Will thou take God at his word?
Will thou let go thy hold-fast of the world, and rid thy hands of thy sins, and
lay hold on eternal life? If not, let conscience tell thee, whether thou ^rt
not distracted, or bewitched, that thou should neglect so happy a choice, by
which thou might be made for ever.

3. God will settle unspeakable privileges at present upon thee. 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. Though the full of your blessedness shall be deferred,
till hereafter, yet God will give you no little things in hand.

He will redeem you from your thraldom. John 8. 36. He will pluck you from the
paw of the Lion, Col. 1. 13. the serpent shall bruise your heel, but you shall
bruise his head. Genesis 3. 15. He shall deliver you from the present evil world.
Gal. 1. 4. Prosperity shall not destroy you, adversity shall not separate
between him and you. Romans 8. 35, 37, 38. He will redeem you from the power of
the grave, Psalm. 49. 15. and make the King of terrors a messenger of peace to
you. He will take out the curse from the Cross, Psalm. 119. 71. and make
affliction the fining-pot, the fan, the physic, to blow off the choff, purify
the metal, and purge the mind, Dan. 12. 10. Esaias. 27. 9. He will save you from
the arrests of the Law, and turn the curse into a blessing to you, Romans 6. 14.
Gal. 3. 14. He has the keys of hell and death, and shuts that no man
opens, Rev. 3. 7. and 1. 18. and he will shut its mouth, as once he did the
Lions, Dan. 6. 22. that you shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 11.

But he will not only save you from misery, but install you into unspeakable
Prerogatives. He will bestow himself upon you, he will be a friend unto you,
and a father to you: 2 Cor. 6. 18. he will be a Sun, and a shield to you: Psalm.
84. 11. in a word, he will be a God to you, Genesis 17. 7. and what can be said
more? What you may expect that a God should do for you, and be to you, that he
will be, that he will do. She that marries a Prince, expects he should do for
her like a Prince, that she may live in suitable state, and have an answerable
dowry. He that has a King for his Father, or friend, expects that he should do
for him like a King. Alas, the Kings and Monarchs of the earth, so much above
you, are but like the painted butterflies amongst the rest of their kind, or
the fair colored Palmer-worm amongst the rest of worms, if compared with God.
As he does infinitely exceed, the glory and power of his glittering dust, so he
will beyond all proportion exceed, in doing for his favorites, what ever
Princes can do for their^. He will give you grace and glory, and withhold no
good thing from you, Psalm. 84. 11. He will take you for his sons and daughters,
and make you heirs of his promises, Heb. 6. 17. and establish his everlasting
Covenant with you, Ier. 32. 40. He will justify you from all that Law,
Conscience, Satan, can charge upon you, Romans 8. 33, 34. he will give you free
access into his presence, and accept your persons, and receive your prayers,
Ephesians. 3. 12. Ephesians. 1. 6. 1. Ioh. 5. 14. He will abide in you, and make you the
men of his secrets, and hold a constant and friendly communion with you, John
14. 23. Ioh. 15. 15. 1 Ioh. 1. 3. His ear shall be open, his door open, his
store open at all times to you. His blessing shall rest upon you, and he will
make your enemies to serve you, and work about all things for good unto you.
Psalm. 115. 13. Romans 8. 28.

4. The terms of mercy are brought as low, as possible, to you. God has
stooped as low to sinners, as with honor he can. He will not be thought a
fautor of sin, nor stain the glory of his holiness: and whither could he come
lower than he has, unless he should do this? He has abated the impossible
terms of the first Covenant. Ier. 3. 13. Mark 5. 36. Acts 16. 31. Acts 3. 19.
Prove. 28. 13. He does not impose any thing unreasonable, or impossible, as a
condition of life upon you. Two things were necessary to be done, according to
the tenor of the first Covenant by you. 1. That you should fully satisfy the
demands of Justice for past offenses. 2. That you should perform personally,
perfectly, and perpetually the whole Law for the time to come. Both these are
to us impossible, Romans 8. 3. But behold Gods gracious abatement in both. He
does not stand upon satisfaction: he is content to take of the surety (and he
of his own providing too) what he might have exacted from you. 2 Cor. 5. 19. he
declares himself to have received a ranson, Io^ 33. 24. 1 Timothy 2. 6. and that
he expects nothing, but that you should accept his Son, and he shall be
righteousness and redemption to you. John. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And for the
future obedience, here he is content to yield to your weakness, and to remit
the rigor. He does not stand upon perfection (as a condition of life, though
he still insists upon it as due,) but is content to accept of sincerity. Genesis
17. 1. Prove. 11. 20. Though you cannot pay the full debt he will accept you
according to that which you have, and will take willing for doing, and the
purpose for the performance: 2 Cor. 8. 12. 2 Chronicles. 6. 8. Heb. 11. 17. and if
you come in his Christ, and set your hearts to please him, and make it the
chief of your cares, he will approve and reward you, though the vessel be
marred in your hands.

Oh consider your makers condescension. Let me say to you, as Naaman's servant
to him; My father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would
thou not have done it? how much rather, when he says unto thee, wash and be
clean? 2 Kings 5. 13. If God had demanded some terrible, some severe and
rigorous thing of you, to escape eternal damnation, would you not have done it?
suppose it had been to spend all your days in sorrow in some howling
Wilderness, or pine your selves with famine, or to offer the fruit of your
bodies for the sin of your souls, would you not have thankfully accepted
eternal redemption, though these had been the conditions? Yea further, if God
should have told you, you should have fried in the fire for millions of ages,
or been tormented so long in Hell, would you not have gladly accepted it? Alas,
all these are not so much as one sand in the glass of eternity. If your
offended Creator should have held you but one year upon the rack, and then come
and bid you take your choice, whether you would renounce your sins, accept his
Christ, and serve him a few years in self-denial, or lie in this case for ever
and ever: do you think you should have stuck at the offer, and disputed the
terms, and have been unresolved, whether you were best to accept of the motion?
O sinner return and live; why should thou die, when life is to be had for
the taking, and mercy should be beholding to thee (as it were) to be saved?
Could thou say indeed, Lord I knew that thou wast an hard man, Mat. 25. 24.
thou had some little excuse; but when the God of heaven has stooped so low,
and bated so far, if now thou should stand off, who shall plead for thee?

Obj. Notwithstanding all these abatements, I am no more able to perform those
conditions, (in themselves so easy) of faith and repentance, and sincere
obedience, than to satisfy and fulfill the Law.

Answ. These you may perform by Gods grace enabling, whereas the other are
naturally impossible, in this state, even to believers themselves. But let the
next consideration serve for a fuller answer.

5. Wherein you are impotent, God does offer grace to enable you. I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded, Prove. 1. 24. What though you are
plunged into the ditch of that misery, from which you can never get out? Christ
offers to help you out; he stretches forth his hand to you, and if you
perish, it is for refusing his help. Behold I stand at the door, and knock: if
any man open to me, I will come in. Rev. 3. 20. What though you are poor, and
wretch^d, and blind, and naked, Christ offers a cure for your blindness, a
cover for your nakedness, a remedy for your poverty, he tendereth you his
righteousness, his graces. I couns^l thee to buy of me gold that thou may be
rich, and white ^aiment that thou may be clothed and anoint thine eyes with
eye salve, that thou may see, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Do you say, the condition is
impossible, for I have not wherewith to buy? You must know, that this buying is
without money and without price. Esaias. 55. 1. This buying is by begging, and
seeking with diligence and constancy in the use of Gods means. Prove. 2. 3, 4.
God commands thee to know him, and to fear him. Do thou say, yea but my
mind is blinded and my heart is hardened from his fear? I answer, God does offer
to enlighten thy mind, and to teach thee his fear: that is presented to thy
choice. Prove. 1. 29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear
of the Lord, So that now if men live in ignorance and estrangement from the
Lord, it is because they will not understand, and desire not the knowledge of
his ways. Job 21. 14. If thou cryest after knowledge, if thou seek her as
Silver, etc. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God. Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. Is not here a fair offer? Turn you at my
reproof: Behold I will pour out my spirit unto you. Prove. 1. 23. Though of your
selves you can do nothing, yet you may do all things through his spirit
enabling you, and he does offer his assistance to you. God bids you, wash you
and make you clean: Esaias. 1. 16. you say you are unable as much as the Leopard
to wash out his spots: Ier. 13. 23. yea but the Lord does offer to purge you,
so that if you be filthy still, it is through your own wilfulness. Eze, 24. 13.
I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged. Jer. 13. 27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? God does wait when you will be
made clean, when you will yield to his motions and accept of his offers, and
let him do for and in you, what you cannot do of your selves. You do not know
how much God will do, upon your importunity if you will but be restless and
instant with him. Luke 11. 8. and 18. 5.

If God has not bound himself by express promise to wicked men, to give them
Grace in the diligent use of the means: yet he has given them abundant
encouragement to expect it from him, if they seek it earnestly in his way. His
most gracious nature is abundant encouragement. If a rich and most bountiful
man should see thee in misery, and bid thee come to his door, would thou not
with confidence expect, at thy coming to find some relief? Thou art not able to
believe, nor repent; God appoints thee to use such and such means, in order to
thy obtaining ^aith and repentance: does not this argue, that God will bestow
these upon thee, if thou do ply him diligently in prayer, meditation,
reading, hearing, self-examination, and the rest of his means? Otherwise, God
should but mock his poor creatures, to put them upon these self denying
endeavors, and then when they have put hard to it, and continued waiting upon
him for grace, deny them at last. Surely if a sweet-natured man would not deal
thus, much less will the most merciful and gracious God.

I intended to have added many other arguments: but these have swollen under my
hands, and I hope the judicious reader, will rather look upon the weight, than
the number.

The Conclusion of the whole.
And now my brethren let me know your minds. What do you intend to do? Will you
go on and die, or will you set upon a through and speedy conversion, and hold on
eternal life? how long will you linger in Sodom? how long will you halt between
two opinions? 1 King. 18. 21. Are you not yet resolved whether Christ or
Barabbas, whether bliss or torment, whether the land Cabul, 1 Kings 9. 13. or
the Paradise of God, be the better choice? Is it a disputable case, whether the
Abana and Pharphar of Damascus, be better than all the streams of Eden? or
whether the vile puddle of sin, be to be preferred before the water of life,
clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb? Can the
world in good earnest do that for you, that Christ can? Will it stand by you to
eternity? will pleasures, titles, lands, treasures, descend with you, Psalm. 49.
17. 1 Timothy 6. 7. If not, had you not need look after somewhat that will? What
mean you to stand wavering, to be off and on? Foolish Children! how long will
you stick between the womb and the world? Shall I leave you at last no farther
than Agrippa, but almost persuaded? Why, you are for ever lost, if left here.
As good not at all, as not altogether Christians. You are half of the mind to
give over your former negligent life, and to set to a strict and holy course:
you could wish that you were as some others be, and could do as they can do.
How long will you rest in idle wishes, and fruitless purposes? when will you
come to a fixed, full, and firm resolve? Do not you see how Satan gulls you, by
tempting you to delays? How long has he tolled you on in the way of perdition?
how many years have you been purposing to amend what if God should have taken
you off this while?

Well, put me not off with a dilatory answer. Tell not me of hereafter. I must
have your present consent. If you be not now resolved, while the Lord is
treating with you, and woing of you, much less are you like to be hereafter,
when these impressions are worn out, and you are hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. Will you give me your hands? Will you set open the doors,
and give the Lord Jesus the full and present possession? Will you put in your
names into his Covenant? Will you subscribe? What do you resolve upon? If you
are still upon your delays, my labor is lost, and all is like to come to
nothing. Fain I would, that you should now put in your adventures. Come, cast
in your lot, make your choice. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation: to day if you will hear his voice. Why should not this be the day
from whence thou should be able to date thine happiness? why should thou
venture a day longer, in this dangerous and dreadful condition? What if God
should this night require thy soul? O that thou might know, in this thy day,
the things that belong unto thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes! Luke
16. 42. This is thy day, and it is but a day. John 9. 4. Others have had their
day, and have received their doom; and now art thou brought upon the stage of
this world, here to act thy part, for a whole eternity Remember, thou art now
upon thy good behavior for everlasting. If thou make not a wise choice now,
thou art undone for ever. Look what thy present choice is, such must thine
eternal condition be. Luke 10. 42. Luke 16. 25. Prove. 1. 27, 28, 29.

And is it true indeed? is life and death at thy choice? yea, it is as true as
truth is. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. why then, what hinders but that thou should be
happy? Nothing does or can hinder, but thine own wilful neglect, or refusal. It
was the passage of the Eunuch to Philip: See here is water, what does hinder me
to be baptized? So I may say to thee: see, here is Christ, here is mercy,
pardon, life, what hinders but that thou should be pardoned, and saved? One
of the Martyrs as he was praying at the stake, had his pardon set by in a box
(which indeed he refused, deservedly, because upon unworthy terms.) But here
the terms are most honorable and easy: O sinner, will thou burn with thy
pardon by? Why do but forthwith give up thy consent to Christ, renounce thy
sins, deny thy self, take up the Yoke, and the Cross, and thou carriest the
day; Christ is thine, pardon, peace, life, blessedness, all are thine: and is
not this an offer worth the embracing; Why should thou hesitate, or
doubtfully dispute about the case? Is it not past controversy, whether God be
better than sin, and glory better than vanity? Why should thou forsake thine
own mercy, and sin against thine own life? When will thou sh^ke off thy sloth,
and lay by thine excuses? Boast not thy self of to morrow: thou know not
where this night may lodge thee. Prove. 27. 1.

Beloved, now the holy Spirit is striving with you. He will not always strive.
Have thou not felt thy heart warmed by the word, and been almost persuaded to
leave off thy sins, and come in to God? Have thou not felt some good motions in
thy mind, wherein thou have been warned of thy danger, and told what thy
careless course would end in? It may be thou art like young Samuel, who when
the Lord called once and again, he knew not the voice of the Lord: 1 Samuel 3. 6,
7. but these motions and items are the offers, and essays, and the calls and
strivings of the spirit. O take the advantage of the tide, and know the day of
thy visitation.

Now the Lord Jesus stretches wide his arms to receive you. He beseeches you
by us. How movingly, how meltingly, how pitifully, how passionately he calls!
The Church is put into a sudden ecstasy upon the sound of his voice, The voice
of my beloved! Cant. 2. 8. O will thou turn a deaf ear to his voice! it is not
the voice that breaks the Ceders, and makes the mountains to skip like a
Calf, that shakes the Wilderness and divides the flames of fire, it is not
Sinai's Thunder; but the soft and still voice. It is not the voice of Mount
Ebal, a voice of cursing, and terror; but the voice of Mount Gerizim, the voice
of blessing, and of glad tidings of good things. It is not the voice of the
Trumpet, nor the noise of War, but a message of peace from the King of peace,
Ephesians. 6. 15. 2. Cor. 5. 18, 20. Methinks it should be with thee as with the
spouse; My soul failed when he spoke, Cant. 5. 6. I may say to thee, O sinner,
as Martha to her sister, The Master is come, and he calls for thee, John. 11.
28. Oh now, with Mary, arise quickly, and come unto him. How sweet are his
invitations! He cries in the open concourse. If any man thirst let him come
unto me and drink. John. 7. 37. Prove. 1. 21. He broacheth his own body for
thee. Oh come and lay thy mouth to his side. How free is he! he excludes none.
Whosoever with, let him come and take the water of life freely, Rev. 22. 17.
Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hith^r. Come, eat of my bread, drink of the
wine which ^ have mingled. For sake the foolish, and live, Prove. 9. 4, 5. 6.
Come unto me, etc. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls. Mat. 11. 28, 29. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out. Joh. 6. 37. How does he bemoan the obstinate refuser? O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen guthereth her
Chickens under hot wings, and ye would not. Mat. 23. 37. Behold me, behold me:
I have stretched out my hands all the day to a rebellious people. Esaias. 65. 1,
2. O be persuaded now at last, to throw your selves into the arms of love.

Behold, O ye sons of men, the Lord Jes^s has thrown open the prisons, and now
he comes to you (as the Magistrates once to them Acts 16. 39.) and b^^ee^heth
you to come out. If it were from a Palace, or a Paradise that Christ did call
you, it were no wonder if you were unwilling (and yet how easily was Adam
tolled from hence?) but it is from your prison, sirs, from your chains, from
the dungeon, from the darkness that he calls you? Esaias. 42. 6, 7. and, yet
will you not come? He calls you unto liberty. Gal. 5. 13. and yet will you
not hearken? His yoke is easy, his Laws are Liberty, his service freedom: Mat.
11. 30. James 1. 25. 1 Cor. 7. 22. and (Whatever prejudices you have against
his ways) if a God may be believed, you shall find them all pleasure and peace,
and shall taste sweetness and joy unutterable, and take infinite delight and
felicity in them. Prove. 3. 17. Psalm. 110. 165. 1 Pet. 1. 1. Psalm. 119. 103. 111.

Beloved, I am loath to leave you. I cannot tell how to give you over. I am now
ready to shut up, but fain I would drive this bargain between Christ and you,
before I end. What, shall I leave you as I found you at last? Have you read
hitherto, and are not yet resolved upon a present abandoning all your sins, and
closing with Jesus Christ? Alas, what shall I say? what shall I do? Will you
turn off all my importunity? Have I run in vain? Have I used so many arguments,
and spent so much time to persuade you, and yet must sit down at last in
disappointment? But it is a small matter that you turn off me: you put a slight
upon the God that made you, you reject the bowels and beseechings of a Savior,
and will be found resisters of the Holy Ghost. Acts 7. 51. if you will not now
be prevailed with, to repent and be converted.

Well, though I have called long and ye have refused, I shall yet this once
more lift up my voice like a Trumpet, and cry from the highest places of the
City, before I conclude with a miserable Conclamatum est. Once more I shall
call after regardless sinners, that, if it be possible, I may awaken them. O
earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, Ier. 22. 29. Unless you be
resolved to die, lend your ears to the last calls of mercy. Behold, in the name
of God, I make open proclamation to you. Hearken unto me, O ye Children. Hear
instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not, Prove. 8. 32, 33.

Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without
price. Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye
that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your
ear and come ye unto me, hear and your soul shall live, and I Will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Esaias 55. 1, 2, 3.

Ho, every one that is sick of any manner of disease or torment, Mat. 4. 23,
24. or is possessed with an evil spirit, whether of pride, or fury, or lust, or
covetousness, come ye to the Physician; bring away your sick. Lo here is he
that heals all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the people.

Ho, every one that is in debt, and every one that is in dist^ess, and every
one that is discontented, gather your selves unto Christ and he will become a
Captain over you. He will be your protection from the arrests of the Law; He
will save you from the hand of Justice. Behold, he is an open sanctuary to you,
he is a known refuge, Heb. 6. 18. Psalm. 48. 3. Away with your sins, and come in
unto him, lest the avenger of blood seize you, lest devouring wrath overtake
you.

Ho, every ignorant sinner, come and buy eyesalve that thou may see, Rev. 3.
18. Away with thine excuses; thou art for ever lost, if thou continuest in this
estate, 2 Cor. 4. 3. But accept of Christ for thy Prophet and he will be a
light unto thee, Esaias. 42. 6. Ephesians 5. 14. Cry unto him for knowledge, study his
word, take pains about the principles of Religion, humble thy self before him,
and he will teach thee his way, and make thee wise unto salvation, Mat. 13. 36.
Luke 8. 9. John 5. 39. Psalm. 25. 9. But if thou will not follow him, in the
painful use of his means but sit down, because thou have but one talent, he
will condemn thee for a wicked and sloathful servant, Mat. 25. 24, 26.

Ho, every profane sinner, come in and live. Return unto the Lord and he will
have mercy upon thee. Be entreated, Oh return, come: Thou that have filled thy
mouth with oaths, and execrations, all manner of sins and blasphemies shall be
forgiven thee, Mark 3. 28. if thou will but thoroughly turn unto Christ, and
come in. Though thou wast as unclean as Magdalen; yet put away thy Whoredoms
out of thy sight, and thine adulteries from between thy breasts, and give up
thy self unto Christ, as a vessel of holiness, alone for his use, and then,
though thy sins be as scarlet, they shall be as wool, and though they be as
crimson, they shall be as white snow, Luke 7. 37. Hos. 2. 2. 1 These. 4. 4.
Esaias. 1. 18.

Hear O ye drunkards, How long will you be drunken? put away your wine, 1 Samuel
1. 14. Though you have rolled in the vomit of your sin, take the vomit of
repentance, and heartily disgorge your beloved lusts, and the Lord will receive
you. 2. Cor. 6. 17. Give up your selves unto Christ, to live soberly,
righteously, and godly; embrace his righteousness; accept his government; and
though you have been swine he will wash you, Rev. 36.

Hear O ye loose companions, whose delight is in vain and wicked society, to
sport away your time in carnal mirth and jollity with them, come in at wisdoms
call, and choose her, and her ways, and forsake the foolish, and you shall
live, Prove. 9. 5, 6.

Hear O ye scorners, hear the word of the Lord. Though you have made a sport of
godliness, and the professors thereof; though you have made a scorn of Christ,
and of his ways; yet, even to you does he call, to gather you under the wings
of his mercy, Prove. 1. 22, 33. In a word, though you should be sound among. the
worst of that black roll, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. yet, upon your through Conversion,
you shall be washed, you shall be justified, you shall be sanctified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of ou^ God, ver. 11.

Ho, every formal professor, that art but a lukewarm and dough-baked
Christian, and restest in the form of godliness, give over thy halving, and thy
halting; be a throughout Christian, and be zealous and repent, and then though
thou have been an offense to Christ's stomach, thou shall be the joy of his
heart, Rev. 3. 16, 19, 20.

And now bear witness, that mercy has been offered you. I call Heaven and
Earth to record against you this day, that I have set before you life and
death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life, that you may live, Deuteronomy.
30. 19. I can but woo you, and warn you: I cannot compel you to be happy: if I
could, I would. What answer will you send me with to my Master? Let me speak
unto you as Abraham's servant to them; and now if you will deal kindly and truly
with my Master, tell me, Genesis 24. 49. Oh for such a happy answer, as Rebekah
gave to them! Genesis 24. 57, 58. And they said, we will call the dams^l, and
enquire at her mouth. And they called Rebekah, and said unto her. Will thou go
with this man? and she said, I will go. Oh that I had but thus much from you!
Why should I be your accuser, Mat. 10. 14, 15. who thirst for your salvation?
Why should the passionate pleadings and wooings of mercy be turned into the
horrid ag^avations of your obstinancy and additions to your misery. Judge in
your selves: Do you not think their condemnation will be doubly dreadful, that
shall still go on in their sins, after all endeavors to recall them?
Doubtless, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon, yea for Sodom and
Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, than for you, Mat. 11. 22, 24.

Beloved, if you have any pity for your perishing souls, close with the present
offers of mercy. If you would not continue and increase the pains of your
traveling Ministers, do not stick in the birth. If the God that made you have
any authority with you, obey his command and come in. If you are not the
despisers of grace, and would not shut up the doors of mercy against your
selves, repent and be converted. Let not Heaven stand open for you in vain. Let
not the Lord Jesus open his wares, and bid you buy without money and without
price, in vain. Let not his Ministers and his Spirit, strive with you in vain,
and leave you now at last unperswaded; lest the sentence go forth against you,
The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in
vain. Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them, Ier. 6. 29, 30.

Father of Spirits, take the heart in hand that is too hard for my weakness. Do
not thou have ended, though I have done. Half a word from thine effectual
power, will do the work. O thou that have the key of David, that openest when
no man shuts, open thou his heart as thou did Lydia's and let the King of
glory enter in; and make this soul thy happy captive. Let not the Tempter
harden him in delays. Let him not stir from this place, nor take his eyes from
these lines till he be resolved to forg^ his sins, and to accept of life upon
thy self-denying terms. In thy name O Lord God did I go forth to these Labors,
in thy name do I shut them up. Let not all the time they have lost; be but lost
hours, let not all the thoughts of heart, and all the pains that have been
about them, be but lost labor. Lord put in thine hand into the heart of this
Reader, and send thy spirit, as once thou did Philip, to join himself to the
Chariot of the Eunuch, while he was reading thy word. And though I should never
know it while I live, yet I beseech thee Lord God let it be found at that day,
that some souls are converted by these labors: and let some be able to stand
forth and say, that by these persuasions, they were wo^ unto thee.

Amen. Amen. Let him that reads say Amen.
FINIS.
Reading Mr. Joseph Allein Book, entitled An Alarm to the unconverted.
REader, who ere thou art do chance to look,
Bless God directed thee to such a Book:
Be serious when thou read, it is no droul,
But that which aims to convert thy soul.
What mad besotted desperado can
Take prejudice against this holy man?
Who did sincerely nothing else desire,
But to prevent thy leaping in the fire;
And penned this Book out of a true endeavor
To keep thee from that lake which burns for
I do beseech you read it over; why ever.
Will you be obstinate and choose to dye?
Know you what Heaven is, or can you tell
The torments of those damned souls in Hell?
Now read and pray, O pray that God will give
A true repentance, that your soul may live:
This Book needs no Commendum, for no doubt
You will commend it, if you read it out:
What did I care, so sinners understood,
If each word were a tear or drop of blood?

