THE HARMONY OF THE Divine Attributes, IN THE Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

OR DISCOURSES, Wherein is Showed, How the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness,
Power and Truth of God are glorified in that Great and Blessed Work.

By William Bates, D. D.

Which things the Angels desire to look into.

1 Pet. 1.12. Nihil tam dignum Deo, quam salus Hominis.

Tertul. LONDON, Printed by J. Darby, for Nathaniel Ranew, and Jonathan
Robinson, at the Kings Arms, and Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; and
Brabazon Aylmer, the at three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1674.

THE PREFACE.
THe Subject of the ensuing Discourses is of that inestimable excellency and
importance, that it deserves our deepest reflections, and care to consider and
apply it: It Is the great Mystery of Godliness, the design of Eternal Wisdom,
the chiefest of all Gods Works, that contains the Glorious Wonders of his Mercy
and Power, wherein he renders himself most worthy of our Supreme Veneration and
Affection. Our most raised Thoughts are infinitely beneath its Dignity.
Although the Light of the Gospel has clearly revealed so much of it as is
requisite to be known in our earthly state, yet the sublimer parts are still
secret, and reserved for a full discovery by the brightness of our Savior's
Appearance. Now if the Excellency of things excites our Spirits to be attentive
in searching into their nature, this Divine Object should awaken all our
Powers, and arrest our Minds, in the serious steady contemplation of it, being
alone capable to satisfy their immortal appetite. The Importance of it is
correspondent to its excellency: for it is no less than the recovery of us from
extreme and eternal misery, and the Restoring of us to the enjoyment of the
Blessed God, a felicity without comparison or end. If we have any regard to
Salvation, (and who would be so unhappy as to neglect it for unconcerning
frivolous Vanities) it will be delightful to know the means by which we may
obtain it; and to employ the flying moments of our short time in those things
that are profitable for our last End, that we may not lose Temporal and Eternal
Life together.

Many of the Ancient and Modern Divines have written of this noble Argument,
from whom I have received benefit in the following composure. But none, as I
know, has considered all the parts together, and presented them in one view.
There still remains a rich abundance for the perpetual exercise of our
Spirits. The Eternal Word alone was able to perfect all things by once
speaking. Humane words are but an Echo that answers the Voice of God, and
cannot fully express its Power, nor pass so immediately through the sense to
the Heart, but they must be repeated. May these Discourses be effectual to
inflame us with the most ardent Love to our Savior, who ransomed us with the
unvaluable price of his own blood, and to persuade us to live for Heaven, the
purchase of that Sacred Treasure, I shall for ever acknowledge the Divine
Grace, and obtain my utmost aim.

W. B.

CHAP. I.
The Introduction. A short view of Man's primitive State. His Conformity to God;
natural, moral, and in Happiness and Dominion over the Creatures. The moral
resemblance, as it refers to all the faculties. The happiness of Man with
respect to his sensitive and spiritual Nature. Of all sublunary Creatures he is
only capable of a Law. What the Law of Nature contains. God entered into a
Covenant with Man. The Reasons of that Dispensation. The Terms of the Covenant
were becoming God and Man. The special clause in The Covenant concerning the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. The Reasons of the Prohibition.

THe felicity which the Lord Jesus procured for Believers, includes a perfect
freedom from Sin, Joh. 8.36.
and all afflictive evils, the just consequents of it: and the fruition of
Righteousness, Peace, Romans 14.17.
and Joy, wherein the Kingdom of God consists. In this the second Covenant
excels the first; the Law supposes Man upright, and the happiness it promises
to exact Obedience, is called Life, it rewards Innocence with Immortality: but
the Blessedness of the Gospel is styled Salvation, which signifies the rescuing
of lapsed Man from a state of misery, and the investing of him with unperishing
Glory.

In order to the Discovery of the excellency of this Benefit, and the endearing
Obligations laid on us by our Redeemer, it is necessary to take a view of that
dreadful and desperate Calamity which seized upon Mankind: the wretchedness of
our Captivity, illustrates the Glory of our Redemption. And since the misery of
Man was not the original condition of his nature, but the effect of his guilty
choice, it is requisite to make some reflection upon his first state* as he came
out of the pure hands of God, that comparing our present misery with our lost
happiness, we may revive in our breasts the affections of Sorrow, Shame and
Indignation against our selves; and considering that the Heavenly Adam has
purchased for us a title to a better Inheritance than was forfeited by the
Earthly one, we may with the more affectionate gratitude, extol the Favor and
Power of our Redeemer.

God who is the living Fountain of all Perfections, spent an entire Eternity,
in the Contemplation of his own Excellencies, before any creature was made. In
the moment appointed by his Wisdom, he gave the first Being to the (...). Three
distinct orders of Natures He formed, the (...) purely Spiritual, the other
purely Material, and between both one mixed, which unites the (...) in it self.
This is Man, the abridgment of the (...) verse, allied to the Angels in his
Soul, and to material things in his Body, and capable of the Happiness of both;
By his internal Faculties enjoying the felicity of the Intellectual: and by his
external tasting the Pleasures of the Sensitive World. Man's greatest
excellency was a perfect Conformity to the Divine Pattern. God created Man in
his own Likeness, in the Image of God created he him. This includes;

First, The Natural Similitude of God in the substance of the Soul, as it is an
intelligent, free, spiritual and Immortal Being. This is assigned to be the
Reason of the Law, That Whosoever sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed;
Genesis 9.6.
for in the Image of God made he Man.

Secondly, A moral Resemblance in its Qualities and Perfections.

Thirdly, That Happiness and Dignity of Man's state, which was the consequent,
and accession to his Holiness. The Natural resemblance I shall not insist on:
for the distinct Illustration of the other, we must consider God in a threefold
respect.

1. In respect of his absolute Holiness, unspotted Purity, infinite Goodness,
incorruptible Justice, and whatever we conceive under the notion of moral
Perfections.

2. With respect to his complete Blessedness, (the result of his infinite
Excellencies;) as he is perfectly exempt from all evils, which might allay, and
lessen his felicity, and enjoys those pleasures, which are worthy of his pure
Nature, and glorious State.

3. In regard of his supreme Dominion, which extends it self to all things in
Heaven and Earth. Now in the Participation of these, the Image of God did
principally consist. The Holiness of Man was the copy of the Divine purity: his
Happiness a representation of the Divine Felicity: and his Dominion over the
lower World, the resemblance of Gods Sovereignty.

I will take a particular survey of them.

1. Man was conformed to God in Holiness. This appears by the expressions of
the Apostle, concerning the Sanctification of corrupt man; which he sets forth,
by the renewing of him in knowledge, Col. 3.10.
righteousness and holiness, after the image of the Creator. The Renovation of
things, is the restoring of them to their Primitive state, Ephesians. 4.24.
and is more, or less perfect, by its proportion to, or distance from the
Original. Holiness, and Righteousness, are the comprehensive Sum of the Moral
Law, Luke 1.73.
which not only represents the Will, but the Nature of God in his Supreme
Excellency, and in conformity to it the Divine likeness eminently appeared.
Adam was created with the perfection of Grace, the progress of the most
excellent Saints is incomparably short of his beginning; By this we may in part
conjecture at the Beauty of Holiness in him, of which one faint ray appearing
in renewed persons is so amiable. This primitive Beauty is expressed in Scripture
by rectitude: God made Man upright. There was an universal entire rectitude in
his Faculties, disposing them for their proper Operations. This will more fully
appear, by considering the distinct powers of the Soul, in their regular
Constitutions.

1. The understanding was enriched with knowledge. Nature was unveiled to Adam,
he entered into its Sanctuary, and discovered its mysterious Operations. When
the Creatures came to pay their Homage to him, Genesis ^.19.
whatsoever he called them, that was the name thereof. And their Names expressed
their Natures. His knowledge reached through the whole compass of the Creation,
from the Sun the glorious vessel of Light, to the Gloworm that shines in the
hedge. And this knowledge was not acquired by Study, 'twas not the fruit of
anxious inquiry, but as the illumination of the Air is in an instant by the
light of the Morning, so his Understanding was enlightened, by a pure beam from
the Father of Lights.

Besides, He had such a knowledge of the Deity, as was sufficient for his Duty
and Felicity* His mind did not stick in the material part of things, but
ascended by the several ranks of Beings, to the Universal Cause. He discovered
the Glory of the Divine Essence and Attributes by their wonderful effects.

1. Almighty Power. When he first opened his eyes, the stupendous Fabric of
Heaven and Earth presented itself to his view, and in it the most express and
clear characters of that Glorious Power, which produced it. For what could
overcome the Infinite distance, between not being, and being, but Infinite
Power? As there is no proportion between not being, and being, so the cause
which unites those terms, must be without limits. Now the Divine Word alone,
(which calls the things that are not, as if they were) caused the World to rise
from the Abyss of empty nothing. At Gods Command the Heavens, Romans 4.17.
Psalm. 33.6.
and all their Host were created. And this led him to consider the Immensity of
the Divine Essence; For Infinite Power is incompatible with a finite Essence,
and by the consideration of the Immensity, he might ascend to the Eternity of
God. To be Eternal, without beginning, and Infinite without bounds, infer, one
another, and necessarily exist in the same subject. For it is impossible, that
any thing which is formed by another, and has a beginning, should not be
limited in its Nature by the cause that produced it. Therefore the Apostle
declares, that the Eternal Power of God is set forth in the Creation of the
World, Romans 1.20.
joining with the discovery of his Power, that of his Eternity.

2. Admirable Wisdom appeared to Man in the Creation. For by considering the
Variety and Union* the Order and Efficacy, the Beauty and Stability of the
World, he clearly discerned that Wisdom, which so regularly disposed all. It Is
thus that Wisdom speaks in the Book of Proverbs; When he prepared the Heavens,
I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth: Prove. 8.27, 28,
29.
When he established the Clouds above: When he strengthened the Fountains of
the Deep: when he gave the Sea his Decree, that the Waters should not pass his
Commandments: when he appointed the Foundations of the Earth: I was with him,
contriving all in the best manner for Ornament and Use. The knowledge of this,
filled his Soul with wonder, and delight. The Psamist breaks forth with
astonishment, as one in the midst of innumerable Miracles, O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in Wisdom have made them all: And if he discovered such
wonderful and Divine Wisdom in the Works of God, Psa. 104.24.
when the vigor of the humane Understanding was so much impaired by the Fall;
how much more did Adam, who perfectly understood Universal Nature, the offices
of its parts, the harmony of the whole, and all the just Laws of Union, by
which God has joined together such a multitude of beings, so distant and
disagreeing, and how the Public Peace is preserved by their Private Enmity.
This discovery caused him to acknowledge, that Great is the Lord, and of great
Power, his Understanding is infinite.

3. Infinite Goodness shined forth in the Creation. This is the leading
Attribute, that called forth the rest to work. As there was no matter, so no
motive to induce God to make the World, but what arose from his Goodness: For
he is an All-sufficient Being, perfectly blessed in himself. His Majesty is not
increased by the Adoration of Angels, nor his Greatness by the Obedience of
Nature; neither was he less happy, or content, in that Eternal Duration before
the existence of any Creature, than he is since. His Original Felicity is
equally incapable of accession; as of diminution. It Is evident therefore, that
only free, and unexcited Goodness, moved him to create all things, that he
might impart being and happiness to the Creature, not enrich his own.

And as by contemplating the other works of God, so especially by reflecting
upon himself, Adam had a clear sight of the Divine Attributes, which concurred
in his Creation. Whether he considered his lowest part, the Body, 'twas formed
of the Earth, the most artificial and beautiful piece of the visible World. The
contrivance of its parts, Difficile est expedire utrum species an utilitas
major sit. Lact. de opif^ Hom.
was with that proportion and exactness, as most conduced to Comeliness and
Service. Its stature was erect and raised, becoming the Lord of the Creatures,
and an observer of the Heavens. A Divine Beauty and Majesty was shed upon it.
And this was no vanishing ray, soon eclipsed by a Disease, and extinguished by
Death, but shined in the countenance without any declination. The Tongue was
Man's peculiar glory, being the interpreter of the mind, and capable to
signify all the Affections of the Soul. In short, the Body was so framed, as
to make a visible discovery of the Prerogatives of his Creation. And when he
reflected upon his Soul, that animated his dust, its excellent endowments,
wherein it is comparable to the Angels, its capacity of enjoying God himself for
ever, he had an internal and most clear testimony of the glorious perfections
of his Creator. For Man, Miratur ali^ homo, cum sit ipse mirator maximum
miraculum. Aug.
who alone admires the works of God, is the most admirable of all.

2. The Image of God was resplendent in man's Conscience, the seat of practical
Knowledge, and Treasury of moral Principles. The directive faculty was sincere,
and incorrupt, not infected with any disguising tincture: 'twas clear from all
prejudices, which might render it an incompetent Judge of good and evil. It
instructed Man in all the parts of his relative Obligations to God, and the
Creatures. 'Twas not fettered and confined, fearfully restraining from what is
Lawful; nor licentious and indulgent in what is forbidden. Briefly, Conscience
in Adam upright, was a subordinate God, that gave Laws, and exacted obedience
to that glorious Being who is its Superior.

3. There was a Divine Impression on the Will. Spiritual Reason kept the
Throne, and the inferior Faculties observed an easy and regular subordination
to its dictates. The Affections were exercised with proportion to the quality
of their Objects. Reason was their inviolable Rule. Love the most noble, and
Master-affection, which gives being and goodness to all the rest, even to
hatred it self; (for so much we hate an object, as it hinders our enjoyment of
the good we love) this precious Incense was offered up to the excellent and
supreme Being, which was the Author of his Life. Adam fully obeyed the first,
and great Command, of loving the Lord with all his heart, soul, and strength.
His love to other things was regulated by his love to God. There was a perfect
accord between flesh and spirit in him. They both joined in the service of God,
and were naturally moved to their happiness. In short, the image of God, in
Adam, was a living, powerful Principle, and had the same relation to the Soul,
which the Soul has to the Body, to animate and order all its Faculties, in
their Offices and Operations, according to the Will of his Creator.

2. The Image of God consisted (though in an inferior degree) in the happy
state of man. Herein he resembled that infinitely Blessed Being. This happiness
had relation to the two Natures, which enter into Man's Composition.

1. To the Animal and Sensitive, and this consisted in two things. 1. In the
excellent disposition of his Organs. 2. In the enjoyment of convenient Objects.

1. In the excellent disposition of the Organs. His body was formed immediately
by God, and so not liable to those defects, which proceed from the weakness of
second causes. No blemish, or disease, which are the effects and footsteps of
sin, were to be found in him. His health was not a frail inconstant
disposition, easily ruined by the jarring elements, but firm and stable. The
humors were in a just temperament, to prevent any destemper, which might tend
to the dissolution of that excellent frame. Briefly all the senses were quick
and lively, able to perform with facility, vigor, and delight, their
operations.

2. There were convenient Objects, to entertain his sensitive faculties.

He enjoyed Nature in its original Purity, crowned with the benediction of God;
before 'twas blasted with the curse. The World was all Harmony and Beauty,
becoming the goodness of the Creator; and not as it is since the Fall disordered
and deformed in many parts, the effect of his Justice. The Earth was liberal to
Adam of all its Treasures: the Heavens of their Light, and sweetest Influences.
He was seated in Eden, a place of so great beauty and delight, that it
represented the Celestial Paradise, which is refresht with Rivers of Pleasure.
And as the ultimate End of the Creatures was to raise his mind, and inflame his
heart with the love of his great Benefactor; So their first and natural use was
the satisfaction of the Senses, from whence the felicity of the Animal Life did
proceed.

2. His supreme Happiness consisted in the exercise of his most noble
Faculties, on their proper Objects. This will appear by considering, that as
the spiritual Faculties have objects which infinitely excel those of the
sensitive; So their capacity is more enlarged, their union with objects is more
intimate, and their perception is with more quickness and vivacity; and thereby
are the greatest instruments of pleasure to the rational being. Now the highest
Faculties in Man, are the Understanding and Will; and their happiness consists
in union with God, by Knowledge and Love.

1. In the Knowledge of God. As the desire of Knowledge is the most natural to
the humane Soul, so the obtaining of it produces the most noble and sweetest
pleasure. And proportionably to the degrees of excellency that are in objects,
so much of rational Perfection and Satisfaction accrues to the mind by the
knowledge of them. The discovery of the Works of God greatly affected Man, yet
the excellencies scattered among them, are but an imperfect and mutable shadow
of God's infinite and unchangable Perfections. How much more delightful was it
to his pure understanding, tracing the footsteps and impressions of God in
Natural things, to ascend to him, who is the glorious Original of all
Perfections. And although his finite understanding could not comprehend the
Divine excellencies, yet his knowledge was answerable to the degrees of
Revelation, wherein God was manifested. He saw the admirable Beauty of the
Creator through the transparent vail of the creatures. And from hence there
arose in the Soul, a pleasure pure, solid, and satisfying, a pleasure divine;
for God takes infinite contentment in the contemplation of Himself.

2. The Happiness of Man consisted in the Love of God. 'Twas not the naked
speculation of the Deity that made him happy, but such a knowledge as ravished
his Affections. For happiness results from the fruitions of all the Faculties.
It Is true, that by the mediation of the understanding, the other Faculties have
access to an object; the Will and Affections cannot be inclined to any thing,
but by virtue of an act of the mind which propounds it as worthy of them. It
follows therefore that when by the discovery of the transcendent excellencies
in God, the Soul is excited to love and to delight in Him as its Supreme Good;
it is then really and perfectly happy. Now as Adam had a perfect knowledge of
God, so the height of his love was answerable to his knowledge, and the
compleatness of his enjoyment was according to his Love. All the Divine
Excellencies were amiable to him. The Majesty, Purity, Justice, and Power of
God, which are the terror of guilty creatures, secured his happiness whilst he
continued in his Obedience. His Conscience was clear and calm, no unquiet fears
discomposed its Tranquillity, 'twas the seat of Innocence and Peace. Briefly,
His love to God was perfect, 1 John 4.18.
without any allay of tormenting fear; and Delight, its inseparable attendant,
was pure without the least mixture of Sorrow.

3. There was in Man's dominion and power over the Creatures, a shining part of
God's Image. He was appointed God's Lieutenant in the world, and adorned with a
Flower of his Crown. God gave him the solemn Investiture of this dignity, when
he brought the Creatures to receive their names from him, Psalm. 8.5, 6.
which was a mark of their homage, and a Token of his supreme Empire to command
them by their names. As this Dominion was established by the order of God, so
'twas exercised by the mediation of the Body. In his Face and Words there was
something so powerful, as commanded all the hosts of the lower world. And as
their subjection was most easy without constraint, or resistance, so 'twas
most equal without violence and oppression.

Thus holy and blessed was Adam in his Primitive state. And that he might
continue so, he was obliged for ever to obey the Will of God* who bestowed upon
him Life and Happiness. By the first neglect of his Duty, he would most justly
and inevitably incur the loss of both. This will appear by considering the
design of God in the Creation.

God did not make the World and Man for the mere exercise of his Power, and so
left them; but as the production of all things was from his Goodness, so their
resolution and tendency is for his Glory. He is as universally the final, as
the efficient cause of all creatures. For that which receives its being from
another, cannot be an end to it self; for the prevision of the end in the mind
of the Creator, sets him a work, and is antecedent to the being of the
creature. Therefore the Wiseman tells us, that God made all things for himself.
And the Apostle, Prove. 16.4.
that Of him, and to him, and through him are all things: Romans 11.36.
to whom be glory for ever. The lower rank of Creatures objectively glorify
God; as there is a visible demonstration of his excellent Attributes in them.
Man is only qualified to know, and love the Creator: And as the benefit of all
redounds to him, it is his duty to pay the tribute for all. By his mouth the
world makes its acknowledgment to God. He is the Interpreter of the silent and
uninterrupted Praises, Psalm. 145.10.
which the full Quire of Heaven and Earth renders to him. O Lord* all thy works
praise thee, (from the most noble to the least worthy) thy Saints bless thee.
Thankfulness is the homage due from understanding Creatures.

And from hence it follows, that Man was only in a state of moral dependence,
and capable of a Law. For a Law being the declaration of the Superiors Will,
requiring Obedience, and threatening Punishment on the failure thereof; there
must be a principle of Reason and choice in that nature that is governed by it.
1. To discover the Authority that enjoins it. 2. To discern the matter of the
Law. 3. To determine it self out of judgment and election to Obedience, as most
excellent in it self and advantageous to the performer.

Now all inferior Creatures are moved by the secret force of natural
inclinations; they are insensible of moral engagements, and are not wrought on
in an illuminative way by the foresight of rewards and punishments. But Man who
is a reasonable creature owes a reasonable service. And it is impossible that
Man should be exempt from a Law. Romans 12.1.
For as the notion of a God, that is of the first and supreme Being, excludes
all possibility of obligation to another, Romans 11.35.
Who has first given to the Lord, and it shall be recompensed to him again?
And of subjection to a Law, for supremacy and subjection are incompatible; so
the quality of a Creature includes the relation of dependence, and natural
subjection to the Will of God. This is most evident from that common Principle
which governs the intelligent Creation. It Is a moral Maxim to which the
reasonable nature necessarily assents, That the dispensing of benefits acquires
to the Giver a Right to command, and lays on the Receiver an Obligation to
obey; and these rights and duties are measured by the nature of the benefits as
their just Rule. This is visible in that Dominion which is amongst men.

If we ascend to the first Springs of Humane Laws, we shall find the original
Right of Power to arise either from Generation in Nature, or Preservation ^n
War, or some public Good accruing to the Society by the prudent care of the
Governor. Now the being and blessedness of the creature are the greatest and
most valuable benefits that can be received; and in the bestowing of them is
laid the most real foundation of Power and Authority. Upon this account Man who
derives his life and felicity from God, is under a natural and strong
obligation to comply with his will. From this right of Creation God asserts his
universal Dominion: I have made the Earth, and created Man upon it, Isa. 45.12.
even my hands have stretched out the Heavens, and all their hosts have I
commanded. And the Psalmist tells us, Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is He
that made us, Psalm. 100.3.
and not we our selves; we are his people and the sheep of his pasture. His
Jurisdiction is grounded on his propriety in Man; and that arises from his
giving being to him. Remember, O Israel, Isa. 44.21.
for thou art my servant, I have formed thee. From hence he has a supreme
Right to impose any Law, for the performance of which Man had an original
Power. Universal Obedience is the just consequent of our obligations to the
Divine Goodness.

Suppose that Man were not the work of God's hands, yet the infinite excellency
of his nature gives him a better title to command us, than Man has upon the
account of his reason to govern those Creatures that are inferior to him. Or
suppose that God had not created the matter of which the Body is composed, but
only inspired it with a living Soul, yet his right over us had been
unquestionable. The Civil Law determines, that when an Artificer works on rich
materials, and the engraving be not of extraordinary value, that the whole
belongs to him who is the owner of the materials. But if the matter be mean,
and the workmanship excellent, in which the price wholly lies; as if a Painter
should draw an admirable Picture on a piece of Canvas, the Picture of right
belongs to him that drew it. So if, according to the error of some
Philosophers, the matter of which the World was made had been Eternal, Plato.
yet God having infused a reasonable Soul into a piece of clay, which is the
principle of its life, and gives it a transcendent value above all other beings
which were made of the same element, it is most just he should have a property
in him, and dominion over him.

The Law of Nature to which Man was subject upon his Creation, contains those
moral Principles concerning good and evil, which have an essential equity in
them, and are the measures of his duty to God, to himself, and to his fellow
creatures. This was published by the voice of Reason, and is holy, just and
good: Romans 7.12.
Holy as it enjoins those things wherein there is a conformity to those
Attributes and Actions of God, which are the pattern of our imitation: So the
general Rule is, Be holy, as God is holy, in all manner of conversation; 1 Pet.
1.15.
and this is most honorable to the humane nature. It Is just, that is, exactly
agreeable to the frame of man's faculties, and most suitable to his condition in
the world: and good, that is, beneficial to the observer of it. In keeping of
it there is great reward. And the obligation to it is eternal, Psalm. 19.11.
it being the unchangeable will of God grounded on the natural and unvariable
relations between God and Man, and between Man and the Creatures.

Besides the particular directions of the Law of Nature, this general Principle
was planted in the reasonable Soul, to obey God in any instance wherein he did
prescribe his pleasure.

Moreover, God was pleased to enter into a Covenant with Adam, and with all his
Posterity, naturally descending from him: And this was the effect;

1. Of admirable Goodness: For by his Supremacy over Man he might have
signified his Will merely by the way of Empire, and required Obedience. But he
was pleased to condescend so far as to deal with Man in a sweeter manner, as
with a Creature capable of his Love, and to work upon him by rewards and
punishments, congruously to the reasonable Nature.

2. Of Wisdom to secure Man's obedience: For the Covenant being a mutual
engagement between God and Man, as it gave him infallible assurance of the
reward to strengthen his Faith, so it was the surest bond to preserve his
Fidelity. It Is true the Precept alone binds by virtue of the authority that
imposes it, but the consent of the Creature increases the Obligation; It twists
the cords of the Law, and binds more strongly to Obedience. Thus Adam was God's
servant, as by the condition of his nature, so by his choice, accepting the
Covenant, from which he could not recede without the guilt and infamy of the
worst perfidiousness.

The terms of the Covenant were becoming the Parties concerned, God and Man; It
established an inseparable Connection between Duty and Felicity. This appears by
the Sanction, In the day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall die.
Genesis 2.17.
In that particular species of Sin the whole genus is included; according to
the Apostles Exposition: Cursed is every one that does not continue in all the
works of the Law to do them. Gal. 3.10.
The threatening of Death was expressed, it being more difficult to be conceived.

The promise of Life upon his Obedience was implied, and easily suggested it
self to the rational Mind. These were the most proper and powerful motives to
excite his Reason, and affect his Will. For Death primarily signifies the
dissolution of the vital union between the Soul and Body, and consequently all
the preparatory dispositions thereunto; Diseases, Pains, and all the Affections
of Mortality, which terminate in Death as their center. This is the extremest
of temporal Evils, which innocent Nature shrunk from, it being a deprivation of
that excellent state which Man enjoyed. But principally it signified the
separation of the Soul from God's reviving presence, who is the only Fountain
of Felicity. Thus the Law is interpreted by the Lawgiver, The Soul that sins
shall die. Briefly, Death in the threatening is comprehensive of all kinds and
degrees of evils, Ezekiel. 18.4.
from the least Pain, to the compleatness of Damnation. Now it is an inviolable
Principle deeply set in the Human Nature, to preserve its being and
blessedness, so that nothing could be a more powerful restraint from Sin, than
the fear of Death which is destructive to both.

This constitution of the Covenant was founded not only in the Will of God, but
in the nature of the things themselves: And this appears by considering,

1. That Holiness is more excellent in it self, and separately considered, than
the reward that attends it. It Is the peculiar glory of the Divine Nature, God
is glorious in Holiness. And as He prefers the infinite purity of his Nature,
before the immortal felicity of his state, so he values in the reasonable
Creature the virtues by which they represent his Holiness, more than their
perfect Contentment by which they are like Him in Blessedness. Now God is the
most just esteemer of things, his judgment is the infallible measure of their
real worth; it is therefore according to natural order that the Happiness of Man
should depend upon his Integrity, and the reward be the fruit of his Obedience.

And although it is impossible that a mere Creature, in what state soever,
should obtain any thing from God by any other title but his voluntary Promise,
the effect of his Goodness; yet 'twas such Goodness as God was invited to
exercise, by the consideration of Man's obedience. And as the neglect of his
Duty had discharged the Obligation on God's part, so the performance gave him a
claim, by right of the Promise, to everlasting Life.

2. As the first part of the alliance was most reasonable, so was the Second,
that Death should be the wages of Sin. It is not conceivable that God should
continue his favor to Man, if he turned Rebel against Him: For this were to
disarm the Law, and expose the Authority of the Lawgiver to contempt, and would
reflect upon the Wisdom of God. Besides, If the reasonable Creature violates
the Law, it necessarily contracts an obligation to punishment, So that if the
Sinner who deserves death should enjoy life, without satisfaction for the
offense, or Repentance to qualify him for pardon, (both which were without the
compass of the first Covenant) this would infringe the unchangable rights of
Justice, and disparage the Divine Purity.

In the first Covenant there was a special clause, which respected Man as the
inhabitant of Paradise, That he should not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil upon pain of Death. Genesis 2.17.
And this Prohibition was upon most wise and just reasons.

1. To declare God's Sovereign Right in all things. In the quality of Creator
he is Supreme Lord. Man enjoyed nothing but by a derived title from his Bounty
and Allowance, and with an obligation to render to him the Homage of all. As
Princes when they give estates to their Subjects, still retain the Royalty, and
receive a small rent, which though inconsiderable in its value, is an
acknowledgment of dependence upon them. So when God placed Adam in Paradise, he
reserved this mark of his Sovereignty, that in the free use of all other
things, Man should abstain from the forbidden Tree.

2. To make trial of Man's Obedience in a matter very congruous to discover it.
In minimis obedientiae periculum faciunt Legislatores, quia Legislatoris ad
Obedientiam obligantis potius habenda est ratio, quam rei de qua lex lata est.
If the Prohibition had been grounded on any moral* internal evil in the nature
of the thing it self, there had not been so clear a testimony of God's
Dominion, nor of Adam's Subjection to it. But when that which in it self was
indifferent, became unlawful merely by the Will of God, and when the Command
had no other excellency, but to make his Authority more sacred, this was a
confining of Man's liberty, and to abstain was pure Obedience.

Besides, The restraint was from that which was very grateful and alluring to
both the parts of Man's compounded Nature. Genesis 3.6.
The Sensitive Appetite is strongly excited by the Lust of the Eye; and this
fruit being beautiful to the sight, the forbearance was an excellent exercise
of virtue in keeping the lower appetite in obedience. Again, The desire of
Knowledge is extremely quick and earnest, and in appearance most worthy of the
rational Nature; Nullus animo suavior cibus. Lactan.
It Is the most high and luscious food of the Soul.

Now the Tree of Knowledge was forbidden; So that the observance of the Law was
the more eminent, in keeping the intellectual Appetite in Mediocrity.

In short, God required Obedience as a Sacrifice. For the Prohibition being in
a matter of natural Pleasure, and a curb to Curiosity, Obsequii gloria est in
eo major, quod quis minus velit. Plin.
which is the Lust and Concupiscence of the Mind after things concealed; by a
reverent regard to it, Man presented his Soul and Body to God as a living
Sacrifice, which was his reasonable service. Romans 12.1.


CHAP. II.
Man's Natural state was mutable. The Devil, moved by hatred and envy, attempts
to seduce him. The Temptation was suitable to Man's compounded Nature. The Woman
being deceived, persuades her Husband. The quality of the first Sin. Many were
combined in it. 'Twas perfectly voluntary. Man had Power to stand. The Devil
could only allure, not compel him. His Understanding and Will the causes of his
Fall. The punishment was of the same date with his Sin. He forfeited his
Righteousness and Felicity. The loss of original Righteousness, as it signifies
the purity and liberty of the Soul. The torment of Conscience that was
consequent to Sin. A whole Army of Evils enter with it into the World.

MAN was created perfectly holy, but in a natural, therefore mutable state. He
was invested with power to prevent his Falling; yet under a possibility of it.
He was complete in his own order, but receptive of sinful impressions. An
invincible Perseverance in Holiness belongs to a supernatural state; it is the
privilege of Grace, and exceeds the design of the first Creation.

The rebellious Spirits, who by a furious ambition had raised a war in Heaven,
and were fallen from their obedience and glory, designed to corrupt Man, and to
make him a companion with them in their revolt. The most subtle amongst them
sets about this work, urged by two strong passions, Hatred and Envy.

1. By Hatred. For being under a final and irrevocable Doom, he looked on God as
an irreconcilable enemy: And not being able to injure his Essence, he struck
at his Image: As the fury of some beasts discharges it self upon the Picture of
a Man. He singled out Adam as the mark of his malice, that by seducing him from
his Duty, he might defeat God's design, which was, to be honored by Man's free
obedience, and so obscure his Glory as if He had made Man in vain.

2. He was solicited by Envy, the first native of Hell: For having lost the
favor of God, and being cast out of Heaven the Region of Joy and Blessedness,
the sight of Adam's Felicity exasperated his Grief. That Man who by the
condition of his nature was below him, should be Prince of the world, whilst he
was a Prisoner under those chains which restrained him and tormented him* the
power and wrath of God, this made his state more intolerable. His torment was
incapable of allay, but by rendering man as miserable as himself. And as hatred
excited his envy, so envy inflamed his hatred, and both joined in mischief. And
thus pusht on, his Subtilty being equal to his Malice, he contrives a
Temptation which might be most taking and dangerous to Man, in his raised and
happy state. He attempts him with art, by propounding the lure of Knowledge and
Pleasure, to inveigle the Spiritual and Sensitive Appetites at once. And that
he might the better succeed, he addresses to the Woman the weakest and most
liable to seduction. He hides himself in the body of a Serpent, which before
Sin was not terrible unto her: And by this instrument insinuates his
Temptation. He first allures with the hopes of impunity, Ye shall not die, then
he promises an universal knowledge of good and evil. By these pretenses he
ruined innocence it self. For the Woman deceived by those specious Allectives,
swallowed the poison of the Serpent, and having tasted Death, she persuaded her
Husband by the same motives to despise the Law of their Creator. Thus Sin
entered and brought confusion into the World. For the moral Harmony of the
World consisting in the just subordination of the several ranks of beings to
one another, and of all to God: When Man who was placed next to God, broke the
Union, his Fall brought a desperate disorder into God's Government.

And although the matter of the Offense seems small, yet the Disobedience was
infinitely great; it being the transgression of that command, which was given
to be the instance and real proof of Man's subjection to God. Totam legem
violavit in illo legalis obedientiae praecepto. Tertul.
The Honor and Majesty of the whole Law was violated in the breach of that
symbolical Precept. 'Twas a direct and formal Rebellion, a public and
universal renouncing of Obedience. Many Sins were combined in that single act.

1. Infidelity: This was the first step to ruin. It appears by the order of
the Temptation: 'twas first said by the Devil, Ye shall not die, to weaken
their Faith; then ye shall be like gods, to flatter their ambition. The fear of
Death would have contrould the efficacy of all his Arguments; till that
restraint was broke, he could fasten nothing upon them. This account the
Apostle gives of the Fall; The woman being deceived, was in the transgression.
1 Timothy 2.14.
As Obedience is the effect of Faith, so Disobedience of Infidelity. And as
Faith comes by hearing the Word of God, so Infidelity by listening to the words
of the Devil. From the deception of the Mind proceeded the depravation of the
Will, the intemperance of the Appetite, and the defection of the whole Man.
Thus as the natural, so the spiritual Death made its first entrance by the Eye.
Primi in homine moriuntur oc^li. Plin.
And this Infidelity is extremely aggravated, as it implies an accusation of
God both of envy and falsehood.

1. Of Envy; As if he had denied them the perfections becoming the humane
Nature; and they might ascend to a higher Orb, than that wherein they were
placed, by eating the forbidden fruit. And what greater disparagement could
there be of the Divine Goodness, than to suspect the Deity of such a low and
base Passion, which is the special character of the Angels of Darkness.

And 'twas equally injurious to the honor of God's Truth. For it is not easy
to conceive that Adam who was so lately the effect of Gods Omnipotence should
presently distrust it as unable to inflict the punishment threatened, but his
assent was weakened as to the truth of the threatening: He did not believe the
danger to be so great or certain upon his Disobedience. And he that believes
not God, 1 John 5.16.
makes him a Liar. An impiety not to be thought on without horror. And that
which heightens the affront, is, that when he distrusted the Fountain of Truth,
he gave credit to the Father of Lies; as appears by his compliance, the real
evidence of his Faith. Now what viler contumely could be offered to the Creator.

2. Prodigious Pride. He was scarce out of the state of nothing, no sooner
created, but he aspired to be as God. Not content with his Image, he affected
an equality, The promise of the Tempter that they should not die, encouraged
him to believe that he should enjoy an Immortality, not depending on Gods Will,
but absolute; which is proper to God alone.
to be like him in his inimitable Attributes. He would rob God of his Eternity
to live without end; of his Sovereignty, to command without dependence; of his
Wisdom, to know all things without reserve. Infinite Insolence! and worthy of
the most fiery indignation. That Man* the Son of the Earth, forgetful of his
Original, should usurp the Prerogatives which are essential to the Deity, and
set up himself a real Idol, was a strain of that arrogance which corrupted the
Angels.

3. Horrid Ingratitude. He was appointed Heir apparent of all things; yet
undervaluing his present portion, he entertains a project of improving his
Happiness. The excellent state newly conferred upon him, was a strong
obligation to pay so small an acknowledgment to his Lord. The use of all the
Garden was allowed to him, only a Tree excepted. Now in the midst of such
variety and plenty, to be inflamed with the intemperate appetite of the
forbidden Fruit, and to break a Command so equal and easy, what was it but a
despising the rich Goodness of his great Benefactor. Besides, Man was endued
with a diviner Spirit than the inferior order of Creatures: Reason and Liberty
were the special privileges of his Nature, and to abuse them to Rebellion,
renders him as more unreasonable, so more disingenuous than the Creatures below
him, who inflexibly obey the Will of God.

4. The visible Contempt of God's Majesty, with a slighting his Justice. For
the Prohibition was so express and terrible, that till he had cast off all
respects to the Lawgiver, 'twas not possible he should venture to disobey him.
The Sin of Adam is therefore called by the Apostle, Disobedience; Romans 5.19.
as eminently such, it being the first and highest instance of it. 'Twas the
profanation of Paradise it self, the place of God's special presence. There he
fell, and trampled on God's Command before his face. What just cause of
astonishment is it, that a reasonable creature should bid open Defiance to the
Author of its Life! That a little breathing dust should contemn its Creator!
That Man should prefer servile compliance to the will of the Tempter, before
free subjection to his Father and Sovereign! To depose God and place the Devil
in his Throne, was double Treason, and provoked his infinite jealousy.

5. Unaccountable and amazing Folly. What a despicable acquisition tempted him
out of Happiness? If there had been any possible comparison between them, the
choice had been more excusable. But that the pleasures of Taste and Curiosity
should outvie the favor of God, which is better than Life, that the most
pernicious evil, gilded with the thin appearance of good, should be preferred
before the substantial and supreme Good, is the reproach of his Reason, and
makes the choice so criminal. And what less than voluntary Madness could
incline him to desire that, which he ought infinitely to have feared, that is,
the knowledge of evil: for nothing could destroy his Happiness, but the
experience of Evil. What but a wilful distraction could induce him to believe
that by defacing God's image, he should become more like him? Thus Man being in
honor, Psalm. 49.12.
but without understanding, became like the beasts that perish.

6. A bloody cruelty to himself, and all his Posterity. When God had made him a
depositary in a matter of infinite moment, that is of his own Happiness, and
all mankinds, this should have been a powerful motive to have kept him
vigilant: But giving a ready ear to the Tempter, he betrayed his trust, and at
once breaks both the Tables of the Law, and becomes guilty of the highest
Impiety and Cruelty. He was a Murderer before a Parent, he disinherited all his
Children before they were born, and made them Slaves before they knew the price
of Liberty.

And that which increases the malignity of this Sin, and adds an infinite
emphasis to it, is, that 'twas perfectly voluntary, his Will was the sole cause
of his Fall. And this is evident by considering;

1. That Adam innocent had a sufficient power to persevere in his holy State.
Deseruit, and desertus est. Aug.
There was no substraction of any Grace which was requisite to his standing; He
left God before he was forsaken by Him. Much less was there any internal
impulsion from God. It Is inconsistent with the Divine Purity to incline the
Creature to sin: As God cannot be tempted to evil, neither tempts he any man.
It Is injurious to his Wisdom to think that God would spoil that work, which he
had composed with so much design and counsel. And it is dishonorable to his
Goodness; He loved his Creature, and Love is an inclination to do good; 'twas
impossible therefore for God to induce Man to sin, or to withdraw that power
which was necessary to resist the Temptation, when the consequent must be his
inevitable ruin.

2. The Devil did only allure, In merito examinanda veniunt, Causa quae
impulit, causa quae retrahere debuit, and personae idonietas ad utrumque. Grot.
he could not ravish his consent. Though his malice is infinite, yet his power
is so restrained that he cannot fasten an immediate, much less an irresistible
impression on the Will: he therefore made use of an external Object, to invite
him. Now Objects have no constraining force, they are but partial agents, and
derive all their efficacy from the Faculties to which they are agreeable. And
although, since Sin has disordered the flesh, there is difficulty in resisting
those objects which pleasantly insinuate themselves, yet such an universal
rectitude was in Adam, and so entire a subjection in the sensual Appetite to
the superior power of Reason, that he might have obtained an easy conquest. A
resolute Negative had made him victorious: Quanto potestas vitandi fuit
facilior, tanto contumaciae crimine oneratur. Difficilium facilis venia.
Tertul* l. 2. ad uxor.
by a strong Denial he had baffled that proud Spirit. As the heavenly Adam,
when he, who is only rich in promises, offered to him the Monarchy of the World
with all its glory, disdained the offer, and cast off Satan with contempt. The
true Rock was unmoved, and broke all the proud waves that dashed against it.

3. It will fully appear that the Disobedience was Voluntary, by considering
what denominates an action to be so. The two springs of humane actions are the
Understanding and Will; and as there is no particular good but may have the
appearance of some difficult unpleasant quality annexed, upon which account the
Will may reject it; so any particular evil may be so disguised by the false
luster of goodness, as to incline the Will to receive it. This is clearly
verified in Adam's Fall. For a specious Object was conveyed, through the
unguarded Sense to his Fancy, and from that to his Understanding, which by a
vicious carelessness neglecting to consider the danger, or judging that the
excellency of the end did outweigh the evil of the means, commended it to the
Will, and that resolved to embrace it. It is evident therefore, that the action
which resulted from the direction of the Mind, and the choice of the Will was
absolutely free.

Besides, As the regret that is mixed with an action, is a certain Character
that the person is under constraint; So the delight that attends it, is a clear
Evidence that he is free. Jam. 1.14.
When the Appetite is drawn by the lure of Pleasure, the more violent, the more
voluntary is its motion. Now the representations of the forbidden fruit were
under the notion of Pleasure. The Woman saw the fruit was good for food, that
is, pleasurable to the Palate, and pleasant to the Eyes, and to be desired to
make one wise; that is, to increase Knowledge, Genesis 3.6.
which is the pleasure of the Mind, and these Allectives drew her into a snare.
Adam with complacency received the temptation, and by the enticement of Satan
committed adultery with the Creature, from whence the cursed race of Sin and
Miseries proceed.

Suppose the Devil had so disguised the Temptation, that notwithstanding all
his circumspection and care, Adam could not have discovered its evil: his
invincible Ignorance had rendered the action involuntary: But Adam was
conscious of his own action, there was light in his mind to discern the evil,
and strength in his will to decline it. For the manner of the defection,
whether it was from affected Ignorance, or secure Neglect, or transport of
Passion, it does not excuse: The action it self was of that moment, and the
supreme Lawgiver so worthy of Reverence, that it should have awakened all the
powers of his Soul to beware of that which was Rebellion against God, and ruin
to himself.

Or suppose he had been tried by Torments, whose extremity and continuance had
vehemently oppressed his nature; this had only lessened the guilt, the action had
still been voluntary; for no external force can compel the Will to choose any
thing, but under the notion of comparative goodness. Now to choose Sin rather
than pains, Job 36.21.
and to prefer ease before obedience, is highly dishonorable to God, whose
Glory ought to be infinitely more valuable to us than Life and all its
endearments. And although sharp Pains by discomposing the Body, make the Soul
unfit for its highest and noblest Operations, so that it cannot perform the
acts of Virtue with delight and freedom, yet then it may abstain from evil. But
this was not Adam's case: The Devil had no Power over him (as over Job, who
felt the extremity of his rage, and yet came off more than conqueror) to
disturb his felicity, he prevailed by a simple suasion.

Briefly, Though Man had strength sufficient to repel all the Powers of
Darkness, yet he was vanquished by the assault of a single Temptation. These are
the circumstances which derive a crimson guilt to Man's rebellious Sin, and
render it above measure sinful.

This will more fully appear by the convincing declaration of God's displeasure
against it, in the dreadful effects that ensued. The punishment of Man was of
the same date with his Sin. Immediately after his Treason against Heaven, he
made a deadly forfeiture of his Original Righteousness and Felicity.

1. He lost his Original Righteousness; which we may consider under the notion
of the purity and beauty of the Soul, or of its dominion and liberty, in
opposition to which, Sin is represented in the Scripture by loathsome Deformity
and Servitude.

1. His Soul degenerated from its purity; the Faculties remained, but the moral
perfections were lost, wherein the brightness of God's Image was most
conspicuous. How is Man disfigured by his Fall? How is he transformed in an
instant from the Image of God, into the Image of the Devil? He is defiled with
the filthiness of flesh and spirit; he is ashamed at the sight of his own
nakedness that reproached him for his crime; but the most shameful was that of
the Soul: The one might be covered with leaves, the other nothing could
conceal. To see a Face of exquisite Beauty devoured by a Cancer, how does it
move compassion; but were the Natural Eye heightened to that clearness and
perspicacity, as to discover the deformity which Sin has brought upon the
Soul, how would it strike with grief, horror and aversation.

2. He was deprived of his Dominion and Liberty. The Understanding was so
wounded by the violence of the fall, that not only its light is much impaired,
but its Power is so weakened as to the lower faculties, that those which
according to the order of nature should obey, have cast off its just authority,
and usurp the Government. The will has lost its true Freedom, whereby 'twas
enlarged to the extent and amplitude of the Divine Will, in loving whasoever
was pleasing to God, and is contracted to mean and base Objects. What a furious
disorder is in the Affections? The restraint of Reason to check their violent
course, provokes them to swell higher and to be more impetuous, and the more
they are gratified, the more insolent and outrageous they grow.

The Senses, whose office is to be the Intelligencers of the Soul, to make
discovery and to give a naked report without disturbing the higher Faculties,
they sometimes mistake disguised enemies for friends* and sometimes by a false
alarm move the lower Appetites, and fill the Soul with disorder and confusion
that the voice of Reason cannot be heard. By the irritation of Grief, the
insinuation of Pleasure, or some other Perturbation, the Soul is captivated and
wounded through the Senses. In short, when Man turned Rebel to God, he became a
slave to all the Creatures. By their primitive Institution they were appointed
to be subservient to the Glory of God, and the use of Man, to be motives of
Love and Obedience to the Creator* but Sin has corrupted and changed them into
so many instruments of vice, they are made subject unto vanity: And Man is so
far sunk into the dregs of Servitude, Romans 8.20.
that he is subject to them. For by forsaking God the Supreme Object of Love,
with as much injustice as folly, and choosing the Creature in his stead* he
becomes a Servant to the meanest thing, upon which he places an inordinate
affection.

Briefly, Man who by his Creation was the son of God, is made a slave to Satan
that damned spirit and most cursed creature. Deplorable Degradation! and worthy
of the deepest shame and sorrow.

2. Man lost his Felicity. Besides the trouble that Sin has in its own nature,
which I have touched on before, there is a consequent guilt and torment attends
it. Adam whilst obedient enjoyed peace with God, a sweet serenity of mind, a
divine calm in the Conscience, and full satisfaction in himself. But after his
Sin, he trembled at God's Voice and was tormented at his Presence. Genesis 3.10.
I heard thy voice, and was afraid, says guilty Adam. He looked on God as
angry, and armed against him, ready to execute the severe Sentence; Conscience
began an early Hell within him: Paradise with all its Pleasures could not
secure him from that sting in his Breast, and that sharpened by the hand of
God. What confusion of Thoughts, what a combat of Passions was he in? when the
Temptation which deceived him vanished, and his spirit recovered out of the
surprise, and took a clear view of his guilt in its true horror, what
indignation did it kindle in his Breast? How did Shame, Sorrow, Revenge,
Despair, those secret executioners torment his spirit. The intelligent Nature,
his peculiar excellency above the brutes, armed misery against him, and put a
keener edge to it: 1. By reflecting upon the foolish exchange he made of God
himself, for the fruit of a tree; That so slender a Temptation should cheat him
of his Blessedness. His present misery is aggravated, by the sad comparison of
it with his primitive Felicity. Nothing remains of his first Innocence, but the
vexatious regret of having lost it. 2. By the foresight of the Death he
deserved. The conscience of his Crimes rackt his Soul with the certain and
fearful expectation of judgment.

Besides the inward torment of his Mind, he was exposed to all miseries from
without. Sin having made a breach into the World, the whole Army of Evils
entered with it; the Curse extends it self to the whole Creation. For the World
being made for Man, the place of his residence, in his punishment it has felt
the effects of God's displeasure. The whole course of Nature is set on fire.
Whereas a general Peace and amicable Correspondence was established between
Heaven and Earth, whilst all were united in subjection to the Creator: Sin that
broke the first Union between God and Man, has ruined the second. As in a
State when one part of the Subjects fall from their Obedience, the rest which
are constant in their Duty, break with the Rebels and make war upon them till
they return to their Allegiance. So universal Nature was armed against
rebellious Man, and had destroyed him without the merciful interposition of God.

The Angels with flaming Swords expelled him from Paradise. The Beasts who were
all innocent, whilst Man remained innocent, they espouse Gods interest, and are
ready to revenge the quarrel of their Creator. The insensible Creation which at
first was altogether beneficial to Man, is become hurtful. The Heavens sometimes
are hardened as Brass, in a long and obstinate serenity: Sometimes are
dissolved in a Deluge of rain: The earth is barren, and unfaithful to the
Sower, Genesis 3.17, 18.
it brings forth Thorns and Thistles instead of Bread. In short, Man is an
enemy to Man. When there were but two Brothers to divide the World* the one
stained his hand in the Blood of the other* And since the Progeny of Adam is
increast into vast Societies, Ferar^m (...) inter se placidae sunt, morsuque
similium abstinent, hi mutua laceratione satiantur. Seneca de Ira.
all the disasters of the world, as Famine, Pestilence, Deluges, the fury of
Beasts have not been so destructive of Mankind, as the sole malignity of Man
against those that partake of the humane Nature.

To conclude, Who can make a list of the evils to which the Body is liable, by
the disagreeing Elements that compose it? The fatal Seeds of Corruption are
bred in it self. It Is a prey to all Diseases from the torturing Stone to the
dying Consumption. It feels the strokes of Death a thousand times before it can
die once. At last, Life is swallowed up of Death. And if Death were a
deliverance from miseries it would lessen its terror, but it is the consummation
of all. The first Death transmits to the second. As the Body dies by the Souls
forsaking it, so the Soul by separation from God its true Life, dies to its
Well-being and Happiness for ever.

CHAP. III.
All Mankind is involved in Adam's guilt, and under the penal consequences that
follow upon it. Adam the natural and moral Principle of Mankind. An hereditary
Corruption is transmitted to all that are propagated from him. The account the
Scripture gives of the Conveiance of it. It Is an innate Habit. It Is universal.
Corrupt Nature contains the seeds of all Sins, though they do not shoot forth
together. It Is voluntary and culpable. The permission of the Fall is suitable
to the Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness of God. The imputation of Adam's Sin to
his Posterity is consistent with God's Justice.

THe Rebellion of the First Man against the great Creator, was a Sin of
universal efficacy, that derives a guilt and stain to Mankind in all Ages of
the World. The account the Scripture gives of it, is grounded on the relation
which all men have to Adam as their natural and moral Principle.

1. Their Natural. God created one Man in the beginning, from whom all others
derive their beings: And that the unity might be the more entire, he formed of
him that aid which was necessary for the communicating his kind to the world.
Acts 17.26.
He made of one Blood all Nations of Men, to dwell on the face of the earth.
And as the whole race of Mankind was virtually in Adam's Loins, so it was
presumed to give virtual consent to what he did. The Angels were created
immediately and distinctly, without dependence upon one another as to their
Original; therefore when a great number revolted from God, the rest were not
complicated in their Sin and Ruin. But when the first Man who was the Father
of Mankind sinned, there was a Conspiracy of all the Sons of Adam in that
Rebellion, and not one Subject left in his Obedience.

2. He was the moral Principle of Mankind. In the first Treaty between God and
Man, Adam was considered not as a single person, but as caput gentis, and
contracted for all his desccndants by ordinary generation. His Person was the
Fountain of theirs, and his Will the representative of theirs. From hence his
vast Progeny became a party in the Covenant, and had a title to the benefits
contained in it, upon his Obedience, and was liable to the Curse upon his
violation of it. Upon this ground the Apostle institutes a parallel between
Adam and Christ. That as by one Man's disobedience many were made sinners; Romans
5.19.
so by the obedience of One, many were made righteous. As Christ in his Death
on the Cross did not suffer as a private person, but as a surety and sponsor
representing the whole Church, according to the testimony of Scripture, If one
died for all, then all were dead: 2 Cor. 5.15.
so the first Adam who was the figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14.
in his Disobedience was esteemed a public Person, representing the whole race
of Mankind; and by a just Law it was not restrained to himself, but is the Sin
of the common nature. Adam broke the first link in the chain whereby Mankind
was united to God, and all the other parts which depended upon it, are
necessarily separated from him. From hence the Scripture says, Ephesians. 2.3.
that by Nature we are Children of wrath, that is, liable to punishment, and
that has relation to guilt.

And of this we have convincing Experience in the common Evils which afflict
Mankind, before the commission of any actual Sin. The Cries of Infants who are
only eloquent to grief, but dumb to all things else, discover that Miseries
attend them. The Tears which are born with their Eyes, signify they are come
into a state of Sorrow. How many Troops of Deadly Diseases are ready to seize
on them, immediately after their Entrance into the World? So that it is apparent
God deals with Man as an enemy, and therefore guilty of some great crime from
his Birth. Ut non fit aestimare Parens melior homini, an tristior noverca
fuerit. Plin. Pr^l. l. 7.
The Ignorance of this made the Heathens accuse Nature, and blaspheme God under
that mask, as less kind and indulgent to Man than to the Creatures below him.
They are not under so hard a Law of coming into the world. They are presently
instructed to Swim, to Fly, to Run for their preservation. They are clothed by
Nature, and their Habits grow in proportion with their Bodies, some with
Feathers, some with Wool, others with Scales which are both Habit and Armor:
But Man who is alone sensible of shame, is born naked, and though of a more
delicate temper, is more exposed to injuries by distempered Seasons, and
utterly unable to repel, or avoid the evils that encompass him. Now the account
the Scripture gives of Original Sin silences all these complaints. Man is a
Ttransgressor from the Womb, and how can he expect a favorable Reception into
the Empire of an offended God? Briefly, Sometimes Death enters into the
retirements of Nature, and changes the Womb into a Grave, which proves that
as soon as we partake of the human Nature, we are guilty of the Sin that is
common to it; For the wages of Sin is Death. Romans 6.23.
Adam in his innocent state had the Privileges of Immortality, but by him Sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men,
Romans 5.12, 14, 17.
as a just Sentence upon the guilty, for that all men have sinned.

2. An Hereditary Corruption is transmitted to all that naturally descend from
him. If Adam had continued in his Obedience, the spiritual as well as the
natural Life had been conveyed to his Children, but for his Rebellion he lost
his primitive rectitude, and contracted an universal Corruption; which he
derives to all his Posterity. And as in a Disease there is the defect of
Health, and a distemper of the humors that affects the Body; so in the
depravation of Nature there is not the mere want of holiness, but a strong
proclivity to sin. This privation of original Righteousness considerd as a Sin,
is naturally from Adam, the principle of lapsed and corrupt Nature: But as a
punishment, it is meritoriously from him, and falls under the ordination of
Divine Justice. Man ^ast it away, and God righteously refuses to restore it.
It Is a sollicitous impertinency to enquire n^cely about the manner of conveying
this universal Corruption. For the bare knowledge o^ it is ineffectual to the
cure. And what greater folly than to make our own evils the object of simple
Speculation. I shall consider only that general account of it, which is set
down in the Scripture.

It Is the universal and unchangable Law of Nature, that every thing produce its
like, not only in regard of the same nature that is propagated from one
individual to another, without a change of the species, but in respect of the
qualities with which that nature is eminently affected. This is visible in the
several kinds of Creatures in the world, they all preserve the nature of the
principle from whence they are derived, and retain the vein of their original,
the quality of their extraction. Thus our Savior tells us that the fruit
partakes of the rottenness of the tree: and whatever is born of the flesh, is
flesh. Mat. 7.18. John 3.6.
The title of Flesh does not signify the material part of our humanity, but
the Corruption of Sin with which the whole nature is infected. This is evident
by the description the Apostle gives of it; Romans 8.7.
That the flesh is not subject to the Law of God, and that which aggravates the
evil is, that it cannot be. Sinful Corruption is expressed by this title, partly
in regard it is transmitted by the way of carnal propagation: Behold I was
shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51.5.
and in Sin did my mother conceive me; And partly in regard it is exercised by
the carnal members. This Corruption is a poison so subtle, that it pierces
into all the powers of the Soul; so contagious, that it infects all the
Actions; so obstinate, that only Omnipotent Grace can heal it. More
particularly;

1. It Is an innate Habit, not merely acquired by Imitation. The root of
bitterness is planted in the Humane Nature, and produces its fruits in the
various seasons of Life. No age is free from its working; Every imagination of
the thoughts of Man's heart are only evil, Genesis 6.5.
and continually evil. We see this verified in Children, when the most early
acts of their Reason, and the first instances of their apprehension are in Sin.
If we ascend higher, and consider Man in his Infant-state, the vicious
inclinations which appear in the Cradle, the violent motions of anger which
disturbs Sucklings, their endeavor to exercise a weak revenge on those that
displease them, convince us that the Corruption is natural, and proceeds from
an infected Original.

Job. 14.4.
2. As it is Natural, so Universal. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? That is, How can a Righteous person be born of a Sinner? The Answer is
peremptory, Not one. The Fountain was poisoned in Adam, and all the Streams
partake of the infection. All that are derived from him in a natural way, and
have a relation to him as their common father, are sharers in this depravation.
What difference soever there is in their Climates, Colors and external
conditions of life, yet the blood from whence they spring taints them all.

3. Corrupt Nature is pregnant with the seeds of all Sin, although they do not
shoot forth together: And for this several accounts may be given. 1. Although
all Sins agree in their cause and end, yet some are contrary in their exercise.
2. The humane spirit is not capable of many Passions in their height at the
same time; and it is the art of our spiritual Enemies to suit their Temptations
to the capacity of Man. 3. As the same Poison produces different effects in
different Bodies, according to those various Humors which are predominant in
them; so the same Corruption of Nature works variously according to the
different tempers of Men. For although the conception of Sin depends immediately
upon the Soul, yet to the bringing of it forth, the concurrence of the external
Faculties is requisite. Thus a Voluptuary who is restrained from the gross acts
of Sensuality by a Disease, or Age, may be as vicious in his Desires, as
another who follows the pernicious swing of his Appetite, having a vigorous
Complexion. Briefly, The variety of circumstances, by which the inward
corruption is excited and drawn forth, makes a great difference as to the open
and visible acts of it. Thus an ambitious person who uses Clemency to
accomplish his design, would exercise Cruelty if 'twere necessary to his end.

It Is true, some are really more temperate, and exempted from the tyranny of
the flesh than others; Cicero was more virtuous than Catiline, and Socrates
than Aristophanes: But these are privileged persons, in whom the efficacy of
Divine Providence either by forming them in the Womb, or in their Education, or
by conducting them in their maturer Age, has corrected the malignity of
Nature. All men have sinned and come short of the glory of God's image. Romans
3.23.
And that Sin breaks not forth so outragiously in some as in others, the
restraint is from an higher Principle, than common and corrupt Nature.

4. This Corruption although natural, yet it is Voluntary and Culpable.

1. Voluntary: All Habits receive their character from those acts by which they
are produced, and as the Disobedience of Adam was voluntary, so is the
Depravation that sprung from it. 2. It Is inherent in the Will. If Adam had
derived a Leprosy to all Men, it were an involuntary evil: Because the
Diseases of the Body are foreign to the Soul; But when the Corruption invades
the internal Faculties, it is denominated from the subject wherein it is seated.
3. It Is the voluntary cause of actual Sins; and if the acts proceeding from
this corruption are voluntary the principle must be of the same nature.

2. It Is Culpable. The formality of Sin consists in its opposition to the Law,
according to the definition of the Apostle, Sin is a transgression of the Law.
Now the Law requires an entire rectitude in all the Faculties. It condemns
corrupt inclinations, the originals as well as the acts of Sin. Besides,
Concupiscence was not inherent in the humane Nature in its Creation, but was
contracted by the Fall. The Soul is stripped of its native Righteousness and
Holiness, and is invested with contrary qualities. There is as great a
difference between the corruption of the Soul in its degenerate state, and its
primitive purity, as between the loathsomness of a Carcass, and the beauty of a
living Body. Sad change! and to be lamented with tears of confusion.

That the Sin of Adam should be so fatal to all his Posterity, is the most
difficult part in the whole order of Divine Providence. Nothing more offends
carnal Reason, which forms many specious Objections against it. I will briefly
consider them.

Since God saw that Adam would not resist the Temptation, and that upon his
Fall, the whole race of Mankind, which he supported as the foundation, would
sink into ruin, Why did he not confirm him against it, was it not within his
Power, and more suitable to his Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness?

To this I answer.

1. The Divine Power could have preserved Man in his Integrity, either by
laying a restraint on the apostate Angels, that they should never have made an
attempt upon him; or by keeping the Understanding waking and vigilant, to
discover the danger of the Temptation, and by fortifying the Will, and rendering
it impenetrable to the fiery darts of Satan, without any prejudice to its
freedom. For that does not consist in an absolute Indifference, but in a
judicious and deliberate choice; so that when the Soul is not led by a blind
instinct, nor forced by a foreign power, Quando Anima tanta satiabitur
visione, and tanta inflammabitur Charitate superioris boni, ut ad seipsam sibi
placendo deficere ab illius dilectione non possit, Aug. Lib. 4. cont. Jul.
but embraces what it knows and approves, it then enjoyes the most true
Liberty. Thus in the glorified Spirits above, by the full and constant Light of
the Mind, the Will is indeclinably fixed upon its supreme Good, and this is its
Crown and Perfection.

2. It was most suitable to the Divine Wisdom, to leave Man to stand or fall by
his own choice:

1. To discover the necessary dependence of all Second Causes upon the first.
No Creature is absolutely impeccable, but the most perfect is liable to
imperfection. He that is essentially, is only unchangeably Good. Infinite
Goodness alone excludes all possibility of receiving Corruption. The Fall of
Angels and Man convince us, that there is one sole Being, immutably Pure and
Holy, on whom all depend, and without whose Influence they cannot be, or must
be eternally miserable.

2. 'Twas very fit that Adam should be first in a state of trial, before he was
confirmed in his Happiness. The reason of it is clear, he was left to his own
judgment and election, that Obedience might be his choice, and in the
performance of it, he might acquire a title to the reward. A determining virtue
over him had crossed the end of his Creation, which was to glorify God in a free
manner. Therefore in Paradise there were amiable objects to allure the lower
Faculties, before they were disordered by Sin. The forbidden Fruit had beauty
to invite the Eye, and sweetness to delight the Palate. And if upon the
competition of the Sensual with the Intellectual Good he had re^ected the one
and chose the other, he had been raised to an unchangeable state; his Innocence
had been crowned with Perseverance. As the Angels who continued in their Duty,
when the rest revolted, are finally established in their Integrity and Felicity.
And the Apostle gives us an account of this order, when he tells us, That was
first which was natural, 1 Cor. 15.46
then that which is spiritual and supernatural* Man was created in a state of
perfection, but 'twas natural, therefore mutable, the confirming of him
immediately had been Grace, which belongs to a more excellent Dispensation. Now
to bring Man from not being to a supernatural state, without trial of the
middle state of Nature, was not so congruous to the Divine Wisdom.

3. The permission of the Fall does not reflect on the Divine Purity; For

1. Man was made Upright; He had no inward Corruption to betray him; There was
Antidote enough in his Nature to expel the strongest Temptation.

2. God was not bound to hinder the commission of Sin: It Is a true Maxim, that
in debitis causa d^ficiens efficit moraliter: But God is not only free from
subjection to a Law, as having no Superior, but was under no voluntary
Obligation by Promise to prevent the Fall.

3. Neither does that first Act of Sin reflect on Gods unspotted Providence
which suffered it, as if Sin were in any degree allowed by Him. The Holy Law
which God gave to direct Man, the terrible Threatening annexed to warn him,
declare his irreconcilable Hatred against Sin. He permits innumerable Sins
every day, ye^ He is as jealous of the Honor of his Holiness now, as in the
beginning. It Is the worst impiety for the Sinner to think God like himself, as
if he took complacency in sin, Psalm. 50.21.
because he is silent for a time and suffers the commission of it. In the next
state he will fully vindicate his Glory, and convince the whole World of his
eternal aversation from sin, by inflicting on sinners the most dreadful and
durable torments.

4. The goodness of God is not disparaged by permitting the fall: This appears
by considering,

1. That God bestowed on Man an excellent being, and a happiness that might
satisfy his nature, considered as humane, or holy. But he perverted the
favors of God, to his dishonor, and this does not lessen the goodness that
gave them. It Is unreasonable to judge of the value of a Benefit, by the
ungrateful abuse of the receiver, and not from its own nature. It Is a chosen
Misery that is come upon Man, and not to be imputed to any defect of the Divine
Goodness.

2. God is infinitely Good notwithstanding the entrance of Sin and Misery into
the World. We must distinguish between natural and voluntary agents. Natural
agents have no power to suspend their acts, but are entirely determined, and
their Operations are ad extremum virium, to the utmost of their efficacy. If
there were infinite degrees of Heat, there would be no Cold, it being overcome
by the force of its contrary. But God is a wise and free Agent, and as he is
Infinite in Goodness; so the exercise of it is voluntary, and only so far as he
pleases.

3. God is an omnipotent Good, and it is his peculiar glory to bring Good out of
Evil, that by the opposition and luster of Contraries, his Goodness might be
the more conspicuous. To speak strictly, Sin is the only evil in the world: for
all the rest which appear so to our fancies and appetites, are either
absolutely good, or upon the supposal of Sin: viz. either for the reformation
of Sinners, or for the ruin of the Obstinate. Now the Evil of Sin God
permitted as a fit o^casion for the more glorious discovery of his Attributes,
in sending his Son into the world to repair his Image which was defaced, and to
raise Man from an Earthly to Celestial Happiness. I shall conclude with the
excellent Answer of St. Austin to the adversary of the Law and the Prophets:
Quibus autem videter sic hominem fieri debuisse, ut peccare nollet, Contra
adver. ^eg. and Proph. Lib. 1. c. 14.
non eis displiceat sic esse factum, ut non peccare posset, si nollet. Nunquid
enim si melior esset qui no^ posset peccare, ideo non benefactus est qui posset
and non peccare? An vero usque adeo d^s^ipiendum est, ut homo videat melius
aliquid fieri debuisse, and hoc Deum vidisse non putet? Aut putet vidisse, and
credat facere noluisse? Aut voluisse quidem and minime potuisse? Avertat hoc
Deus a Cordibus piorum. The substance of which is; that it is an impious folly
to imagine that God was either defective in wisdom, not to know what was the
best state for man in his Creation; or defective in goodness, that knowing it,
he would not confer it upon him; or defective in power, that willing, he was
unable to make him better.

There is another Objection vehemently urged, that the imputation of Adam's sin
to all his posterity who were not existent at that time, and did not give their
personal consent to the treaty between God and him, is inconsistent with
Justice; To this I answer.

1. The terms of the first Covenant are such, that the common Reason of Mankind
cannot justly refuse. For suppose all the Progeny of Adam had appeared with him
before their Creator, and this had been propounded, that God would make an
agreement with their common father on their behalf, That if he continued in his
Obedience, they should enjoy a happy Immortality; if he declined from it, they
should be deprived of Blessedness. What shadow of exception can be formed
against this proposal? For God who is the Master of his own favors, and gives
them upon what terms he pleases, might upon their refusal have justly
annihilated them. The Command was equal, and his Obedience for all was as
easy, as that of every particular person for himself.

Besides, Adam was as much concerned to observe the Conditions of the Covenant,
for securing his own interest, as theirs, and after a short time of trial they
should be confirmed in their Blessedness. By all which it is apparent how
reasonable the conditions of the original Agreement between God and Man are.

2. God has a power over our Wills superior to that we our selves have. If
God offers a Covenant to the Creature, the terms being equal, it becomes a Law,
and consent is due as an act of Obedience. And if a Community may appoint one
of their number to be their Representative, to transact affairs of the greatest
moment, and according to his management, the benefit, or damage, shall accrue
to them; may not God who has a supreme dominion over us, constitute Adam the
Representative of Mankind, and unite the consent of all in his general Will,
Vid. Ward de Peccat. origin.
so that as he fulfilled or neglected his Duty, they should be happy or
miserable? This Consideration alone, that the First Covenant was ordered by
God, may perfectly satisfy all enquiries. As Salvian having confessed his
Ignorance of the reasons of some dispositions of Providence, silences all
Objections with this; Nihil in hac re opus est aliqiud audire, Salv. lib. 3. De
Prove.
satis sit pro universis rationibus Author Deus. Neither is this a mere
extrinsick Argument, as Authority usually is, because there is an intrinsic
reason of this Authority, the absolute Rectitude and Justice of Gods nature,
Who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Psalm. 145.17.


CHAP. IV.
The impossibility of Man's Recovery, by his Natural Power. He cannot regain his
Primitive Holiness. The Understanding and Will, the superior Faculties are
depraved. The Mind is ignorant and insensible of our Corruption. The Will is
more depraved than the Mind. It embraces only Sensual Good. Carnal Objects are
wounding to the Conscience, and unsatisfying to the Affections, yet the Will
eagerly pursues them. The moral Impotence, that arises from a perverse
Disposition of the Will, is culpable. Neither the Beauty, nor the Reward of
Holiness can prevail upon the unrenewed Will. Guilty Man cannot recover the
Favor of God. He is unable to make Satisfaction to Justice. He is incapable of
real Repentance, which might qualify him for Pardon.

WHen Adam was expelled from Paradise, the entrance was guarded by a flaming
Sword, to signify, That all hopes of Return by the way of Nature are cut off
for ever. He lost his Right, and could not recover it by Power. The chiefest
ornaments of Paradise are the Image and Favor of God, of which he is justly
deprived: and there is no possibility for him to regain them. What can he
expect from his own Reason that betrayed him to ruin? If it did not support him
when he stood, how can it raise him when he is fallen? If there were a power in
lapsed Man to restore himself, it would exceed the original Power he had to
will and obey: It being infinitely more difficult for a dead man to rise, than
for a living man to put forth vital Actions.

For the clearer opening of this Poin^, concerning Man's absolute Disability to
recover his Primitive State, I will distinctly consider it, with respect to the
Image and Favor of God, upon which his Blessedness depends.

1. He cannot recover his Primitive Holiness. This will appear by considering,
that whatsoever is corrupted in its noble parts, can never restore it self; the
power of an external agent is requisite for the recovering of its Integrity.
This is verified by innumerable instances, in things artificial and natural. If
a Clock be disordered by a fall, the Workman must mend it, before it can be
useful. If Wine that is rich and generous declines by the loss of spirits, it
can never be revived without a new supply. In the humane Body, where there is a
more nobl^ form, and more powerful to redress any evil that may happen to the
parts, if a Gangrene seize on any Member, nothing can resist its course, but
the application of outward means; it cannot be cured by the internal principles
of its constitution. And proportionably in moral Agents, when the Faculties
which are the principles of action are corrupted, it is impossible, without the
virtue of a Divine cause, they should ever be restored to their original
Rectitude. As the Image of God was at first imprinted on the Humane Nature by
Creation, so the renewed Image is wrought in him by the same creating Power.
This will be more evident by considering that inward and deep depravation of
the Understanding and Will, Ephesians. 4.24.
the two Superior Faculties which command the rest.

1. The Understanding has lost the right apprehension of things. As Sin began
in the darkness of the Mind, so one of its worst effects is, the increasing
that Darkness, which can only be dispelled by a supernatural Light. Now what
the Eye is to the Body, that is the Mind for the directing the Will and
conducting the Life. And if the light that is in us be darkness, how great is
that darkness? Mat. 6.23.
How irregular and dangerous must our motions be? Not only the lower part of
the Soul* is under a dreadful disorder; but the Spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4.23.
the divinest part is depraved with Ignorance and Error. The Light of Reason is
not pure; But as the Sun when with its beams it sends down pestilential
Influences, and corrupts the Air in the enlightening it, so the carnal Mind
corrupts the whole Man, by representing good as evil, and evil as good. The
Wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. Romans 11 7.
And the Apostle describes the state of the Gentile World, Ephesians. 4.11.
That their understandings were darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their
hearts. The corruption of their Manners proceeded from their Minds. For all
Virtues are directed by Reason in their Exercise, so that if the Understanding
be darkened, all virtuous Operations cease.

Besides, corrupt Man being without Light and Life can neither discern, nor
feel his Misery; Ephesians. 4.19. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 4.6.
The carnal Mind is insensible of its Infirmity, ignorant of its Ignorance, and
suffers under the incurable extremes of being blind, and imagining that it is
very clear-sighted. More particularly the Reasons why the carnal Mind has not
a due sense of sinful Corruption are,

1. Because it is natural, and cleaves to the principles of our being, from the
Birth and Conception, and natural things do not affect us.

2. It Is confirmed by Custom, which is a second Nature, and has a strange
power to stupifie Conscience and render it insensible. As the Historian
observed concerning the Roman Soldiers, that by constant use, their Arms were
no more a burden to them than their natural Members.

3. In the transition from the Infant state, (...) the age of discerning, Man
is incapable of observing his native Corruption: since at first he acts evilly,
and is in constant conversation with Sinners, who bring Vice into his
acquaintance; and by making it familiar, lessen the horror and aversation from
it. Besides, those corrupt and numerous examples wherewith he is encompast,
call forth his sinful inclinations, which as they are heightened by repeated
acts, and become more strong and obstinate, so less sensible to him. And by
this we may understand how irrecoverable Man is by his own Reason. The first
step to our Cure is begun in the knowledge of our Disease, and this discovery
is made by the Understanding, when it is seeing and vigilant, not when it is
blind. A Disease in the Body is perceived by the Mind, but when the Soul is the
affected part, and the rectitude of Reason is lost, there is no remaining
principle to give notice of it. And as that Disease is most dangerous which
strikes at the Life, and is without Pain: for Pain is not the chief evil but
supposes it, it is the spur of Nature* urging us to seek for Cure: So the
corruption of the Understanding is very fatal to Man; for although he labors
under many pernicious Lusts which in the issue will prove deadly, yet he is
insensible of them, and from thence fol^^^s a Carelessness and Contempt of the
means for his Recovery.

2. The Corruption of the Will is more incurable than that of the Mind. For
it is full not only of Impotence, but contrariety to what is spiritually good.
There are some weak strictures of Truth in lapsed Man, but they dye in the
Brain, and are powerless and ineffectual as to the Will, which rushes into the
embraces of worldly Objects. This the universal Experience of Mankind since the
Fall, does evidently prove, and the account of it is in the following
Considerations.

1. There is a strong inclination in Man to Happiness. This desire is born and
brought up with him, and is common to all that partake of the reasonable
Nature. From the Prince to the poorest wretch; from the most knowing, to the
meanest in understanding, every one desires to be happy: As the great flames
and the little sparks of fire all naturally ascend to their sphere.

2. The constituting of any thing to be our Happiness, is the first and
universal Maxim, from whence all moral consequences are derived. It Is the rule
of our Desires, and the end of our actions. As in natural things, the
principles of their production operate according to their quality, so in moral
things the end is as powerful to form the Soul for its Operations in order to
it. Therefore as all desire to be happy, so they apply themselves to those
means, which appear to be convenient for the obtaining of it.

(...)^ Arist. Lib. 3. Ethic.
3. Every one frames a Happiness according to his temper. The apprehensions of
it are answerable to the dispositions of the person. For Felicity is the
pleasure which arises (...) the harmonious agreement between the Object and the
Appetite. Now Man by his original and contracted corruption, is altogether
carnal, he inherits the Serpents curse to creep on the earth, he cleaves to
defiling and debasing objects, and is only qualified for sensual satisfactions.
The Soul is incarnated, and it shapes a Happiness to it self, in the enjoyment
of those things which are delicious to the Senses. The shadow of felicity is
pursued with equal ardour, as that which is real and substantial. The supreme
part of Man, the Understanding, is employed to serve the lower Faculties,
Reason is used to make him more ingenious and luxurious in Sensuality: So much
more brutish than the Brutes is he become, when besides that part which is so
by its natural conditions, the most noble part is made so by unnatural choice
and corruption. From hence the Apostle gives an universal Character of Men in
their corrupt state, That they are foolish and disobedient, Tit. 3.3.
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures. This pursuit of Sensual
pleasure, is the service of a Slave* which has no other Law of his Life but
the Will of his Master. The Servitude is diverse, but all are Slaves, the chains
are not the same, some are more glittering but not less weighty, and every one
is deprived of true Liberty.

But the Bondage is so pleasing, that corrupted Man prefers it before spiritual
and real Freedom. Sensual Lusts blind the Understanding, and bind the Will so
that he is unable because unwilling to rescue himself. He is deluded with the
false appearance of Liberty, and imagines that to live according to Rule, is a
slavish Confinement. As if the Horse were free, because his Rider allows him a
full career in a pleasant Road, when the bridle is in his mouth, and he is
under its imperious check at pleasure. Or a Galley-slave were free, because the
Vessel wherein he rows with so much toil, roams over the vast Ocean. And
whereas there are two Considerations which are proper to convince Man that the
full and unconfined enjoyment of Worldly things, cannot make him happy, because
they are wounding to the Conscience, and unsatisfying to the Affections; yet
these are ineffectual to take him off from an eager pursuit of them. I will
particularly consider this, to show how unable Man in his lapsed condition is
to disintangle himself from miserable vanities, and consequently to recover his
lost Holiness.

1. Sensual Pleasures are wounding to the Conscience. There is a secret
acknowledgment in every Man's breast of a Superior Power to whom he must give
an account, and though Conscience is much impaired in its Integrity, yet
sometimes it recoils upon the Sinner by the foulness of his actions, and its
testimony brings such terror, as makes Sin very unpleasant. The Poet tells us,
that of all the Torments of Hell, the most cruel and that which exceeds the
rest is, Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.

And how can the Sinner delight freely in that which vexes and frets the most
vital and tender part. He cannot enjoy his charming Lusts without guilt, nor
embrace them without the reluctance of a contradicting Principle within him. As
the fear of Poison will imbitter the sweetest Cup, so the purest Pleasures are
allayed with afflicting apprehensions of the future, and the presage of
Judgment to come. Now Man in his Sensual state tries all ways to disarm
Conscience, that he may please the lower appetites without regret. I will
instance in the principal.

1. He uses many pleas and pretexts to justify, or extenuate the evil, and if
possible to satisfy carnality, and Conscience too. Self-love, which is the
eloquent advocate of Sense, puts a varnish upon Sin, to take off from its
horrid appearance; and endeavors not only to color the object, but to corrupt
the Eye by a disguising tincture, that the sight of things may not be according
to truth, but the desire. Thus the Heathens allowed Intemperance, Uncleanness,
and other infamous Vices as innocent gratifications of Nature. Now if the
Principles in Man are poisoned, so that evil is esteemed good, he then lives in
the quiet practice of Sin without reflection or remorse. There is no sting
remains to awaken him out of Security. But if he cannot so far bribe Conscience
as to make it silent, or favorable to that which delights the Sense, if he
cannot escape its internal condemnation, the next method is by a strong
diversion to lessen the trouble.

2. When the carnal Mind sees nothing within but what torments, and finds an
intolerable pain in conversing with it self, it runs abroad, and uses all the
arts of oblivion to lose the remembrance of its true state. As Cain, to drown
the voice of Conscience, fell a building Cities; and Saul, to dispel his
Melancholy, called for Music: The business and pleasures of this life are
dangerous amusements to divert the Soul, by the representation of what is
profitable or pleasant, from considering the moral qualities of good and evil.
Thus Conscience, like an intermitting Pulse, ceases for a while. Miserable
consolation! which does not remove, but conceal the evil till it be past
remedy. But if Conscience, notwithstanding all these evasions, still pursues a
Sinner, and at times something disturbs his reason, and his rest, yet he will
not part with carnal Pleasures. For being only acquainted with those things
that affect the Senses, and having no relish of that Happiness which is sublime
and supernatural, if he parts with them he is deprived of all delight, which is
to him a state more intolerable than that wherein there is a mixture of
delight and torment. From hence it appears that the interposition of
Conscience, though with a flaming sword between Man carnal, and his beloved
objects, is not effectual to restrain him.

2. All worldly things are unsatisfying to the Affections. There are three
Considerations which depreciate and lessen the value of any good.

1. The shortness of its duration. 2. If it brings only a slight pleasure. 3.
If that pleasure be attended with torments.
All which are contrary to the essential properties of the supreme Good, which
is perpetual, and sincere without the least mixture of evil, and produces the
highest delight to the Soul. Now all these concur to vilify worldly things:
Isa. 40.6, 7. 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. (...)^ Pindar.
1. They are short in their duration: Not only the voice of Heaven but of the
Earth declares this, That all flesh is grass, and the glory of it as the flower
of the grass. Life the foundation of all Temporal enjoyments is but a Span: The
longest Liver can measure in a thought the space of time between his
Infant-state and the present hour: how long soever, it seems as short to him as
the twinkling of an eye. And all the glory of the flesh, as Titles, Treasures,
Delights, are as the flower of the grass, which is the most tender amongst
Vegetables, and of so weak a subsistence, that a little breath of Wind, the
hand of an Infant, the teeth of a Worm can destroy it. The pleasures of Sin
(under which Secular Greatness and Wealth are comprehended) are but for a
season. Heb. 11.25.
They are so short lived, that they expire in the birth, and die whilst they
are tasted. Again; they bring only a slight pleasure, being disproportionable
to the desires of the Soul. They are confined to the Senses, wherein the Beasts
are more accurate than Man, but cannot reach to the upper and more comprehensive
Faculties. Nay they cannot satisfy the greedy Senses, Eccles. 1.
much less quiet the spiritual and immortal Appetite. What the Poet speaks with
astonishment of Alexander's insatiable Ambition, Aestuat infelix angusto limite
mundi,

That the whole World seemed to him as a narrow Prison, wherein he was
miserable, and as it were suffocated, is true of every one. If the World was
seated in the Heart of Man, it can no more satisfy it, than the Picture of a
Feast can fill the Stomach. Besides, vexation is added to the vanity of worldly
things. And that either because the vehement delights of Sense corrupt the
temperament of the Body in which the vital complexion consists, and expose it
to those sharp Diseases, that it may be said without an Hyperbole, That a
thousand Pleasures are not equal to one Hours pain that attends them: or,
because of the inward torture of the Mind, arising from the sense of Guilt and
Folly, which is the anticipation of Hell it self, the beginning of eternal
Sorrows.

Now these things are not obscure Articles of Faith, nor abstracted Doctrines,
to be considered only by refined Reason, but are manifest and clear as the
Light, and verified by continual Experience: It Is therefore strange to
amazement, that Man should search after Happiness in these things where he
knows it is not to be found* and court real Infelicity under a deceitful
appearance, when the Fallacy is transparent. Who from a principle of Reason
would choose for his Happiness a real Good, which after a little time he should
be deprived of for ever: or a slight good for ever; as the sight of a Picture,
or the hearing of Music. Yet thus unreasonable is Man in his lapsed state,
whose Soul is truly immortal, and capable of infinite Blessedness, yet he
chooses those delights which are neither satisfying, nor lasting. And because
the Humane Understanding from time to time is convinced of the vanity of all
sublunary things, therefore to lessen the vexation which arises from
Disappointment, and that the Appetite may not be taken off from them, corrupted
Man tries;

1. By variety of objects to preserve uniformity in Delight. The most pleasing
if confined to them grow nauseous and insipid, after the expiring of a few
moments there remains nothing but satiety and sickly resentments: and then
changes are the remedies, to take off the weariness of one pleasure by another.
The Humane Soul is under a perpetual instability of restless desires, it
despises what it enjoyes, and values what is new, as if Novelty and Goodness
were the same in all temporal things. And as the Birds remain in the Air by
constant motion, without which they would quickly fall to the Earth as other
heavy bodies, there being nothing solid to support them; so the Spirit of Man,
by many unquiet agitations and continual changes subsists for a time, till at
last it falls into Discontent and Despair, the center of corrupt Nature.

2. When present things are unsatisfactory, he entertains himself with Hope:
for that being terminated on a future Object which is of a doubtful nature, the
Mind attends to those Arguments which produce a pleasant belief, to find that
in several objects* which it cannot in any single one, and to make up in
number, what is wanting in measure, whereas the present is manifest and takes
away all liberty of thinking. Upon this ground Sensual Pleasure is more in
expectation than fruition: For Hope by a mavelous enchantment not only makes
that which is future present, but representing in one view that which cannot be
enjoyed but in the intervals of time, it unites all the successive parts in one
point, so that what is divided and lessened in the fruition, which is always
gradual, is offered at once and entire. Thus Man carnal deceived by the
imperfect light of Fancy, and the false glass of Hope, Psalm. 3.6.
chooses a fictitious felicity. Man walks in a vain show. His original Error
has produced this in its own image. And although the complacency he takes in
sensual objects is like the joy of a distracted Person, the issue of folly and
illusion, and Experience discovers the deceit that is in them; as smelling to
an artificial Rose, undeceives the Eye; yet he will embrace his Error. Man is
in a voluntary Dream, which represents to him the World as his Happiness, and
when he is awakened, he dreams again, choosing to be deceived with delight
rather than to discover the truth without it. This is set forth by the Prophet,
Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet said thou not there is no
hope: Isa. 57.10.
that is, Thou art tired in the chase of satisfaction from one thing to
another, yet thou would not give over, but still pursuest those shadows which
can never be brought nearer to thee. And the true reason of it is, that in the
humane Nature there is an intense and continual desire of Pleasure, without
which Life itself has no satisfaction. For Life consisting in the operations
of the Soul, either the external of the Senses, or the internal of the Mind,
it is sweetened by those delights which are suitable to them. So that if all
pleasant operations cease, without possibility of returning* Death is more
desirable than Life. And in the corrupt state there is so strict an alliance
between the Flesh and Spirit, that there is but one appetite between them, and
that is of the flesh.

All the Designs and Endeavors of the carnal Man are by fit means to obtain
satisfaction to his Senses: as if the Contentment of the Flesh and the
Happiness of the Soul were the same thing; or as if the Soul were to die with
the Body, and with both, all Hopes and Fears, all Joys and Sorrows were at an
end. The Flesh is now grown absolute, and has acquired a perfect Empire, and
taken a full possession of all the Faculties. For this reason the Apostle tells
us, Romans 8.7, 8.
They that are in the Flesh cannot please God. And the carnal will is enmity
against God, it is not subject, neither can it be. It Is ensnared in the cords of
Concupiscence, and cannot recover it self from its foolish bondage. But that
does not lessen the guilt; which will appear by considering, there is a twofold
Impotence.

1. There is a natural Impotence which protects from the severity of Justice.
No Man is bound to stop the Sun in its course, or to remove Mountains: For the
humane Nature was never endued with Faculties to do those things. They are
inculpably without our power. Now the Law enjoins nothing but what Man had in
his Creation an original Power to perform.

2. There is a moral Impotence, which arises from a perverse disposition of the
Will, and is joined with a delight to Sin, and a strong aversion from the holy
Commands of God; and the more deep and inveterate this is, the more worthy it is
of punishment. Aristotle asserts, Ethic. 3.
That those who contract invincible Habits by Custom, are inexcusable though
they cannot abstain from evil. For since Liberty consists in doing what one
wills, this impossibility does not destroy Liberty; the depravation of the
Faculties does not hinder their voluntary operations. The Understanding
conceives, the Will chooses, the Appetite desires freely. A distracted Person
that kills is not guilty of Murder, and therefore secure from the Sentence of
the Law. For his Understanding being distempered by the disorder of the images
in his Fancy, it does not judge aright, so that the action is involuntary, and
therefore not culpable. But there is a vast difference between the causes of
Distraction, and those which induce a carnal Man to sin. The first are seated
in the distemper of the Brain, over which the Will has no Power: whereas there
should be a regular subjection of the lower appetite to the Will enlightened and
directed by the Mind. The Will it self is corrupted and brought into captivity
by things pleasing to the lower Faculties: It cannot disintangle it self, but
its impotence lies in its obstinacy. This is the meaning of St. Peter, speaking
concerning unclean Persons, That their eyes are full of adultery, and they
cannot cease from Sin. It Is from their fault alone that they are without power.
Therefore the Scripture represents Man to be (...) and (...), weak but wicked.
His disability to supernatural Good, arises from an inordinate Affection to
that which is sensual. So that it is so far from excusing, that it renders
inexcusable, being voluntary and vicious. And in this the Diseases of the Body
are different from those of the Soul. In the first the desire of healing is
ineffectual, through want of knowledge or power to apply Sovereign Remedies.
Whereas in the second, the sincere desire of their Cure is sufficient, for the
Diseases are corrupt desires.

The Natural Man is wholly led by Sense, by Fancy, and the Passions, and he
esteems it his infelicity to be otherwise; as the degenerous Slave, who was
displeased with a Jubilee, and refused Liberty. Servitude is his Sensuality. He
is not only in love with the unworthy object, but with the vicious affection,
and abhors the cure of it. As one in the Poet that was so delighted in his
pleasant Madness, that he was offended at his Recovery; -- Cui sic extorta
voluptas
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
This is acknowledged by St. Austin in his Confessions, where he describes the
conflict between Conviction and Corruption in his Soul. He tells us in the
strife between Reason and Lust, that he had recourse to God, and his Prayer
was, Da mihi continentiam, sed noli modo, he desired Chastity, but not too
soon. This is the general sense though not the general discourse of men. As the
Sick Person that desired his Physician to remove his Fever, but not his thirst,
which made his drink very pleasing to him: So Man in his sensual state would
fain be freed from the aestuations of Conscience, but he cherishes those carnal
desires, which give a high taste to objects suitable to them. Inter caetera
Mortalitatis incommoda, hoc est, errandi necessitas, and erroris amor. Senec.
From hence it appears, that although in the corrupt Nature there is no liberty
of indifferency to good and evil, yet there is a liberty of delight in evil;
and though the Will in its natural capacity may choose good, yet it is morally
determined by its love to evil^

In short, There is so much power not to sin as is sufficient to sin; that is,
that the forbidden action be free, and so become a Sin. Which strange
combination of Liberty and Necessity is excellently expressed by St. Bernard,
That the Soul which fell by its own choice, Quod surgere Anima per se non
po^est, quae per se cadere potuit, voluntas in causa est, quae corrupt
corporis vitioso amore languescens, and jacens, amorem justitiae non admit^it:
Ita nescio quo pravo, sed mi^o modo, ipsa sibi voluntas, peccato quidem in
deterius mutata, necessitatem facit, ut nec necessitas cum voluntaria fit,
excusare valeat voluntatem, nec voluntas cum fit illecta, excludere
necessitatem.
cannot recover it self, is from the corruption of the Will, which overcome by
the vicious love of the Body, rejects the love of Righteousness, so that in a
manner as strange as evil, the Will being corrupted with Sin, makes a necessity
to it self, yet so that the necessity being voluntary, does not excuse the
Will, nor the Will being pleasantly and powerfully allured exclude Necessity.
The Law therefore remains in its full force, and God is righteous in the
commanding and condemning Sinners. From all that has been discoursed it is
evident, how impossible it is for corrupt Man to recover his lost Holiness: For
there are only two Motives to induce the reasonable Creature to seek after it.

1. Its Beau^y and Loveliness. 2. The Reward that attends it. And both these
Arguments are ineffectual to work upon him.
1. The Beauty of Holiness, which excels all other created Perfections, it
being a conformity to the most glorious Attribute of the Deity, does not allure
him; For, Unusquisque ut affectus est ita judicat; Man understands according to
his Affections. The renewed Mind can only see the essential and intimate Beauty
of Holiness.

Now in fallen Man the clearness of the discerning power is lost. As the natural
Eye till it is purged from vicious qualities, cannot look on things that are
bright and sublime, and if it has been long in darkness, it suffers by the
most pleasing Object the light: so the internal eye of the Mind, that it may
see the lively luster of Holiness, it must be cleansed from the filthiness of
carnal Affections, and having been so long under thick darkness it must be
strengthened, before it can sustain the brightness of things spiritual. Till it
be prepared, it can see nothing amiable and desirable in the Image of God.

2. The Reward of Holiness has no attractive power on the carnal Will; because
it is Future, and Spiritual.

1. It Is Future, and therefore the conceptions of it are very dark and
imperfect: The Soul is sunk down into the Senses, and they are short-sighted
and cannot look beyond what is present, to the next life. And as the images of
things are weakened and confused proportionably to their distance, and make a
fainter impression upon the Faculty; so the representation of Heaven and
Blessedness, as a Happiness to come hereafter, and therefore remote, does but
coldly affect the Will. A present vanity, in the judgment of the carnal Soul,
outweighs the most glorious futurity. 'Till there be taken from before its eyes
the (in Tertullian's language) thick curtain of the visible World, Quae illi
dispositioni aeternitatis, aul^ei vice oppansa est. Apolog.
it cannot discern the difference between them, nor value the reward for its
excellency and duration.

2. It Is Spiritual, and there must be a divine Disposition of the Soul, before
it is capable of it. The pure in heart can only see the pure God. The Felicity
above is that which Eye has not seen, Mat. 5.8.
nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. 1
Cor. 2.9.
Now the carnal Man is only affected with gross and corporeal things. The
certainty, immensity, and immortality of the Heavenly Reward, does not prevail
with him to seek after it. He has no palate for Spiritual Pleasures, it is
vitiated by luscious Vanities, and cannot relish rational and refined Joys.
'Till the temper of the Soul be altered, the bread of Angels is distastful to
it. For the Appetite is according to the disposition of the Stomach, and when
that is corrupted, it longs for things hurtful and rejects wholesome food. If a
carnal Man were translated to Heaven, where the Love of God reigns, and where
the brightest and sweetest discoveries of his Glory appear, he would not find
Paradise in Heaven it self. For Delight arises not merely from the excellency
of the object, but from the proportionableness to the Faculty. Though God is an
infinite Good in himself, yet if he is not conceived as the Supreme Good to
Man, he cannot make him happy.

Suppose some slight Convictions to be in the Mind, that Happiness consists in
the enjoyment of God, yet this being offer^d upon the terms of quitting all
sensual Lusts, the carnal Man esteems the condition impossible and therefore is
discouraged from using any endeavors to obtain it. For to excite Hope, it is
not sufficient to propose a Reward that is real and excellent, but that is
attainable. For although Hope has its tendency to a difficult Good, as its
proper object, and the difficulty is so far from discouraging, that it quickens
the Soul, and draws forth all the active Powers, by rendering it greater in our
esteem, yet when the difficulty is excessive and confines upon impossibility,
it dejects the Soul and enclines it to despair: Thus when the condition of
obtaining some good is necessary, but insufferable, it takes off from all
endeavors in order to it.

To consider it in a temporal Case, will make it more clear. As one that
labors under a Dropsy, and is vexed with an intolerable and insatiable
thirst, if a Physician should assure him of Cure upon condition he would
abstain from drinking, he could not conceive any real hope of being healed,
judging it impossible to resist the importunity of his drought, he therefore
neglects the means, he drinks and dies. Thus the corrupt Heart of Man, that is
under a perpetual thirst of carnal Pleasures, and is more inflamed by the
satisfaction it receives, judges it an insuperable condition to part with them
for the acquiring of spiritual Happiness: And this sensual and sottish Despair
causes a total neglect of the means. It Is thus exp^est by the Israelites, when
God commanded them to return from the evil of their ways in order to their
Happiness, and they said, There is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, Abstinere nequeo. Grot. Jer. 18.12.
and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart. They were Slaves
to their domineering Appetites, and resolved to make no trial about that they
judged impossible. Briefly, In fallen Man there is something predominant, which he
values above the favor and fruition of God, and that is the World. As in the
Parable, where Happiness is set for^h under the familiar representation of a
Feast, those who were invited to it, excuse themselves by such reasons as
clearly discover that some amiable Lust charmed them so strongly, that in the
competition 'twas preferred before Heaven. One says, I have bought a piece of
ground, Luke 14.18.
and I must needs go see it; and another, I have bought a yoke of oxen, and
must go to prove them; and a third, I have married a wife and cannot come. The
objects of their Passions are different but they all produce the same effect,
they reject Happiness. The sum of all is, That as Man fell from his Obedience,
and lost the Image of God, by seeking Perfection and Satisfaction, that is,
Happiness in the creature; so he can never return to his Obedience, and
acknowledge God as his Supreme Lord, till he chooses him for his Happiness. And
this he can never entirely do, till he is born again, and has a new principle
of Life that may change the complexion of the Soul, and qualify it for those
delights which are sublime and spiritual.

Secondly, Fallen Man can never recover the Favor of God; And this is evident
upon a double account.

1. He is not able to make satisfaction to Gods Justice, for the dishonor
brought to him.

2. He is incapable of real Repentance, which might qualify him for Pardon.

First, He is unable to satisfy Justice for his offense, either by exact
obedience for the future, or by enduring the punishment that is due to Sin.

1. Supposing that Man could perform exact Obedience after his Fall, yet that
could not be satisfaction. It Is essential to Satisfaction, that the action by
which it is made, be in the power of the person that satisfies. A Servant as a
Servant cannot make satisfaction for an injury done to his Lord, for whatsoever
service he performs was due before the offense, and is not properly a
restitution, because it is not of his own. Now the complete Obedience of the
Creature is due to God. He is the Lord of all our Actions, and whatever Man
does is but the payment of the original Debt. The Law requires a perpetual
reverence of the Lawgiver, and express Obedience to his Will in all things. So
that it is impossible that the highest respect to it afterward, should
compensate for the least violation of it.

Besides, To make Satisfaction for a Fault, it is necessary the Offender do some
voluntary act, that may be as honorable to the person, and as much above what
he was before obliged to, as the contempt was dishonorable and below that
which was due. Unless God receive that which is as estimable in the nature of
Obedience, as the injury he received is in the nature of Contempt, there can be
no Satisfaction. Now there is a greater dishonor brought to God by the
commission of one Sin, than there is honor by the perfect Obedience of all the
Angels: For in their Obedience God is preferred by the Creature, before things
infinitely beneath him, which is but a small honor, but by one Sin he is
disvalued in the comparison, which is infinite Contempt.

2. Man cannot make satisfaction by Suffering. For the Punishment must be equal
to the Offense, which derives its guilt from the dignity of the Person
offended, and the indignity of the offender. Now God is the Universal King, his
Justice is Infinite, which Man has injured, and his Glory, which Man has
obscured; and Man is finite. And what proportion is there between finite and
infinite? How can a worthless Rebel that is hateful to God expiate the offense
of so excellent a Majesty? If he sacrifice himself, he can never appease the
Divine Displeasure, for what does he offer but a lump of Rebellion and
Ingratitude? He can make no other Satisfaction but that of the Devils, which
continues for ever, and is not completed.

Secondly, Fallen Man considered only in his corrupt and miserable state is
incapable of real Repentance, which is a necessary Condition to qualify him
for Pardon. For whereas Repentance includes an ingenuous sorrow for Sin past,
and a sincere forsaking of it, he is utterly indisposed for both.

1. He cannot be ingenuously sorrowful for his offense. It Is true, when the
circumstances are changed, that which was pleasing will cause trouble of
Spirit; As when a Malefactor suffers for his Crimes, he reflects upon his
Actions with Sorrow. But this has no moral worth in it: For it is a forced act,
proceeding from a violent Principle, 1 Cor. 7.10. (...)^
and is consistent with as great a love to Sin as he had before, and is
entirely terminated on himself. But that grief which is divine, and is
accompanied with a change in heart and life, respects the stain more than the
punishment of Sin: and arises from Love to God, who is disobeyed and dishonored
by it: Now it is not conceivable, that the guilty Creature can love God, whilst
he looks on him as an irreconcilable enemy. Distrust of the favor of a
person, which is a degree of fear, is attended with coldness of affection, a
strong fear, which still intimates an uncertainty in the event, inclines to
hatred: But when fear is turned into despair, it causes direct hatred. An
instance of this we have in the Devils, who curse the Fountain of Blessedness.
If the Evil be past Remedy, the sense of it is attended with rage and
transports of blasphemy against God himself. Rev. 16.21.
A despairing Sinner begins in this life the gnashing of teeth against his
Judge, and kindles the fire that shall torment him for ever.

It Is for this reason the Scripture propounds the Goodness of God, as the most
powerful persuasive to lead men to Repentance. Romans 2.4.
There can be no kindly relentings without filial Affection, and that is
always tempered with the expectation of favor. Without hope of Pardon, all
other motives are ineffectual to melt the heart.

Now the first Covenant obliged Man to Obedience or Punishment: It required
Innocence, and did not accept of Repentance. The final voice of the Law is, Do,
or Die. Guilty Man cannot look on God with comfort under the notion of a Holy
Creator, that delights to view his own resemblance in the innocent creature,
nor of a compassionate Father that spares an offending Son, but he apprehends
him to be an inexorable Judge, who has Right and Power to revenge the
Disobedience. He ^an find no expedient for his Deliverance, nor conceive how
Mercy can save him, without the violation of Justice, an Attribute as essential
to the Divine Nature as Mercy. And what can induce him to make an humble
confession of his fault, when he expected nothing but an irrevocable Doom: An
instance of this we have in Adam, who being under the conviction of his Sin,
and an apprehension that God would be severe, did not solicit for Mercy, but
endeavored to transfer the guilt on God himself. The woman thou gave me,
Genesis 3.12.
she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. As if she had been designed for a
snare, and not to be an aid in his innocent state.

2. A sincere Resolution to forsake Sin, is built on the hopes of Mercy. Till
the reasonable Creature know that Heaven is open to Repentance, to his second
and better thoughts, he is irreclaimable. He that never hopes to receive any
good, will continue in doing evil. Despair of Mercy causes a despising of the
Law. The Apostate Angels who are without the reserves of Pardon, are confirmed
in their Rebellion: their Guilt is mixed with Fury, they persist in their war
against God, though they know the issue will be deadly to them. And had there
not been an early revelation of Mercy to Adam, he had been incorrigibly wicked
as the Devils. For despair had inflamed his hatred against God, which is of all
the Passions the most incureable.

Those vicious Affections that depend on the humors of the Body which are
mutable, alter with them: But Hatred is seated in the superior part of the
Soul, which is of a Spiritual nature and Diabolical in obstinacy.

In short, When the reasonable Creature is guilty and vicious, and knows that
God is Just and Holy, and that He will be severe in revenging all Disobedience,
he has no Care nor Desire to reform himself. He will not lay a restraint on
his pleasing Appetites, when he expects no recompense: he esteems it lost
labor to abstain: And all his design is to allay and sweeten the fear of
future Evils by present enjoyments. When he is scorcht with the apprehensions
of wrath to come, he plunges himself into sensual excesses for some relief. He
resolves to make his best of Sin for a time: according to the Principle of the
Epicures, 1 Cor. 15.
Let us eat and drink while we may, to morrow we shall die.

The Sum of all is this, that an unrelenting and unreformed Sinner is incapable
of Pardon* For unless God should renounce his own Nature, and deny his Deity,
He cannot receive him to favor. And it is inconceivable how the rational
Creature once lapsed, should ever be encouraged to Repentance without the
expectation of Mercy: And there being an inseparable alliance between the
integrity and felicity of Man by the terms of the first Covenant, the one
failing, he could not entertain the least degree of Hope concerning the other.

By all which it appears he is under an invincible necessity of sinning and
suffering for ever; his Misery is complete and desperate.

CHAP. V.
Of the Divine Wisdom in the contrivance of Man 's Redemption. Understanding
agents propound an End, and choose Means for the obtaining it. The End of God
is of the highest consequence, his own Glory and Man's Recovery. The difficulty
of accomplishing it. The Means are proportionable. The Divine Wisdom glorified
in taking occasion from the Sin and Fall of Man to bring Glory to God, and to
raise Man to a more excellent State. It appears in ordaining such a Mediator,
as was fit to reconcile God to Man, and Man to God. It Is discovered in the
designation of the Second Person to be our Savior. And making the Remedy to
have a proportion to the cause of our Ruin. It Is visible in the manner whereby
our Redemption is accomplished. And in the ordaining such contemptible means to
produce such glorious effects. And laying the design of the Gospel, so as to
provide for the comfort, and promote the holiness of Man.

GOD by his infallible Prescience (to which all things are eternally present)
viewing the Fall of Adam, and that all Mankind lay bleeding in him, out of deep
compassion to his Creature, and that the Devil might not be finally victorious
over him, in his Council decreed the Recovery of Man from his languishing and
miserable state. The design and the means are most worthy of God, and in both
his Wisdom appears.

This will be made visible by considering, that all understanding Agents first
propound an end, and then choose the means for the obtaining of it. And the
more perfect the Understanding is, the more excellent is the end it designs,
and the more fit and convenient are the means it makes use of for the acquiring
it. Now when God whose Understanding is infinite, (and in comparison of whom
the most prudent and advised are but as dark shadows) when he determines to
work, especially in a most glorious manner, the end and the means are equally
admirable.

First, The end is of the highest Consequence. Were it some low inconsiderable
thing, it were unworthy one thought of God for the effecting it. To be curious
in the contriving how to accomplish that which is of no importance, exposes to
a just imputation of Folly; But when the most excellent Good is the end, and
the difficulties which hinder the obtaining of it are insuperable to a finite
understanding, it then becomes the only wise God to discover the Divinity of
his Wisdom, 1 Timothy 1.17.
in making a way where he finds none. And such was the end of God in the work
of our Redemption. This was declared by the Angels, who were sent Ambassadors
extraordinary to bring tidings of peace to the world, Luke 2.13, 14.
They praised God, saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on Earth Peace,
good Will toward men.

The supreme End is his own Glory, and in order to it, the Salvation of Man
has the nature and respect of a medium.

The subordinate is the Recovery of the world from its lapsed and wretched
state.

1. The supreme End is the Glory of God. This signifies principally his
internal and essential Glory: and that consists in the Perfections of his
Nature* which can never be fully conceived by the Angels* but overwhelm by
their excellent greatness all created Understandings. But the Glory that
results from Gods works is properly intended in the present Argument, and
implies,

2. The manifestation whereby he is pleased to represent Himself in the
exercise of his Attributes. As the Divine Nature is the primary and complete
Object of his Love, so he takes delight in those Actions wherein the image and
brightness of his own virtues appear.

Now in all the works of God there is an evidence of his Excellencies. But as
some Stars shine with a different glory, so there are some noble effects,
wherein the Divine Attributes are so conspicuous, that in compare with them,
the rest of God^s works are but obscure expressions of his Greatness. The
principal are Creation and Redemption. The Heavens declare the glory of God,
Psalm. 19.1.
and the Firmament his handywork. And when God surveyed the whole Creation,
Genesis 1.
and saw that all which he had made was good, He ordained a Sabbath, to
signify the content and satisfaction he had in the discovery of his eternal
Perfections therein.

But especially his Glory is most resplendent in the Work of Redemption,
wherein more of the Divine Attributes are exercis^d than in the Creation, and
in a more glorious manner. It Is here that Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Holiness
and Power are united in their highest degree and exaltation. Upon this account
the Apostle uses that expression, The glorious Gospel of the Blessed God: 1 Timothy 1.11.
It being the clearest revelation of his excellent Attributes, the unspotted
mirror wherein the great and wonderful effects of the Deity are set forth.
(...)^ Act. 2.11.


3. The Praise and Thanksgiving that arises from the discovery of his
Perfections by reasonable Creatures, who consider and acknowledge them. When
there is a solemn veneration of his excellencies, and the most ardent
affections to Him for the communication of his goodness. Thus in Gods account,
Whosoever offers praise, glorifies him. Psalm. 50.23.
An eminent example of this is set down in Job 38.7. when at the birth of the
World, The Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy. And at its new Birth, Psalm. 66.2.
they descend and make his praise glorious in a triumphant Song. It will be the
eternal exercise of the Saints in Heaven, where they more fully understand the
Mystery of our Redemption, and consider every circumstance that may add a
luster to it, to ascribe Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power to him that sits on
the Throne, Rev. 5.13.
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Secondly, The subordinate End is the restoring of Man: And this is inviolably
joined with the other. It Is expressed by Peace on earth, and good will toward
men. Sin had broke that sacred Alliance which was between God and Man: and
exposed him to his just displeasure. A misery inconceivable. And what is more
becoming God, who is the Father of Mercies, than to glorify his dear
Attribute, and that which in a peculiar manner characterises his Nature, by the
Salvation of the miserable? God is love. 1 John 4.9.
What is more honorable to Him, than by his Almighty Mercy to raise so many
Monuments from the dust, wherein his Goodness may live and reign for ever? Now
for the accomplishing of these excellent Ends, the Divine Wisdom pitched upon
those means which were most fit and congruous, which I shall distinctly
consider:

The Misery of fallen Man consisted in the Corruption of his nature by Sin, and
the Punishment that ensues: And his Happiness is in the restoring him to his
primitive Holiness, and in Reconciliation to God, and the full fruition of him.
The way to effect this was beyond the compass of any created Understanding.

That God, who is rich in Goodness, should be favorable to the Angels, who
serve him in perfect Purity, we may easily conceive; for although they do not
merit his favor, yet they never provokt his Anger. And it is impossible but
that he should love the Image of his Holiness wherever it shines.

Or suppose an innocent creature in Misery, the Divine Mercy would speedily
excite his power to rescue it: For God is Love to all his Creatures as such,
till some extrinsecal cause intervenes, which God hates more than he loves the
Creature; and that is Sin, which alone stops the effusion of his Goodness, and
opens a wide passage for wrath to fall upon the guilty. But how to save the
Creature that is undone by its own choice, and is as sinful as miserable, will
pose the wisdom of the world. Heaven it self seemed to be divided. Mercy
inclined to save, but Justice interposed for satisfaction. Mercy regarded Man
with respect to his misery, and the pleas of it are, Shall the Almighty build
to ruin? Shall the most excellent creature in the lower world perish, the
fault not being solely his? Shall the enemy triumph for ever, and raise his
Trophies from the Works of the most High? Shall the reasonable Creature lose
the fruition of God, and God the subjection and service of the Creature, and
all Mankind be made in vain? Justice considered Man as guilty of a transcendent
Crime, and it is its nature to render to every one what is due; now the wages of
Sin is Death, and shall not the Judge of all the world do right? All the the
other Attributes seemed to be attendants on Justice. The Wisdom of God enforced
its Plea, it being most indecent that Sin which provokes the execution, should
procure the abrogation of the Law; this would encourage the commission of Sin
without fear. The Majesty of God was concerned, for it was not becoming his
excellent Greatness to treat with defiled dust, and to offer Pardon to a
presumptuous Rebel immediately after his Offense, and before he made
Supplication to his Judge. The Holiness of God did quicken his Justice to
execute the threatening, For he is of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity. Habak.
1*
As Goodness is the essential object of his Will, which he loves unchangeably
wherever it is* so is Sin the eternal object of his hatred, and where it is
found in the love of it* renders the subject odious to him. He will not take
the wicked by the hand. Job 8.20. (...)^ Plat.
The Law of contrariety forbids Purity and Pollution to mix together. And the
veracity of God required the inflicting the punishment. For the Law being a
declaration of God's Will, according to which He would dispense Rewards and
Punishments, either it must be executed upon the Offend^r, or if
extraordinarily dispensed with, it must be upon such terms, as the honor of
Gods Truth may be preserved. This seeming conflict was between the Attributes.

The sublim^st Spirits in Heaven were at a loss how to unravel the difficulty,
and to find out the miraculous way to reconcile infinite Mercy with inflexible
Justice; how to satisfy the demands of the one, and the requests of the other.
God was to overcome Himself before He restored Man. In this exigence his Mercy
excited his Wisdom to interpose as an Arbiter, which in the Treasures of its
incomprehensible Light, found out an admirable expedient to save Man, without
prejudice to his other Perfections: That was, by constituting a Mediator both
able and willing, between the guilty creature and Himself: That by transferring
the punishment on the Surety, he might punish Sin, and pardon the Sinner. And
here, the more severe and rigorous Justice is, the more admirable is the Mercy
that saves. In the same stupendous Sacrifice he declared his respect to
Justice, and his delight in Mercy. The two principal relations of our Redeemer
are, the one of a gift from God to man, the other of an oblation for men to
God. By the one God satisfies his infinite Love to Man, and by the other
satisfies his infinite Justice for Man. Neither is it unbecoming God to
condescend in accepting the returning Sinner, when a Mediator of infinite
dignity intercedes for favor. The Divine Majesty is not lessened when God is
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Neither is the Sanctity of God
disparaged by his Clemency to Sinners, 2 Cor. 5.
for the Redeemer is the principle and pattern of Holiness to all that are
saved. The same Grace that inclined God to send his Son to die for us, gives
his Spirit to live in us, to renew us in the inward Man, that by conformity to
God we may be prepared for communion with him. Here is a sweet concurrence of
all the attributes, Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. Who
can count up this heap of wonders? Who can unfold all the treasures of this
mysterious Love? The tongue of an Angel cannot explicate it according to its
dignity: It Is the fairest copy of the Divine Wisdom, the consummation of all
God's Counsels, wherein all the Attributes are displayed in their brightest
luster: It Is here the manifold wisdom of God appears. Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12.
(...), an allusion to the posture of the Cherubims looking into the Ark.
The Angels of Light bend themselves with extraordinary application of Mind,
and ar^ent Affections to study the rich and unsearchable variety that is in it,
only the same Understanding comprehends it which contrived it. But as one that
views the Ocean, although he cannot see its bounds or bottom, yet he sees so
much as to know that that vast collection of waters is far greater than what is
within the compass of his short sight. So although we cannot understand all the
depths of that immense Wisdom, which order^d the way of our Salvation, yet we
may discover so much, as to know with the Apostle, that it surpasses knowledge.
Ephesians. 3.
He that is the Brightness of his Father^s Glory, and the Light of the World,
so illuminate our dark Understandings that we may conceive aright of this great
Mystery.

The First thing that offers it self to Consideration is, the compass of the
Divine Wisdom, in taking occasion from the Sin and Fall of Man to bring more
Glory to God, and to raise him to a more excellent state. Sin in its own nature
has no tendency to good, it is not an apt medium to promote the Glory of God:
so far is it from a direct contributing to it, that on the contrary it is the
most real dishonor to Him. I^ Pictura lumen non alia res quam umbra commendat,
Plin.
But as a black ground in a Picture which in it self only defiles, when placed
by Art, sets off the brighter colors and heightens their beauty: So the evil
of Sin, which considered absolutely, obscures the Glory of God, yet by the
disposition of his Providence, it serves to illustrate his Name, and to make it
more glorious in the esteem of reasonable Creatures. Non Specie, sed Ordine
placent. Aug.
Without the Sin of Man there had been no place for the most perfect exercise
of his Goodness. O foelix culpa q^ae tantum and talem meruit habere
Redemptorem. Happy fault not in it self, but by the wise and merciful Counsel
of God to be repaired in a way so advantageous, that the Salvation of the Earth
is the Wonder of Heaven, the Redemption of Man ravishes the Angels.

The Glory of God is more visible in the recovery of laps^d Man, than if the
Law had been obeyed, or executed. If Adam had persever'd in his Duty, the
Reward had been from Gaace, for owing himself to God, he could receive nothing
but as a gift from his Bounty; so that Goodness only had then been exerci'sd,
and not in its highest and most obliging Acts, which are to save the guilty and
the miserable: for Innocence is incapable of Mercy. If the Sentence had been
inflicted, Justice had been honored with a solemn Sacrifice, but Mercy the
sweet, tender, and indulgent Attribute, had never appeared. But now the Wisdom
of God is eminent in the accord of both these Attributes. God is equally
glorious, as equally God in preserving the authority of his Law by an act of
Justice upon our Surety, as in the exercise of Mercy by remitting the
punishment to the Offender.

And it is no less honorable to God's Wisdom to restore Man with infinite
advantage. It Is a mystery in Nature, That the corruption of one thing is the
generation of another; it is more mysterious in Grace, that the Fall of Man
should occasion his more noble Restitution. Innocence was not his last End, his
supreme felicity transcends the first. The holiness of Adam was perfect, but
mutable: But Holiness in the Redeemed, though in a less degree, shall be
victorious over all Temptations: for they are joined to the heavenly Adam in a
strict and inviolable union. And those Graces are acted by them, for the
exercise of which there was no objects and occasions in innocence. As
Compassion to the miserable, 1 Pet. 2.20.
Forgiveness of injuries, For^itude and Patience, all which as they are a most
lively resemblance of the Divine Perfections, so an excellent ornament to the
Soul, 1 Pet. 4.14.
and infinitely endear it to God. And the Happiness of our renewed state
exceeds our primitive Felicity. Whether we consider the nature of it, it is
wholly spiritual, or the place of it, Heaven the Sanctuary of Life and
Immortality, or the constitution of the Body which shall be clothed with
celestial qualities: But this will be particularly discussed in its proper
place.

These are the effects of infinite Wisdom, to the production of which Sin
affords no casuality, but has merely an accidental respect. As the Apostle
interprets the words of David, Against thee only have I sinned, Romans 3.4.
that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and overcome when thou
judge. Which does not respect the intention of David, but the event only. The
greater his injustice was in the commission, the more clear would God's Justice
be in the condemnation of his Sin.

2. The Wisdom of God appeared in ordaining such a Mediator, who was qualified
to reconcile God to Man, and Man to God. The first and most admirable Article
in the mystery of Godliness, and the foundation of all the rest is, that God is
manifest in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
The middle must equally touch the extremes. A Mediator must be capable of the
sentiments and affections of both the parties he will reconcile. He must be a
just esteemer of the Rights and Injuries of the one and the other, and have a
common interest in both. The Son of God assuming the Humane Nature, perfectly
possesses these qualities, he has zeal for God, and compassion for Man. He
has taken pledges of Heaven and Earth; the supreme Nature in Heaven, and the
most excellent on the Earth, to make the hostility cease between them. He is
Immanuel by nature and office. And if no less than an inspired Wisdom could
devise how to frame the earthly Tabernacle, Exodus 36.
wherein God dwelt in a shadowy and typical manner, what Wisdom was requisite
to frame the Humane Nature of Christ, wherein the Deity was really to dwell.

John 1.
Now to discover more clearly the Divine Wisdom in uniting the two Natures in
Christ, Colos. 1.
to qualify him for his Office, it is requisite to consider that the office of
Mediator has three charges annexed to it; the Priestly, which respects God; the
Prophetical and Kingly, which regards Men. These have a respect to the ^^ils
which oppress fallen Man: And they are Guilt* Ignorance, Sin and Death. Man was
capitally guilty of the breach of Gods Law, and under the tyranny of his Lusts,
and in the issue liable to Death.

The Redeemer is made to him Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. These Benefits are dispensed by Him in his threefold Office; As a
Priest he exipates Sin, as a Prophet he instructs the Church, as a King he
regulates the lives of his Subjects, delivers them from their Enemies, and
makes them happy. Now the Divine and Humane Nature are requisite for the
performance of all these. For nothing is effectual to an end, but what is
proportionable and commensurate thereunto, and to proportion excesses as well
as defects are opposite. This will appear by taking a distinct view of the
several Offices of our Mediator.

1. The Priestly Office has two parts.

1. To make expiation for Sin. 2. Intercession for Sinners.
Now for the making expiation of Sin, there was a necessary concurrence of the
two Natures in our Redeemer. He must be Man; for the Deity was not capable of
those Submissions and Sufferings which were requisite to expiate Sin. And he
must be Man, that the sinning nature might suffer, and thereby acquire a title
to the Satisfaction that is made. The m^ritorious imputation of Christ's
Sufferings to Man is grounded on the union between them, which is as well
natural in his partaking of Flesh and Blood, as moral in the consent of their
Wills. As the Apostle observes, That he who sanctifies, Heb. 2.11.
and they that are sanctified are all one; So he that suffers, and they for
whom he suffers must have communion in the same nature. For this reason, God
having resolved never to dispense Mercy to the fallen Angels, the Redeemer did
not assume the Angelical nature, but the seed of Abraham.

And as the Humane Nature was necessary to qualify him for Sufferings, and to
make them suitable, so the Divine was to make them sufficient. The lower nature
considered in it self, could make no satisfaction: The Dignity of the Divine
Person makes a temporal punishment to be of an infinite value in God's account.
The humane Nature was the Sacrifice, Solus Deus sentire^solus Homo superare
mortem non potuit, quam pro nobis obire debuit.
the divine the Priest to render it acceptable. He had sunk under the weight of
wrath, if the Deity had not been personally present to support him. Briefly, To
perform the first part of his Office, he must suffer, yet be impassible; Die,
yet be immortal; and undergo the wrath of God, to deliver Man from it.

2. To make Intercess^on for us, it was requisite that He should partake of
both Natures, that he might have credit with God, and compassion to Man. The
Son has a prevailing interest in the Father, as he testifies, I know thou
heardst me always. A Privilege which neither Abraham, Joh. 11.42.
Moses, nor any other who were the most favored Saints enjoyed. And, as Man,
he was fit for Passion and Compassion. The Humane nature is the proper subject
of fe^ling pity, especially when it has felt misery. God is capable of Love,
not in strictness of Compassion. For Sympathy proceeds from an experimental
sense of what one has suffered, and the sight of the like affliction in others
revives the affections which we^e felt in that state, and enclines to pity.

The Apostle offers this to Believers as the ground of comfort, that He who
took our nature and felt our griefs intercedes for us. Heb. 4.15.
For we have not an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
Infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
but was in all things tempted as we are, yet without Sin; that with an humble
confidence we may come to the Throne of Grace. He has drunk deepest of the cup
of Sorrows, that he may be an All^sufficient Comforter to those that mourn. He
has such tender Bowels we may trust him to solicit our Salvation. In short,
It Is the great support of our Faith that we have access to the Father by the
Son, Ephesians. 2.18.
and present all our requests by a Mediator, so worthy and so dear to Him, and
by One who left the Joys of Heaven, that by enduring Affliction on Earth, his
heart might be made tuneable to the hearts of the afflicted.

Secondly, For the discharge of the Proph^tical Office, 'twas necessary the
Mediator should be God and Man.

1. He must be God, that he might deliver his Counsels with more authority and
efficacy than any mere Creature could. He must be a Teacher sent from Heaven
that reveals to us the Will of God concerning the way thither, and the
certainty and excellency of that state. Now Christ is the original of all
Wisdom, it is not said the Word of the Lord came to Him, as to the Prophets; He
is the Fountain of all Sacred Knowledge. The Son came from the Bosom of the
Father, John 1.18.
the Seat of his Counsels and Compassions, to reveal those Secrets which were
concealed from the Angels, in that Light which is inaccessible. And it is God
alone can teach the Heart, and convince the Conscience, so as to produce a
saving Belief of the Heavenly Doctrine, and a delight in the discovery, and a
resolution to follow it wherever it directs.

2. 'Twas fit he should be Man, that he might be familiarly conversant with us,
and conveigh the Counsels of God in such a way as Man could receive. All saving
Truth comes from God, and it follows by just consequence, that the nearer he is
to us the better we are like to be instructed. Now there are two things which
render sinful man incapable of immediate converse with God.

1. The Infirmity of his Nature. 2. The Guilt that cleav^s to him.
First, The Infirmity of Man's Nature cannot endure the Glory of God's
appearance. When the Law was delivered on Mount Sinai, the Israelites were
under great terrors at the Sights and Prodigies which accompanied the Divine
Presence, and they desired that God would speak to them no more in his Majesty
and Greatness, Deuteronomy. 5.25.
Job 13.11.
lest they should die. There is such a disproportion between our meaness and
his excellencies, Dan. 10.17.
that Daniel, though a Favorite of Heaven, yet his Comeliness was turned into
corruption at the sight of a Vision. And the beloved Disciple fell down as dead
at the appearance of Christ in his Glory. Rev. 1.17.
When the Eye gazes on the Sun, it is more tormented with the brightness than
pleased with the beauty of it; But when the beams are transmitted through a
colored medium, they are more temperate and sweetened to the sight. The Eternal
Word is clothed with a robe of Light, which the more bright it is, the less
visible it renders him to mortal eyes; but the incarnate Word is eclipsed and
allayed by a vail of flesh, and so made accessible to us. Heb. 10.20.
God out of a tender respect to our frailty and fears, promised to raise up a
Prophet clothed in our nature, Deu. 18.15.
that we might comfortably and quietly receive his Instructions.

2. Guilt makes us fearful of his Presence. The approach of God awakens the
Conscience, which is his spy in our bosoms, and causes a dreadful apparition of
Sin in its view. When one beam of Christ's Divinity broke forth in the
miraculous draught of fishes; Peter cries out, Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord. Luke 5.8.
Holiness armed with terrors strikes a Sinner into consternation. Now when the
Mind is shaken with a storm of fear, it cannot calmly attend to the counsels of
Wisdom. But the Son of God appearing in our Nature, to expiate Sin and appease
Divine Justice, we are encouraged to draw near to him, and sit at his feet, to
hear the words of eternal Life. Thus God complied with our necessity, that with
a freer dispensation we might receive the counsels of our Savior.

3. He is qualified for his Kingly Office, by the Union of the two Natures in
him. He must be God to conquer Satan, and convert the World. As eminent an act
of Power was necessary to redeem, as to create. For although the Supreme Judge
was to be satisfied by humble Sufferings, yet Satan who usurpt the Right of
God, (for Man had no power to alienate himself) was to be subdued: Joh. 12.22.
having no just title, he was to be cast out by power. Luke 11.38.
And no less than the Divine Power could accomplish our victorious rescue from
him. In his love he pitied us, and his holy Arm got him the victory. He is the
Author of eternal Salvation, Isa. 63.9.
which no inferior agent could ever accomplish. Heb. 7.23. and 2.14.
It Is God alone can overcome Death, and him that had the power of Death, and
bring us safely to Felicity.

Besides, our King must be Man, that by the excellency of his Example, He might
lead us in the way of Life. The most rational Method to reform the World is,
not only to enact Laws to be the Rule of virtuous Actions, but for Lawgivers to
make Virtue honorable and imitable by their own practice. And to encourage us
in the holy War against our enemies visible and invisible, 'twas congruous that
the Prince of our Salvation should take the Humane Nature, and submit to the
inconveniences of our warfaring state. As Kings when they design a glorious
Conquest* go forth in Person, and willingly endure the hardships of a military
condition, to animate their Armies. The Apostle tells us, that it became him,
Heb. 2.10.
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to
Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through Sufferings. God
the great Designer of all things, foreseeing the Sufferings to which the Godly
would be exposed in the World, ordained it as most convenient, that the Author
of their Deliverance should by Sufferings obtain the Reward, that by his
example he might strengthen and deliver those that suffer to the end. Again,
the Son of God entered into our Family, and is not ashamed to call us brethren,
to make his Scepter amiable to us. Heb. 2.11.
He exercises his Dominion with a natural and sensible touch of pity, he
pardons our failings and puts a value on our sincere though mean Services, as
an honor done to him. Briefly, In him there is a combination of Power and
Love; The Power of the Deity with the tenderness and clemency of the Humane
Nature. He is the mighty God and Prince of peace. Isa. 6.9.
He is a King just and powerful against our enemies, Z^c. 9.
but mild and gentle to his People. He is willing to remove from us all the
evils we cannot endure, our Sins and Sorrows; and able to convey to us all the
Blessings we are capable to enjoy. In all his Glory He remembers that he is our
Savior. At the Day of Judgment, when He shall come with a train of mighty
Angels, Tit. 2.13.
He will be as tender of Man, as when He suffered on the Cross. And from hence
we may discover the excellency of God's contrivance in uniting the Divine and
Humane Nature in our Redeemer, that He might have ability and affection to
qualify him for that great and blessed Work.

Thirdly, The Divine Wisdom appears in the designation of the Person. For God
resolving to save Man in a way that is honorable to his Justice, it was
expedient a Person in the Blessed Trinity should be put into a state of
subjection, to endure the punishment due to Sin; But it was not convenient the
Father should: For

1. He must then have been sent into the World, which is incongruous to the
Relations that are between those glorious Persons. For as they subsist in a
certain Order, so their Operations are according to the manner of their
subsistence. The Father is from Himself, and the first motions in all things
are ascribed to Him; the Son is from the Father, and all his actions take their
rise from him. The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do. Joh. 5.19.
The effecting our Redemption is referred to the Fathers Will as the supreme
cause: our Savior, upon his entrance into the world to undertake that work,
declares, I come to do thy will O God. Upon this account the Apostle addresses
his thanks to the Father as the first Agent in our Salvation: Heb. 10.7.
Col. 1.12.
which is not to lessen the glory of the Son and Spirit, but to signify that
in the accomplishment of it, their working follows their being.

2. It was not fit that the Father should be incarnate, for He must then have
sustained the part of a Criminal, and appeared in that quality before the
Supreme Judge: But this was not consonant to the order among the Persons. For
although they are of equal Majesty, being one God, yet the Father is the first
Person, and to him it belongs most congruously to be the Guardian of the Laws
and Rights of Heaven, to exact Satisfaction for offenses, and to receive
Intercessions for the Pardon of the Penitent.

3. Neither was it fit that the Third Person should undertake that work. For
besides the Sacrifice for Propitiation, it was necessary the Divine Power
should be exerted to enlighten the Minds, and incline the Wills of men to
receive the Redeemer, that the Benefits of his Death might be applied to them.
Vid. Amyr. de Trin.
Now the Redeemer is considered as the Object, and the Holy Spirit as the
Disposer of the faculty to receive it. And in the natural order of things, the
object must exist before the operation of the faculty upon it. There must be
Light before the Eye can see it. So in the disposition of the causes of our
Salvation, the Redeemer must be ordained, and Salvation purchased before the
Divine Power is put forth to enable the Soul to receive it, and accordingly
it is the Office of the Spirit, who is the Power of God, Luke 1.35.
and by whom the Father and the Son execute all things, to render effectual the
Redemtion procured by the Son:

Briefly, The Mission of the Persons is according to their principle. John
3.17. Joh. 16.7.
The Father sends the Son to acquire Salvation for us; the Son sends the Spirit
to apply it. Thus there is no disturbing of their Sacred order; more
particularly in appointing the Son to assume the Humane Nature, and to restore
lapsed Man, the Wisdom of God is evident; For by that,

1. The Properties of the Sacred Persons are preserved entire: the same Title
is appropriated to both Natures in our Redeemer. His state on Earth corresponds
with his state in Heaven. He is the only Son from Eternity, and the firstborn
in time: and the Honor due to the eternal and divine, and to the temporal but
supernatural Sonship, is attributed to Him.

2. To unite the glorious Titles of Creator and Redeemer in the same Person.
Heb. 1.2.
The Father made the world by the Son. By this title he had an original
propriety in Man, which could not be extinguished: Though we had forfeited our
Right in Him, He did not lose his Right in us. Our contract with Satan could
not nullify it. Now 'twas consonant that the Son should be employed to recover
his own, that the Creator in the beginning should be the Redeemer in the fullness
of time.

3. Who could more fitly restore us to Favor, and the Right of Children, than
the only begotten, and only beloved Son, who is the singular and everlasting
object of his Father's delight? Our relation to God is an imitation and
expression of Christ's. He is a Son by nature, a Servant by condescension, we
are Servants by Nature, and Sons by Grace and Favor. Ephesians. 1.5.
Our Adoption into the line of Heaven is by the purchase of his Blood. The
Eternal Son took flesh, Romans 8.29.
and was made under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of sons.

Who was more fit to repair the Image of God in Man, and to beautify our
Natures, that were defiled with Sin, than the Son who is the express Image of
his Fathers person, Heb. 1.3.
and brighness and beauty it self? Who can better communicate the Divine
Counsels to us, than the Eternal Word?

4. The Wisdom of God appears in making the Remedy to have a proportion to the
cause of our Ruin; that as we fell in Adam our Representative, so we are
raised by Christ, who is made the Head of our Recovery. 1 Cor. 15.22
The Apostle makes the comparison between the first and second Adam. Therefore
as by the offense of one Judgment came upon all to condemnation, Romans 5.18, 19.
even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to the
justification of Life. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous. They are considered as
Causes having the same respect to the effects produced by them. Aemula ratione
recuperavit n^s Deus* Tertul.
The effects are Sin and Righteousness, Condemnation and Justification. As the
Disobedience of the first Adam is meritoriously imputed to all his natural
Posterity, and brings Death upon all; so the Righteousness of the second is
meritoriously imputed to all his spiritual Progeny, to obtain life for them.
And as the carnal Adam by his Rebellion made forfeiture of our original
Righteousness, and derives a corrupt nature to all that descend from him. So
the spiritual has by his Obedience purchased Divine Grace for us, that being
the price without which so rich a treasure as Holiness could not be obtained.
And from him there is a vital efficacy conveyed to renew his People. The same
Spirit of Holiness which anointed our Redeemer, does quicken all his race,
that as They have born the Image of the earthly, 1 Cor. 15.49
they may bear the Image of the heavenly Adam.

5. The Divine Wisdom is visible in the manner whereby our Redemption is
accomplished; that is, by the Humiliation of the Son of God. By this He did
counterwork the Sin of Angels and Man. Vnum quodque eodem modo dissolvitur, quo
constituitur.
Pride is the poison of every Sin, for in every one, the Creature prefers his
pleasure, and sets up his Will above Gods: but it was the special Sin of Adam.
The Devil would have levelled Heaven by an unpardonable usurpation; he said, I
will be like the Most High: and Man was infected with his breath, (you shall be
like God), and became sick of the same Disease. Now Christ that by the quality
of the Remedy, he might cure our Disease in its source and cause, He applies to
our pride an unspeakable humility.

Man was guilty of the highest Robbery in affecting to be equal with God, and
the Eternal Son who was in the form of God, who was equal to Him in Majesty and
Authority, Phil. 2.6.
without Sacriledg or Usurpation, he emptied himself by assuming the Humane
Nature in its servile state. The Word was made Flesh, the meanest part is
specified, John 1.14.
to signify the greatness of his abasement. There is such an infinite distance
between God and flesh, that the condescension is as admirable as the
contrivance. So great was the malignity of our Pride, for the cure of which
such a profound Humility was requisite. By this he destroyed the first work of
the Devil. 1 John 3.8.


6. The Wisdom of God appears in ordaining such contemptible, and in appearance
opposite means, to accomplish such glorious effects. The Way is as wonderful as
the Work. That Christ by dying on the Cross, a reputed Malefactor, should be
made our eternal Righteousness, that descending to the grave, He should bring
up the lost World to Life and Immortality, is so incredible to our narrow
Understandings, that He saves us, and astonishes us at once. And in nothing
it is more visible, That the Thoughts of God are as far above our thoughts, Isa.
55.8.
and his ways above our ways, as Heaven is above the Earth. It Is a secret in
Physic to compound the most noble Remedies of things destructive to Nature,
and thereby make one Death victorious over another: But that Eternal Life
should spring from Death, Glory from Ignominy, Blessedness from a Curse, is so
repugnant to Humane Sense, that to render the belief of it easy, 'twas
foretold by many Prophesies, that when it came to pass, it might be looked on as
the effect of God's eternal Counsel. The Apostle tells us that Christ crucified
was to the Jews a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23.
and to the Gentiles foolishness. The grand Sophies of the world esteemed it
absurd and unreasonable to believe, that He who was exposed to Sufferings could
save others, but those who are Called discover that the Doctrine of Salvation
by the Cross of Christ, which the world counted folly, is the great Wisdom of
God, and most convenient for his end. A double reason is given of this method.
ver. 24.


1. Because the Heathen world did not find and own God in the way of Nature.
For after That in the Wisdom of God the World by Wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor.
1.21.
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. The
frame of the World is called the Wisdom of God; the name of the Cause is given
to the Effect, in regard the Divine Wisdom is so clearly discovered there, as
if it had taken a visible form, and had presented it self to the view of Men.
But those who professed themselves wise, did not acknowledge the Creator: Romans
1.22.
For some conceited the World to be eternal, others that it was the product of
chance, and became guilty of the most absolute contradiction to Reason. For who
can believe that one who is blind from his birth, and by consequence perfectly
ignorant of all Colors, and of the Art of Painting, should take a bundle of
Pencils into his Hand, and dipping them in Colors mixed and corrupted, paint a
great Battle with that perfection in the design, propriety in the colors,
distinction in the habits and countenances, as if it were not represented but
present to the Spectators. Who ever saw a Temple, or Palace, or any regular
Building, spring from the stony bowels of a Mountain?

Yet some famous Philosophers became thus vain in their imaginations, Romans 1.21.
fancying that the World proceeded from the casual concourse of Atoms. And the
rest of them neglected to know God so far as they might, and to honor him so
far as they knew. They debased the Deity by unworthy conceptions of his Nature,
and by performing such acts of Worship, as were not fit for a rational Spirit
to offer, nor for the pure Majesty of Heaven to receive. Besides, they ascribed
his Name, Attributes and Honor to Creatures; not only the Lights of Heaven,
and the secret Powers which they supposed did govern them, not only Kings, and
Great Men, who were by their Authority raised above others, but the most
despicable things in nature, Beasts and Birds were the objects of their
Adoration. They changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image made
like to a corruptible man, Romans 1.23.
and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. A Sin so foul, that
it betrayed them to brutish Blindness, and to the most infamous Lusts, natural
and unnatural. Now since the most clear and open discovery of Gods Wisdom was
ineffectual to reclaim the World, He was pleased to change his method. They
neglected Him appearing in his Majesty, and he now comes clothed with
Infirmities: And since by natural light they would not see God the Creator, He
is imperceptible to the light of Nature as Redeemer: The discovery of Him
depends on revelation. The Wisdom of God in making the World is evident to
every Eye, but in the Gospel it is Wisdom in a Mystery. The Deity was
conspicuous in the Creation, 1 Cor. 2.7.
but concealed under a vail of Flesh when he wrought our Redemption. He was
more easily discoverd when invisible, than when visible: He created the World
by Power, but restored it by Sufferings.

2. That the Honor of all might solely redound to him; God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the wise; 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29.
and the weak things of the World to confound the things that are mighty, and
base things of the World, and things which are despised God has chosen; yea,
and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh
should glory in his presence. Thus Moses, the Redeemer of Israel, was an Infant
exposed to the mercy of the Waters, drawn forth from an Ark of Bul-rushes, and
not employed whilst he lived in the splendor of the Court, but when Banished as
a Criminal, and deprived of all power. And our Redeemer took not on him the
Nature of Angels, equal to Satan in power, but took part of flesh and blood,
the more signally to triumph over that proud Spirit in the Humane Nature which
was inferior to his, and had been vanquished by him in Paradise. Therefore he
did not immediately exercise Omnipotent power to destroy him, but managed our
weakness and infirmity to foil the roaring Lion. He did not enter into the
Combat in the glory of his Deity, Non ei Majestate natura sua, sed habitu
nostrae congrediens, and nihil ei extorquens violento dominatu, sed superans
lege justitiae, Paulin.
but disguised under the Humane Nature, which was subject to Mortality. And
thus the Devil is overcome in the same manner as he first got the Victory: for
as the whole race of Man was Captivated by him in Adam their Representative, so
Believers are victorious over him as the Tempter and Tormentor, by the Conquest
that Christ their Representative obtained in the Wilderness, and on the Cross.
And as our ruin was effected by the subtilty of Satan, so our recovery is
wrought by the wisdom of God; who takes the wise in their own craftiness. 1
Cor. 1.
The Devil excited Judas by avarice, the Jews by malice, and Pilate from reason
of State, to accomplish the death of Christ, and he then seemed to be
Victorious; now what was more honorable to the Prince of our Salvation, than
the turning the Enemies point upon his own breast, and by dying to overcome him
that had the power of Death. Heb. 2.14.
This was signified in the first promise of the Gospel, where the Salvation of
Man is enclosed in the curse of the Serpent, that is the Devil clothed with
that figure, It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel. That is,
Genesis 3.15.
The Son of God should by Suffering in our Flesh, overcome the Enemy of
Mankind, and rescue innumerable Captives from his Tyranny: Here the Events are
most contrary to the probability of their Cause. And what is more worthy of
God, than to obtain his ends in such a manner, as the Glory of all may be in
solidum ascribed to Him.

7. The Divine Wisdom appears in laying the design of the Gospel in such a
manner, as to provide for the comfort, and promote the holiness of Man. This is
Gods signature upon all heavenly Doctrines, which distinguishes them from
carnal Inventions, they have a direct tendency to promote his Glory, and the
real benefit of the rational Creature: Thus the way of Salvation by Jesus
Christ, is most fit as to reconcile God to Man by securing his Honor, so to
reconcile Man to God by encouraging his Hope. 'Till this be effected, he can
never be happy in communion with God: For that is nothing else but the
reciprocal exercise of Love between God and the Soul. Now nothing can represent
God as amiable to a guilty Creature, but his inclination to Pardon. Whilst
there are apprehensions of inexorable Severity, there will be hard thoughts
burning in the Breast against God: Till the Soul is released from terrors it
can never truly love him. To extinguish our Hatred, He must conquer our Fears,
and this He has done by giving us the most undoubted and convincing Evidence
of his Affections.

1 John 4.8, 9.
1. By contracting the most intimate alliance with Mankind. In this God is not
only lovely, but Love; and his Love is not only visible to our Understandings,
but to our Senses: The Divine Nature in Christ is joined to the Humane, in an
union that is not typical or temporary, but real and permanent. The Word was
made Flesh. Joh. 1. Col. 1.
And in him dwells the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. Now as Love is an
Affection of Union, so the strictest union is an Evidence of the greatest Love.
The Son of God took the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.
the original element of our Nature, that our interest in Him might be more
clear and certain. He stoopt from the height of his Glory to our low embraces,
that we might with more confidence lay hold on his Mercy.

2. By providing complete Satisfaction to offended Justice. The guilty
convinced Creature is restless, and inquisitive after a way to escape the wrath
to come. For being under the apprehension that God is an incensed Judge, it is
very sensible of the greatness and nearness of the danger, there being nothing
between it and eternal Torments, but a thin vail of flesh. Now God has
prepared such a Satisfaction, as exceeds the guilt of Sin: that is a temporary
act, but of infinite evil being committed against an infinite object; the Death
of Christ was a temporary Passion, but of infinite value in respect of the
subject; the honor of the Law is fully repaired, so that God is justly
merciful, and dispenses Pardon to the glory of his Righteousness. He has set
forth his Son to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness, that he might be just, Romans 3.25.
and the justifier of him who believes in Jesus. And what stronger Security can
be given, that God is ready to pardon Man, upon his accepting the terms of the
Gospel, than the giving his Son to be our Atonement? If the Stream swell so
high as to overflow the Banks, will it stop in a descending Valley? Has He
with so dear an expense satisfied his Justice, and will he deny his Mercy to
relenting and returning Sinners? This Argument is powerful enough to overcome
the most obstinate Infidelity.

3. By the unspeakable Gift of his Son, he assures our hopes of Heaven, which
is a Reward so great and glorious, that our guilty Hearts are apt to suspect we
shall never enjoy it. We are secure of his Faithfulness, having his infallible
Promise; and of his Goodness, having such a Pledge in our hands. As the Apostle
argues, If he has given us his Son, will he not with him give us all things?
Romans 8.32.
Will He give us the Tree of Life, and not permit us to eat of the Fruit of it?
Is it conceivable that having laid the Foundation of our Happiness in the Death
of his Son, an act to which his tender Affection seemed so repugnant, that He
will not perform the rest, which He can do by the mere signification of his
Will? It Is an excellent encouragement St. Austin propounds from hence; S^^urus
esto accepturum te vitam ipsius, qui pignus habes mortis ipsius, etc. Be
assured thou shall partake of his Life, who have the Pledge of it in his Death.
He has performed more than He promised. It Is more incredible that the Eternal
should die, than that a mortal Creature should live for ever.

In short, Since no mortal Eye can discover the Heavenly Glory, to convince us
of the reality of the invisible state, and to support our departing Souls in
their passage through the dark and terrible Valley, our Savior rose from the
Grave, ascended in our Nature to Heaven, and is the model of our Happiness: He
is at the right Hand of God to dispense Life and Immortality to all that
believe on Him. And what can be more comfortable to us, than the assurance of
that Blessedness, which as it eclipses all the glory of the World, so it makes
Death it self desirable in order to the enjoyment of it.

2. As the Comfort, so the Holiness of Man is most promoted in this way of our
Redemption. Suppose we had been recovered upon easier terms, the evil of Sin
would have been lessened in our esteem. We are apt to judge of the danger of a
Disease from the difficulty of its Cure. Hunger is reputed a small trouble,
(although if it be not satisfied 'twill prove deadly) because a small price
will procure what may remove it. And the Mercy that saves us, had not appeared
so great. He that falls into a Pit, and is drawn forth by an easy pull of the
Hand, does not think himself greatly obliged to the person that helped him,
though if he had remained there he must have perished. But when the Son of God
has suffered for us, more than ever one Friend suffered for another, or a
Father for a Son, or than the strength and patience of an Angel could endure;
Who would not be struck with horror at the thoughts of that Poison which
required such a dreadful Cure? And the benefit we receive in so costly a way,
is justly magnified by us. Now what is more apt to inflame our love to God,
than the admirable expression of his Love to us, in that with the most precious
Blood he ransomed us from Hell? How does it endear Obedience, that God has
sacrificed his Son, to keep us from acts of hostility. So that the Grace of the
Gospel is so far from indulging Sin, that it gives the most deadly wound to it.
Especially when the tenor of the new Covenant is, That the Condemned Creature,
in order to receiving Pardon, and the Benefits that are purchased, must receive
the Benefactor with the most entire consent for his Prince and Savior. The Law
of Faith requires us to submit to his Scepter, as well as to depend upon his
Sacrifice. The Gospel is a conditional Act of Oblivion, that none may venture
to sin upon confidence of Pardon.

And since the occasion of the Fall was from a conceit that Man could better
his estate by complying with the Tempter, and obtain a more desirable Happiness
in the Creature, than in the Favor of God: his Recovery is by revealing to him
wherein true Blessedness consists; and giving him an assurance that he may
obtain it. For Man will never subject himself to God as his Highest Lord, till
he looks on him as his last End, and Sovereign Good. Now the Gospel offers to
us the most effectual means, to convince Man of the folly of his choice, in
making the Creature his Happiness. For the Son of God who was Heir of all
things when He came into the world, was in the perpetual exercise of
Self-denial. He lived a despised Life, and died an ignominious Death, to
discover to us, That as the miseries of this Life cannot make us miserable, so
the good things of it cannot make us happy. Besides, how is it possible that the
wretched enjoyment of this World, should be the Blessedness for which He spent
his Sweat, his Tears, his Blood. The rich price he laid down does most
powerfully convince us, That our Felicity is infinitely more valuable than all
earthly things, and can be no less than the fruition of God himself. Thus the
Divine Wisdom has so ordered the way of our Salvation, that as Mercy and
Justice in God, so Holiness and Comfort may be perfectly united in the
reasonable Creature.

CHAP. VI.
Practical Inferences. A superlative degree of Praise and Thankfulness due to
God for the revelation of the Gospel. It Is not discovered by the Creation. It Is
above the reach of Natural Reason. The Heathen World is entirely ignorant of
it. It Is pure Grace that distinguishes one Nation from another, in sending the
Gospel. Evangelical Knowledge deserves our most serious study. The Gospel
exceeds all contemplative and practick Sciences. Contemplative in the greatness
of its object, and the certainty of its principle. Practick in the excellency
of its End, and the efficacy of the Means.

1. WHat a Superlative degree of Praise and Thankfulness is due to God, for
revealing his eternal and compassionate Counsel in order to our Salvation. The
Fall of Man was so wounding and deadly, that only an Infinite Understanding
could find out the means for his Recovery. And if that Mercy which moved the
Lord to ordain the Remedy, had not discovered it, a thick cloud of Despair had
covered Mankind, being for ever unable to conceive the way of our Redemption.
It Is a Mystery which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.
nor ^ath entered into the heart of man to conceive. All Humane Knowledge is
acquired by two sorts of Faculties; the external and internal. Of the first,
Sight and Hearing are the most spiritual, and convey the knowledge of the most
worthy objects. They are the Senses of Discipline, the other three or immerst
in matter, and are incapable to make such clear discoveries. Besides those
impressions that are made on the senses, we may form some Ideas in the
imagination; upon which the mind reflecting may argue and discourse: Thus far
the light and vigor of the understanding can only go. So that the Apostle
declares that the whole plot of the Gospel was without the compass of our most
searching faculties: this will be evident by considering,

1. There was no discovery of it in the Creation: the Voice of the Heavens
instruct us concerning the being of God, but not in the secrets of his Will.
The economy of Man's Redemption is the merciful design of God, which has no
connection with the existence of the creatures, but depends only upon his good
pleasure. It Is as impossible to read the Divine Decrees in the Volume of the
World, as for the eye to discover a sound, which has neither Figure, Color,
nor visible motion. Besides, the Glorious Nature of God in three Persons, which
is the foundation of this Mysterious Mercy, is not made known by the visible
frame of the Universe. It Is true in all External Works the three Persons are
equally concerned: being of one Essence, they are of one Efficacy, and the
Essential perfections of the Deity as they concur, so they are evident in the
production of all things. The first motive is Goodness, that which orders and
directs is Wisdom: Romans 1.20.
that which executes is Power. And the several ranks of Creatures, according to
their state, reflect an honor on their Author. Things endued with life,
declare him to be the fountain of Life, and intellectual creatures represent
him to be the Father of Lights. But the personal being as Personal, operating
nothing out of the Divine Nature, there is no resemblance in the World that
expresses the Distinction, Propriety, and Singularity of the Persons, so as to
discover them to the humane understanding. Those deeper Mysteries of the Deity
are only made known by the Word of God.

2. It Is above the strain and reach of natural Reason to attain to the
knowledge of it. There are seminal sparks of the Law in the heart of Man, Romans
2.15.
some common principles of Piety, Justice, and Charity, without which the World
would soon disband, and fall into confusion; but there is not the least
presumption or conjecture of the contrivance of the Gospel. Though misery
sharpens the mind, and makes it more ingenious to find out ways of
Deliverance, yet here Reason was utterly at a loss. How could it ever enter
into the thoughts of the Israelites that by erecting a Brazen Serpent on a
Pole, and looking toward it, the wounds made by the Fiery Serpents should be
healed. And how could guilty Man find out a way to satisfy Infinite Justice by
the Sufferings of a Mediator, and to heal the wounded spirit by believing on
him. The most inquiring Reason, could never have thought of the Wonders of the
Incarnation, that a Virgin should conceive, and a God be born, nor of the Death
of the Prince of Life, and the Resurrection, and Ascension of the Lord of
Glory. We may see how impossible it is for the natural understanding to
discover the mystery of Redemption, when those that had the highest reputation
for wisdom were ignorant of the Creation. The Philosophers were divided in
nothing more, Facilius inter Horologia quam inter Philosophos conveniet, Senec.
then in their account of the Worlds Original. Some imagined it to proceed from
Water, others from Fire; some from Order, others from Confusion; some to be
from Eternity, others in Time. If the Souls eye be so weakened as not to see
that Eternal Power, which is so apparent in its effects, much less could it
pierce into the Will, and free determinations of God, of which there is not the
least intimation or shadow in the things that are made. This Wisdom comes from
above and was hidden from Ages, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.4.
and Generations. It Is called the Mystery of Christ; he is the Object, and
Revealer of it. The Mystery of Faith, the discovery of which was by pure
Revelation. 1 Timothy 3.9.
The Mystery of his Will, Ephesians. 1.9.
an inviolable Secret till he was pleased to make it known. Were the humane
understanding as clear as it is corrupt, yet it cannot by the strength of
discourse arrive to the knowledge of it. Supernatural Revelation was necessary
to discover it to the Angels. The thoughts of Men are a secret, into which the
Creator alone has right to enter, it being his prerogative to search the
heart. 2 Chr. 6.30.


The Angels conjecture only, from the dispositions of Men, from outward
circumstances, from the Images in the Fancy, and from material impressions on
the Blood and Spirits, what are the thoughts of the Heart: and much less can
they discover the Counsel of God himself. Ephesians. 3.10.
The Apostle tells us to Principalities and Powers in heavenly places, by the
Church the manifold Wisdom of God is made known* By the first coming of Christ,
and the conversion of the World, the depths of the Divine Wisdom were opened,
and there remains much undiscovered, which his second coming shall gloriously
make known. Before the first they understood not the foundation, til the second
not the perfection of our recovery. Briefly, 1 Cor. 2.10.
the Spirit that searches the mysterious Counsels of God, is the alone
Intelligencer of Heaven, that reveals them to the world. And the more to incite
us with sincere and humble Thankfulness to acknowledge this invaluable Mercy, it
will be useful to reflect on the state of the Heathen world, who are entirely
ignorant of this Mystery.

The Apostle describes the case of the Gentiles in such terms as argue it to be
extremely dangerous, if not desperate. Their understandings were darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 2.12.
through the ignorance that is in them. They were without Christ, aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant of the Promise,
without hope. They had no sense of their misery, no expectation, nor desire of
Mercy. Not only the barbarous and savage, but the polisht and civilized Nations
are called (...), being without the knowledge of the true God, and of a Savior.
Philosophy never made one Believer. And as the want of a Sovereign Remedy
exposes a man that has a mortal Disease to certain ruin; so the single
Ignorance of the Gospel leaves men in a state of Perdition. It Is true, where
the Faculties are not capable, or the Object is not revealed, God does not
impute the want of Knowledge as a crime. But Salvation is obtained only by the
Covenant of Grace, which is founded in the Satisfaction of the Redeemer. Isa.
53.11.
And it is by the knowledge of him that he justifies many* God would have all men
saved by coming to the knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4.
that is the Doctrine of the Gospel, so called in respect of its excellency,
being the most profitable that ever was revealed. The Infants of Believers are
saved by special Privilege, for the merits of Christ, without any apprehension
of him. But others who are come to the use of Reason, and made partakers of
Blessedness by the Knowledge of God in Christ. This is Life eternal, to know
thee to be the only true God, Joh. 17.3.
and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. The Sun quickens some creatures by its
vital Influences, which are buried in the caves of the Earth, and never see the
Light. But the Sun of Righteousness illuminates all whom he saves. What degree
of Knowledge is necessary of the Dignity of his Person, and the Efficacy of his
Mediation, I cannot determine; But that the Heathens, who are absolutely
strangers to the only means of our recovery, and do not believe on God
reconciled in the Son of his Love, should partake of Saving Mercy; I do not see
any thing in the Gospel (which is the revelation of God's Will concerning our
Salvation) upon which to build a rational Hope. Indeed if any Heathen were
seriously penitent, God is so merciful, that He would rather dispatch an Angel
from Heaven, saying, Deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a
ransom, or by some other extraordinary way instruct him in the necessary
knowledge of our Savior, than suffer him to perish to the prejudice of his
Mercy. But Repentance as well as Forgiveness is purchased and dispensed alone
by our Savior. And that any received this benefit, Act. 5.31.
who are entirely ignorant of the Benefactor we cannot tell. Now this should
raise our esteem of the discriminating favor of God to us.

What a flood of Errors and Miseries covered the Earth, when the Grace of God
that brings Salvation first appeared. The Deluge was universal, and so was the
Destruction. Those that were most renowned for Wisdom, the Philosophers of
Greece, and the Orators of Rome, were swallowed up, only the Church of Christ
is triumphant over the merciless waters. When Noah from the top of the Mountain
saw the sad remains of that dreadful Inundation, what a lively sense of Joy
possessed his breast? As Misery is heightened, so Happiness is set off by
comparison: Est miser nem^ nisi comparatus.
Not that there is any regular content to see the destruction of others; but
the sense of our own preservation from a common ruin, Non qui^ vexari quenquam
est sincera voluptas; Sed quibus ips^ malis careas, quia cernere suave est,
Lucret.
raises our joy to its highest elevation. The first work of Noah after his
deliverance was to build an Altar on which to offer the Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving to his Preserver. We should imitate his Example.

How many Nations unknown to our world remain in the Darkness, and Shadow of
Death, now the Dayspring from on High has visited us. This special Favor
calls for special Thankfulness. Were there any qualities in us to incline God
to prefer us before others, it would lessen our esteem of the Benefit. But this
distinguishing Mercy is one of those free Acts of God, for which there is no
reason in the objects on which they are exercised. Quare ergo illi datum est,
and illi non dadum? Non me piget dicere, hoc est profundum Crucis. Admiratione
exclamare p^ss^m, disputatione demonstrare non possum, quam magnifica sunt
opera tua Domine. Aug. De Verb. Apostol. Sermon. 7.
St. Austin calls it, Profundum Crucis. As the lowest part of the Cross is
under ground unseen, but the upper part is exposed to sight: So the effects of
Divine Predestination, the fruits of the Cross, are visible, but the Reasons
are not within our view. When God divided the world, and chose Israel for his
Heritage to receive the Promise of the Messiah, and left the rest in thick and
disconsolate darkness, there was no apparent cause of this inequality; for they
all sprang from the same corrupt root, and equally deserved a final rejection*
There was no singular good in them, nor transcendent evil in others. The
unaccountable Pleasure of God was the sole motive of the different
Dispensation. Our Savior breaks forth in an ecstasy of Joy, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, Luke
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them
unto babes; even so Father* for so it seemed good in thy sight. It Is the
Prerogative of God to reveal the secrets of the Kingdom to whom he pleases.
Mat. 13.11.
It Is an act of pure Grace, putting a difference between one Nation and
another, with the same liberty, as in the Creation of the same indigested
matter He formed the Earth, the dregs of the Universe, and the Sun and Stars
the ornaments of the Heavens, and the glory of the visible World. How can we
reflect on our Spiritual Obligations to Divine Grace without a rapture of Soul?
The corruption of Nature was universal, our Ignorance as perverse, and our
Manners as profane as of other Nations, and we had been condemned to an eternal
Night, if the Light of Life had not graciously shined upon us. This should warm
our hearts in affectionate acknowledgments to God, Who has made known to us
the riches of the glory of this mystery amongst the Gentiles; Col. 1.26, 27
and with that revelation the concomitant power of the Spirit, to translate us
from the kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son. If the
Publication of the Law by the Ministry of Angels to the Israelites were such a
Privilege that it is reckoned their peculiar Treasure: He has showed his
Statutes unto Israel; Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He has not dealt so with any Nation; What is the revelation of the Gospel by
the Son of God Himself? For although the Law is obscured and defaced since the
Fall, yet there are some ingrafted Notions of it in the humane Nature, but
there is not the least suspicion of the Gospel. The Law discovers our Misery,
but the Gospel alone shows the way to be delivered from it. If an Advantage so
great and so precious does not touch our hearts; and in possessing it with joy,
we are not sensible of the engagements the Father of Mercies has laid upon us,
we shall be the ungratefullest wretches in the world.

2. This incomprehensible Mystery is worthy of our most serious thoughts and
study, that we may arrive to a fuller knowledge of it. And to incite us, it
will be fit to consider those excellencies, which will render it most
desirable. Knowledge is a quality so eminent, that it truly enobles one Spirit
above another. As Reason is the singular Ornament of the humane Nature, whereby
it excels the Bruits, so in proportion Knowledge, which is the perfection of
the Understanding, raises those who are possessors of it, above others that
want it. The Testimony of Solomon confirms this, Eccles. 2.13.
Then I saw that Wisdom excells Folly as far as Light excels Darkness. And
according to the nature and quality of the Knowledge, such is the advantage it
brings to us. Now the Doctrine of the Gospel excels the most noble Sciences, as
well contemplative as practick: it excels the contemplative in the sublimity of
the object, and in the certainty of its Principle.

1. In the sublimity and greatness of the Object: and it is no less then the
highest design of the eternal Wisdom, the most glorious work of the great God.
In the Creation his footsteps appear, in our Redemption his Image: In the Law
his Justice and Holiness, but in the Gospel all his Perfections shine forth in
their brightest luster. The bare theory of this inriches the mind, and the
contemplation of it affects the Soul, that is conversant about it, with the
highest admiration and the most sincere and lasting delight.

Neque enim quicquam habet in se, hujus materiae tractatio pulchrius, cum
cuncta habeat futura usui, quam quod homines magnificentia sua detin et, nec
mercede sed miraculo colitur. Senec.
1. It affects the Soul with the highest admiration. The strongest Spirits
cannot comprehend its just greatness: the understanding sinks under the weight
of Glory. The Apostle who had seen the light of Heaven, and had such knowledge
as never any man before; yet upon considering one part of the Divine Wisdom,
breaks forth in astonishment, Oh the depth of the riches of the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Decrees, and his ways past finding
out! It Is fit when we have spent the strength of our minds in the consideration
of this excelling object, and are at the end of our subtilty, to supply the
defects of our Understandings with Admiration. As the Psalmist expresses
himself, Lord, how wonderful are thy thoughts to usward! The Angels adore this
glorious Mystery with an humble Reverence. 1 Pet. 1.12.
The admiration that is caused by it, is a principal delight of the Mind: It Is
true, the wonder that proceeds from Ignorance (when the cause of some visible
effect is not known) is the imperfection and torment of the spirit, but that
which arises from the knowledge of those things which are most above our
conception and our hope, is the highest advancement of our Minds, and brings
the greatest satisfaction to the Soul. Now the contrivance of our Redemption,
was infinitely above the ^light of Reason, Psa. 126.1.
and our expectation. When the Lord turned the captivity of Sion, they were as
in a dream: The way of accomplishing it was so incredible, that it seemed
rather the picture of Fancy, than a real Deliverance. And there is far greater
reason that the rescuing of us from the Powers of Hell, and the restoring us to
Liberty and Glory by Christ, should raise our wonder.

1 Pet. 2.9.
The Gospel is called a mavelous Light, upon the account of the objects it
discovers. But such a perverse judgment is in men, that they neglect those
things which deserve the highest admiration, and spend their wonder on meaner
things. Art is more admired than Nature: a counterfeit Eye of Crystal, which
has neither sight nor motion, than the living Eye, the Sun of the little
world, that directs the whole Man. And the effects of Nature are more admired,
than the sublime and supernatural works of Grace. Yet these infinitely exceed
the other. The World is the work of Gods hand, but the Gospel is his plot, and
the chiefest of all his ways. What a combination of Wonders is there in the
great Mystery of Godliness? That He who fills Heaven and Earth should be
confined to the Virgins Womb; that Life should die, and being dead revive; that
Mercy should triumph without any disparagement to Justice: these are Miracles
that transcend all that is done in Nature.

And this appears by the judgment of God himself, who best knows the excellency
of his own works. For whereas upon the finishing the first Creation, he
ordained the Seventh Day, that reasonable Creatures might more solemnly ascribe
to him the Glory of his Attributes, which are visible in the things that are
made; he has upon the completing our Redemtion, by the rising of Christ from
the Dead, made the First Day Sacred for his Service and Praise, there being the
clearest illustration of his Perfections in that Blessed Work. God is more
pleased in the contemplation of the new World, than of the old. The latter by
its extraordinary Magnificence has lessened the dignity of the former, as the
greater Light obscures the less. Therefore the Sabbath is changed into the
Lord's Day. And what a just reproach is it to Man that he should be inobservant
and unaffected with this glorious Mercy, wherein he may always find new cause
of Admiration. Psalm. 92.5, 6.
O Lord, how great are thy Works! and thy Thoughts how deep! a brutish man
knows not, neither does a fool understand this. The admiring of any other
thing in comparison of this Mystery, is the effect of Inconsideration, or
Infidelity.

2. It produces the most sincere and lasting pleasure. As the taste is to meat,
to allure us to feed for the support of our bodies; that is delight to
Knowledge, to excite the mind to seek after it. But its vast capacity can never
be satisfied with the knowledge of inferior things. The pleasure is more in the
acquisition, than in the possession of it. For the mind is diverted in the
search, but having attained to that knowledge which cannot fill the rational
appetite, it is disgusted with the fruits of its travel, and seeks some other
object to relieve its langour. From hence it is, that variety is the spring of
delight, and pleasure is the product of novelty. We find the pleasure of the
first taste in learning something new, is always most sensible. The most
elegant compositions, and excellent discourses, which ravished at the first
reading, yet repeated often are nauseous and irksome. The exercise of the mind
on an object fully known, is unprofitable, and therefore tedious: whereas by
turning the thoughts on something else, it may acquire new knowledge. But the
Apostle tells us that the Mystery of our Redemption contains all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge, to intimate their excellence, Col. 2.
and abundance: the unsearchable riches of Grace are laid up in it. There is
infinite variety and perpetual matter for the inquiry of the most excellent
understanding: no created reason is able to reach its height or sound its
depths: by the continual study, and increase in the knowledge of it, the mind
enjoys a persevering pleasure, that far exceeds the short vehemence of sensual
delights.

2. It excels other Sciences in the certainty of its Principle; which is divine
Revelation. Humane Sciences are built upon uncertain maxims, which being
admitted with precipitation, and not confirmed by sufficient Experiments, the
Mind can never fully acquiesce in them. Those Doctrines which were esteemed in
one Age, the vanity of them is discovered in another. Modern Philosophy
discards the Ancient. But the Doctrine of Salvation is the Word of Truth, its
original is from Heaven, it bears the characters and marks of its Divine
descent. It Is confirmed by the Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. It Is
always the same, 1 Cor. 2.4.
unchangeable as God the Author, and Christ the Object of it, who is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever. And the knowledge which the sincere and
enlightened Mind has of it, is not uncertain opinion, but a clear, Heb. 13.
solid and firm apprehension. It Is a Contemplation of the Glory of God with
open face. 2 Cor. 3.18.
This appears by the effects it produces in those that have received the true
tincture of it in their Souls, they despise all things which carnal Men admire,
in comparison of this inestimable Treasure.

2. The Doctrine of the Gospel exceeds all practic Sciences in the excellency
of its end, and the efficacy of the means to obtain it.

The end of it is, The Supreme Happiness of Man: the restoring of him to the
Innocence and Excellency of his first state. And the means are appointed by
infinite Wisdom, so that the most insuperable obstacles are removed: and these
are the Justice of God that condemns the guilty, and that strong and obstinate
aversion which is in corrupted man from true Felicity. Here is a Mediator
revealed, Heb. 7.25.
who is able to save to the uttermost: who has quenched the Wrath of God by the
Blood of his Divine Sacrifice: who has expiated Sin by the value of his Death,
and purifies the Soul by the virtue of his Life, that it may consent to its own
Salvation. No less than a Divine Power could perform this work. From hence the
superlative excellency of Evangelical Knowledge does arise: all other Knowledge
is unprofitable without it, and that alone can make us perfectly blessed; Joh.
17.3.
This is Life eternal, to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. I
will briefly consider how ineffectual all other Knowledge is, whether Natural,
Political, or Moral, to recover us from our Misery.

The most exact insight into Natural things leaves the Mind blind and poor,
ignorant of Happiness, and the way to it. Solomon who had an extraordinary
measure of Natural Knowledge, and was able to set a just price upon it, tells us
that the increase of knowledge was attended with proportionable degrees of
sorrow. For the more a man knows, Eccles. 1.
the more he discerns the insufficiency of that knowledge to supply his defects,
and satisfy his desires. He was therefore weary of his Wisdom, as well as of
his Folly. The Devils know more than the profoundest Philosophers, yet their
Knowledge does not alleviate their Torments. It Is so far from directing how to
escape misery, that it will more expose to it, by enlarging the Faculties, and
making them more capable of Torment. It Is the observation of St. Ambrose, that
when God discovered the Creation of the World to Moses, He did not inform him
of the greatness of the Heavens, the number of the Stars, their Aspects and
Influences; whether they derive their light from the Sun, or have it inherent
in their own bodies; from whence Eclipses are caused; how the Rainbow is
painted; how the Winds fly in the Air, or the causes of the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; but so much as might be a foundation of Faith and Obedience, and
left the rest, Ambros. P. 6* Hexam. c. 2.
Quasi marcescentis sapientiae vanitates, as the vanities of perishing wisdom.
The most knowing Philosopher though encompast with these sparks, yet if
ignorant of the Redeemer, Isa.
shall lie down in sorrow for ever.

And as natural, so political Knowledge in order to the governing of Kingdoms
and States, has no power to confer happiness upon man. It concerns not his
main interest, it is terminated within the compass of this short life, and
provides not for Death, and Eternity. The Wisdom of the World is folly in a
disguise, a specious Ignorance, which although it may secure the temporal
state, yet it leaves us naked and exposed to Spiritual enemies which war
against the Soul. And all the moral knowledge which is treasured up in the Books
of the Heathens, is insufficient to restore man to his original integrity and
felicity. Reason sees that Man is ignorant, and guilty, mortal, and miserable,
that he is transported with vain passions, and tormented with accusations of
Conscience, but it could not redress these evils. Corrupt Nature is like an
imperfect Building that lies in rubbish, the imperfection is visible, but not
the way how to finish it, for through ignorance of the first design, every one
follows his own fancy, whereas when the Architect comes to finish his own
project, it appears regular and beautiful. Thus the various directions of
Philosophers to recover fallen Man out of his ruins, and to raise him to his
first state, were vain. Some glimmerings they had, that the happiness of the
reasonable nature consisted in its union with God, but in order to this, they
propounded such means as were not only ineffectual, but opposite. Such is the
pride and folly of carnal wisdom, that to bring God and Man together, it
advances Man, and depresses God. The Stoics ascribed to their Wiseman those
prerogatives whereby he equaled their Supreme God. Sapiens cum Diis ex pari
vivit. Deorum Socius, non Supplex, Controversiam facit Diis de Felicitate.
Senec.
They made him the architect of his own virtue and felicity, and to vie with
Jupiter himself, to be one of his Peers. Others reduced the Gods to live like
Men, and Men like Beasts, by placing happiness in sensual pleasures. Thus
instead of curing, they fomented the hereditary, and principal Diseases of
mankind, Pride, and Concupiscence, which at first caused the separation of man
from God, and infinitely increased the distance between them. For what sins are
more contrary to the Majesty and Purity of God than Pride, which robs him of
his Excellency; and carnal lust, which turns a man into a beast. Besides, all
their inventions to expiate sin, to appease the Deity and make him favorable,
to calm the Conscience, were frivolous and unprofitable. And their most
generous principles, and accurate Precepts, were short of that purity and
perfection werewith moral duties are to be performed to God and men. Briefly,
they wasted their Candle in vain, in searching for the way to true happiness.
But God who created Man for the enjoyment of himself, has happily accomplished
his eternal Decree, by the work of our Redemption, wherein his own Glory is
most visible. And the Gospel which reveals this to us, humbles whom it
justifies, and comforts those that were condemned: it abases more then the Law,
but without despair, and advances more then Nature could, but without
presumption. The Mediator takes away the guilt of our old sins, and our
inclination to new sins: we are not only pardoned but preferred, made Heirs of
God, joynt-Heirs with Christ. Romans 8.17.
For these reasons the Apostle sets so high a value upon the Heavenly Doctrine,
that reveals a Savior to the undone World. 1 Cor. 2.2.
He desired to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. He despised
all Pharisaical and Philosophical Learning in comparison of the Excellency of
the Knowledge of Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.8.
Other knowledge swells the mind and increases the esteem of our selves, this
gives us a sincere view of our state. It discovers our misery in its causes and
the Almighty Mercy that saves us. Other knowledge inlightens the understanding,
without changing the heart, but this inspires us with the love of God, with the
hatred of sin, and makes us truly better. In seeking after other knowledge, the
mind is perplexed by endless inquiries: here it is at rest, as the wavering
Needle is fixed when turned to its beloved Star. Ignorance of other things may
be without any real damage to us; for we may be directed by the skilful how to
preserve Life and Estate. Isa. 5.11.
But this Knowledge is absolutely necessary to Justify, Sanctify, and Save
us. All other knowledge is useless at the hour of death, then the richest stock
of Learning is lost, the vessel being split wherein the treasure was laid; but
this Pearl of inestimable price, as it is the ornament of our prosperity, so
it is the support of our adversity: A little ray of this is infinitely more
desirable, then the light of all humane Sciences in their luster and perfection.

And what an amazing folly is it, that men who are possessed with an earnest
passion of knowing, should waste their time and strength in searching after
these things, the knowledge of which cannot remove those evils which oppress
them, and be careless of the saving knowledge of the Gospel. Were there no
other reason to diminish the esteem of earthly knowledge, but the difficulty of
its acquisition, that error often surprises those who are searching after
truth, this might check our intemperate pursuit of it. Sin has not only
shortened our understandings, but our lives, that we cannot arrive to the
perfect discovery of inferior things. But suppose that one by his vast mind
should comprehend all created things, from the Center of the Earth to the
Circumference of the Heavens, and were not savingly inlighten'd in the Mystery
of our Redemption, with all his knowledge he would be a prey to Satan, and
increase the triumphs of Hell. The Historian upbraids the Roman luxury, Quis
non miretur umbra tantum gratia ex alieno petitam orb. Plin.
that with so much cost and hazard they should send to foreign parts, for
Trees that were beautiful but barren, and produced a shadow only without fruit.
With greater reason we may wonder that men should with the expense of their
precious hours purchase barren curiosities, which are unprofitable to their
last end. How can a condemned Criminal, who is in suspense between Life and
Death, attend to study the secrets of Nature and Art, when all his thoughts are
taken up how to prevent the execution of the Sentence? and it is no less than a
prodigy of madness, that men who have but a short and uncertain space allowed
them to escape the wrath to come, should rack their brains in studying things
impertinent to salvation, and neglect the Knowledge of a Redeemer. Especially
when there is so clear a Revelation of him? The righteousness of Faith does not
command us to ascend to the Heavens, Romans 10.6, 7.
or descend into the deep to make a discovery of it, but the Word is nigh us
that discovers the certain way to a happy immortallity. Seneca a Philosopher,
Senec. praef. l. not. quest.
and a Courtier, valued his being in the world only upon this account, that he
might contemplate the Starry Heaven. Quid erat cur in numero viventium me
positum esse gauderem? an ut cibos et potum percolarem? ut hoc Corpus Casurum,
ac fluidum, periturumque nisi subinde impleatur farcirem? e^ viverem ^egri
minister ^ ut morti timerem cui omnes nascimur? detrahe hoc in aestimabile
bonum, non est vita tanti ut sudem, ut aestuem, O quam contempta res est homo
nisi supra human^ se erexerit!
He only saw the visible beauty of the Firmament, but was ignorant of the Glory
within it, and of the way that leads to it, yet to our shame he speaks, that
the sight of it made him despise the Earth, and without the contemplation of
the Celestial bodies, he esteemed his continuance in the World not the life of
a Man, but the toil of a Beast. But what transports had he been in, if he had
been acquainted with the contrivance of our Redemption, the admirable order of
its parts, and the beauty that results from the composition of the whole. 2
Cor. 3.18.
But we that with open face may in the Glass of the Gospel behold the Glory of
the Lord, turn away our eyes from it to vanity. Here the complaint is more
just, Ad sapientiam quis accedit? quis dignam judicat nisi quam in transitu
noverit? we content our selves with slight and transient glances, but do not
seriously and fixedly consider this blessed design of God, upon which the
beginning of our happiness in this, and the perfection of it in the next life
is built. Let us provoke our selves by the example of the Angels who are not
concerned in this Redemption as man is, for they continued in their fidelity to
their Creator, and were always happy in his favor; and where there is no
alienation between parties, reconcilement is unnecessary; yet they are Students
with us in the same Book, and unite all their powers in the contemplation of
this mystery: they are represented stooping to pry into these secrets, 1 Pet.
1.12.
to signify their delight in what they know, and their desire to advance in
the knowledge of them. With what intention then should we study the Gospel, who
are the Subject and end of it.

CHAP. VII.
The simple Speculation of the Gospel not sufficient without a real Belief, and
Cordial Acceptance. The Reasons why the Jews and Gentiles conspired in the
contempt of it. How just it is to resign up the Understanding to Revelation.
God knows his own Nature and Will, and cannot deceive us. We must believe the
things that are clearly revealed, though we do not understand the manner of
their existence: Although they are attended with seeming contradictions. No
Article of Faith is really repugnant to Reason. We must distinguish between
things incomprehensible, and inconceivable. Between corrupt and right Reason.
How Reason is subservient to Faith. Humility and Holiness qualify for the
belief of the Gospel-mysteries. A naked belief of Supernatural Truths is
unprofitable for Salvation. An effectual Assent that prevails upon the Will,
and renders the whole Man obsequious, is due to the quality of the
Gospel-Revelation.

THe simple Speculation of this glorious Mystery will be of no profit without a
real belief of it, and a cordial acceptance of Salvation, upon the terms which
the Divine Wisdom prescribes. The Gospel requires the Obedience of the
Understanding, and of the Will; unless it obtains a full possession of the
Soul, there is no saving efficacy derived from it. And such is the sublimity
and purity of the Object, that till Reason is sanctified, and subdued, it
cannot sincerely entertain it. I will therefore distinctly consider the
opposition which carnal Reason has made against it, and show how just it is,
that the Humane Understanding should with reverence yield up it self to the
Word of God, that reveals this great Mystery to us.

The Apostle tells us, that Jews and Gentiles conspired in the contempt of the
Gospel. 1 Cor. 1.
Reason cannot hear without great astonishment, for the appearing contradiction
between the terms, that God should be made Man, and the Eternal die. The Jews
esteemed it an intolerable Blasphemy, and without any Process of Law were ready
to stone the Lord Jesus, Joh. 10.33.
That being a man, he should make himself equal with God. And they upbraided
him in his Sufferings that he could not save himself. If he be the King of
Israel, Mat. 27.42.
let him come down from the Cross, and we will believe on him. The Gentiles
despised the Gospel as an absurd ill-contrived Fable. 1 Cor. 1.23.
For what in appearance is more unbecoming God, Negant Deo dignum, ut homo
fieri vellet, se^que infirmitate carnis oneraret, ut passionibus, ut doloribus,
ut morti se ipse subjiceret. Lact.
and injurious to his Perfections, than to take the frail garment of Flesh, to
be torn and trampled on. Their natural Knowledge of the Deity inclined them to
think the Incarnation impossible. There is no resemblance of it in the whole
compass of Nature. For natural Union supposes the parts incomplete, and capable
of Perfection by their joining together: But that a Being infinitely perfect
should assume by personal Union a nature inferior to it self, the Heathens
looked on it as a Fable forged according to the model of the fictions concerning
Danae, and Antiope. Orig. contra Cells.
And the Doctrine of our Saviors Death on the Cross they rejected as an
impiety contumelious to God. They judged it inconsistent with the Majesty and
Happiness of the Deity, to ascribe to Him that, which is the punishment of the
most guilty and miserable. In the account of carnal Reason they thought more
worthily of God by denying that of Him, which is only due to the worst of men.
Celsus, who with as much Subtilty as Malice, Orig. contra Cells. Lib. 1.
urges all that with any appearance could be objected against our Savior,
principally insists on his Poverty and Sufferings, the Meanness and Misery of
his condition in the world. 'Twas fit, says he, that the Son of God should
appear as the Sun, (...)^
which renders it self conspicuous by its own light: But the Gospel having
declared the Word to be the Son of God, relates that he was a man of Sorrows,
that had no power to defend himself, and was deserted by his Father and
Followers, scourged with Rods, and shamefully executed. He could not reconcile
so many things that seemed utterly incompatible, as Sovereignty and Servitude,
Innocence and Punishment, the lowest of humane Miseries, Death, with the
highest of divine Honors, Adoration. Briefly, Nothing was more contrary to
Flesh and Blood, than to believe that person to be the Redeemer of the World,
who did not rescue himself from his Enemies, and to expect Immortality from him
that was overcome by Death. Now the Causes of this Infidelity are,

1. The Darkness of the Mind, which is so corrupted by Original Pravity, that
it cannot behold Heavenly Mysteries in their proper light, so as to acquiesce
in the truth of them. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness to him* and he cannot know them; because they are spiritually
discerned. There is no proportion between the Natural Understanding and
Supernatural Truths. For although the rational Soul is a Spirit, as it is
distinguished from corporeal Beings, yet till it is purged from Error, and
vicious Affections, it can never discover the Divinity of things Spiritual, so
as to embrace them with certainty and delight. As there must be a Spirit of
Revelation to unvail the object, Ephesians. 1.17.
so of Wisdom to enlighten the eye, that it may be prepared for the reception
of it. As Heaven is only seen by its own Light, So Christ is by his own Spirit.
Divine Objects, and Faith that discerns them are, of the same original, and of
the same quality. The natural Understanding, as the effects declare, is like
the Funeral Lamps which by the Ancients were put into Sepulchers, to guard the
ashes of their dead Friends, which shine so long as they are kept close, a
thick moist vapor feeding them, and repairing what was consumed: but in
opening the Sepulchers, and exposing them to the free air, they presently faint
and expire. Thus natural Reason whilst conversant in things below, and watching
with the dead, that is in the Phrase of the Ancients, studying the Books of Men
who have left the world, it discovers something, although it is rather a
Twilight than clear; But when it is brought from the narrow sphere of things
sensible, to contemplate the immensity of things Spiritual and Supernatural,
its light declines, and is turned into darkness.

2. The Pride of the Humane Understanding, which disdains to stoop to the
height of these mysteries. It Is observable, that those who most excelled in
Natural Wisdom, were the greatest despisers of Evangelical Truths. Porphyrius,
Julianus, Maximus, Hierocles.
The proud Wits of the World chose rather to be Masters of their own, than
Scholars to another. Soli rationi cedo. (...) Plato. 1 Cor. 1.19, 20*
They made Reason their Supreme Rule, and Philosophy their highest Principle,
and would not believe what they could not comprehend. They derided Christians
as captives of a blind Belief, and their Faith as the effect of Folly; and
rejected Revelation, the only means to conveigh the knowledge of Divine
Mysteries to them. Therefore the Apostle, by way of upbraiding, enquires, Where
is the wise man? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? God
has made the wisdom of the world foolishness. As those who are really poor,
and would appear rich in the Pomp of their Habits and Attendants, are made
poorer by that expense; so those who were destitute of true Wisdom and would
appear wise in making Reason the Judge of Divine Revelation, and the last
resolution of all things, by that false affectation of Wisdom, they became more
foolish: By all their Disputes against the appearing absurdities of the
Christian Religion, they were brought into a more learned Darkness.

3. The prejudices which arose from Sensual Lusts hindered the Belief of the
Gospel. As the carnal Understanding rebels against the sublimity of its
Doctrine, so the carnal Appetite against the purity of its Precepts. And
according to the Dispositions of Men from whence they act, such light they
desire to direct them in acting. The Gospel is a Mystery of Godliness, and
those who are under the love of Sin, cherish an affected Ignorance, lest the
Light should inflame Conscience, by representing to them the deadly guilt that
cleaves to Sin, and thereby make it uneasy. This account our Savior gives of
the Infidelity of the world, Joh. 3.19.
That men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. And
that this was the real cause, what ever was pretended, is clear, in that the
Gentiles who opposed Christ, adored those impure Deities, whose infamous Lusts
were acknowledged by them. And with what color then could they reject our
Redeemer because crucified? As if Vice were not more incompatible with the
Deity, than Sufferings.

Now though Reason enslaved by prejudice, and corrupted by Passion, despises
the Gospel, yet when it is enlightened by Faith, it discovers such a wise
economy in it, that were it not true, it would transcend the most noble
created Mind to invent it: It Is so much above our most excellent Thoughts, that
no Humane Understanding would ever attempt to feign it, with confidence of
persuading the world into a Belief of it. How is it possible that it should be
contrived by natural Reason, since no man can believe it sincerely when it is
revealed, without a supernatural Faith. To confirm our Belief of these great
and saving Mysteries, I will show how just it is, that the Understanding should
resign itself to Divine Revelation which has made them known. In order to
this, we must consider,

1. There are some Doctrines in the Gospel, the Understanding could not
discover, but when they are revealed, it has a clear apprehension of them upon
a rational account, and sees the characters of Truth visibly stamped on their
Forehead. As the Doctrine of Satisfaction to Divine Justice, that Pardon might
be dispensed to repenting Sinners. For our natural conception of God includes
his infinite Purity and Justice; And when the design of the Gospel is made
known, whereby he has provided abundantly for the honor of those Attributes,
so that He does the greatest Good without encouraging the least Evil, Reason
acquiesces and acknowledges, this I sought, but could not find. Now although
the primary Obligation to believe such Doctrines arises from Revelation, yet
being ratified by Reason, they are embraced with more Clearness by the Mind.

2. There are some Doctrines, which as Reason by its light could not discover,
so when they are made known, it cannot comprehend; but they are by a clear and
necessary connection joined with the other that Reason approves. As the Mystery
of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, which are the
Foundations of the whole work of our Redemption. The Nature of God is repugnant
to Plurality, there can be but one Essence, and the nature of Satisfaction
requires a distinction of Persons: for he that suffers as guilty, must be
distinguished from the person of the Judge that exacts Satisfaction; and no mere
Creature is able by his obedient sufferings to repair the Honor of God, so
that a Divine Person assuming the Nature of Man was alone capable to make that
satisfaction, which the Gospel propounds and Reason consents to. Besides, it is
clear that the Doctrine of the Trinity, that is, of three glorious Relations in
the Godhead, and of the Incarnation, are most firmly connected with all the
parts of the Christian Religion, left in the Writings of the Apostles, which as
they were confirmed by Miracles, the Divine Signatures of their certainty, so
they contain such authentic marks of their Divinity, that right Reason cannot
reject them.

3. Whereas there are three Principles by which we apprehend things, Sense,
Reason and Faith, these lights have their different objects that must not be
confounded. Sense is confined to things material, Reason considers things
abstracted from matter, Faith regards the Mysteries revealed from Heaven: and
these must not transgress their order. Sense is an incompetent judge of things
about which Reason is only conversant. It can only make a report of those
objects, which by their natural characters are exposed to it. And Reason can
only discourse of things within its sphere; Supernatural things which derive
from Revelation, and are purely the objects of Faith, are not within its
territories and jurisdiction. Those Superlative Mysteries exceed all our
intellectual Abilities.

It Is true, the Understanding is a rational Faculty, and every act of it is
really or in appearance grounded on Reason. But there is a wide difference
between the proving a Doctrine by Reason, and the giving a reason why we
believe the truth of it. For instance, we cannot prove the Trinity by natural
Reason; and the subtilty of the Schoolmen, who affect to give some reason of
all things, is here more prejudicial than advantageous to the Truth: For he
that pretends to maintain a point by Reason, and is unsuccessful, does weaken
the credit which the Authority of Revelation gives. And it is considerable, that
the Scripture in delivering supernatural truths, produce God's Authority as
their only proof, without using any other way of arguing: But although we
cannot demonstrate these Mysteries by Reason, yet we may give a rational
account why we believe them.

Is it not the highest Reason to believe the discovery that God has made of
Himself, and his Decrees? For he perfectly knows his own Nature and Will; and
it is impossible He should deceive us: This Natural Principle is the Foundation
of Faith. When God speaks, it becomes Man to hear with Silence and Submission.
His naked Word is as certain as a Demonstration.

And is it not most reasonable to believe, that the Deity cannot be fully
understood by us? The Sun may more easily be included in a spark of Fire, than
the infinite Perfections of God be comprehended by a finite Mind. The Angels
who dwell so near the Fountain of Light, Isai. 6.2.
cover their faces in a holy Confusion, not being able to comprehend Him. How
much less can Man in this earthly state, distant from God, and oppressed with a
burden of Flesh. Now from hence it follows;

1. That Ignorance of the manner how Divine Mysteries exist, is no sufficient
Plea for Infidelity, when the Scripture reveals that they are. For Reason that
is limited and restrained, cannot frame a Conception that is commensurate to
the Essence and Power of God. This will appear more clearly by considering the
Mysterious Excellencies of the Divine Nature, the certainty of which we
believe, but the manner we cannot understand: Infinitus, immensus and soli sibi
tantus, quantus est notus, nobis* vero ad intellectum* pectus angustum est, and
ideo sic eum digne aestimamus, cum inaestimabilem dicimus, Min. Fall.
As that his Essence and Attributes are the same, without the least shadow of
composition, yet his Wisdom and Power are to our apprehensions distinct, and
his Mercy and Justice in some manner opposite. That his Essence is entire in
all places, yet not terminated in any. That He is above the Heavens, and
beneath the Earth, yet has no relation of high or low, distant or near. That
He penetrates all substances, but is mixed with none. That he understands, yet
receives no Idea's within Himself; that He wills, yet has no motion that
carries Him out of Himself; That in Him Time has no Succession, that which is
past is not gone, and that which is future, is not to come. That He loves
without Passion, is angry without Disturbance, repents without Change. These
Perfections are above the capacity of Reason fully to understand, yet essential
to the Deity. Here we must exalt Faith, and abase Reason. Thus in the Mystery
of the Incarnation, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that two such distant Natures should compose one Person, without the confusion
of Properties, Reason cannot reach unto, but it is clearly revealed in the Word:
Here therefore we must obey, Joh. 1.14.
not enquire.

The Obedience of Faith is, to embrace an obscure Truth with a firm assent,
upon the account of a Divine testimony. If Reason will not assent to
Revelation, till it understands the manner of how Divine things are, it does
not obey it at all. The Understanding then sincerely submits, when it is
inclined by those motives, which demonstrate that such a Belief is due to the
Authority of the Revealer, and to the quality of the Object. To believe only in
proportion to our narrow conceptions, is to disparage the Divine Truth, and
debase the Divine Power. We cannot know what God can do, He is Omnipotent,
though we are not omniscient: It Is just we should humble our Ignorance to his
Wisdom, And that every lofty imagination, and high thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of God should be cast down, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and every thought captivated into the obedience of Christ. It Is our wisdom to
receive the great Mysteries of the Gospel in their simplicity: for in
attempting to give an exact and curious explication of them, the Understanding
as in an Hedge of Thorns, the more it strives, the more it is wounded and
entangled. Gods Ways are as far above ours, and his Thoughts above ours, as
Heaven is above the Earth. To reject what we cannot comprehend, is not only to
sin against Faith, but against Reason, which acknowledges it self finite, Job.
and unable to search out the Almighty to perfection.

2. We are obliged to believe those Mysteries that are plainly delivered in
Scripture, notwithstanding those seeming Contradictions wherewith they may be
charged. In the objects of Sense, the contrariety of appearances does not
lessen the certainty of things. The Stars to our sight seem but glittering
Sparks, yet they are immense Bodies. And it is one thing to be assured of a
Truth, another to answer all the difficulties that encounter it: A mean
Understanding is capable of the first, the second is so difficult, that in
clear things the profoundest Philosophers may not be able to untie all the
intricate and knotty Objections which may be urged against them. It Is
sufficient the Belief of Supernatural Mysteries is built on the Veracity and
Power of God, this makes them prudently credible. This resolves all doubts, and
produces such a stability of spirit as nothing can shake. A sincere Believer is
assured, That all opposition against Revealed Truths is fallacious, though he
cannot discover the Fallacy. Now the transcendent Mysteries of the Christian
Religion, the Trinity of Persons in the Divine Nature, the Incarnation of the
Son of God, are clearly and expressly set down in the Word, and although subtle
and obstinate Opponents have used many guilty Arts to dispirit and enervate
those Texts of Scripture, in putting an inferior sense upon them, and have
rackt them with violence to make them speak according to their prejudices, yet
all is in vain, the Evidence of Truth is victorious. A Heathen who considers
not the Gospel as a Divine Revelation, but merely as a Doctrine delivered in
Writing, and judges of its sense by natural Light, will acknowledge that those
things are delivered in it. And notwithstanding those who usurp a Sovereign
Authority to themselves, to judge of Divine Mysteries according to their own
apprehensions, deny them as mere Contradictions, yet they can never conclude
them impossible: For no certain Argument can be alleged against the being of a
thing, without a clear knowledge of its nature: Now although we may understand
the nature of Man, we do not the Nature of God, the Economy of the Persons,
and his Power to unite himself to a Nature below Him.

It Is true no Article of Faith is really repugnant to Reason, for God is the
Author of Natural, as well as of Supernatural Light, and He cannot contradict
Himself: they are emanations from Him, and though different, yet not
destructive of each other. But we must distinguish between those things that
are above Reason and incomprehensible, and those things that are against Reason
and utterly inconceivable: Some things are above Reason in regard of their
transcendent excellency, or distance from us; the Divine Essence, the Eternal
Decrees, the Hypostatical Union are such high and glorious objects, that it is
an impossible enterprise to comprehend them: the intellectual Eye is dazzled
with their overpowring Light. We can have but an imperfect knowledge of them:
And there is no just cause of wonder that Supernatural Revelation should speak
incomprehensible things of God. For He is a singular and admirable Being,
infinitely above the ordinary course of Nature. The Maxims of Philosophy are not
to be extended to Him. We must adore what we cannot fully understand: But those
things are against Reason, and utterly inconceivable, that involve a
contradiction, and have a natural repugnancy to our Understandings, which
cannot conceive any thing that is formally impossible: And there is no such
Doctrine in the Christian Religion.

2. We must distinguish between Reason corrupted, and right Reason. Since the
Fall, the clearness of the Humane Understanding is lost, and the light that
remains is eclipsed by the interposition of sensual lusts. The carnal Mind
cannot out of Ignorance, and will not from Pride and other malignant habits
receive things spiritual. And from hence arises many suspicions and doubts,
(concerning supernatural Verities) the shadows of darkened Reason, and of dying
Faith. If any Divine Mystery seems incredible, it is from the corruption of our
Reason, not from Reason it self, from its darkness, not its light. And as
Reason is obliged to correct the Errors of Sense, when it is deceived either by
some vicious quality in the organ, or by the distance of the object, or by the
falsness of the medium, that corrupts the image in conveying of it: So it is the
office of Faith to reform the judgment of Reason, when either from its own
weakness, or the height of things Spiritual, it is mistaken about them. For this
end supernatural Revelation was given, not to extinguish Reason, but to redress
it, and enrich it with the discovery of Heavenly things. Faith is called Wisdom
and Knowledge: it does not quench the vigor of the Faculty wherein it is seated,
but elevates it, and gives it a spiritual preception of those things that are
most distant from its commerce. It does not lead us through a mist to the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Faith is a rational Light: For

1. It arises from the consideration of those Arguments which convince the
Mind, that the Scripture is a Divine Revelation: I know, says the Apostle,
whom I have believed. 2 Timothy 1.12
And we are commanded Always to be ready to give an account of the hope that
is in us. 1 Pet. 3.15.
Those that owe their Christianity merely to the Felicity of their Birth,
without a sight of that transcendent excellency in our Religion, which
evidences that it came from Heaven, do not believe aright. As the Eye that is
clouded with a Suffusion, so that all things appear yellow to it, when it
judges things to be yellow that are so, its judgment is vicious: Because it
proceeds not from the quality of the object, but from its own indisposition. So
those that believe the Gospel upon a false Principle, because it is the Religion
of their Country, though in its self the word of Truth, yet they are not right
Believers. It Is not Judgment but Chance that enclines them to embrace it. The
Turks upon the same reason are zealous votaries of Mahomet, as they are
Disciples of Christ.

2. Faith makes use of Reason to consider what Doctrines are revealed in the
Scripture, and to deduce those Consequences which have a clear connection with
supernatural Principles. Thus Reason is an excellent instrument to distinguish
those things which are of a Divine Original, from what is spurious and
counterfeit. For sometimes that is pretended to be a Mystery of Religion, which
is only the fruit of Fancy, and that is defended by the sacred respect of
Faith, that Reason ought not to violate, which is but a groundless imagination;
so that we remain in an Error, by the sole apprehensions of falling into one,
as those that die for fear of Death. The Bereans are commended for their
searching the Scriptures, Act. 17.11.
whether the Doctrines they heard were consentaneous to them. But it is a
necessary Duty that Reason, how stiff soever, should fully comply with God,
where it appears reasonable that He has spoken.

Briefly, The richest Ornament of the Creature is Humility, and the most
excellent effect of it is, the sense of the weakness of our Understanding. This
is the temper of Soul that prepares it for Faith: partly as it puts us on a
serious consideration of those things which are revealed to us in the Word:
Infidelity proceeds from the want of consideration, and nothing hinders that so
much as Pride: Partly, as it stops all curious enquiries into those things
which are unsearchable: and principally as it entitles to the Promise, God will
instruct and give Grace to the humble. The knowledge of Heaven, as well as the
Kingdom of Heaven is the inheritance of the poor in spirit. A greater progress
is made in the knowledge and belief of these Mysteries by humble Prayer, than by
the most anxious study. As at Court, an hour of Favor is worth a years
attendance. Man cannot acquire so much as God can give.

And as Humility, so Holiness prepares the Soul for the receiving of
Supernatural Truths. The Understanding is clarified by the purification of the
Heart. It Is not the difficulty and obscurity of things revealed, that is the
real cause of Infidelity, since men believe other things upon far less
Evidence; but it is the prejudice of the lower Faculties that hinders them. When
all Affections to sin are mortified, the Soul is in the best disposition to
receive Divine Revelation. He that does the will of God, Joh. 7.17.
shall know whether the Doctrine of the Gospel came from Heaven.

The Spirit of God is the alone Instructor of the Spirit of Man in these
Mysteries, so as to produce a Saving Belief of them. That Knowledge is more
clear and satisfying, that we have by his Teaching, than by our own Learning.
The Rational Mind may discern the Literal Sense of the Propositions in the
Gospel, and may yield a naked assent to the truth of them; but without
supernatural irradiation by the Spirit of Life, there can be no transforming
and saving Knowledge and Belief of them. And as the vast expansion of Air that
is about us, does not preserve Life, but that part which we breath in, so it is
not the compass of our Knowledge and Belief (though it were equal to the whole
revealed Will of God) that is vital to the Soul, but that which is practiced by
us. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.2.
Though he had the understanding of all Mysteries, and all Knowledge, and all
Faith, yet if it were not joined with Love, the Principle of Obedience, it were
unprofitable. There is the same difference between the Speculative Knowledge of
these Mysteries, and that which is Affectionate and Operative, as between the
wearing of Pearls for Ornament, and the taking of them as a Cordial to revive
the fainting spirits.

In short, Such a Belief is required, as prevails upon the Will, and draws the
Affections, and (...) the whole Man obsequious to the Gospel. For (...) a Faith
is alone answerable to the quality of the Revelation. The Gospel is not a mere
Narrative, but a Promise. Christ is not represented only as an innocent Person
dying, but as the Son of God dying to deliver Men from Sin, and the effects of
it. The fallen Angels may understand and believe it without any Affections,
being unconcern^d in it: To them it is a naked History, but to Men it is a
Promise, and cannot be rightly received, without the most ardent Affections.
This is a faithful Saying, 1 Timothy 1.15^
and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save
Sinners. It Is essentia^^^ good, as true; its Sweetness and Profit are equal to
its Certainty: So that it commends it self to all our Faculties.

There are severe and sad Truths, which are attended with fearful expectation,
and the Mind is averse from receiving them: As the Law which like Lightning
terrifies the Soul with its amazing Brightness; and there are pleasant
illusions which have no solid Foundation: And as Truth does not delight the
Mind, unless united to Goodness, such as is suitable to its Palate, so Goodness
does not affect the Will unless it be real. Now the Doctrine of the Gospel is
as certain as the Law, and infinitely more comfortable than all the Inventions
of Men. It Is in the knowledge of it alone that the sensible and considering Soul
enjoys perfect Satisfaction and the most composed Rest. It Is evident that the
Understanding does not behold these Truths in their proper light, when the Will
does not embrace them. For the rational Appetite follows the last judgment of
the Mind. When the Apostle had a powerful Conviction of The Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.
this made him so earnest to gain an interest in Him. For this reason, those
who are only Christians in Title, Having a form of Godliness and denying the
power of it, are in Scripture Language styled Infidels: It being impossible
that those who truly and heartily believe this great Mystery of Godliness,
should remain ungodly. It Is a strong and effectual Assent that descends from
the Brain to the Heart and Life, that denominates us true Believers: So that
when the Death of Christ is propounded as the cause of our Reconciliation with
God, the wonder of the Mystery does not make it incredible: when as the reason
of the Morti^^^ation of our Lusts, the Pleasures of Sin do not disguise its
horror: When Salvation is offered upon our accepting of Christ for our Prince
and Savior, the Soul is ravished with its Beauty, and chooses it for an
everlasting portion.

To conclude, The Doctrine of the Gospel clearly discovers its Divine Original:
It Is so reasonable in itself, and profitable to us, so sublime and elevated
above Man, yet has such an admirable agreement with Natural Truths, it is so
perfectly corresponding in all its parts; that without affected Obstinacy no
man can reject it. And if after the open revelation of it we are so stupid and
wicked, as not to see its Superlative Excellency, and not to receive it with
the Faith, Love, and Obedience which is due to it; what contempt is this of
that infinite Wisdom which contrived the astonishing way of our Salvation? What
a reproach to the Divine Understanding, as if it had been employed from
Eternity about a matter of no moment, and that deserves not our serious
Consideration and Acceptance? The neglect of it will justly bring a more severe
punishment than the Hell of the uninstructed Heathens, who are strangers to
Supernatural Mysteries.

CHAP. VIII.
The Mercy of God is represented with peculiar advantages above the other
Attributes. It Is eminently glorified in our Redemption in respect of its
freeness and greatness. The freeness of it amplified from the consideration of
the original and object of it. God is perfectly happy in Himself, and needs not
the Creature to preserve or heighten his felicity. The glorious reward
conferred upon our Savior does not prejudice the freeness of his love to Man.
There was no tie upon God to save Man. The Object of Mercy is Man in his lapsed
state. It Is illustrated by the consideration of what he is in himself. No
motives of love are in him. He is a rebel impotent and obstinate. The freeness
of mercy set forth by comparing him with the fallen Angels who are left in
perfect irremediable misery. Their first state, fall, and punishment. The
Reasons why the Wisdom of God made no provision for their recovery.

ALthough all the Divine Attributes are equal as they are in God, (for one
Infinite cannot exceed another) yet in their exercise and effects, they shine
with a different glory. And Mercy is represented in Scripture with peculiar
advantages above the rest. It Is God's natural offspring, he is styled the
Father of Mercies. 2 Cor. 1.3.
It Is his dear Attribute, that which he places next to himself, He is
proclaimed the Lord God Gracious and Merciful. Exodus 34.6. Much. 7.18. Ephesians.
2.4.
It Is his delight, Mercy pleases him. It Is his Treasure, he is rich in Mercy.
It Is his triumphant Attribute, and the special matter of his Glory, Jam. 2.13.
Mercy rejoices over Judgment. Now in the performance of our Redemption, Mercy
is the predominant Attribute, that sets all the rest a working. The acts of his
Wisdom, Justice, and Power were in order to the illustration of his Mercy. And
if we duly consider that Glorious Work, we shall find in it all the ingredients
of the most sovereign Mercy. In discoursing of it, I shall principally consider
two things wherein this Attribute is eminently glorified, the Freeness, and the
Greatness of it. The Freeness of this Mercy will appear by considering the
original, and object of it.

1. The Original is God: and the notion of a Deity includes infinite
perfections, so that it neeessarily follows that he has no need of the
creatures service to preserve or heighten his feli^ity. Job 35.7.
If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine
hand? From Eternity he was without external honor, yet in that infinite
duration he was perfectly joyful and happy. He is the fountain of his own
blessedness, the Theater of his own Glory, the Glass of his own Beauty. One
drop increases the Ocean, but to God a million of Worlds ^an add nothing. Every
thing has so much of Goodness as it derives from him. As there was no gain to
him by the Creation, so there can be no loss by the annihilation of all things.
The World proceeded from his Wisdom as the Idea and Exemplar, and from his
Power as the efficient cause; and it so proceeds from him, as to remain more
perfectly in him. And as the possession of all things, and the obedience of
Angels and Men is of no advantage to God, so the opposition of impenitent
Rebels cannot lessen his Blessedness. If thou sinnest, what do^t thou against
him? or, Job 35.6.
if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? The Sun suffers
no loss of its light by the darkness of the night, or an Eclipse, but the World
lo^es its day: if intelligent Beings do not esteem him for his Greatness, and
love him for his Goodness, it is no injury to him, but their own infelicity.
Were it for his interest, he could by one act of Power conquer the obstinacy of
his fiercest Enemies. If he require subjection from his creatures, it is not
that he may be happy but liberal, that his Goodness may take its rise to reward
them. Now this is the special commendation of Divine Love, it does not arise
out of indigency as Created Love, but out of fullness and redundancy. Our
Savior tells us there is none good but God: not only in respect of the
perfection of that Attribute, Mat. 19.17.
as it is in God in a transcendent manner, but as to the effects of his
goodness, which are merely for the benefit of the receiver. He is only rich in
Mercy, to whom nothing is wanting, or profitable. The most liberal Monarch does
not always give, for he stands in need of his Subjects. And where there is an
expectation of Service for the support of the giver, ^tis trafique and no gift.
Humane affection is begotten, and nourisht by something without, but the Love
of God is from within: the misery of the Creature is the occasion, but the
reason of it is from himself. And how free was that Love, that caused the
infinitely blessed God to do so much for our recovery, as if his felicity were
imperfect without ours!

It does not prejudice the freeness of redeeming Mercy, that Christ's personal
Glory was the reward of his Sufferings.

1. It Is true, that our Redeemer for the Joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2.
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God: but he was not first drawn to the undertaking of that hard
service by the interest of the reward. For if we consider him in his Divine
Nature, he was the second Person in the Trinity, equal to the first, he possessed
all the Supreme Excellencies of the Deity, and by assuming our Nature the only
gain he purchased to himself, was to be capable of loss for the accomplishing
our Salvation. Such was the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that being rich, 2
Cor. 8.9.
yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be made
rich. And although his humane Soul was encouraged by the Glorious recompense
the Father promised, to make him King and Judge of the World; yet his Love to
Man was not kindled from that consideration, neither is it lessened by his
obtaining of it. For immediately upon the union of the humane Nature to the
Eternal Son, the Highest Honor was due to him. When the first-begotten was
brought into the World, 'twas said, Let all the Angels of God worship him. Heb.
1.6.
The Sovereign Power in Heaven and Earth was his inheritance, annexed to the
dignity of his Primogeniture: the Name above every name was a preferment due to
his Person. He voluntarily renounced his right for a time, and appeared in the
form of a Servant upon our account, that by humbling himself he might
accomplish our Salvation. He entered into Glory after a course of Sufferings,
because the Economy of our Redemption so required, but his original title to
it was by the personal union. To illustrate this by a lower instance: the
Mother of Moses* was called to be his Nurse by Pharaohs Daughter, with the
promise of a reward, as if she had no relation to him: Now the pure love of a
Mother, not the gain of a Nurse, was the motive that inclined her to nourish
him with her Milk. Christus enim per naturam bonus non propter praemii
cupiditatem; ideo passus est quia benefacere eum delectavit, non quia
incrementum Gloriae ex sua passione quae rebat. Ambros.
Thus the Love of Christ was the primary active cause that made him liberal to
us of his Blood: neither did the just expectation of the reward take off from
it.

The Sum is: the essence of Love consists in desiring the good of another
without respect to our selves; and Love is so much the more free, as the
benefit we give to another, is less profitable, or more damageable to us. Now
among Men it is impossible that to a virtuous benefactour there should not
redound a double Benefit.

1. From the Eternal Reward which God has promised. And,

2. From the Internal Beauty of an honest action, which the Philosopher
affirms, does exceed any loss that can befall us. For if one dies for his
Friend, yet he loves himself most, for he would not choose to be less virtuous
than his Friend, and by dying for him he excels him in Virtue, which is more
valuable than Life it self. But to the Son of God no such advantage could
accrue; for being infinitely holy and happy in his Essence, there can be no
addition to his Felicity or Virtues by any external emanation from him. His
Love was for our profit, not his own.

2. The freeness of Gods Mercy is evident by considering there was no ^ye upon
him to dispense it. Grace strictly taken differs from Love: for that may be a
Debt, and without injustice not denied. There are inviolable obligations on
Children to Love their Parents; and duty lessens desert: the performance of it
does not so much deserve praise, as the neglect merits censure and reproof. But
the Love of God to Man is a pure, free, and liberal Affection, no way due. The
Grace of God, Romans 5.15.
and the gift by Grace has abounded unto many. The Creation was an effusion of
goodness, much more Redemption. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and
Honor, and Power: Rev. 4.11.
for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were
created. It Is Grace that gave being to the Angels, with all the prerogatives
that adorn their Natures: it is Grace confirmed them in their original
integrity. For God ows them nothing, and they are nothing to him. 'Twas Grace
that placed Adam in Paradise, and made him as a visible God in the lower World.
And if Grace alone dispensed benefits to innocent Creatures, much more to those
who are obnoxious to justice: the first was free, but this is merciful. And
this leads to the second consideration, which exalts redeeming Love.

The object of it is Man in his lapsed state. In this respect it excels the
goodness that prevented him at the beginning. In the Creation as there was no
object to invite, so nothing repugnant to man's being and happiness: the dust of
the Earth did not merit such an excellent condition as it received from the
pure bounty of God, but there was no moral unworthiness* But the Grace of the
Gospel has a different object, the wretched and unworthy, and it produces
different operations, it is healing and medicinal, ransoming and delivering, and
has a peculiar character among the Divine Attributes. It Is goodness that
crowns the Angels, but it is Mercy, the Sanctuary of the guilty, and refuge of
the miserable, that saves Man. The Scripture has consecrated the name of Grace
in a special manner, to signify the most excellent and admirable favor of God
in recovering us from our justly deserved misery. We are justified freely by
his Grace: Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.5. Joh. 1.17. Tit. 2.11.
By Grace we are saved: Grace and Truth is come by Jesus Christ: it is the Grace
of God that brings Salvation. And this is gloriously manifested toward Man in
that, 1. considered in himself he is altogether unworthy of it. 2. As compared
with the fallen Angels, who are left under perfect irremediable Misery.

First, Man considered in himself is unworthy of the Favor of God. The usual
Motives of Love are,

1. The Goodnels of things or persons. This is the proper allective of the
Rational Appetite: There is such a ravishing Beauty in it, that it powerfully
calls forth Affection. When there is an union of amiable qualities in a Person,
every one finds an attractive.

2. A Conformity in Disposition has a mighty force to beget Love. Resemblance
is the common Principle of Union in Nature: Social Plants thrive best when near
together: Sensitive Creatures associate with those of their kind. And Love
which is an affectionate Union, and a voluntary Band, is best caused by a
Similitude in inclinations. The Harmony of Tempers is the strongest and
sweetest tie of Friendship.

3. Love is an innocent and powerful charm to produce Love: Tibi monstrabo
amatorium sine Medicamento, fine Herbis, fine ullius ^eneficae Ca^mine, si vis
amari ama. Senec.
it is of universal Virtue, and known by all the World. None are of such an
unnatural Hardness, but they are softened and receive impression from it. Now
there are none of these inducements to incline God to love Man. The first
quality he was utterly destitute of: Nothing excellent or amiable was in him:
Nothing but Deformity and Defilements. The Love of God makes us amiable, but
did not find us so. Redemption is a free Favor* not excited by the worth of
him that receives it, but the grace of him that dispenses it; Romans 5.8.
Herein God commended his Love to us, that while we were Sinners Christ died
for us. Our goodness was not the Motive of his Love, but his Love the original
of our goodness.

2. There is a fixed Contrariety in the corrupted nature of Man to the Holy
Nature and Will of God; For which he is not only unworthy of his Love, but
worthy of his wrath. We are opposite to Him in our Minds, Affections and
Actions: A strong Antipathy is seated in all our Faculties. How unqualified
were we for his Love? There is infinite Holiness in Him, whereby He is
eternally opposite to all Sin, yet He expressed infinite Love to Sinners in
saving them from Misery.

3. There was not the least spark of Love in Man to God: Romans 5.10.
notwithstanding his infinite Beauty and Bounty to us, yet we renewed acts of
hostility against Him every day. and 1.30.
And it was the worst kind of hostility arising from the hatred of God, and
that for his Holiness his most amiable Perfection: yet then in his Love He
pitied us. The same favor bestowed on an Enemy, is morally more valuable than
given to a Friend. For it is Love that puts a price on Benefits: and the more
undeserved they are* the more they are endeared by the Affection that gives
them. Here is Love, not that we loved God, but that He loved us, 1 John 4.10.
and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins. We were Rebels against
God, and at enmity with the Prince of Life, yet then He gave Himself for us.

It will further appear that our Salvation comes from pure favor, if we
consider Man not only as a rebellious enemy to God, but impotent and obstinate,
without power to resist Justice, and without affection to desire Mercy.
Sometimes the interest of a Prince may induce him to spare the guilty, he may
be compelled to pardon, whom he cannot punish. The multitude is the greatest
Potentate. The Sons of Zerviah were too strong for David: and then it is not
pity, but policy to suspend the judgment. But our condition is described by the
Apostle, that when we were sinners, Romans 5.6.
and without strength, then Christ dyed for us. Man is a despicable Creature,
so weak that he trembles at the appearance of a worm, and yet so wicked that he
lifts up his head against Heaven. How unable is he to encounter with offended
Omnipotence? How easily can God destroy him, when by his sole Word he made him?
if he unclasps his hand that suports all things, they will presently relasp
into their first confusion. The whole world of sinners was shut up, utterly
unable to repel or avoid his displeasure: And what amazing Love is it to spare
Rebels that were under his feet? When a man finds his enemy, 1* Sam. 24.9.
will he let him go well away? but God when we were all at his Mercy spared and
saved us.

Besides, Rebels sometimes solicit the favor of their Prince by their
Acknowledgments, their Tears and Supplications, the testimonies of their
Repentance: but Man persisted in his fierce enmity, and had the weapons of
defiance in his hands against his Creator; he trampled on his Laws and despised
his Deity, yet then the Lord of Host became the God of peace. In short, there
was nothing to call forth the Divine Compassion but our misery: The Breach
began on Man's part, but Reconciliation on God's* Mercy opened his melting Eye,
and prevented not only our desert, but our expectation, and desires. The design
was laid from Eternity. God foresaw our sin, and our misery, 1 Pet. 1.20. Isa.
53.10.
and appointed a Savior before the foundation of the World. 'Twas the most
early* and pure Love to provide a ransom for us before we had a being;
therefore we could not be deserving, nor desirous of it; and after we were
made, we deserv^d nothing but Damnation.

2. The Grace of God eminently appears in Man's recovery, by comparing his state
with that of the fallen Angels who are left under misery: this is a special
circumstance that magnifies the favor; and to make it more sensible to us, it
will be convenient briefly to consider the first state of the Angels, their
fall, and their punishment.

God in creating the World, formed two natures capable of his Image and Favor,
to glorify and enjoy him, Angels, and Men; and placed them in the principal
parts of the universe, Heaven and Earth.

The Angels were the eldest Offspring of his Love, the purest productions of
that supreme Light: Man in his best state was inferior to them. A great number
of them kept not their first state of integrity and felicity. Their sin is
intimated in Scripture; Psalm. 8.5. Jud. 6.
Ordain not a Novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the Devil: that is, 1 Timothy 3.15.
lest he become guilty of that sin which brought a severe sentence on the
Devil. The Prince of darkness was blinded with the luster of his own
excellencies, and attempted upon the Regalia of Heaven, affecting an
independent state. He disavoued his Benefactor, inricht with his benefits. And
in the same moment he with his companions in rebellion, were banished from
Heaven. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and
delivered them into Chains of Darkness to be reserved unto Judgment. 2 Pet. 2.4.
Mercy did not interpose to avert or suspend their Judgment, but immediately
they were expelled from the Divine Pre^ence. A solemn triumph in Heaven
followed: a voice came out of the Throne saying, Praise our God all ye his
Servants: and there was a^ it were the voice of mighty thundrings, saying,
Hallelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns. They are now the most eminent
examples of revenging wrath. Their present misery is insupportable, and they
expect worse. When our Savior cast some of them out of the possessed persons,
they cried out, Art thou come to torment us before our time? Mark 1.
Miserimum est timere cum s^eres nihil; it is the height of misery to have
nothing to Hope, and something to Fear. Their guilt is attended with despair;
they are in everlasting Chains. He that carries the Keys of Hell and Death will
never open their Prison. If the sentence did admit a Revocation after a million
of years, their torment would be nothing in comparison of what it is: for the
longest measure of time bears no proportion to Eternity; and hope would allay
the sense of the present sufferings with the prospect of future ease. But their
Judgment is irreversible; they are under the blackness of darkness for ever.
There is not the least glimps of hope to allay their sorrows, no Starlight to
sweeten the horrors of their Eternal night. They are ser^i poenae, that can
never be redeemed. It were a kind of pardon to them to be capable of Death: but
God will never be so far reconciled, as to annihilate them. His Anger shall be
accomplished, Ezekiel. 3.5.
and his Fury rest upon them. Immortality, the privilege of their nature,
infinitely increases their torment: for when the Understanding by a strong and
active apprehension, has a terrible and unbounded prospect of the continuance
of their Sufferings, that what is intolerable must be Eternal, this
inexpressibly exasperates their Misery: There wants a word beyond Death to set
it forth. This is the condition of the sinning Angels, and God might have dealt
in as strict Justice with rebellious Man. It Is true there are many Reasons may
be assigned why the Wisdom of God made no provision for their Recovery.

1. It was most decent that the first Breach of the Divine Law should be
punished, to secure Obedience for the future. Prudent Lawgivers are severe
against the first Transgressors, the Leaders in Disobedience: He that first
presumed to break the Sabbath, was by God^s command put to Death. And Solomon
the King of Peace, punished the first attempt upon his Royalty with Death,
though in the person of his Brother.

2. The Malignity of their Sin was in the highest degree: For such was the
clearness of the Angelical Understanding, that there was nothing of Ignorance
and Deceit to lessen the voluntariness of their Sin; 'twas no mistake, but
Malice: They fell in the light of Heaven, and rendered themselves incapable of
Mercy. As under the Law, those who sinned with a high hand; that is, Heb. 9.7.
not out of Ignorance or Imbecility to please their Passions, but knowingly
and proudly despised the Command, Number. 15.30 Heb. 10.26, 27, 28, 29.
their Presupmtion was inexpiable, no Sacrifice was appointed for it. And the
Gospel, though the Declaration of Mercy, yet excepts those who sin the great
Transgression against the Holy Ghost. Now of such a nature was the Sin of the
Rebellious Angels, it being a contemptuous violation of Gods Majesty, Phil. 3.
and therefore unpardonable. Besides, they are wholly spiritual Beings, without
any allay of flesh, and so fell to the utmost in evil, there being nothing to
suspend the intireness of their Will: whereas the Humane Spirit is more slow by
its union with the Body. And that which extremely aggravates their sin is, that
it was committed in the state of perfect Happiness. They despised the full
fruition of God: 'twas therefore congruous to the Divine Wisdom, that their
final Sentence should depend upon their first Election: whereas Man's Rebellion,
though inconceivably great, was against a lower Light and less Grace dispensed
to him.

3. They finn'd without a Tempter, and were not in the same capacity with Man
to be restored by a Savior. The Devil is an original Proprietor in Sin, Joh.
8.44.
it is of his own; Man was beguiled by the Serpents subtilty: as he fell by
another Malice, so he is recovered by another Merit.

4. The Angelical Nature was not entirely lost, Myriads of blessed Spirits
still continue in the place of their Innocence and Glory, and for ever ascribe
to the Great Creator that incommunicable Honor, which is due to Him, Psalm. 103.
and perfectly do his Commandments. But all Mankind was lost in Adam, and no
Religion was left in the lower world.

Now although in these and other respects it was most consistent with the
Wisdom and Justice of God, to conclude them under an irrevocable Doom, yet the
principal cause that inclined him to save Man, was mere and perfect Grace. The
Law mad^ no distinction, but awarded the same Punishment: Mercy alone made the
difference: and the reason of that is in Himself. Millions of them fell
Sacrifices to Justice, and guilty Man was spared. It Is not for the excellency
of our Natures, for Man in his Creation was lower than the Angels; nor upon the
account of Service, for they having more eminent Endowments of Wisdom and Power
might have brought greater honor to God; nor for our Innocence, for though not
equally, yet we had highly offended Him: But it must be resolved into that Love
which passes Knowledge. 'Twas the unaccountable Pleasure of God that preferred
babes before the wise and prudent: and herein Grace is most glorious. Ephesians.
Mat. 11. Ephesians. 1.6. Heb. 2.
He in no wise took the nature of Angels, though immortal Spirits; He did not
put forth his hand to help them, and break the force of their Fall, He did
nothing for their relief, they are under unallayed wrath: but He took the Se^d
of Abraham, and plants a new Colony of those who sprung from the Earth, in the
Heavenly Country, to fill up the vacant places of those Apostate Spirits. This
is just matter of our highest admiration, why the milder Attribute is exercised
toward Man, and the severer on them? Why the vessels of clay are chosen, and
the vessels of Gold neglected? How can we reflect upon it without the warmest
Affections to our Redeemer? We shall never fully understand the Riches of
distinguishing Grace, till our Savior shall be their Judge, and receive us into
the Kingdom of Joy and Glory, and condemn them to an Eternal Separation from
his Presence.

CHAP. IX.
The Greatness of Redeeming Love discovered by considering the Evils from which
we are freed. The Servitude of Sin, the Tyranny of Satan, the Bondage of the
Law, the Empire of Death. The measure of Love is proportionable to the degrees
of our Misery. No possible Remedy for us in Nature. Our Deliverance is
complete. The Divine Love is magnified in the Means by which our Redeemer is
accomplish^d. They are the Incarnation and Sufferings of the Son of God. Love
is manifested in the Incarnation, upon the account of the essential Condition
of the Nature assumed, and its Servile state. Christ took our Nature after it
had lost its Innocence. The most evident Proof of God's Love is in the
Sufferings of Christ. The description of them with respect to his Soul and
Body. The Sufferings of his Soul set forth from the Causes of his Grief; The
Disposition of Christ, and the Design of God in afflicting Him. The sorrows of
his forsaken state. All comforting Influences were suspended, but without
prejudice to the Personal Union, or the perfection of his Grace, or the Love of
his Father toward Him. The Death of the Cross considered, with respect to the
Ignominy and Torment that concurred in it. The Love of the Father and of Christ
amplified upon the account of his enduring it.

THe next Circumstance to be considered in the Divine Mercy is the degree of
it: And this is described by the Apostle in all the dimensions which can
signify its greatness. He prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.18.
that they may be able to comprehend with all Saints the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height of the love of God in Christ which passes knowledge. No
language is sufficient to express it: if our hearts were as large as the Sand
on the Seashore, yet they were too straight to comprehend it. But although we
cannot arrive to the perfect knowledge of this excellent Love, yet it is our duty
to study it with the greatest application of mind; for our happiness depends
upon it; and so far we may understand as to inflame our hearts with a
superlative Affection to God. And the full discovery which here we desire, and
search after, in the future state shall be obtained by the presence and light
of our Redeemer. Now the greatness of the Divine Love in our Redemption
appears, 1. By reflecting on the mighty Evils from which we are freed. 2. The
means by which our Redemption is accomplished. 3. That excellent State to which
we are advanced by our Redeemer,


1. If we reflect upon the horror of our natural state, it will exceedingly
heighten the mercy that delivered us. This I have in part opened before,
therefore I will be the shorter in describing it. Man by his rebellion had
forfeited Gods favor, and the honor and happiness he enjoyed in Paradise. And
as there is no middle state between Sovereignty and misery, he that falls from
the Throne stops not till he comes to the bottom; so when Man fell from God and
the dignity of his innocent state, he became extremely miserable. He is under
the servitude of sin, the tyranny of Satan, the bondage of the Law, and the
empire of Death.

1. Man is a captive to sin. He is fallen from the hand of his counsel, under
the power of his passions, Love, Hatred, Ambition, Envy, Fear, Sorrow, and all
the other stinging Affections, (of which is true what the Historian speaks of
the several kinds of Serpents in Africa, Quantus nomiuum tantus mortium
numerus) exercise a tyranny over him. And if no man can serve two Masters, Mat.
6.24.
as the Oracle of Truth tells us, how wretched is the slavery of Man, whose
passions are so opposite, that in obeying one, he cannot escape the lash of many
imperious Masters. He is possessed with a Legion of impure lusts. And as the
Demoniac in the Gospel was sometimes cast into the fire, and sometimes into the
water; so is he hurried by the fury of contrary passions. This servitude to sin
is in all respects complete. For those who serve are either born servants, or
bought with a price, or made captives by force: and sin has all these kinds of
title to man. Psalm. 51. Romans 7. Isa. 28.15.
He is conceived and born in sin: he is sold under sin: and sells himself to do
evil. As that which is sold passes into the possession of the buyer, -- so the
sinner exchanging himself for the pleasures of sin, is under its power.
Original sin took possession of our nature, and actual of our lives. He is the
servant of corruption by yiedling to it: for of whom a man is overcome, of the
same he is brought in bondage. Pet. 2.19.
The condition of the most wretched bond-^lave is more sweet and less servile
than that of a sinner. For the severest tyranny is exercised only upon the
body, Slaves are called (...), Bodies, Rev. 18.13.
the soul remains free in the midst of chains; but the power of sin oppresses
the Soul, the most noble part, and defaces the bright character of the Deity
that was stamped upon its visage. The worst slavery is terminated with this
present life. Job 3.18, 19
In the grave the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor. The small and the great are there, and the Servant is free from his
Master. But there is no exemption from this servitude by death, it extends its
self to Eternity.

2. Man since his fall is under the tyranny of Satan, who is called the God of
this World, and is more absolute then all temporal Princes, his dominion being
over the will. He overcame man in Paradise, and by the right of War he rules
over him. The soul is kept in his bondage by subtle Chains, of which the
spiritual nature is capable. The understanding is captivated by ignorance and
errors; the will by inordinate and dangerous lusts; the memory by the images of
sinful pleasures, those mortal visions which inchant the soul, and make it not
desirous of liberty. Never did cruel Pirat so incompassionately urge his Slaves
to ply their Oars in charging, or flying from an enemy, as Satan incites those
who are his captives to do his will. 2 Timothy 2.26.
And can there be a more afflicting calamity, then to be the slave of ones
enemy, especially if base and cruel? This is the condition of man, he is a
captive to the Devil, who was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning. He is
under the rage of that bloody Tyrant, whose ambition was to render Man as
miserable as himself, who in triumph upbraids him for his folly, and adds
derision to his Cruelty.

3. Fallen Man is under the Curse and Terrors of the Law. For being guilty, he
is justly exposed to the punishment threatened against transgressors, without
the allowance of repentance to obtain pardon. And Conscience, which is the
Ecch^ of the Law in his bosom, repeats the dreadful sentence. This is an
Acouser which none can silence, a Judge that none can decline: and from hence
it is that Men all their life are subject to bondage, Heb. 2.
being obnoxious to the wrath of God, which the awakened Conscience fearfully
sets before them.

This complicated Servitude of a Sinner, the Scripture represents under great
variety of Similitudes, that the defects of one may be supplied by another.
Every Sinner is a Servant, Joh. 8.34.
now a Servant by flight may recover his Liberty: But he is not only a Servant,
2 Timothy 2. ult.
but a Captive in chains: A Captive may be freed by laying down a Ransom; but
the Sinner is not only a Captive, Mat. 18.
but deeply in debt: Every Debtor is not miserable by his own fault, it may be
his Infelicity not his Crime that he is poor; but the Sinner is guilty of the
highest offense: A guilty Person may enjoy his Health, Isa. 1.6.
but the Sinner is sick of a deadly Disease, an incurable wound: 2 Timothy 2.25.
The Apostle sets forth the Conversion of a Sinner, by the word (...), which
signifies an awaking out of sleep, caused by the fumes of Wine, or strong
Liquor: which is an excellent resemblance of the Sinners state, wherein the
Spiritual Senses are bound up, and the Passions* as thick and malignant
Vapors, cloud the Mind, that it cannot reflect upon their Miseries.
He that is sick and wounded may send for the Physician in order to his
Recovery; But the Sinner is in a deep sleep. He that is asleep may awake; But
the Sinner is in a state of Death, which implies not only a Cessation from all
vital Actions, but an absolute disability to perform them. The Understanding is
disabled for any Spiritual Perception, the Will for any Holy Inclinations, the
whole Man is disabled for the sense of his wretched state. This is the
spiritual Death which justly exposes the Sinner to Death temporal and eternal.

4. Every Man as descending from Adam, is born a Sacrifice to Death. His
condition in this world is so wretched and unworthy the original excellency of
his Nature, that it deserves not the name of Life: It Is a continual exercise of
sinful Actions dishonorable to God, and damning to himself, and after the
succession of a few Years in the defilements of Sin, and the accidents of this
frail state, in doing and suffering evil, Man comes to his fatal Period, and
falls into the bottomless Pit, the place of Pollutions and Horrors, of Sin and
Torments. It Is there That the wrath of God abides on him; Psalm. 90.12.
and who knows the power of his wrath? According to his fear so is his wrath.
Fear is an unbounded Passion, and can extend it self to the apprehension of
such Torments, which no finite Power can inflict: But the Wrath of God exceeds
the most jealous fears of the guilty Conscience. It proceeds from infinite
Justice, and is executed by Almighty Power, and contains eminently all kinds of
evils. A Lake of flaming Brimstone, and whatever is most dreadful to Sense, is
but an imperfect Allusion to represent it.

And how great is that Love which pitied and rescued us from Sin and Hell? This
Saving Mercy is set out for its tenderness and vehemence by the commotion of
the bowels, at the sight of one in misery: Luke 1.78.
especially the working of the Mother's, when any evil befalls her Children:
Such an inward deep resentment of our distress was in the Father of Mercies.
When we were in our blood, He said to us, Live. Ezekiel.
And that which further discovers the eminent degree of his Love is, that He
might have been unconcerned with our Distress, and left us under despair of
Deliverance. There is a Compassion which arises from Self-love, when the sight
of another Misery surprises us, and affects us in such a manner as to disturb
our Repose, and imbitter our Joy, by considering our liableness to the same
troubles, and from hence we are inclined to help them. And there is a
Compassion that proceeds from pure love to the miserable, when the Person that
expresses it, is above all the assaults of evil, and incapable of all
Affections that might lessen his Felicity, and yet applies himself to relieve
the afflicted; and such was Gods toward Man.

If it had been a tolerable Evil under which we were fallen, the Mercy that
recovered us had been less: For Benefits are valued by the necessity of the
receiver. But Man was disinherited of Paradise, an Heir of Hell, his Misery was
inconceivably great. Now the measure of God's Love is proportionable to the
Misery from whence we are redeemed. If there had been any possible Remedy for
us in Nature, our engagements had not been so great: But only He that created
us by his Power, could restore us by his Love. Briefly, it magnifies the Divine
Compassion that our Deliverance is full and entire. It had been admirable
Favor to have mitigated our Misery, but we have perfect Redemption, sweetened
by the remembrance of those dreadful evils that oppressed us. As the three Hebrew
Martyrs came unhurt out of the fiery Furnace, The hair of their heads were not
singed, nor their coats changed, nor the smell of the fire had passed on them.
Dan. 3.27.
So the Saints above have no marks of Sin or Misery remaining upon them, not
the least spot or wrinkle to blast their Beauty, nor the least trouble to
diminish their Blessedness; but for ever possess the Fullness of Joy, and Glory,
a pure and triumphant Felicity.

2. The Greatness of the Divine Love toward fallen Man appears in the means by
which our Redemption is accomplished. And those are the Incarnation and
Sufferings of the Son of God. The Incarnation manifests this Love upon a double
account.

1. In regard of the essential condition of the nature he assumed. 2. Its
Servile state and meanness*
1. The essential condition of the humane nature assumed by our Redeemer
discovers his transcendent Love to us. For what proportion is there between God
and Man? Infinite and Finite are not terms that admit comparison, as Greater
and Less, but are distant, as All and Nothing. The whole World before him, Isa.
40.15, 17.
is but as the drop of the Bucket that has scarce weight to fall; and the
small dust of the Balance, that is not of such moment as to turn the scales;
it is as nothing, and counted less then nothing and vanity. The Deity in its own
nature includes Independence and Sovereignty. To be a Creature implys
dependence, and subjection. The Angelical Nature is infinitely inferior to the
Divine, and Man is lower then the Angels; yet the Word was made Flesh. Add to
this, he was not made as Adam in the perfection of his nature, and beginning
the first step of his life in the full exercise of Reason, and Dominion over
the Creatures, but he came into the World by the way of a natural birth, and
dependence upon a mortal Creature. The Eternal Wisdom of the Father stoopt to a
state of infancy, which is most distant from that of Wisdom, wherein though the
Life yet the Light of the reasonable Soul is not visible, and the mighty God to
a condition of indigence and infirmity. The Lord of Nature submitted to the
Laws of it. Admirable Love, wherein God seemed to forget his own Greatness, and
the meanness of the Creature! This is more indeared to us by considering,

2. The Servile state of the Nature be assumed. An account of this we have in
the Words of the Apostle. Let this mind be in you, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8.
which was also in Christ; who being in the form of God, that is, enjoying the
Divine Nature with all its Glory eternally, and invariably. As to be in the
form of a King, signifies not only to be a King, but to have all the
conspicuous marks of Royalty, the Crown, Scepter, Throne, the Guards and State
of a King. John 17.5. Isa. 6.1, 2. Prove. 8.15.
Thus our Savior possessed that Glory that is truly Divine, before he took our
nature. The Angels adored him in Heaven, and by him Princes reigned on the
Earth. It Is added, he thought it no robbery to be equal with God; that is,
being the essential Image of the Father, he had a rightful possession of all
his perfections. Yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of Man; this is a lower degree
of condescension, than the assuming the naked humane nature. A Servant is not
simply a Man, there being many Men of higher quality, but a Man in a low State.
Now he that was in the form of God, lessened himself into the form of a
servant, that is, took the humane nature without honor, attended with its
infirmities; So that by the visible condition of his life, he was judged to be
an ordinary person, and not that under that meanness the Lord of Angels had
been concealed. This will more distinctly be understood, if we consider the
lowness of his extraction, the poverty of his birth, and the tenor of his life
whilst he converst with Men. What Nation was more despicable in the esteem of
the World than the Jews? and Christ came of their stock; The Jews are called by
Tacitus, Vilissima pars servientium. Lib. 5. Hist. Joh. 7.50. Joh. 1.46. Luke
2.14. Levit. 11.
and among the Jews none were more vilified than the Galileans, and in
Galilee-Nazareth was a contemptible village, and in Nazareth the Family of
Joseph was very obscure, and to him our Savior was nearly allied. His reputed
Father was a Carpenter, and his Mother a poor Virgin, that offered two Pigeons
for her purification. He first breathed in a Stable, and was covered with poor
swadling-cloaths, who was Master of Heaven and Earth, and adorns all creatures
with their glory. But Love made him who is Heir of all things, renounce the
privilege of his supernatural Sonship. Incredible condesension! Therefore an
Angel was dispatched from Heaven, who appeared with a surprising miraculous
light, the visible character of his dignity, to prevent the scandal which might
arise from the meanness of his condition, and to assure the Shepherds that the
Babe which lay in the Manger, was the Redeemer of the World. The course of his
Life was a preface, Luke 2.12.
and preparative for the Death of the Cross. He had a just right to all that
Glory, which a created Nature personally united to the Deity could receive. An
eminent instance of it there is in his Transfiguration, when Glory descended
from Heaven to encompass him; that which was so short should have been
continual, but he presently returned to the: lowness of his former condition.
The fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, yet in his humble state he was
voluntarily deprived of those admirable effects which should proceed from that
union. Strange separation between the Deity, and the Glory that results from
it! God is light, and the Son is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, yet in
his Pilgrimage upon the Earth he was always under a cloud. Astonishing
Miracle! transcending all those in the course of Nature, yet the power of Love
effected it. He was made not only lower than the Angels, Heb. 2. Psalm. 22.
but less than all Men, joining (Oh amazing abasement!) the Majesty of God,
with the meanness of a Worm. The High and Lofty-One, whom the Prophet saw
Exalted on a High Throne, Esaias. 6.
and all the Powers of Heaven in a posture of Reverence about Him, was despised
and rejected of Men: they turned their eyes from him, Esaias. 53.
not for the luster of his Countenance, but for shame.

If the Lord had assumed our Nature in its most honorable Condition, and
appeared in its Beauty, the condescension were infinite: For although Men are
distinguished among themselves by Titles of Honor, yet as two Gloworms that
shine with an unequal brightness in the Night, are equally obscured by the
light of the Sun; So all men, those that are advanced to the most eminent
degree, as well as the most abject and wretehed, are in the same distance from
God. But He emptied himself of all his Glory; Phil. 2. Esa. 53.2.
he grew up as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry ground, there was no
Form or Comeliness in him. From his Birth to the time of his Preaching he lived
so privately, as only known under the quality of the Carpenters Son. There was
a continual repression of that inconceivable Glory, that was due to him the
first moment of his appearing among Men. In short, His despised Condition was
an abasement not only of his Divinity, but his Humanity. And how conspicuous
was his Love in this darkning Condescension? 2* Cor. 8 9.
We know the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; that though he was rich, he became
poor for our sakes. He did not assume that which was due to the excellency of
his Nature, but what was convenient for our Redepmtion, which was to be
accomplished by Sufferings.

Where can be found an Example of such Love? Some have favorable Inclinations
to help the distressed, and will express so much Compassion as is consistent
with their state and quality: But if in order to the relieving of the
miserable, one must submit to what is shameful, who has an affection so strong
and vehement as to purchase his Brothers Redemption at the loss of his own
Honor? Yet the Son of God descended from his Throne, and put on our vile
Mortality: He parted with his Glory that He might be qualified to part with his
Life for our Salvation. How does this exalt his Compassion to us?

And further, He took our Nature after it had lost its Primitive Innocence. The
natural distance between God and the creature is infinite, the moral between
God and the sinful creature, if possible, is more than infinite: Yet the Mercy
of our Redeemer overcame this distance. What an ecstasy of Love transported the
Son of God so far as to espouse our Nature, after it was defiled and debased
with Sin? He was essential Innocence and Purity, yet He came in the similitude
of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.
which to outward view was not different from what was really sinful. He was
the Holy Lawgiver, yet He submitted to that Law, which made Him appear under
the character and disreputation of a Sinner. Gal. 4.4.
He paid the bloody Tribute of the Children of wrath, being circumcised as
guilty of Adam's Sin; and he was baptized as guilty of his own.

2. The most evident and sensible proof of the greatness of Gods Love to
Mankind, is in the Sufferings of our Redeemer to obtain our Pardon. He is
called in Scripture, Isai. 53.
A man of Sorrows, the title signifies their number and quality. His whole Life
was a continual Passion: He suffered the contradiction of Sinners, who by their
malicious Calumnies obscured the luster of his Miracles and most innocent
Actions: He endured the Temptations of Satan in the Desert: He was often in
danger of his Life; But all these were nothing in comparison of his last
Sufferings. It Is therefore said, that at the bare apprehension of them, He
began to be sorrowful, as if He had never felt any Grief till then: His former
Afflictions were like scattered drops of Rain; But as in the Deluge All the
Fountains beneath, and all the Windows of Heaven above were opened; So in our
Saviors last Sufferings, the Anger of God, the Cruelty of Men, the Fury of
Devils broke out together against him. And that the degrees of his Love may be
measured by those of his Sufferings, it will be fit to consider them with
respect to his Soul and his Body. The Gospel delivers to us the relation of
both.

1. Upon his entrance into the Garden, He complains, My Soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto Death. There were present only Peter, James, and John his
happy Favorites, who assured him of their fidelity; there was no visible enemy
to afflict Him, yet his Soul was environed with Sorrows. It Is easy to conceive
the injuries He suffered from the rage of Men, for they were terminated upon
his Body; But how to understand his inward Sufferings, the wounds of his
Spirit, the cross to which his Soul was nailed, is very difficult. Yet these
were in expressibly greater as the visible effects dedeclare. The anguish of
his soul so affected his body, that his Sweat was as it were great drops of
Blood, the miraculous evidence of his Agony. The terror was so dreadful, that
the assistance of an Angel could not calm it. And if we consider the causes of
his grief, the dispositions of Christ, and the design of God in afflicting him,
it will further appear that no sorrow was ever like his. The Causes were,

1. The evil of Sin which infinitely exceeds all other: for the just measure of
an evil is taken from the good to which it is opposite, and of which it deprives
us. Now Sin is formally opposite to the Holy nature, and will of God, and
meritoriously deprives of his blessed presence for ever. Therefore God being
the supreme Good, Sin is the supreme evil. And grief being the resentment of an
evil, that which is proportioned to the evil of Sin must be infinite. Now the
Lord Christ alone had perfect light to discover Sin in its true horror, and
perfect zeal to hate it according to its nature: for who can understand the
excellency of good, and the malignity of evil, but the Author of the one and
the Judge of the other? who can fully conceive the guilt of rebellion against
God, but the Son of God who is alone able to comprehend his own Majesty? On
this account the grief of our Redeemer exceeded all the sorrow of repenting
Sinners, from the beginning of the World. For our knowledge is so imperfect,
and our zeal so remiss, that our grief for sin is much beneath what it is worthy
of, but sin was as hateful to Christ as it is in it self, and his sorrow was
equal to its evil.

2. The Death he was to suffer, attended with all the Curses of the Law, and
the terrible marks of Gods Indignation. From hence it is said, he began to be
sore amazed and to be very heavy. Mat. 14.34.
It Is wonderful that the Son of God, who had perfect patience, and the strength
of the Deity to support him, who knew that his Passion should soon pass away,
and that the issue should be his own glorious Resurrection and the recovery of
lapsed Man, that he should be shaken with fear and oppressed with sorrow at the
first approches of it: how many of the Martyrs have with an undisturbed courage
embraced a more cruel death? but to them 'twas disarmed, whereas our Savior
encountered it with all its formidable Pomp, with its Darts and Poison.

3. The Wrath of God was inflamed against him. For although he was perfectly
Innocent, and more distant from sin than Heaven is from the Earth, yet by the
ordination of God, and his own consent being made our Sponsor, Esa. 53.
the Iniquity of us all was laid upon him. He suffered as deeply as if he had
been guilty. Vindictive justice was inexorable to his Prayers and Tears.
Although he renewed his request with the greatest ardency, as it is said by the
Evangelist, that being in an Agony he prayed more earnestly, yet God would not
spare him. The Father of Mercies saw his Son humbled in his presence, prostrate
on the Earth, yet deals with him in extreme severity. He was stricken, smiten
of God, and afflicted. And who is able to conceive the weight of God's Hand
when he punishes sin according to its desert? who can understand the degrees of
those Sufferings when God exacts satisfaction from one that was obliged, and
able to make it? how piercing were those sorrows whereby Divine Justice,
infinitely incensed, was to be appeased? Who knows the consequence of those
words, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? It Is impossible to
comprehend, or represent that great and terrible Mystery. But thus much we may
understand, That Holiness and Glory being essential to the Deity, they are
communicated to the Reasonable Nature when united to it; But with this
difference, that Holiness necessarily results from Union with God: For Sin
being infinitely repugnant to His Nature, makes a Separation between Him and
the creature: But Glory and Joy are dispensed in a free and arbitrary manner.
This dereliction of our Savior must be understood with respect to the second,
not the first Communication. In the extremity of his Torments all his
Affections were innocent and regular, being only raised to that degree, which
the vehemence of the object required. He expressed no murmur against God, nor
anger against his enemies. His Faith, Love, Humility, Patience were then in
their Exaltation. But that glorious and unspeakable Joy which in the course of
his Life the Deity conveyed to Him, was then withdrawn. An impetuous torrent of
pure unmixed Sorrows broke into his holy Soul; He felt no refreshing
emanations, so that having lost the sense of present Joy, there remained in his
Soul only the hope of future Joy. And in that sad moment, his Mind was so
intent upon his Sufferings, that he seems to have been diverted from the actual
consideration of the Glory that attended the issue of them.

Briefly, All comforting Influences were suspended, but without prejudice to
the Personal Union, or the Perfection of his Grace, or to the Love of his
Father toward Him. His Soul was liable to sorrows, as his Body to death. For
the Deity is the Principle of Life as well as of Joy; and as the Body of Christ
was three days in the state of Death, and the Hypostatical Union remained
entire; so his Soul was left for a time under the fearful impressions of wrath,
yet was not separated from the Godhead. And although He endured what ever was
necessary for the Expiation of Sin, yet all vicious Evils, as Blasphemy, Hatred
of God, and any other which are not inflicted by the Judge, but in strictness
are accidental to the Punishment, and proceed from the weakness or wickedness
of the Patient, he was not in the least guilty of. Besides when his Father
appeared an enemy against him, at that time He was infinitely pleased in his
Obedience. But with these exceptions our Blessed Lord suffered whatever was due
to us.

The Sorrows of his forsaken state were inexpressibly great; for according to
the degree and sense we have of Happiness, such in proportion is our grief for
the loss of it. Now Christ had the fullest enjoyment, and the highest valuation
of Gods favor. His enjoyment was raised above what the most glorious Spirits
are capable of: All his Faculties were pure and vigorous, never blunted with
Sin, and intimately united to the Deity. How cutting then was it to his Soul,
to be suspended from the perfect vision of God? To be divorced as it were from
himself, and to lose that Paradise He always had within Him? If all the Angels
of Light were at once deprived of their glory, the loss were not equal to this
dreadful eclipse of the Sun of Righteousness: As if all the Stars were
extinguished, the darkness would not be so terrible, as if the Sun the fountain
of light were put out. Whatever his Sufferings were in kind, yet in degree they
were answerable to the full and just desert of Sin, and surpast the power of
the Humane or Angelical Nature to endure. In short, His Sorrows were only
equaled by that Love which procured them.

And as the Sufferings infflicted by the hand of God, so the Evils He endured
from men, declare the infiniteness of our Redeemers Love to us. For the further
discovery of it, it is necessary to reflect upon his Death, which is set down by
the Apostle as the lowest degree of his Humiliation, in which the succession of
all his Bodily Sufferings is included, it being the complement of all. And if
we consider the quality of it, the Goodness of our Redeemer will be more
visible in his voluntary submission to it. Two Circumstances make the kind of
death which is to be suffered, very terrible to us, Ignominy and Torment, and
they eminently concur in the Death of the Cross.

1. The greatest Ignominy attended it, and that in the account of God and Men.
As honor is in honorante, it depends upon the esteem of others; so infamy
consists in judgment of others. Now in the acount of the World every Death
inflicted for a Crime is attended with disgrace: But that receives its degrees
from the manner of it. To be executed privately is a favor, but to be made a
spectacle to the multitude, increases the dishonor of one that suffers. When
Death is speedily inflicted, the sense of shame is presently past; but to be
exposed to public view for many Hours, as a Malefactor, whilst the Beholders
detest the Crime, and abhor the Punishment, is an heavy aggravation of it.
Beheading which is suddenly dispatched by a Sword, a military Instrument, and
therefore more honorable, was a Privilege: But to hang on the Cross, was the
most conspicuous mark of the public Justice and Displeasure: a special Infamy
was concomitant with it. Among the Jews hanging on a Tree was branded with the
Curse: Therefore God commanded that the bodies of those that were hanged on a
tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
should be taken down in the Evening, that the Land might not be defiled with a
Curse. And the judgment of other Nations was answerable: for it was only
inflicted on the most infamous Offenders, Pone Crucem Servo. Juven. Sat. 6.

Liberi Homines aut Cives Romani hoc supplicio affici non poterant, nisi servi
poenae fierent.

Facinus est vincire Romanum Civem, Scelus est verberare, prope Parricidium
necare, quid dicam in Crucem tollere? Verbo quidem satis digno tam nefaria res
appellari nullo modo potest.


as Fugitives, Slaves, Thieves, and Traitors, such whom the lowness of their
Quality, or the height of their Crimes rendered unworthy of any respect. Hence
it is, that Cicero to aggravate the Cruelty of Verres in crucifying a Roman
Citizen, calls it an unnamed wickedness. No Eloquence could equal the evil of
it.

2. The pain of that Death was extreme. The Hands and Feet, those parts wherein
the complexion of the Nerves meet, and are of exquisite Sense, were nailed.
Crucified persons suffered a slow Death, but quick Torments: They felt
themselves die. Therefore in pity the Soldiers broke their Legs, to put a
period to their Misery. And to complete their Punishment, they were judged
unworthy of Burial, the last consolation of the dead; they were deprived of
Repose in the bosom of the Earth our common Mother, and exposed as a prey to
Birds and Beasts.

Now the Son of God endured no gentler or nobler Death than that of the Cross.
His pure and gracious Hands, which were never stretched out but to do good, were
pierced; Psalm. 22.
and those Feet which bore the Redeemer of the World, and for which the Waters
had a reverence, were nailed. His Body, the precious workmanship of the Holy
Ghost, the Temple of the Deity, was destroyed. He that is the Glory of Heaven
was made the scorn of the Earth: The King of Kings was crucified between two
Thieves, in Jerusalem, at their Sacred Feast, in the face of the World. His
naked Body was exposed on the Cross for three Hours, only covered with a Veil
of Darkness. This was such a stupendous submission of the Son of God, that his
Death astonished the Universe in another manner, than his Birth and Life, his
Resurrection and Ascension. Universal Nature relented at his last Sufferings.
The Sun was struck with horror and withdrew its light; it did not appear
crowned with beams, when the Creator was with thorns. The Earth trembled, and
the Rocks rent, the most insensible creatures sympathis'd with Him, and it is in
this we have the most visible instance of Divine Love to us.

The Scripture distinctly represents the Love of God in giving his Son, and the
Love of Christ in giving Himself to die for Man, and both require our deepest
consideration.

The Father expressed such an excess of Love, that our Savior himself speaks of
it with admiration: God so loved the world, that He gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on Him should not perish, Joh. 3.16.
but have everlasting Life. If Abraham's resolution to offer his son, Genesis
22.12.
was in the judgment of God a convincing Evidence of his Affection, how much
more is the actual sacrificing of Christ the strongest proof of God's Love to
us? For God had a higher Title to Isaac than Abraham had: The Father of Spirits
has a nearer claim, than the Fathers of the Flesh. Abraham's readiness to
offer up his son was Obedience to a Command, not his own choice; 'twas rather
an act of Justice than Love, by which he rendered to God what was his own. But
God Spared not his own Son in whom he had an Eternal Right: And He was not only
free from Obligation, but not sued to for our Salvation in that wonderful way.
For what Love of Men, or of the most charitable Spirits in Heaven could have
conceived such a thought, that the Son of God should die for our Redemption? It
had been an impious Blasphemy to have desired it; so that Christ is the most
absolute gift of God to us. Besides, The love of Abraham is to be measured by
the Reasons that might excite it; For according to the amiableness of the
object, so much greater is the love that gives it. Many endearing cirumstances
made Isaac the joy of his father, yet at the best he was an imprafect mortal
creature, so that but a moderate affection was regularly due to him. Whereas
our Redeemer was not a mere Man, or an Angel, but God's only begotten Son,
which Title signifies his unity with him in his state and perfections, and
according to the Excellency of his Nature such is his Fathers Love to him. In
this was manifested the Love of God to us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, John 4.9.
that we might live through Him. The Love of God in all temporal blessings is
but faint in the comparison with the Love that is expressed in our Redeemer. As
much as the Creator exceeds the creature, the gift of Christ is above the gift
of the whole world. Herein is Love, says the Apostle, that is the clearest and
highest expression of it that can be, God sent his Son to be a Propitiation for
our Sins. The Wisdom and Power of God never acted to the utmost of their
efficacy; he could frame a more Glorious World, but the Love of God cannot in a
higher degree be expressed. As the Apostle to set forth how sacred and inviolable
Gods promise is, says, Heb. 6.17.
that because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himself; so when he
would give the most excellent testimony of his favor to mankind, he gave his
Eternal Son, the Heir of his Love and Blessedness. The giving of Heaven it self
with all its Joys and Glory, is not so perfect and full a demonstration of the
Love of God, as the giving of his Son to die for us.

According to the rule of common esteem, a greater Love was expressed to wretched
Man, than to Christ himself: for we expend things less valuable for those that
are more precious; so that God in giving him to die for us, declared that our
Salvation was more dear to him then the life of his only Son. When no meaner
Ransom than the Blood Royal of Heaven could purchase our Redemption, God
delighted in the expense of that sacred Treasure for us. It pleased the Lord to
bruise him. Isa. 53*
Though the Death of Christ absolutely considered was the highest provocation
of God's displeasure, and brought the greatest guilt upon the Jews, for which
Wrath came upon them to the uttermost; yet in respect of the end, namely the
Salvation of Men, 'twas the most greatful Offering to him, Ephesians. 5.2.
a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor. This is an endearing circumstance of
Gods Love to us. God repented that he made Man, but never that he redeemed him.

And as the Love of the Father, so the Love of Christ appears in a superlative
manner in dying for us. Joh. 15.8.
Greater Love has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his life for his
Friend. There is no kind of Love that exceeds the affection which is expressed in
dying for another: but there are diverse degrees of it: and the highest is to
die for our enemies. The Apostle says, Romans 5.7.
perhaps for a good man some would dare to die. It Is possible gratitude may
prevail upon one who is under strong obligations, to die for his benefactor. Or
some may from a generous principle be willing with the loss of their lives to
preserve one, who is a general and public good. But this is a rare, and almost
incredible thing. It Is recorded as a miraculous instance of the power of Love,
that the two Sicilian Philosophers Damon, and Pithias, each had courage to die
for his Friend. For one of them being condemned to die by the Tyrant, and
desiring to give the last farewell to his Family, his Friend entered into Prison
as his Surety to die for him, if he did not return at the appointed time. And
he came to the amazement of all, that expected the issue of such a hazardous
caution. Yet in this example there seems to be in the Second such a confidence
of the fidelity of the first, that he was assured he should not die in being a
pledge for him: and in the first 'twas not mere friendship, or sense of the
obligation, but the regard of his own honor that made him rescue his Friend
from Death. And if Love were the sole motive, yet the highest expression of it
was to part with a short life, which in a little time must have been resigned
by the order of nature. But the Love of our Savior was so pure and great,
there can be no resemblance, much less any parallel of it. For he was perfectly
Holy, and so the privilege of immortality was due to him, and his life was
infinitely more precious than the lives of Angels and Men, yet he laid it down
and submitted to a cursed Death, and to that which was infinitely more bitter,
the Wrath of God. And all this for sinful men, who were under the just and
heavy displeasure of the Almighty. He loved us, and gave himself for us: If he
had only interposed as an Advocate to speak for us, Gal. 2.20.
or only had acted for our recovery, Qui me tantum and semel dicondo fecit, in
reficiendo and dixit multa, and gessit mira, and pertulit indigna. Bern.
his Love had been admirable; but he suffered for us. He is not only our
Mediator, but Redeemer; not only Redeemer, but Ransom.

'Twas excellent goodness in David, when he saw the destruction of his People,
to offer Himself and Family as a Sacrifice to avert the Wrath of God from them.
2 Samuel 24.17
But his pride was the cause of the Judgment, whereas our Redeemer was
perfectly innocent. David interceeded for his Subjects, Christ for his Enemies.
He received the Arrows of the Almighty into his Breast to shelter us. Isa.
53.4, 5.
He bore our griefs, and carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquites, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Among the Romans the
Despotick power was so terrible, that if a slave had attemped upon the Life of
his Master, all the rest had been crucified with the guilty person. But our
gracious Master dyed for his slaves who had conspired against him. He shed his
Blood for those who spilt it.

And the readiness of our Lord to save us, though by the sharpest sufferings,
magnifies his Love. When the richest Sacrifices under the Law were insufficient
to take away sin, and no lower price then the blood of God could obtain our
pardon, upon his entering into the World to excute that wonderful Commission
which cost him his Life, with what ardour of affection did he undertake it!
Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. When Peter from carnal affection deprecated
his sufferings, Master spare thy self, he who was incarnate goodness, and never
quenched the smoking flax, Mat. 16.23.
expresses the same indignation against him, Get thee behind me Satan, as he
did formerly against the Devil tempting to worship him. He esteemed him the
worst adversary that would divert him from his Sufferings: He longed for the
Baptism of his Blood. And when Death was in his view with all the circumstances
of terror, and the supreme Judge stood before him ready to inflict the just
punishment of sin, though the apprehension of it was so dreadful that he could
scarce live under it, yet he resolved to accomplish his Work. Our Salvation was
amiable to him in his Agony. This is specially observed by the Evangelist, Joh.
13.1.
that Jesus having loved his own, he loved them to the end. When the Soldiers
came to seize upon him, though by one word he could have commanded Legions of
Angels for his rescue, yet he yielded up himself to their Cruelty: 'Twas not
any defect of power, but the strength of his Love that made him to suffer. He
was willing to be Crucified, that we might be Glorified: our Redemption was
sweeter to him, than Death was bitter, by which it was to be obtained. 'Twas
excellently said by Pherecides, (...). Pherecid. apud Procl.
that God transformed himself into Love when he made the World: but with
greater reason it is said by the Apostle, God is Love, when he redeemed it.
'Twas Love that by a miraculous condescension took our Nature, accomplishing
the desire of the mystical Spouse, Cant. 1.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his Mouth: 'Twas Love that stoop't to the
form of a Servant, and led a poor despised life here below; 'Twas Love that
endured a Death neither easy, nor honorable, but most unworthy the glory of
the Divine, and the innocence of the Humane nature. Love chose to die on the
Cross, that we might live in Heaven, rather than to enjoy that blessedness, and
leave Mankind in misery.

CHAP. X.
Divine Mercy is magnified in the excellency of the state to which Man is
advanced. He is inricht with higher Prerogatives, under a better Covenant,
entitled to a more glorious Reward than Adam at first enjoyed. The Humane
Nature is personally united to the Son of God. Believers are spiritually united
to Christ. The Gospel is a better Covenant than that of the Law. It admits of
Repentance and Reconciliation after Sin. It accepts of Sincerity instead of
Perfection. It affords supernatural Assistance to Believers, whereby they shall
be victorious over all opposition in their way to Heaven. The difference
between the Grace of the Creator and that of the Redeemer. The stability of the
New Covenant is built on the Love of God which is unchangeable, and the
Operations of his Spirit that are effectual. The mutability and weakness of the
Humane Will, and the strength of Temptations shall not frustrate the merciful
Design of God in regard of his Elect. The glorious Reward of the Gospel exceeds
the Primitive Felicity of Adam, in the place of it, the highest Heaven. Adam's
life was attended with innocent Infirmities, from which the glorified Life is
entirely exempt. The Felicity of Heaven exceeds the first, in the manner,
degrees, and continuance of the fruition.

THe Third Consideration which makes the Love of God so admirable to lapsed
Man, is, the excellency of that state to which he is advanced by the Redeemer.
To be only exempted from Death is a great favor: The grace of a Prince is
eminent in releasing a condemned Person from the punishment of the Law. This is
sufficient for the Mercy of Man, but not for the Love of God: He pardons and
prefers the guilty; He rescues us from Hell, and raises us to Glory; He bestows
Eternity upon those who were unworthy of Life. The excellency of our condition
under the Gospel will be set off, by comparing it with that of innocent Man in
Paradise. It Is true he was then in a state of Holiness and Honor, and in
perfect possession of that Blessedness which was suitable to his Nature; yet in
many respects our last state transcends our first, and redeeming Love exceeds
creating.

If Man had been only restored to his forfeited Rights, to the enjoyment of the
same Happiness which was lost, his first state were most desirable; And it had
been greater Goodness to have preserved him innocent, than to recover him from
ruin. As he that preserves his Friend from falling into the hands of the
Enemy, by interposing between him and danger, in the midst of the Combat,
delivers him in a more noble manner, than by paying a Ransom for him after many
days spent in woeful Captivity. And that Physician is more excellent in his
Art, who prevents Diseases, and keeps the Body in health and vigor, than
another that expels them by sharp Remedies. But the Grace of the Gospel has so
much mended our condition, that if it were offered to our choice, either to
enjoy the innocent state of Adam, or the renewed by Christ, it were folly like
that of our first Parents, to prefer the former before the latter. The Jubilee
of the Law restored to the same Inheritance, but the Jubilee of the Gospel
gives us the Investiture of that which is transcendently better than what we at
first possessed. Since The Dayspring from on High has visited us in tender
mercy, we are enricht with higher Prerogatives, and are under a better
Covenant, and entitled to a more glorious Reward, than was due to Man by the
Law of his Creation.

First, The Humane Nature is raised to an higher degree of Honor, than if Man
had continued in his Innocent state.

1. By its intimate Union with the Son of God. He assumed it as the fit
Instrument of our Redemption, and preferred it before the Angelical, which
surpast Man's in his Primitive State. Col. 2.9.
The Fullness of the God-thead dwells in our Redeemer bodily. From hence it is*
that the Angels descended to pay Him homage at his Birth, and attended his
Majesty in his disguise. The Son of Man has those Titles which are above the
Dignity of any mere Creature; He is King of the Church, and Judge of the World;
he exercises Divine Power, and receives Divine Praise. Briefly, The humane
Nature in our Redeemer is an associate with the Divine; and being made a little
lower then the Angles for a time, is now advanced far above all Principalities
and Powers. Ephesians. 1.21.


2. In all those who are partakers of Grace and Glory by the Lord Jesus. Adam
was the Son of God by Creation, but to be joined to Christ as our head, by a
union so intimate, that he lives in us, and counts himself incomplete without
us, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 1.23.
and by that union to be adopted into the line of Heaven, and thereby to have
an interest in the exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel; Servo
ut servo nihil potest donari.
to be constituted Heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ, are such discoveries
of the dignity of our supernatural state, that the lowest Believer is advanced
above Adam in all his honor. Nay, the Angels though superior to Man in the
excellency of their nature, yet are accidently lower by the honor of our
alliance: Their King is our Brother. And this relative dignity which seems to
eclipse their Glory, might excite their envy, but such an ingenuous goodness
dwells in those pure and blessed Spirits, that they rejoice in our restoration
and advancement.

To this I shall add, that as the Son of God has a special relation to Man, so
the most tender affections for him. To illustrate this by a sensible instance:
Angels and Men are as two different Nations in Language and Customs, but under
the same Empire: and if a Prince that commands two Nations should employ one
for the safety and prosperity of the other, it were an Argument of special
favor. Now the Angels are sent forth to minister for them who are Heirs of
Salvation. Besides, Heb. 1.14.
in two other things the peculiar affection of the Prince would be most evident
to that Nation.

1. If he put on their habit, and attire himself according to their fashion.

2. If he fixed his residence among them. Now the Son of God was clothed with
our flesh, and found in fashion as a man, and for ever appears in it in Heaven;
and will at the last day invest our bodies with glory like to his own. He now
dwells in us by his Spirit, and when our warfare is accomplished, he shall in a
special manner be present with us in the eternal Mansions. As God incarnate he
converst with Men on Earth, and as such he will converse with them in heaven.
There he raigns as the firstborn in the midst of many Brethren. Now all these
Prerogatives are the fruits of our Redemption.

And how great is that Mercy which has raised Mankind more glorious out of its
ruins! The Apostle breaks out with a Heavenly astonishment, Behold what manner
of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God! 1 John 3.1.
that we who are Strangers and Enemies, Children of Wrath by nature, should be
dignified with the honorable, and amiable title of his Sons! 'Twas a rare and
most merciful condescension in Pharaoh's Daughter, to rescue an innocent and
forsaken Infant from perishing by the waters, and adopt him to be her Son but
how much greater kindness was it for God to save guilty and wretched Man from
Eternal Flames, and to take him into his Family. The Ambition of the Prodigal
rose no higher than to be a Servant; wha^ an inestimable favor is it to make
us Children! When God would express the most dear and peculiar affection to
Solomon, he says, I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son: this was the
highest honor he could promise; 2 Samuel 7.14.
and all believers are dignified with it. It Is the same relation that Christ
has: when he was going to Heaven he comforted his Disciples with these words,
I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. There is indeed
a diversity in the foundation of it: Christ is a Son by Nature, we are by mere
Favor; he is by Generation, we are by Adoption. Briefly, Jesus Christ has
made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father: These are the highest
Offices upon Earth, and were attended with the most conspicuous Honor; and the
Holy Spirit chose those bright Images, to convey a clearer notice of the glory
to which our Redeemer has raised us. Not only all the Crowns and Scepters in
this perishing World are infinitely beneath this dignity, but the honor of our
innocent state was not equal to it.

Secondly, The Gospel is a better Covenant than that which was established with
Man in his Creation: and the excellency of it will appear, by considering,

1. It Is more beneficial, in that it admits of Repentance and Reconciliation
after sin, and accepts of Sincerity instead of perfection. The Apostle
magnifies the Office of Christ, Heb. 8.6.
By how much he is a Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon
better promises. The comparison there, is, between the Ministry of the Gospel
and the Mosaical economy. And the excellency of the Gospel is specified, in
respect of those infinitely better promises that are in it. The ceremonial Law
appointed Sacrifices for sins of ignorance and error, and to obtain only legal
impunity; but the Gospel upon the account of Christ's all-sufficient Sacrifice,
offers full Pardon for all Sins that are repented of and forsaken. Now with
greater reason the Covenant of Grace is to be preferred before the Covenant of
Works. For the Law considered Man as holy, and endued with perfection of Grace
equal to whatsoever was commanded: 'Twas the measure of his Ability as well as
Duty, and required exact Obedience, or threatened extreme Misery. The least
breach of it is fatal: A single Offense as certainly exposes to the curse, as
if the whole were violated. And in our lapsed state we are utterly disabled to
comply with its Purity and Perfection. But the Gospel contains the Promises of
Mercy, and is in the hands of a Mediator. Act. 2.38.
The tenor of it is, That Repentance and Remission of Sins be preached in the
Name of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.3^*
And if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged. It Is not if we are
innocent, for then none could be exempt from Condemnation: But if the convinced
Sinner erect a Tribunal in Conscience, and strips Sin of its disguise, to view
it in its native deformity; if he pronounce the Sentence of the Law against
himself, and glorify the Justice of God which he cannot satisfy, and forsake
the Sins which are the causes of his sorrow, he is qualified for pardoning
Mercy.

Besides, The Gospel does not only apply Pardon to us for all forsaken Sins,
but provides a Remedy for those Infirmities to which the best are incident.
Whilst we are in this mortal state, we are exposed to Temptations from without,
and have Corruptions within that often betray us: Now to support our drooping
Spirits, our Redeemer sits in Heaven to plead for us* and perpetually renews
the Pardon that was once purchased, to every contrite spirit, for those
unavoidable frailties which cleave to us here. The promise of Grace is not made
void by the sudden surprises of Passions. If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, 1 John 2.
Jesus Christ the Righteous. The rigor of the Law is mollified by his
Mediation with the Father: A title of Love and Tenderness. God deals not with
the Severity of a Judge, but He spares us as a man spares his own son that
serves him. Malac. 3.


And as He pardons us upon our Repentance, so He accepts our hearty, though
mean, services. Now the Legal, that is, unsinning and complete Obedience cannot
be performed; the Evangelical, that is, the sincere, though imperfect, is
graciously received. God does not require the duties of a Man by the measures
of an Angel. Unfeigned Endeavors to please Him, unreserved Respects to all his
Commands, single and holy aims at his Glory are rewarded. Briefly, Although the
Law is continued as a Rule of living, yet not as the Covenant of Life. And what
an admirable exaltation of Mercy is there in this new Treaty of God with
Sinners? It Is true, the first Covenant was holy, just, and good, but it made no
abatements of favor, and it is now weak through the flesh: Romans 9.
that is, The carnal corrupt Nature is so strong and impetuous, that the
restraints of the Law are ineffectual to stop its desires, and therefore cannot
bring Man to that Life that is promised, by the performance of the Condition
required. But the Gospel provides an Indulgence for relenting and returning
Sinners. This is the language of God in that Covenant, I will be merciful to
their unrighteousness and their sins, Heb. 8.
and their Iniquities will I remember no more.

2. The excellency of the Evangelical Covenant above the Legal, is, in that
supernatural Assistance which is conveyed by it to Believers, whereby they
shall be certainly victorious over all opposition in their way to Heaven. It Is
true Adam was endued with perfect holiness and freedom, but he might entangle
himself in the snares of Sin, and Death. The Grace of the Creator given to him
was always present, but it depended on the natural use of his Faculties,
without the interposing any extraordinary operation of God's Spirit. The
Principle of Holiness was in himself, and 'twas subjected to his Will: He had a
power to obey if he would, but not that actually determined his will, for then
he had persevered. But the Grace of the Redeemer that flows from Christ as our
quickening Head, and is conveyed to all his Members, enclines the Will so
powerfully that it is made subject to it. God works in us to will and to do of
his good pleasure; Phil. 2.13.
The use of our Faculties, and the exercise of Grace, depends on the good
pleasure of God, who is unchangeable, and the operations of the Spirit which
are prevailing and effectual. And upon these two the stability of the New
Covenant is founded.

1. On the Love of God, who is as unchangable in his Will, as in his Nature.
This Love is the cause of Election, Romans 8.35. Isa. 9. Joh. 17.6.
from whence there can be no separation. This gives Christ to Believers, and
Believers to Him: Thine they were, says our Savior, and thou gave them me.
Which words signify not the common title God has to all by Creation: for Men
thus universally considered, compose the world; and our Savior distinguishes
those that are given Joh. 16.17.
him from the world; but that special right God has in them by election. And
all those are given by the Father to Christ in their effectual Calling, (which
is expressed by his drawing them to the Son) and are committed to his care, Joh.
5.44.
to lead them through a course of Obedience to Glory. For them Christ
absolutely prays as Mediator, John 17.
Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, and
see my Glory: And he is always heard in his requests.

It Is from hence that the Apostle challenges all Creatures in Heaven and Ear^h,
with that full and strong persuasion, that nothing could separate between
Believers, Romans 8.38.
and their Happiness. For I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. His assurance is not built on the
special Prerogatives he had as an Apostle, not on his rapture to Paradise, nor
Revelations, nor the Apparition of Angels, for of these he makes no mention;
but on that which is common to all Believers, the Love of God declared in the
Word, and shed abroad in their hearts. And it is observable that the Apostle
having spoken in his own person, changes the number, I am persuaded that
nothing shall separate us, to associate with himself in the partaking of that
blessed Privilege, all true Believers, who have an interest in the same Love of
God, the same Promises of Salvation, and had felt the sanctifying work of the
Spirit, the certain proof of their Election. For how is it possible that God
should retract his merciful purpose to save his People? He that chose them from
Eternity before they could know Him, and from pure Love (there being nothing in
the Creature to induce Him) gave his Son to suffer Death for them, will He stop
there, without bestowing that Grace which may render it effectual? What can
change his Affections? He that prevented them in his Mercy, when they were in
their pollutions, will He leave them after his Image is engraven upon them? He
that loved them so as to unite them to Christ when they were strangers, will He
hate them when they are his Members? No: His loving kindness is everlasting,
Jer. 31.
and the Covenant that is built on it, is more firm than the Pillars of Heaven,
and the Foundations of the Earth. This supported David in his dying hours, that
God had made with him an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure,
2 Samuel 23.5.
for that was all his Salvation.

2. The New Covenant is secured by the efficacy of Divine and Supernatural
Grace. Heb. 8.10.
This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, says the
Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and
I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People. The Elect are
enabled to perform the conditions of the Gospel, to which Eternal Life is
promised. Our Redeemer blesses us in turning us from our Iniquities. Act. 3.26.
And although the instability of the humane Spirit, by reason of remanent
Corruptions, and those various Temptations to which we are liable, may excite
our fear, lest we should fall short of the high prize of our Calling, yet the
Grace of the Gospel secures true Believers against both.

1. Whilst we are in the present state, our Corruptions are not perfectly
healed, but there are some remains, which like a Gangrene threaten to seize on
the vital parts, wherein the spiritual Life is seated. But the divine Nature
which is conveyed to all that are spiritually descended from Christ, is active
and powerful to resist all carnal desires, and will prevail in the end. For if
sin in its full vigor could not control the efficacy of converting Grace, how
can the relics of it, after Grace has taken possession, be strong enough to
spoil it of its conquest. There is a greater distance from Death to Life, than
from Life to Action. That Omnipotent Grace that visited us in the Grave, and
restored life to the dead, can much more perpetuate it in the living. That
which was so powerful as to pluck the heart of stone out of the Breast, can
preserve the Heart of Flesh.

It Is true, the Grace that is given to Believers, in its own nature is a
perishing quality, as that which was bestowed on Adam. Non only the slight
superficial tincture in hypocrites will wear off, but that deep impression of
sanctifying Grace in true Believers, if it be not renewed, would soon be
defaced. But God has promised to put his Spirit into their hearts, and to
cause them to walk in his Statutes, and they shall keep his Commandments. Ezec.
36.27.
He is a living reigning Principle in them, to which all their faculties are
subordinate. The Spirit infused Grace at first, and enlivens it daily: he
confirms their Faith, inflames their Love, encourages their Obedience, and
refreshes in their minds the Idea's of that glory which is invisible and
future. In short, his influence cherishes the blessed beginnings of the
spiritual Life. So that sincere Grace though weak in its degree, yet it is in a
state of progress, til it come to perfection. The Waters of the Spirit have a
cleansing virtue upon Believers, till every spot be taken away, and their
purified Souls ascend to Heaven.

2. The Grace of the Spirit shall make true Christians finally victorious over
Temptations to which they may be exposed. And those are various: Some are
pleasant and insinuating, others are sharp and furious, and are managed by the
Devil our subtle and industrious Enemy, to undermine, or by open battery to
overthrow us. And how difficult is it for the Soul whilst united to Flesh, to
resist the charms of what is amiable, or to endure the assaults of what is
terrible to sense? But the renewed Christian has no reason to be afrighted
with disquieting fears, that any sinful temptation may come, which
notwithstanding his watchfulness, may overcome him irrecoverably. For,

1. Temptations are External, and have no power over our spirits but what we
give them. A voluntary resistance secures the victory to us. And the Apostle
tells us, Greater is he that is in Believers, then he that is in the World. 1 John 4.4.
God is stronger not only in himself, but as working in us, by the vigorous
assistance of his Grace to confirm us, than the Devil assisted with all the
delights and terrors of the world, and taking advantage of that remaining
concupiscence which is not entirely extinguished, is, to corrupt, and destroy
us.

2. All Temptations in their degrees and continuance, are ordered by Gods
Providence. He is the president of the combat: none enters into the lists but
by his call: in all Ages the Promise shall be verified, 1 Cor. 10.13* Romans 8.37.
God will not suffer his People to be tempted above what they are able. They
shall come off more then Conquerours, through Christ that loves them. And as
St. Austin observes; Major quippe libertas est necessaria, adversus tot, et
tantas tentationes, quae in Paradiso non fuit dono perseverantiae munita, ac
firmata, ut cum omnibus terroribus and erroribus suis, vincatur mundus.
more powerful Grace is necessary to fortify Christians, in the midst of all
opposition, then Adam at first received. This is visible in the glorious issue
of the Martyrs* Who loved not their Lives unto the Death: For Adam when no
person threatened him, nay against the prohibition of God, abusing his Liberty,
did not abide in his Happiness, when 'twas most easy to him to avoid Sin. But
the Martyrs remained firm in the Faith, not only under Terrors, but Torments.
And which is the more admirable, in that Adam saw the Happiness present, which
he should forfeit by his Disobedience, and the Martyrs believed only the future
Glory they were to receive. This proceeded only from God who was so merciful,
as to make them faithful. Briefly, Unless there were a power above the Divine,
the Elect are ^ecured from final Apostasy. Our Savior tells us that his Father
is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of his hand. His
Invariable Will and Almighty Power prevents their perishing. Indeed if it were
only by the strength of Natural Reason, or Courage, that we are to overcome
Temptations, some might be so violent as to make the strongest to faint and
fall away: But if the Divine Power be the Principle that supports us, it will
make the weakest victorious. For the Grace of God makes us strong, and is not
made weak by us.

From hence we may fully discover the advantage we have by the Gospel, above
the terms of the first Covenant. Restoring Mercy has bettered our Condition:
We have lost the integrity of the first, and got the perfection of the second
Adam: Our Salvation is put into a stronger and safer hand. I give, says our
Redeemer, Joh. 10.
unto my sheep eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand. That is an inviolable Sanctuary, from whence no
Believer can be taken. Christ is our Friend, not only to the Altar, but now in
the Throne: Our Reconciliation is ascribed to his Death, our Conservation to
his Life. Romans 5.10.
He that was created in a state of Nature could sin and die, but He that is
born of God cannot sin unto death: 1 John 3.9.
the new birth is unto Eternal Life. In short, As the Mercy of God is glorified
in the whole work of our Salvation, so especially in the first, and last Grace,
it confers upon us. In Vocation that prevents us, and Perseverance that crowns
us: according to the double change made in our state, translating us from
Darkness to Light, and from the imperfect Light of Grace, to the full Light of
Glory.

I have more particularly discoursed of this Advantage by the New Covenant, in
regard the Glory of God, and the comfort of true Christians is so much
concerned in it. For if Grace and Free Will are put in joint commission, so
that the efficacy of it depends on the mutability of the Will, which may
receive or reject it, the consequence is visible, that (which is impious to
suppose) the Son of God might have died in vain. For that which is not
effectual without a contingent condition, must needs be as uncertain, as the
condition on which it depends. So that although the Wisdom of God so admirably
formed the design of our Salvation, and there is such a connection in his
Counsels, yet all may be defeated by the mutability of Man's desires. And the
most sincere Christians would be always terrified with perplexing jealousies,
that notwithstanding their most serious Resolutions to continue in their Duty,
yet one day they may perish by their Apostasy. But the Gospel assures us, that
God will not reverse his own Eternal Decrees: And that the Redeemer shall see
the travel of his Soul, Isa 53.11.
and be satisfied: and that Believers are kept by the Power of God through
Faith unto Salvation.

3. There is an excellent manifestation of Divine Love, in the glorious reward
that is promised to Believers, which far exceeds the primitive felicity of Man.
Adam was under the Covenant of nature, that promised a reward suitable to his
obedience, and state. The manner of declaring that Covenant was natural.

1. External, by the discovery of God's Attributes in his Works, from which it
was easy for man to collect his duty and his reward.

2. Internal, by his natural faculties. By the light of Reason he understood
that so long as he continued in his original Innocence, the Creator who from
pure goodness gave him his being, and all the happiness which was concomitant
with it, would certainly preserve him in the perpetual enjoyment of it. But
there was no promise of Heaven annexed to that Covenant, without which Adam
could attain no knowledge, nor conceive any hopes of it. If there had been a
necessary connection between his perfect Obedience, and the life of Glory, it
would have been revealed to him, to allure his will: for there can be no desire
of an unknown good. And whereas in the Covenant God principally and primarily
regards the promise, and but secondarily the threatening, the exercise of
goodness being more pleasing to him than of revenging justice; it is said, that
God expressly threatened Death, but he made no promise of Heaven: by which it is
evident it did not belong to that Covenant. For it was easier for Man to
understand the quality of the punishment that attended sin, than to conceive of
Celestial Happiness, of which he was incapable in his animal state.

It Is true, God might have bestowed Heaven as an absolute gift upon Man, after
a course of obedience; but 'twas not due by the condition of the first
Covenant. A natural work can give no title to a supernatural reward. Man's
perseverance in his duty, according to the Original Treaty, had been attended
with Immortal Happiness upon the Earth; but the blessed Hope is only promised
in the Gospel, Tit. 2.13.
and unspeakably transcends the felicity of Nature in its consummat state.

This Reward is answerable to the unvaluable treasure which was laid down for
it. The Blood of the Son of God as it is a Ransom to redeem us from misery, so
it is a Price to purchase glory for Believers. 1 Timothy 2.6.
It Is called the Blood of the New Testament, because it conveys a title to the
Heavenly Inheritance. Mat. 26.28.
Our impunity is the effect of his Satisfaction, our positive happiness of his
redundant merit. God was so well pleased with his perfect Obedience, which
infinitely surpasses that of any mere creature, that he promised to confer upon
those who believe in him, all the glorious qualities becoming the Sons of God,
and to make them associates with him in his Eternal Kingdom. The complete
happiness of the Redeemed, is the Redeemers recompense, in which he is fully
satisfied for all his sufferings. Now the transcendent excellency of this above
the first state of Man, will more distinctly appear by considering,

I. The place where it is enjoyed, and that is the Heaven of Heavens. Adam was
put into the Terrestrial Paradise, a place suitable to his natural being, and
abounding with all pleasing objects; but they were such as creatures of a lower
kind enjoyed with him. But Heaven is the Element of Angels, their native seat,
who are the most noble part of the Creation. It Is the true Palace of God,
entirely separated from the impurities and imperfections, the alterations and
changes of the lower World; where he reigns in Eternal Peace. It Is the Temple
of the Divine Majesty, where his exellent Glory is revealed in the most
conspicuous manner. It Is the habitation of his holiness, the place where his
honor dwells. It Is the sacred Mansion of Light, and Joy, and Glory. Paradise
with all its pleasures was but a shadow of it.

II. The Life of Adam was attended with innocent infirmities. For the body
being composed of the same principles with other sensitive creatures, 'twas
liable to hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and was to be repaired by food and
sleep. Adam was made a living Soul, therefore subject to those inclinations and
necessities which are purely animal. 1 Cor. 15.45
And although whilst innocent, no disease could seize on him, yet he was
capable of hurtful impressions: though he should have been preserved from
death, yet he was perishable. His life was in a perpetual flux: 'twas Immortal
not merely from the temperament of his Body, but to be sustained by the power
of God in the use of means. From hence it follows that Adam in his natural
state* was not capable of the vision of God. Heaven is too pure an Air for him
to have lived in. The Glory of it is inconsistent with such a tempered Body.
Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Cor. 15.50
The faculties would be confounded with its overcoming brightness. Till the
sensitive powers are refined, and exalted to that degree that they become
spiritual, they cannot converse with glorified objects. Now the bodies of the
Saints shall be invested with Celestial qualities. The Natural shall be changed
into a Spiritual body, and be preserved as the Angels by the sole virtue of the
quickening Spirit. The life above shall flourish in its full vigor, without any
other support, than the Divine power that first created it. And as the body
shall be spiritual, so truly immortal, and free from all corruptive change; as
the Sun which for so many ages has shined with an equal brightness to the
World, and has a dureable fullness of light in it. In this respect the Children
of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36.
are equal to the Angels, who being pure Spirits, do not marry to perpetuate
their kind, for they never die. And the glorified body shall be clothed with a
more Divine beauty in the Resurrection, than Adam had in the Creation. The
glory of the second Temple shall excel that of the first. In short, 1 Cor.
15.47.
the first Man was of the Earth earthy, and could derive but an earthy
condition to his descendents: But the Lord Christ is from Heaven, and is the
principle of an Heavenly and Glorious life to all that are united to him.

III. The felicity of Heaven exceeds the first, in the manner and degrees of
the fruition, and the continuance of it.

1. The Vision of God in Heaven is immediate. Adam was a spectator of God's
Works, and his understanding being full of Light, he clearly discovered the
Divine Attributes in their effects. The strokes of the Creators Hand are
engraven in all the parts of the Universe. The Heavens, and Earth, and all
things in them, are evident testimonies of the excellency of their Author. The
invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen. Romans
1.20.
And the knowledge that shined in his soul, produced a transcendent esteem of
the Deity, in whom Wisdom and Power are united in their supreme degree, and a
superlative love and delight in him for his goodness. Yet his sight of God was
but through a Glass, an eclipsing medium. For inferior beings are so imperfect,
that they can give but a weak resemblance of his infinite perfections. But the
sight of God in Heaven, 1 John 3.2.
is called, the seeing of him as he is, and signifies the most clear and
complete knowledge, which the rational soul when purified and raised to its
most perfect state can receive; and out-shines all the discoveries of God in
the lower World. Adam had a visible copy of his invisible beauty, but the
Saints in Heaven see the glorious Original. He saw God in the reflection of the
Creature, but the Saints are under the direct beams of Glory, 1* Cor. 13.12.
and see him face to face. All the Attributes appear in their full and
brightest luster to them. Wisdom, Love, Justice, Holiness, Power, are
manifested in their exaltation. And the glorified Soul, to qualify it for
converse with God in this intimate manner, has a more excellent constitution
then was given to it in the Creation. A new edge is put upon the faculties
whereby they are fitted for those objects which are peculiar to Heaven. The
intellectual eye is fortified for the immediate intuition of God. Adam in
Paradise was absent from the Lord, in comparison of the Saints who encompass
his Throne, and are in the presence of his Glory.

Besides, It Is the peculiar excellency of the Heavenly Life, that the Saints
every moment enjoy it without any allay, in the highest degree of its
Perfection. The Life of Adam was always in a circle of low and mean functions
of the Animal Nature, which being common to him and Beasts, the acts of it are
not strictly Humane. But the Spiritual Life in Heaven is entirely freed from
those servile necessities, and is spent in the eternal performance of the most
noble actions of which the intelligent Nature is capable. The Saints do always
contemplate, admire, love, enjoy, and praise their everlasting Benefactor. God
is to them all in all.

In short, That which prefers the Glory of Heaven infinitely before the first
state of Man, is the continuance of it for ever: It Is an unwithering and
never-fading Glory. Adam was liable to Temptations, and capable of Change, he
fell in the Garden of Eden, and was sentenced to die. But Heaven is the
Sanctuary of Life and Immortality; it is inaccessible to any evil. The Serpent
that corrupted Paradise with its Poison, cannot enter there. As there is no seed
of Corruption within, so no cause of it without. Our Redeemer offered Himself
by the Eternal Spirit, and purchased an eternal Inheritance for his People.
Their Felicity is full and perpetual, without increase, for in the first moment
it is perfect, and shall continue without declination. The Day of Judgment is
called the Last Day: For Days, and Weeks, and Months, and Years, the
Revolutions which now measure Time, shall then be swallowed up in an
unchangeable Eternity. 1 These. 4.^.
The Saints shall be for ever with the Lord. And in all these respects, the
Glory of the Redeemed, as far exceeds the Felicity of Man in the Creation, as
Heaven, the bright Seat of it, is above the fading beauty of the terrestrial
Paradise.

CHAP. XI.
Redeeming Love deserves our highest Admiration, and humble Acknowledgments.
The illustration of it by several Considerations. God is infinitely amiable in
Himself, yet his Love is transient to the Creature. It Is admirable in Creating
and Preserving Man, more in Redeeming him and by the Death of his Son. The
discovery of God's Love in our Redemption is the strongest persuasiue to
Repentance. The Law is ineffectual to produce real Repentance. The common
benefits of Providence are insuff^cient to cause Faith and Repentance in the
guilty Creature. The clear discovery of pardoning Mercy in the Gospel can only
remove our Fears, and induce us to return to God. The transcendent Love of God
should kindle in us a reciprocal Love to Him. His Excellency, and His ordinary
Bounty to Mankind cannot prevail upon us to love Him. His Love to us in Christ
only conquers our Hatred. Our Love to Him must be sincere and superlative. The
despising of Saving Mercy is the highest Provocation. It makes the Condemnation
of Men most just certain, and heavy.

1. 'THis Redeeming Love deserves our highest Admiration, and most humble
acknowledgments. If we consider God aright, it may raise our wonder, that He is
pleased to bestow kindness upon any created being. For in Him is all that is
excellent and amiable; and it is essential to the Deity, to have the perfect
knowledge of Himself, and perfect Love to Himself. His Love being proportioned
to his Excellencies, the act is infinite, as the object: And the perfections of
the Divine Nature, being equal to his Love, it is a just cause of admiration
that it is not confined to himself, but is transient and goes forth to the
Creature. When David looked up to the Heavens, and saw the Majesty of God
written in Characters of light, he admires that Love which first made Man a
little lower then the Angels, and Crowned him with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.
and that providential care which is mindful of him, and visits him every
moment. Such an inconceivable distance there is between God and Man, that it is
wonderful, God will spend a thought upon us. Lord, what is Man that thou take
knowledge of him? or the Son of Man that thou make account of him? Man is
like to vanity, Psalm. 144.
his days are as a shadow that passes away. His being in this world has
nothing firm, or solid; it is like a shadow, that depends upon a cause that is
in perpetual motion, the light of the Sun, and is always changing, till it
vanishes in the darkness of the night. But if we consider Man in the quality of
a sinner, and what God has wrought for his recovery, we are overcome with
amazement. All temporal favors are but foils to this miraculous Mercy, and
unspeakably below the least instance of it: without it all the privileges we
enjoy above inferior Creatures in this life, will prove aggravations of our
future misery. God saw us in our degenerate state, destroyed by our selves, and
yet, O Goodness truly Divine! he loved us so far, as to make the way for our
recovery. High Mountains were to be levelled, and great depths to be filled up,
before we could arrive at blessedness: all this God has done. He has brought
the Curse of the guilty upon the innocent, and exposed his beloved Son to the
Sword of his Justice, to turn the blow from us. What astonishing goodness is
it, that God who is the Author and end of all things, should become the means
of our Salvation? And by the lowest abasement? What is so worthy of admiration
as that the Eternal should become mortal, that being in the form of God, he
should take on him the form of a Servant, that the Judge of the World should be
condemned by the guilty, that he should leave his Throne in Heaven to be nailed
to the Cross, that the Prince of Life should taste of Death? These are the
great Wonders which the Lord of Love has performed, and all for sinful,
miserable and unworthy Man, who deserved not the least drop of that Sweat and
Blood he spent for him: and without any advantage to himself, for what content
can be added to his felicity by a cursed Creature? Infinite Love, that is as
admirable as saving! Love that passes Knowledge! and is as much above our
comprehension as desert. In natural things, admiration is the effect of
ignorance, but here it is increased by Knowledge. For the more we understand the
excellent Greatness of God, and the vileness of Man, the more we shall admire
saving Mercy.

And the most humble acknowledgments are due for it. When David told
Mephibosheth, that he should eat bread with him at his T^ble continually, 2 Samuel 9.7, 8.
he bowed himself, and said, What is thy Servant, that thou should look on
such a dead Dog as I am? A speech full of gratitude, and humility; yet he was of
a Royal extraction, though at that time in a low condition. With a far greater
sense of our unworthiness, we should reflect upon that condescending Love, that
provides the Bread of God for the food of our Souls, without which we had
perished for want. David in that divine thanksgiving recorded in the Scripture,
reflects upon his own meanness, and from that magnifies the favor of God
toward him. Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, 2 Samuel 7.18.
that thou have brought me hitherto? and this was yet a small thing in thy
sight, O Lord God, but thou have spoken of thy Servants house, for a great
while to come, and is this the manner of Man, O Lord God? if such humble and
thankful acknowledgments were due for the Scepter of Israel, what is for the
Crown of Heaven? and and that procured for us by the sufferings of the Son of
God. Briefly, Goodness is the foundation of Glory, therefore the most solemn
and affectionate Praise is to be rendered for transcendent Goodness, The
consent of Heaven and Earth, is; in ascribing blessing, and honor, Rev. 5.13.
and glory to him that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for ever.

2. The Love of God discovered in our Redemption, is the most powerful
persuasive to Repentance. For the discovery of this we must consider, that real
Repentance is the consequent of Faith, and always in proportion to it.
Therefore, the Law which represents to us the Divine Purity and Justice,
without any allay of Mercy, can never work true Repentance in a Sinner. When
Conscience is under the strong conviction of guilt, and of Gods Justice as
implacable, it causes a dreadful flight from him, and a retchless neglect of
means. Despair hardens. Neither is the discovery of God in Nature, prevailing
over the impenitent Hearts of men. It Is true, the visible frame of the World,
and the continual benefits of Providence, instruct Men in those prime Truths,
the Being and Bounty of God to those that serve Him, and invite them to their
Duty. God never left himself without a witness in any age: Act. 4.17.
His Goodness is designed To lead men to Repentance. And the Apostle aggravates
the obstinacy of Men, that rendered that method entirely fruitless. But the
Declaration of Gods Goodness in the Gospel is infinitely more clear and
powerful, than the silent revelation by the works of Creation and Providence.
For although the Patience and general Goodness of God offered some intimations
that he is placable, yet not a sufficient support for a guilty and jealous
Creature to rely on. The natural notion of Gods Justice is so deeply rooted in
the Humane Soul, that till He is pleased to proclaim an Act of Grace and
Pardon, on the conditions of Faith and Repentance, it is hardly possible that
convinced Sinners should apprehend Him otherwise than an Enemy; and that all
the common Benefits they enjoy, are but Provisions allowed in the interval
between the Sentence pronounced by the Law, and the Execution of it at Death.
Therefore God to overcome our fears, and to melt us into a compliance, has
given in the Scripture the highest assurance of his willingness to receive all
relenting and returning Sinners. He interposes the most solemn Oath to remove
our suspicions. Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. Ezekiel. 18.23.
And have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? says the Lord God:
And not that he should return from his ways and live? The majesty and ardency
of the Expressions testify the truth and vehemence of his desire, so far as
the Excellency of his Nature is capable to feel our Affections. And the Reason
of it is clear; for the Conversion of a Sinner implies a thorough change in the
Will and Affections from Sin to Grace, and that is infinitely pleasing to Gods
Holiness, and the giving of Life to the converted is most suitable to his
Mercy. The Angels who are infinitely inferior to Him in Goodness, rejoice in
the Repentance and Salvation of Men; Much more God does. There is an eminent
difference between his inclinations to exercise Mercy, and Justice. He uses
expressions of regret when He is constrained to punish. Psalm. 81.13. Hos. 11.8.
O that my People had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways. And
how shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? mine heart
is turned within me: As a merciful Judge, that pities the Man when he condemns
the Malefactor. But He dispenses Acts of Grace with pleasure, He pardons
Iniquity, Mic* 7.18.
and passes by transgressions, because He delights in Mercy. It Is true, when
Sinners are finally obdurate, God is pleased in their Ruin, for the honor of
his Justice; yet, it is not in such a manner as in their Conversion and Life. He
does not invite Sinners to transgress, that He may condemn them: He is not
pleased when they give occasion for the exercise of his Anger. And above all,
we have the clearest and surest discovery of pardoning Mercy in the Death of
Christ. For what stronger evidence can there be of God's readiness to pardon,
than sending his Son into the World to be a Sacrifice for Sin, that Mercy
without prejudice to his other Perfections might upon our Repentance forgive
us? And what more rational argument is there, and more congruous to the Breast
of a Man, to work in him a serious grief and hearty detestation of Sin, not
only as a cursed thing, but as it is contrary to the Divine Will, than the
belief that God, in whose Power alone it is to pardon Sinners, is most desirous
to pardon them, if they will return to Obedience? The Prodigal in his extreme
distress resolved to go to his Father with penitential acknowledgments and
submission: and, to use the words of a devout Writer, His guilty Conscience as
desperate asks him, Qua spe, with what hope? He replies to himself, Illa qua
Pater est. Ego perdidi quod erat filii; ille quod patris est n^n amisit: Though
I have neglected the duty and lost the confidence of a Son, he has not lost
the compassion of a Father. That Parable represents Man in his degenerate
forlorn state, and that the Divine Goodness is the Motive that prevails upon
him to return to his duty.

3. The transcendent Love that God has expressed in our Redemption by Christ,
should kindle in us a reciprocal affection to him. For what is more natural
than that one flame should produce another? We love him, because he loved us
first. The original of our Love to God is from the evidence of his to us: this
alone can strongly and sweetly draw the heart to him. It Is true, the divine
excellencies as they deserve a superlative esteem, so the highest affection:
but the bare contemplation of them is ineffectual to fire the Heart with a
zealous Love to God. For Man in his Corrupt state has a Diabolical Seed in
him; he is inclined not only to Sensuality, which is an implicit hatred of God,
(for an eager Appetite to those things which God forbids, and a fixed
Aversation from what He commands, are the Natural effects of Hatred,) But to
malignity and direct hatred against God. Col. 1.21.
He is an enemy in his mind through wicked Works: and this enmity arises from
the consideration of Gods Justice, and the effects of it. Man cannot Sin and be
happy, therefore he wishes there were no God to whom he must be accountable. He
is no more wrought on by the Divine perfections and beauties to love the Deity,
than a guilty person, who resolvedly goes on to break the Laws, can be
persuaded to love the Judge, for his excellent knowledge, and his inflexible
integrity, who will certainly condemn him. Besides, the great and abundant
blessings, which God, as Creator, and Preserver, bestows upon all, cannot
prevail upon guilty Creatures to love him. Indeed the goodness that raised us
from a state of nothing, is unspeakably great, and lays an Eternal Obligation
upon us. The whole stock of our affections is due to Him, for conferring upon
us the humane Nature, that is common to Kings and the meanest Beggar. All the
Riches and Dignity of the greatest Prince, whereby he exceeds the poorest
Wretch, compared to this benefit which they both share in* have no more
proportion than a Farthing to an immense Treasure. The Innumerable Expressions
of God's Love to us every Day should infinitely endear Him to us. For who is so
inhumane as not to love his Parents, or his Friend, who defended him from his
deadly Enemies, or relieved him in his poverty, especially if the vein of his
bounty be not dried up, but always diffuses it self in new favors? If we love
the memory of that Emperor, who reflecting upon one day that past without his
bestowing some benefit, with grief said, Diem perdidi, I have lost a day; how
much more should we love God who every moment bestows innumerable blessings
upon his Creatures. But sinful Man has contracted such an unnatural hardness,
that he receives no impressions from the renewed Mercies of God. He violates
the Principles of Nature, and Reason. For how unnatural is it, not to love our
Benefactour, when the dull Ox and the stupid Ass serve those that feed them?
and how unreasonable, when the Publicans return love for love? Now there is
nothing that can perfectly overcome our hatred, but the consideration of that
Love, which has freed us from Eternal Misery: for the guilty Creature will be
always suspicious, that notwithstanding the ordinary benefits of Providence,
God is an enemy to it: and till Man is convinced, that in loving God, he most
truly loves himself, he will never sincerely affect him. This was one great
design of God in the Way, as well as in the Work of our Redemption, to gain our
hearts entirely to himself. He saves us in the most endearing, and obliging
manner. As David's affection declared its self, I will not serve the Lord with
that which cost me nothing: So God would not save Man with that which cost him
nothing, but with the dearest price has purchased a Title to our Love. God was
in Christ reconciling the World to himself, as well as through Christ
reconciling himself to the World. He has propounded such Arguments for our
Love, so powerful, and sublime, that Adam in Innocence was unacquainted with.
He sent down his own Bowels to testify His Affection to us. And that should be
the greatest indearment of our Love, which was the greatest evidence of his.

And if we consider the Person of our Redeemer, what more worthy object of our
affection than Christ? And Christ dying with all the circumstances of dishonor
and pain, and dying thus for Love, and this Love terminated on Man. If He had
no attractive excellencies in himself, yet his dying for us should make him
infinitely precious and dear to our Souls. He is more amiable on the Cross,
than in the Throne: For there we see the clearest Testimony, and the most
Glorious Triumph of his Love. There he endured the Anger of Heaven, and the
scorn of the Earth. There we might see Joy sadned, Faith fearing, Salvation
suffering, and Life dying. Quid violentius triumphat de Deo? Videas in Christo
laetari tristitiam, pavere fidem, salutem pati, vitam mori.
Blessed Redeemer, what could thou have done or Suffered more, to quicken our
dead Powers, and inflame our cold Hearts toward thee? How can we remember thy
bleeding, dying Love without an Ecstasy of affection? If we are not more
insensible than the Rocks, it is impossible but we must be touched and softened
by it.

Suppose an Angel by special delegation had been enabled to have trod Satan
under our feet, our obligations to him had been inexpressible, and our love
might have been intercepted from ascending to our Creator. For Salvation is a
greater benefit, than the mere giving to us our natural being. As the privation
of felicity with the actual misery that is joined with it, is infinitely worse
than the negation of being. Our Lord pronounced concerning Judas; Mat. 26.24.
It had been good for that Man that he had never been born. Redeeming Goodness
exceeds creating. Now the Son of God that he might have our highest Love, alone
wrought Salvation for us.

And what admirable Goodness is it, that he puts a value upon our affection,
and accepts such a small return! our most intense and ardent love bears no more
proportion to his, than a spark to the Element of Fire. Besides, His Love to us
was pure, and without any benefit to himself; but ours to him is profitable to
our Souls, for their eternal advantage. Yet with this He is fully satisfied;
when we love Him in the quality of a Savior, we give Him the Glory of that he
designs most to be Glorified in, that is, of his Mercy to the miserable. For
this reason he instituted the Sacrament of the Supper, the contrivance of his
Love, to refresh the memory of his Death, and quicken our fainting love to him.
Now the Love that our Savior requires must be.

1. Sincere and Unfeigned. This declares it self by a care to please Him in all
things. If a Man love me, says our Savior, he will keep my Commandments.
Obedience is the most natural and necessary product of Love. For Love is the
spring of Action, and employs all the faculties in the service of the person
loved. 2 Cor. 5. (...)^
The Apostle expresses the force of it by an emphatical Word, The Love of
Christ constrains us: it signifies to have one bound, and so much under power
that he cannot move without leave. As the inspired Prophets were carried by the
Spirit, and entirely acted by his motions. Act. 18.5.
Such an absolute Empire had the Love of Christ over him, ruling all the
inclinations of his Heart, and actions of his Life. It Is this alone makes
Obedience cheerful, and constant. For Love is seated in the Will, and the
Obedience that proceeds from it, is out of choice, and purely voluntary. No
Commandment is grievous that is performed from Love. 1 John 5.3.
And it makes Obedience constant: that which is forced from the impression of
fear is unsteadfast; but what is mixed with delight is lasting.

2. Our Love to Christ must be supreme, exceeding that which is given to all
inferior Objects. The most elevated and entire Affection is due to Him who
saves us from Torments that are extreme and eternal, and bestows upon us an
Inheritance immortal and undefiled. Life it self and all the endearments of it,
Relations, Estates are to be disvalued, when set in comparison with Him. Nay if
(by an impossible supposition) they could be separated, our Savior should be
more dear to us than Salvation. For He declared greater Love in giving Himself
for our Ransom, than in giving Heaven to be our Reward. When we love Him in the
highest degree we are capable of, we have reason to mourn for the imperfection
of it. In short, A Superlative Love as it is due to our Redeemer, so it is only
accepted by Him. He that loves father or mother, son or daughter more than
Him, is not worthy of Him. Mat. 10.37.
And He tells us in other places that we must hate them, to show, that this
Love should so far exceed the Affection that is due to those persons, that in
all occasions where ^hey divide from Christ, we should demean our selves as if
we had only for them an indifference, and even an aversation. Indeed the
preferring of any thing before Him, who is altogether desirable in Himself, and
infinitely deserves our Love, is brutishly to undervalue Him, and in effect not
to love Him. For in a Temptation where Christ and the beloved object are set in
competition; as a greater weight turns the Scales, so the stronger Affection
will cause a person to renounce Christ, for the possession of what he loves
better. It Is the Love of Christ reigning in the Heart, that is the only
Principle of Perseverance.

4. What an high Provocation is it to despise Redeeming Mercy, and to defeat
that infinite Goodness which has been at such expense for our Recovery? The
Son of God has emptied all the Treasures of his Love, to purchase Deliverance
for guilty and wretched Captives, He has past through so many pains and thorns
to come and offer it to them; He sollicits them to receive Pardon and Liberty,
upon the conditions of Acceptance and Amendment, which are absolutely necessary
to qualify them for Felicity: Now if they slight the Benefit, and renounce
their Redemption; if they sell themselves again under the Servitude of Sin, and
gratify the Devil with a new conquest over them; what a bloody Cruelty is this
to their own Souls, and a vile indignity to the Lord of Glory? And are there
any servile spirits so charmed with their misery, and so in love with their
chains, who will stoop under their cruel Captivity, to be reserved for eternal
Punishment? Who can believe it? But alas Examples are numerous and ordinary:
The most by a Folly as prodigious as their Ingratitude, prefer their Sins
before their Savior, and love that which is the only just object of Hatred,
and hate Him who is the most worthy object of Love. It Is a most astonishing
consideration, that Love should persuade Christ to die for Men, and that they
should trample upon his Blood, and choose rather to die by themselves, than to
live by Him. That God should be so easy to forgive, and Man so hard to be
forgiven. This is a Sin of that transcendent height, that all the abominations
of Sodom and Gomorrah, are not equal to it. This exasperates Mercy, that dear
and tender Attribute; the only Advocate in God's Bosom for us: This makes the
Judge irreconcilable. The rejecting of life upon the gracious terms of the
Gospel, makes the condemnation of Men most just, certain, and heavy

1. Most Just: for when Christ has performed what was necessary for the
expiation of sin, and has opened the Throne of Grace, which was before shut
against us, and by this God has declared how willing he is to save Sinners; if
they are wilful to be damned, and frustrate the blessed methods of Grace, it is
most equal they should inherit their own choice: They judge themselves unworthy
of Eternal Life. Conscience will justify the severest doom against them.

2. It makes their condemnation certain, and final. The Sentence of the Law is
reversible by an appeal to an Higher Court; but that of the Gospel against the
refusers of Mercy will remain in its full force for ever. He that believes not,
Joh. 3 18*
is condemned already. It Is some consolation to a Malefactor, that the Sentence
is not pronounced against him: but an unbeliever has no respite. The Gospel
assures the sincere Believer, that he shall not enter into Condemnation, to
prevent his fears of an after sentence, but it denounces a present doom,
against those who reject it. The Wrath of God abides on them. Obstinate
infidelity sets beyond all possibility of Pardon: there is no Sacrifice for
that Sin. Salvation is self cannot save the impenitent Infidel: For he excludes
the only means whereby Mercy is conveyed. How desperate then is the case of
such a Sinner? To what Sanctuary will he fly? all the other Attributes condemn
him, Holiness excites Justice, and Justice awakens Power for his destruction;
and if Mercy interpose not between him and ruin, he must perish irrecoverably.
Who ever loves not the Lord Christ is Anathema Maranatha; He is under an
irrevocable Curse, which the Redeemer will confirm at his coming.

3. Wilful neglect of Redeeming Mercy aggravates the Sentence, and brings an
extraordinary damnation upon Sinners. Besides the doom of the Law which
continues in its vigor against transgressors, the Gospel adds a more heavy one
against the impenitent, because he beleives not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. Infidelity is an outrage not to a Man or an Angel, Joh.
3.18.
but to the Eternal Son. For the Redemption of Souls is reckoned as a part of
his reward, He shall see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied. Isa. 53.
Those therefore that spurn at Salvation, deny him the honor of his
sufferings: and are guilty of the defiance of his Love, of the contempt of his
Clemency, of the provocation of the most sensible and severe Attribute when
it is incensed. This is to strike him at the Heart, and to kick against his
Bowels. Ut denuo malus, recuperata praeda sua, adversus Dominum gaudeat.
Tertul. de Poen
This increases the anguish of his sufferings, and imbitters the Cup of his
Passion. This renews his Sorrows, and makes his Wounds bleed afresh. Ungrateful
Wretches! that refuse to bring Glory to their Redeemer, and blessedness to
themselves: that rather choose that the accuser should triumph in their misery,
Joh. 3.19.
then their Savior rejoice in their felicity. This is the great condemnation,
that Christ came into the World to exempt Men from Death, and they refuse the
Pardon. It Is an aggravation of sin above what the Devils are capable of, for
Pardon was never offered to those rebellious spirits. In short, so deadly a
malignity there is in it, that it poisons the Gospel it self, and turns the
sweetest Mercy into the sorest Judgment. The Sun of Righteousness who is a
reviving light to the penitent Believer, is a consuming Fire to the obdurate.
How much more tolerable had been the condition of such Sinners, if saving Grace
had never appeared unto Men, or they had never heard of it? for the Degrees of
Wrath shall be in proportion to the riches of neglected goodness. The refusing
Life from Christ, makes us guilty of his Death. And when he shall come in his
Glory, and be visible to all that Pierced Him, what Vengence will be the
portion of those who despised the Majesty of his Person, the mystery of his
Compassions and Sufferings? Those that lived and dyed in the darkness of
Heathenism, shall have a cooler Climate in Hell, then those who neglect the
great Salvation.

CHAP. XII.
Divine Justice concurs with Mercy in the work of our Redemption. The Reasons
why we are Redeemed by the Satisfaction of Justice are specified: to declare
Gods hatred of Sin, to vindicate the honor of the Law, to prevent the secure
commission of Sin. These Ends are obtained in the Death of Christ. The reality
of the Satisfaction made to Divine Justice considered. The requisites in order
to it. The appointment of God, who in this transaction is to be considered not
as a Judge, that is Minister of the Law, but as Governor. His right of
Jurisdiction to relax the Law as to the execution of it. His Will declared to
accept of the compensation made. The consent of our Redeemer was necessary. He
must be perfectly Holy. He must be God and Man.

THe Deity in it self is Simple and Pure, without mixture or variety: The
Scripture ascribes Attributes to God for our clearer understanding. And those
as essential in Him are simply one: They are distinguished only with respect to
the diverse objects on which they are terminated, and the different effects
that proceed from them.

The two great Attributes which are exercised toward reasonable Creatures in
their lapsed state, are Mercy and Justice: these admirably concur in the work
of our Redemption. Although God spared guilty Man for the honor of his Mercy,
yet He spared not his own Son, who became a Surety for the offender, but
delivered Him up to a cruel Death, for the glory of his Justice. For the
clearer understanding of this, three things are to be considered;

1. The Reasons why we are redeemed by the Satisfaction of Justice.

2. The Reality of the Satisfaction made by our Redeemer.

3. The compleatness and perfection of it. Concerning the first there are three
different Opinions, among those who acknowledge the reality of Satisfaction.

1. That it is not possible that Sin should be pardoned without Satisfaction.
For Justice being a natural and necessary excellency in God, has an
unchangable respect to the qualities which are in the Creatures: That as the
Divine Goodness is necessarily exercised toward a Creature perfectly holy, so
Justice is in punishing the guilty, unless a Satisfaction intervene. And if it
be not possible, considering the perfection of the Deity, that Holiness should
be unrewarded, far less can it be, that Sin should be unpunisht: since the
exercise of Justice, upon which Punishment depends, is more necessary than that
of Goodness, which is the cause of Remuneration. For the Rewards which Bounty
dispenses are pure Favors, whereas the Punishments which Justice inflicts, are
due. In short, Since Justice is a Perfection, it is in God in a supreme degree,
and being infinite it is inflexible. This Opinion is asserted by several Divines
of eminent Learning.

The Second Opinion is, That God by his Absolute Dominion and Prerogative,
might have released the Sinner from Punishment without any Satisfaction. For as
by his Sovereignty He transferred the Punishment from the guilty to the
innocent; so He might have forgiven Sin, if no Redeemer had interposed. From
hence it follows, that the Death of Christ for the Expiation of Sin was
necessary only with respect to the Divine Decree.

3. The Third Opinion is, That considering God in this transaction as qualified
with the Office of Supreme Judge and Governor of the World, who has given just
Laws to direct his Creatures in their Obedience, and to be the rule of his
proceedings with them as to Rewards and Punishments, He has so far restrained
the exercise of his Power, that upon the breach of the Law, either it must be
executed upon the Sinner, or if extraordinarily dispenst with, it must be upon
such terms as may secure the Ends of Government: and those are His own Honor,
and public Order, and the Benefit of those that are governed. And upon these
accounts 'twas requisite, supposing the merciful design of God to pardon Sin,
that his Righteousness should be declared in the Sufferings of Christ. I will
distinctly open this.

In the Law the Sovereignty and Holiness of God eminently appear: And there are
two things in all Sins, which expose the Offender justly to Punishment:

1. A Contempt of God's Sovereignty, and in that respect there is a kind of
equality between them. He that offends in one, Jam. 2.10.
is guilty of all, they being ratified by the same Authority. And from hence
it is, that Guilt is the natural Passion of Sin, that always adheres to it. For
as God has a Judicial Power to inflict Punishment upon the Disobedient by
virtue of his Sovereignty, so the desert of Punishment arises from the
despising it in the violation of his Commands.

2. In every Sin there is a contrariety to Gods Holiness. And in this the
natural turpitude of Sin consists, which is receptive of degrees. From hence
arises Gods hatred of Sin, which is as essential as his Love to Himself: the
infinite Purity and Rectitude of his Nature, infers the most perfect abhorrence
of whatever is opposite to it. Psalm. 11.5, 7.
The righteous Lord loves righteousness, but the wicked his soul hates. Now the
Justice of God is founded in his Sovereignty and his Holiness, and the reason
why it is exercised against Sin, is not an arbitrary Constitution, but his Holy
Nature, to which* Sin is repugnant. These things being premised, it follows,
That God in the relation of a Governor is Protector of those Sacred Laws, which
are to direct the Reasonable Creature. And as 'twas most reasonable that in the
first giving the Law, He should lay the strongest restraint upon Man for
preventing Sin, by the threatening of Death, the greatest evil in it self, and
in the estimation of Mankind; so it is most congruous to Reason, when the
command was broke by Man's Rebellion, that the Penalty should be inflicted
either on his Person, according to the immediate intent of the Law, or
something equivalent should be done, that the Majesty and Purity of God might
appear in his Justice, and there might be a visible discovery of the value He
puts on Obedience.

The life of the Law depends upon the execution of it: for impunity extenuates
Sin in the account of Men, and incourages to the free commission of it. If
Pardon be easily obtained, Sin will be easily committed. The first temptation
was prevalent by this persuasion, that no punishment would follow. Besides, if
upon the bold violation of the Law no punishment were inflicted, not only the
glory of God's Holiness would be obscured, as if He did not love Righteousness
and hate Sin, but suffered the contempt of the one, and the commission of the
other without control; but it would either reflect upon His Wisdom, as if He
had not upon just reason established an alliance between the Offense and the
Penalty: or upon His Power, as if He were not able to vindicate the Rights of
Heaven. And after His giving a Law, and declaring the according to the tenor of
it, He would dispense Rewards and Punishments, if Sin were unrevenged, it would
lessen the sacredness of his Truth in the esteem of Men. So that the Law, and
Lawgiver would be exposed to contempt. By all which it appears, that the Honor
of God was infinitely concerned in His requiring satisfaction for the breach of
his Laws.

Temporal Magistrates are bound to execute wise and equal Laws, for the
preservation of public order, and civil societies. It Is true, there be some
cases wherein the Lawgiver may be forced to dispense with the Law, as when the
sparing of an offender is more advantage to the State than his punishment:
Besides, there is a superior Tribunal to which great Offenders are obnoxious,
and good Magistrates, when through weakness they are fain to spare the guilty,
refer them to God's Judgment. But it is otherwise in the Divine Government: For
God is infinitely free from any necessity of Compliance. There is no exigency
of Government that requires, that any Offenders should escape his Severity.
Neither is there any Justice above his, which might exact Satisfaction of them.
Besides, the Majesty of his Laws is more Sacred than of those which preserve
Earthly States, and ought to be more inviolable. The sum is, to declare God^s
hatred of Sin which is essential to his nature, to preserve the honor of the
Law which otherwise would be securely despised, to prevent sin by keeping up in
Men an holy fear to offend God, which should be an eternal respect of the
rational Creature to Him, 'twas most fit, that the presumptuous breach of Gods
Command should not be unpunished. Now when the Son of God was made a Sacrifice
for Sin, and by a bloody Death made expiation of it, the World is convinced,
how infinitely hateful Sin is to him, the dignity of the Law is maintained, and
Sin is most effectually discouraged. There is the same terror, though not the
same rigor, as if all mankind had been finally condemned. Thus it appears how
becoming God it was, to accomplish our Salvation in such a manner, that Justice
and Mercy are revealed in their most noble and eminent effects, and operations.

2. The reality of the satisfaction made to Divine Justice is next to be
proved. This is the center, and heart of the Christian Religion, from whence
all vital and comforting influences are derived: and for the opening of it, I
will first consider the requisites in order to it: which are

1. The Appointment of God, whose Power and Will are to be considered in this
transaction.

1. His Power: for it is an act of supremacy to admit that the sufferings of
another should be effectual to redeem the offender. God does not in this affair
sustain the Person of a Judge, that is the Minister of the Law, and cannot free
the guilty by transferring the punishment on another, but is to be considered
as Governor, who may by pure Jurisdiction dispense in the execution of the
Law, upon those considerations which fully answer the ends of Government.

The Law is not executed according to the Letter of it, for then no sinner can
be saved: but repenting Believers are free from condemnation. Nor is it
abrogated, for then no obligation remains as to the duty, or penalty of it: but
Men are still bound to obey it, and impenitent Infidels are still under the
Curse: The Wrath of God abides upon them. But it is relaxt as to the punishment,
by the merciful condescension of the Lawgiver.

Some Laws are not capable of relaxation in their own nature: because there is
included moral iniquity in the relaxation. As the commands to love God, and
obey Conscience, can never lose their binding force. It Is an universal rule
that suffers no exception, God cannot deny himself; therefore he can never
allow sin, that directly opposes the perfections of His Nature. Besides, some
Laws cannot be relaxt ex hypothesi, upon the account of the Divine Decree which
makes them irrevocable, as that all who die in their impenitency shall be
damned. Now there was no express sign annexed to the Sanction of the original
Law, to intimate, that it should be unalterable as to the letter of it. The
threatening declared the desert of Sin in the Offender, and the right of
punishing in the Superior; but it is so to be understood, as not to frustrate
the power of the Lawgiver, to relax the punishment upon wise and just reasons.

The Law did neither propound, nor exclude this expedient: for judging without
passion against the Sinner, it is satisfied with the punishment of the Crime.
For it is not the evil of the sufferer that is primarily designed by the Law,
but the preservation of public order, for the honor of the Lawgiver, and the
benefit of those that are subjects. So that the relaxing the punishment, as to
the person of the Sinner, by compensation, fully answers the intent of the Law.

2. As by the right of Jurisdiction God might relax the Law, and appoint a
Mediator to interpose by way of Ransom, so he has declared his will to accept
of Him. The Law in strictness obliged the Sinning person to suffer, so that he
might have refused any other Satisfaction. Therefore the whole Work of our
Redemption is referred to His Will as the primary cause. John 3.17.
Our Savior was sent into the World by the order of God: He was sealed, that
is, authorized for that great Work by commission from Him. He was called to His
Office, by the voice of his Father from heaven, Mat. 3.17. Act. 10.38..
Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. God anointed him with the
Holy^Ghost, and with Power, which signifies as the enduing of Him with the
Graces of the Spirit, so the investing Him in the dignity of Mediator, as
Kings, Priests, and Prophets were. And both were necessary: for his Graces
without his Office are unprofitable to us, and His Office without His capacity,
of no advantage. In short, the Apostle observes this as the peculiar excellency
of the New Covenant, and the foundation of our hopes, that the Mediator was
constituted by a solemn Oath, The Lord has sworn, Heb. 7.21.
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.

2. The Consent of our Redeemer was necessary, that he might by Sufferings
satisfy for us. For being the Lord from Heaven, there was no Superior
Authority to command, or Power to compel him. It Is true, having become our
Surety, 'twas necessary He should be accountable to the Law: But the first
undertaking was most free. When one has entered into Bonds to pay the Debt of
an insolvent person, he must give satisfaction; but it is an act of liberty and
choice to make himself liable. Luke 24.46.
Our Savior tells us, It behoved Christ to suffer; he does not say that the
Son of God should suffer, but that Christ. This Title signifies the same Person
in substance, but not in the same respect and consideration. Christ is the
Second Person clothed with our Nature. There was no necessity that obliged God
to appoint his Son, or the Son to accept the Office of Mediator; But when the
Eternal Son had undertook that charge, and was made Christ, that is, assumed
our Nature in order to redeem us, 'twas necessary that He should suffer.

Besides, His Consent was necessary upon another account. For the Satisfaction
does not arise merely from the Dignity of his Person, but from the Law of
substitution, whereby He put himself in our stead, and voluntarily obliged
Himself to suffer the Punishment due to us. The efficacy of his Death is by
virtue of the Contract between the Father and Him, of which there could be no
cause but pure Mercy, and His voluntary Condescension.

Now the Scripture declares the willingness of Christ, particularly at his
entrance into the World, and at his Death. Upon His coming into the World, He
begins his Life by the internal Oblation of Himself to his Father; Sacrifice
and Offering thou did not desire; mine ears have thou opened: that is, He
entirely resigned himself to be Gods Servant, Burnt-Offering and Sin-Offering
have thou not required. Then said I, Lo, I come, Heb. 10.6, 7.
in the volume of thy book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my
God, yea thy Law is within my heart. He saw the Divine Decree, and embraced it;
the Law was in his Heart, and fully possessed all his Thoughts and Affections,
and had a commanding influence upon his Life. And his Willingness was fully
expressed by Him, when He approacht to His last Sufferings. For although He
declined Death as Man, having natural and innocent desires of
Self-Preservation, yet as Mediator he readily submitted to it. Not my Will, but
thine be done, was his voice in the Garden. And this argued the compleatness
and fixedness of his Will, that notwithstanding his aversation from Death
absolutely considered, yet with an unabated election He still chose it as the
means of our Salvation. No involuntary Constraint was laid upon him, to force
him to that submission; But the sole causes of it were his free Compliance with
his Fathers Will, and his tender Compassion toward Men. He says, I have power
to lay down my life, Joh. 10.18.
and power to take it up; this command I received of my Father. In his Death,
Obedience and Sacrifice were united. The Typical Sacrifices were led to the
Altar, but the Lamb of God presented Himself: Gal. 1.4. Tit. 2.14.
it is said, He gave himself for us, to signify his willingness in dying. Now
the Freeness of our Redeemer in dying for us, qualified his Sufferings to be
meritorious. Romans 5.19.
The Apostle tells us, that By the obedience of one many are made righteous:
that is, By his voluntary Sufferings we are justified: for without his Consent,
his Death could not have the respect of a punishment for our Sins. No Man can
be compelled to pay another Debt, unless he make himself Surety for it.
Briefly, The Appointment of God, and the Undertaking of Christ, to redeem us
from the Curse of the Law by his suffering it, are the Foundation of the
New Testament.

3. He that interposed as Mediator must be perfectly Holy, otherwise he had
been liable to Justice for his own Sin. And guilty Blood is impure and corrupt,
apter to stain by its effusion and sprinkling, than to purge away Sin. The
Apostle joins these two as inseparable, 1 John 3.5.
He appeared to take away Sin, and in Him is no sin. The Priesthood under the
Law was imperfect; as for other reasons, so for the sins of the Priests. Aaron
the first and chief of the Levitical Order, was guilty of gross Idolatry, so
that Reconciliation could not be obtained by their Ministry: For how can one
Captive ransom another, or Sin expiate Sin? But our Mediator was absolutely
innocent, without the least tincture of Sin original, or actual. He was
conceived in a miraculous manner, infinitely distant from all the impurities of
the earth. That which is produced in an ordinary way receives its propriety
from second Causes, and contracts the defilement that cleaves to the whole
species: Whatever is born of blood, and the will of the flesh, that is formed
of the substance of the Flesh, and by the sensual Appetite is defiled: but
though He was formed of the substance of the Virgin, yet by virtue of an
Heavenly Principle, according to the words of the Angel to her, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, Luke 1.35.
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that Holy
thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. He came in
the appearance only of sinful flesh. As the Brazen Serpent had the figure, Romans
8.3.
and not the poison of the fiery Serpent. He was without actual Sin; He foiled
the Tempter in all his arts and methods wherewith he tried Him. He resisted the
Lust of the Flesh, by refusing to make the stones Bread to assuage his Hunger;
and the Lust of the Eyes, in despising the Kingdoms of the World with all their
Treasures; and the Pride of Life, when he would not throw himself down, that by
the interposing of Angels for His rescue, there might be a visible proof that
He was the Son of God. The Accuser himself confessed Him to be the Holy One of
God: Mar. 1.24.
he found no corruption within Him, and could draw nothing out of him. Judas
that betrayed him, and Pilate that condemned him, acknowledged his Innocence.
He perfectly fulfilled the Law, and did always what pleased his Father. In the
midst of his Sufferings, no irregular motion disturbed his Soul, but He always
expressed the highest Reverence to God, and incredible Charity to Men. He was
compared to a Lamb, (for his Passion and his Patience) that quietly dies at the
foot of the Altar.

Besides, We may consider in our Mediator not only a perfect freedom from Sin,
but an impossibility that he should be touched by it. The Angelical Nature was
liable to folly; but the Humane Nature by its intimate and unchangeable Union
with the Divine is established above all possibility of Falling. The Deity is
Holiness (...) self, and by its personal presence, is a greater preservative
from sin, than either the vision of God in Heaven, or the most permanent habit
of Grace. Our Savior tells us the Son can do nothing of himself, but according
to the pattern the Father sets him. John 5.19.
Now the perfect Holiness of our Redeemer has a special efficacy in making his
Death to be the expiation of Sin, as the Scripture frequently declares. Heb.
7.26, 27.
For such an high Priest became us who is holy, harmless, undefiled and
separate from sinners. And he that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21.
We are Redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver, and Gold, 1 Pet. 1.18.
but with the precious Blood of Christ as of a Lamb without blemish, Isa. 53.11.
and without spot. And by his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many.

4. 'Twas requisite the Mediator should be God and Man. He must assume the
nature of Man, that he might be put in his stead in order to make satisfaction
for him. He was to be our representative, therefore such a conjunction between
us must be, that God might esteem all his People to suffer in him. By the Law
of Israel the right of Redemption belonged to him that was next in blood: Now
Christ took the Seed of Abraham, the original element of our nature, that
having a right of Propriety in us as God, He might have a right of Propinquity
as Man. He was allied to all Men, as Men: that His sufferings might be
universally beneficial. And He must be God: it is not his Innocence only, or
Deputation, but the Dignity of His Person that qualifies Him to be an
all-sufficient Sacrifice for Sin, so that God may dispense pardon, in a way
that is honorable to Justice. For Justice requires a proportion between the
Punishment and the Crime: and that receives its quality from the dignity of the
person offended. Now since the Majesty of God is infinite against whom sin is
committed, the guilt of it can never be expiated but by an infinite
Satisfaction. There is no name under Heaven, nor in Heaven that could save us,
but the Son of God, Act. 4.12.
who being equal to Him in greatness, became Man.

If there had been such compassion in the Angels as to have inclined them, to
interpose between Justice and us, they had not been qualified for that Work:
not only upon the account of their different nature, so that by substitution
they could not satisfy for us; nor that being immaterial substances, they are
exempted from the dominion of death, which was the punishment denounced against
the sinner, and to which his Surety must be subjected: but principally that
being finite Creatures they are incapable to atone an incensed God. Who among
all their glorious Orders durst appear before so consuming a fire? who could
have been an Altar whereon to sanctify a Sacrifice to Divine Justice? no mere
Creature how worthy so ever could propitiate the supreme Majesty when justly
provoked. Our Redeemer was to be the Lord of Angels. The Apostle tells us that
it pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell. This respects not
his original Nature, but his Office, and the reason of it is, to reconcile by
the blood of the Cross, things in Heaven, and in the Earth. From the greatness
of the Work we may infer the quality of the means, and from the quality of the
means, the Nature of the Person that is to perform it. Peace with God who was
provoked by our Rebellion, could only be made by an infinite Sacrifice. Now in
Christ the Deity it self, not its influences, and the fullness of it, not any
particular perfection only, dwelt really and substantially. God was present in
the Ark in a shadow, and representation; He is present in nature by his
sustaining Power, and in his Saints by special favor, and the eminent effects,
the Graces and Comforts that proceed from it; but he is present in Christ in a
singular and transcendent manner. The Humanity is related to the Word not only
as a Creature to the Author of its being, for in this regard it has an equal
respect to all the persons, but by a peculiar conjunction: for it is actuated by
the same subsistence as the Divine Essence is in the Son, but with this
difference, the one is voluntary, the other necessary; the one is espoused by
Love, the other received by Nature.

Now from this intimate Union, there is a communication of the special
qualities of both natures to the Person of Christ: Man is exalted to be the Son
of God, and the Word abased to be the Son of Man. As by reason of the vital
Union between the Soul and Body, the essential parts of Man, it is truly said
that he is rational in respect of his soul, and mortal in respect of his body.
This Union derives an infinite merit to the obedience of Christ. For the humane
nature having its complement from the Divine Person, it is not the nature simply
considered, but the person that is the fountain of actions. To illustrate this
by an instance: the civil Law determines that a tree transplanted from one
soil to another, and taking root there, it belongs to the owner of that
ground; in regard that receiving nourishment from a new earth, it becomes as it
were another tree, though there be the same individual root, the same body, and
the same soul of vegetation as before. Thus the humane nature taken from the
common mass of Mankind, and transplanted by personal Union into the Divine, is
to be reckoned as entirely belonging to the Divine, and the actions proceeding
from it are not merely humane, but are raised above their natural worth, and
become meritorious. One hour of Christ's Life glorified God more, than an
everlasting duration spent by Angels and Men in the praises of him. For the
most perfect creatures are limited, and finite, and their services cannot fully
correspond with the Majesty of God; but when the Word was made Flesh, and
entered into a new state of subjection, he glorified God in a Divine manner and
most worthy of him. He that comes from above, is above all. The all sufficiency
of his Satisfaction arises from hence, He that was in the form of God, Joh.
3.31.
and thought it no robbery to be equal with God; that is, Phil. 2.6.
in the truth of the Divine Nature He was equal with the Father, and without
sacrilege, or usurpation possessed Divine Honor, he became obedient to the
Death of the Cross. The Lord of Glory was Crucified. 1 Cor. 2.8.
We are purchased by the Blood of God. Act. 20.28.
And the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. The Divine
Nature gives it an infinite and everlasting efficacy.

And it is observable, that the Socinians the declared enemies of his Eternity,
consentaneously to their first impious error, deny his Satisfaction. For if
Jesus Christ were but a titular God, his Sufferings how deep soever, had been
insufficient to expiate our offense: in His Death He had been only a Martyr,
not a Mediator. For no Satisfaction can be made to Divine Justice, but by
suffering that which is equivalent to the guilt of sin, which as it is infinite,
such must the Satisfaction be.

CHAP. XIII.
Divine Justice is declared and glorified in the Death of Christ. The threefold
account the Scripture gives of it: As a Punishment inflicted for Sin, as a
Price to redeem us from Hell, as a Sacrifice to reconcile us to God. Man was
Capitally guilty. Christ with the allowance of God interposes as his Surety.
His Death was inflicted on him by the Supreme Judge. The impulsive Cause of it
was Sin. His Sufferings were equivalent to the Sentence of the Law. The Effect
of them is our Freedom. An Answer to the Objection, That it is a violation of
Justice to transfer the Punishment from the guilty to the innocent. The Death
of Christ is the Price that redeems from Hell. This singular effect of his
Death distinguishes it from the death of the Martyrs. An Answer to the
Objections. How could God receive this Price, since he gave his Son to that
Death which redeems us? And how our Redeemer, supposing him God, can make
Satisfaction to Himself? The Death of Christ represented as a Sacrifice. The
Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law were substituted in the place of guilty Men.
The Effects of them answerable to their threefold respect, to God, Sin and Men:
The Atonement of Anger, the Expiation of Sin, and Freedom from Punishment. All
sorts of Placatory Sacrifices are referred to Christ, and the effects of them
in a sublime and perfect manner. No prejudice to the Freeness and Greatness of
God's Love, that Christ by his Death reconciled Him to men.

HAving premised these things, I shall now prove that the Divine Justice is
really declared and glorified in the obedient Sufferings of Christ. For the
opening this point, it is necessary to consider the account the Scripture gives
of his Death; which is threefold:

1. It Is represented under the relation of a Punishment inflicted on him for
Sin, and the effect of it is Satisfaction to the Law.

2. As a Price to redeem us from Hell.

3. Under the notion of a Sacrifice to reconcile God to Sinners.

First. As a Punishment inflicted on him for Sin. This will appear by
considering,

1. That Man by his Rebellion against God was capitally guilty: He stood
sentenced by the Law to Death.

2. Christ with the allowance of the Supreme Judge, interposed as our Surety,
and in that relation was made liable to Punishment. Sins are by resemblance
called Debts. As a Debt obliges the Debtor to payment, so Sin does the Sinner
to Punishment. And as the Creditor has a right to exact the Payment from the
Debtor, Vid. Dr. Stillingfleet, who with admirable clearness has vindicated
the Doctrine of Satisfaction, from the Objections of Crelli^e.
so God has a right to inflict Punishment on the guilty. But with this
difference, the Creditor by the mere signification of his will may discharge
the Debtor, for he has an absolute power over his estate: whereas public
Justice is concerned in the Punishment of the guilty. This is evident by many
instances. For it is not sufficient that a Criminal satisfy his Adversary,
unless the Prince, who is the Guardian of the Laws, give him Pardon. The
interest of a private Person, who has received an injury, is so distinct from
that of the State, that sometimes the injured party solicites the Pardon of the
offender without success. Which shows that principally it is not to satisfy the
particular person, that the Crime is punished, but to satisfy the Law, and
prevent future Disorders.

Now our Debt was not pecuniary but penal: And as in civil Cases, where one
becomes Surety for another, he is obliged to pay the Debt, for in the estimate
of the Law they are but one person; So the Lord Jesus Christ entering into this
relation, He sustained the person of Sinners, Heb. 7.22.
and became judicially one with them, and according to the order of Justice,
was liable to their punishment. The displeasure of God was primarily and
directly against the Sinner, but the effects of it fell upon Christ, who
undertook for him. The Apostle tells us, That when the Fullness of time came,
God sent his Son, made under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
that he might redeem them that were under the Law. He took our Nature and
Condition: He was made under the Law Moral and Ceremonial. The directive part
of the Moral Law He fulfilled by the Innocence of his Life; the penalty he
satisfied as our Surety, being under an Obligation to save us. And he appeared
as a Sinner in his subjection to the Law of Moses. Col. 2.14.
That Handwriting was against us; He therefore entered into the Bond that we
had forfeited. In his Circumcision He signed it with those drops of Blood,
which were an earnest of his shedding the rest on the Cross. For whosoever was
Circumcised, became a Debtor to the whole Law. And we may observe, it is said,
That as Moses lifted up the brazen Serpent, so the Law of which Moses was a
type and Minister, lifted up the Messiah on the Cross.

3. The Scripture is very clear and express in setting down the part that God
had in the Sufferings of Christ as Supreme Judge, the impulsive cause that moved
Him, their proportion to the punishment of the Law, and the effect of them for
our Deliverance. He was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledg
of God. Acts 2.23.
All the various and vicious actions of men, were overruled by his Providence:
The falsness of Judas, the fearfulness of Pilate, and the malice of the Jews
were subservient to Gods eternal design. And as He wills not the Death of a
Sinner, much less of his Son, but for most weighty Reasons: these are declared
by the Prophet, All we like sheep have gone astray, and turned every one to his
own ways: Our Errors were different, but the issue was the same, that is,
Eternal Death: Isa. 53.6.
And the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all: that is, the Punishment of
our Iniquities. His Sufferings had such a respect to Sin, as included the
imputation of it. 'Twas an act of Sovereignty in God to appoint Christ as Man
to be our Surety, but an act of Justice to inflict the punishment, when Christ
had undertaken for us. It Is said, He has born our griefs, and carried our
sorrows. The expressions are comprehensive of all the Miseries of his Life,
especially his last Sufferings. The Hebrew words Nasa, and Sabal signify such
a taking away, (...) Primum designat ips^m actum tollendi onus in humeros,
alterum gestationem on^^is impositi.
as is by laying upon one who bears it from us. And thus it is interpreted by
St. Peter, He himself bare our sins in his own Body on the tree. This
necessarily implies the derivation of our guilt to him, and the consequent of
it, the transferring of our punishment. Those words are full and pregnant to
the same purpose: He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53.5.
he was bruised for our Iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was on him,
and with his stripes we are healed. Where the meritorious cause of his
Sufferings is set down, as appears by the connection of the words with the
former. The Jews thought him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted; that is,
justly punished for Blasphemy, and usurping Divine Honor. In opposition to this
conceit it is added, But he was wounded for our transgressions. This the Apostle
expressly tells us, when he declares that Christ died for our Sins.

This will appear more fully, by considering what the desert of Sin is. By our
Rebellion we made the forfeiture of Soul and Body to Divine Justice: Death,
both the first and the second, was the Sentence of the Law. Now the Sufferings
of Christ were answerable to this Punishment. The Death which the Law threatened
for Sin, was to be accompanied with Dishonor and Pain. And he suffered the
Death of the Cross to which a special Curse was annexed. And this was not only
in respect of the Judgment of Men, before whom a Crucified person was made a
Spectacle of public Vengeance for his Crimes, but in respect of Gods
declaration concerning it. The Jews were commanded that none should hang on a
Tree longer then the Evening; Deuteronomy. 21.23.
lest the Holy Land should be profaned by that, which was an express mark of
Gods Curse. Now the legal Curse was a Typical signification of the real, that
should be suffered by our Redeemer. Besides, his Death was attended with
exquisite pains: he suffered variety of torments, by the scourges, the thorns,
the nails, that pierced his Hands and Feet, the least vital, but most sensible
parts. He refused the Wine mixed with Myrrh, that was given to stupifie the
senses; for the design of his Passion required, that he should have the
quickest sense of his Sufferings, which were the Punishment of Sin. And his
inward Sorrows were equivalent to the pains of loss and sense that are due to
Sinners. It Is true, there are circumstances in the Sufferings of the damned, as
Blaspemy, Rage, Impotent fierceness of mind, which are not appointed by the
Law, but are accidental arising from the perverseness of their Spirits: For the
punishment of the Law is a Physical evil, but these are Moral: and that
punishment is inflicted by the Judge, but these are only from the guilty
Sufferers: Now to these he was not possibly liable. Besides, the Death that the
Sinner ought to Suffer is Eternal, attended with despair, and the intolerable
anguish of Conscience. Now our Redeemer having no real Guilt, was not liable to
the worm of Conscience, and his Temporary Sufferings were equivalent to the
Eternal, upon the account of his Divine Person, so that he was not capable of
Despair. But he endured the unknown terrors of the second Death, so far as was
consistent with the Perfection of his Nature. The anguish of his Soul was not
merely from sympathy with his Body, but immediately from Divine Displeasure. It
pleased the Lord to bruise him: this principally respects the Impressions of
Wrath made upon his inward Man. Isa. 53.10.
Had the Cup he feared been only Death, with the bitter ingredients of
dishonor and pain, many have drank it with more appearing resolution. The
Martyrs endured more cruel torments without complaint; nay in their sharpest
conflicts have expressed a triumphant joy. Whereas our Redeemer was under all the
innocent degrees of fear and sorrow at the approach of his Sufferings. From
whence was the difference? Had Christ less Courage? He was the Fountain of
their Fortitude: the difference was not in the disposition of the Patients, but
in the Nature of the Sufferings. He endured that which is infinitely more
terrible than all outward torments. The Light of Joy that always shined in his
Soul, a sweet Image of Heaven, was then totally eclipsed. God, the Fountain of
Compassion, restrained himself; his Father appeared a severe inexorable Judge,
and dealt with him not as his Son, but our Surety. Under all the Cruelties
exercised by men, the Lamb of God opened not his mouth, but when the Father of
Mercies, and the God of all Consolations forsook him, then he broke forth into
a mournful complaint. Now by this account of Christ's Sufferings from Scripture,
it is evident, they were truly penal; for they were inflicted for Sin, by the
Supreme Judge, and were equivalent to the Sentence of the Law. And the benefit
we receive upon their account, proves that they are satisfaction to Divine
Justice, for we are exempted from Punishment, by his Submission to it. He freed
us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. 3 13. Isa. 53.5.
The Chastisements of our Peace was upon him, by whose stripes we are healed.
So that his Death being the Meritorious Cause of freeing the Guilty, is
properly Satisfaction.

Before I proceed to the second Consideration of Christ's Death, I will briefly
answer the Objection of the Socinians, viz. That it is a Violation of Justice to
transfer the Punishment from one to another, so that the Righteous God could
not Punish his innocent Son for our Sins. Now to show the invalidity of this
Pretense we must consider.

1. That Justice is not an irregular appetite of Vengeance arising from Hatred
that cannot be satisfied but with the Destruction of the Guilty. It preserves
Right with pure Affections, and is content when the Injury is repaired, from
whomsoever satisfaction comes.

2. Though an innocent person cannot suffer as innocent without Injustice, yet
he may voluntarily contract an Obligation, which will expose him to deserved
sufferings. The Wisdom and Justice of all Nations agree in punishing one for
another fault, where consent is preceding, as in the case of Hostages. And
although it is Essential to the Nature of Punishment to be inflicted for Sin,
yet not on the Person of the Sinner: for in Conspectu fori, the Sinner and
Surety are one.

3. That exchange is not allowed in Criminal Causes where the Guilty ought to
suffer in Person, it is not from any Injustice in the Nature of the thing, for
then it would not be allowed in Civil; but there are special Reasons why an
Innocent Person is not ordinarily admitted to suffer for an offender.

1. No man has absolute Power over his own life. It Is a depositum consigned to
him for a time, and must be preserved till God, or the Public good, calls for
it.

2. The Public would suffer prejudice by the loss of a good Subject. Therefore
the Rule of the Law is just, Non auditur perire volens. The desire of one that
devotes himself to ruin is not to be heard. And the guilty person who is
spared might grow worse by impunity, and cause great disorders by his evil
example. But these considerations are of no force in the case of our Savior:
For,

1. He had full Power to dispose of his life: I have power to lay it down, Joh.
10.18.
and I have power to take it again: this Commandment have I received of my
Father. He declares his Power as God, that his life entirely depended on his
will, to preserve it, or part with it: and his subjection as Mediator to the
order of his Father.

2. Our Savior could not finally Perish. 'Twas not possible he should be held
under the power of Death. Act. 2.24.
Otherwise it had been against the Laws of reason, that the precious should for
ever suffer for the vile. Better ten thousand Worlds had been lost, than that
the Holy One of God should perish. He saved us through his Sufferings, though
as by fire: and had a glorious reward in the issue.

3. There is an infinite good redounds from his Sufferings: for Sinners are
exempted from Death, and the preservation of the guilty is for the glory of
Gods government: for those who are redeemed by his Death, are renewed by his
Spirit. He covers their sins, that he may cure them. He is made Righteousness
and Sanctification to his People. The serious belief that Christ by dying has
rescued us from Hell, 1 Cor. 1.30.
produces a superlative Love to him, an ingenuous and grateful fear lest we
should offend Him, an ambition to please Him in all things; briefly, Universal
Obedience to his Will, as its most natural and necessary effect. So that in
laying the punishment on Christ, under which Mankind must have sunk for ever,
there is nothing against Justice.

2. The Death of Christ is the price which redeems us from our woeful Captivity.
Mankind was fallen under the dominion of Satan and Death, and could not obtain
freedom by escape, or mere power. For by the order of Divine Justice we were
detained Prisoners; So that till God the Supreme Judge is satisfied, there can
be no discharge. Now the Lord Christ has procured our deliverance by his
Death, according to the testimony of the Apostle, We have Redemption through
his Blood, Col. 1.14.
even the forgiveness of sins. His Blood is congruously called a price, because
in consideration of it our Freedom is purchased. He is our Redeemer by Ransom;
1 Timothy 2.6.
He gave himself a Ransom for all: and that signifies the price paid for the
freeing of a Captive. The word used by the Apostle (...), has a special
Emphasis, it signifies an exchange of conditions with us, the redeeming us from
Death, by dying for us. As the (...), who devoted themselves to Death, for the
rescuing of others. Our Savior told his Disciples that the Son of Man came to
give his Life a ransom for many: Mat. 20.28. (...)^
(...) signifies a commutation or exchange, with respect of things, or persons:
Thus we are commanded to render to none Evil for evil: Luke 11.12. (...)^
And if a Son ask of his Father a Fish will he give him a Serpent for a Fish?
When it is used in respect of persons, it imports a substitution in another
place. (...). Mat. 17.27.
Archelaus reigned instead of his Father Herod and Peter paid tribute for
Christ, that is, representing Him: the effect therefore of our Saviors words,
that He gave his Life a Ransom for many, is evidently this, that he died in
their stead; and his Life as a Price intervened to obtain their Redemption.
It Is for this Reason the Glorified Saints sung a Hymn of Praise to the Divine
Lamb, saying, Thou art worthy for thou wast slain, Rev. 5.9.
and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood. This singular and blessed effect of
Christ's Death, distinguishes it from the Death of the most Excellent Martyrs.
If he had dyed only for the Confirmation of the Gospel, or to exhibit to us a
Pattern of Suffering Graces, what were there peculiar and extraordinary in his
Death? How can it be said that he was Crucified for us alone? 1 Cor. 1.13.
For the Martyrs Sealed the Truth with their Blood, and left admirable Examples
of Love to God, of Zeal for his Glory, of patience under Torments, and of
Compassion to their Persecutors: yet it were intolerable Blasphemy to say that
they redeemed us by their Death. And it is observable, when the Death of Christ
is propounded in Scripture as a Pattern of Patience, it is with a special
Circumstance that distinguishes it from all others. Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps: 1 Pet. 2.19, 24.
who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree; by whose stripes
ye were healed. The truth is, if the sole end of Christ's Death were to induce
Men to believe His Promises, and to imitate His Graces, there had been no such
necessity of it: for the Miracles he did, had been sufficient to confirm the
Gospel, yet Remission of Sins is never attributed to them: and the Miseries he
Suffered during the course of his Life, had been sufficient to instruct us how
to behave our selves under Indignities and Persecutions: and at the last he
might have given as full a Testimony to the Truth of his Doctrine by his
descent from the Cross as by dying for us. But no lower Price than his Blood
could make Compensation to the Law, and satisfaction to God, and to deny this,
is to Rob him of the Glory of his Death, and to destroy all our Comfort.

It Is objected by those who nullify the Mystery of the Cross of the Lord
Jesus; How could God receive this Price, since he gave up his Son to that Death
which Redeems us? And how can our Redeemer, supposing him God, make
satisfaction to himself? To this I answer.

1. The infinite Goodness of God in giving our Redeemer, does not divest him of
the Office of Supreme Judge, nor prejudice his examining of the Cause according
to his Sovereign Jurisdiction, and his receiving a Ransom to preserve the
Rights of Justice inviolable. There is an eminent instance of this in Zaleucus,
the Prince of the Locrians; who past a Law that Adulterers should lose both
their eyes: and when his Son was convicted of that Crime, the people who
respected him for his Excellent Virtues, out of pity to him, interceded for the
Offender. Vid. Aelian Var. histor. l. 13. c. 24.
Zaleucus in a Conflict between Zeal for Justice, and Affection to his Son,
took but one Eye from him, and parted with one of his own to satisfy the Law.
And thus he paid and received the Punishment: he paid it as a Father, and
received it as the Conservator of Public Justice. Thus when guilty Mankind in
its Poverty could not pay the Forfeiture to the Law, God the Father of Mercies
was pleased to give it from the Treasures of his Love; that is, the Blood of
his Son for our Ransom. And this he receives from the Hand of Christ, offered
upon the Cross, as the Supreme Judge, and declares it fully valuable, and the
Rights of Justice to be truly performed.

2. It is not inconsistent with Reason, that the Son of God clothed with our
Nature, should by his Death make Satisfaction to the Deity, and therefore to
himself. In the according of two Parties, a Person that belongs to one of them,
may interpose for Reconciliation, provided that he devests his own Interest,
and leaves it with the Party from whom he comes. Thus when the Senate of Rome,
and the People were in dissension, Menenius Agrippa, Liv^ l. 2.
one of the Senators trusted his own Concernment with the Council, of which he
was a Member, and mediated between the Parties to reconcile them. Thus when the
Father and the Son both possessed of the Imperial Power, have been offended by
Rebellious Subjects, it is not inconvenient that the Son interpose as a
Mediator, to restore them to the Favor of the Prince. And by this he
reconciles them to himself, and procures them Pardon of an Offense, by which
his own Majesty was violated. This he does as Mediator, not as a a Party
concerned. Now this is a fit Illustration of the Great Work of our Redemption,
so far as Humane things can represent Divine. For all the Persons of the
Glorious Trinity were equally provoked by our Sin; and to obtain our Pardon the
Son with the consent of the Father deposits his Interest into his Hands, and as
a Mediator intervenes between us and him, who in this Transaction is the
Depositary of the Rights of Heaven, and having performed what Justice required,
he reconciled the World to God, that is, to the Father, Himself, and the
Eternal Spirit. In this Cause his Person is the same, but his Quality is
different: he made Satisfaction as Mediator, and received it as God. It Is in
this sense that the Apostle says, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous: 1 John 2.2.
Not to exclude the other Persons, but in regard the Father as the First Person
is the Protector of Justice, our Mediator in appeasing Him appeases the others
also.

3. The Death of Christ is represented under the notion of a Sacrifice offered
up to God. For the more full understanding of this, we must consider that
Sacrifices were of two kinds.

1. Some were Eucharistical: They are called Peace Offerings, by which the
Sacrificer acknowledged the Bounty of God, and his own unworthiness, and
rendered Praise for a favor received, and desired the Divine Blessing.

2. Expiatory: The Sin Offerings for the averting of Gods wrath. The
Institution of them was upon a double Reason;

1. That Man is a sinner, and therefore obnoxious to the just indignation and
extreme displeasure of the Holy and Righteous God. 2. That God was to be
propitiated, that he might pardon them. These Truths are engraven in the
natural Consciences of Men, as appears by the^^ pretended Expiations of sin
among the Heathens: But are more clearly revealed in the Scripture. Under the
Law without the effusion of Blood there was no Remission; To signify, Heb.
9.22.
that God would not forgive Sin without the atonement of Justice, which
required the Death of the Offender; but it being tempered with Mercy, accepted
a Sacrifice in his stead. And that there was a Substitution of the Beast in the
place of the guilty Offender, appears by the Law concerning Sacrifices. 1.
None were instituted for Capital Offenses, as Murder, Idolatry, Adultery, etc.
Because the Sinner himself was to be cut off: But for other Sins, which
although in strictness they deserved Death, yet God who was the King of Israel,
was pleased to remit the Forfeiture, and to accept the life of the Sacrifice
for the Life of the Sinner. 2. The guilty Person was to offer a clean Beast of
his own; to signify the Surrogation of it in his stead. For in the relation of
a Possessour he had a dominion over it, to apply it to that use. 3. The Priest,
or the person that offered, Exo. 29.10. Lev. 1.4.
was to lay his hands on the head of the Sacrifice, thereby Consecrating it to
God, and Devoting it in his stead to bear the Punishment. For this reason 'twas
called a Sin, and a Curse. 4. The Confession of Sin by the People, Lev. 17.11.
or the Priest, as in the day of Atonement, signified that the guilt of all met
on the Sacrifice for Expiation. 5. The Blood was to be shed wherein the vital
spirits are, an express representation what the Sinner deserved: and that it
was accepted for his Life. 6. Lastly, The deprecating of God's Anger was joined
with the Sacrifice. As when a Man was slain, and the Murderer was not found;
the Elders of the City next to the dead Body, were to kill an Heifer in a
Valley, and to pray that innocent Blood might not be laid to their charge:
otherwise the Land could not be cleansed from the guilt of Blood, but by the
Blood of the Murderer.

Those effects are expressed by (...) and (...) with the Hebrews, and by (...)
with the Greeks. Lev. 4.20, 26, 31, 35.
2. The Effects of these Sacrifices declare their nature: And they are
answerable to their threefold respect, to God, to Sin, to Man. To God, that his
Anger might be appeased; to Sin, that the fault might be expiated; to Man, that
the guilty person might obtain Pardon, and Freedom from Punishment. Thus when a
Sacrifice was duly offered, it is said to be of a sweet savor unto the Lord,
and to atone him, Lev. 1.17. and the Remission of Sins, with the Release of the
Sinner followed; The Priest shall expiate it, that is declaratively, and it
shall be forgiven him. Now there was a double Guilt contracted by those that
were under the Mosaical Dispensation.

1. Typical, From the breach of a Ceremonial Constitution, which had no
relation to Morality. Such were natural Pollutions, accidental Diseases, the
touching of a dead Body, etc. which were esteemed vicious according to the Law,
and the Defiled were excluded from Sacred and Civil Society. Now these
Impurities, considered in themselves, deserved no punishment. For involuntary
and inevitable Infirmities, and corporeal things, which do not infect the
inward man, are the marks of our abject and weak state, but are not in
themselves sinful. Therefore Ceremonial Guilt was expiated by a Ceremonial
Offering. For it is according to the nature of things, that Obligations should
be dissolved by the same means, by which they are contracted. As therefore
those Pollutions were penal merely by the positive Will of God; So, (the
exercise of his Supreme Right being tempered with Wisdom and Equity,) he
ordained that the guilt should be abolisht by a Sacrifice, and that they should
be fully restored to their former Privileges. Thus the Apostle tells us, that
the Blood of those Sacrifices Sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, that
is, Heb. 9.13.
communicated a legal Purity to the Offerers, and consequently a right to
approach the holy Place. Now the reason of these Institutions was, that the
legal Impurity might represent the true defilements of Sin, and the Expiatory
Sacrifices prefigure that great and admirable Oblation, which should purge away
all Sin.

2. A real Guilt which respects the Conscience, and was contracted from the
breach of the Moral Law, and subjected the Offender to Death temporal and
eternal. This could not be purged away by those Sacrifices. For how is it
possible the Blood of a Beast should cleanse the Soul of a Man, or content the
Justice of an offended God? Nay on the contrary they revived the guilt of Sin,
and reinforced the rigor of the Law, and were a public profession of the
Misery of Men: For this reason the Law is called the Ministry of Death. As the
Moral contained a declaration of our guilt, and Gods right to punish, so all
the parts of the Ceremonial were either arguments and convictions of Sin, or
images of the punishment due for them. But as they had a relation to Christ who
was their Complement, so they signified the expiation of moral guilt by his
Sacrifice, Levit 5. Vid. Vossium contra Ravensperg. c. 24.
and freed the Sinner from that temporal Death to which he was liable; as a
Representative of our freedom from Eternal Death by the Blood of the Cross.
This will appear more clearly by considering, 1. That all kinds of placatory
Sacrifices are referred to Christ in the New Testament. 2. That all their
Effects are attributed to him in a sublimer and most perfect manner. He is
called a Lamb in the notion of a Sacrifice, The Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world. Rev. 13.8. Lev. 5.6. and 14.12. 1 Cor. 5.7. Exo. 12.13.
A Lamb was used in the Expiation of moral and legal Impurities. He is called
our Passover that was sacrificed for us. The Paschal Lamb in its first
Institution had an expiatory efficacy, for God by looking on that Blood,
averted the destruction from the Israelites, which seized on the Egyptians.
This was the reason of the Prohibition, that none should go out of the house
till the Morning, lest they should be struck by the destroying Angel: Not but
that the Angel could distinguish the Israelites from the Egyptians abroa^, but
'twas typical, to show their security was in being under the guard of the Lambs
Blood, which was shed to spare theirs. Thus the Apostle Peter tells us, We are
redeemed by the Blood of the pure and perfect Lamb. And he was represented by
the red Heifer, 1 Pet. 1.18.
whose ashes were the chief ingredient in the water of Purification. For if the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, Heb 9.13, 14.
and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the Flesh* How much more shall the Blood of Christ purge the
Conscience? Especially the Anniversary Sacrifice, which was the Abridgment and
Recapitulation of all the rest, had an eminent respect to Christ: The whole
Epistle to the Hebrews is tinctured with this divine Doctrine.

Secondly, The Effects of Christ's Death are infinitely more excellent than
those that proceeded from Levitical Sacrifices. Heb. 10.1.
The Law had a shadow of good things to come; But the real Virtue and Efficacy
is only found in Christ.

1. The Aversion of Gods Wrath is ascribed to his Death; according to the Words
of the Apostle: Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in
his Blood, Romans 3.5^26.
to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God, to declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that
he might be Just, and the justifier of him that believed in Jesus. A
Propitiation (...), The Title of the Mercy-Seat, Heb. 5.5.
partly in regard it covered the Tables of the Law which were broke by us, to
signify that by Him Pardon is procured for us, and principally because God was
rendered Propitious by the sprinkling the Blood of the Sacrifice on it, and
exhibited himself there, as on a Throne of Grace, favorable t^ his people. For
this Reason he gives the name of the Figure to Christ, for he alone answers the
Charge of the Law, and interposes between Justice and our Guilt, and by his own
Blood has reconciled God to us. Now the design of God in this appointment was
to declare his Righteousness, that is, that Glorious Attribute that inclines
him to punish Sinners: For in the Legal Propitiations, although the guilt of
Men was publicly declared in the Death of the Sacrifices, yet the Justice of
God did not fully appear, since he accepted the Life of a Beast in Compensation
for the Life of a Man: but in the Death of Christ he has given the most clear
Demonstration of his Justice, a sufficient Example of his Hatred to Sin,
Condemning it, and Revenging himself upon it, in the Person of his beloved Son;
that the whole World may acknowledge 'twas not from any Inadvertency, but
merely by the Dispensation of his Wisdom and Goodness that he forbore so long.
And by the Death of Christ he has declared that Glorious Mystery which no
created Understanding could ever have conceived, that he is inflexibly just,
and will not suffer sin to pass unpunished, and that he justifies those who are
guilty in themselves, if by a purifying Faith they receive Christ for Pardon.
The same Apostle tells us, that Christ has given himself for us, (...) an
allusion to the peace offering and sin-offering; for the truth of both is in
the death of Christ, which appeases God, and obtains the Blessings that depend
on his favor.
an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. He
is qualified as a Priest, whose Office it was to present to God an offering for
Appeasing his Anger; He gave himself; the Oblation that is added to his Death,
gives the complete Formality of a Sacrifice to it; for it is the Priest gives
being to the Sacrifice: and the effect of it is, to be a sweet smelling savor
to God, that is, to conciliate his Favor to us. The same phrase is applied to
the Sin-Offering under the Law. Genesis 8.20. Exodus 29. Lev. 1.10.
We may observe that upon this account our Reconciliation to God is attributed
to the Death of Christ, in distinction from his Glorified Life: Romans 5.10.
For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. And the same Apostle
tells us, that God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.
not imputing their trespasses unto them; we pray you therefore in Christ's
stead, be reconciled to God. A double Reconciliation is mentioned, that of God
to Men, and of Men to God: the first is the ground of the Apostle's
exhortation, the latter the effect of it. The first was obtained by the Death
of Christ, who by imputation had our guilt transferred upon Him, and
consequently our punishment, and in consideration of it, God who is Just and
Holy is willing to pardon penitent Believers. The latter is by the powerful
working of the Spirit, who assures Men that are guilty, and therefore
suspicious and fearful of God's anger, that he is most willing to pardon them
upon their repentance, since he has in such an admirable manner found out the
means to satisfy his Justice.

2. The true expiation of sin is the effect of Christ's Death. He is called the
Lamb of God, 1 John 29.
that takes away the sins of the World. Now sin may be taken away in two
manners.

First, by removing its guilt, and exempting the Person that committed it from
Death; and when this is effected by enduring the punishment that was due to
sin, it is properly expiation.

Secondly, By healing the corrupt inclinations of the Heart, from whence actual
sins proceed. It Is true, our Redeemer takes away sin in both these respects: he
delivers from the Damnation and Dominion of it: for he is made of God our
Righteousness and Sanctfication. 1 Cor. 1.30.
But the first sense is only convenient here: for it is evident that the Lamb
took away sin, that is, the guilt of it, by dying instead of the sinner, and
had no effect for the destroying the malignant habits of sin in those who
offered them. It appears further that this Divine Lamb has taken away the
guilt of our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.
in that He bore them in his own Body on the Tree. For the native force of the
word signifies, not only to take away, (...).
but to carry and bear, which applied to sin is nothing else but to suffer the
penalty of it. And it is to be observed, when Cleansing, Purifying, and Washing
are attributed to the Blood of Christ, they have an immediate respect to the
guilt of sin, and declare its efficacy to take off the obligation to
punishment. Thus it is said that His Blood cleanses from all sin: 1 John 1.7.
Heb. 9.4. Rev. 1.6.
and that it purges the Conscience foom dead Works; and that we are washed from
our sins in His Blood. The frequent Sprinklings and Purifications with Water
under the Law, prefigured our cleansing from the defilements of sin by the
Grace of the Spirit; but the shedding of the Blood of Sacrifices was to purge
away sins* so far as they made liable to a Curse.

Thirdly, Our exemption from punishment, and our restoration to Communion with
God in Grace and Glory is the fruit of his expiating sin. For this reason the
Blood of the Mediator speaks better things then that of Abel: Heb. 12.24.
For that cried for revenge against the Murderer, but his procures remission to
Believers. And as the just desert of sin is separation from the presence of
God, who is the fountain of felicity; so when the guilt is taken away, the
person is received into God's favor, and fellowship. A representation of this
is set down in the 24 of Exodus where we have described the manner of dedicating
the Covenant between God and Israel by bloody Sacrifices: Exodus 24.6, 11.
after Moses had finished the Offering, and sprinkled the Blood on the Altar and
the People, the Elders of Israel who were forbid before to approach near to the
Lord, were then invited to come into his presence, Exodus 24.9, 10, 11. Heb.
13.20. Luke 22.20.
and in token of reconciliation feasted before him. Thus the Eternal Covenant
is established by the Blood of the Mediator, and all the benefits it contains,
as remission of sins, freedom to draw near to the Throne of Grace, and the
enjoyment of God in Glory, are the fruits of his reconciling Sacrifice.

The sum of all is this, That as under the Law God was not appeased without
shedding of Blood, nor sin expiated without suffering the punishment, nor the
sinner pardoned without the substitution of a sacrifice; so all these are
eminently accomplished in the Death of Christ. He reconciled God to us by his
most precious Blood, and expiated sin by enduring the Curse, and has procured
our pardon by being made sin for us. So that it is most evident, that the proper
and direct end of the Death of Christ was, that God might exercise his Mercy to
the guilty sinner in a way that is honorable to his Justice*

It Is objected, that if God from infinite Mercy gave his Son to us, then
antecedently to the coming of Christ he had the highest love for mankind, and
consequently there was no need that Christ by his Death should satisfy
Justice, to reconcile him to us. But a clear answer may be given to this by
considering,

1. That Anger and Love are consistent at the same time, and may in several
respects be terminated on the same subject. A Father resents a double affection
toward a rebellious Son; he loves him as his Son, is angry with with him as
disobedient. Thus in our lapsed state God had compassion on us as his
creatures, and was angry with us as sinners. As the injured party he laid aside
his anger, but as the preserver of Justice he required satisfaction.

2. We must dinstinguish between a love of goodwill and compassion, and a love
of complacency. The first is that which moved God to ordain the means, that
without prejudice to his other perfections he might confer pardon and all
spiritual benefits upon us: the other is that whereby he delights in us being
reconciled to him, and renewed according to his Image. The first supposes him
placable, the latter that he is appeased. There is a visible instance of this
in the case of Job's Friends. The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, Job. 42.7,
8.
My anger is kindled against thee, and thy two Friends; because ye have not
spoken of me the things that are right, as my Servant Job. Here is a
declaration of God's anger, yet with the mixture of Love: for it follows,
therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks, and seven Rams, and go to my
Servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my Servant Job
shall pray for you, for him will I accept. He loved them when he directed the
way that they might be restored to his Favor; yet he was not reconciled, for
then there had been no need of Sacrifices to atone his anger.

2. It Is further objected, that supposing the Satisfaction of Christ to Justice,
both the freeness and greatness of God's Love in pardoning sinners, will be
much lessened. But it will appear that the Divine Mercy is not prejudiced in
either of those respects.

First, The freenss of Gods Love is not diminished, for that is the original
mover in our Salvation, and has no cause above it, to excite or draw it forth,
but merely arises from his own will. This Love is so absolute that it has no
respect to the sufferings of Christ as Mediator: for God so loved the World,
Romans 9.18.
that he gave his Son to die for us; and that which is the effect and testimony
of his Love, cannot be the impulsive cause of it. This first Love of God to Man
is commended to us in Christ, who is the medium to bring it honorably about.

Secondly, Grace in Scripture is never opposed to Christ's Merits, but to ours.
If we had made Satisfaction, Justice it self had absolved us. For the Law
having two parts, the command of our Duty which consists in a moral good, and
the sanction of the punishment that is a physical evil; to do or to suffer is
necessary, not both: or, if we had provided a Surety, such as the Judge could
not reject, we had been infinitely obliged to him, but not to the favor of the
Judge. But it is otherwise here. God sent the Reconciler when we were enemies,
and the Pardon that is dispensed to us upon the account of his Sufferings, is
the effect of mere Mercy. We are justified freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. It Is pure Love that appointed and accepted,
that imputes and applies his Righteousness to us.

And as the Freeness, so the Riches of his Mercy is not lessened by the
Satisfaction Christ made for us. It Is true we have a pattern of God's Justice,
never to be paralleled, in the Death of Christ: but to the severity of Justice
toward his only beloved Son, his clemency toward us guilty Rebels is fully
comensurate. For He pardons us without the expense of one drop of our Blood,
though the Soul of Christ was poured forth as an Offering for Sin. Thus in an
admirable manner He satisfies Justice, and glorifies Mercy: and this could have
been no other way effected: for if He had given His Spirit alone to restore us
to His Image, His Love had eminently appeared, but the honor of his Justice
had not been secured. But in our Redemption they are infinitely magnified; His
Love could give no more than the Life of His Son, and Justice required no less:
for Death being the Wages of Sin, there could be no satisfaction without the
Death of our Redeemer.

CHAP. XIV.
The Compleatness of Christ's Satisfaction proved from the Causes and Effects
of it. The Causes are the Quality of his Person, and Degrees of his Sufferings.
The Effects are His Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession at Gods right hand,
and his exercising the Supreme Power in Heaven and Earth. The excellent
Benefits which God reconciled bestows on Men, are the Effects and Evidences of
his complete Satisfaction. They are Pardon of Sin, Grace, and Glory. That
Repentance and Faith are required, in order to the partaking of the Benefits
purchased by Christ's Death, does not lessen the Merit of his Sufferings. That
Afflictions and Death are inflicted on Believers, does not derogate from their
All Sufficiency.

THe Third thing to be considered is the Compleatness of the Satisfaction that
Christ has made, by which it will appear that Gods Justice as well as Mercy is
fully glorified in his Sufferings. For the proof of this I will first consider
the Causes from whence the compleatness of his Satisfaction arises.

Secondly, The Effects that proceed from it, which are convincing Evidences
that God is fully appeased. The Causes of his complete Satisfaction are two.

1. The Quality of his Person derives an infinite value to his obedient
Sufferings. Our Surety was equally God, and as truly Infinite in His
Perfections as the Father, who was provoked by our Sins, therefore he was able
to make Satisfaction for them. He is the Son of God not merely in respect of
the honor of his Office, or the special Favor of God, for on these accounts
that Title is communicated to others: but his only Son by Nature. The sole
pre-eminence in Gifts and Dignity would give Him the title of the firstborn,
Psalm. 82.6. John 3.16. John 8.36. Heb. 1.5.
but not deprive them of the quality of Brethren. Now the wisdom and justice of
all Nations agree, that Punishments receive their estimate from the quality of
the Persons that suffer. The Poet observes that the Death of a virtuous Person
is more precious than of Legions. Of what inestimable value then is the death
of Christ, Pluris enim Decii, quam qui servantur ab illis. Juven.
and how worthy a Ransom for lost mankind? For although the Deity is
impassible, yet he that was a Divine Person he suffered. A King suffers more
than a private person, although the strokes he endures in his body, cannot
immediately reach his honor. And it is specially to be observed, that the
Efficacy of Christ's Blood is ascribed to his Divine Nature: This the Apostle
declares, Col. 1.14.
In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins,
who is the image of the invisible God: Not an artificial Image which
imperfectly represents the Original; As a Picture that sets forth the Color
and Figure of a Man, but not his Life and Nature: But the essential and exact
Image of his Father, that expresses all his glorious Perfections in their
immensity and eternity. This is testified expressly in Hebr. 1.3. The Son of
God, the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person, having
purged by himself our sins, is set down on the right hand of Majesty on High.
From hence arises the infinite difference between the Sacrifices of the Law,
and Christ's, in their value and virtue. This with admirable Emphasis is set
down in Hebr. 9.13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes
of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purification of the
flesh; How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works to
serve the living God? Wherein the Apostle makes a double Hypothesis. 1. That
the Legal Sacrifices were ineffectual to purify from real guilt. 2. That by
their Typical Cleansing, they signified the washing away of moral guilt by the
Blood of Christ.

1. Their insufficiency to expiate Sin appears, if we consider the subject; Sin
is to be expiated in the same nature wherein 'twas committed; now the Beasts
are of an inferior rank, and have no communion with Man in his nature: Or, if
we consider the object, God was provoked by Sin, and He is a Spirit, Psalm.
50.13.
and not to be appeased by gross material things: His Wisdom requires that a
rational Sacrifice should expiate the guilt of a rational Creature: And Justice
is not satisfied without a proportion between the Guilt and the Punishment.
This weakness and insufficiency of the Legal Sacrifices to expiate Sin, is
evident from their variety and repetition: For if full Remission had been
obtained, The worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of
sin. It Is the sense of Guilt, Heb. 10.2.
and the fear of Condemnation that required the renewing of the Sacrifice. Now
under the Law, the Ministry of the Priests never came to a period or
perfection. The Millions of Sacrifices in all Ages, from the erecting the
Tabernacle to the coming of Christ, had not virtue to expiate one Sin. They
were only shadows which could give no refreshment to the inflamed Conscience,
but as they depended on Christ, the body and substance of them. But the Son of
God, who offered himself up by the Eternal Spirit to the Father, is a Sacrifice
not only Intelligent and Reasonable, but incomparably more precious than the
most noble Creatures in Earth or in Heaven it self. He was Priest and Sacrifice
in respect of both His Natures, His entire Person was the Offerer and Offering:
Therefore the Apostle from the excellency of his Sacrifice, infers the unity of
its Oblation, and from thence concludes its Efficacy. Christ did not by the
Blood of Bulls and Goats, but by his own Blood He entered in once to the Holy
Place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us: Heb. 10.14.
and by one Offering He has for ever perfected them who are sanctified. Upon
this account God promised in the New Covenant, That their Sins and Iniquities
He would remember no more, having received complete satisfaction by the
Sufferings of his Son. It Is now said that once in the end of the world has he
appeared, Heb. 9.26, 27, 28.
to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed for all
men once to die* and after Death comes Judgment: So Christ was once offered to
bear the Sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the
second time without sin. As there is no other natural death to suffer between
Death and Judgment, so there is no other propitiatory Sacrifice between his
all-sufficient Death on the Cross, and the last coming of our Redeemer. There
is one Consideration I shall add, to show the great difference between Legal
Sacrifices and the Death of Christ as to its saving virtue. The Law absolutely
forbids the eating of Blood, and the peoples tasting of the Sin Offerings; to
signify the imperfection of those Sacrifices. For since they were consumed in
their Consecration to Gods Justice, and nothing was left for the nourishment of
the Offerers, 'twas a sign they could not appease God. The Offerers had
communion with them when they brought them to the Altar, and in a manner
derived their guilt to them, but they had no virtue by them in coming from it.
The Sinner conveyed death to the Sacrifice, but did not receive life from it.
But Christ the Lamb of God was not swallowed up in his Offering to Divine
Justice: It Is his peculiar Glory that He has completely made Satisfaction. We
may feed upon the flesh of this precious Victim, and drink his Blood. As He
entered into communion of Death with us, so we are partakers of Life by Him.

2. The Compleatness of his Satisfaction is grounded on the degrees of his
Sufferings. There was no defect in the payment He made. We owed a debt of Blood
to the Law, and his Life was offered up as a Sacrifice: otherwise the Law had
remained in its full vigor, and Justice had been unsatisfied. That a Divine
Person has suffered our Punishment, is properly the reason of our Redemption.
As it is not the quality of the Surety that releases the Debtor from Prison, but
the payment which he makes in his name. The Blood of Christ shed, Mat. 26.28.
Mar. 14.24.
poured forth from his Veins, and offered up to God, in that precise
consideration ratifies the New Testament. The sum is, Our Savior by his Death
suffered the malediction of the Law, and his Divine Nature gave a full value to
his Sufferings, so that the satisfaction proceeding from them, was not merely
ex pacto, as Brass Money is current by composition; but ex merito, as pure Gold
has an intrinsic worth; and God who was infinitely provokt, is infinitely
pleased.

2. The effects and evidences of his complete Satisfaction are,

First, His Resurrection from the Grave. For if we consider the Lord Christ in
the quality of our Surety, He satisfied the Law in his Death: and having made
complete payment of our debt, He received the acquittance in his Resurrection.
His Death appeased God, His Resurrection assures Men. As he rose himself, so in
one concurrent action God is said to raise him. Romans 6.4. Isa. 53.13.
He was releast from the Grave, as from Prison, by public sentence; which is
an indubitable argument of the validity and acceptance of the payment made by
him in our name. For being under such bonds as the Justice and Power of God, he
could never have loosed the pains of Death, Act. 2 24.
if his Sufferings had not fully been fully Satisfactory and received by him
for our discharge. And it is observable that the raising of Chiist is ascribed
to God as reconciled. Now the God of peace who brought again from the dead the
great Shepherd of the Sheep, Heb. 13.20.
through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. The Divine Power was not put
forth till God was pacified. Justice incensed exposed him to Death, and Justice
appeased freed Him from the dead. And his Resurrection is attributed to his
Blood, that being the full price of his and our liberty. In short, when
inflexible Justice ceases to punish, there is the strongest proof it is
satisfied.

Secondly, His Ascent into Heaven, and Intercession for us prove the
compleatness and alsufficiency of his Sacrifice. If He had been excluded from
the Divine Presence, there had been just cause to suspect that anger had been
still remaining in God's Breast; but His admission into Heaven is an infallible
testimony that God is reconciled. This our Savior produces as the Argument by
which the Holy Ghost will overcome the guilty fears of Men. He shall convince
the World of Righteousnss, because I go to my Father. Joh. 16.10.
Christ in his Sufferings was numbered among transgressors. He dyed as a guilty
person, not only in respect of the calumnies of Men, but the curse of the Law,
and the Wrath of God which then appeared inexorable against sin. But having
overcome Death, and broke through the weight of the Law, and retired to his
Father, he made apparent the innocence of his righteous Person, and that a
complete Righteousness is acquired by his Sufferings, sufficient to justify
all that shall truly accept of it.

This will be more evident, by considering his entry into Heaven as the true
High Priest, who carried the Blood of the New Covenant into the Celestial
Sanctuary. For the opening this, we are to consider there are two parts of the
Priestly Office.

1. To offer Sacrifice.

2. To make intercession for the People by virtue of the Sacrifice. This was
performed by the High Priest in the Feast of Atonement which was celebrated in
the month Tisri. Levit. 16.14, 15.
The oblation of the Sacrifices was without, at the Altar* the Intercession was
made in the Holy of Holies, into which none might enter but the High Priest
once a year. And first he must expiate his own sins, and the sins of the people
by Sacrifices, before he could remove the Vail, and enter into that sacred and
venerable place, where no sinner had right to appear. Then he was to present
the precious Incense, and the Blood of the Sacrifices, to render God favorable
to them. Heb. 9.4.
Now these were shadows of what Christ was to perform. The Holy of Holies was
the type of the third-Heaven, in its Situation, Quality and Furniture. For it
was the most secret part of the Tabernacle, separated by a double Vail, by that
which was between it and the first Sanctuary, and by another that distinguished
the first from the outward Court. Thus the Heaven of Heavens is the most
distant part of the Universe, and separated from the lower World, by the Starry
Heaven, and by the Airy Region, which reaches down to the Earth. Besides, the
most Holy part of the Tabernacle was inaccessible to sinners: as Heaven is
styled by the Apostle the place of inaccessible light. And it was the Throne of
God, where he reigned: according to the Language of the Psalmist, He dwelt
between the Cherubims. Psalm. 80.1.
The figures of the Cherubims represented the Myriads of holy Angels, that
adore the incomprehensible Deity, and are always ready to execute his commands.
The Tables of the Law were a Symbol of that infinite Wisdom and Holiness which
ordained them: and the Highpriests entering with the Blood of the Sacrifice,
and carrying with him all the Tribes of Israel upon his Breast, signified that
Jesus Christ the true High Priest after he had really expiated sin by his
Divine Sacrifice in the lower World, should enter into the Eternal Sanctuary
with his own Blood, and introduce with him all his People. Of this there was a
mavelous sign given, for in the same moment that Christ expired, the Vail of
the Temple that separated the Oracle from the first part, was rent from the top
to the bottom; to signify that the true High Priest had Authority and Right to
enter into Heaven itself. And the special end of his ascending is expressed by
the Apostle: Heb 9.24.
For Christ is not entered into the Holy places made with hands, which are the
Figures of the true, but into Heaven its self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. As the High Priest might not enter into that sacred and terrible
place, neither could he propitiate God without sprinkling the Blood of the
slain Sacrifice; So our Redeemer first performed what was necessary for the
Expiation of Sin, and then He past through the visible Heavens, and ascended
before the Throne of God to appear as our Advocate. He made an oblation of
Himself on the Earth, before He could make intercession for us in Heaven, which
is the consummation of his Priestly Office. The first was a proper Sacrifice,
the second is a commemoration of it: Therefore He is said To appear before his
Father by Sacrifice.

Besides what has been discoursed of the order and dependence of these parts
of his Priestly Office, Heb. 9.26.
which proves that He had accomplished the expiation of Sin, before He was
admitted into Heaven to intercede for us: There are two other Considerations
which manifest the compleatness of his Satisfaction.

1. The manner of his Intercession. 2. Its omnipotent Efficacy.

1. The manner of it. He does not appear in the form of a Suppliant upon his
Knees before the Throne, offering up tears and strong cries as in the day of
his flesh, but He sits at Gods right hand making intercession for us. He
sollicits our Salvation, not as a favor to him* but as the price of his
Sufferings, and as due to his infinite Merit. His Blood in the same manner
pleads for our Pardon, as the blood of righteous Abel called for vengeance
against the Murderer: Heb. 12.24.
Not by an articulate voice, but by suing to Justice for a full recompense of
it. In short, His Intercession is the continual representation of his most
worthy Passion.

2. The omnipotent Efficacy of his Intercession proves that God is fully
satisfied. He frees us from the greatest Evils, and obtains for us the greatest
Good in the quality of Mediator. 1 John 2.2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
Righteous; and he is the propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but
for the Sins of the whole world. He disarms the Anger of God, and hinders the
effects of his Indignation against repenting Sinners. Now the prevalency of his
Mediation is grounded on the perfection of his Sacrifice. The blessedness of
Heaven is conferred on Believers according to his Will. Father, I will that
those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am to see my glory. Joh.
17.24.
His request is effectual, not only because He is Gods Son, and in highest
favor with Him, but for his meritorious Sufferings.

It Is for this reason that the Office of Mediator is incommunicable to any
Creature. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
who gave himself a ransom for all. The Apostle makes a Parallel between the
unity of the Mediator, and of the Deity, which is most Sacred and inviolable.
For the right of Intercession, as it is an authoritative act, is founded in
Redemption, they cannot be divided. And we may observe by the way, How the
Popish Doctrine that erects as many Advocates as Angels, or Saints, or whoever
are Canonised, is guilty of Impiety and Folly: Of Impiety, In taking the
Sovereign Crown from the Head of Christ to adorn others with it, as if they had
more credit with God, or compassion for Men: And of Folly, In expecting
benefits by their Intercession, who have no satisfactory Merit to purchase
them. The numerous Advocates that are conceived by superstitious Persons in
their Fancies, are like the counterfeit Suns, Non totum imitantur, sed
imaginemejus, figuramque, caeterum nihil habent ardoris, hebetes and languidi.
Sen. Not. Quaest.
that are drawn in the Clouds by Reflection, as in a Glass: which although they
shine with a considerable brightness, yet they are only Suns in appearance, and
derive no quickening Influences to the Earth. The blessed Spirits above, who
enjoy a dependant Light from the Sun of Righteousness, yet convey no Benefits
to Men by Meritorious interceding for them. We obtain Grace and Glory only upon
the requests of our Redeemer. Briefly, The acts of his Priesthood respect the
Attributes, which in a special manner are to be glorified in our Salvation. By
his Death He made Satisfaction to Justice, by his Intercession he sollicites
Mercy: And they both join together with the same readiness and warmth to
dispense the Benefits which He purchased for his People.

Thirdly, The Compleatness of his Satisfaction is fully proved by the glorious
issue of his Sufferings. This will be most evident by considering the connection
and dependence which his Glory has upon his Humiliation: And that is twofold:

1. A dependence of Order. His Abasement and Sufferings were to precede his
Majesty and Power: As in Nature things pass from a lower state to Perfection.
This Order was necessary. For being originally in the form of God, it was
impossible he should be advanced, Cui nihil ad augendum fastigium superest, hic
uno modo crescere potest, Si se ipse submittat, securus magnitudinis suae.
Plin. Panegyr.
if he did not voluntarily descend from his Glory, that so he might be capable
of exaltation. He was first made a little lower than the Angels and after
raised above them.

2. A dependence of efficacy. Glory is the reward of his Sufferings. This is
expressly declared by the Apostle. Christ humbled himself, and became obedient
to the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2.9.
wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every name,
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow; The mark of that homage that
all creatures pay to him. This exaltation is correspondent to the degrees of
his abasement. His Body was restored to Life and Immortality, and ascended on a
bright Cloud, God's Chariot, being attended with Angels, and the everlasting
Gates opened to receive the King of Glory: He is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of the Majesty in Heaven: this signifies that Divine Dignity to
which He is advanced, Heb. 1.3.
next to his Father. For God being an infinite Spirit has neither right nor
left hand in strict sense. Our Redeemers Honor is the same, and His Empire of
the same extent with his Fathers. Thus the Apostle interprets the words of the
Psalmist, that the Messiah should sit at the right hand of God, till he made
his Enemies his Footstool, Psalm. 110.1.
by reigning; for he must reign till he has put all his Enemies under his feet.

1 Cor. 15.25.
And Saint Peter tells us, That the Father has made him Lord and Christ: That
is, by a Sovereign trust has committed to him the Government of the Church,
and the World: not devesting himself of his essential Dominion, but exercising
it by Christ. The height of this Dignity is emphatically set forth by the
Apostle: The Father has seated him at his own right hand in the Heavenly
places, far above all Principalities, and Powers, Ephesians. 1.21.
and Might, and Dominion, (which titles signify the several degrees of Glory,
among the Angels) and every name that is named not only in this World* but that
which is to come: that is, has given him a transcendent and incommunicable
Glory, the use of names being to signify the quality of Persons. In short, he
is made the Head of the Church, and Judge of the World: Angels and Men shall
stand before his Tribunal, and receive their Eternal decision from him. Now in
this economy of our Mediator, his Humiliation was the cause of his Exaltation
upon a double account.

1. As the Death of Christ was an expression of such humility, such admirable
Obedience to God, such Divine Love to Men, that it was perfectly pleasing to
his Father, and his Power being equal to his Love he infinitely rewarded it.

2. The Death of Christ was for Satisfaction to Justice, and when he had done
that Work, he was to enter into rest. It behoved Christ to Suffer and enter
into Glory. It Is true, Luke 2^
Divine Honor was due to him upon another title, as the Son of God: but the
receiving of it was deferred by dispensation for a time. First, He must redeem
us, and then Reign. The Scripture is very clear in referring his actual
possession of Glory, as the just consequent to his complete expiation of sin.
Heb. 1.3. and 10.12.
When by himself He had purged our sins, He sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high. And after he had made one Sacrifice for sins, for ever sat
down on the right hand of God.

And not only the Will of the Father, but the nature of the thing it self
required this way of proceeding. For Jesus Christ by voluntary susception
undertaking to satisfy the Law for us, as he was obliged to suffer what was
necessary in order to our Redemption, so 'twas reasonable after Justice was
satisfied, that the humane nature should be freed from its infirmities, and the
Glory of his Divine be so conspicuous, that every tongue should confess that
Jesus who was despised on Earth is supreme Lord: The Apostle sums up all
together in that triumphant challeng, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's Elect? Romans 8*34, 35.
It Is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It Is Christ that died, yea
rather is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us.

3. The excellent benefits which God reconciled bestows upon us, are the
effects and evidences of the compleatness of Christ's Satisfaction. And these
are pardon of Sin, Grace, and Glory. The Apostle tells us that the Law made
nothing perfect: all its Sacrifices and Ceremonies could not expiate the guilt,
Heb. 7.19.
nor cleanse the stain of sin, nor open Heaven for us: which three are requisite
to our perfection. But Christ by one Offering has perfected for ever them that
are Sanctified. Heb. ^0.14.
By him we obtain full Justification, Renovation and Communion with God:
therefore his Sacrifice, the Meritorious cause of procuring them, must be
perfect.

1. Our Justification is the effect of his Death: for the obligation of the Law
is made void by it. God forgives us our Trespasses, blotting out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.14.
and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. The terms are used, that
are proper to the cancelling a civil Bond. The killing letter of the Law is
abolisht by the Blood of the Cross, the Nails and the Spear have rent it in
pieces, to signify that its condemning power is taken away.

Now the infinite virtue of his Death in taking away the guilt of sin will more
fully appear, if we consider.

1. That it has procured Pardon for sins committed in all ages of the World.
Without the intervention of a Sacrifice God would not Pardon, and the most
costly that were offered up by sinners, were of no value to make compensation
to Justice: but the Blood of Christ was the only propitiation for sins
committed before his coming. The Apostle tells us, He was not obliged to offer
himself often, Heb. 9.25, 26.
as the High Priest entered into the Holy place every year, with the Blood of
others, but now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin,
by the Sacrifice of himself. The direct sense of the Words is, that the virtue
of his Sacrifice extended it self to all times: for otherwise in regard Men
have always needed propitiation, He must have Suffered often since the Creation
of the World. And if it be asked how His Death had a saving influence before He
actually Suffered? the answer is clear: We must consider the Death of Christ
not as a Natural but Moral cause: it is not as a Medicine that heals, but as a
Ransom that frees a Captive. Natural Causes operate nothing before their real
existence; but it is not necessary that moral Causes should have an actual
being; it is sufficient that they shall be, and that the person with whom they
are effectual, accept the Promise. As a Captive is releast upon assurance given
that he will send his ransom, though it is not actually deposited. Thus the
death of Christ was available to purchase pardon for Believers before his
coming; for he interposed as their Surety, and God, to whom all things are
present, knew the accomplishment of it in the appointed time. He is therefore
called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; Rev. 13.8.
not only in respect of God's Decree, but his Efficacy. The salvation we derive
from him, was ever in him. He appeared under the Empire of Augustus, and dyed
under Tyberius, but he was a Redeemer in all ages, otherwise the comparison
were not just, that as by Adam all die, 1 Cor. 15.22.
so by Christ all are made alive.

It Is true, under the old Testament they had not a clear knowledge of him, yet
they enjoyed the benefit of his unvaluable Sufferings. For the medium by which
the benefits our Redeemer purchased, are conveyed to Men, is not the exact
knowledge of what he did and suffered, but sincere Faith in the Promise of God.
Now the Divine Revelation being the rule and measure of Faith, such a degree
was sufficient to Salvation, as answered the general discovery of Grace.
Believers depended upon God's goodness to pardon them in such a way as was
honorable to his Justice. They had some general Knowledge that the Messiah
should come, and bring Salvation: Abraham rejoiced to see the day of Christ:
Moses valued the Afflictions of Christ, more than the Treasures of Egypt. And
Believers in general are described to be waiters for the Consolation of Israel.
In short, the Jewish and Christian Church are essentially one; they differ no
more than the morning and Evening Star, which is the same, but is diversely
called, from its appearance before the Sunrising, or after its setting. So our
Faith respects a Savior that is past, theirs respected Him as to come.

Besides, The saving virtue of his Death as it reaches to all former, so to all
succeeding Ages. He is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; not only in
respect of his Person, but his Office. Heb. 13.8.
The virtue of the Legal Sacrifices expired with the Offering: upon a new sin
they were repeated. Their imperfection is argued from their repetition. But the
precious Oblation of Christ has an everlasting efficacy to obtain full Pardon
for Believers. His Blood is as powerful to propitiate God, as if it were this
day shed upon the Cross. He is able to save to perpetuity all that shall
address to God by Him: Since He ever lives to make Intercession* The Pardon
that He once purchased, shall ever be applied to contrite Believers. The
Covenant that was sealed with his Blood is eternal, and the Mercies contained
in it.

2. The perfection of his Sacrifice is evident, by its expiating universally
the guilt of all transgressions. It Is true, Sins in their own nature are
different, some have a crimson guilt attending them, and accordingly Conscience
should be affected: But the Grace of the Gospel makes no difference. The
Apostle tells us, that the Blood of Christ cleanses from all sins: Whatever
the kinds, degrees and circumstances are. As the Deluge overflowed the highest
Mountains, as well as the least Hill, so pardoning Mercy covers Sins of the
first magnitude as well as the smallest. Under the Law, one Sacrifice could
expiate but one Offense, though but against a carnal Commandment, but this one
washes away the guilt of all Sins against the Moral Law. And in that
Dispensation no Sacrifices were instituted for Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, and
other Crimes; which were certainly punished with Death. But under the Gospel,
Sins of what quality soever, if repented of, are pardoned. The Apostle having
reckoned up Idolaters, Adulterers, and many other notorious Sinners that shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.11.
tells the Corinthians, that such were some of them; but they were sanctified,
and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. It Is true, Those who sin
against the Holy Ghost are excepted from Pardon: But the Reason is, Because the
Death of Christ was not appointed for the Expiation of it: And there being no
Sacrifice, there is no Satisfaction, and consequently no Pardon. The Wisdom
and Justice of God requires this Severity against them: For if he that despised
Moses Law died without Mercy, Heb. 10.26.
of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he
was sanctified an unholy thing, Heb. 10.28, 29.
and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace? that is, They renounce their
Redeemer as if he were not the Son of God, and virtually consent to the cruel
Sentence past against Him, as if he had blasphemed when He declared Himself to
be so, and thereby out sin his Sufferings. How reasonable is it they should be
for ever deprived of the Benefits, who obstinately reject the Means that
purchased them.

2. The Death of Christ has procured Grace for Men. We made a Forfeiture of
our Original Holiness, and were righteously deprived of it. And till Divine
Justice was appeased, all influences of Grace were suspended. Now the Death of
Christ opened Heaven, and brought down the Spirit, who is the Principle of
Renovation in us. The world lay in wickedness as a Carcass in the grave, 1 John
2.19.
insensible of its horror and corruption. The Holy Spirit has inspired it with
a new life, and by a mavelous change has caused Purity to succeed Pollution.

3. The receiving Believers into Heaven is a convincing proof of the
all sufficiency of his Sacrifice. For Justice will not permit that Glory and
Immortality, which are the Privileges of the Righteous, should be given to
guilty and defiled Creatures. Therefore our Savior's first and greatest work
was to remove the bar, that excluded us from the place of Felicity. It Is more
difficult to justify a Sinner, than to glorify a Saint. The Goodness of God
inclines Him to bestow Happiness on those who are not obnoxious to the Law; but
his Justice was to be atoned by Sufferings. Now what stronger Argument can
there be, that God is infinitely pleased with what His Son has done and
suffered for his People, than the taking of them into his Presence to see his
Glory? The Apostle sets down this order in the work of our Redemption, Heb. 5.9.
That Christ being made perfect by Sufferings, that is, having consummated that
part of his Office which respected the expiation of Sin; He became the Author
of eternal Salvation to all that obey him. To sum up all, it is observable, that
the Scripture attributes to the Death of Christ not only Satisfaction, whereby
we are redeemed from Punishment; but such a redundant Merit, as purchases for
us Adoption, Gal. 3.4, 5.
and all the glorious Prerogatives of the Children of God. Upon these accounts
his Blood has a double Efficacy. As the Blood of the Covenant, Heb. 13.20.
Luke 22.20
it procured our peace; as the Blood of the Testament, it conveyes to us a
Title to Heaven it self; according to that of St. Paul, we have boldness to
enter into the Holiest by his Blood. Heb. 10.19.


I will remove two slender prejudices against this Doctrine;

1. That Repentance and Faith are required in order to the partaking of the
precious benefits which Christ has purchased, does not lessen the Merit of his
Death, and the compleatness of the Satisfaction made to God by it. For we must
consider,

There is a great difference between the payment of that the Law requires by
the Debtor, and the payment of that which was not in the original Obligation by
another in his stead. Upon the payment of the first, actual freedom immediately
follows. If a Debtor pays the sum he ows, or a Criminal endure the punishment
of the Law, they are actually discharged, and never liable to be sued or suffer
again. But when the same that the Law requires is not paid, but something else,
by another; the release of the guilty is suspended upon those cond^tions, which
he that freely makes satisfaction, (...) the Governor who by favor accepts
it, are ^^eased to appoint. Now it is thus in the transaction of our Redemption:
Christ laid down his Life for us, and this was not the very thing in strict
sense that the Law required. For according to the threatening, the Soul that
sins shall die; the Delinquent in his own person was to suffer the penalty: and
there was no necessity natural or moral that obliged God to admit of his
Satisfaction for our discharge. If the Law had expressed that the sinner or his
surety should suffer, there had been no need of a better Covenant. But in this
the Grace of God so illustrously appears, that by his appointment the
punishment of the guilty was transferred to the Innocent, who voluntarily
undertook for them. In this respect God truly pardons sin, though he received
entire Satisfaction; for he might in right have refused it.

Now these things being supposed, although the Blood of Christ was a price so
precious, that it can only be valued by God that received it, and might
worthily have redeemed a thousand Worlds, yet the effects of it are to be
dispensed according to the Eternal Covenant between the Father and the Son, and
the tenor of it is revealed in the Gospel, viz. that Repentance and Faith are
the conditions, upon which the obtaining pardon of sin, and all the blessings
which are the consequents of it depends: thus Christ who makes Satisfaction,
and God that accepts it, declare. The Commission of the Apostles from his own
mouth was to preach Repentance, Luke 24.47.
and Remission of sins in his name to all Nations: and he was exalted by God to
be a Prince, Acts 5.31.
and a Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sin.

The establishing of this order is not a mere positive command, wherein the
will of the Lawgiver is the sole ground of our duty; but there is a special
congruity and reason in the nature of the thing it self. For Christ has
satisfied Justice, that God may exercise pardoning Mercy in such a manner as is
suitable to his other perfections. Now it is contrary to his Wisdom to dispense
the precious benefits of his Sons Blood to impenitent Unbelievers; to give such
rich Pearls, and so dearly bought, to Swine that will trample them under their
feet; to bestow Salvation on those who despise the Savior. It Is contrary to
his Holiness to forgive those who will securely abuse his favor, as if his
pardon were a privilege and license to sin against him. Nay, final Impenitency
is unpardonable to Mercy it self. For the objects of Justice and Mercy cannot
be the same: now an impenitent sinner is necessarily under the revenging
Justice of God. It Is no disparagement to his omnipotency that he cannot save
such. For although God can do whatsoever he will, yet he can will nothing but
what is agreeable to his Nature. Not that there is any Law above God, that
obliges him to act, but he is a Law to himself. And the more excellent his
perfections are, the less he can contradict them. As it is no reflection upon
his power that he cannot die, neither is it that he can do nothing unbecoming
his perfections. On the contrary, it implies weakness to be liable to any such
act. Thus supposing the Creature Holy, it is impossible but he should love it,
not that he ows any thing to the Creature, but in regard he is infinitely good:
and if impenitent and obstinate in sin, he cannot but hate and punish it; not
that he is accountable for his Actions, but because he is infinitely Just. And
from hence it appears, that the requiring of Repentance and Faith in order to
the actual partaking of the blessings our Redeemer purchased, does not diminish
the value of his Satisfaction, they being not the causes of pardon, but
necessary qualifications in the subject that receives it.

2. It does not lessen the Compleatness of his Satisfaction, that Believers are
liable to Afflictions and Death. For these are continued according to the
agreement between God and our Redeemer, for other ends than satisfaction to
Justice, which was fully accomplished by him. This will appear by several
Considerations.

1. Some Afflictions have not the nature of a Punishment, but are intended only
for the exercise of their Graces; That the trial of their Faith, 1 Pet. 17.
Jam. 1.^.
Patience, and Hope being much more precious than of Gold that perishes,
though it be tried by the fire, might be found unto praise. Romans 5.2, 3.
Now these Afflictions are the occasion of their Joy, and in order to their
Glory. Of this kind are all the Sufferings that Christians endure for the
promotion of the Gospel. Thus the Apostles esteemed themselves dignified, in
suffering what was contumelious and reproachful for the Name of Christ. Act.
5.41. Phil. 1.29.
And St. Paul interprets it as a special favor, that God called forth the
Philippians to the Combat. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ to
suffer: Not only the Graces of Faith and Fortitude, but the Affliction was
given: So Believers are declared Happy, 1 Pet. 4.14.
when they are partakers of Christ's Sufferings: for the Spirit of Glory rests
on them. Now it is evident that Afflictions of this nature are no Punishments.
For since it is essential to Punishment to be inflicted for a Fault, and every
Fault has a turpitude in it; It necessarily follows, that Punishment which is
the brand of a crime must be always attended with infamy, and the Sufferer
under shame. But Christians are honorable by their Sufferings for God, as they
conform them to the Image of his Son, who was consecrated by Sufferings.

2. Afflictions are sent sometimes not with respect to a Sin committed, but to
prevent the commission of it: and this distinguishes them from Punishments. For
the Law deters from Evil, not by inflicting, but threatening the Penalty. But in
the Divine Discipline there is another Reason. God afflicts to restrain from
Sin: As St. Paul had a thorn in the flesh to prevent Pride. 2 Cor. 12.7.


3. Those Evils that are inflicted on Believers for Sin, do not diminish the
power and value of Christ's Passion. For we must distinguish between
Punishments which are merely castigatory for the good of the Offender, and that
are purely vindictive for the just Satisfaction of the Law. Now Believers are
liable to the first, but are freed from the other. For Christ has redeemed
them from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for them.

The Popish Doctrine of Satisfaction to offended Justice by our suffering
temporal Evils, is attended with many pernicious Consequences.

1. It robs the Cross of Christ of one part of its Glory, as if something were
left to us to make up, in the degrees and virtue of his Sufferings.

2. It reflects on Gods Justice, as if He exacted two different Satisfactions
for Sin: the one from Christ our Surety, the other from the Sinner.

3. It disparages his Mercy, in making Him to punish whom He pardons, and to
inflict a Penalty after the Sin is remitted.

4. It Is dangerous to Man, by feeding a false Presumption in him, as if by the
merit of his sufferings he could expiate Sin, and obtain part of that Salvation
which we entirely owe to the Death of our Redeemer.

The difference between Chastisements, and purely vindictive Punishments,
appears in three things.

1. In the Causes from whence they proceed. The severest Sufferings of the
Godly are not the effects of the Divine Vengeance. It Is true, they are
Evidences of Gods displeasure against them for Sin, but not of Hatred. For
being reconciled to them in Christ, He bears an unchangeable Affection to
them; and Love cannot hate, though it may be angry. The motive that excites God
to correct them is Love: according to that testimony of the Apostle, Whom the
Lord loves He chastens. Heb. 12.6. Isai. 1.5.
As sometimes out of his severest displeasure He forbeares to strike, and
condemns obstinate Sinners to Prosperity here, so from the tenderest Mercy he
afflicts his own. But purely vindictive Judgments proceed from mere wrath.

2. They differ in their measures. The Evils that Believers suffer are always
proportioned to their strength. They are not the sudden eruptions of Anger, but
deliberate Dispensations: David deprecates Gods Judgment as it is opposed to
Favor, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord: Psalm. 143.2.
and Jeremiah desires Gods Judgment, as it is opposed to Fury, Correct me, Oh
Lord, in thy Judgment, Jer. 10.24.
not in thy Fury. It Is the gracious Promise of God to David with respect to
Solomon: 2 Samuel 7.14.
If he commit Iniquity I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
stripes of the childaen of men: that is, Chastise him moderately: For in the
style of the Scripture as things are magnified by the Epithet Divine, or of
God, as the Cedars of God, that is, very tall; And Nineve is called The City of
God, that is, very great: So to signify things that are in a mediocrity, the
Scripture uses the Epithet humane, or of Men: And according to the Rule of
Opposition, the Rod of God is an extraordinary Affliction which destroys the
Sinner; it is such a Punishment as a man can neither inflict, nor endure: But
the Rod of Men is a moderate Correction, that does not exceed the strength of
the Patient. But every purely vindictive Punishment which the Law pronounces,
is in proportion to the nature of the Crime, not the strength of the Criminal.

3. They are distinguished by the intention and end of God in inflicting them.

1. In Chastisements God primarily designs the Profit of his People, Heb. 12.10.
That they may be partakers of his Holiness. When they are secure and carnal,
He awakens Conscience by the sharp voice of the Rod; to reflect upon Sin, to
make them observant for the future; to render their Affections more indifferent
to the World, and stronger toward Heaven. The Apostle expresses the nature of
Chastisements, When we are judged, (...)^ 1 Cor. 11.32.
we are instructed by the Lord: They are more lively Lessons than those which
are by the Word alone, and make a deeper impression upon the heart. David
acknowledges, Before he was afflicted he went astray, Ps. 119.67.
but now have I kept thy words. Corrupt Nature makes Gods Favors pernicious,
but his Grace makes our Punishments profitable. Briefly, They are not
satisfactions for what is past, but admonitions for the time to come. But
purely vindictive Judgments are not inflicted for the reformation of an
Offender, but to preserve the honor of the Sovereign, and Public Order, and
to make compensation for the breach of the Law. If any advantage accrue to the
Offender it is accidental, and besides the intention of the Judge.

2. The end of chastisements upon Believers is to prevent their final
destruction. 1 Cor. 11.
When we are Judged, we are Chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned
with the World. And this sweetens and allays all their Sufferings. As the
Psalmist declares, Let the Righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness, let
him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head.
But the Vindictive Punishment of a Malefactor is not to prevent his
condemnation; for Death is sometimes the Sentence. In this respect the temporal
evils that befall the Wicked and the Godly, though materially the same, yet
legally differ. For to the Wicked they are as so many earnests of the complete
payment they shall make to Justice in another World; the beginnings of Eternal
Sorrows: but to the Godly they are in order to their Salvation. They are as the
Red Sea, through which the Israelites past to the Land of Promise, but the
Egyptians were drowned in it. Briefly, their Sufferings differ as much in their
issue, as the Kingdoms of Heaven and of Hell.

2. That Death remains to Believers, does not lessen the perfection of Christ's
Satisfaction. It Is true considered absolutely, it is the revenge of the Law for
sin, and the greatest temporal evil, so that it may seem strange, that those
who are Redeemed by an Alsufficient ransom, should pay this Tribute to the King
of Terrors. But the nature of it is changed: it is a Curse to the wicked
inflicted for Satisfaction to Justice, but a Privilege to Believers. 1 Cor.
3.22.
As God appointing the Rainbow to be the Sign of his Covenant, that he would
drown the World no more, ordained the same Waters to be the token of his Mercy,
which were the instrument of his Justice. Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord. Rev. 14.13.
And the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 16.19.
that precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints: Christ has
taken away what is truly destructive in it. It Is continued for their advantage.

1. Corruption has so depraved the sensitive appetite, that during our natural
state we are not entirely freed from it: but Death that destroys the natural
frame of the Body, puts an end to sin. And in this respect, there is a great
difference between the Death of Christ and of Believers: the end of his was to
remove the guilt of sin, of theirs to extinguish the relics of it.

2. It Is a delivery from Temporal evils, and an entrance into Glory. Death and
Despair seize on the Wicked at once, but the Righteous has hope in his Death.

3. The Grave shall give up its spoils at the last. It retains the Body for a
time, not to destroy but purify it. John 11.
Our Savior tells us that whoever believes on him shall not see death, for he
will raise them up at the last day. He that dies a Man, shall revive an Angel,
clothed with Light and Immortality. I will conclude this argument with the
words of St. Austin: Ablato criminis nexu, relicta est mors. Nunc vero majore
and mirabiliore gratia Salvatoris in usus justitiae peccati poena est conversa:
Lib. 13. de civit. c. 4.
tum enim dictum est Homini, morieris si peccaveris, nunc dictum est Martyri,
morere ne pecces. Et sic per ineffabilem Dei misericordiam and ipsa poena
vitiorum transit in arma virtutis,, and fit justi meritum, etiam supplicium
peccatoris. Although the Guilt of Sin is removed, yet death remains. But by the
admirable Grace of the Redeemer, the punishment of sin is made an advantage to
Holiness. The Law threatened Man with Death if he sinned; the Gospel commands a
Martyr to die, that he may not sin. And thus by the unspeakable Mercy of God,
the punishment of Vice becomes the security of Virtue; and that which was
revenged upon the sinner, gives to the Righteous a title to a glorious reward.

CHAP. XV.
Inferences. In the Death of Christ there is the clearest discovery of the evil
of sin. The strictness of divine Justice is most visible in it. The
consideration of the ends of Christ's Death takes off the scandal of the Cross,
and changes the offense into admiration. The Satisfaction of Justice by Christ's
Sufferings affords the strongest assurance that God is ready to pardon sinners.
The absolute necessity of complying with the terms of the Gospel for
Justification. There are but two ways of appearing before the supreme Judge:
either in Innocence, or by the Righteousness of Christ: The Causes why men
reject Christ are, a legal temper that is natural to them, and the predominant
love of sin. The unavoidable misery of all that will not submit to our Savior.

1. FRom hence we may discover most clearly the evil of Sin, which no Sacrifice
could expiate but the Blood of the Son of God. It Is true, the internal
Malignity of Sin, abstracted from its dreadful effects, is most worthy of our
hatred. For it is in its own nature direct enmity against God, and obscures the
Glory of all his Attributes. It Is the violation of his Majesty, who is the
universal Sovereign of Heaven and Earth. A contrariety to his Holiness, which
shines forth in his Law. A despising his Goodness, the atractive to Obedience.
The contempt of his Omniscience, which sees every sin when it is committed. The
slighting of his terrible Justice and Power, as if the Sinner could secure
himself from his Indignation. A denial of his Truth, as if the threatening were
a vain terror to scare Men from sin. And all this done voluntarily to please an
irregular corrupt Appetite, by a despicable Creature, who absolutely depends
upon God for his being and happiness.

These Considerations seriously pondered, are most proper to discover the
extremity of its evil. But sensible demonstrations are most powerful to
convince and affect us: and those are taken from the fearful Punishments that
are inflicted for Sin. Now the Torments of Hell which are the just and full
recompense of Sin, are not sensible till they are inevitable. And temporal
Judgments cannot fully declare the infinite Displeasure of God against the
wilful contempt of his Authority. But in the Sufferings of Christ it is expressed
to the utmost. If Justice it self had rent the Heavens, and come down in the
most visible Terror to revenge the Rebellions of Men, it could never have made
stronger impressions upon us, than the Death of Christ duly considered. The
Destruction of the World by Water; the miraculous burning of Sodom and Gomorrah
by showers of Fire, and all other the most terrible Judgments, do not afford
such a sensible instruction of the evil of Sin. If we regard the Dignity of his
Person, and the depth of his Sufferings, He is an unparalled example of Gods
Indignation for the breach of his Holy Law. For He that was the Son of God, and
the Lord of Glory, was made a Man of Sorrows. He endured Derision, Scourgings,
Stripes, and at last a cruel and cursed Death. The Holy of Holies was crucified
between two Thieves. By how much the Life of Christ was more precious than the
lives of all men, so much in his Death does the wrath of God appear more fully
against Sin, than it would in the destruction of the whole world of Sinners.
And His Spiritual Sufferings infinitely exceeded all His Corporeal. The
Impressions of Wrath that were inflicted by Gods immediate Hand upon his Soul,
forced from him those strong Cries, that moved all the powers of Heaven and
Earth with Compassion. If the curtain were drawn aside, and we should look into
the Chambers of Death, where Sinners lie down in Sorrow for ever; and hear the
woeful expressions, and deep Complaints of the Damned, with what horror and
distraction they speak of their torments, we could not have a fuller testimony
of God's Infinite displeasure against sin, than in the Anguish and Agonies of
our Redeemer. For whatever His Sufferings were in kind, yet in their degree and
measure they were equally terrible with those that condemned Sinners endure.
Now how is it possible that Rational Agents should freely, in the open light,
for perishing vanities dare to commit sin? Can they avoid or endure the Wrath
of an Incensed God? If God spared not his Son when he came in the similitude of
sinful flesh, how shall Sinners who are deeply and universally defiled escape?
Can they fortify themselves against the Supreme Judge? Can they encounter with
the fury of the Almighty, the apprehensions of which made the Soul of Christ
heavy unto Death? Have they patience to bear that for ever, which was to
Christ, who had the strength of the Deity to support him, intolerable for a few
hours? If it were so with the green Tree, what will become of the dry, when
exposed to the fiery Trial? If he that was Holy and Innocent suffered so
dreadfully, what must they expect, who add impenitency to their guilt, and live
in the bold commission of Sin, without reflection and remorse? What prodigious
Madness is it to drink iniquity like water, as a harmless thing, when it is a
poison so deadly, that the least drop of it brings certain ruin? What
desperate Folly, to have slight apprehensions of that, which is attended with
the first and second Death? Nothing but unreasonable Infidelity and
Inconsideration can make men venturous to provoke the living God, who is
infinitely sensible of their Sins, and who both can and will punish them by
Torments extreme and eternal.

2. The strictness of Divine Justice appears, that required Satisfaction
equivalent to the desert of sin. The natural Notion of the Deity, as the
Governor of the World, instructed the Heathens, That the transgression of his
Laws was worthy of Death. Romans 1.31.
This proves that the obligation to punishment, does not arise from the mere
will of God, which is only discovered by Revelation, but is founded in the
nature of things, and by its own light is manifested to reasonable creatures.
From hence they inferred, That it was not becoming the Divine nature, as
qualified with the relation of Supreme Ruler, to pardon Sin without
Satisfaction. This appears by the Sacrifices and Ceremonies, the Religions and
Expiations which were performed by the most ignorant Nations. And although they
infinitely abused themselves in the conceit they had of their pretended
efficacy and virtue, yet the universal consent of Mankind in the belief that
Satisfaction was necessary, declares it to be true. This, as other natural
Doctrines, is more fully revealed by Scripture. Heb. 9.22.
Under the Law without shedding of blood there was no remission, not that
common Blood could make Satisfaction for Sin, but God commanded there should be
a visible mark of its necessity, in the Worship offered to him, and a
prefiguration that it should be accomplished by a Sacrifice eternally
efficacious.

And the Economy of our Salvation clearly proves, that to preserve the honor
of Gods Government, Sin must be punished, that Sinners might be pardoned. For
nothing was more repugnant to the Will of God absolutely considered, than the
Death of his Beloved Son, and the natural Will of Christ was averse from it.
What then moved that Infinite Wisdom, which wills nothing but what is
perfectly reasonable, to ordain that event? Why should it take so great a
circuit, if the way was so short, that by pure Favor, without Satisfaction,
Sin might have been pardoned? Our Savior declares the necessity of his
suffering Death, supposing the merciful Will of his Father to save us, when He
says, That as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish. It Is
true, Since God had foretold and prefigured his Death by the oracles and
actions under the Law, it necessarily came to pass. But to consider things
exactly, the unchangeable truth of Types and Prophesies is not the primitive
and main reason of the necessity of things, but only a sign of the certainty of
the event. In strictness, things do not arrive because of their prediction, but
are foretold because they shall arrive. It is apparent there was a Divine
Decree before the Prophesies; and that in the Light of God's Infinite Knowledge
things are, before they were foretold. So it is not said a Man must be of a
ruddy complexion, because his Picture is so, but on the contrary, because he is
ruddy, his Picture must be so. That Christ by dying on the Cross should Redeem
Man, was the reason that the Serpent of brass was erected on a pole to heal the
Israelites, and not on the contrary. Briefly, the Apostle supposes this
necessity of Satisfaction, as an evident principle, when he proves wilful
Apostates to be incapable of Salvation: Because there remains no more Sacrifice
for sin. For the consequence were of no force, if sin might be pardoned without
Sacrifice, that is, without Satisfaction.

3. This account of Christ's Death takes off the scandal of the Cross, and
changes the offense into admiration. 'Twas foretold of Christ, that he should
be a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense; not a just cause, Luke 2.34.
but an occasion of offense to the corrupt hearts of Men, and principally for
his Sufferings. The Jews were pleased with the titles of honor given to the
Messiah, that he should be a King, Powerful and Glorious. But that poverty,
disgrace and the suffering Death should be his character, they could not
endure: therefore they endeavored to prevert the sense of the Prophets. His
Disciples who attended him in his mean state, expected those sad apappearances
would terminate in visible Glory and Greatness: but when they saw him arrested
by his Enemies, Condemned and Crucified, this was so opposite to their
expectation, that they fainted under the disappointment. And when Christ
Crucified was Preached to the Gentile World, they rejected him with scorn. His
Death seemed so contrary to the Dignity of his Person, and the design of his
Office, that they could not relish the Doctrine of the Gospel. They judged it
absurd, to expect Life from one that was subjected to Death, and Blessedness
from him, who was made a Curse. De cruce Christi nobis insultant Sapientes
hujus mundi, et dicunt, quale cor habitis, qui Deum Colitis Crucifixum. Aug.
Sermon. de verb. Apost.
To those who look on the Death of Christ with the eyes of carnal wisdom, and
according to the Laws of corrupt reason, it appears folly and weakness, and
most unworthy of God; but if we consider it in its principles and ends, all the
prejudices vanish, and we clearly discover it to be the most noble and eminent
effect of the Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Justice of God. To the eye of sense
'twas a spectacle of horror, that a perfect Innocent should be cruelly
tormented; but to the eye of Faith, under that sad and ignominious appearance,
there was a Divine Mystery, able to raise our wonder, and ravish our
affections. For he that was naked, and nailed to the Cross, was really the Son
of God, and the Savior of Men: And his Death with all the penal circumstances
of dishonor and pain, is the only Expiation of sin, and Satisfaction to
Justice. He by offering up his Blood appea'sd the wrath of God, quenched the
flaming Sword that made Paradise inaccessible to us; he took away sin, the true
dishonor of our natures, and purchased for us the Graces of the Spirit, the
richest ornaments of the reasonable Creature. The Doctrine of the Cross is the
only foundation of the Gospel, that unites all its parts, and supports the
whole building. It Is the cause of our Righteousness and Peace, of our
Redemption and Reconciliation. How blessed an exchange have the Merits of his
Sufferings made with those of our Sins? Life instead of Death, Glory for Shame,
and Happiness for Misery. For this reason the Apostle with vehemence declares,
that, to be the sole ground of his boasting and triumph, which others esteemed
a cause of blushing. God forbid that I should Glory save in the Cross of
Christ. Gal. 6.14.
He rejects with extreme detestation the mention of any other thing, as the
cause of his Happiness, and matter of his Glory. The Cross was a tree of Death
to Christ, and of Life to us. The supreme Wisdom is justified of its Children.

4. The Satisfaction of Divine Justice by the Sufferings of Christ, affords the
strongest assurance to Man, who is a guilty and suspicious creature, that God
is most ready to pardon sin. There is in the natural Conscience when opened by
a piercing conviction of sin, such a quick sense of Guilt, and Gods Justice,
that it can never have an entire confidence in his Mercy, till Justice be
atoned. From hence the convinced Sinner is restlesly inquisitive, how to find
out the way of reconciliation with a Righteous God. Thus he is represented
inquiring by the Prophet, Mic. 6.6, 7.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most High
God? shall I come before him with Burnt-Offerings, with Calves of a year old?
will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand rivers of
oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my Body for
the sin of my Soul? The Scripture tells us that some consumed their Children to
render their Idols favorable to them. But all these means were ineffectual:
their most costly Sacrifices were only food for the fire. Nay, instead of
expiating their old, they committed new sins, and were so far from appeasing,
that they inflamed the Wrath of God, by their cruel oblations. But in the
Gospel there is the most rational and easy way propounded, for the Satisfaction
of God and the Justification of Man. The Righteousness of Faith speaks on
this wise, Say not in thy heart, Romans 10.6, 7, 9.
Who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is to bring down Christ from above) Or who
shall descend into the deep? (that is to bring up Christ again from the dead)
But if thou will confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. The
Apostle sets forth the anxiety of an awakened Sinner, he is at a loss to find
out a way to escape Judgment: for things that are on the surface of the Earth,
or floating on the Waters, are within our view, and may be obtained: but those
that are above our Understanding to discover, or Power to obtain, are
proverbially said to to be in the Heavens above, or in the Deeps. And it is
applied here to the different ways of Justification, by the Law and the
Gospel. The Law propounds Life, upon an impossible condition: but the Gospel
clearly reveals to us, that Christ has performed what is necessary for our
Justification, and that by a lively and practical Faith we shall have an
Interest in it. The Lord Jesus being ascended, has given us a convincing
proof, that the Propitiation for our Sins is perfect: For otherwise He had not
been received into Gods Sanctuary. Therefore to be under perplexities how we
may be justified, is to deny the value of his Righteousness, and the truth of
his Ascension. And say not who shall descend into the deep, to bear the
Torments of Hell, and expiate Sin, this is to deny the virtue of his Death,
whereby he appeased God, and redeemed us from the wrath to come. In the Law the
condemning Righteousness of God is made visible, in the Gospel his justifying
Righteousness is revealed, from Faith to Faith. Romans 1.17.
And this is an infallible proof of its divine descent. For whereas all other
Religions either stupifie Conscience, and harden it in carnal Security, or
terrify it by continual Alarms of Vengeance; the Gospel alone has discovered
how God may show Mercy to repenting Sinners without injury to his Justice. The
Heathens robbed one Attribute to enrich another: either they conceived God to
be indulgent to their Sins, and easy to pardon, to the prejudice of his
Justice; or cruel and revengful, to the dishonor of his Goodness: But
Christians are instructed how these are wonderfully reconciled and magnified in
our Redemption. From hence there is a divine calm in the Conscience, and that
Peace which passes Understanding. The Soul is not only freed from the Fear of
Gods anger, but has a lively Hope of his Favor and Love. This is expressed by
the Apostle, when he reckons among the Privileges of Believers, That they are
come to God the Judge of all, Heb. 12.23,
and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling
that speaks better things than the blood of Abel. The apprehension of God as
the Judge of the world, strikes the guilty with fear and terror; but as He is
sweetened by the Mediator, we may approach to Him with confidence. For what Sins
are there which so entire a Satisfaction does not expiate? What Torments can
they deserve, which his wounds and stripes have not removed? God is Just as
well as Merciful in justifying those who believe in Jesus. It Is not the quality
of Sins, but of Sinners that excepts them from Pardon. Christ is the golden
Altar in Heaven for penitent Believers to fly to, from whence God will never
pluck any one to destroy him.

5. From hence we may learn, how absolute a necessity there is for our coming
to Christ for Justification.

There are but two ways of appearing before the Righteous and Supreme Judge.

1. In Innocence and sinless Obedience; or by the Righteousness of Christ: The
one is by the Law, the other by Grace. And these two can never be compounded,
for he that pleads Innocence, in that disclaims Favor; and he that sues for
Favor, acknowledges Guilt. Now the first cannot be performed by us. For entire
Obedience to the Law supposes the integrity of our natures, there being a Moral
impossibility that the Faculties once corrupted should act regularly: But Man
is stained with Original Sin from his Conception. And the form of the Law runs
universally, Cursed is every one that obeys not in all things which are written
in the Book of the Law to do them. Gal. 3.10.
In these Scales one evil work preponderates a thousand good. If a Man were
guilty but of one single Error, his entire Obedience afterward could not save
him; for that being always due to the Law, the payment of it cannot discount
for the former Debt. So that we cannot in any degree be justified by the Law,
for there is no middle between transgressing, and not transgressing it. He that
breaks one Article in a Covenant, cuts off his claim to any benefit by it.

Briefly, the Law Justifies only the Perfect, and condemns without distinction
all that are Guilty. So that to pretend Justification by the works of it, is as
unreasonable, as for a man to produce in Court the Bond which obliges him to
his Creditor, in testimony that he ows him nothing. Whoever presumes to appear
before God's Judgment Seat in his own righteousness, shall be covered with
confusion.

2. By the Righteousness of Christ. This alone absolves from the Guilt of sin,
saves from Hell, and can endure the trial of God's Tribunal. This the Apostle
prized as his unvaluable treasure, in comparison of which, all other things are
but dross and dung: that I may be found in him; Phil. 3.9.
not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. That
which he ordained, and rewarded in the Person of our Redeemer, he cannot but
accept. Now this Righteousness is meritoriously imputed only to Believers. For
depending solely upon the Will of God as to its being and effects, it cannot
possibly be reckoned to any for their benefit and advantage, but in that way
which he has appointed. The Lord Christ who made Satisfaction, tells us, that
the benefit of it is communicated only through our Believing. God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3.16.
that whosoever believes on him should not perish. As all sins are mortal in
respect of their guilt, but death is not actually inflicted for them, upon the
account of the Grace of the New Covenant: so all sins are venial in respect of
the Satisfaction made by Christ, but they are not actually pardoned, till the
performing of the condition to which pardon is annexed. Faith transfers the
guilt from the Sinner to the Sacrifice. And this is not an act restrained to
the understanding, but principally respects the will, by which we accept or
refuse Salvation. The nature of it is best expressed by the Scripture Phrase, the
receiving Christ, Joh. 1.12.
which respects the terms, upon which God offers him in the Gospel, to be our
Prince and Savior. Act. 5.31.
The state of favor begins upon our consent to the New Covenant. And how
reasonable is the condition it requires? how impossible is it to be otherwise?
God is reconcilable by the Death of Christ, so that he may exercise Mercy
without injury to his Justice and Holiness: He is willing and desirous to be
upon terms of amity with Men, but cannot be actually reconciled till they
accept of them: for reconcilement is between two. Though God upon the account
of Christ is made placable to the humane nature, which he is not to the
Angelical in its lapsed state, and has condescended so far as to offer
conditions of peace to Men, yet they are reconciled at once. That Christ
becomes an effectual Mediator, there must be the consent of both parties. As
God has declared his by laying the punishment of our sins on Christ; so Man
gives his, by submitting to the Law of Faith. And the great end of Preaching
the Gospel is, to overcome the obstinacy of Men, and reconcile them to God, and
their happiness: We are Ambassadors for Christ; and pray you in Christ's stead,
2 Cor. 5.20.
to be reconciled to God. With this difference, Christ furnished the means, they
only bring the message of reconciliation. Now Men are with difficulty wrought
on, to comply with the conditions of Pardon by Christ.

1. Upon the account of a legal Temper that universally inclines them to seek
for Justification by their own Works. This is most suitable to the Law, and
light of nature; for the tenor of the first Covenant was, Do and live. So that
the way of Gospel-Justification, as it is supernatural in its discovery, so in
its contrariety to Man's Principles. Besides, as Pride at first aspired to make
Man as God, so it tempts him to usurp the honor of Christ to be his own
Savior. He is unwilling to stoop, that he may drink of the Waters of Life.
Till the Heart by the weight of its guilt is broken in pieces, and looses its
former fashion and figure it will not humbly comply with the offer of Salvation
for the Merits of another. And it is very remarkable, that upon the first
opening of the Gospel, no Evangelical Doctrine was more disrelisht by the Jews,
than Justification by imputed Righteousness. The Apostle gives this account of
their opposition, that being ignorant of God's Righteousness, Romans 10.
and going about to establish their own Righteousness they submitted not to the
Righteousness of God. They were prepossest with this Principle, that Life was
to be obtained by their works: because the express condition of the Law was so.
And mistaking the end of its Institution by Moses, they set the Law against the
Promises. For since the Fall, the Law was given, not absolutely to be a
Covenant of Life, but with a design to prepare Men for the Gospel: that upon
the sight of their Guilt, and the Curse, they might have recourse to the
Redeemer, and by Faith embrace that Satisfaction he has made for them. Christ
is the end of the Law, for Righteousness, Romans 10.4.
to every one that believes. From the example of the Jews we may see how Men
are naturally affected. And it is worthy of observation, that the reformation of
Religion took its rise by the same controversy with the Papists, by which the
Gospel was first introduced into the World. For besides innumerable abuses
crept into the Church, the People were persuaded that by purchasing
Indulgences, they should be saved from the Wrath of God. And when this darkness
covered the face of the Earth, the zeal of the first Reformers broke forth;
who, to undeceive the world, clearly demonstrated from Scriptures, that
Justification is alone obtained by a lively and purifying Faith in the Blood of
Christ. A strong proof that the same Gospel which was first revealed by the
Apostles, was revived by those excellent Men; and the same Church which was
first built by the Apostles, was raised out of its ruins by them.

Now the Gospel, to eradicate this disposition which is so natural and strong
in fallen Man, is in nothing more clear and express, than in declaring that by
the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight. The
Apostle asserts without distinction, Romans 3.10.
that by the Works of the Law Justification cannot be obtained: Gal. 3.11.
whether they proceed from the power of Nature, or the Grace of the Spirit. For
he argues against the merit of Works to Justification, not against the
principle from whence they proceed. And where he most affectionately declares
his esteem of Christ, Romans 3.27.
and his Righteousness, as the sole meritorious cause of his Justification, he
expressly rejects his own Righteousness, which is of the Law. Phil. 3.9.
By his own Righteousness, he comprehends all the works of the renewed, as well
as natural state, for they are performed by Man, and are acts of Obedience to
the Law, which commands perfect Love to God. These are withering leaves that
cannot conceal our shame, when we appear before God in Judgment. Not but that
good works are most pleasing to him, but not for this end, to expiate Sin. We
must distinguish between their substance, and the quality that error gives
them. The opinion of merit changes their nature, and turns Gold into Dross. And
if our real Righteousness, how exact soever, cannot absolve us from the least
guilt, much less can the performance of some external actions, though specious
in appearance, yet not commanded by God, and that have no moral value. All the
Disciplines and Severities, whereby men think to make Satisfaction to the Law,
are like a Crown of Straw, that dishonours the Head instead of adorning it. But
that Righteousness which was acquired by the Meritorious Sufferings of Christ,
and is embraced by Faith, is alsufficient for our Justification. This is as
pure as Innocence, to all the effects of Pardon and Reconciliation; this alone
secures us from the charge of the Law, and the challenge of Justice. Being
clothed with this, we may enter Heaven, and converse with the pure society of
Angels without blushing. The Saints who now reign in Glory, were not Men who
lived in the perfection of Holiness here below, but Repenting, Believing
Sinners, who are washed white in the Blood of the Lamb.

2. The most universal hinderance of Men's complying with the conditions of
Pardon by Christ, is, the predominant love of some Lust. Although Men would
entertain him as a Savior to redeem them from Hell, yet they reject him as
their Lord. Those in the Parable who said, Luke 19.14.
We will not have this. Man to reign over us, expressed the inward sense and
silent thoughts of all carnal Men. Many would depend on his Sacrifice, yet will
not submit to his Scepter; they would have Christ to pacify their Consciences,
and the world to please their Affections. Thus they divide between the Offices
of Christ, his Priestly and his Regal. They would have Christ to die for them,
but not to live in them. They divide the acts of the same Office: they lean on
his Cross to support them from falling to Hell, but Crucify not one Lust on
it. They are desirous he should reconcile them to God by his Sacrifice, but not
to bless them, in turning them from their Iniquities. And thus in effect they
absolutely refuse him, Act. 3.26.
and render his Death unavailable. For the receiving of Christ as Mediator in
all his Offices, is the Condition indispensably requisite to partake of the
Benefits of his Sufferings. The Resigning up of our selves to him as our
Prince, is as necessary an act of justifying Faith, as the Apprehending the
Crucified Savior. So that in every real Christian, Faith is the Principle of
Obedience and Peace, and is as inseparable from Holiness as from Salvation.

To conclude this Argument: From hence we may see, How desperate the state is
of impenitent Unbelievers. They are cut off from any claim to the Benefits of
Christ's Death. The Law of Faith, like that of the Medes and Persians, is
unalterable. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life. Christ died not
to expiate final Infidelity. This is the mortal Sin, that actually damns. It
charges all their guilt upon Sinners: It renders the Sufferings of Christ
fruitless and ineffectual to them. For it is not the Preparation of a Sovereign
Remedy that cures the Disease, but the applying it. As our Sins were imputed to
him, upon the account of his Union with us in nature, and his consent to be our
Surety; so his Righteousness is meritoriously imputed to us, upon our Union
with him by a lively Faith. The man that looked on the Rainbow, when he was
ready to be drowned, what relief was it to him; that God had promised not to
drown the world, when he must perish in the waters? So though Christ has
purchased Pardon for repenting Believers, Rev. 4.3.
and a Rainbow encompasses the Throne of God, the sign of Reconciliation, what
advantage is this to the Unbeliever, who dies in his Sins and drops into the
Lake of Fire? It Is not from any defect of Mercy in God, or Righteousness in
Christ, but for the obstinate refusal of it, that men certainly perish. This
inhances their Guilt and Misery. All the rich expense of Grace for their
Redemption shall be charged upon them. The Blood of Christ shall not be imputed
for their Ransom, but for their deeper Damnation: and instead of speaking
better things than the Blood of Abel, shall call louder for Vengeance against
them than that innocent blood which reached Heaven with its voice against the
Murderer. Briefly, whom so precious a Sacrifice does not redeem, they are
reserved entire victims, Mark 9.49.
whole burnt Offerings to Divine Justice. Every impenitent Unbeliever shall be
salted with fire.

CHAP. XVI.
Of all the Divine Perfections Holiness is peculiarly admirable. The honor of
it is secured in our Redemption. In the bitter Sufferings of Christ God
declared Himself unappeasable to Sin, though appeaseable to Sinners. The
Privileges purchased by Christ, are conveyed upon terms honorable to
Holiness. Pardon of Sin, Adoption, the Inheritance of Glory are annexed to
special Qualifications in those who receive them. The Redeemer is made a
quickening Principle to inspire us with new Life. In order to our
Sanctification He has given us the most perfect Rule of Holiness, He exhibited
a complete Pattern of it, He purchased and conveyes the Spirit of Holiness to
us. He presents the strongest Motives to persuade us to be holy. The perfect
Laws of Christ are considered, as they enjoin an absolute separation from all
Evil, and command the practice of all substantial Goodness. Some particular
Precepts, which the Gospel especially enforces, with the Reasons of them are
considered.

OF all the Perfections of the Deity, none is more worthy of his Nature, and so
peculiarly admirable as his Infinite Purity. It Is the most shining Attribute
that derives a luster to all the rest: He is glorious in Holiness. Wisdom
degenerates into Craft, Power into Tyranny, Exodus 15.15*
Mercy loses its nature without Holiness. He swears by it as his Supreme
Excellency. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, Psalm. 89.35.
I will not lie unto David. It Is the most venerable Attribute, in the Praise
whereof the Harmony of Heaven agrees. The Angels and Saints above are
represented, expressing their ecstasy and ravishment at the beauty of Holiness.
Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. Psalm. 147.10, 11.
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory.
This He only loves and values in the Creature, being the Impression of his most
Divine and amiable Perfection. Inferior Creatures have a resemblance of other
Divine Attributes: The Winds and Thunder set forth God's Power, the firmness of
the Rocks, and the incorruptibility of the Heavens are an obscure
representation of his Unchangeableness; but Holiness, that is the most
Orient-Pearl in the Crown of Heaven, only shines in the reasonable Creature.
Upon this account Man only is said to be formed after his Image. And in Men
there are some appearances of the Deity, that do not entitle to his special
Love. In Princes there is a shadow of his Sovereignty, yet they may be the
objects of his displeasure; but a likeness to God in Holiness atracts his Eye
and Heart, and infinitely endears the Creature to him. Now this Attribute is in
a special manner provokt by Man's sin, and we are restored to the favor and
friendship of God, in such a manner, as may preserve the Honor of it entire
and inviolable.

This will fully appear by considering what our Redeemer suffered for the
purchasing our Pardon, and the terms upon which the precious Benefits of his
Death are conveied to us, and what he has done to restore our lost Holiness,
that we may be qualified for the enjoyment of God.

1. God's Infinite Purity is declared in his Justice, in that He would not
pardon Sin but upon such terms as might fully demonstrate how odious 'twas to
him. What inflamed the Wrath of God against his Beloved Son, whom by a voice
from Heaven he declared to be the object of his delight? What made Him
inexorable to his Prayers and Tears, when He solicited the Divine Power and
Love, the Attributes that relieve the miserable, crying, Abba, Father, all
things are possible to thee, let this Cup pass from me? What made him suspend
all comforting Influences, and by a dreadful Desertion afflict him when he was
environed with Sorrows? It Is Sin only that caused this fierce displeasure, not
inherent, (for the Messiah was cut off but not for himself,) but imputed by his
voluntary undertaking for us. God so loved the World, and so hated Sin, that He
gave his Son to purchase our Pardon by Sufferings. When his Compassions to Man
were at the highest, yet then his antipathy against Sin was so strong, that no
less Sacrifice could reconcile Him to us. Thus God declared himself to be
unappeasable to Sin, though not to Sinners.

2. The Privileges that are purchased by our Redeemers Sufferings, are
dispenst upon those terms which are honorable to Gods Holiness. I will
instance in the three great Benefits of the Evangelical Covenant. The Pardon of
Sin, Adoption into God's Family, and the Inheritance of Glory. All which are
conditional, and annexed to special Qualifications in the persons who have a
title to them.

1. The Death of Christ is beneficial to Pardon and Life, only to those who
repent and believe. The Holy God will by no means spare the guilty, that is,
declare the guilty innocent, or forgive an incapable subject. All the Promises
of Grace and Mercy are with respect to Repentance from dead works, and to a
lively Faith. The Son of God is made a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance
and Remission of Sins. And the Apostle tells us, That being justified by Faith,
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. The first includes a
cordial grief for Sins past, and sincere effectual Resolutions to forsake them;
and has a necessary conjunction with Pardon, as by virtue of the Divine
Command, so from a condecency and fitness with respect to God the giver of
Pardon, and to the quality of the Blessing it self. The other Qualification is
Faith, to which Justification is in a special manner attributed, not in respect
of Efficiency or Merit, for the Mercy of God upon the account of Christ's
Satisfaction is the sole Cause of our Pardon; but as a moral instrument, that
is the Condition upon which God absolves Man from his guilt. And this Grace of
Faith as it respects entire Christ in all his Offices, so it contains the Seed
and first Life of Evangelical Obedience. It crucifies our Lusts, overcomes the
World, works by Love, as well as justifies the person by relying on the Merits
of Christ for Salvation.

2 Adoption into Gods Family (the purchase of Christ's Meritorious Sufferings,
who Redeemed us from the Servitude of Sin and Death) is conferred upon us in
Regeneration. Gal. ^.^.
For this Prerogative consists not merely in an Extrinsick Relation to God, and
a title to the Eternal Inheritance; but in our participation of the Divine
Nature, whereby we are the living Images of Gods Holiness. Civil Adoption gives
the title, but not the reality of a Son; But the Divine is efficacious, and
changes us into the real likeness of our Heavenly Father. We cannot enter into
this state of Favor, but upon our cleansing from all Impurity: Be separate
from the pollutions of the profane world, 2 Cor. 6.17.
and I will receive you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons
and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. These are the indispensable terms upon
which we are received into that honorable Alliance. None can enjoy the
Privilege, but those that yield the Obedience of Children.

3. Holiness is the Condition on which our future Blessedness depends. Electing
Mercy does not produce our Glorification immediately, but begins in our
Vocation and Justification, which are the intermediate Links in the Chain of
Salvation. As Natural Causes work on a distant object, by passing through the
medium. God first gives Grace, then Glory. Psalm. 84.11.
The everlasting Covenant that is sealed by the Blood of Christ, establishes
the connection between them. Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5.8.
for they shall see God. The exclusion of all others is peremptory and
universal: Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. The Righteousness of the
Kingdom is the only way of entering into it. Heb. 12.14.
A few good actions scattered in our lives, are not availeable, but a course of
Obedience brings to Happiness. Romans 2.7.
Those who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor,
and Immortality, shall inherit eternal life. This is not a mere positive
Appointment, but grounded on the unchangeable respect of things. There is a
rational convenience between Holiness and Happiness, according to the Wisdom
and Goodness of God, and it is expressed in Scripture by the natural relation of
the Seed to the Harvest, both as to the quality and measure. Gal. 6.7.
What a man sows that shall he reap, We must be like God in purity, before we
can be in felicity. Indeed, 'twould be a disparagement to Gods Holiness, and
pollute Heaven it self* to receive unsanctified Persons as impure as those in
Hell. It Is equally impossible for the Creature to be happy without the favor
of the Holy God, and for God to communicate His favor to the sinful Creature.
Briefly, according to the Law of Faith, no wicked Person has any right to the
Satisfaction Christ made, nor to the Inheritance he purchased for Believers.

3. Man in his corrupt state is deprived of Spiritual Life, so that till he is
revived by special Grace, he can neither obey nor enjoy God. Now the Redeemer
is made a quickening Principle to inspire us with new life.

In order to our Sanctification he has done four things.

First, He has given to us the most perfect Laws as the Rule of Holiness.

Secondly, He exhibited the most complete Pattern of Holiness in his Life upon
the Earth.

Thirdly, He purchased and conveyes the Spirit of Holiness, to renew, and to
enable us for the performance of our Duties.

Fourthly, He has presented the strongest inducements and motives to persuade
us to be Holy.

First, He has given to Men the most perfect Laws as the rule of Holiness. The
principal parts of the Holy Life, are ceasing from evil, and the doing well.
Now the Commands of Christ refer to the purifying of us from sin, Isa. 1.16, 17.
and the adorning us with all Graces for the discharge of our universal Duty.

1. They enjoin a real and absolute separation, from all filthiness of the
Flesh and Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1.
The outward and inward Man must be cleansed not only from Pollutions of a
deeper die, but from all Carnality and Hypocrisy. The Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared to all Men, 2 Tit. 11.12.
teaching them to deny ungodliness, and worldly Lusts. All those irregular and
impetuous desires which are raised by worldly Objects, Honors, Riches, and
Pleasures, 1 John 2.16.
and reign in worldly Men, Pride, Covetousness and Voluptuousness. The Gospel
is most clear, full, and vehement, for the true and inward Mortification of the
whole body of corruption, of every particular darling sin. It commands us to
pluck out the right eye, Mat. 5.
and to cut off the right hand: That is, to part with every grateful and
gainful lust. Gal. 5.2, 11.
It obliges us to crucify the Flesh, with the affections and lusts. Humane
Laws regard External actions as prejudicial to Societies: but thoughts and
resolutions that break not forth into act, are not within the Jurisdiction of
the Magistrate. But the Law of Christ reforms the powers of the Soul, and all
the most secret and inward motions that depend upon them. It forbids the first
irregular desires of the carnal appetite. We must hate sin in all its degrees,
strangle it in the birth, destroy it in the conception. We are enjoined to fly
the appearances and accesses of evil; what ever is of a suspicious nature, and
not fully consistent with the purity of the Gospel, and what ever invites to
sin and exposes us to the power of it, becomes vicious and must be avoided.
That glorious purity, that shall adorn the Church when our Redeemer presents it
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27.
every Christian must aspire to in this Life. In short, the Gospel commands us
to be Holy as God is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
who is infinitely distant from the least conceivable pollution.

2. The Precepts of Christ contain all solid substantial goodness, that is
essentially necessary in order to our supreme Happiness, and prepares us for
the Life of Heaven. In his Sermon on the Mount, He commends to us Humility,
Meekness, and Mercy, Peaceableness and Patience, and doing good for evil, which
are so many beams of Gods Image, the reflections of his Goodness upon
intelligent Creatures. And that comprehensive precept of the Apostle describes
the Duties of all Christians: whatsoever things are true; Phil. 4.8.
Truth is the principal character of our profession, and is to be expressed in
our Words and Actions: whatsoever things are honest, or venerable, that is
answer the dignity of our High-calling, and agree with the gravity and
comeliness of the Christian profession: whatsoever things are just according to
Divine and Humane Laws: whatsoever things are pure, we must preserve the Heart,
the Hand, the Tongue, the Eye from impurity; whatsoever things are lovely and
of good report, some Graces are amiable and attractive in the view of Men, as
easiness to pardon, a readiness to oblige, compassion to the afflicted,
liberality to the necessitous, sweetness of conversation without gall and
bitterness: these are of universal esteem with mankind, and soften the most
savage tempers. If there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise think on
these things. And St. Peter excites Believers, to join to their Faith, by which
the Gospel of Christ is embraced, Intellectual and Moral virtues, without which
it is but a vain picture of Christianity. Add to your Faith Virtue, 2 Pet. 1.5.
and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance
Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly kindness, and
to Brotherly kindness Charity. He enforces the command, give all diligence that
these things abound in you; and ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in
the Knowledge of Christ. Now these Graces purify and perfect, refine and ra^se
the humane nature, and without a Command their Goodness is a strong obligation.

I will take a more distinct view of the Precepts of Christ as they are set
down in that excellent abridgement of them by the Apostle. The Grace of God
that brings Salvation has appeared to all Men, Tit. 2.11, 12
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present world.

Here is a distribution of our duties with respect to their several Objects,
our selves, others, and God. The first are regulated by Temperance, the second
by Justice, the third by Godliness. And from the accomplishment of these is
formed that Holiness without which no man shall see God.

1. In respect to our selves; we must live soberly. Temperance governs the
sensual appetites and affections by sanctified reason. The Gospel allows the
sober and chaste use of pleasures, but absolutely and severely forbids all
excess in those that are lawful, and abstinence from all that are unlawful,
that stain and vilify the Soul, and alienate it from converse with God, and
mortify its lust to spiritual delights. By sensual complacency Man first lost
his Innocence and Happiness, and till the flesh is subdued to the spirit, he
can never recover them. The carnal mind is enmity against God. 2 Pet. 2.11.
Fleshly lusts war against the Soul. Therefore we are urged with the most
affectionate earnestness, to abstain from them, by withdrawing their
incentives, and crucifying our corrupt inclinations. In short, the Law of
Christ obliges us, as to deal with the body as an enemy, (that is disposed to
revolt against the Spirit) by watching over all our senses, lest they should
betray us to temptations, so to preserve it as a thing consecrated to God, from
all impurity, that will render it unworthy the honor of being the Temple of
the Holy Ghost.

2. We are commanded to live Righteously, in our relation to others. Justice is
the supreme Virtue of humane Life, that renders to every one what is due. The
Gospel gives rules for Men in every state and place, to do what Reason
requires. As no condition is excluded from its Blessedness, so every one is
obliged by its Precepts. Subjects are commanded to obey all the lawful commands
of Authority, Romans 13.1, 2.
and not resist; and that upon the strongest motive not only for Wrath, but
for Conscience. They must obey Man for Gods sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. Act. 5.29.
but never disobey God for Man's sake. And Princes are obliged to be an
encouragement to good Works, and a terror to the evil; Romans 13.5.
that those who are under them may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, 1 Timothy
2.2.
in all Godliness and Honesty. It injoynes all the respective duties of
Husbands, and Wives, Ephesians. 5.
Parents, and Children, Masters and Servants. And that in all contracts and
commerce none defrauds his Brother: 1 These. 4.6. Apud n^s ille Religiosior qui
justior, Minut.
accordingly in the esteem of Christians, he is more religious who is more
righteous than others. Briefly, Christian righteousness is not to be measured
by the rigor of Laws, but by that rule of universal Equity delivered by our
Savior, Whatsoever ye would have others do to you, do it to them. Mat. 7.12.


3. We are instructed by the Law of Christ to live Godly. This part of our duty
respects our apprehensions, affections and demeanor to God, which must be
suitable to his Glorious perfections. The Gospel has revealed them clearly to
us, viz. the Unity, Simplicity, Eternity and Purity of the Divine Nature, that
it subsists in three Persons, the Father, Son, and Spirit, and his Wisdom Power
and Goodness in the Work of our Redemption. It requires that we pay the special
Honor that is due to God, in the esteem and veneration of our Minds, in the
subjection of our Wills, in the assent of our Affections to him as their proper
object. That we have an entire Faith in his Word, a firm Hope in his Promises,
a Holy Jealousy for his Honor, a Religious care in his Service. And that we
express our reverence, love, and dependence on him in our Prayers and Praises.
That our Worshp of Him be in such a manner, as becomes God who receives it, and
Man that presents it. God is a pure Spirit, and Man is a reasonable Creature,
therefore ^e must worship him in Spirit and Truth. And since Man in his fallen
State cannot approach the Holy and Just God without a Mediator, he is directed
by the Gospel to address himself to the Throne of Grace, in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, who alone can reconcile our Persons, and render our Services
acceptable with his Father.

Besides the immediate service of the Deity, Godliness includes the propension
and tendency of the Soul to him in the whole conversation, and it contains
three things.

1. That our Obedience proceeds from love to God as its vital Principle. This
must warm and animate the external action: this alone makes Obedience as
delightful to us, so pleasing to God. He shows Mercy to those who love him, and
keep his Commandments. Exodus 20.6.
Faith works by Love, and enclines the Soul to obey with the same Affection,
that God enjoins the Precept.

2. That all our Conversation be regulated by his Will as the Rule. He is our
Father and Sovereign, and the respect to his Law gives to every action the
formality of Obedience. We must choose our Duty because he commands it.
Whatsoever ye do in word, or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, that
is, for his command, and by his assistance.

3. That the Glory of God be the supreme End of all our Actions. This
Qualification must adhere not only to necessary Duties, but to our natural and
civil Actions. Our light must so shine before men, that they may see our good
works, Mat. 5.16. 1 Cor. 10.31
and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do, all must be done in a regular, and due proportion to the
Glory of God. A general Designation of this is absolutely requisite, 1 Pet.
4.11.
and the renewing of our intentions actually in matters of moment. For He being
the sole Author of our Lives and Happiness, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
we cannot without extreme ingratitude and disobedience, neglect to glorify
Him in our Bodies and Spirits which are his.

This Religious tendency of the Soul to God, as the Supreme Lord and our utmost
End, sanctifies our Actions, and gives an excellency to them above what is
inherent in their own nature. Thus moral Duties toward Men, Heb. 13.16.
when they are directed to God, become Divine. Acts of Charity are so many
Sacred Oblations to the Deity. Men are but the Altars upon which we lay our
Presents, God receives them, as if immediately offered to his Majesty, and
consumed to his Honor. Such was the charity of the Philippians toward the
relief of the Apostle, which he calls An odor of a sweet smell, a Saerifice
acceptable, well pleasing to God. Phil. 4.18.
The same Bounty was an act of Compassion to Man, and Devotion to God. This
changes the nature of the meanest and most troublesome things. What was more
vile and harsh than the employment of a Slave, yet a respect to God makes it a
Religious Service, that is the most noble and voluntary of all humane Actions.
For the Believer addressing his service to Christ, and the Infidel only to his
Master, Ephesians. 6.5.
he does cheerfully what the other does by constraint, Tit. 2.10.
and adorns the Gospel of God our Savior as truly, as if he were in a higher
condition.

All Virtues are of the same descent and family, though in respect of the
matter about which they are conversant, and their exercise they are different,
Some are heroical, some are humble, and the lowest being conducted by Love to
God in the meanest offices, shall have an eternal Reward. In short, Piety is
the principle and chief ingredient of Righteousness and Charity to Men. For
since God is the Author of our common Nature, and the relations whereby we are
united one to another, it is necessary that a regard to him should be the first,
and have an influence upon all other Duties.

I shall further consider some particular Precepts, which the Gospel does
especially enforce upon us, and the Reasons of them.

1. That concerning Humility, the peculiar Grace of Christians, so becoming our
state as Creatures and Sinners, the parent and nurse of other Graces, that
preserves in us the light of Faith, and the heat of Love; that procures Modesty
in Prosperity, and Patience in Adversity; that is the root of Gratitude and
Obedience, and is so lovely in God's eyes, that He gives Grace to the Humble:
This our Savior makes a necessary qualification in all those who shall enter
into his Kingdom; Except ye be converted and become as little children, Mat.
18.3.
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. As by Humility he purchased our
Salvation, so by that Grace we possess it. And since Pride arises out of
Ignorance, the Gospel to cause in us a just and lowly sense of our
unworthiness, discovers the nakedness and misery of the humane Nature, divested
of its primitive Righteousness. It reveals the transmission of Original Sin,
from the first Man to all his Posterity, wherewith they are infected and
debased; a Mystery so far from our knowledge, that the participation of it seems
impossible, and unjust to carnal Reason. Ephesians. 2.
We are dead in Sins and Trespasses, without any Spiritual strength to perform
our Duty. The Gospel ascribes all that is good in Man to the free and powerful
Grace of God. He works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.12.
He gives Grace to some because He he is Good, denies it to others because He
is Just, but does injury to none, because all being guilty, He owes it to none.
Grace in its being and activity entirely depends upon Him. As the drowsy Sap
is drawn forth into flourishing and fruitfulness by the approaches of the Sun;
so habitual Grace is drawn forth into act by the presence and influences of the
Sun of Righteousness. Without me, John 15.
our Savior tells his Disciples, ye can do nothing. I have labored more
abundantly than they all, says the Apostle, yet not I, 1 Cor. 11.10
but the Grace of God in me. The operations of Grace are ours, but the Power
that enables us is from God. Our preservation from Evil, and perseverance in
Good, is a most free unmerited Favor, the effect of his renewed Grace in the
course of our Lives. Without his special assistance, we should every hour
forsake Him, and provoke Him to forsake us. As the Iron cannot ascend or hang
in the Air longer than the virtue of the Loadstone draws it; So our Affections
cannot ascend to those glorious things that are above, without the continually
attracting Power of Grace. It Is by humble Prayer wherein we acknowledge our
wants and unworthiness, and declare our dependence upon the Divine Mercy and
Power, that we obtain Grace. Now from these Reasons the Gospel commands
Humility, in our demeanor toward God and Men. And if we seriously consider
them, how can any crevise be opened in the heart for the least breath of Pride
to enter? How can a poor diseased wretch that has neither Money, nor can by
any industry procure nourishment, or Physic for his deadly Diseases, and
receives from a merciful person not only Food, but Sovereign Medicines brought
from another World (for such is the Divine Grace sent to us from Heaven)
without his desert, or possibility of retribution, be proud toward his
Benefactor? How can he that only lives upon Alms, boast that he is rich? How
can a Creature be proud of the Gifts of God, which it cannot possess without
Humility, and without acknowledging that they are derived from Mercy? If we had
continued in our Integrity, the praise of all had been entirely due to God; For
our Faculties and the excellent dispositions that fitted them for action, were
bestowed upon us freely by Him, and depended upon his Grace in their exercise.
But there is now greater reason to attribute the Glory of all our goodness
solely to him: for He revives our dead Souls by the infusion of Grace, without
which we are to every good work reprobate. Since all our Spiritual Abilities
are Graces, the more we have received the more we are obliged, and therefore
should be more humble and thankful to the Author of them. And in comparing our
selves with others, the Gospel forbids all proud reflections upon our selves as
dignified above them, For who makes thee to differ from another? And what have
thou that thou did not receive? And if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received it? If God discern one from another by
special gifts, the Man has nothing of his own that makes him excellent.
Although inherent Graces command a respect from others to the Person in whom
they shine, yet he that possesses them ought rather to consider himself in
those qualities that are natural, and make him like the worst, than in those
that are divine, proceeding from the sole Favor of God, and that exalt him
above them.

Add further, that God has ordained in the Gospel Repentance, and Faith, which
are humbling Graces, to be the conditions of our obtaining Pardon. By
Repentance we acknowledge that if we are condemned, it is just severity, and if
we are Saved it is rich Mercy. Romans 3.27. Romans 4.
And Faith absolutely excludes boasting. For it supposes the Creature guilty,
and receives Pardon from the Sovereign Grace of God, upon the account of our
Crucified Redeemer. The benefit, and the manner of our receiving it was
typified in the miraculous cure of the Israelites by looking up to the Brazen
Serpent. For the act of seeing is performed by receiving the Images which are
derived from the objects: it is rather a Passion then an Action; that it might
appear that the healing Virtue was merely from the Power of God, and the Honor
of it entirely his. In short, God had respect to the lowliness of this Grace,
in appointing it to be the qualification of a Justified person: for the most
firm reliance on Gods Mercy, is always joined with the strongest renouncing of
our own Merits. Briefly, to excite humility in us, the Gospel tells us, that
the Glorious reward is from rich bounty and liberality. Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. As the Election
of us to Glory, so the actual possession of it proceeds from pure Favor. There
is no more proportion between all our Services and that High and Eternal
felicity; than between the running a few steps, and the obtaining an Imperial
Crown. Indeed not only Heaven, but all the Graces that are necessary to purify
and prepare us for it, we receive from undeserved Mercy. So that God crowns in
us not our proper Works, but his own proper Gifts.

2. The Gospel strictly commands Self-denial, when the Honor of God and
Religion is concerned. Jesus tells his Disciples, If any Man will come after
me, let him deny himself, Mat. 16.24.
and take up his Cross and follow me. Life and all the endearments of it,
Estates, Honors, Relations, Pleasures must be put under our feet, to take the
first step with our Redeemer. This is absolutely necessary to the being of a
Christian. In the preparation of his mind and the resolution of his will, he
must live a Martyr, and whenever his duty requires, he must break all the
Retinacula Vitae, the voluntary bands that fasten us to the World, and die a
Martyr, rather than suffer a divorce to be made between his Heart and Christ.
Whatsoever is most esteemed and loved in the world, must be parted with as a
snare, if it tempts us from our Obedience; or offered up as a Sacrifice, when
the Glory of God calls for it. And this command that appears so hard to sense,
is most just and reasonable. For God has by so many titles a right to us, that
we ought to make an entire Dedication of our selves and our most valuable
interests to him. Our Redeemer infinitely denied himself to save us, and it is
most just we should in gratitude deny our selves to serve him. Besides, an
infinite advantage redounds to us: for our Savior assures us, that whosoever
will save his life when it is inconsistent with the performance of his duty,
Mat. 16.25.
shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for his sake, shall find it.
Now what is more prudent, than of two evils that are propounded to choose the
least? that is, Temporal Death, rather than Eternal; and of two goods that are
offered to our choice, to prefer the greater, a Life in Heaven, before that on
the Earth. Especially if we consider that we must shortly yield the present
life to the infirmities of Nature, and it is the richest traffic to exchange
that which is frail and mortal, for that which remains in its perfection for
ever.

3. The Gospel enjoins Universal Love among Men. Romans 13.14.
This is that fire which Christ came to kindle upon the Earth; it is the
abridgment of all Christian perperfection, the fulfilling of the Divine Law,
for all the particular Precepts are in substance, Love. He that loves his
Neighbor will have a tender regard to his Life, Honor and Estate, which is the
sum of the second Table. The extent of our Love must be to all that partake of
the same common nature. The universal consanguinity between Men should make us
regard them as our allies. Every Man that wants our help is our Neighbor. Do
good to all, is the command of the Apostle. Luke 10.36. Gal. 6.10. 1 Pet. 1.22.
Romans 12.9.
For the quality of our Love it must be unfeigned without dissimulation. The
Image of it in Words without real Effects, provokes the Divine displeasure: for
as all falsehood is odious to the God of Truth, so especially the counterfeiting
of Charity, that is the impression of his Spirit, and the seal of his Kingdom.
A sincere pure affection, that rejoices at the good, and resents the evils of
others as our own, and expresses it self in all real Offices, not for our
private respects, but their benefit, is required of us. And as to the degree of
our Love, 1 Pet. 4.8.
we are commanded above all things to have fervent Charity among our selves.
This principally respects Christians, Tot and t^nta Christiani nominis
charissima vincula. August.
who are united by so many sacred and amiable bands, as being formed of the
same Eternal Seed, Children of the same Heavenly Father, and joynt-Heirs of the
same Glorious Inheritance. Christian Charity has a more noble Principle than
the affections of nature, for it proceeds from the Love of God shed abroad in
Believers, to make them one Heart and one Soul, and a more Divine pattern,
which is the Example of Christ; Who has by his Sufferings restored us to the
Favor of God, that we should Love one another, as He has Loved us. This Duty
is most stricty enjoined, for without Love, Angelical Eloquence is but an empty
noise, 1 Cor. 13.
and all other Virtues have but a false luster; Prophecy, Faith, Knowledge,
Miracles, the highest outward Acts of Charity or Self-denial, the giving our
Estates to the Poor, or Bodies to Martyrdom, are neither pleasing to God, nor
profitable to him that does them.

Besides, That special branch of Love, the forgiving of Injuries, is the
peculiar Precept of our Savior. For the whole World consents to the returning
evil for evil. The vicious Love of our selves makes us very sensible, and
according to our preverse judgments to revenge an injury, seems as just as to
requite a benefit. From hence revenge is the most Rebellious and Obstinate
Passion. An Offense remains as a thorn in the mind, that inflames and torments
it, till it is appeased by a vindication. It Is more difficult to overcome the
Spirit then to gain a Battle. We are apt to revolve in our thoughts injuries
that have been done to us, and after a long distance of time the memory
represents them as fresh as at the first. Now the Gospel commands a hearty and
entire forgiveness of injuries, though repeated never so often to seventy seven
times. We must not only quench the Fire of Anger, but kindle the Fire of Love
toward our greatest Enemies. I say unto you, Love your Enemies, Mat. 5.44.
Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you, Pray for them which
despitefully use you, and Persecute you. This is urged from the consideration
of God's forgiving us, Col. 3.13.
who being infinitely provoked, yet pardons innumerable faults to us, moved
only by his Mercy. And how reasonable is it that we should at his command remit
a few faults to our Brethren? To extinguish the strong inclination that is in
corrupt Nature to revenge, our Savior has suspended the Promise of Pardon to
us upon our pardoning others. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your
Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye forgive not their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. He that is cruel to another
cannot expect Mercy, but in every Prayer to God indites himself, and virtually
pronounces his own Condemnation.

4. The Gospel enjoins Contentment in every state, which is our great Duty and
Felicity, mainly influential upon our whole life, to prevent both Sin and
Misery. Be content with such things as you have, for he has said, I will never
leave thee, Heb. 3.5.
nor forsake thee. It forbids all Murmurings against Providence, which is the
seed of Rebellion, and all anxious thoughts concerning things future. Take no
thought for to morrow, we should not anticipate evils, Mat. 6.31.
by our apprehensions and fears, they come fast enough; Sufficient for the day
is the evil thereof. Our corrupt Desires are vast and restless as the Sea, and
when contradicted they betray us to Discontent and Disobedience. The Gospel
therefore retrenches all inordinate Affections, and vehemently condemns
Covetousness, as a Vice not to be named among Saints but with abhorrency. It
discovers to us most clearly, that temporal things are not the materials of our
Happiness. For the Son of God voluntarily denied himself the enjoyment of them.
And as the highest Stars are so much distant from an Eclipse, as they are above
the Shadow of the Earth; so the Soul that in its esteem and desires is above
the world, its brightness and joy cannot be darkened or eclipsed by any
accidents there. The Gospel forbids all vain Sorrows, as well as vain
Pleasures; and distinguishes real Godliness from an appearance, by contentment
as its inseparable Character. Godliness with Content is great gain. 1 Timothy 6.6.
When we are in the saddest circumstances, our Savior commands us to possess
our Souls in Patience, Luke 29.19.
to preserve a calm Constitution of Spirit, which no storms from without can
discompose. For this end he assures us that nothing comes to pass without the
Knowledge and Efficiency, or at least, Permission of God. That the H^irs of our
Head are numbered, and not one falls to the Earth without his License. Now the
serious belief of a Wise, Just and Powerful Providence that governs all things,
has a mighty efficacy to maintain a constant tranquillity and equal temper in
the Soul amidst the confusions of the World. God works all things according to
the counsel of his own will: Ephesians. 1.11.
and if we could discover the immediate reasons of every Providence, we cannot
have more satisfaction then from this General Principle, that is applicable to
all, as light to every color, That what God does is always best. This resolves
all the doubts of the most entangled minds, and rectifies our false judgments.
From hence a Believer has as true content in complying with God's Will, as if
God had complied with his, and is reconciled to every condition. Besides, the
Gospel assures us, that all things work together for the good of those that
love God. For their Spiritual good at present; Romans 8.28.
by weakening their corruptions: for affliction is a kind of manage, by which
the sensual part is exercised and made pliable to the motions of the Spirit:
and by increasing their Graces, the unvaluable Treasures of Heaven. If the
dearest Objects of our Affections, the most worthy of our Love and Grief are
taken away, it is for this reason, that God may have our Love himself, in its
most full and inflamed degree. And Afflictions are in order to their
Everlasting good. Now the certain expectation of a blessed issue out of all
troubles, is to the Heart of a Christian as the putting a Rudder to a Ship,
which without it is exposed to the fury of the winds, and in continual dangers,
but by its guidance makes use of every Wind to convey it to its Port. Hope
produces not only acquiescence, Romans 12.12.
but joy in the sharpest Tribulations. For every true Christian being ordained
to a Glorious and Supernatural Blessedness hereafter; all things that befall
them here below, as means, are regulated and transformed into the nature of the
End to which they carry them. Thus temporal evils are turned into good. Our
light Afflictions which are but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4
work for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory. To consider this Life as the
passage to another, that is as durable as Eternity, and as blessed as the
Enjoyment of God can make it; that the present miseries have a final respect to
future Happiness, will change our opinion about them, and render them not only
tolerable, but so far eligible as they are instrumental and preparatory for it.
If the Bloody as well as the Milky way leads to God's Throne, a Christian
willingly walks in it.

In short, A lively Hope, accompanies a Christian to his last expiring breath,
till it is consummated in Celestial fruition. So that Death it self, the
universal terror of Mankind, is made desirable, as an entrance into
Immortality, and the first day of our Triumph. Thus I have considered some
particular Precepts of Christ, which are of greatest use for the government of
our Hearts and Lives; and the reasons upon which they are grounded, to make
them effectual. Now to discover more fully the compleatness of the Evangelical
Rule, I will consider it with respect to the Law of Moses, and the Philosophy
of the Heathens.

CHAP. XVII.
The Perfection of Christ's Laws appears by comparing them with the Precepts of
Moses. The Temple-Service was managed with Pomp suitable to the disposition of
the Jews, and the dispensation of the Law. The Christian Service is Pure and
Spiritual. The Levitical Ceremonies and Ornaments are excluded from it, not
only as unnecessary, but inconsist with its Spirituality. The obligation to the
Rituals of Moses is abolisht, to introduce real Righteousness. The Indulgence
of Polygamy and Divorce is taken away by Christ, and Marriage restored to its
Primitive Purity. He cleared the Law from the darkening Glosses of the
Pharisees. And enforced it by new Obligations. The Law of Christ exceeds the
Rules which the highest Masters of Morality in the School of Nature ever
prescribed. Philosophy is defective as to Piety, and in several things contrary
to it. Philosophers delivered unworthy Conceptions of God. Philosophy does not
enjoin the Love of God, which is the first and great Command of the Natural
Law. Philosophers lay down the servile Maxim* To comply with the common
Idolatry. They arrogated to themselves the praise of their Virtue and
Happiness. Philosophy does not propound the Glory of God for the Supreme End of
all Humane Actions. Philosophy is defective as to the Duties respecting our
selves and others. It allows the first sinful motions of the lower Appetites.
The Stoics renounce the Passions. Philosophy insufficient to form the Soul to
Patience and Content under Afflictions: and to support in the hour of Death. A
Reflection upon some Immoral Maxims of the several Sects of Philosophers.

THe Perfection of the Laws of Christ will further appear, by comparing them
with the Precepts of Moses, and with the Rules which the highest Masters of
Morality in the School of Nature have prescribed for the directing our lives.
The Gospel exceeds the Mosaical Institution;

1. In ordaining a Service that is Pure, Spiritual, and Divine, consisting in
the Contemplation, Love and Praises of God, such as the holy Angels perform
above. The Temple-Service was managed with Pomp and external Magnificence,
suitable to the disposition of that People, and the dispensation of the Law.
The Church was then in its Infant-state, as St. Paul expresses it; and that Age
is more wrought on by Sense than Reason: For such is the subordination of our
Faculties, that the vegetative first acts, then the sensitive, then the
rational, as the organs appointed for its use, acquire perfection. The knowledge
of the Jews was obscure and imperfect, and the external part of their Religion
was ordered in such a manner, that the senses were much affected. Their Lights,
Perfumes, Music and Sacrifices were the proper entertainment of their external
Faculties. Besides, being encompast with Nations whose Service to their Idols
was full of Ceremonies, to render the temptation ineffectual, and take off from
the efficacy of those allurements which might seduce them to the imitation of
Idolatry, God ordained his Service to be performed with great splendor. Add
further, The Dispensation of the Law was typical and mysterious, representing
by visible material objects, and their power to ravish the Senses, Spiritual
things, and their efficacy to work upon the Soul. But our Redeemer has rent
the Vail, and brought forth Heavenly things into a full Day, and the clearest
Evidence. Whereas Moses was very exact in describing the numerous Ceremonies of
the Jewish Religion, the quality of their Sacrifices, the Place, the Persons by
whom they must be prepared and presented to the Lord: We are now commanded to
draw near to God with cleansed hands and purified hearts, and that Men Pray
every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. Every place is
a Temple, and every Christian a Priest, to offer up Spiritual Incense to God.
The most of the Levitical Ceremonies and Ornaments are excluded from the
Christian Service, not only as unnecessary, but inconsistent with its
Spiritualness: As Paint, they corrupt the native beauty of Religion. The
Apostle tells us, that humane Eloquence was not used in the first preaching of
the Gospel, lest it should render the truth of it uncertain, and rob the Cross
of Christ of its Glory in converting the World: for (...) would be apt to
imagine that 'twas not the supernatural virtue of the Doctrine, and the
efficacy of its Reasons, but the artifice of Orators that overcame the spirits
of Men: So if the Service of the Gospel were made so pompous, the Worshippers
would be inclined to believe, that the external part was the most principal,
and to content themselves in that, without the aims and affections of the Soul,
which are the life of all our Services. Besides, upon another account outward
Pomp in Religion is apter to quench than en^^ame Devotion: For we are so
compounded of Flesh and Spirit, that when the corporeal Faculties are
vehemently affected with their objects, it is very hard for the Spiritual to act
with equal vigor; there being such commerce between the fancy and the outward
Senses, that they are never exercised in the reception of their objects, but
the Imagination is drawn that way, and cannot present to the mind distinctly
and with the calmness that is requisite, those things on which our thoughts
should be fixed. But when those diverting objects are removed, the Soul directly
ascends to God, and looks on him as the Searcher and Judge of the Heart; and
worships him proportionally to his perfections. That this was the design of
Christ, appears particularly in the Institution of the Sacraments, which he
ordained in a merciful condescension to our present state* for there is a
natural desir^ in us to have pledges of things promised; therefore he was
pleased to add to the Declaration of his Will in the Gospel, the Sacraments as
confirming seals of his Love; by which the application of his Benefits is more
special, and the representation more lively, than that which is meerl^ by the
Word. But they are few in number, on Baptism and the Lords Supper, simple in
their nature, and easy in their signification, most fit to relieve our
infirmity, and to raise our Souls to Heavenly things. Briefly, the Service of
the Gospel is answerable to the excellent light of knowledge shed abroad in the
hearts of Christians.

2. Our Redeemer has abolisht all obligation to the other Rituals of Moses, to
introduce that real Righteousness which was signified by them. The carnal
Commandments given to the Jews, are called Statutes that were not good; Ezekiel.
20.25.
either in respect of their matter, not being perfective of the humane nature,
or their effect: for they brought Death to the disobedient, not Life to the
Obedient: the most strict observation of them did not make the performers
either better, or more happy. But Christians are dead to these Elements, Col. 2.
that is, perfectly freed from subjection to them. The Kingdom of God consists
not in Meat, and Drink, Romans 14.17, 18.
but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; for he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of Men. We are
commanded to purge out the old leaven of Malice, and Wickedness, that sowers
and swells the mind, and to keep the feast, with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth. We are obliged to be free from the moral imperfections,
the vices and passions, which were represented by the natural qualities of
those Creatures which were forbidden to the Jews, and to purify the Heart
instead of the frequent washings under the Law. But the Gospel frees us from
the intolerable yoke of the legal abstinencies, observations, and disciplines,
the amusements of low and servile Spirits, wherewith they would compensate
their defects in real Holiness, and exchange the substance of Religion for the
shadow and colors of it. For this reason the Apostle is severe against those,
who would join the fringes of Moses to the robe of Christ.

3. The indulgence of Polygamy and Divorce that was granted to the Jews, is
taken away by Christ, and Marriage restored to the purity of its first
Institution. The permission of these was by a political Law, and the effect was
temporal Impunity. For God is to be considered not only in the relation of a
Creator and universal Governor, that gave Laws to regulate Conscience, but in
a special relation to the Jews as their King. And as in a Civil State a prudent
Governor permits a less evil, for the prevention of a greater, without an
approbation of it; So God was pleased in his Wisdom to tolerate those things,
in condescension to their carnal and perverse humors, for the hardness of their
Hearts, Mal. 2.14, 15. Mat. 19.8.
lest worse inconveniences should follow: But our Savior reduces Marriage to
the Sanctity of its original, when man was formed according to the Image of
God's Holiness. He that made them at the beginning, made them Male and Female:
for this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife,
Mat. 19.4, 5, 6.
and they twain shall be one flesh. What therefore God has joined together,
let no Man put asunder. From the unity of the Person, that one Male was made
and one Female, it follows that the super-inducing of another into the
Marriage Bed is against the first Institution. And the Union that is between
them not being only civil in a consent of wills, but natural by the joining of
two bodies, something natural must intervene to dissolve it, viz. the Adultery
of one party. Excepting that case, our Savior severely forbids the putting the
Wife away.

4. Our Redeemer has improved the obligations of the moral Law, by a clearer
discovery of the purity and extent of its precepts, and by peculiar and
powerful Enforcements. In his Sermon on the Mount he clears it from the
darkning glosses of the Phaisees, who observed the letter of the Law, but not
the design of the Lawgiver. He declares that not only the gross act, but all
things of the same alliance are forbidden; not only Murder, but rash Anger, and
vilifying words, which wound the Reputation. Not only actual pollution, but the
impurity of the Eye, and the staining of the Soul with unclean thoughts, are
all comprised in the prohibition. He informs them that every Man in calamity is
their Neighbor, and to be relieved, and commands them to love their deadliest
enemies. Briefly, He tells the multitude, that unless their Righteousness
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.
that is, the utmost that they thought themselves obliged to, they should not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Besides, our Savior has superadded special
Enforcements to his Precepts. The Arguments to persuade Christians to be
universally Holy, from Christ's Redeeming them for that great end, was not known
either in the Economy of Nature, or the Law: For before our lapsed state there
was no need of a Redeemer, and he was not revealed during the Legal
Dispensation. His Death was only shadowed forth in Types, and foretold in such
a manner, as was obscure to the Jews. The Gospel urges new reasons to increase
our aversion from sin, which neither Adam nor Moses were acquainted with. So
the Apostle dehorts Christians from uncleanness, because their bodies are
Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
and Temples of the Holy Ghost, and therefore should be inviolably consecrated
to purity. If the Utensils of the Temple were so sacred* that the employing
them to a common use, was revenged in a miraculous manner; How much sorer
punishment shall be inflicted on those who defile themselves, after they were
sanctified by the Blood of the Covenant? The Gospel also recommends to us Love
to one another, Heb. 10.19.
in imitation of that admirable Love which Christ expressed to us, and commands
the highest Obedience, even unto death when God requires it, in conformity to
our Redeemers Sufferings. These and many other Motives are derived from a pure
vein of Christianity, and exalt the Moral Law to a higher pitch, as to its
Obligation upon men, than in its first delivery by Moses.

2. The Laws of Christ exceed the Rules which the best Masters of Morality in
the School of Nature have prescribed for the Government of our Lives. It Is
true, there are remaining Principles of the Moral Law in the heart of Man; Some
warm sparks are still left which the Philosophers labored to enliven and
cherish. Many excellent Precepts of Morality they delivered, either to calm the
Affections, and lay the storms in our Breasts, whereby the most men are guilty
and miserable, or to regulate the civil Conversation with others. And since the
coming of Christ, Prometheus-like, Recentiores Platonici virtutes quasdam
posuerunt purgativas sed spurias; illas enim e Scriptoribus Christianis
suffurati sunt, namque ejusmodi virtutum nullus omnino ante Christum meminit.
L. Vives de Verit. Rel. Christ.
they brought their dead Torches to the Sun, and stole some light from the
Scriptures. Yet upon searching we shall easily discover, that notwithstanding
all their boasts, to purge the Soul from its defilements, contracted by its
union with the Body, and to restore it to its primitive Perfection, They became
vain in their thoughts, and their foolish heart was darkened. Although the
vulgar Heathens thought them to be guides in the safe way, yet they were
Companions with them in their wanderings; And Truth instructs us, that When the
blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch. I will briefly show that their
Morals are defective, and mixed with false Rules: only premising three things.
1. That I shall not insist on their Ignorance of our Redeemer, and their
Infidelity in respect of those Evangelical Mysteries, that are only discovered
by Revelation; for that precisely considered, does not make them guilty before
God: But only take notice of their defects in natural Religion, and moral
Duties, Romans 2.15.
to which the Law written in the heart obliges all Mankind.

2. That Virtue is not to be confounded with Vice, although it is not assisted
by special Grace. Those who performed acts of Civil Justice, and Kindness, and
Honor, were not guilty as those who violated all the Laws of Nature and
Reason. Their heroic Actions were praiseworthy among men, and God gave them a
temporal Reward; although not being enlivened by Faith, and purified by Love to
God, and an holy Intention for his Glory, they were dead works, unprofitable as
to Salvation.

(...)^ Naturam optim^m ducem sequi. Stoici passim.
3. Their highest Rule, viz. To live according to Nature, is imperfect and
insufficient. For although Nature in its original Purity furnished us with
perfect Instructions, yet in its corrupt state it is not so enlightened and
regular, as to direct us in our universal Duty. It Is as possible to find all
the Rules of Architecture in the ruins of a Building, as to find in the
remaining Principles of the natural Law, full and sufficient Directions for the
whole Duty of Man, either as to the performing good, or avoiding evil. Ephesians.
4.17, 18.
The Mind is darkened and defiled with error, that indisposes it for its office.

I will now proceed to show how insufficient Philosophy is to direct us in our
Duty to God, our selves, and others.

First, In respect of Piety, which is the chief Duty of the reasonable
Creature, Philosophy is very defective, nay in many things contrary to it.

1. By delivering unworthy Notions and Conceptions of the Deity. Not only the
vulgar Heathens changed the truth of God into a lie, when they measured his
Incomprehensible Perfections by the narrow compass of their Imaginations, or
when looking on Him through the appearing disorders of the World, they thought
Him unjust and cruel; As the most beautiful Face seems deformed and monstrous
in a disturbed stream; But the most renowned Philosophers dishonored Him by
their base apprehensions. For the true Notion of God signifies a Being
Infinite, Independent, the universal Creator, who preserves Heaven and Earth,
the absolute Director of all Events, that his Providence takes notice of all
Actions, that He is a liberal Rewarder of those that seek Him, and a just
Revenger of those that violate his Laws: Now all this was contradicted by them.
Arist. Plat. The Stoics imagined that God and the World made a complete
Animal, of which He was the Soul. Vid. Aug* de Civit. Dei. c. 18.
Some asserted the World to be eternal, others that Matter was; and in that
denied Him to be the first Cause of all things. Some limited his Being,
confining Him to one of the Poles of Heaven: Others extended it only to the
Amplitude of the World. The Epicurei nec Philosophi in rebus sanctis, nec
sancti in Philosophia. Aug. c. 7. de vera* Rel. (...).

Irridendum agere curam rerum humanarum illud quicquid est summum. Anne tam
tristi atque multiplici ministerio non pollui credamus dubitemusque? Plin. lib.
2. c. 7.


Epicureans totally denied his governing Providence, and made Him an idle
Spectator of things below. They asserted, That God was contented with his own
Majesty and Glory; That whatever was without Him was neither in his thoughts
nor care: as if to be employed in ordering the various accidents of the world,
were incompatible with his Blessedness, and He needed their Impiety to relieve
Him. Thus by confining his Power, who is Infinite, they denied Him in
confessing Him. Author Lib. de Mundo.
Others allowed Him to regard the great affairs of Kingdoms and Nations, to
manage Crowns and Scepters; but to stoop so low as to regard particular things,
they judged as unbecoming the Divine Nature, as for the Sun to descend from
Heaven to light a Candle for a Servant in the dark. They took the Scepter out
of God's hand, and set up a foolish and blind Power, to dispose of all mutable
things. Vid. Epist 74.
Seneca himself represents Fortune as not discerning the worthy from the
unworthy, and scattering its gifts without respect to Virtue. Some made Him a
Servant to Nature; That he necessarily turned the Spheres; Adimit Aristoteles
Deo id quod in entibus ratione praeditis est optimum, libertatem, and ex
Principe Mundi facit Ministrum Naturae, cui in agerdo seviat.

Seneca brings in Jupiter, their Supreme God speaking to virtuous men in their
Calamities, Quia non poteram vos ist^s subducere, adversus omnia armavi.


Others subjected Him to an invincible Destiny, that He could not do what He
desired. Thus the wisest of the Heathens dishonored the Deity by their false
imaginations, and instead of representing him with his proper Attributes, drew
a picture of themselves. Besides, their impious fancies had a pernicious
influence upon the lives of Men: especially the denial of his Providence; for
that took away the strongest restraint of corrupt nature, the fear of future
Judgment. For humane Laws do not punish secret crimes that are innumerable, nor
all open, as those of persons in power, which are most hurtful: Therefore they
are a weak instrument to preserve Innocence and Virtue. Only the respect of God
to whom every heart is manifest, every action a Testimony, and every great
Person a Subject, is of equal force to give check to sin in all, in the
dakrness of the night, and the light of the day, in the works of the hand, and
the thoughts of the heart.

2. Philosophy is very defective as to Piety, in not injoyning the Love of God.
The first and great Command in the Law of Nature, (the order of the Precepts
being according to their dignity) is, Thou shall love the Lord with all thy
Heart, Soul, and Strength. It Is most reasonable that our Love should first
ascend to Him, and in its full vigor: For our Obligations to him are infinite,
and all inferior objects are incomparably beneath him. Yet Philosophers speak
little or nothing of this, which is the principal part of natural Religion.
Aristotle who was so clear-sighted in other things, when he discourses of God,
is not only affectedly obscure, to conceal his ignorance, as the Fish which
troubles the Water for fear of being caught; but it is on the occasion of
speculative Sciences, as in his Phisicks, when he considers him as the first
cause of all the motions in the World; or in his Metaphysics, as the supreme
Being, the knowledge of whom he says is most noble in it self, but of no use to
Men. But in his Morals, where he had reason to consider the Deity as an object
most worthy of our Love, Respect, and Obedience in an infinite Degree, he
totally omits such a representation of him, although the Love of God is that
alone which gives price to all moral Virtues. And from hence it is that
Philosophy is so defective as to Rules for the preparing Men for an intimate
and delightful Communion with God, which is the effect of Holy and Perfect
Love, and the supreme Happiness of the reasonable Nature. If in the Platonical
Philosophy there are some things directing to it, yet they are but frigidly
expressed, and so obscurely, that like Inscriptions in ancient Medals or Marbles
which are defaced, they are hardly legible. This is the singular Character of
the Gospel, that distinguishes it from all humane Institutions; it represents
the infinite amiableness of God, and his goodness to us, to excite our
Affections to him in a Superlative manner: it commands us to follow him as dear
Children, and presses us to seek for those Dispositions which may qualify us
for the enjoyment of him in a way of Friendship and Love.

3. The best Philosophers laid down this servile and pernicious Maxim, Xenop.
l. 1. memor. Plato agnovit unum Deum, summum Opificem universi, sed praeter eum
statuit Deos duplices, Daemonas and H^roas, quibus sacr^ fieri jussit. Apul. Vt
nemo fuerit dubitaturus furere eos, si cum paucioribus furerent, nunc sanitatis
patrocinium insanientium turba, quae omnia sapiens servabit tanquam legibus
jussa, non tanquam Diis grata. Aug. lib. 5. c. 10. de Civitat.
That a wise Man should always conform to the Religion of his Country.
Socrates who acknowledged one Supreme God, yet (according to the counsel of the
Oracle that directed all to Sacrifice according to the Law of the City) he
advised his Friends to comply with the common Idolatry, and those who did
otherwise he branded as superstitious and vain. And his practice was
accordingly. For he frequented the Temples, assisted at their Sacrifices, which
he declares before his Judges, to purge himself from the Crime of which he was
accused. Seneca speaking of the Heathen worship, acknowledges 'twas
unreasonable, and only the multitude of fools rendered it excusable, yet he
would have a Philosopher to conform to those customs in Obedience to the Law,
not as pleasing to the God's. Thus they made Religion a dependence on the
State. They performed the Rites of heathenish Superstition, that were either
filthy, fantastical, or cruel, such as the Devil the master of those
Ceremonies ordained. They became less than Men by worshipping the most vile and
despicable Creatures, and sunk themselves by the most execrable Idolatry
beneath the Powers of darkness, to whom they offered Sacrifice. Now this
Philosophical Principle is the most palpable violation of the Law of Nature:
for that instructs us that God is the only object of Religion, and that we are
to obey him without exception from any inferior Power. Here 'twas Conscience to
disobey the Law, and a most worthy cause wherein they should have manifested
that generous contempt of Death they so much boasted of. But they detained the
truth in unrighteousness, and although they knew God, Romans 1.23, 24. Licet a
populo diversa sentirent, Templa haberent communia cum populo. Aug. lib. 4.
cont. Jul.
they glorified him not as God, but changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God,
into an Image made like to a corruptible Man, and to Birds, and Beasts, and
creeping things. A sin of so provoking a nature, that God gave them up to the
vilest ^ lusts, whereby they defiled and debased themselves; Carnal impurity
being a just punishment of Spiritual.

4. They arrogated to themselves the sole praise of their Virtues and
Happiness. Judicium hoc omnium mortalium, fortunam a Deo petendam, a s^ipso
sumendam sapientiam. Cicero.
This impiety is most visible in the writings of the Stoics, the Pharisees in
Philosophy. They were so far from depending on God for Light and Grace in the
conduct of their Lives, and from praying to him to make them virtuous, that
they opposed nothing with more pride and contempt. Hoc in sapientia pretiosum
atque magnificu^ est, quod ^on obvenit quod illam quisque sibi debet, quod non
ab alio petitur: quid haberes in philosophia, quod suspiceres, si beneficiaria,
res esset? Senec* Epist. 9.

Quis quod vir bonus esset gratias Diis egit unquam? at quod dives, quod
honoratus, quod in columis. Cic. l. 3. de not. Deor.

Virtutem nemo unquam acceptam Deo retulit: nimirum recte. Propter virtutem
enim jure laudamur, and in virtute recte gloriamur, quod non contingeret si id
donum a Deo, non a nobis haberemus.


They thought that Wisdom would loose its value and luster, that nothing were
in it worthy of admiration, if it came from above, and depended upon the Grace
of another. They acknowledged that the natural Life, that Riches, Honors, and
other inferior things, common to the worst, were the gifts of God; but
asserted that Wisdom and Virtue, the special perfection of the Humane Nature,
were the effects of their own industry. Impious folly! to believe that we owe
the greatest benefits to our selves, and the lesser only to God. Thus they
robbed him of the Honor of his most precious Gifts. So strongly did the poison
of the old Serpent, breathed forth in those words, Ye shall be as God, that
infected the first Man, still work in his Posterity. Were they Angels in
perfection, yet the proud reflecting on their excellencies would instantly turn
them into Devils. And as they boasted of virtue, so of happiness as entirely
depending upon themselves. They ascribe to their Wiseman an absolute Empire
over all things, they raise him above the Clouds; what ever may disquiet, or
disorder, they exempt him from all Passions, and make him ever equal to
himself, that he is never surprised with accidents, that it is not in the power
of pains or troubles to draw a sigh or tear from him, that he despises all that
the World can give or take, and is contented with pure and naked Virtue; in
short they put the Crown upon his Head, by attributing all to the power of his
own Spirit. Thus they contradicted the Rites of Heaven. Their impiety was so
bold that they put no difference between God and their wise person, Deus non
vincit sapientem faelicitate, etiamsi vincit aetate. Senec.
but this, that God was an immortal Wise-Person, and a wise Man was a mortal
God. Nay, that he had this advantage, (since it is great art to comprize many
things in a little space,) to enjoy as much happiness in an age, as Jupiter in
his eternity. And which is the highest excess of Pride and Blasphemy, Est
aliquid quo Sapiens antecedat Deum, ille naturae beneficio, non suo est
Sapiens. Magna res est, habere imbecillitatem hominis, and securitatem Dei.

Ferte fortiter, hoc est quo Deum ante cedatis, ille extra patientiam malorum
est, vos supra patientiam. Senec.


they preferred the wretched imperfect virtue and happiness of their Wiseman,
before the Infinite and unchangeable Purity and Felicity of God himself. For
God they said is wise and happy by the privilege of his Nature, where as a
Philosopher is so by the discourse of Reason, and the choice of his will,
notwithstanding the resistance of his Passions, and the difficulties he
encounters in the World. Thus to raise themselves above the Throne of God,
since the rebellious Angels, none have ever attempted besides the Stoics. It Is
no wonder, that they were the most early opposers of the Gospel; for how could
they acknowledge God in his state of abasement and humility, who exalted their
Verutous Man above him in his Majesty and Glory. Yet this is the Sect that was
most renowned among the Heathens. Timeo ne Stoici soli sint Philosophi. Cic.


5. Philosophy is very defective, in not propounding the Glory of God, as the
end to which all our actions should finally refer. This should have the first
and chief place in that Practical Science: For every Action receiving its
specification and value from its End, that which is the Supreme and common to
all Actions, must be fixed before we come to the particular and subordinate; and
that is the Glory of God. Now the design of Philosophers in their Precepts, was
either.

First, Quotus enim quisque Philosophorum invenitur, qui sit ita moratus, ita
animo ac vita constitutus ut ratio postulat, qui disciplinam suam non
ostentationem Scientiae, sed legem vita putet?
To use Virtue as the means to obtain Reputation and Honor in the World. This
was evident in their Books and Actions. They were sick of self-love, and did
many things to satisfy the Eye. They led their lives as in a Scene, where one
person is within, and another is represented without, by an Artificial
imitation of what is true. They were swelled with presumption, having little
merit, and a great deal of vanity. Now this respect to the Opinion of others,
corrupts the intention, and vitiates the action. It Is not sincere Virtue, but a
superficial appearance that is regarded. For it is sufficient to that purpose,
to seem to be virtuous without being so. As a proud person would rather wear
counterfeit Pearls that are esteemed right, then right which are esteemed
counterfeit. Tota infidelaum vita falsa virtus est, etiam in optimis moribus
Prosp.
So one that is vainglorious prefers the reputation of being virtuous, before
real Virtue. From hence we may discover that many of their most specious
Actions were disguised Sins, their Virtues were false as their Deities. Upon
this account St. Austin condemns the Heroical Actions of the Romans as vicious;
Lib. 4. cont. Jul. c. 3.
Virtute civili, non vera, sed very simili, humanae gloriae servierunt. Pride
had a principal part in them.

Epicurus virtutes induxit voluptatis ancillas, ab sit autem ut verae virtutes
cuiquam serviant nisi illi, vel propter illum cui dicimus Deus virtutum
converte nos. August. cont. Jul. lib. 4.
Or secondly, The end of Philosophy was to prevent the mischiefs which
licentiousness and disorders might bring upon men from without, or to preserve
inward peace, by suppressing the turbulent passions arising from Lust, or Rage,
that discompose the mind. This was the pretended design of Epicurus, to whom
Virtue was amiable only as the Instrument of pleasure.

Or thirdly, The height of Philosophy was to propound the beauty of Virtue,
Nec facile invenies multis e millibus unum virtutem pretium qui p^tet esse sui.
Ipse decor recti facti, si praemia desint; Non movit and gratis poenitet esse
probum. Ovid depont.

Stoici virtutem descripserunt seipsa contentam, ab omnibus liberam, and quae
sola sibi sit praemium: Sed licet a quibusdum tunc verae and honestae putentur
esse virtutes, cum ad seipsas referuntur nec propt^r aliud expetuntur, etiam
tunc inflatae ac superbiae sunt and ideo non virtutes sed vitia judicanda sunt.
Aug. lib. 19, de Civit. c. 25.


and its charming Aspect, as the most worthy Motive to draw the Affections. Now
supposing that some of the Heathens, (although very few) by discovering the
internal beauty of Virtue, had a love to it, and performed some things without
any private respect, but for the rectitude of the action, and the inward
satisfaction that springs from it, yet they were still defective. For Virtue is
but a ray of the Deity, and our duty is not complete, unless it be referred to
his Glory, who is the principle and pattern of it. In short, the great Creator
made Man for himself, and it is most just that as his Favor is our sovereign
happiness, so his Glory should be our supreme end, without which nothing is
regular, and truly beautiful. By these several instances it appears how
insufficient Philosophy is to direct us in our principal duty, that respects
God.

2. Philosophy was defective in its directions about moral duties that respect
our selves or others.

1. Philosophers were not sensible of the first inclinations to sin. They allow
the disorder of the sensitive appetite as innocent, till it passes to the
supreme part of the Soul, and induces it to deliberate, or resolve upon moral
actions. For they were ignorant of that Original and intimate pollution that
cleaves to the humane nature; and because our faculties are natural, they
thought the first motions to forbidden objects, that are universal in the best
as well as worst, to be the necessity of Nature rather then the effect of
Corruption. Accordingly all their Precepts reach no farther than the Counsels
of the Heart: But the desires and motions of the lower faculties, though very
culpable, are left by them indifferent. So that it is evident that many
defilements and stains are in their purgative virtues.

2. The Stoics not being able to reconcile the passions with reason, wholly
renounced them. Their Philosophy is like the River in Thrace, -- Quod potum
saxea reddit Ovid. Met.

Viscera, quod tactis inducit marmora rebus.


For by a fiction of fancy they turn their virtuous Person into a Statue, that
feels neither the inclinations of Love, nor aversions of hatred; that is not
touched with Joy or Sorrow; that is exempt from Fears and Hopes. The tender and
melting affections of nature toward the misery of others, they entirely
extinguish as unbecoming perfect Virtue. They attribute Wisdom to none, but
whom they rob of Humanity. Now as it is the ordinary effect of folly to run into
one extreme by avoiding another, so it is most visibly here. For the Affections
are not like poisonous plants to be eradicated; but as wild, to be cultivated.
They were at first set in the fresh soil of Man's nature by the hand of God. And
the Scripture describes the Divine perfections, and the actions proceeding from
them, by terms borrowed from humane affections, which proves them to be
innocent in their own nature. Plutarch observes when Lycurgus commanded to cut
up all the Vines in Sparta, to prevent Drunkenness, he should rather have made
Fountains by them, to allay the heat of the Wines, and make them beneficial: So
true Wisdom prescribes how to moderate and temper the affections, not to
destroy them. It Is true they are now sinfully inclined, yet being removed from
Carnal to Spiritual objects, they are excellently serviceable. As Reason is to
guide the Affections, so they are to excite Reason, whose operations would be
languid without them. The natures that are purely spiritual, as the Angels,
have an understanding so clear, as suddenly to discover in objects their
qualiteis, and to feel their efficacy; but Man is compounded of two natures,
and the matter of his body obscures the light of his mind, that he cannot make
such a full discovery of good or evil at the first view, as may be requisite to
quicken his pursuit of the one, and flight from the other: Now the Affections
awaken the vigor of the Mind, to make an earnest application to its object.
They are as the Winds which although sometimes tempestuous, yet are necessary
to convey the Ship to the Port. So that it is contumelious to the Creator, and
injurious to the humane nature, to take them away as absolutely vicious. The
Lord Jesus who was pure and perfect, expressed all humane affections according to
the quality of the objects presented to him. And his Law requires us not to
mortify, but to purify, consecrate, and employ them for spiritual and
honorable uses.

4. Philosophy is ineffectual by all its Rules to form the Soul to true
Patience and Contentment under sufferings. Now considering the variety and
greatness of the changes, and calamitys to which the present life is obnoxious,
there is no Virtue more necessary. And if we look into the World before
Christianity had reformed the thoughts and language of Men, we shall discover
their miserable errors upon the account of the seeming confusion in humane
affairs, the unequal distribution of temporal good and evils here below. If the
Heathens saw Injustice triumph over Innocence; and crimes worthy of the
severest punishment, crowned with Prosperity; if a young man dyed who in their
esteem deserved to live for ever, and a vicious person lived an age, who was
unworthy to be born, they complained that the World was not governed according
to Righteousness: but rash fortune or blind fate ruled all. As the Pharisee in
the Gospel, seeing the Woman that had been a notorious sinner so kindly
received by Christ, said within himself, If this Man were a Prophet, he would
know who it is that touches him. So they concluded, if there were a Providence,
that did see and take care of sublunary things, that did not only permit, but
dispose of all affairs, it would make a visible distinction between the
Virtuous and the Wicked.

It Is true, God did not to leave the Gentiles without a witness of himself; for
sometimes the reasons of his Providence in the great changes of the World were
so conspicuous, that they might discover an eye in the Scepter, that his
Government was managed with infinite Wisdom. Other Providence were veiled and
mysterious, and the sight of those that were clear should have induced them to
believe the Justice and Wisdom of those they could not comprehend. As Socrates
having read a Book of Heraclitus a great Philosopher, Vid. Diog. Laert.
but studiously obscure, and his Judgment being demanded concerning it,
replied, that what he understood was very rational, and he thought what he did
not understand was so. But they did not wisely consider things. The present
sense of troubles tempted them, either to deny Providence, or accuse it. Every
day some unhappy wretch or other reproacht their Gods for the disasters he
suffered. Tully himself was guilty of this impiery: Quando neque Dii quos tu
castissime coluisti, neque homines quos eg^ servavi semper nobis gratiam
retulerunt. Tull 4 Epist. ad Vxor.
Now the end of Philosophy was to redress these evils, to make an afflicted to
be a contented state. The Philosophers speak much of the Power of their
Precepts to establish the Soul in the instability of worldly things, to put it
into an impregnable fortress, by its situation above the most terrible
accidents. They boasted in a Poetical bravery, of their Victories over Fortune,
that they despised its flattery in a calm, and its fury in a storm, and in
every place erect Trophies to Virtue triumphing over it. These are great words,
and sound high, but are empty of substance and reality. Upon trial we shall
find that all their Armor though polish't and shining, yet is not of proof
against sharp Afflictions. The Arguments they used for comfort are taken,

Pati necesse est mult^ mortalem mala. Nae^ius.
1. From necessity; that we are born to Sufferings, the Laws of humanity, which
are unchangeble, subject us to them. But this consideration is not only
ineffectual to cause true contentment, but produces the contrary effect. As the
strength of Egypt is decribed to be like a reed that will pierce the hand
instead of suporting it. For our desires after freedom from miseries are
inviolable: so that every evil the more fatal and inevitable it is, the more it
afflicts us. If there be no way of escape, the Spirit is overcome by
impatience, or despair.

2. From reflection upon the miseries that befall others. Nullam tam miseram
nominabis domum, quae non inveniat in miseriore solatium. Malevoli solatii
genus turba miserorum? Senec.

Tully speaks to the Epicureans, Sed vobis voluptatum perceptarum recordario
beatam vitam facit, and quidem corpore perceptarum. Tusc.

Opinio est quae nos cruciat, and tanti quodque malum est, quanti taxavimus.
Circumspice ista quae nos agunt in insaniam, quae cum plurimis lachrymis
amittimus, scimus no^ da^num in his molestum esse, sed opinione^ da^ni. Senec.


But this kind of consolation is vicious in its cause, proceeding from secret
envy and uncharitableness. There is little difference between him that regards
another misery to lessen his own, and those who take pleasure in other
afflictions. And it administers no real comfort; If a thousand drink of the
waters of Marah, they are not less bitter.

3. Others sought for ease under sufferings by remembering the pleasures that
were formerly enjoyed. But this inflames rather than allays the Distemper. For
as things are more clearly known, so more sensibly felt by comparison; He that
is tormented with the Gout, cannot relieve his misery, by remembering the
pleasant Wine he drank before his fit.

4. The Stoics Universal Cure of afflictions was, to change their opinion of
them, and esteem them not real evils. Thus Posidonius (so much commended by
Tully) who for many years was under torturing Diseases and survived a contiunal
Death; being visited by Pompey at Rhodes, he entertained him with a
Philosophical Discourse, and when his pains were most acute, he said, Nihil
agis dolor, quanquam sis molestus, nunquam te^ esse confitebor malum: In vain
do thou assault me pain; though thou art troublesome, thou shall never force
me to confess thou art evil. But the folly of this boasting is visible: for
though he might appear with a cheerful countenance in the Paroxism of his
Disease to commend his Philosophy, like a Mountebank that swallows poison to
put off his Druggs, yet the reality of his grief was evident: his Sense was
overcome, though his Tongue remained a Stoic. If words could charm the Sense
not to feel pains, or compose the mind not to resent afflictions, 'twere
material to give molifying Titles to them. But since it is not Fancy that makes
them stinging, but their contrariety to Nature, it is no relief to represent
them otherwise than they are.

5. Others composed themselves by considering the benefit of patience.
Discontent puts an edge on troubles; Levius fit patientia, quicquid corriger^
sit nefas. Horat.
to kick against the pricks exasperates the pain, to be restless and turmoiling
increases the Fever. But this is not properly a consolation; for although a
calm and quiet submission prevents those new degrees of trouble, which by
fretting and vexing we bring upon our selves, yet it does not remove the evil,
which may be very afflicting and grievous in its own nature; so that without
other considerations to support the mind, it will sink under it. And as these,
so many other Arguments they used to fortify the Spirit against Sufferings,
are like a hedge which at a distance seems to be a safe retreat from Gunshot,
but those who retire to it, find it a weak Defense. This appears by the
carriage of the best instructed Heathens, in their calamities, Professing
themselves to be wise in their Speculations, they became fools in practice, and
were confounded with all their Philosophy, when they should have made use of
it. Some killed themselves for the apprehension of sufferings; their death was
not the effect of courage but cowardice; the remedy of their fear. Others,
impatient of disappointment in their great designs, refused to live. I will
instance in two of the most eminent among them, Cato and Brutus, they were both
Philosophers of the manly sect; and Virtue never appeared with a brighter
luster among the Heathens, than when joined with a Stoical resolution. Zenoni a
quo caepit rigida ac virilis sapientia.
And they were not imperfect Proficients, but Masters in Philosophy. Seneca
employs all the ornaments of his Eloquence to make Catoes Elogy: Cape quantum
debes virtutis pulcherrimae ac magnificentissimae speciem, quae nobis non
sertis, sed sudore and sanguine colenda est. Aspice Marcum Catonem.
He represents him as the consummate exemplar of Wisdom, as one that realized
the sublime Idea of Virtue described in their Writings. And Brutus was esteemed
equal to Cato. Yet these with all the power of their Philosophy were not able
to bear the shock of Adversity. Like raw Fencers, one thrust put them into such
disorder, that they forgot all their instructions in the place of trial. For
being unsuccesful in their endeavors to restore Rome to its liberty, overcome
with discontent and despair, they laid violent hands upon themselves. Cato
being prevented in his first attempt, afterward tore open his Wounds with
fierceness and rage. And Brutus ready to plunge the Sword into his Breast,
complained that Virtue was but a vain name; so insufficient are the best
Precepts of mere natural Reason to relieve us in distress. As Torrents that are
dried up in the heat of Summer when there is the most need of them, so all
comforts fail in extremity, that are not derived from the Fountain of Life.

I will only add how ineffectual Philosophy is to support us in a dying hour.
The fear of Death is a Passion so strong that by it Men are kept in bondage all
their days. It Is an Enemy that threatens none whom it does not strike, and
there is none but it threatens. Certainly that Spectre which Et pridie qua^
occideretur, in sermon nato super coenam, apud M. L^pidum, quis^am esset fi^^s
vitae co^modi simus, repentinum inopinatumque praetulerat. Suet.
Caesar had not courage to look in the face is very affrighting. Alexander
himself that so often despised it in the Field; when passion that transported
him, cast a Vail over his Eyes, yet when he was struck with a mortal Disease in
Babylon, and had Death in his view, Vid. Plutarch
his Palace was filled with Priests and Diviners, and no superstition was so
sottish, but he used to preserve himself. And although the Philosophers seemed
to contemn Death, yet the great preparations they made to encounter it,
Philosophy is defined by Plato, (...).
argue a secret fear in their Breasts. Many Discourses, Reasonings, and
Arguments are employed to sweeten that cruel necessity of it, but they are all
ineffectual.

Stultum est timere, quod vitare non possis. Laber. In illis qui morbo
finiuntur, magnum ex ipsa necessitate solatium est. Plin.

Moriar; hoc: dicis, desinam aegrotari posse, desinam alligari posse, desinam
mori posse. Senec.


1. That it is the condition of our nature: to be a Man and immortal are
inconsistent. But this consolation afflicts to extremity. If there were any
means to escape, the soul might take courage. He is doubly miserable, whose
misery is without remedy.

2. That it puts a period to all temporal evils. But as this is of no force
with those who are prosperous, and never felt those miseries which make Life
intolerable, so it cannot rationally relieve any that have not good hopes of
felicity after death. The Heathens discovered not the sting of Death, as it is
the wages of sin, and consigns the guilty to eternal Death; so that they built
upon a false foundation, as if it were the cure of all evils.

3. They encouraged themselves from their ignorance of the consequences of
death, whether it only changed their place, or extinguished their persons. Nam
si supremus ille dies non extinctionem, sed commutationem affert loci, quid
optabilius? sin autem perimit, ac ^elet omnino, quid melius quam in mediis
vitae laboribus obdormisc^re?
Socrates who dyed with a seeming indifference, gave this account of it; That
he did not know whether death was good or evil. But this is not fortitude, but
folly: as Aristotle observes, That a readiness to encounter dangers arising
from ignorance, is not true valor but a brutish boldness. What madness is it
then for one that enters upon an eternal state, not knowing whether it shall be
Happy or Miserable, to be uneffected with that dreadful uncertainty?

But now the Gospel furnishes us with real remedies against all the evils of
our present state. It Is the true Paradise wherein the Tree of Life is planted,
whose Leaves are for the healing of the Nations. We are assured that God
disposes all things with the Wisdom and Love of a Father, and that his
Providence is most admirable, and worthy of praise in those things, wherein
they who are only led by sense, doubt whether it be at all. For as it is the
first point of prudence to keep off evils, so the second and more excellent is,
to make them beneficial. Christians are more then Conquerours through Christ
that loves them. They are always in an ascendent State; and believing, rejoice
with an unspeakable and glorified Joy. Death it self is not only disarmed, but
made subservient to their everlasting good. Briefly, Christian Patience endures
all things, as well as Charity, because it expects a blessed issue. It draws
from present miseries the assurance of future Happinss. A Believer while he
possesses nothing but the Cross, sees by Faith the Crown of the Eternal Kingdom
hanging over his head; and the lively hope of it makes him not only patient,
but thankful and joyful. This sweetens the loss of all temporal goods and the
presence of all temporal evils. St. Paul in his Chains was infinitely more
contented than Caesar or Seneca, than all the Princes and Philosophers in the
World.

I will conclude this Argument by a short reflection on the immoral maxims of
several Sects of Philosophers. Cynicorum natio tota ejicienda est. Est enini
inimica verecundiae, sine qua nihil rectum esse potest, nihil honestum. Cicer.

Et qui nec Cynicos, nec Stoica dogmata legit, A Cynicis tunica distantia.
Juvenal.


The Cynicks assert that all natural actions may be done in the face of the
Sun; that it is worthy of a Philosopher, to do those things in the presence of
all, which would make impudence it self to blush. A maxim contrary to all the
rules of decency, and corruptive of good manners. For as the despising of
Virtue, produces the slighting of reputation: So the contempt of reputation
causes the neglect of Virtue. Yet the Stoics with all their gravity were not
far from this advice. Besides, among other unreasonable Paradoxes, they assert
all sins are equal; that the killing a Bird is of the same guilt with the
murdering a Parent: a Principle that breaks the restraints of fear, and shame,
and opens a passage to all licentiousness. They commended Self-Murder in
several cases; which unnatural fury is culpable in many respects, (...)^
Injuriosum est rapto vivere, at contra pulcherrimum rapto mori.

Aspice Marc. Catonem, sacro illo pectori puriss^m^s manus admoventem, and
vulnera parum demissa laxantem. Senec.


of rebellion against God, injustice to others, and cruelty to ones self. Zeno
the founder of that Sect practiced his own Doctrine. For falling to the ground,
he interpreted it to be a Summons to appear in another World, and strangled
himself. Aristotle allows the appetite of revenging injuries, to be as natural
as the inclination to gratitude, judging according to the common rule that one
contrary is the measure of another. Nay he condemns the putting up an injury as
degenerous and servile. He makes indignation at the prosperity of unworthy Men
a Virtue, (and to prove it, tells us the Grecians attributed it to their Gods
as a passion becoming the excellency of their natures.) But if we consider the
Supreme Disposer of all things may do what he pleases with his own, that he is
infinitely Wise, and in the next World will dispense Eternal recompenses; there
is not the least cause of irritation for that seeming disorder. Vide Lib. 4.
Ethic.
He also allows pride to be a noble temper that proceeds from a sublime Spirit.
He represents his Hero by this among other characters, that he is displeased
with those who mention to him the benefits he has received, which make him
inferior to those that gave them; as if humility and gratitude, were qualities
contrary to magnaminity. He condemns Envy (as a vice) that would bring down
others to our meanness, but commends Emulation, which urges to ascend to the
height of them that are above us. But this is no real Virtue, for it does not
excite us by the worth of moral good, but from the vain desire of equality, or
pre-eminence. And Plato himself, though styled Divine, yet delivers many things
that are destructive of moral honesty. He dissolves the most sacred band of
humane society, ordaining in his Commonwealth a Community of Wives. He allows
an honest man to lie in some occasions; whereas the rule is Eternal, We must
not do evil, Si eos inspiciamus ut Pagani, Chri^stiane scripserunt; si ut
Christiani, Paganice. Erasmus.
that good may come thereby. In short, a considering Eye will discover many
spots, as well as beauties in their most admired institutions. They commend
those things as Virtues which are Vices, and leave out those Virtues which are
necessary for the perfection of our nature, and the Virtues they commend, are
defective in those qualities that are requisite to make them sincere. If
Philosophy were Incarnate, and had expressed the Purity and Efficacy of all its
Precepts in real actions, yet it had abundantly fallen short of that
Supernatural, Angelical, Divine Holiness which the Gospel requires. Till the
Wisdom of God removed his Chair from Heaven to Earth to instruct the World, not
only the depravation of the lower faculties, but the darkness of the humane
understanding, hindered Men from performing their universal duty. The Gospel
alone brings light to the Mind, Peace to the Conscience, Purity to the
Affections, and rectitude to the Life.

CHAP. XVIII.
Examples have a special Efficacy above Precepts to form us to Holiness. The
Example of Christ is most proper to that end, being absolutely perfect, and
accommodate to our present state. Some Virtues are necessary to our condition
as Creatures, or to our condition in the world, of which the Deity is
incapable; and these eminently appear in the Life of Christ. They are Humility,
Obedience, and Love in suffering for us. His Life contains all our Duties, or
Motives to perform them. Jesus Christ purchased the Spirit of Holiness by his
sufferings, and confers it since his Exaltation. The Sanctifying Spirit is the
only Concomitant of Evangelical Mercy. The Declaration of the Law on Mount
Sinai was not accompanied with the renewing Efficacy of the Spirit, nor the
natural Discovery of the Divine Goodness in the Works of Creation and
Providence. The lower Operations of the Spirit were only in the Heathens. The
Philosophical change differs from the Spiritual and Divine. Socrates and Seneca
considered. Our Savior presents the strongest Inducements to persuade us to be
holy. They are proper to work upon Fear, Hope, and Love. The greatness of those
Objects, and their Truth are clearly manifested in the Gospel.

THe Second Means by which our Redeemer restores us to Holiness, is by
exhibiting a complete Pattern of it in his Life upon Earth. For the discovery
how influential this is upon us, we must consider, That in all the most noble
works, the principal Cause is an exact Idea in the mind of the Agent; and
Examples are the same. He that desires to excel in Painting, or Sculpture, must
view the most accomplished Pieces of those Arts. Thus in Morality, the
consideration of Eminent Actions performed by others, is of admirable efficacy
to raise us to perfection. That Examples have a peculiar Power above the naked
Precept to dispose us to the practice of Holiness, appears by considering;

1. That they most clearly express to us the Nature of our Duties in their
Subjects and sensible Effects. General Precepts form abstract Idea's of Virtue,
but in Examples Virtues are made visible in all their Circumstances.

Contumacia redargui non potest sine exemple. Nam habere non possunt quae
doceas firmitatem, nisi ea prior feceris. Quia natura hominu^ proclivis in
vitia, videri vult non modo cum venia, sed etiam cum ratione peccare. Lact. de
ver. Sap.
2. Precepts instruct us what things are our Duty, but Examples assure us that
they are possible. They resemble a clear Stream wherein we may not only
discover our Spots, but wash them off. When we see Men like our selves, who are
united to frail flesh, and in the same condition with us, to command their
Passions, to overcome the most glorious and glittering Temptations, we are
encouraged in our Spiritual Warfare.

3. Examples by a secret and lively incentive urge us to imitation. The Romans
kept in their houses the Pictures of their Progenitors to heighten their
Spirits, and provoke them to follow the Presidents set before them. We are
touched in another manner by the visible practice of Saints, which reproaches
our defects and obliges us to the same Care and Zeal, than by Laws though holy
and good. Now the Example of Christ is most proper to form us to Holiness, it
being absolutely perfect, and accommodate to our present state.

1. It Is absolutely perfect. There is no example of a mere man, that is to be
followed without limitation. Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ, says the
great Apostle. Nay, if we would unite the Excellencies of all good Men into
one, yet we might not securely follow him in all things: for his remaining
defects might be so disguised by the Virtues to which they are joined, that we
should err in our imitation. But the Life of Christ was as the purest Gold,
without any allay of baser metal. His conversation was a living Law. He did no
sin, neither was any guile found in his mouth. He was holy, harmless,
undefiled, Heb. 7.26*
separate from sinners. He united the efficacy of example with the direction of
Precepts; his actions always answered his words. Christianity, the purest
Institution in the World, is only a conformity to his pattern. The universal
command of the Gospel, that comprises all our duties is, to walk as Christ
walked.

2. His Example is most accommodate to our present State. There must be some
proportion between the model and copy that is to be drawn by it. Now the Divine
Nature is the Supreme Rule of Moral Perfections. We are commanded to be Holy,
as God is Holy. But such is the obscurity of our Minds, and the weakness of our
Natures, that the Pattern was too high and Glorious to be expressed by us. We had
not strength to Ascend to Him, but He had goodness to Descend to us: and in
this present state to set before us a Pattern more fitted to our capacity.
Although Light is the proper object of Sight; yet that immense Light which the
Sun has in the Meridian is invisible to our sight; we more easily discover the
reflection of it in some opacous Body: So the Divine Attributes are sweetened in
the Son of God Incarnate, and being united with the Graces proper for the
Humane Nature, are more perceptible to our minds, and more imitable by us. This
was one great design of his coming into the World, to set before us in doing
and suffering, not a mere Spectacle for our wonder, John 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.21.
but a Copy to be transcribed in our Hearts and Lives. He therefore chose such
a tenor of life as every one might imitate. His Supreme Virtue expressed it self
in such a temperate course of actions, that as Abimelech said to his followers,
Look on me and do likewise: So our true Abimelech, Judge. 9.48.
our Father, and Sovereign, calls upon us to imitate him. The first effect of
Predestination is to conform us to the Image of the Son, who was for this end
made the firstborn among many Brethren. He assumed the Humane Nature that we
might partake of the Divine, not only by His Merit but by His Example.

This will appear more fully by considering, There are some Virtues necessary
to our condition as Creatures, or with respect to our state of trial here
below, which the Deity is not capable of, and those most eminently appear in
the Life of Christ. I will instance in three which are the Elements of
Christian Perfection. His Humility in despising all the Honor of the World,
His Obedience in Sacrificing His Will entirely to God's, and His Charity in
procuring the Salvation of Men by his Sufferings: and in all these He denied to
his Humane Nature the privilege due to it by its union with the Eternal Word.

1. Humility in strictness has no place in God: He requires the Tribute of
Glory from all his Creatures. And the Son of God had a right to Divine Honor
upon his first Appearance here below. Yet He was born in a Stable, and made
subject to our common imperfections. Although He was ordained to convert the
World by his Doctrine and Miracles, yet for the tenth part of his time he lived
concealed and silent, being subject to his Mother and reputed Father, Mar. 6.3.
in the servile work of a Carpenter. And after his solemn investiture into his
Office by a Voice from Heaven, yet he was despised and contemned; He refused to
be a King, and stoopt so low as to wash his Disciples feet. All this he did to
instruct us to be meek and lowly, to correct our Pride, John 13. Mat. 11.29.
the most intimate and radicated corruption of Nature. For as those Diseases
are most incurable, which draw nourishment from that food which is taken for
the support of Life; so Pride that turns virtuous actions which are the matter
of praise into its nourishment, is most difficultly overcome. But the Example
of the Son of God, in whom there is an union of all Divine and Humane
Perfections, debaseing himself to the form of a Servant, is sufficient, if duly
considered, to make us walk humbly.

2. Obedience is a Virtue that becomes an inferior either a Servant or Subject,
who are justly under the power of others, and must be complying with their
Will: So that it is very distant from God, who has none superior to him in
Dominion or Wisdom, but his Will is the Rule of Goodness to his own and others
Actions. Now the Son of God became Man and was Universally Obedient to the Law
of his Father. And his Obedience had all the ingredients that might commend it
to our imitation. The value of Obedience arises upon three accounts.

1. The Dignity of the Person that obeys: it is more Meritorious in an
Honorable than in a mean Person.

2. From the difficulty of the Command; it being no great Victory over the
appetite in Obedience, ubi diligitur quod debetur, where the instance is
agreeable to our affections.

3. From the intireness of the will in obeying. For to perform a commanded
Action against our consent, is only to be subject in the meaner part of Man,
the Body, and to resist in the superior, which is the Mind. Now in all these
respects the Obedience of Christ was Perfect. In the Dignity of the Person
Obeying, it exceeded the Obedience of all the Angels, as much as the Divine
Person exceeded all created. The difficulty of the Command is greater than ever
was put upon Servant or Subject: He was Obedient to the Death of the Cross,
that is, Death with dishonor and torment, the evils that are most contrary to
the Humane Nature and Appetite. And the compleatness of his Will in obeying is
most evident. For if Christ had desired deliverance from his Persecutors, he
had certainly obtained it. He tells his Disciples, that upon his request, his
Father would send twelve Legions of Angels for his rescue. But he resigned the
whole Power of his Will to his Fathers; not my will, but thy will be done, was
his Voice at his private Passion in the Garden. He submitted the act and
exercise of his will; not what I will, but what thou will, he says in another
Evangelist: he yielded not only the faculty, and exercise of his will to do
what God enjoined, but in that manner which was pleasing to Him, Not as I will,
but as thou will, he expresses in the words of a third. Now what is there in
Heaven or Earth that can move our Wills to entire Obedience, if this mavelous
Pattern does not affect us? Let the same Mind be in you that was in Christ,
says the Apostle. How glorious is it to do what he did, and what a reproach to
decline what he suffered, who had the Holiness of God to give excellency to the
Action, and the infirmity of Man to endure the sharpness of the Passion!

3. Love to Mankind is expressed by our Savior in a peculiar manner. For
although God is Infinitely Good to us, yet he does not prefer the happiness of
Man before his own Blessedness. The Salvation of the whole World were not to be
purchased with the least diminution of the Divine Felicity. But the Son of God
suffered the extremest Evil, to procure the most sovereign Good for us, who
were in Rebellion against his Laws and Empire. Briefly, The Life of Christ
contains all our Duties toward God and Man, expressed in the most perfect
manner, or Motives to perform them. We may clearly see in his deportment
innocent Wisdom, prudent Simplicity, compassionate Zeal, perfect Patience, the
courage of Faith, the joy of Hope, the tenderness and care of Love,
incomparable Meekness, Modesty, Humility and Purity. He spent the night in
Communion with God, and the day in Charity to Men. He perfectly hated Sin, and
equally loved Souls. The nearest and readiest way to Perfection, is a serious
regard to his Precedent: For the causes of all Sin are either the desire of
what he despised, or the fear of what He suffered. He voluntarily deprived
himself to Riches, Cum omnibus vitae officiis justitiae specimen praebuisset,
ut doloris quoque patientiam, mortisque contemptum, quibus perfecta et
consummata sit virtus, traderet homini, venit in manus impiae nationis, cum et
vitare potuisset scientia futuri qua^ gerebat, et repedere eadem virtute qu^
mirabilia f^^it. Tert. de c^m. Christ.
Honors, Pleasures, to render them contemptible, and endured outrages of all
sorts, the contradiction of Sinners, and the sharpest Sufferings to make them
tolerable. He ascended Mount Calvary to his Cross; before he ascended from
Mount Olivet to his Throne; He was naked before He was clothed with Light, and
crowned with thorns before with Glory: And thus he powerfully teaches us to
follow his steps who suffered for us. If a Physician of great esteem, in a
Disease takes a bitter Potion, it would persuade those who are in the same
danger, to use the same Remedy. Since the Son of God to purchase our Happiness,
denied himself the enjoyment of worldly delights, and endured the worst of
temporal Evils, nothing can be more effectual to convince us, that the
Pleasures of the world are not considerable as to our last end, and that
present Afflictions are so far from being inconsistent with our supreme
Blessedness, that they prepare us for it.

In short, His excellent Example not only enlightens our Minds to discover our
Duty, but inables and excites to perform it. As the Eye in beholding visible
objects receives their Image, so by contemplating the Graces that are
conspicuous in our Redeemer, we derive a similitude from them. We all, says
the Apostle, with open face beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.18.
that is by viewing in the Gospel the Life of Christ, which was glorious in
Holiness, We are changed into the same Image from ^lory to Glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord: that is, gradually fashioned in Grace according to his
likeness.

And what can more powerfully move and persuade us to Holiness, than to
consider the President that Christ has set before us. For how honorable is it
to be like the Son of God? By conformity to Christ, we partake of the Divine
Perfections. The King of Heaven will acknowledge us for his Children, when we
bear the resemblance of our elder Brother. Besides the motive of Honor, Love
does strongly incline to follow Holiness in imitation of our Redeemer. This is
one difference between Knowledge and Love, the understanding draws the object
to it self and transforms it into its own likeness. Thus material objects have
an immaterial existence in the mind when it contemplates them. But Love goes
forth to the object loved; the Soul is more where it loves than where it lives;
that is, there is more of its intellectual presence, its thoughts and desires,
and it always affects a resemblance to it. Thus Love humbled God, and made him
like to us in Nature; and Love exalts Man, by making him like to God in
Holiness; for it excites us to imitate and express in our actions the Virtues
of him who has called us to his Kingdom and Glory.

3. In order to the restoring of Holiness to lapsed Man, the Lord Christ
purchased and conveys the Spirit to them. A state of Sin includes a total
privation of Holiness, and an active contrariety against it. The Sinner is dead
as to the Spiritual Life, and a^^^nable to revive himself, as a carcass is to
break the gates of Death and return to the light of the world: but he lives to
the Sensual Life; and expresses a constant opposition to the Law of God. He is
without strength as to his Duty, not able to conceive an holy thought, or to
excite a sincere and ardent desire toward Divine things; but has strong
inclinations of Will, and great Power for that which is evil. Now to restore
Spiritual Life to the dead Soul, and to conquer the living enmity that is in it
against Holiness, no less than the Divine Power was requisite. And the
effecting this is peculiarly attributed to the Spirit. Our Savior tells
Nicodemus, John. 3.5.
Except a man be born of water, and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. And the Apostle says, That according to his Mercy He saves us,
by the washing of Regeneration, and by the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Tit. 3.5.
As in the Creation, where all the Persons concurred, 'twas the motion of the
Spirit that conveyed the Life of Nature; So in the Renovation of the World,
where they all cooperate, it is the powerful working of the Spirit that produces
the Life of Grace. He visits us in the grave, and inspires the breath and flame
of Heaven to animate and warm our dead hearts. 'Twas requisite not only that
the Word should take Flesh, but that Flesh should receive the Spirit, to
quicken and enable it to perform the acts of the Divine Life. It Is for this
reason the third Person is frequently styled in Scripture the Holy Spirit. That
Title has not an immediate respect to his Nature, but to the Operations which
are assigned to Him, in the admirable Economy of our Redemption. It Is not upon
the account of his essential and eternal Purity, which is common to all the
Persons, but in regard of his Office, to infuse Holiness into the depraved
Soul, and renew the Divine Image, that he is so called. Now Jesus Christ
purchased the Spirit by his Humiliation and Sufferings, and conveys Him to us
in his Exaltation and Glory.

1. He purchased the Spirit by his Sufferings. For since Man fell from his
original Innocence, he is justly deprived of special Grace, that is necessary
to heal and recover him. And till by a perfect Sacrifice Divine Justice was
appeased, (that had shut the Treasury of Heaven,) and the Forfeiture taken off,
he could not obtain the eternal Riches. God must be reconciled before He will
bestow the Holy Spirit; a Gift so great and so precious, the earnest of his
peculiar Love and special Favor to us. Therefore our Savior tells his
Disciples, who were extremely afflicted for his departure from them, That it
was expedient he should go away, John 16.7.
for otherwise the Spirit would not come; whose Office was to convince and
convert the World. The departure of Christ implied his Death and Ascension;
both which were requisite in order to the sending of Him. If the Blood of
Christ had not been shed on the Cross, the Spirit had not been poured forth
from Heaven. The effusion of the one, was the cause of the effusion of the
other. The Rock that refreshed the Israelites in the Desert, did not power
forth its miraculous waters, till it was struck by the Rod of Moses; to
instruct us, That Christ our Spiritual Rock must be struck with the Curse of
the Law, the mystical Rod of Moses, to communicate the Waters of Life to us,
that is, the Spirit, who is represented in Scripture under that element.

2. Our Redeemer confers the Spirit after his glorious Exaltation, When he
ascended on high, Ephesians. 4.8.
he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. After his triumph over
Principalities and Powers, He dispensed his Bounty in this rich Donative. For
the Holy Spirit was first given to Christ as the reward of his excellent
Obedience in dying, that was infinitely pleasing to God, to be communicated
from him to Men. And he received the Spirit in the quality of Mediator upon his
entrance into Heaven. The Psalmist declares this Prophetically. Psalm. 68.18.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for Men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them. He acquired a right to those Treasures by dying, but he takes
possession of them after his Ascension. Now He is Crowned, He holds forth the
Scepter of his Royalty. Therefore it is said that when Christ was upon the
Earth, the Holy Spirit was not given, because Jesus was not Glorified. If it be
objected, that Believers before the Ascension of Christ, were partakers of the
Spirit; the answer is clear.

1. It was upon Christ's interposing in the beginning as Mediator, and with
respect to his future Death and Ascension, that the Spirit was given to them.

2. The degrees of communicating the Spirit before and after the Ascension of
Christ are very different; whether we consider the gifts of the Spirit, those
extraordinary abilities with which the Apostles were endued; 2 Cor. 1.
or the fruits of the Spirit, the Sanctifying Graces that are bestowed on
Believers, Gal. 5.22.
the measure of them far exceeds whatever was conveyed before. The Spirit
Descended as in a dew upon the Jewish Nation, but it is now powered forth in
showers upon all flesh. Now in the style of Scripture things are said to be,
when apparently and eminently they discover their being. So that comparatively
to the Power and Virtue of the Spirit discovered in the Church since the
Glorification of Christ, he was not given before. All the former manifestations
are obscured by the excess and excellency of the later. And not only the Decree
of God which is sufficient to connect those things that have no natural
dependence, but there are special reasons for the order of this Dispensation:
for the great end of the Spirit's coming was to reveal fully to the World the
way of Salvation; to discover the unsearchable riches of Grace; to assure Men
of happiness after this Life, that they might be reduced from a state of
Rebellion to Obedience, and their affections be refined and purified from all
Earthliness and made Angelical and Heavenly. Now the Principal demonstrations
which he used to persuade Men of these things, are the Death and Resurrection
of Christ, without which these Mysteries had been under a cloud. That the
Instruction therefore of the Spirit might be clear and effectual, it was
necessary Christ should Suffer and enter into Heaven, and accomplish those
things he was to teach.

And from hence we may observe that the Sanctifying Grace of the Spirit is only
the concomitant of the Evangelical Mercy. The Gospel and the Spirit are the
Wings by which the Sun of Righteousness brings healing and life to the World.
The declaration of the Law from Mount Sinai was Divine, but not accompanied
with the efficacy of Grace: Therefore it is called the ministration of Death. 2
Cor. 3.7.
It conveyed no Spiritual strength as delivered by the hands of Moses,
considering him precisely in the quality of the legal Mediator, but threatened a
Curse to the breakers of it. All the promises of Mercy scattered in the Books
of Moses belong to the Covenant of Grace. The Gospel is called the Law of the
Spirit of Life, and the Ministration of the Spirit; that is, the Spirit of
Holiness and Comfort from whom true and Eternal Life proceeds, (...) is solely
communicated by it. The discovery of the Divine Goodness in the Works of
Creation and Providence, is natural, and without the renewing power of the
Spirit: There is a correspondence between the external Revelation of Mercy, and
the internal Grace of the Spirit in their Original: as the one is supernatural,
so is the other. Not but that the Heathens had some fainter beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, for he inlightens every man that comes into the World, and some
lower operations of the Spirit, whereby they were reduced from Intemperance,
Incontinency and other gross Vices; to the practice of several Virtues that
respect the Civil Life. And of this we have an eminent instance recorded by
Diogenes Laertius. That Polemo half-drunk, crowned with Roses, and in the dress
of a Harlot rather than of a Man, coming into the School of the severe
Zenocrates, hearing him discourse of Temperance, as by a Charm was so perfectly
changed, that casting away the Garland from his Head, and the lascivious
Ornaments that were about him, and which was more considerable, his vicious
Habits from his Soul; he that entered in a Reveller come forth a Philosopher,
so corrected and composed in his manners, that he was called the Dorick tone,
which of all others was the most solemn and majestical in the Music of those
times. Now this alteration was wrought by the force of natural Reason, which
prevailed on him to renounce those sensual and base lusts, that were
inconsistent with the Honor and Peace of a Man in this present Life. But still
he was exceedingly distant from the Purity of a true Saint, who partakes of the
Divine Nature, and is inclined in all his motions to God. All the Precepts of
Morality, to use the Similtude of Plutarch, are like strong Perfumes that
sometimes revive those that are in a Swoon by the Falling Sickness, but never
heal them: So they may recover those that are debaucht from the outward
practice of those ignoble Vices which violate Natural Conscience, but they
cannot rectify and cure the corrupt Nature. The highest Philosophical Change
was only from those Vices which were scandalous in the view of men; but
consisted with those which were, though more subtle, yet not less sinful, and
discernable by the pure Eye of God. 'Twas from one kind of Sin to another,
Aliis peccatis, alia peccata vincuntur. Caeteras cupiditates hujus unius (nempe
gloriae) ingenti cupiditate presserunt. Aug. Lib. 5. de Civ. Dei.
from sensual to spiritual; Satan cast out Satan; or from higher to lower
degrees of Sin, but not from Sin to Holiness. And although the same good Works,
as to the external substance, were performed by the Heathens, as by Christians,
yet they vastly differ in their Principle and End. A Brute performs all the
acts of Sense that a Man does, but it is merely from the sensitive Soul, that is
of a lower order than that which animates a Man. So in the Heathen 'twas only
the humane Spirit excited by Secular Interests, Self-love, servile Fear, that
performed Moral Actions. But the Holy Spirit (who infuses Grace, that is as it
were a second Soul, to elevate that which before quickened the Body) is the
true Principle of Christian Virtues. This sanctifying Spirit, who transforms us
into the Divine Nature, and makes an entire and through Change in the Heart and
Conversation, they did not receive in the way of Nature. Of this we have a
convincing proof in the Example of the best Masters of Morality, who by their
Discourses or Writings raised it to the point of its perfection. Nec nova
inferens Daemonia, sed vetera depellens, nec adolescentiam vitians, sed omni
bono pudoris informans, Tert. de An. Christianam sapientiam Socaticae
praeferens. O sapientiae Atticae exemplum, Lenro est Philosophus. Tertul.
Apolog. Vid. Xenophon. Memorab. l. 4.
Socrates the Father of Philosophy, to whom this honor is ascribed among the
Grecians, that he first made Wisdom descend from Heaven to earth, because he
left the study of Astronomy, in which the Philosophers before him were most
conversant, and applied himself to that which was useful for the Government of
Life, and Reformation of Manners: He that is propounded by Celsus as an
unparalled Pattern, as one that discovered to what degree of excellency
Virtue might raise the humane Spirit, yet was guilty of great immorality and
impiety. Vid. Theod. Graecar. affect. Cur. l. 12. vid. Plat. Con^iv.
Those who pretend to have known the retirements of his Life, accused him of
impure commerce with Alcibiades. He betrayed the Chastity of his Wife, by
giving her to his Friend. Plato and Xenophon his admirers, declare his
compliance with the common Idolatry, which is justly aggravated by St. Austin,
being against the Convictions of his Conscience. For although in private
Discourse with his Friends he acknowledged but one God, and considered the Sun
and Moon only as the works and instruments of the Divine Power, and in the rank
of other Creatures; yet in his Apology before his Judges to prevent the fatal
Sentence, he charged his enemies to be guilty of impudent falsehood, who accused
him that he did not believe the Gods, since he believed, as all other men, that
the Sun and Moon were Gods. And during the time of his imprisonment, he never
addressed one Prayer to God for the pardon of his Sins; (...). Xenoph. lib. 4.
Memor.
for he had so high an opinion of his own Virtues, that he was insensible of
his Vices. And dying, he commanded a Cock to be offered to Aesculapius, that
is, to the Devil, under the disguise of that famous Physician. To Socrates I
shall add Seneca: Never any, excepting the Sacred Writers, and those who are
instructed by them, has writ more excellently. He describes Virtue as if the
living Original were in his Breast; but how dull a Copy was drawn in his Life.
There is as great a difference between the expression of it by his Pen and by
his Actions, as between the lively Picture of a Face by a rare Pencil, (...).
Vid. Xiphil. in Vit. Ner.
and the rude Draught of it with a Coal. What a villainous part did he act in
exciting Nero to murder his Mother; and after in writing an Apology for it,
employing the colors of his Rhetoric to cover one of the foulest blots which
has appeared in the succession of all Ages? His Philosophy was not a powerful
Antidote against the Contagion of the Court. What just excuse can there be of
his Cruelty to his Wife, in cutting her Veins, Vid. Tacit. lib. 15.
that she might die with him; from a vainglorious desire to eternize their
Reputation? And whereas among the whole Chorus of Virtues, Punctum est in quo
navigatis, in quo bellatis, in quo regna disponitis, sursum ingentia spatia, in
quorum possessionem animus admittitur. Senec. Lib. 1. not. quaest.
he in a special manner exalts Magnanimity in the contempt of earthly things,
and determines that the necessities of Nature are the just measures of ^^ches
and Delights, and all other things which the irregular Appetites of men pursue;
So that one would think him an Angel in flesh, conversing below to instruct the
world how to be happy: yet the Historians of those times tax him for insatiable
Avarice, that in a little time by unworthy arts he raked up an incredible Sum
of Money. Supposing it a Calumny that he forged many Wills to seize upon the
Inheritance belonging to others, what excuse can there be for his excessive
Usury, his forcing the Britains to borrow a Million of Sesterces, and calling
for it in, so much to their prejudice, as was likely to have caused their
Rebellion? What for his sumptuous Palaces, and Gardens of Pleasure, exceeding
the Luxury of Nero? And all these possessed by a man who had no Son to inherit, a
Philosopher, a Stoic, the great commender of blessed Poverty. All the Apology
he makes, is, that a Wise man that is himself, Non amat Divitias sed mavult,
non in animum illas sed in domum inducit, non respicit possessas sed continet.
Agreeing with Aristippus a Philosophizing Animal, who being reproved for his
intanglement in brutish love with a famous Harlot, replied; I possess her,
Diog. Laert.
not she me. The only difference is in the matter of their Affections, the one
was Riches, the other Pleasure. By these instances we may judge of the rest of
the Philosophers: Although a Vein of Gold appear in their Writings, yet their
Lives were full of Dross. The best of them are charged to have practiced vice
with those, Vid. Philonis judicium de Platonico convivio, in Lib. de vitae
Contempt. Quanquam illorum se ingenia amare dicebant ea fere potissimum amabant
quae been habitabant. Quis est enim iste amor amicitiae? cur neque deformem
Adolescentem quisquam amat, nec formosum senem? Cicer.

Venerem nefandam and quosvis Incestus esse adiaphora dicebant non s^lum
Epicurei, sed severi illi Stoici, quod Sextus Empiricus nos docet ex Zenone,
and Chrysippo.


to whom they commended the Precepts of Virtue. The foulest Actions were
approved by some, and the most excellent condemned by others that pretended to
Philosophical Perfection. Unnatural Lust was allowed as indifferent by Zeno and
Chrysippus: And the noblest Love in giving Life it self for the Glory of God in
Martyrdom is censured by Epictetus and Antoninus, as the effect of foolish and
incurable Melancholy in Christians, who were disgusted with the World, and
devoted themselves to Death. The Spirit of Holiness who forms the powerful and
lasting habits of true Virtue in the Soul; that effectually enclines from the
Love of God, and with an intention for his Glory, to obey his Will, as it was
purchased by Jesus Christ, so it is peculiar to the Dispensation of the Gospel
that reveals Him. The Doctrine of it is not delivered with so much Pomp, but
with infinite more efficacy than the most eloquent Instructions of
Philosophers: One plain Sermon that represents Christ as Crucified before our
eyes, to obtain Pardon of Sin for us; inflames the Soul with a more ardent Love
to God, and vehement hatred of Sin, than all their elegant and sublime
Discourses. There is the same difference between their Morals and the
Evangelical Institution, as between two Nurses; The one is adorned, and looks
lovely to the eye, but wants Milk to nourish the Infant in her Arms; the other
is not so amiable in appearance, but has a living spring of Milk to nourish
her Child. Philosophy has the advantage of artificial beauty, but cannot
supply the nourishment that is necessary to maintain the spiritual Life. But
the Gospel affords the sincere rational milk to the Soul, that it may grow
thereby. It Is therefore called the Word of Life, a title that distinguishes it
from the Law, and all humane Institutions.

4. Jesus Christ has presented the strongest inducements and motives to
persuade us to Holiness. The way which he takes to save us, is not by a mere
act of Power to raise us above our selves, but he deals with us conveniently to
our frame, in making use of our Affections to bring us to himself. And whereas
there are three Affections that have a mighty power over the reasonable Nature,
and are the inward springs of humane actions, viz. Fear, Hope, and Love; He
has propounded such Objects to them, which being duly considered, are
infinitely more efficacious than any thing that may divert us from our duty.
The great temptations to sin are from the terrors or delights of Sense, and to
overcome these, he has brought to our assistance the Powers of the World to
come: that is, has revealed the dreadful preparations for the Punishment of
the Wicked, and the Glorious Rewards that attend the Godly in their future
State.

Now to discover the efficacy of those Objects for the persuading Men to be
Holy I will consider, 1. Their Greatness, as it is described in the Gospel. 2.
Their Truth and Reality, of which our Savior has given us convincing evidence
and assurance.

1. To excite our Fear, he threatens Torments extreme and eternal. These are
set forth by such representations, as may impress the quickest sense of them
upon Men. For the Imagination depends on sensible experience, and is strongly
affected with those things that are terrible to our outward faculties. Now*
Hell is described by a Worm gnawing the most tender parts, Mar. 9.44.
that are most capable of pain; to signify the furious reflections of the
guilty Soul, the sting of the enraged Conscience, the torment of those perfect
Passions that continually vex the Damned. And it is set forth by Fire and
Brimstone, that is most fierce to sense, the serious consideration of which is
enough to cause terror and amazement in all that are liable to it. And if the
sole apprehension be intolerable, how much more will the dwelling with
devouring Fire, and everlasting burning? It Is called the blackness of darkness,
to signify the complete horror of that state. The Fire has only force to
burn, not to give any light to mitigate the obscurity. It Is called the second
Death, in comparison of which that of the body is but the shadow of Death. Rev.
20.14. mortui vitae, and morti sic fine victuri. Aug.
Nothing of Life remains but the sense of Misery, and that will be as strong
for ever, as at the first entrance into it. This infinitely increases the
Torment, that it shall never end. The suffering Soul knows it shall be Eternal,
and as such it is felt and afflicts. The Fire that devours shall never say it is
enough, that sad Night shall never have a Morning, that horrible Tempest never
any Calm. The Damned have no breathing of Rest in their extreme pains, no
shadow of Hope to refresh them in their intolerable heat, Rev. 20.10.
but are under torment day and night, for ever and ever. Now what can be more
powerful to restrain Men from sin than the terrors of the Lord? if the desires
of carnal and momenta^y pleasures are impetuous and urgent, what can be more
effectual to give check to them, than the consideration that they are attended
with a painful Eternity, that within a little while nothing will remain of the
most pleasant lusts but the Worm and the Fire? Thus one extreme is cured by
another. Or, if the fear of Men who can inflict but outward evils, and Death on
the Body, at any time resists the performance of our Duty, what is more proper
to lessen the impression, than to remember how dreadful a thing it is to fall
into the revenging hands of the living God, who lives for ever, and can punish
for ever? Thus our Savior fortified his Disciples against Persecution, I say
unto you, my Friends, Luke 12.4, 5.
Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more they can
do; but I will forwarn you whom you shall fear: fear him which after he has
killed has power to cast into Hell; yea I say unto you, fear him. Eternal
Damnation is infinitely more fearful than Temporal Death. As the Rod of Moses
devoured the Rods of the Magicians. So the fear of Hell overcomes the fear of
Death, and all the Torments which end with this Life.

I shall add further, to show how fit an Argument this is to work on mankind;
That usually the Fear of evil more deeply affects than the Hope of good. When
the Imagination is violently struck with an object, it has a mighty force to
turn the Mind and Will it self. Therefore Laws are secured by Punishments, not
by Rewards. Indeed the fear of Hell at first disposes us for the love of
Heaven: to escape the one we fly to the other. As the virtue of the Loadstone
is increast by arming it with Iron, which although it has no attractive power
in it self; yet by conjunction, it makes the others more forcible: So the
promise of Heaven makes a stronger impression upon us by the threatening of Hell
to all that despise it. Were it not for the Torments of Hell (which are more
easily conceived by us whilst we are clothed with flesh, than Celestial Joys,
and therefore more strongly affect us) Heaven would be neglected, and be as
empty of Saints as it is full of Glory. To awaken us out of the deep Lethargy of
sensual Lusts, the most pleasant Music is ineffectual, nothing less is
requisite than cutting and scarifying.

And not only those that begin, and first enter in the ways of Godliness, but
those who are advanced in Christianity have need of this Bridle. For there are
some temptations wherein the Flesh assaults the Spirit with that violence, that
Love it self is obliged to call in Fear to its assistance, as being more proper
to repress its inordinate motions. It Is only in Heaven that perfect Love will
consume all concupiscence, and cast out fear of Judgment: but whilst we are
encompast with temptations, we must not think under the pretext of a more
raised Spirituality, that the fear of Hell is either unbecoming or unnecessary.
It Is not unworthy a Child of God to employ all the Motives of the Gospel. We
are commanded to work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.


But the opening of Hell to our view is not sufficient alone to make us Holy.
For the strongest terrors although they restrain from the outward forbidden
act, yet they do not change the Heart. According to that of St. Austin,
Inaniter se victorem putat esse peccati, qui poenae timore non peccat; quia
etsi non impletur foris negotium malae cupiditatis, ipsa tamen cupiditas intus
est hostis; That is, the fear of Punishment can never make us truly victorious
over sin, because although we do not actually accomplish the desires of the
corrupt Will, yet the corrupt Will is still an enemy that lives within, and is
only destroyed by the love of Holiness, which allures us by the excellent
Reward that is promised to it. Besides, Fear is a violent Passion to which
Nature is repugnant, so that although its power is great, yet not constant: how
strong soever the force is by which a stone is thrown upwards, yet it is weakened
by degrees, and overcome by the natural weight of the Stone, whereby it falls
to the Center. So the Humane Nature resists Fear, and lessens its impetuousness
so far, that frequently it returns to sensual Lusts. Therefore, that the Law of
the Spirit may be perfect and stable, it must be confirmed by the hopes of
Heaven. As the Natural, so the Spiritual Life must be nourisht by grateful
food, it is not preserved with Aloes or Wormwood. For this reason our Savior,

2. To encourage and raise our Hopes, offers to us a Reward infinitely
valuable: for as God is Infinite such is the Happiness he bestows on his
favorites. It Is described to us in Scripture under the most enamouring
representations; as a state of Peace and Love, of Joy and Glory.

The Prince of Peace reigns in the Holy Jerusalem that is above, and preserves
an everlasting serenity and calmness. The mutinous Spirits that rebelled, were
presently chased from thence, into this lower Region, where they brought
trouble and disorder. He makes Peace in his high Places. The Peace of Heaven
is like the Crystal Sea before the Throne of the Lamb, which no unquiet
agitation ever troubles or disturbs.

An inviolable Love unites all his Subjects, no division or jealousy
discomposes their Concord. They enjoy without envy: for infinite Blessedness is
not diminished by the number of the possessours. The Inheritance in light is
communicated to all. Although the Angels are distinguished by their several
Orders and Ministrations, as Seraphims, and Cherubims, Thrones and Powers, yet
a Chain of Holy Love binds all their affections together. And the Saints
although they shine with different degrees of Glory, yet as in a Chorus of
Music; although the voices are different, they make but one entire harmony: So
Love that ever continues, unites their wills in a delightful harmonious
Agreement. Although there are millions of the Celestial Inhabitants, yet they
all make but one Society, Love mixing in one mass of Light, and Glory, all
their understandings and wills.

And since all true Joy and Sweetness springs from Love, it is impossible but
they must feel unspeakable complacency, in the reciprocal exercise of so Holy
and Pure an Affection. But principally, their Joy arises from the possession of
God himself; by the clearest Knowledge and purest Love of his Excellencies. They
see him as he is. 1 John* 3.2.
Sight is the most Spiritual and noble Sense, that gives the most distinct and
evident discovery of its objects. The Soul in its exalted state, sees the King
in his Beauty, all the perfections of that infinitely Glorious and Blessed
Nature, in their brightness and purity. And this Sight causes the most ardent
Love, by which there is an intimate and vital union between the soul and its
happiness; and from hence springs perfect delight: In thy presence is fullness
of Joy. Psalm. 16.11.
It expels all evil that would imbitter and lessen our felicity. And this is an
admirable privilege for the Humane Nature, that is so sensible of trouble. All
complaints and cries, all sighings and sorrows are for ever banished from
Heaven. If the Light of the Sun be so pleasant, Rev. 21.4.
that every morning revives the World, and renders it new to us, which was
buried in the darkness of the night; how infinitely pleasant will the Light of
Glory be, that discovers the absolute and universal Excellency of the Deity,
the beauty of his Holiness, the perfection of his Wisdom, the greatness of his
Power, and the riches of his Mercy? How inexpressibly great is the Happiness
that proceeds from the illumination of a purified Soul, when such is the
amiableness of God, that his infinite and eternal Felicity arises from the
fruition of himself? The Joy of Heaven is so full, and satisfying, that a
thousand years there are but as one day. Inferior earthly goods presently lose
the flower of novelty, and languish in our enjoyment of them: Variety is
necessary to put an edge upon our appetites, and quicken our delights; because
they are imperfect, and fall short of our expectation. But the object of our
Blessedness is infinitely great, and produces the same pure and perfect Joy for
ever. After the longest fruition it never cloys or satiates, but is as fresh
and new as the first moment.

And that which is the peculiar Pleasure of the Redeemed is, Job. 17.24.
that they shall be with Christ, and see his Glory; What a mavelous joy will
fill our hearts, to see our Blessed Savior, who suffered so much for us on
Earth, to reign in Heaven? Here He was in his enemies hands, there he has them
under his feet. Here He was in the form of a Servant, there He appears in the
form of God, adorned with all the marks of Majesty. Here He was under the cloud
of his Fathers displeasure, there He appears as the Brightness of his Glory.
Here He was ignominiously Crucified, there He is crowned with Immortal Honor.
Now considering the ardent Affections which the Saints have to their Redeemer,
the contemplation of him in this glorious state, must infinitely ravish their
hearts. Especially, if we consider that the exaltation of Christ is theirs. The
Members triumph when the Head is crowned. His excellent Glory reflects a luster
upon them, and by the sight of it, they are changed into his Likeness. If the
imperfect and dim sight of his Divine Virtues in the Gospel, has a power to
change Believers into his Image from glory to glory, how much more the Vision
of his unveiled Face? Our Graces here are but as the rude draught and first
colors of the Divine Image, that shall then be in its perfection. We know that
when he appears we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.
for we shall see him as he is. The similitude between the Saints above and
Christ is so exact, that if one should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and
were not directed by the Light of that place, he would be apt to think every
glorified Saint he meets to be more than a creature. St. John the beloved of
Christ, and as clear-sighted as any of the Apostles, mistook an Angel for God;
and would have adored him, although he did not appear in his full glory. The
Kingdoms of the world with all their splendor are no more in compare to it,
than a dead spark to the Sun in its brightness. The very Bodies of the Saints
shall be raised from the Grave, and beautified with eternal Ornaments: They
shall be Companions with the Angels, and conformed to the glorious Body of
Christ. Briefly, In the present state we are not capable to receive the full
knowledge of Heaven: What we understand is infinitely desirable, but the most
glorious part is still undiscovered. The Apostle tells us, Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what
God has prepared for those that love him. 1 Cor, 2.9.
All that is beautiful or sweet here, is but a shadow of that Glory, a drop of
that vast Ocean of delights. For all that is desirable in the Creatures, and is
dispersed among them, is united in God as the Original, in an infinite and
indeficient manner, with all the Prerogatives that the Creatures have not.
Celestial Blessedness as much exceeds our most raised thoughts, as God is more
glorious in himself than in any representations made of him by the shadows of
our earthly Imaginations. There is a greater disproportion between the
condition of a Saint on Earth and in Heaven, than between the Life of an Infant
in the Womb, and of the same person when advanced to the Throne, and attended
with the Nobility of a Nation. Romans 8.17.
St. John declares, Now we are the Sons of God, but it does not appear what we
shall be. Who knows the full signification of being heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ, of partaking in that glorious Reward which is given to
him for his great Services to the Crown of Heaven? Who can tell the weight, the
number and measure of that Blessedness? To him that overcomes, says our
Redeemer, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame,
Rev. 3.21.
and am set down with my Father in his Throne. We have reason to break forth in
the Language of the Psalmist, How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up
for those that fear thee? and supply the defects of our understanding with a
Holy admiration, that is the only measure of those things that are above our
measure.

Besides, the Reward as in excellency it is Divine, so in duration it is
perpetual. Heaven is an inheritance as safe as great Here we are subject to
time, that carries us and all our goods down its swift stream; but there
Eternity, that is fixed and unchangeable, embraces us in its bosom. We shall be
secure and at Rest, for no Person shall take away our Crown, Rev. 22.5.
we shall reign for ever and ever. At God^s right hand are pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
that can never abate or end: As his Liberal Hand bestows, so his Powerful
preserves our Happiness. The Blessed shall sing Everlasting Hymns of Glory, and
Songs of thanksgiving to the Great Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, who has
prepared and purchased that felicity for them, and has brought them to the
secure possession of it.

Now can there be a more powerful motive to Obedience than Infinite and Eternal
Blessedness? what can pretend to our Affections in competition with it? Carnal
pleasures only gratify our viler part the Body, in its vilest state, but the
Joys of Heaven are Spiritual and Sublime, and proportioned to our noblest and
most capacious Faculties. Earthly delights cannot satisfy our senses, but the
Peace of God passes understanding. One hours enjoyment of it is better than an
Eternity spent in the pleasures of sin. What inexcusable madness is it to
prefer painted trifles before that inestimable Treasure? Who can truly believe
there is such an excellent Glory, but he must love it and vigorously endeavor
to obtain it? Who would not go to the Celestial Canaan though the way lies
through a Wilderness where no Flower or Fruit grows? All temporal evils are not
only to be endured, but cheerfully embraced in order to the possessing of it.
The Apostle tells us, I reckon that the sufferings of the present time, are not
comparable with the Glory that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.
And he was the most fit person to make the comparison, having made trial of
both States. For he was a Man of Sorrows, that had past through affli^ctions of
all kinds, and he was ravished up to Paradise, where he heard those things that
exceed all expressions of Humane Words. Now after a serious estimate, he
declares, that the Eternal weight of Glory, infinitely outballances the Light,
2 Cor. 4.17.
and momentany troubles of this Life. Thus from what has been said concerning
the greatness of the recompenses hereafter; we may understand how powerful they
are to deter Men from Sin, and to allure them to Holiness.

2. That these objects may be effectual, our Savior has clearly revealed
them, and given us convincing evidence, and assurance of their reality. The
Heathens had only some glimmerings, and suspicions of a future state: They were
under doubts concerning the Nature of the Soul, whether mortal, or
incorruptible, wavering between the assent and denial; and inclining to this,
or that part, as Sense persuaded them to believe themselves only as Bruits, or
Reason to acknowledge themselves Men. Vid. Apolog. and Phaed. Platonis.
Socrates before his Judges speaks as one that desired Immortality; and in his
last Discourses to his Friends he endeavors to persuade them, but could not
conquer his own doubts, nor assure himself. All his discourses end in
Conjectures and uncertain guesses. Et contum and Stygio ranas in gurgite
nigras, Atque una transire vadum tot millia cymba, Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui
nondum ore lavantur.
Besides, the Hell which they fancyed, was made up of such ridiculous and
senseless terrors, that could only affect Children, who were not arrived to
the perfect use of Reason. And their apprehensions of Happiness in the next
Life, were so extravagant, that what the Philosopher said in general of Hope,
that it is the Dream of waking Men, is more justly applicable to the Hope of the
Heathens, in respect of the future reward. For as the illusions of a Dream have
many times a real Subject, but environed with so many fantastic Imaginations,
as spoils all the proportions of it; so their Opinion had a foundation in
Truth, but was mixed with many Errors inconsistent with perfect felicity. And
as the pleasure of a Dream is slight and vanishing, so the uncertain
expectation of felicity did but lightly touch their Spirits. Briefly, they had
no true Knowledge, nor firm Belief of Eternal Blessedness in the Vision of God,
nor of the endless Torments in Hell; and wanting those great Principles from
whence the Rules and Power to live in a holy manner are derived, they fell
short of that Purity which is a necessary qualification to prepare Men for
Heaven. They were in a confused labyrinth, without true Light, or Guide,
entangled with miserable Errors, and stumbled every step whilst they sought
after Happiness. But the Lord Christ has instructed the World concerning those
invisible future Recompenses. He has expressly threatened whatever is to be
feared by Man, as a rational or sensible Creature, the Worm that never dies,
and the Fire that shall never be quenched, in case of Disobedience; and he has
promised whatever is to be hoped for, in case of Obedience. The Wrath of God
is revealed from Heaven, Romans 1.18.
in the Gospel, against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men. And our
Savior has brought Light and Immortality to light. 2 Timothy 1.10.
He has declared the nature and quality of Eternal Life: that it consists in
the most perfect acts of our raised and most receptive Faculties, upon the most
excellent objects. That it contains perfect Holiness and pure Felicity, being
for ever distant from the infirmities and defilements of our mortal state. He
has revealed as the quality, so the extent of it, relating to the Body as well
as the Soul. Whereas the Philosophers of all sorts, the Academicks, Stoics,
Peripateticks, Epicureans, laboring with all the force of their understanding,
formed a Felicity according to their Fancies, which was either wholly Sensual,
or else but for half of man: For of the Resurrection, and consequently the
Immortality of the Body, not the least notice for many Ages ever arrived to
them; Our Savior who alone had the words of eternal life, has promised a
Happiness that respects entire man: The Soul and the Body which are his
essential parts shall be united and endued with all the glorious qualities
becoming the Sons of God. And of all this he has given to the world the
highest assurance: For he verified his Doctrine by his own Example; rising from
the Grave, and appearing to his Apostles crowned with Immortality, and visibly
ascending before them to Heaven. Since there is no greater Paradox to Reason
than the Resurrection, which seemed utterly incredible to men, and not to be
the object of a rational desire; God by raising him from the Grave, has given
the most convincing Argument that our Redeemer was sent from him, to acquaint
the World with the future state. Thus the Apostle speaks to the Athenians, The
times of ignorance God winked at, Act. 17.30.
but now commands all men eve ry where to repent; because he has appointed a
day, wherein he will judge the World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has
ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised
him from the dead. Jesus Christ who was attested from Heaven to be the Son of
God by that great and powerful Act, declared the Recompenses that shall attend
Men after Death; Therefore a full and perfect assent is due to his Testimony.
Hell with all its Dread and Terror is not a Picture drawn by fancy to affright
the World, but is revealed by him, whose Words shall remain when Heaven and
Earth shall pass away. The Heavenly Glories are not the Visions of a
contemplative person that have no existence, but are great Realities, promised
by him who as he died to purchase, so he rose to witness the Truth of them. And
to bring these Great Things, that are separate and distant from this present
state, nearer to us; He sometimes causes Hell to rise up from beneath and flash
in the face of secure sinners, that they may break off their Sins by
Repentance: and sometimes he opens Heaven from above, the Paradise of true
delights, and sends down of the precious fruits of the Sun, of the precious
things of the lasting Hills, that by the sight of their Beauty, and the taste
of their sweetness, we may for ever abhor the pleasures of Sin. By the frequent
and sensible experience of the truth of the Gospel in its Threatenings and
Promises, innumerable persons have been converted from Sin to Holiness, from
Earth to Heaven, from Vanity to Eternity.

3. Love is a prevalent affection, stronger than Death; and Kindness is the
greatest endearment of Love. Now the Lord Jesus expressed such admirable Love to
us, that being duly considered, it cannot but inspire us with Love to him
again, and with a grateful desire to please him in all things. He descended
from Heaven to Earth, and delivered himself to a shameful Death, that He might
redeem us from all Iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And what
Argument is more powerful to cause in us a serious hatred of Sin, than the
Consideration of what Christ has suffered to free us from the punishment and
power of it? If a Man for his Crimes were condemned to the Gallyes, and a
Friend of his who had been extremely injured by him, should ransom him by a
great sum; when the guilty person is restored to liberty, will he not blush for
shame at the memory of what he has done? But how much more if his Friend would
suffer for him the pains and infamy of his slavery, if any spark of Humanity
remain in him, can he ever delight himself in those Actions, which made such a
benefit necessary to him? And is it possible for a Christian to live in those
Sins for which Christ died? Will not Love cause an humble Fear, lest he should
frustrate the great Design, and make void the most blessed effect of his
terrible Sufferings? why did he Redeem us with so excellent a price, from our
cruel Bondage, Luke 1.74.
but to restore us to his free service? why did he vindicate us from the power
of the Usurper to whom we were captives, but to make us Subjects to our Natural
Prince? Why did he purify us with his most precious Blood from our deadly
Defilements, Ergo te dignum gere tali pretio, ne veniat Christus qui te
mundavit, qui te redemit, and si te in peccato invenerit, dicat tibi; quae
utilitas in sanguine meo? quid profeci tibi dum descendo in corruptionem? Amb.
de Virginit. p. 3.
but that we might be entirely consecrated to his Glory, and be fervent in good
works? What can work upon an ingenious Person more than sense of Kindness? What
can oblige more strongly to duty than Gratieude? What more powerful attractive
to Obedinnce than Love? This pure Love confirms the Glorified Saints for ever
in Holiness. For they are not Holy to obtain Heaven, because they are possessed
of it; nor to preserve their Blessedness, because, they are past all hazard of
losing it; but from the most lively and permanent sense of their Obligations:
because they have obtained that incomparable Felicity, by a Gift never to be
reverst, and by a Mercy transcendently great. And the same Love to God that is
in the Saints above in the highest degree of perfection, and makes them for
ever to Glorify him, will proportionably to our state in this life cause us to
observe his Commands with delight and constancy. A true Christian is moved by
Fear, more by Hope, most by Love.

CHAP. XIX
The Compleatness of our Recovery by Jesus Cist. He frees us from the Power as
well as Guilt of Sin. Sin is the Disease and Wound of the Soul: the mere Pardon
of it cannot make us happy. Sanctification equals if not excels Justification.
It qualifies us for the enjoyment of God. Saving Grace does not encourage the
Practice of sin. The Promise of Pardon and Heaven are conditional. To abuse the
Mercy of the Gospel, is dishonorable to God, and pernicious to Man. The
excellency of the Christian Religion discovered from its design and effect. The
design is to purge Men from Sin, and conform them to God's Holiness according
to their capacity. This gives it the most visible pre-eminence above other
Religions. The admirable effect of the Gospel in the primitive Christians. An
earnest Exhortation to live according to the purity of the Gospel, and the
great Obligations our Savior has laid on us.

1. FRom hence we may discover the Perfection and Compleatness of the
Redemption, that our Savior purchased for us. He fully repairs what was ruined
by the Fall. He was called Jesus, Mat. 1.21.
because He should save his People from their Sins. He reconciles them to God,
and redeems them from their vain conversation. He came by Water and Blood, to
signify the accomplishment of what was represented by the Ceremonial
Purification, and the Blood of the Sacrifices; Satisfaction and Sanctification
are found in Him. And this was not a needless Compassion, but absolutely
requisite ingorder to our Felicity. Man in his guilty, corrupt state may be
compared to a condemned Malefactor, infected with noisome and painful wounds and
diseases, and wants the Grace of the Prince to pardon him, and Sovereign
Remedies to heal him. Supposing the Sentence were reverst, yet he cannot enjoy
his Life, till he is restored to health. Thus the Sinner is under the
condemnation of the Law, and under many spiritual, powerful Distempers, that
make him truly miserable. His irregular Passions are so many sorts of Diseases,
not only contrary to Health but to one another, that continually torment him.
He feels all the effects of Sickness. He is inflamed by his Lusts, and made
restless, being without power to accomplish or to restrain them. All his
Faculties are disabled for the Spiritual Life, that is only worthy of his
Nature, and whose operations are mixed with sincere and lasting Pleasure. Sin as
it is the Disease, so it is the Wound of the Soul, and attended with all the
evils of those that are most terrible. The whole head is sick, the whole heart
is faint, from the sole of the foot, even to the head, Esaias. 1.
there is no soundess in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. Now
our Redeemer as he has obtained a full Remission of our Sins, so he restores
Holiness to us, the true health and vigor of the Soul. He has made a Plaster
of his living Flesh, mixed with his Tears and Blood, those divine and powerful
Ingredients to heal our Wounds. By the Holy Spirit it is applied to us, that we
may partake of its virtue and influence. His Grace that pardons us, does also
purify the Conscience from dead works, that we may serve the Living God.
Without this the bare exemption from Punishment, were not sufficient to make us
happy: For although the guilty Conscience were secure from Wrath to come, yet
those fierce unruly Passions, the generation of Vipers that lodge in the breast
of the Sinner, would cause a real Hell. Till these are mortified there can be
no ease nor rest. Besides, Sin is the true dishonor of Man's Nature, that
degrades him from his excellency, and changes him into a Beast or a Devil. So
that to have a license to wallow in the mire, to live in the practice of Sin,
that defiles and debases him, were a miserable Privilege. The Scripture
therefore represents the curing of our corrupt Inclinations, and the cleansing
of us from our Pollutions, to be the eminent effect and blessed work of Saving
Mercy. Accordingly St. Peter tells the Jews, that God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to bless you, Act. 3.26.
in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities: that is, Christ in his
glorified state gives the Spirit of Holiness to work a sincere thorough Change
in men, from all presumptuous reigning Sins to universal Holiness. An
unvaluable benefit, that equals if not excels our Justification. For as the
evil of Sin is in its own nature worse than the evil of Punishment, so the
freeing us from its dominion is a greater Blessing than mere impunity. The Son
of God for a time was made subject to our Miseries, not to our Sins. He
divested himself of his Glory, not of Holiness. And the Apostle in the ecstasy
of his affection desired to be made unhappy for the Salvation of the Jews, not
to be unholy. Besides, the end is more noble than the means: Now Jesus Christ
purchased our Pardon, that we might be restored to our forfeited Holiness. He
ransomed us by his Death, that he might bless us by his Resurrection. He gave
himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Sanctification is the last end of all
he did and suffered for us.

Holiness is the chiefest excellency of Man, his highest advantage above
inferior Beings. It Is the Supreme Beauty of the Soul, the resemblance of
Angels, the Image of God Himself. In this the perfection of the reasonable
Nature truly consists, and Glory naturally results from it. As a Diamond, when
its earthy and colorless parts are taken away, shines forth in its luster; so
when the Soul is freed from its Impurities, and all terrene Affections, it will
appear with a Divine Brightness. The Church shall then be glorious, when
cleansed from every spot, and made complete in Holiness. To this I will only
add, that without Holiness we cannot see God, that is, delightfully enjoy Him.
Suppose the Law were dispenst with, that forbids any unclean person to enter
into the Holy Jerusalem, the place cannot make him happy. For Happiness
consists in the Fruition of an object that is suitable and satisfying to our
desires. The Holy God cannot be our Felicity, without our partaking of his
Nature. Imputed Righteousness frees us from Hell, inherent makes us fit for
Heaven. The sum is, Jesus Christ that he might be a perfect Savior, sanctifies
all whom He justifies; for otherwise we could not be totally exempted from
suffering evil, nor capable of enjoying the supreme Good, we could not be happy
here nor hereafter.

2. From hence it appears, that Saving Grace gives no encouragement to the
practice of Sin. For the principal aim of our Redeemers Love in dying for us,
was to sanctify and cleanse us, by the washing of water and the Word. And
accordingly all the Promises of Pardon and Salvation are conditional. The holy
Mercy of the Gospel offers Forgiveness only to Penitent Believers, that return
from Sin to Obedience: We are commanded to repent and be converted, that our
sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19.
in the time of refreshment, from the presence of the Lord. And Heaven is the
reward of persevering Obedience: To them who by patient continuance in
well-doing, Romans 2.7.
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. There cannot be the
least ground of a rational just Hope in any person without Holiness. Whoever
has this hope in him, purifies himself even as he is pure. 1 John 3.3.
By which it appears, that the genuine and proper use we are to make of the
exceeding great, and precious Promises is, That by them we may be partakers of
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and escape the pollution that is in the world through lust. Yet the corrupt
hearts of men are so strongly inclined to their lusts, that they turn the Grace
of God into wantonness, and make an advantage of Mercy to assist their
Security; presuming to sin with less fear and more license, upon the account of
the glorious Revelation of it by our Redeemer. The most live as if they might
be saved without being Saints, and enjoy the Paradise of the Flesh here, and
not be excluded from that of the Spirit hereafter. But Grace does not in the
least degree authorize and favor their Lusts, nor relax the Sinews of
Obedience; it is perfectly innocent of their unnatural abuse of it. The Poison
is not in the Flower, but the Spider. Therefore the Apostle propounds it with
indignation, Shall we sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. Romans 6.1, 2.
He uses this form of Speech, to express an extreme abhorrency of a thing that
is either impious and dishonorable to God, or pernicious and destructive to
Men. As when he puts the question, Is God unjust who takes vengeance? God
forbid. And is there iniquity in God? Romans 3.5, 6.
God forbid. He rejects the mention of it with infinite aversation. Romans 9.14.
Indeed what greater disparagement can there be of the Divine Purity, than to
indulge our selves in Sin upon confidence of an easy Forgiveness? As if the
Son of God had been consecrated by such terrible Sufferings, to purchase and
prepare a Pardon for those who sin securely? What an unexpressible indignity is
it to make a monstrous alliance between Christ and Belial?

And this abuse of Grace is pernicious to men: if the Antidote be turned into
Poison, and the Remedy cherish the Disease, the cause is desperate. The Apostle
tells us, Those that do evil that good may come thereby, their damnation is
just. Suppose a presuming Sinner were assured, that after he had gratified his
carnal vile desires, he should repent and be pardoned, yet 'twere an
unreasonable defect of Self-love to do so: What Israelite was so foolhardy as
to provoke a fiery Serpent to bite him, though he knew he should be healed by
the brazen Serpent? But it is a degree beyond madness, for Men to live in a
course of Sin upon the hopes of Salvation, making the Mercy of God to be his
bondage, as if he could not be happy without them. An unrenewed Sinner may be
the object of Gods Compassion, but while he remains so, he is incapable of
Communion with him here, much less hereafter. Under the Law the Lepers were
excluded the Camp of Israel, where the presence of God was in a special manner;
much more shall those who are covered with moral Pollutions, be kept out from
the habitation of his Holiness. It Is a mortal Delusion for any to pretend that
electing Mercy will bring them to Glory, or that the all-sufficient Sacrifice
of Christ will atone God's displeasure toward them, although they indulge
themselves in a course of Sin. The Book of Life is secret, only the Lamb with
whose Blood the names of the Elect are written there, can open the seals of it.
But the Gospel that is a lower Book of Life, tells us the qualifications of
those who are vessels of Mercy, they are by Grace prepared for Glory, and that
there can be no benefit by the Death of Christ without conformity to his Life.
Those who abuse Mercy now, shall have Justice for ever.

3. From hence we may discover the peculiar excellency of the Christian
Religion, above all other Institutions; and that in respect of its Design and
effect. The whole Design of the Gospel is expressed in the words of Christ from
Heaven to Paul, when he sent him to the Gentiles, To open their eyes, and to
turn them from darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in Christ. One great
End of it is to take away all the filthiness and malignity wherewith Sin has
infected the world, and to cause in men a real conformity to Gods Holiness,
according to their capacity. As the Reward it promises is not an earthly
Happiness, such as we enjoy here, but Celestial; so the Holiness it requires,
is not an ordinary natural Perfection, which Men honor with the title of
Virtue, but an Angelical Divine quality that sanctifies us throughout in
Spirit, Soul and Body, that cleanses the Thoughts and Affections, and expresses
itself in a course of universal Obedience to Gods Will. Indeed there are other
things that commend the Gospel to any, that with judgment compares it with
other Religions. The height of its Mysteries which are so sacred and venerable,
that upon the discovery, Fit totum Fabula Coelum. Martial.
they affect with reverence and admiration. Whereas the Religion of the
Gentiles was built on Follies and Fables. Their most solemn Mysteries to which
they were admitted after so long a circuit of Ceremonies and great
preparations, contained nothing but a prodigious mixture of Vanity and Impiety,
worthy to be concealed in everlasting darkness. Besides, the confirmation of
the Gospel by Miracles does authorize it above all humane Institutions. And the
glorious eternal Reward of it infinitely exceeds whatever is propounded by
them. But that which gives it the most visible pre-eminence, 1 Timothy 6.3.
is, That it is a Doctrine according to godliness. The End is the character of
its nature. The whole contexture and harmony of its Doctrines, Precepts,
Promises, Threatenings is for the exaltation of Godliness. The objects of Faith
revealed are not merely speculative, to be conceived and believed only as true,
or to be gazed on in an Ecstasy of Wonder, but are Mysteries of Godliness, that
have a powerful influence upon practice. The Design of God in the publication
of them, is not only to enlighten the Mind, but to warm the Heart, and purify
the Affections. God discovers his Nature that we may imitate Him, and his Works
that we may glorify Him. All the Precepts of the Gospel are to embrace Christ
by a lively Faith, to seek for Righteousness and Holiness in Him; to live
Godly, Righteously, and Soberly in this present world. When our Savior was on
the Earth, the End of his Sermons, as appears in the Gospel, was to regulate
the lives of Men, to correct their vicious Passions rather than to explicate
the greatest Mysteries. Other Religions oblige their Disciples either to some
external actions, that have no moral worth in them, so that it is impossible for
any one that is guided by Reason to be taken with such vanities. Or they
require things incommodious and burdensome. The Priests of Baal cut
themselves. And among the Chinese, though in great reputation for wisdom,
their Penitents expose themselves half naked to the injuries of the sharpest
Weather, with a double cruelty and pleasure of the Devil, who makes them freez
here, and expects they should burn for ever. It Is not the most strict
observance of serious Trifles, nor submitting to rigorous Austerities that
ennobles the humane nature, and commends us to God. The most zealous performers
of things indifferent, and that chastise themselves with a bloody Discipline,
labor for nothing, and may pass to Hell through Purgatory. But the Religion of
Christ reforms the Understanding and Will, and all the actions depending on
them. It chases away Error, and Vice, and Hatred, and sheds abroad Light and
Love, Purity and Peace; and forms on Earth a lively representation of that pure
Society that is in Heaven. The End of it is to render men like the Angels in
Holiness, (...)^
that they may be so in Blessedness. This will render it amiable to all that
consider it without Passion. And it is worthy of observation, that although many
Heathens and Heretics have contradicted other parts of the Christian Religion;
yet none have dared openly to condemn the Moral part of it.

The Effect of the Gospel has been answerable to the Design. One main
difference between the old and new Law, is, that the old gave the knowledge of
Rules without power to observe them; the new that is attended with the Grace of
Christ enables us by a holy Love to perform that, which the other made men only
to understand. Of this we have the most sensible Evidence in the Primitive
Church, that was produced by the first beams of the Sun of Righteousness, and
had received the first fruits of the Spirit. What is more wonderful and worthy
of God, than that perfect Love, which made all the first Believers to have one
Heart and one Soul? What greater contempt of the World can be imagined, than
the voluntary parting with all their Goods in consecrating them to God for the
relief of the Poor? And the Churches of the Gentiles, while the Blood of Christ
was warm, and His Actions fresh in the memories of men, were exemplary in
Holiness. They were as Stars shining in a perverse generation. There was such a
brightness in their Conversations, that it pierced through the darkness of
Paganism, and made a visible difference between them and all others. Their
words and actions were so full of zeal for the Glory of God, of Chastity,
Temperance, Justice, Charity, that the Heathens from the Holiness of their
lives concluded the Holiness of their Law, and that the Doctrine that produced
such fruits could not be evil. The first light that discovered the Truth of the
Christian Faith to many, was from the Graces and Virtues that appeared in the
Faithful. The Purity of their Lives, their Courage in Death, were as powerful
to convert the World, as their Sermons, Vid. Chrysostom. in Homil. 6. in 1 Epist.
ad Corinth.
Disputations and Miracles. And those who were under such strong prejudices;
that they would not examine the Doctrine of the Gospel, yet they could not but
admire the Integrity and Innocence, that was visible in the conversation of
Christians. They esteem^d their persons from the good qualities that were
visible in them, when they hated the Christian name for the concealed evil they
unreasonably suspected to be under it. This Tertullian excellently represents
in his Apology. The most part are so prejudiced against the Name, and are
possessed with such a blind hatred to it, that they make it a matter of reproach
even to those whom they otherwise esteemed. Caius, Bonus Vir Caius Sejus, nisi
Christianus.
they say, is a good man, he has no fault, but that he is a Christian. Thus
the excellent Holiness of the Professors of the Gospel forced a veneration from
their Enemies.

But we are fallen from Heaven, and mixed with the dust. Our conversation has
nothing singular in Holiness to distinguish us from the World. The same corrupt
Passions reign in Professors of Christianity, as in those who are strangers
from the Sacred Covenant. If we compare our selves with the Primitive Church,
we must confess our unworthiness to be called their successors. Sixteen hundred
years are run out since the Son of God came down to sanctify and save the
World, which are so many degrees, whereby we are descended from the first
Perfection. We are more distant from them in Holiness than in Time. So
universal and great is the Corruption, that it is almost as difficult to revive
the dying Faith of Christians, and to reform their Lives according to the
purity of their Profession, as the Conversion of the World was from Heathenism
to Christianity.

It Is true, In every Age there are some Examples of the Virtue of the Gospel,
that reflect an honor upon it. And this last Age, which we may call the Winter
of the World, in which the Holy Spirit has foretold, That the love of many
shall grow cold, by a mavelous Antiperistasis has inflamed the hearts of
some excellent Saints toward God and Religion. But the great number of the
wicked, and the progress of Sin in their Lives, there is no measure of Tears
sufficient to lament.

Fourthly, I shall press Christians to walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
answerably to the Holiness and Purity of that Divine Institution, and to those
great and strict Obligations it lays upon us. The Gospel requires an entire
Holiness in all our Faculties, an equal respect to all our Duties: We are
commanded to cleanse our selves from all pollutions of flesh and spirit, to be
holy in all manner of conversation. We are enjoined, To be perfecting Holiness
in the fear of God. To be holy, as He that has called us is Holy. A certain
measure of Faith, and Love, and Obedience, a mediocrity in Virtue, we must not
content our selves with. It Is not a counsel of Perfection given only to some
Christians of a peculiar order and elevation; But the command of a Law that
without exception binds all, Be perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect. The
Gospel gives no Dispensation to any Person, nor in any Duty. The Doctrine that
asserts there are some excellent works to which the lower sort of Christians is
not obliged, is equally pernicious, both to those who do them by Presumption,
as if they were not due, and were therefore meritorious; and to those who
neglect them, by a blind Security, as if they might be saved, without striving
to reach the highest degrees of Obedience. It Is a weak pretense, that because
the consummate measure of Sanctification can only be attained in the next life,
therefore we should not endeavor after it here. For by sincere and constant
endeavors we make nearer approaches to it, and according to the degrees of our
progress, such are those of our joy. As Nature has prescribed to all heavy
Bodies their going to the Center, and although none comes to it, and many are
at a great distance from it, yet the ordination of Nature is not in vain:
Because by virtue of it, every heavy Body is always tending thither in motion
or inclination. So although we cannot reach to complete Holiness in this
imperfect state, yet it is not in vain that the Gospel prescribes it, and
infuses into Christians those dispositions whereby they are gradually carried
to the full accomplishment of it. Not to arrive to Perfection is the weakness
of the Flesh, not to aspire after it is the fault of the Spirit. To excite us,
it will be of moment to consider the great Obligations that the Gospel lays
upon Christians to be holy. By that Covenant the Holy God is pleased to take
them into the Relation of his Children; 1 John 3.1.
and as the nature of Sanctification, so the motives of it are contained in
that Title. For so near an Alliance obliges them to a faithful observation of
his Commands, and to imitate him with the greatest care, that the Vein of his
Spirit, and the Marks of his Blood may appear in all their actions. Whosoever
is born of God does not commit sin: 1 John 3.9.
The allowed practice of it is inconsistent with the quality of a Son of God,
it is contrary to the Grace of his Divine Birth. Nay, the omission of Good, as
well as the commission of Evil is inconsistent with that Relation. It Is for
this reason, that Holiness is so much the character of a true Christian, that
to be a Christian and a Saint are the same thing in the Writings of the
Apostles. That venerable Title obliges him to a higher practice of Virtue, than
ever the Pagans imagined. He is far behind them, if he do not surpass them, and
if he is surpassed by them, he will be clothed with shame. Besides, our
Redeemer who has a right to us by so many titles, by his Divine and Humane
Nature, by his Life and Death, by his Glory and Sufferings; as He strictly
commands us to be holy, so he has joined Example to his Authority, That we may
walk as he walked, and be as he was in the world. St. Paul makes use of this
consideration, to restrain the Disciples of Christ from all Sin, and to
persuade them to universal Holiness. After he had mentioned the disorders of
the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.20.
to deter the Ephesians from the like; he tells them, But ye have not so
learned Christ, that is, his rule and practice instructed them otherwise. And
when he commands the Romans, To walk honestly as in the day, Romans 13.13, 14.
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying; he opposes to all these vices, the pattern that Christ set
before us, But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. The expression intimates the
Duty, that as the Garment is commensurate to the Body, so we are to imitate all
the parts of his Holy Conversation.

It Is no wonder that the Heathens gratified the inclinations of Lust or Rage,
when their Gods were represented acting in such a manner, as to authorize their
Vices. Semina pene omnium scelerum, a Diis suis peccantium turba collegit, as
Julius Firmicius justly reproaches them. There was no Villainy, how notorious
soever, but had some Deity for its Protector. They found in Heaven a
Justification of all their crimes, and became vicious by imitation. Deorum
cultores boni esse non possint; ab ipsis enim diis erudiuntur ad injustitiam.
Lactan.
For it is very congruous for men to follow those whom they esteem to be
perfect, and to whom they think themselves accountable. If they attribute to
their Supreme God, the Judge of the World, Vices as Virtues, What Virtues will
there be to reward, or Vices to punish in Men? But for those that name the Name
of Christ to continue in iniquity, is the most unbecoming thing in the world.
For they live in the perfect contradiction of their Profession. An unholy
Christian is a real Apostate from Christ, that retracts by his wickedness the
Dedication that was made of him in his Baptism. Although he does not abjure our
Savior in words, he denies him in his works. A proud person renounces his
Humility, the revengful his Mercy, the lukewarm his Zeal, the unclean his
Purity, the covetous his Bounty and Compassion, the hypocrite his Sincerity.
And can there be any thing more indecent and absurd, than to pretend the
relation and respect of Disciples to such an holy Master, and yet by
Disobedience to deny him? When the bloody Spectacles of the Gladiators were
first brought to Athens, a Wise man cried out to the Masters of the Prizes,
That they should remove the Statue and Altar of Mercy out of the City, there
being such an incongruity between the Goddess they pretended to worship, and
that cruel Sacrifice of Men for the sport of the People. It were more suitable
for those who are not afraid to violate the most Holy Laws, and to contradict
the Pattern of Christ, to leave their Profession, and to take some other more
complying with their Lusts. It Is not the Title of a Christian that sanctifies
those who pollute and defame it. It Is not wearing the Livery of Christ that can
honor those who stain it by their filthiness; but it is an aggravation of their
guilt. It Is an unconceivable indignity to our Savior, and revives the old
calumnies of the Heathens, Celsus, Zosimus.
as if the Gospel were a Sanctuary for Criminals, when those that call him
Lord, do not what he commands them. I know, says Christ, the blasphemy of them
that say, they are Jews and are not, Rev. 2.9.
but are the Synagogue of Satan. Those that own the Profession of Christianity,
and live in unchristian Practices, are baptized Pagans, and in effect revile
our Blessed Redeemer, as if He had proclaimed a licentious impunity for
Sinners. Such Wretches may deceive themselves with a pretense they believe in
Christ, and that visibly they declare their dependence on him; but this
pretense will be as unprofitable as it is vain. It Is not the calling him Lord,
that will give them admission into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 7.21.
The naked name of a Christian cannot protect them from the wrath of God.
Tertullian smartly upbraids some in his time who were careless of the Dignity
and Purity of the Christian Profession in their Lives, Lib. de Poen.
imagining that they might reverence God in their hearts, without regarding him
in their actions: that they might Salvo metu and fide peccare, Sin without
losing their fear of God, and their Faith: To refute this gross contradiction,
he propounds it in a sensible example, Hoc est salva castitate matrimonium
violare, salva pietate parenti venenum temperare, Th^s is the same thing as to
violate the Fidelity of Marriage, without the wounding of Chastity, or to
poison a Parent without failing in the duty that is owing to them. And to
express his indignation, he tells them, Sic ergo and ipsi salva venia in
Gehennam detruduntur, dum salvo metu peccant. Let them expect that God will
cast them into Hell, without prejudice to their Pardon, as they pretend to Sin
without prejudice to the respect they bear him.

To sum up all; Jesus Christ as by his Doctrine and Life he clearly discovered
our Duty, so he offers to us the Aid of his Spirit for our assistance, by which
the Commands of the Gospel are not only possible but easy: And to enforce our
obligations he has threatened such Vengeance to the rebellious, and promised
such a Reward to those that obey the Gospel, that it is impossible we should
not be deeply affected with them, if we seriously believe them, and He has
given such evidence of their truth, that it is impossible we should not believe
them, unless the God of this world has blinded our minds. It Is matter
therefore of just astonishment, that Christians should not express the efficacy
of the Gospel in their actions. How can a reasonable Creature believe that
eternal Damnation shall be the Punishment of Sin, and yet live in the wilful
practice of it? The Historian speaking of Mushroms that sometimes proved deadly
to whole Families, asks with wonder, Familias nuper intterimere, and tota
Convivia, quae voluptas tanta tam ancipitis cibi?
What pleasure could allure them to eat such doubtful Meat? Yet they may be so
corrected as to become innocent. But when it is certain that the Pleasures of
Sin are mortal, Can any one be tempted by those attractives to venture on that,
which will undoubtedly bring Death to the Soul? Let Sense itself be Judge, and
make the comparison between whatsoever the present Life can afford for delight
in Sin, and what the future Death will bring to torment it: Let the Flesh see
into what torments all its delights shall be changed, and with what other fire
than of impure Lust it shall burn for ever.

Besides, We are encouraged to our Duty with the assurance of a Happiness so
excellent, that not only the enjoyment of it in the next World, but the just
expectation of it here makes us truly blessed. If the Reward were small, or the
Promise uncertain, there might be some pretense for our not performing the
Conditions to obtain it: but when the one is infinitely great, and the other as
true as the God of truth, what more powerful motive can be conceived to make us
holy. It Is the Apostles chosen Argument, that We should walk worthy of him who
has called us to his Kingdom and Glory. The Heathens were in a great measure
strangers to the Secrets of another World; they had but a shadow of
probability, we have the Light of Truth brought down from Heaven by the Son of
God, that reveals to us a Blessedness, that deserves our most ardent active
Affections. But if Men are not wrought on by natural Reason, nor divine Faith,
if neither the Terrors of the Lord, nor the blessed Hope can persuade them
from Sin to Holiness, their condition is irrecoverable. In this the Rules of
Natural and Spiritual Healing agree. Hippocrat. Sect. 7. Aphoris. ult.
Where neither Corrosives nor Lenitives are successful, we must use the Knife;
if cutting off be unprofitable, we must fear the part; if the Fire is
ineffectual, the Ulcer is incurable. If the threatening of Hellfire, through
Unbelief and Carelessness is not feared, and has no efficacy to correct and
change Sinners, what remains but to make a presage of eternal Death, that will
unavoidably and speedily seize on them? And if so clear a discovery of the
Heavenly Glory does not produce in men a living Faith that works by Love, and a
lively Hope that purifies the Heart and Conversation, what can be concluded,
but that they are wholly sensual and senseless, and shall be for ever deprived
of that Blessedness they now despise and neglect?

CHAP. XX.
The Divine Power is admirably glorified in the Creation of the World, in
respect of the greatness of the effect, and the manner of its production. It Is
as evident in our Redemption. The Principal Effects of it are considered. The
Incarnation of the Son of God is a work fully responsible to Omnipotence. Our
Redeemers Supernatural Conception by the Holy Ghost. The Divine Power was
eminently declared in the Miracles Jesus Christ wrought in the course of his
Ministry. His Miracles were the evidence of His Celestial Calling, they were
necessary for the conviction of the World: their Nature considered. The Divine
Power was Glorified in making the Death of Christ Victorious over all our
Spiritual Enemies. The Resurrection of Christ the effect of Glorious Power. The
Reasons of it from the quality of his Person, and the nature of his Office,
that he might dispense the Blessings he had purchased for Believers. His
Resurrection is the foundation of Faith. It has a threefold reference, to his
Person as the Son of God, to his Death as an Alsufficient Sacrifice, to his
Promise of raising Believers at the last day.

THE Divine Power is admirably glorified in the Creation of the World; not only
in regard of the greatness of the Effect, that comprehends the Heavens and
Earth, and all things in them: but in regard of the marvelous way of its
Production: for He made the great Universe, without the concurrence of any
material cause from nothing. For this reason the raising this glorious Fabric
is produc^d as the distinctive character of the Deity from the troop of false
gods. The Psalmist declares, The Lord is to be fear^d above all gods, Psalm.
96.4, 5.
for all the gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made the Heavens. And
as He began the Creation by proceeding from nothing to real existence, so in
forming the other parts, He drew them from infirm and indisposed matter, as
from a second nothing; that all his Creatures might bear the real testimonies
of Infinite Power. Thus He commanded Light to arise out of Darkness, and
sensible Creatures from an insensible Element. He created Man, the
accomplishment of all his Works, from the lowest and grossest Element the
Earth. Now although at the first view we might conceive that the visible World
is the greatest Miracle that ever God performed, yet upon serious reflection we
shall discover, that the works of Grace are as wonderful as the works of
Nature, and that the Power of God is as evidently expressed in our Redemption, as
in the Creation. For the fuller understanding of this, I will consider some of
the principal Effects of the Divine Power in order to our blessed Recovery.

1. The Incarnation of the Son of God, in accomplishing whereof such Power was
exercised, as no limited Understanding is able to comprehend. The Word was made
Flesh. Joh. 1.14.
This signifies the real Union between the Humane Nature and the Divine in our
Redeemer. Before his Incarnation he appeared in an humane form to the
Patriarchs, and in the flaming Bush to Moses, but it is never said with respect
to those Apparitions, that the Word was made Flame, or Man. But when He came
into the World to save us, He assumed the complete Nature of Man into an
Hypostatical Union with himself. That admirable Person possesses the Titles,
Qualities and Natures of God and Man. In that ineffable Union, each of the
Natures preserves its proper form, with all the necessary consequents
proceeding from it. The Humane Nature is joined to the Eternal Word, but not
changed into its Divinity; it is not infinite and impassible. The Deity is
united to Flesh, but not transformed into its Nature, it is not finite and
passible. But although there is a distinction, yet no separation: Although
there are two Natures, yet but one sole Jesus. In the same Subsistence the
Creator and the Creature are miraculously allied. Now this is a work fully
responsible to Omnipotence, and expresses whatever is signified by that Title.
The Apostle mentions it with an Attribute of excellency, Without controversy
great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. It Is as sublime,
1 Timothy 3.16.
as holy. In this the Divine Power appears in its Magnificence, and in some
respect more gloriously than in the Creation: For there is incomparably a
greater disparity between the Majesty, Greatness and Infiniteness of God, and
the Meanness of Man, than between the whole World and Nothing. The degrees of
disparity between the World and Nothing are not actually infinite, but between
the most excellent creature and the Glorious Creator they are absolutely
infinite. From hence it is, that that which in other things resolves our
doubts, here increases the wonder, and in appearance makes it more incredible.
Ye do err, says Christ to the Sadduces (who denied the Resurrection) not
knowing the Power of God. But the more raised thoughts we have of his immense
Power, the more unlikely his conjunction with a nature so far beneath him will
seem to be.

2. The Divine Power was magnified in our Redeemers Supernatural Conception.
'Twas requisite his Body should be miraculously formed of the substance of a
Woman, by the operation of the Holy Ghost, not only in respect of its singular
Dignity, and that he might be the pattern of our Regeneration, that is
performed by the Efficacy of the Spirit not of the Flesh, but in respect of his
Office: For he was the Heavenly Adam and therefore allied to us; and absolutely
pure from the stain of Sin. Heaven and Earth concurred to form that Divine Man
the King of both, the Earth furnishing matter, and Heaven the principle of his
conception. Accordingly the Angel told Mary, who questioned how she could be a
Mother, not having known a Man, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1.
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that Holy
thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. This was
foretold many Ages as an admirable Effect of God's Power. When Judah was
oppressed by two potent Kings, and despaired of an escape, to raise their
drooping Spirits, the Prophet tells them, the Lord himself would give them a
sign of their future Deliverance. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, Isa. 7.14.
and shall call his Name Immanuel. The Argument is from the greater to the
less: for it is apparently more difficult that a Virgin, without injury or
blemish to her purity and integrity, should conceive and bring forth Immanuel,
than the defeating humane forces how great soever. If God will accomplish that
Stupendous, unheard of wonder, much more would he rescue his People from the
fury of their adversaries.

3. The Divine Power was eminently declared in the Miracles our Savior wrought
during the time of his public Ministry, to verify his Divine Mission, that He
was the great Prophet sent from God to instruct Men in the way of Life. In
discoursing of this, I will briefly show, that Miracles were a convincing proof
of his Celestial Calling, and that the performance of them was necessary in
order to the conviction of the World, and consider particularly those He
wrought.

1. A Miracle is an extraordinary Operation of God in Nature, either in
stopping its course, or in producing some effects that are above its Laws and
Power: So that when He is pleased to work any, they are his Seal to authorize
the Person and Doctrine to which they are annexed. By them Faith is made
visible: The Unbeliever is convinced by his Senses, the only witnesses above
reproach in his account. From hence Nicodemus addresses himself to Christ,
Master, John 3.2.
we know that thou art a Teacher come from God; for no man can do those
Miracles that thou do, except God be with him: That is, No inferior Agent
can perform them, without the special assistance of the Divine Power. And it is
not to be supposed, that God will lend his Omnipotency to the Devil to work a
real Miracle, to confirm a falsity; and thereby, necessarily induce Men into
error in a matter of infinite moment: f^r such is the Doctrine of Salvation
that Christ Preached.

2. The working of Miracles was necessary to convince the World, that Jesus
Christ was sent from God, whether we consider the Jews or the Gentiles. To
convince the Jews, upon a double account.

1. Because the performance of them was one of the characters of the promised
Messiah. For this reason when two of John's Disciples came to inquire whether he
were the expected Prophet, he returns this answer to the question, Mat. 11.4, 5.
Go and show John those things which ye do hear and see, the Blind receive
their Sight, and the Lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the
Dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached to them. Thus he
described his Office, and verified the Commission he had from God, by
representing his Miracles in the Words of the Prophecy. Esa. 35.5, 6.


2. Our Savior came to alter the Religion of the Jews that had been confirmed
by many illustrious Miracles, therefore to assure them that he was Authorized
from Heaven, he wrought such and so many, that for their greatness, clearness
and number exceeded all that were done before his coming. Our Savior tells the
Jews, If I had not done among them the Works which none other man did, they had
not had sin: that is, in rejecting him. For if he had exercised only a Power
like unto that of Moses and the Prophets, in his Miraculous Actions, they had
been obliged to have honored him as one of their rank, but not to have
attributed an incomparable Dignity to him. But he did those which neither Moses
nor the Prophets had performed, and in those that had been done, Christ
excelled them in the manner of doing them. This the Jews could not contradict,
and from hence their infidelity was made culpable.

Secondly, Miracles were necessary to convince the Gentiles. 1. For the Gospel
forbids the various Religions among them, and commands all to worship God alone
in Jesus Christ, so that without a sensible demonstration, that that was the
way wherein He would be served, their prejudices had been invincible. 2. The
Gospel propounds Threatenings and Promises that regard a future state, where no
living Eye can see their effects, so that without an extraordinary
confirmation, it was not likely that men should yield a firm assent to them. If
it be said, Our Savior did his Miracles only in Judea, where very few of the
Gentiles saw his Person or Works. I answer, His Miracles were primarily
designed for the conviction of the Jews, and in a secondary intention to disarm
Infidelity among the Gentiles. Therefore the Testimony of them was conveyed by
those who were Eyewitnesses, and most worthy of credit, and who did many great
wonders in the Name of Christ, to verify the report of his famous Miracles,
and declare his Power and Divinity. Of this more afterward.

Now I will briefly consider the Miracles wrought by Christ, that were the
certain Signs of Gods favoring of him, and made his Commission authentic.
Before his coming the hand of the Synagogue was dried up, and impotent to
produce Miracles. The Holy Spirit was withdrawn, and for the space of four
hundred years, no Prophet nor Worker of Wonders appeared. John the Baptist,
though the Angel deputed to signify the coming of Christ, yet did no Miracles.
But our Savior was invested with Power from above, and performed many. Their
quality and number is considerable.

1. They were not mere. Signs, as the conversion of Moses Rod into a Serpent;
nor destructive and punishing, as the Wonders in Egypt; but advantageous and
beneficial to men, the equal demonstrations of his Mercy and Power. He cured
Diseases that were absolutely desperate, by the mere signification of his Will;
As the Son of the Nobleman who was sick at Capernaum, John 4.46.
when Himself was at Cana in Galilee: or by such visible means, that the
Spectators might be fully convinced, that it was not the external application,
but his sole Virtue and Divine Power that produced the effect; Thus by
anointing with Clay and Spittle the Eyes of him that was born blind, who never
had any natural possibility of seeing, he wrought an unparalleld Cure. It was
never yet heard, John 9.
that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind. Therefore he that was
healed, inferred from that, as a most pregnant proof, that our Savior was from
God. He raised the dead. This effect exceeds the power not only of Men, but of
the Angels. It Is true, That one Angel destroyed in a night an hundred fourscore
and five thousand of the Assyrian Army; but it is as true, that all the Angels
together cannot raise from the dead one Man. It Is wholly the work of the Lord
of Nature, who holds the Keys of Life and Death in his hands. It Is only his
Light can dispel the darkness, his Voice can break the silence of the Grave.
And it is observable, that our Savior who sometimes concealed his miraculous
works, and forbid the publishing of them, yet performed this kind before many
Witnesses, that they might publish and verify it, as being most conclusive of
his mission from God. Mar. 5.42.
He raised to life the Rulers Daughter, to the astonishment of all that were
present to attend her Funeral. The Widows Son of Naim was carried without the
Gates of the City to his Grave, Jesus stops the sad train, and restores life to
the young Man, and to his Mother something more dear than her life. And the
more signally to triumph over Death, Luke 7.15.
he pursued it to its fort, the obscurity of the Grave. Lazarus was buried four
days, his Carcass was corrupted, Jesus calls him from the bottom of his Tomb
with that powerful voice that created the World; The Dead answers and comes
forth to the amazement of all that saw the Glory of God so clearly manifested.
Joh. 11.44.
The Evangelist reports that the People afterward were as desirous to see
Lazarus as Jesus. Add to these his casting out of Devils. Before the Fall, the
unclean Spirit was incorporated with the Serpent, but now with Man himself. He
seizes on the External Organs and Internal Faculties, and rules him at his
pleasure. In the time of Christ great numbers were possessed: for the Devil
perceiving the ruin of his Kingdom approaching, he would extend the limits of
it here, and by the perfect possessing of sinners, begin their torment, which
is one act of his principality. The case of those persons was most
compassionable. For in that close fight the soul was disarmed of its defensive
weapons, being hindered in a great measure of the free use of its faculties.
Whereas in other Temptations he works by outward object at a distance, here he
makes a violent assault on both parts. It Is the true anticipation of Hell, for
the possessed person is not exempted from Suffering, the privilege of Death, nor
enjoys the free power of doing, the effect of Life. Now the ejecting of this
Enemy was above the force of any humane means; no material applications had
power over immaterial Spirits. But our Savior by a Word commanded them forth
of their Garrisons. And the Evangelists observe that the sight of it affected
the People in an extraordinary manner above what his other Miracles did. It Is
said, they were all amazed, Mat. 1.27.29, 33.
insomuch that they questioned among themselves saying, what thing is this,
what new Doctrine is this? For with Authority commands he even the unclean
Spirits, and they obey him. His Empire over evil Spirits was more admired than
over Diseases, or Death it self. Those who were insensible of his former
Miracles, received impression from this: Luke 9.43. Mat. 9.33.
They were astonished at the mighty Power of God, confessing that it was never
so seen in Israel. And another time they said, is not this the Son of David? i.
e. the Messiah. The Pharisees his obstinate enemies were more troubled about
this, than any other action; and to elude the present conviction that He came
from God, ascribed it to a secret compact with Beelzebub, as if there were a
collusion between the evil Spirits, a lesser Devil retired that the Prince
might reign. But so great was the Evidence of the Spirit of God in that act of
Jurisdiction over the Devils, that our Savior charges them with unpardonable
Guilt for their wilful denying it.

The number of his Miracles was so great, that St. John says, If all were
written, the world could not contain the Books. We may in part conjecture how
numerous they were, by taking notice how many he performed in one day. Mat.
9.10, 18, 20, 25, 29, 33.
He dined with Matthew at Capernaum; whiles He was there, Jairus entreats Him
to go to his Daughter newly dead; as He went the Woman with the bloody Issue
touched the hem of his garment and was healed; He raised the dead Maid; in his
returning He cured two blind men, and immediately after cast out the Devil from
one that was dumb. And in all these miraculous Operations the glory of Gods
Power was clearly manifested.

4. The Divine Power admirably appeared in making the Death of Christ
victorious over all our Spiritual Enemies. Now to show what an eminent degree
of Power was exercised in the effecting this, we must consider, that after
Satan was cast out of Heaven for his Rebellion, he set up a throne on the
Earth, and usurpt an absolute Empire over Mankind. His Power was great, and his
Malice was equal to his Power. The Apostle represents him with his black Army
under the titles of Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6.12.
the rulers of the darkness of this world, spiritual wickednesses in heavenly
places; as in respect of the Order among them, so in respect of their Dominion
they exercise in the World. His Principality has two parts; To tempt Men
powerfully to sin, and to execute the wrath of God upon them. He works
effectually in the Children of Disobedience. He fires their Lusts, and by the
thick ascending smoke darkens their Minds, and hurries them to do the vilest
Actions. And he has the power of death, to torment Sinners; God justly
permitting him to exercise his Cruelty upon those who comply with his
Temptations. Now in the time of Christ seeing, many ravished out of his hands,
and translated into the Kingdom of God, he grew jealous of his state, and by
his instruments brought Him to a cruel and shameful Death. He then in
appearance obtained a complete Conquest, but in truth was absolutely overcome.
And from hence the glorious Power of Christ is most clearly manifested. As he
that will take the height of a Mountain, must descend to the lowest part of the
Valley, where fixing his Instrument, he may discover the distance from the foot
to the top of it: So we must descend to the lowest degree of our Saviors
abasement, to understand the height of his exaltation. Heb. 2.14.
By Death he overcame him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil. For
his cruel Empire was founded in Man's Sin; his greatness was built on our Ruins.
All the penal Evils he brings on Mankind are upon the account of our
Disobedience, and his mighty power in Temptations, is from our inward
Corruption. Otherwise he might surround, but could not surprise us. Now the
Lord Christ by his Death has taken away the Guilt and Power of Sin: The Guilt
in enduring the Curse of the Law, and thereby satisfying Eternal Justice, which
all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth could not do: and the Power of it, Romans
6.6.
By crucifying our old man with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin. Gal. 6.
By the Cross of Christ the world is crucified to us, and we are crucified to
the world. By it we are vindicated from the power of Satan, into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God. For this reason our Savior, a little before his
Passion, said, Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. 2 Col. 15.
By the Cross he spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it, to their extreme confusion, in the view of
Heaven and Earth. Although the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ are the
proper acts of his Triumph, yet his Death is the sole cause and original of it.
The Nails and Spear that pierced his Body, were his omnipotent Arms, and the
Cross the instrument of his Sufferings, was the Trophee of his Victory. All our
triumphant Palms are gathered from that tree. It Is there our Savior bruised
the head of the old Serpent, and renewed his ancient Victory over him.

And from hence it was, that upon the first Preaching of Christ crucified,
Oracles were struck dumb, and put to eternal silence, invisible Powers were
forced to do him visible honor. (...). Theodor. de Cur. Graec. Affect. Lib. 12.
As the Rising Sun causes the Night-birds to retire, so his Name chased the
rout of false Deities into darkness. They continue to be our enemies, but not
our lords. Now where did the Divine Power ever appear more glorious than in our
crucified Savior? He has done greater things suffering as Man, than acting as
God. The Works of Creation and Providence are not equal to the effects of his
Death. In the Creation a corruptible World was produced from Nothing, which as
it had no disposition, so no contrariety to receive the form the Creator gave
it: But the new World of Grace that is immortal, was formed out of rebellious
matter. The most eminent work of Providence was the drowning the Egyptians in
the Red Sea: But the spiritual Pharaoh and all his Hosts were drowned in his
Blood. In short, the Cross has opened Heaven to us, and wrought a miraculous
change on the Earth. But this I shall more particularly consider under another
Head of Discourse.

Fifthly, The Divine Power was eminently magnified in Christ's Resurrection from
the Grave. This was foretold concerning the Messiah by the Prophet David
speaking in the type, My flesh shall rest in hope, Psalm. 16.10.
for thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy One
to see corruption. As it was ordained by Gods Counsel, so 'twas executed by his
Power. This is decisive, that He is the Messiah. His other Miracles were
performed by the Prophets, but this was singular and only done by the God of
the Prophets. The Reasons of it prove, that 'twas equally necessary for his
Glory and our Salvation.

1. The Quality of his Person required it. For He was a Heavenly Man without
Guilt, therefore immortal by the original Constitution of his Nature. Death
that is the wages of Sin had no power over him. He was subject to it not by the
Law of his Conception, but the Dispensation of his Love, not to satisfy
Nature, but purchase our Salvation. Therefore the Eternal Law that annexes
Immortality to Innocence, would not suffer that He should remain in the state
of Death.

2. The Nature of his Office made it necessary. As the Economy of our
Redemption required, that He should descend from Heaven the Seat of his Glory,
that by dying He might expiate our Sins, so after his lying in the Grave so
long as to attest the reality of his Death; 'twas necessary he should rise
again in order to his dispensing the glorious Benefits He had purchased. The
Apostle tells the Corinthians, If Christ be not risen, then our preaching is in
vain, 1 Cor. 15.14
and your faith is also in vain. For the Faith of Christians has a threefold
reference. 1. To the Person of Christ, that he is the Son of God. 2. To his
Death, that it is an all-sufficient Sacrifice for Sin. 3. To his Promise, that
He will raise Believers at the last Day. Now the Resurrection of Christ is the
Foundation of Faith in respect of all these.

1. He was declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4.
He was the Son of God from Eternity as the Word, and from the first moment of
his Incarnation as God-Man; But the honor of this relation was much eclipsed
in his poor Life, and ignominious Death. And although his darkest night was
enlightened with some discoveries of his Deity, yet they were transient and
soon vanished. But in his Resurrection God did publicly own him in the face of
the World, therefore he is represented, testifyi^g from Heaven, thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee, Act. 13.33.
According to the Phrase of Scripture; then things are said to be, when they
conspicuously appear. All the Miraculous proofs by which God acknowledged him
for his Son during his Life, had been ineffectual without this. If he had
remained in the Grave it had been reasonable to believe him an ordinary person,
and that his Death had been the punishment of his presumption; but his
Resurrection was the most illustrious and convincing evidence, that he was what
he declared himself to be. For it is not conceiveable that God should put forth
an Almighty power to raise him, and thereby au^horise his usurpation, if by
robbery he had assumed that Glorious Title. He is therefore said to be
justified by the Spirit, Tim. 3.16.
which raised him, from all the accusations of his Enemies, who charged him
with Blasphemy for making himself equal with God: Upon the evidence of it,
Thomas adored him as his Lord and God.

2. His Resurrection is the most pregnant proof of the All suffitiency of his
Satisfaction. This was special in the death of Christ, that the Curse of the
Law accompanied it, and seemed like an Infinite weight to lie on his Grave. But
in rising again, the Value and Virtue of His Sufferings was fully declared.
Therefore the Apostle tells us, that he was delivered for our Offenses, Romans
4.25.
and was raised again for our Justification. Although his Death was sufficient
to Merit our Pardon, yet since Believers alone actually partake of the benefit,
and none could believe, if he had not rose from the Grave; it is clear His Death
had been ineffectual without it.

3. Our Faith in His Promises to give Life and Glory to his Servants, is built
on his Resurrection: for how could we believe him to be the Author of Life,
who remained under the power of Death? How could he quicken and Glorify us,
who finally perished? If he had been confined to the Grave, all our hopes had
been buried with him. But his Resurrection is the Cause, Pattern and Argument of
ours: he did not only raise his Body from the Grave, but his Church with him.
Now the effecting this is attributed to the Divine Power with a note of
eminency: Romans 6.4.
Christ was raised by the Glory of his Father that is by his Power, which in
that Act was manifested in its full splendor; for what is stronger than death?
and more in exorable than the Grave? Omnipotency alone can break its Gates, and
loose its Bands.

CHAP. XXI.
The Divine Power was glorified in the Conversion of the World to Christianity.
Notwithstanding the imaginary Infirmity in Christ Crucified, yet to the Called
He was the Power of God. The numerous and great difficulties that obstructed
the receiving the Gospel. What the state of the World was at the first
Preaching it. Ignorance was universal. Idolatry and the depravation of Manners
were the consequents of it. Idolatry was fortified by Custom, Antiquity and
external Pomp. The depravation of Manners was extreme: The principal account of
it from their disbelieving a Future state, and their attributing to their gods
those Passions and Vices that were pleasing to the Flesh. The aversion of the
vulgar Heathens was strengthened by those in veneration among them. The
Philosophers Priests and Princes vehemently opposed the Gospel; An account of
their enmity against it. The consideration of the Means by which the Gospel was
conveyed, discovers that Omnipotency alone made it successful. The persons
employed were a few Fishermen without Authority and Power to force Men to
Obedience, and without Art or Eloquence to insinuate the belief of their
Doctrine. The great, sudden and lasting change in the World by the Preaching of
Gospel is a certain Argument of the Divine Power, that animated those weak
appearances. Idolatry was abolisht. A miraculous change followed in the Lives
of Men. Christians gave a divorce to all the sinful delights of Sense, and
embraced for the honor of Christ those things that Nature most abhors. A short
view of the Sufferings and Courage of the Martyrs. Their Patience was inspired
from Heaven. Christianity was victorious over all opposition. The Divine Power
will be gloriously manifested in the complete Salvavation of the Church at the
last Day. Our Savior shall then finish his Mediatory Office. Death the last
Enemy shall be destroyed. The Bodies of the Saints shall be raised and
conformed to the (...) Body of Christ.

6. THe Divine Power was glorified in the Conversion of the World to
Christianity. The Apostle tells us, That Christ crucified was to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness. 1 Cor. 1.23.
The Jews expected the Messiah to deliver them from temporal Servitude, and
establish an universal Empire either by the force of Arms, or by the terror of
Signs and Prodigies, as Moses did against the Egiptians. But when instead of
Power they saw nothing but Weakness, and instead of a glorious Triumph, a
disgraceful Punishment, they despised his Person, and rejected his Doctrine.
But notwithstanding this imaginary infirmity in Christ crucified, v. 24.
Yet to those that are called according to the Divine purpose, He was the most
excellent Power of God. It being more glorious to subdue the World to the Faith
and Obedience of a crucified Person, than if He had appeared with all the
Powers of Heaven, and Princes of the Earth as his Attendants. Romans 1.16.
For this reason the Apostle declares, He was not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, it being the Power of God to Salvation to all that believe, to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek. And he prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians. ^.18, 19,
20.
That the eyes of their understandings being enlightened, they might know what
is the exceeding greatness of his Power to us ward who believe, according to
the working of his mighty Power which He wrought in Christ, when He raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places. He
uses various and lofty expressions, as if one had been insufficient to signify
the extent and efficacy of that Power which produced the Faith of ^^rist in the
Heathens. And if we duly consider things, it will appear, that the terms of the
Apostle are not too strong and hyperbolical, but just and equal to the degree
of power requisite for the accomplishment of that great work. For the
understanding of this, I will consider three things. 1. The numerous and great
difficulties that obstructed the receiving of the Gospel. 2. The quality of the
means by which 'twas conveyed and became successful. 3. The eminent, sudden,
universal and lasting change made by it in the World.

1. The numerous and great difficulties that obstructed the receiving of the
Gospel: This will appear by representing the state and disposition of the World
at that time when it was first Preached.

First; Ignorance was Universal; a deep thick darkness covered the face of the
Earth. And the consequents of that gross palpable Ignorance, were execrable
Idolatry and the most notorious deprevation of manners.

1. Execrable Idolatry: for as in the night Specter walk, So in the times of
Ignorance, the Prince of darkness made his progress in the Earth. He reigned in
the hearts of Men, and in the places of their Devotion. The whole World was
filled with Idols of several Forms and Mysteries, some aimiable, others
terrible according to the humor of Superstition. For many Ages Satan had kept
peaceable possession of his Empire: For the Ignorant World did not understand
its Misery, but willingly paid that honor to the cruel Usurper, that was only
due to the Lawful Sovereign. They were confirmed in their Idolatry by several
things.

1. They were trained up in it from their Infant state. Now the first
persuasions of the mind though grossly false, and ill habits do strangly
captivate, and are with difficulty removed: because the concurrence of those
faculties is requisite; which are under the Power of Error and Vice. No Tyrant
is so exactly obeyed as custom, especially in things esteemed Sacred: for the
conceit that the service is pleasing to the Deity, renders men incapable to
believe any thing, that contradicts it. 'Twas as hard to make the Gentiles
forsake the Religion they received from their Birth, and to loose the
impressions made in their tender Age, as to make the Affricans change their
Skin, and become fair, and the Furop^ans to turn black: for the tincture which
the Religion practiced in each Country conveys to the Souls of Men, is as deep
and lasting, as that which the Sun impresses upon their bodies, according to
the diversity of its Aspects.

2. The Pagan Religion was derived through a long succession from their
Progenitors. Vid. Sym. in relat. ad Imperat. Majorum excipere displinam,
Religiones traditas colere, Coecil. Tantum Sanctit^^^s attribuere consuevit,
quantum astruxerit vetustatis. M. Foel. Hoc sanctum ab aevo est, Hoc ab Atavis
traditum. Prudent.
Antiquity brings I know not what respect to things, but it is specially
venerable in matters of Religion. Therefore the Heathens accused the Christian
Religion of Novelty, and urged nothing more plausibly than the Argument of
immemorial Prescription for their Superstition. They would not consider whether
it were just and reasonable, but with a blind deference yielded up themselves
to the Authority of the Ancients. They resolved not to condemn their Parents
and Friends, that had gone before them in the Road of Damnation, but chose to
dye in their Idolatry. So hard is it to resist the current of the World, and to
rescue our selves from the Bondage of popular Errors.

3. The Pomp of the Pagan Worship was very pleasing to the flesh. The
Magnificence of their Temples adorned with the Trophies of Superstition, their
Mysterious Ceremonies, their Music, their Processions, their Images and
Altars, their Sacrifices and purifications, and the rest of the Equipage of a
carnal Religion, drew their respects and strongly affected their Minds through
their Senses: Whereas the Religion of the Gospel is Spiritual and serious, holy
and pure, and has nothing to move the Carnal part. Now how difficult was it to
overcome Paganism when fortified by Custom, Antiquity, and so agreeable to
Sense.

2. The depravation of Manners was such in the Heathen World, that if the
unclean Spirits had been incarnate, and taken their residence among Men, they
could not have acted worse Villainies. The whole Earth was covered with
Abominations, as Egypt with the Frogs that poisoned the whole Climate. We may
see a picture of their conversation in the first to the Romans. And it could
not be otherwise; For as the Apostle says, Those who are drunk are drunk in
the night. So when the Mind is darkened with Ignorance and Error, the
Affections are corrupted, and Men give up themselves to the unfruitful works of
darkness. Unnatural Crimes were committed even among the Grecians and Romans
with that liberty, as if no spark of common Reason had remained in them. The
most filthy Lusts had lost the fear and shame that naturally attends them. They
esteemed those things to be the means to obtain Happiness, that were causes of
the contrary. They placed their Sovereign Good in extreme Evil, i. e. sinful
Pleasures. Apud eos tota impuritas vocatur urbanitas. M. Fael.
They were encouraged to work all uncleanness with gr^ediness, not only upon
the account of present Impunity, for their Laws left almost all Vices
indifferent but what disturbed the tranqu^llity of the State, and not only by
the multitude of Examples, so that Vices by their commonness had lost their
names, and were styled Virtues, nay 'twas a Crime to appear innocent among the
guilty, but principally because they thought themselves secure as to a future
state: For either they wholly disbelieved it, and it is congruous that those who
think to die like Beasts, should live like Beasts; Et cuncta licere credimus Et
sequimur magnorum exempla Deorum. Biblis tempting her brother to incest. Ovid.
Met. l. 9. Fab. 7.
or else by attributing to their Deities those Passions and Vices that so
powerfully reigned in themselves, they were strongly persuaded no Punishment
would be inflicted. For how could the gods made them Sacrifices to their
Justice, who were companions with them in their Crimes? Or revenge the
imitation of their own actions? This was to cast down the banks, and to let the
torrent of corrupt Nature break forth in all its fury. As St. Austin observes
of Homer, the father of Poetical ^^ctions, that representing the Murders,
Thefts and Adulteries of their gods, he made those Sins divine Properties, and
effectually commended them to the Heathens: Quisquis ^a feciss^t, Confess. Atque
Deum? qui templa coeli summa Sonitu concucit, Ego homuncio hoc non facerem? Ego
illud vero ita feci ac lubens. Teren. Eun.
non homines perditos sed coelestes Deos videbatur imitatus. And he gives an
instance of this from a Comedy of Terence, Where a vicious young Man is
introduced, reporting how he animated himself to satisfy his brutish lust, as
having no less a Deity than Jupiter for his Master and Model. In short, the
Theology of the Pagans inflamed them to the bold commission of every pleasant
Sin. The History of their gods was so intersperst with the most infamous
Impurities, that at the first reading, Verterunt pupillas Virgins in
Meretrices, They lost the Virginity of their Eyes, then of their Souls, and
then of their Bodies. Now the Gospel is a holy Discipline that forbids all
excesses, that enjoins universal Purity and Chastity; So that when it was first
preached to the Heathens, they thought it impossible to be obeyed, unless Men
were Angels without Bodies, or Statues without Souls.

I shall add further, That the aversion of the Heathens from Christianity was
much strengthened by those who were in Veneration among them, and vehemently
opposed it. And they were the Philosophers greatly esteemed for Wisdom, their
Priests that had dominion over their Consciences, and their Princes that had
power over their states and lives.

1. Philosophers vehemently opposed the receiving of the Gospel. At the first
view it may be just matter of wonder that they should be enemies to it, whether
we consider the objects of Faith, or the rules of Life laid down in it. The
objects of Faith were new and noble, of infinite beauty and profit, and most
worthy of a rational Contemplation to be exercised upon: Now that the
Philosophers who were so diligent to improve their minds who received with
complacency truths of a lower descent, and of infinitely less importance,
should reject Evangelical Truths, sublime in their Nature, saving in their
Efficacy, and revealed from Heaven, what account can be given of it? Tertullian
reproaches them with reason, That the Christian Faith was the only thing, which
Curiosity did not tempt them to search into. Hic solum curiositas humana
torpescit. Apol. c. 1.
Besides, whereas the Gospel is a plain and perfect Institution for the
government of Life, wholly conversant about the Souls of men, and assures a
Blessedness infinitely more excellent than was ever thought of by them, it
might have been expected that those who in regard of Morality seemed most to
approach to it, and whose professed design was to search after Happiness, should
have readily entertained, and used their best endeavors to have drawn others
to embrace it. But if we consider things aright, our wonder will vanish: for
their Knowledge and Morality which in themselves were Preparatives, yet
accidentally hindered their submission to the Gospel, and caused the most
potent prejudices against it, and that upon a double account. Mundi Philosophus
est gloriae animal, and popularis aurae atque nummorum venale mancipium, Hier.


First, Of Pride. Secondly, Of Satisfaction in their own way.

1. Pride was their Universal Disease, they had a liberal esteem of themselves,
as raised above the common rank of Men. And because Philosophy had instructed
them in some truths, they believed the false as well as the true, and concluded
all things impossible that did not concur with their old tenets: they admitted
no higher Principle than natural Reason, and utterly rejected Divine
Revelation: which was as unreasonable as if one that never saw but the light of
a Candle, should contend there was no other light in the World. Now a Person
that does not believe Divine Revelation, is wholly unqualified to judge of
supernatural Mysteries. For till the Authority of the Revealer is submitted to,
he cannot truly consider their Cause and their End. Besides, they looked on it
as a reproach that any secret should be revealed to others and not to them. It
seemed to darken their Glory that any School should be more knowing than
theirs. Therefore they chose to be instructors of Error, rather than Disciples
to the Truth. Add further, they thought their honor concerned to defend the
Principles they had once espoused. From hence a rose the great contestations
between themselves, accompanied with Invectives and Satyrs, being very jealous
for their Opinions, and passionate for the interest of their Sects. Now the
Gospel was in some things contrary to all of them, so that being touched in
their tenderest part, no wonder they were so violent against it. Our Savior
asks the Jews, how can ye believe, which receive honor one from another, and
seek not the Honor which comes from God only? He propounds it as an impossible
thing. The Gospel would strip them of all their pretended excellencies; and
commanded as its first Article, they should humbly resign their understandings
to Divine Revelation; this they looked on as a submission unworthy their refined
strong Spirits.

2. They had satisfaction in their own imperfect Virtues. Because they did some
things to recover the Humane Nature from its degenerate state, they were more
confirmed in their Infidelity, than the grossest Idolaters and the most vicious
Persons. For the more probable Arguments they had to obtain happiness in their
own way, the more obstinately they refused any other. They thought there was no
need of a Savior to intercede for them, or of the Spirit of Grace to assist
them, but they had self-Sufficiency for the acquiring of Felicity. Like foolish
Chemists that have melted away a great part of their Estates in vain, yet in
expectation of the great Elixir, create in their fancies treasures of Gold, and
enrich themselves. So the Philosophers who wasted their time and Spirits in
searching after Happiness to little purpose, although the best of their
Principles and the height of their Virtue were insufficient to support them
under any pressing Affliction, yet they had vain hopes of obtaining perfect
Tranquillity and Content by them. Now the Gospel commanding an entire
renounceing of our selves, to embrace the sole Goodness and Will of God, it was
hard for those who were so full of pride and vanity, to relish a Doctrine so
contrary to them. In truth, whatever the Philosophers pretended concerning the
incredibility that the Son of God should suffer death, yet it was not so much
the Cross to which Christ was nailed by his Enemies, that made them reject the
Gospel, Quid in his deprehendas praeter fictam frontem and perpetuum etiam, and
quandam ex arogantia autoritatem. Q^int.
as the other Cross to which Jesus would fasten them; i. e. the strict and holy
Discipline to which he commands them to submit. A Discipline that condemns the
vanity and glory of their Wisdom and Virtue, that mortifies sensual pleasures,
which many of the Philosophers indulged themselves in, notwithstanding all
their discourses of the purgative and illuminative life. And that this was the
real cause of their rejecting Christ crucified, Philosophorum supercilia
contemnimus, vitia faecundissime accusantes, intercutibus ipsi vitiis madentes.
M. Fael.
is evident; for they knew, it was not unusual, for Persons of extraordinary
Wisdom and Virtue, to suffer in the World. Their presents and example upbraids
the Vicious, and Wounds their Spirits: as a great light sore and distempered
eyes. And some of them acknowledged the Wisdom of Providence; in permitting
this for an excellent end, that Virtue, tried by the fire, might be the more
resplendent. Socrates himself so admired by them, was so disguised by the
malice of his enemies, that he was condemned to die by Poison: Yet this was so
far from obscuring his Reputation, that his suffering Death was esteemed the
most noble effect of his courage, and the most excellent Proof of his Virtue.
Why then should they make a contrary judgment of our Redeemers Sufferings;
whose Innocenee was perfect, and whose Patience was so Holy and Divine; that in
the midst of His torments he Prayed for his Murderers? No reason can be justly
alleged; but some darling lust spiritual or fleshly which they were resolved
to cherish. The light that comes from above illuminates the humble, and dazles
the proud. The presumption of their own knowledge, was the cause of their
Prodigious stupidity. Simple ignorance is not so dangerous as error, which
has a false light that deceives and leads to precipies. We find therefore that
none were fiercer enemies to the Gospel then the Philosophers.

The sacred story tells us, that when the Apostle Preached at Athens, that was
as much the seat of Superstition as of Sciences, the Epcureans and Stoics
though most opposite in their Principles, yet conspired to encounter him; they
entertained him with scorn, what will this Babbler say? and his success was but
small there. He that fisht with a net in other places, and brought great
numbers to Baptism, there did only with an angle, and caught but one or two
Souls. And in the progress of the Gospel they persisted in their opposition.
The most grave and virtuous among them censured the Martyrs as foolhardy in
their generous Sufferings for the Name of Jesus Christ. Antoninus accused the
Christians of obstinacy in their readiness to endure Torments. (...)^ Lib. 2.
(...)^ l. 4. c. 7.
Arrianus represents their Courage as proceeding from a customary contempt of
Death, which he opposes to Judgment and Reason. Crescens the Stoic was the
Persecutor of Justin Martyr. In all Ages the Gospel felt the sharp points of
their malicious Wits. They despised it as an ill-contrived Fable, as the
entertainment of small Understandings, And Faith, Nemo accedat eruditus, nemo
sapiens, nemo prudens, arcemus enim tales: Quod si quis est indoctus,
insipiens, infans fidenter veniat. H^c pacto satis apparet, quod solos fat^o^,
ignaros, stolidos, mancipia, muli^^culas, pueros captent, and p^llici^^^ Maxim.
Madaurensis in Epist. ad St. August.
as the presidium of the weak and illiterate, who were incapable of
consideration. Now when those who were in highest reputation for their Morality
and Learning, discountenanced Christianity, it was a strong Argument to move
the vulgar Heathens to judge of it as a mere delusion. In our Saviors time
'twas urged as a sufficient reason against the receiving of Him as sent from
God, Because none of the Pharisees, Joh. 7.4^*
the most learned, and most likely to understand the Prophecies concerning the
Messiah, believed on him.

2. The Heathen Priests vehemently obstructed the reception of the Gospel; for
their Interest was specially concerned upon the account of their reputation and
gain. With great Art they had kept the People in Ignorance for a long time:
They persuaded them that their Idolatrous Ceremonies made the gods favorable,
and were the supreme Causes of their Prosperity. From this Fountain all
Superstition was derived. Now if the Doctrine of Christ (that strictly forbids
the Worship of Idols) were received, who would attend to their old Lies? Who
would purchase their deceitful Promises? Who would maintain them with prodigal
Donatives? Who would esteem them divine Men? They must lose their honor and
support, and for their Fables be the scorn of the Multitude. It Is no wonder
then that their Passions should be edged, and their Endeavors furious in
opposing the Truth. And since the People had a reverend regard for their
Office, they readily joined with them in their opposition.

3. Princes who were adored by the People, thought themselves obliged to
prevent the introduction of a new Religion, Vulgaria legum capita separatim
Deos non habendos, nec novos.
lest their Empire should be in hazard, or the Majesty and Greatness of it
lessened. For Religion being the true Foundation of public Peace, every change
in it is suspected as dangerous, and likely to bring some eminent alteration in
the State. Act. 16.21.
St. Paul was accused for teaching Customs, which were not lawful for them to
observe being Romans. And in aftertimes Christians were condemned as seditious
and mutinous, and their Assembly as riotous and unlawful. And it is observable
that there never was a less favorable constitution of time, than when the
Gospel was first preached. For Tiberius was extremely cruel, and extremely
jealous of all novelty that might disturb his repose. Orientem fidem Romae
primus Nero cruentavit, Tert. Scorp.
And Nero the bloodiest Tyrant that ever sat on the Roman Throne, endeavored
to strangle Christianity in the Cradle.

Besides, the Doctrine of Christ, was not only new and strange, but severe; for
it gives no dispensation for Persons of the highest rank from universal duty.
It Is the Law of God, to whom all are equally subject, and must be equally
obedient. It gives rules without exception, to the Court, as well as the
Cottage; to those clothed in Purple and those in Sackcloth: it condemns the
greatest for Delinquents, and guilty of Eternal Death, if they do not abandon
those pleasures to which corrupt Nature and many strong Temptations violently
incline them. Now the Heathen Princes who were prosperous and vicious, could
not relish a Doctrine that retrencht their exorbitant desires, and strictly
forbade their unconfined enjoyment of sensual delights, which they esteemed the
Prerogative annexed to their supreme dignity. From what has been discoursed* we
may judge how great resistance the Gospel met with in its first publication.
For all things that can make an enterpr^se impossible, were united together
against it. Wisdom and Power, the pleasures of Sin and zeal for Religion, the
understandings and wills of Men, the Learned and Ignorant, Magistrates and
People, Men and Devils, joined to suppress it. Hell was in a Commotion, and the
Prince of Darkness in Arms, not to suffer the Crowns of so many Kingdoms to
fall from his Head, which for so many ages he had kept: He was enraged to lose
the Homage and service, especially of the more knowing Nations, as the
Graecians and Romans; who, by how much the more capable of truth, with so much
the more art to the dishonor of God, for a long time had been kept under his
Deceit.

2. If we consider the means by which the Gospel was conveyed, it will be more
evident that Omnipotence alone made it succesful. When Christ came from Heaven
to convert the World, it had been according to the Law of reason more suitable
to his purpose, to have been born at Rome the seat of the Empire, wherein the
confluence of all Nations met, than in an obscure corner. So when the Apostles
were first sent forth to propagate the Gospel, humane prudence would judge,
that they should have been assisted either with Authority and Power, or with
Learning and eloquence, to compel, or persuade to a submission to it. But if
there had been any proportion between the quality of the instruments, and the
effects produced, the Gospel had been esteemed a Doctrine purely Humane. The
immediate Agents had been entitled to all the honor by the suffrage of the
senses; and their proper sufficiency would have obscured the Virtue of Christ
that wrought in them. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
Therefore God chose the weak things of the World, to confound the mighty; and
base things of the World, and things which are despised has God chosen: Yea
and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, that his Glorious
Power may be fully manifested.

The persons employed were a few fishermen, with a Publican and a Tent-maker,
without Authority and Power to force Men to obedience, and without the charms
of Eloquence to insinuate the belief of the Doctrines they delivered.

1. They were without Authority and Power. Other Religions were established in
several Nations, by persons of the greatest Eminency and credit among them.
That of the Persians by Zoroastres, that of the Egyptians by Hermes, that of
the Grecians by Orpheus, that of the Romans by Numa, all Kings or of great
Reputation for their Wisdom and Virtue; and they were received without
contradiction. For being correspondent to the corrupt inclinations of Men, it
was not strange that the Princes had either capacity to invent them, or power
to plant them. And in later times Mahomet opened a way for his Religion by his
sword, and advanced it by his Conquest. Now it is no wonder that a Religion so
pleasing to the lower appetites that gives license to all corrupt affections in
the present Life, and promises a sensual Paradise suitable to beasts in the
future, should be embraced by those who were subject to his arms. But the
Apostles were meanly born and educated, without credit and reputation,
destitute of all humane strength, and had only a Crucified Person for their
leader. Christianity was exposed naked in the day of its birth, without any
shelter from secular Powers.

2. They had not the advantage of Art and Eloquence to commend their Religion.
There is a kind of charm in Rhetoric that makes things appear otherwise than
they are: the best cause it ruins, the worst it confirms. Truth, though in its
self invincible, yet by it seems to be overcome; and Error obtains a false
triumph. We have a visible proof of this in the Writings of Celsus, Symmachus,
Caecilius and others for Paganism against Christianity. What a vast difference
is there between the lies and filthiness of the one, and the Truth and Sanctity
of the other? Yet with what admirable address did they manage that Infamous
Subject? Although it seemed incapable of any defense, yet they gave such
colors to it, by the beauty of their expressions, and their apparent reasons,
that it seemed plausible; and Christianity notwithstanding its brightness and
purity was made odious to the people. But the Apostles were most of them wholly
unlearned. St. Paul himself acknowledges that he was weak in presence, and his
Speech was not with the enticing words of Man's Wisdom. 2 Cor. 2.4.
A crucified Christ was all their Rhetoric. Now these impotent despicable
Persons, were employed to subdue the World to the Cross of Christ; and in that
season, when the Roman Empire was at its height, when the most rigorous
Severities were used against all Innovations, when Philosophy and Eloquence
were in their flower and Vigor, so that Truth unless adorned with the dress
and artifice of falsehood was despised, and a Message from God himself, unless
eloquently conveyed, had no force to persuade. Therefore the Apostles debased
themselves in the sense of their own weakness, We have this treasure in earthen
vessels, 2. Cor. 4.7.
That the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. 'Twas from
distrust of themselves, their true confidence in God proceeded. They were only
so far powerful as he enabled them: like in^^ruments in which there is not
Virtue sufficient for the carving of a Statute, if they do not receive it
impressed from the Artificer that uses them. Briefly, as God the Author of
Wonders uses that which is weak in Nature, to conquer the most rebellious parts
of it: He makes the weak sand a more powerful bridle to the impetuous Element
of Waters, than the strongest banks raised by the industry of Men, and composed
of the most solid materials: so he was pleased by a few artless impotent
persons to confound the wisdom and overcome the power of the World.

3. The great sudden and lasting Change that was made in the World by the
Preaching of the Gospel, is a certain Argument of the Divine Power that
animated those mean appearances, and that no instrument is weak in Gods hands.

1. The greatness of the Change is such, that it was only possible to Divine
Power. It Is a great Miracle to render sight to the Blind, but it is more
miraculous to inlighten the Dark mind, to see the truth and beauty of
Supernatural Mysteries, when they are disguised under reproach and sad
representations, and effectually to believe them; especially when the inferior
appetite is so contrary to Faith, It Is a prodigy to raise the Dead, but it is
more admirable to sanctify an habituated sinner. For in comparing the quality
of those Miracles, that is the greatest in the performing whereof God is
discovered to be the absolute Lord of the greater Nature: Now the intellectual
Nature is superior to the corporeal. Besides, there is no contradiction from a
Dead body against the Divine Power in raising it; on the contrary, if any sense
were remaining, it would ardently desire to be restored to the full enjoyment
of Life: but corrupt Nature is most opposite to renewing Grace. Now these
marvelous effects were produced by the Revelation of Jesus Christ to the
Heathens. The glorious light of Truth scattered the thick and terrible darkness
of Ignorance and error that was so universal. The Gospel in its power and the
quality of its effects, was like those words, Let there be Light, which the
Eternal Word pronounced upon the confused Chaos, and infused a Soul and Life
into the World. The clear knowledge of God in his Nature, and Glorious Works of
Creation and Redemption, of the duty of Man, of the future state, was
communicated to the meanest understandings. And in proportion to the Light of
Faith, such was the measure of Piety, and Holiness. Idolatry that had Number,
Antiquity, Authority of its side, was entirely abolisht. The false Deities were
cast out of the Temple: and the Cross of Christ was planted in the Hearts of
Men. Accordingly the Apostle tells the Thessalonians; For they themselves show
of us, 1 These. 1, 9.
what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from
Idols, to serve the Living and true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven,
whom he raised from the Dead, even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to
come. Innumerable from secret Atheism and public Gentilism were converted to
acknowledge and accept of the Redeemer for their Lord. What could produce such a
marvelous change in the World but an Almighty power? How seemingly impossible
was it to bring so many, who were proud in their natures, perverse in their
customs, and indubitably assenting to their false Religions, from such a
distance as the Worship of innumerable Deities, to adore a Crucified God? 'Twas
admirable that Alexander broke the Persian Empire with an Army of Thirty
Thousand: but what is there comparable in that Conquest, to the Acts of the
Apostles? How much less difficult is it for some Nations to change their Kings,
than for all to change their Gods? How far more easy is it to overcome the
bodies of Men, than subdue their Souls? Upon the most exact inquiry, there will
never be found in humane nature any cause capable to produce such an effect,
nor in the Records of all Ages any example like it.

Add to this the excellent Reformation in the hearts and lives of Men. As their
understandings, so their wills and affections the sources of action were
miraculously altered. What the Sages of the World could not effect in a few
select Persons, The Gospel has done in great numbers, nay raised them above
all their feigned Ideas, above the higest pitch of their Proud Philosophy.
Those strong and furious passions which Natural Reason was as unable to
restrain, as a thread of silk is to govern a fierce beast, the Gospel has
tamed and brought into order: It has executed what Philosophy durst never
enterprise, despairing of Success. The Gospel has made the Wise Men of the
World resign their Reason to Faith; it has persuaded Carnal Men to mortify the
Flesh, the Ambitious to despise secular Honors, the Voluptuous to renounce
their Pleasures, the Covetous to distribute their Goods to the Poor, the
Injured and Incensed to forgive their Enemies, and all this for Love to God, an
affection unknown to all other Laws and Institutions. Wherever it came, it
miraculously transformed Pagans into Christians, which was as truly Wonderful,
as for the Basilisk to part with its Poison, for a Wolf to be chang^d into a
Lamb, nay, for Dogs, (such were the Gentiles in our Saviors Language) to be
changed into Angels of light and purity. An eminent instance we have of its
efficacy in the Corinthians, who in their Heathen-state were guilty of the
vilest enormities: But after their receiving the Gospel, the Apostle testifys,
they were washed, sanctified, and Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, 2
Cor. 6.10, 11.
and by the Spirit of our God. Justine Martyr tells Triphon, that those who had
been stained with all filthiness, and enslaved by charming imperious lusts, yet
becoming Christians, they were purified and freed, (...)^ In Apol. Post.
and delighted in those Virtues that were most contrary to their former Vices.
This Alteration was so visible, that the lives of the first Christians were an
Apology for their Faith. And it is strongly urged by Origin, Tertullian,
Lactantius and others, as a convinceing proof of the Divinity of the Christian
Doctrine, that it made the Professors of it Divine in their conversations. The
Creation of Grace was like the Creation of Nature, when trees sprang up in an
instant laden with fruits; so in the converted, all the blessed fruits of the
Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance abounded. This testimony even a Pagan Persecutor gives the
common sort of Christians, Plin. Lib. 10 Epist. 7.
that they assembled to sing Hymns to Christ, that they obliged themselves
solemnly to injure no Person, to deceive none, to preserve faithfully what was
committed to them, to be always true. And as in obedience to the Gospel, they
gave a divorce to all the sinful delights of sense; so, which was incomparably
more difficult, they embraced those things which Nature does most abhor: no
Religion in the World ever exposed its followers to such Sufferings, nor
inspired them with such resolution to sustain them. All other Religions were
productions of the flesh, and being allied together, if any time jealousy
caused a discord between them, yet an open Persecution was unusual. But when
Christianity first appeared, they all turned their Hatred and Violence against
it, as a foreigner of a different extraction. How many living Martyrs were
Exiles for the Faith, and deprived of all humane consolation? yet they esteemed
themselves more blessed in their Miseries than others in their Pleasures. How
many thousands were put to Death for the honor of our Redeemer? yet the least
thing is the number, in comparison of the manner of their Sufferings. If they
had suffered a mild Martyrdom, an easy and sudden Death, wherein the Combat
and Victory had been finished at a Blow, their Love and courage had not been so
admirable: Ulpian wrote seven books, to describe the Variety of Torments the
Christians suffered. Timebit forsitan caro gladium gravem, and crucem excelsam,
and rabiem Bestiarum, and summam ignium poenam, and omne Carnificis ingenium in
Tormentis. Tert. ad Martyr.
but they endured torments so various and terrible, that had they not been
practiced upon them by their enemies, it were incredible that ever Malice
should be so ingenious to invent, or cruelty so hardened to inflict them. If
all the Fury of Hell had come forth to suggest new Tortures, they could not
have devised worse. Neither was their mere suffering such Torments so
astonishing, as their readiness to encounter them, and their behavior under
them. They maintained their Faith in the presence of the most formidable
Princes. Ignatius said to the Romans dissuading him from suffering, Ignoscite
mihi filioli, quid mihi prosit ego scio. Hieron. De Script. Ecclesiast.
Some who might by favor, were afraid to escape the common Persecution,
esteeming no Death precious but Martyrdom. They contended earnestly to suffer,
and envied others the honorable Ignominy and happy Torments that were endured
for their beloved Redeemer. We have an instance of their Courage in Tiburtius,
who thus spoke to his Judges: Bind me to Racks and Wheels, condemn me, banish
me, load me with Chains, burn me, tear me, omit no kind of Torment. If you
banish me, the smallest corner of the Earth shall be to me as the whole World,
because I shall find my God there: If you kill me, by the same act you will
give me the happy Liberty I sigh after, and deliver me from a Prison on Earth
to reign in Heaven: If you condemn me to the fire, I have quenched other flames
in resisting Concupiscence: Ordain what Torment you please, it shall not
trouble me, since my Heart is filled with Love to suffer and desire it. They
were thankful to those who condemned them, and regarded their Executioners with
the same eye, Inde est quod ibidem sententiis vestris gratias agimus. Tert.
as St. Peter did the Angel, that brake off his Fetters, to restore him to
Freedom. They cheerfully received them, as those who brought the keys of
Paradise in the same hands wherewith they brought their Swords. They entered
into the Fire with joy, and were not only patient but triumphant in their
Sufferings, Hic est habitus victoriae nostrae, haec palmata vestis, tali curru
triumphamus. Ter^tul. Tot^m hominem animus circumfert, and quo velit (...)*
Tertul. ad Mart.
as if they had been glorified in their Souls, and impassible to the Sufferings
of their Bodies. I have seen, says Eusebius, the Executioners tired with
tormenting them, lie down panting and breathing, and others not less fierce,
but more fresh succeed in their cruel Service; But I never saw the Martyrs
weary of Sufferings, nor heard them desire a Truce, much less Deliverance from
them. If the Judges were softened with their Blood, and by the force of Nature
were compelled to be compassionate, so as to offer them a release if they would
but feign to deny Christ; They were filled with indignation, esteeming it the
worst injury, that their Persecutors expected, they would be guilty of but the
shadow of Infidelity to their dear Savior. They were ambitious of the longest
and most terrible Sufferings for His sake, to be Martyrs in every member. They
sang the Praises of Christ (their Tongues being harmonious with the affections
of their Hearts) in the Flames, they preached Him from the Crosses, they
rejoiced in him as their only Good, in the midst of devouring Beasts. Briefly,
They preserved an inviolable Faith to Him, notwithstanding the most furious
Batteries against them: The barbarous Enemy might tear their Hearts from their
Breasts, but never Christ from their Hearts, to whom they were inseparably
united by Love, stronger than the most cruel Death.

Now what less then the Divine Power could support them under those Torments,
which it is almost incredible a Body made of flesh could endure? I will not
Dispute whether it exceeds all Natural force to suffer such, from a vicious
Affection of Pride, or obstinacy: but the frequency of it exceeds all Natural
Possibility. 'Twas not impossible for one of the Romans to hold his Right Hand
unmoved over a burning Torch, to extinguish in the King their Enemy, all hopes
(...) drawing (...) him the Secrets of his Country by the force of Torments;
but it was not Possible that many thousands such should have been in Rome. For
then that single Example had not been so wonderful in all Antiquity. But the
Noble Army of Martyrs who overcame in the most bloody battles, was numerous
beyond account; and composed of all sorts of Persons, of the aged and infirm,
of tender Youths, of delicate Women, of the Honorable and obscure; Yet in that
difference of Ages, and Sexes, and States, there appeared such an equality of
Virtue, Latriones and robusti Corporis viri ejusmodi Lacerationes perferre
nequeunt, exclama^t and genitus edunt, quia deest illis inspirata patientia.
Nostri autem ut de viris taceam, pueri and mulier culae tortores suos tacit
vincunt, and exprimere illis genitum nec ignis potest. Lactant. Lib. 5. c. 13.
that it was Visible, the same Heavenly Spirit inspired them all with Courage,
and by assuring them of Eternal Life, made them despise present Death. Such
Heroical and frequent Constancy must be ascribed to the Breast Plate of Faith,
and Love, of a Celestial temper, wherewith the Almighty had Armed them.

If it be said that some have died for a false Religion, so that the
extraordinary assistance of Heaven was not necessary to encourage the Christian
Martyrs. The Answer is clear. There is a vast difference between the number of
the Sufferers, and manner of their Sufferings.

1. Some few moved by Vanity and Melancholy, or compelled, have suffered for a
false Religion, that was authorized by the Custom of their Country for many
Ages. But innumerable Christians animated by the example of their Crucified
King, freely sacrificed themselves for the testimony of the Gospel upon the
first Revelation of it, before any humane respects gave color to it.

2. In those who suffered for a false Religion were visible either Fear or
Vainglory, Stubbornness or Rage; But the Christians in their greatest
Sufferings expressed Magnanimity without Pride, Constancy without Fierceness,
Patience without Stupidity, and such an admirable Compassion to their Enemies,
as persuaded some of their Tormentors to be companions with them in Martyrdom.

2. The suddainness and universality of the change effected by the Gospel, is a
signal Evidence of the Divine Power that attended it. The Apostle declares the
admirable progress of it in all the world, during his time. Col. 1.6.
In a few years with incredible swiftness it past through Judea, Samaria,
Syria, Greece, and all the parts of the known habitable World. Tacitus
acknowledges that in the eleventh year of Nero, great numbers of Christians
were at Rome, at a great distance from the place where the Gospel was first
preached. It appears from the Writings of the Primitive Christians, that in the
Second Century after the Death of Christ, the Roman Empire was filled with
Christian Churches. The World was peopled with a new Generation. Now what
Secret Power produced that sudden and universal Change? How came it to pass
that the Gospel, contrary to the order of new Things, should be so readily
received, and in those places where the most insuperable obstacles opposed it?
In Corinth the Seat of Luxury and Voluptuousness; in Ephesus where Idolatry had
its Throne; in Rome it self where Honors, Riches, Pleasures were adored. Moses
with all his great Miracles never conquered one Nation to the true God. The
Pharisees compast Sea and Land to make a Proselyte: Mat. 23.
But the Gospel in a little time converted many Nations from their Opinions and
Manners wherein they had been instructed and educated, to those that were not
only different but contrary. The wonder in Esaias was exceeded, That a Nation was
born in a day. For the World was renewed as it were in a moment. Such a
quickening universal Efficacy was joined with the Preaching of the Gospel, that
the Power of God was ^ver more visibly manifested in any work. Therefore the
Apostle mentions it as one part of the great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
that Christ was believed o^ in the World. There is nothing but Supernatural,
as in the birth, so in the progress of Christianity.

Ergo vincimus cum occidimur, plures efficimur, quoties metimur a vobis: Semen
est Sanguis Christianorum, Tertul. Apol.
3. The lasting Change made by the Gospel is the Effect of Infinite Power.
Philosophy though maintained by the successive force of the greatest Wits, yet
declined and came to nothing. But Christianity attended only by its own
Authority, established its Dominion, and raised an Eternal Empire of Truth and
Holiness in the World. The Reason of Man cannot inspire into its Productions a
Principle of Life, only that Power which conveys to Man an immortal Soul, can
derive to its Institutions a Spirit to Animate and preserve them. And this
Victorious Permanent Efficacy of the Gospel is more admirable, Dioclesian.
Jovian. and Maximinianus, Herculaeus, Caesares, Augusti. amplificato per
Orientem, and Occidentem Imperio Romano, and nomine Christianor. qui Remp.
evertebant, extincto.
in regard it prevailed without the assistance, and against the opposition of
all. The more it was oppressed the more it prosper'd. It gained credit and
Disciples by Contradiction and Persecution; it was multiplied by the Deaths of
its followers. The Cloud of Witnesses dissolving in a shower of Blood, made the
Church Fruitful. Although some Persecutors have boasted of their utter
abolishing the Christian Name in all parts of the Empire; yet those
inscriptions are the Proud Monuments of their Vanity, not Victory. Tyrants are
perished, but Truth remains for ever. By which it is evident, that as the Gospel
had a higher Principle than what is from below, so it was assisted with more
than Humane Power. To sum up in short what has been amplified; how Gloriously
was the Arm of the Lord revealed in raising the World that for four thousand
years lay in Wickedness? What less than a Divine Power could soften such an
obstinate hardness as long custom in Sin brings? What could pluck up errors
that had taken such deep root in the Spirits of Men, and were Naturalized to
them, and plant a Discipline so austere and thorny to sense? Who but the
Almighty could cast out the Devil from his Empire, and withdraw his Subjects
that were captivated by the terror of Laws, and by the delights of the flesh?
What invisible Power made innumerable of the tender sex who were not by temper
courageous, nor by obstinacy inflexible, nay, who were so fearful that they
could not see a drawn sword without affrightment, yet so resolute, as to
despise all the instruments of Cruelty? What is more astonishing than to see a
flock of sheep encounter and overcome an Army of Lions? This was the Lords
doing, and ought to be marvelous in our Eyes. Briefly, the making a Crucified
Person to Reign in the midst of his Enemies, and to give Laws to the whole
Earth, is a Victory worthy the Lord of Hosts. The Conversion of the World to
Christianity was the effect of infinite Mercy, and equal Power.

Lastly, The Divine Power shall be Gloriously manifested in the complete
Salvation of the Church at the end of the World. Jesus Christ as Mediator is
invested with Sovereign Power in Heaven and Earth: and in that quality he shall
exercise it, 1 Cor. 15.25.
till our Salvation is finished. For he must reign till he has put all Enemies
under his feet. 2 Heb.
But we see not yet all things put under him. Although those Persons and things
that never degenerated from their Original, are entirely subject to him; the
Angels obey his Will, Universal Nature is Governed by his Providence; The
Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, and all things produc'^ from them, never resist
the Direction of his hand; yet there are others that fell from their Integrity,
and some things consequent to Man's Rebellion, which either oppose the Power of
Christ, or are not yet actually subdued: and they are the Enemies of our
Salvation, Satan, Sin, and Death. Now the perfect Freedom of the Church from
all these, will be the last Glorious Act of Christ's Regal Office. And it is
observeable, the Day of Judgment is called the Day of Redemption, with respect
to the final accomplishment of our Felicity, that was purchased by the infinite
Price of his Sufferings. The day of Christ's Death was the Day of Redemption, as
to our Right and Title; for then our Ransom was fully paid, and it is by the
Immortal efficacy of his Blood that we partake of the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God: but the Actual enjoyment of it shall be at the last day. Therefore
the perfection of all our Spiritual Privileges is referred to that time, when
Death our L^st Enemy shall be overcome. Romans 8.
The Apostle says, and not only they but our selves also, which have the first
Fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves, groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption; to wit, the Redemption of our Bodies. During the present Life, we
are taken into Gods Family, in the quality of his Children; but the most Solemn
Act of our Adoption shall be at the last Day. In this there is a similitude
between Christ and his Members: for although he was the Son of God by his
marvelous Conception, and owned by him while he performed his Ministry upon the
Earth; yet all the Testimonies of Gods Favor to him, were not comparable to
the Declaration of it, in raising him from the Grave: Then in the face of
Heaven and Earth, He said, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee. So
in this Life God acknowledges and treats us as his Children, he clothes us with
the Righteousness of his Son, feeds us with his Word, defends us from our
Spiritual Enemies; but the most Public Declaration of his favor shall be in
the next Life, when all the Children of the Resurrection shall be born in a
Day. Add further; although the Souls of Believers immediately upon their
Separation are received into Heaven, and during the sleep of Death enjoy
admirable Visions of Glory, yet their Blessedness is imperfect, in comparison
of that excellent degree which shall be enjoyed at the Resurrection. As the
Roman Generals after a complete Conquest, first entered the City privately, and
after having obtained License of the Senate, made their Triumphant entry with
all the magnificence and splendor becoming the Greatness of their Victories:
So after a Faithful Christian has fought the good fight, and is come off, more
than a Conqueror, he enters privately into the Celestial City, but when the
body is raised to Immortality, he shall then in the company and with the
acclamations of the Holy Angels, have a Glorious entry into it. I will briefly
consider why the Bodies of the Saints shall be raised, and how the Divine Power
will be manifested in that last Act.

1. The General reason is from Gods Justice. As the Economy of Divine
Providence requires, there must be a Future State, when God shall sit upon a
judicial Throne to weigh the Actions of all Men, and render to every one
according to their quality; so it is as necessary that the Person be Judged, and
not one Part alone. The Law Commands the entire Man composed of his Essential
Parts the Soul and Body: And it is obeyed or violated by both of them. Although
the Guilt or Moral Goodness of Actions is chiefly Attributed to the Soul,
because it is the Principle of them, yet the Actions are imputed to the whole
Man. The Soul is the Guide, the Body the Instrument: Animi imperio Corporis
servitio magis utimur. Sal.
it is reasonable therefore that both should receive their recompense. We see
the Example of this in Humane Justice, which is a copy of the Divine. The whole
Man is punished or rewarded. The Soul is punished with Disgrace and Infamy, the
Body with Pains: the Soul is rewarded with Esteem and Honor, the Body with
External marks of Dignity. Thus the Divine Justice will render to every one
according to things done in the Body, whether Good or Evil. 2 Cor. 5.10.


2. The special reason of the Saints Resurrection is their Union with Christ:
for he is not only our Redeemer and Prince, but our second Adam, the same in
Grace as the first was in Nature. Now as from the first the Soul was destroyed
by Sin, and the Body by Death, so the second restores them both to their
Primitive state; the one by Grace, the other by a Glorious Resurrection.
Accordingly the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.21.
that by Man came Death, and by Man came the Resurrection from the Dead. Christ
removed the Moral and Natural impossibility of our Glorious Resurrection: the
Moral, by the infinite merit of his Death, whereby Divine Justice is satisfied,
that otherwise would not permit the Guilty to be restored to Eternal Life: and
the Natural, by his rising from the Grave to a Glorious Imortality. For his
Infinite Power can do the same in all Believers. It Is observable, the Apostle
infers the Resurrection of Believers from that of Christ, not only as the
Cause, but the Original Example. For the Members must be conformed to the Head,
the Children to their Father, the younger to the elder Brother. Therefore he is
called, the first fruits of them that sleep: 1 Cor. 15.
and the first begotten of the Dead. Rev. 1
In Christ's Resurrection ours is so fully assured, that the event is
infallible. Now no less than Infinite Power is requisite to raise the Bodies of
the Saints from the dust, and to transform them into the similitude of Christ's.

1. To raise them. Nothing is more astonishing to Nature than that the Bodies
which after so many Ages in the perpetual circulation of the Elements have past
into a thousand different Forms, Imperfectae in homine naturae, praecipua
solatia, ne Deum qui them posse omnia; nam nec sibi potest mortem Conscisere,
nec mortales aeter nitate donare, nec revocare defunctos. Pli. lib. 2. c. 7.
one part of them being resolved into Water, another evaporated into Air,
another turned into Dust, should be restored to their first State. What Wisdom
is requisite to separate the Parts so mixed and confounded? what Power to
recompose them? what Virtue to reinspire them with new Life? It may seem more
difficult than to revive a Dead Body whose Organs and matter is not changed, of
which we have Examples in the Scripture. When the Spirit of the Lord placed
Ezekiel in the midst of a Valley covered with bones, and caused him to consider
attentively their Number which was very great, and their extreme dryness, he
asked him, whether these bones could live? Ezekiel. 37.4, 5, 6.
upon which as one divided and ballanc't between the seeming Impossibility of
the thing in it self, and the consideration of the Divine Power to which
nothing is impossible, he answered, Lord thou know. Upon this God commanded
him, to Prophecy upon those bones, and speak to them, as if they had been
endued with Sense and Understanding. O ye dry Bones, hear the Word of the Lord:
Thus says the Lord God unto these Bones, Behold I will cause breath to enter
into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring in
flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put Breath in you, and ye shall
live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. And immediately there was a general
commotion among them, they joined together, the sinews and flesh came upon
them, and the skin covered them. And upon a second Prophesy they were all
inspired with the Breath of Life, and stood up an exceeding great Army. Now
whether this was really represented to his outward senses, or only by the
efficacy of the Spirit to his imagination, no doubt so strange a Spectacle
vehemently affected him; as with Joy in hope of the miraculous Restoration of
Israel, Tu periri Deo credis si quid oculis nostris bebetibus subtra^itur.
Corpus omne sive arescit in pulverem* sive in humorem solvitur, vel in cinerem
comprimitur, vel in nidorem tenuatur, sub ducitur nobis, sed Deo elementorum
custodia reservatur. Arnob. lib. 11.
which that Vision foretold, so with admiration of the Divine Power. But when
the Trumpet of the Archangel shall sound the Universal Jubilee, and call forth
the Dead from all their Receptacles, when the Elements as Faithful Depositaries
shall effectively restore what was committed to them, How Admirable will the
Power of God appear?

2. No less than Infinite Power is able to change the raised Bodies into the
likeness of Christ's. The Apostle speaks with an exaggeration of it: For our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus, Christ, who shall change our Vile Bodies, that it may be fashioned like
unto his Glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself. This resemblance will be only in the Person of
Believers. All Men shall rise to be judged, but not all to be transformed.
There is a Resurrection to Death as well as to Life. Unhappy Resurrection!
Which only serves to make the Body the Food of Eternal Death. But the Saints
who endeavored to be like to Christ in purity, shall then have a perfect
conformity to him in Glory and Immortality. How Glorious the Body of Christ is,
we may conjecture in part by what the Apostle relates to Agrippa: At midday, O
King, Act. 26.13.
I saw in the way a light from Heaven above the brightness of the Sun shining
round about me; Which was no other but the Light of the Face of Christ that
struck him with Blindness. One Ray of this reflecting upon the first Martyr
Saint Stephen in his Sufferings, gave an Angelical Glory to his countenance.
And Saint John tells us, 1 John 3.2.
when he appears we shall be like him. He alludes to the rising of the Sun, but
with this difference: when the Sun appears in the Morning, the Stars are made
invisible; but the Bodies of the Saints shall be clothed with a Sun-like
luster, and shine in the midst of Christ's Glory. Omnipotency alone that Subdues
all things, can raise and refine them from their Dross unto such an admirable
Brightness. The Angels will be surprised with wonder to see Millions of Stars
spring out of the Dust. The Lord Jesus Christ will be admired in all them that
Believe. 2 These. 1.10^


2. Their Bodies shall be raised to a Glorious Immortality. In this the General
Resurrection is Different from that which was Particular, as of Lazarus: by the
one Death was overcome and put to flight, only for some time: for his second
life was no more exempt from Death, than his first: But by the other, 1 Cor.
15.54.
Death shall be swallowed in Victory, and lose its force for ever. Then shall
our true Joshua be magnified in the sight of the whole World, and the Glorious
number of Saints shall cast their Crowns at his Feet, and sing the Triumphant
Song, Thou have Redeemed us to God by thy Blood, and rescued us by thy Power
from all our Enemies, and art worthy of Honor and Glory and Blessing for ever.

CHAP. XXII.
The extraordinary working of the Divine Power is a convincing proof of the
Verity of the Christian Religion. The internal Excellencies of it are clear
marks of its Divinity, to the purified Mind. The external Operations of God's
power were requisite to convince men in their corrupt state, that the Doctrine
the Gospel came from God. The miraculous owning of Christ by the whole Divinity
from Heaven. The Resurrection of Christ the most important Article of of the
Gospel, and the demonstration of all the rest. How valuable the Testimony of
the Apostles is concerning it. That 'twas impossible they should deceive, or be
deceived. The quality of the Witnesses considered. There cannot be the least
reasonable suspicion of them. It Is utterly incredible that any humane temporal
respects moved them to feign the Resurrection of Christ. The nature of the
Testimony considered. It was of a matter of fact, and verified to all their
Senses. The Uniformity of it secures us there was no corruption in the
Witnesses, and that it was no illusion. They sealed the truth of it with their
Blood. The Miracles the Apostles did in the Name of Christ* a strong
demonstration that he was raised to a glorious life. That Power was continued
in the Church for a time. The Conclusion, how reasonable it is to give an
entire Assent to the truth of Christianity. It Is desperate Infidelity not to
believe it; and the highest Madness to pretend to believe it, and to live in
disobedience to it.

1 FRom what has been discoursed concerning the extraordinary working of the
Divine Power, we have a most convincing proof of the Verity of the Christian
Religion. For since God has by so many miraculous Effects, the infallible
indications of His Favor to the Person of Jesus Christ, justified his
Doctrine, no reasonable doubt can remain concerning it. Indeed the internal
excellencies of it which are visible to the purged Eye of the Soul, are clear
marks of its Divinity. The Mystery of our Redemption is made up of various
parts, Vid. Mr. Baxter's excellent account of The Reasonableness of
Christianity.
in the Union of which such an evident Wisdom appears, that the rational Mind,
unless enslaved by prejudice, must be ravished into a compliance. Even that
which most offends Sense, the Meanness of our Saviors condition in the world,
and the miseries to which He was exposed, do so perfectly correspond with his
great design to make Men holy and heavenly, that it appears to be the effect of
most wise Counsel. And such a Beauty of Holiness shines in the Moral part, as
clearly proves God to be its Author. It denounces war against all Vices, and
commands every Virtue. All that is excellent in humane Institutions it delivers
with infinite more authority and efficacy: And what natural reason did not
reach to, it fully describes in order to the Glory of God and the Happiness of
Man. Now as God, the Author of Nature, has by Tastes, and Smells, and other
sensible qualities, distinguished things wholesome from noxious, even to the
lowest living Creatures: So He has much more distinguished objects that are
saving from deadly, that is, the true Religion from the false, by undoubted
evidences to any who will exercise their Spiritual Senses, and sincerely desire
to know and obey it. And that all the wise and holy embraced it in the face of
the greatest discouragements, is an unanswerable Argument that it is pleasing to
God. For how is it possible that the Good God should suffer those to fall into
mortal Error, who from an ardent Affection to Him despised whatever is amiable
or terrible in the world? How is it possible He should deny the Knowledge of
Himself to those to whom He gave such a pure Love to Himself?

But the humane Nature in its corrupted state is contrary both to the Doctrine
of the Gospel, that propounds Supernatural Verities hard to believe, and to the
commands of it, that enjoin things hard to do: For this reason 'twas necessary
that God by some external Operations, the undeniable effects of His Power,
should discover to the World his approbation of it.

Now that Christ is the Son of God, and Redeemer of the World, was miraculously
declared from Heaven by the whole Divinity, There are Three that bear Record in
Heaven, the Father, and the Word, 1 John 1.5.
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One. The Father testified by a Voice
as loud as Thunder at his Baptism, and Transfiguration, Thou art my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3.17.
The Son by his glorious appariton to Paul, when He struck him to the earth
with these words, Why persecutest thou me? The Light was so radiant, the Voice
so strong, Act. 9.4.
the impression it made so deep and sensible, that he knew it came from God.
And He manifested Himself to St. John with that brightness, That he fell at his
feet as dead, till in compassion He revived him, and said, I am He that lives
and was dead, Rev. 1.17.
and behold I am alive for evermore. And the Holy Spirit by his miraculous
descent in the shape of a Dove upon Him, and in fiery Tongues upon the
Apostles, gave a visible testimony that Jesus Christ was sent from God to save
the World. I will particularly consider one Effect of the Divine Power, the
Resurrection of Christ, this being the most important Article of the Gospel,
and the demonstration of all the rest. For it is not conceivable that God would
by his Almighty Power have raised Him from the Grave to a glorious Life, (and
it is impossible He should be otherwise) if He had taken the Name of the Son of
God in vain, and arrogated to himself Divine Honor, and only pretended that he
was sent from Him. By the Resurrection He was declared to be the Son of God
with Power. Romans 1.4.
For that being the proof of his Mission, justifies the truth of his Doctrine,
and particularly of the quality of God's Son, which He always attributed to
Himself. Now if Infidelity object, that we who live in the present Age have no
sensible testimony that Christ is risen, and what assurance is there, that the
Apostles who reported it were not Deceivers or deceived? In Answer to this, I
will briefly (...) how valuable the Testimony of the Apostles is, and worthy of
all acceptance; and that 'twas equally impossible they should be deceived, or
intend to deceive. His Death is attested by his Enemies. (...) a Pagan relates
that He Suffered under Pontius Pilate. And the Jews to this day (...) so
unhappy as to boast of their being the causes of his Crucifixion, and call him
by a name that is the mark of his Punishment. But his Resurrection they
peremptorily deny. Now the Apostles being sent to convert the World, were to
^ay this down as the foundation of their Preaching, that Jesus Christ was
raised from the dead, that all might yield Faith and Obedience to Him. This was
then special charge, as St. Peter declares, Act. 2.1.20. and 10.41. Act. 2.32.
Wherefore of th^se men which have companied with us, all the time that the
Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto
the same day that He was taken up from us, must be one ordained to be a witness
of his Resurrection. They were to testify concerning His Doctrine and Life,
His Miracles and Sufferings, but principally His Resurrection. For this reason
St. Paul, who was extraordinarily admitted into their Order, had a miraculous
Sight of Christ from Heaven (Last of all He was seen of me) to testify it to
the World. Now for our full conviction, 1 Cor. 15.8.
it is necessary to consider the quality of the Witnesses, and the nature of
their Testimony.

1. The Witnesses were such of whom there cannot be the least reasonable
Suspicion. In testimoniis dignitas, fides, mores, gravitas examinanda est.
In Civil Causes of the greatest moment, the Testimony of the Honorable and
the Rich are accounted valuable, because they are not easily corrupted: one of
a low degree may from baseness of Spirit, through Cowardice and Fear be tempted
to deny the Truth: one in a poor condition may be so dazzled with the luster of
Gold, when he considers the price of Perjury, as to be induced to assert a
falsehood. But who is more incorruptible, the Noble that from a sense of Honor
abhor a Lie, Romans 3.8.
or those who by their Divine Birth and Qualities did so detest it, that they
would not tell a Lie for the Glory of God? Who is more worthy of Credit, the
Rich whose Riches sometimes excites their desires after more, or those who by a
generous disdain despised all things. Besides, Persons of known Integrity whom
the different images of hopes and fears cannot probably incline to evil, are
admitted to decide the weightiest Causes: Now the Apostles were so innocent,
sober, honest and unblameable in the whole tenor of their Conversations, that
their most malignant Adversaries could never fasten an accusation upon them.
Indeed if their carnal Interests had been concerned, there might have been some
colorable Objections against their Testimony: But if we duly consider things,
it will appear utterly incredible that any deceit could be in it. For as all
the actions of reasonable Men proceed from Reason solid or apparent, so
particularly Imposture and Fiction are never without some Motive and Design:
For being contrary to Nature, there must ^ntervene a foreign Consideration for
their contrivance. Now the universal Motives to invent Fables are Honor,
Riches, or Pleasure. But none of these could possibly move the Apostles to
feign the Resurrection of Christ. Not to insist on the Meanness of their
Extraction and Education, who had only seen Boats and Nets, and conversed with
Lakes and Fishes, whereas Ambition usually springs up in Persons of high birth
and breeding; it is evident that no respect to humane Praise excited them, since
they attributed the Doctrine of the Gospel, that should give them reputation in
the World, to the Holy Spirit, and ascribed the Glory of their miraculous
Actions entirely to the Divine Power. When the People of Lystra would have
given Divine Honor to St. Paul, Act. 3.12, 13
he disclaimed it with abhorrency: and 4.10.
And presently after, those who would have adored him as a God, stoned him as a
Malefactor; he chose rather to be their Sacrifice than their Idol. Besides, how
could they expect to be great or rich by declaring that One who came to such a
Tragical End in the face of the world, was raised to Life, when the hands of
the Jews were still bloody with the Wounds of their Master, and their hearts so
enraged against all that honored his Name, as to excommunicate them for
execrable Persons. It had been as extravagant to have designed the acquiring of
Reputation or Riches by their Preaching, as for one to throw himself into a
flaming Furnace to be cooled and refreshed: And that Pleasure could not be
their Aim is manifest: For they met with nothing but Poverty and Persecution,
with Derision and Disgrace, with Hardships and all the effects of Fury, which
they willingly endured rather than cease from Preaching, or deny what they had
Preached. Their unheard of Resolution to forsake their Native Countey, and
travel to all the known parts of the Earth, to convey the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, is a strong Demonstration that they believed it to be true, and of
infinite moment, most worthy of all the dangers to which they voluntarily
exposed themselves. Never did Ambition or Avarice, the most active Passions,
cause men to be more diligent, than they were to communicate the Knowledge of
our Savior to all Nations. Now what greater assurance can we possibly receive
that they were sincere in their Report.

Secondly, The nature of the Testimony makes it very credible.

1. It was of a matter of Fact. If it had been some high Speculation of
universal Things abstracted from Matter, and above the cognizance of the
Senses, there might be some pretense to object, That the Disciples, unexercised
in Sciences, were deceived by the Subtlety of there Master: But it is a singular
Thing of which the Senses are the most faithful Informers, and competent Judges.

2. It was an ocular Testimony, which as it makes the strongest impression upon
the Spectator, so upon the belief of others. Thus St. John, That which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked on declare we unto you. 1 John 1.1.
And that they were not deceived we have great certainty; For Jesus had
conversed a long time with them before his Death, and their Respect and Love to
Him, and after their Compassion had deeply engraved the lineaments of his
Visage in their memories, and He presented himself not many years, but three
days after his absence, so that it was impossible they should have forgot his
Countenance. He appeared to them not once or twice, but many times, and not
suddenly as a flash of Lightning that presently vanishes, but converst with
them familiarly for forty days. And it is observable, the Apostles themselves
were not easily wrought on to believe this Truth. When the Testimony of the
Angels assured them that He was risen, yet they were suspended between Hopes
and Fears. And at his first Appearance they were vehemently surpised; They saw
Him die on the Cross three days before, and their Memories were still filled
with the frightful images of his Sufferings, so that they were balanced
between the present testimony of Sense, Luke 24.37, 39, 43.
and the fresh remembrance of what they had seen. Therefore He justified the
truth of his Resurrection to all their Senses. He discoursed with them, made
them feel his Wounds, eat and drank with them, 1 John 1.1.
so that 'twas impossible they should be deceived, unless willingly. Thus by
the wise dispensation of God, their doubting has confirmed our Faith.

Thirdly, The Uniformity of the testimony makes it valuable upon a double
account. First, As it secures us, there was no corruption in the Witnesses.
Secondly, That it was no Illusion.

1. That there was no Corruption in the Witnesses. The most prudent way to
discover the falsity of a testimony, is to interrogate the Witnesses severally,
to see if there be any contradiction between them. But if they concur not only
as to the Substance, but Circumstances, their Deposition is very credible. Now
the Apostles exactly agreed in their testimony, as appears by the several
Gospels, in which, although wrote in diverse times and places, yet there is an
admirable Harmony not only as to the Fact it self, but the least
particularities.

2. The Agreement of so many proves it was no Illusion. If He had only appeared
to some persons separately, carnal Reason, which is ingenious to deceive
itself, might object that it was only the effect of a distempered fancy, and no
real object of Sense. But after He had shown Himself to some of the Disciples
apart, and that holy Company was met together, uniting the several sparks, to
encourage their hopes of his Resurrection, He came to them altogether; and for
many days conversed with them. Now who can believe that so many should be
obstructed with Melancholy for so long time, so as constantly to remain under
the power of a Delusion? Besides, He afterward appeared to five hundred at
once: Now how could such a number of different Ages, Sexes, Temperaments be at
the same time struck with the same Imagination?

Add further, If a strong Imagination had deceived them by Melancholy, there
would have been some discoveries of that Humor in their Actions. For it is
impossible that the Mind so indisposed, should for a long time act regularly.
But in the whole course of their Lives not the least extravagancy appears.
Their Zeal was tempered with Prudence, their Innocence was without Folly, their
Conversation was becoming their great Office. And of this we have
unquestionable Evidence: For otherwise so many Persons of excellent Wisdom had
never been persuaded by them to embrace Christianity; neither had their Enemies
so furiously persecuted them: For it is beyond belief that they had so far
extinguished the Sentiments of Humanity, as to treat the Apostles as the most
guilty Criminals, whom they knew to be distracted, and therefore worthy of
Compassion rather than Hatred.

But if it be objected, that it might be a Phantasm, or solid Body formed
according to the Likeness of Christ, that abused the Apostles, and after some
time withdrew itself. The vanity of the Objection is very apparent: For such an
effect could not be without the operation of a Spiritual Cause. Now the good
Angels cannot be guilty of falsehood, of which they had been in that
representation: for He that appeared, declared himself to be Jesus that
suffered: neither would the evil use such an Artifice: The old Serpent was too
wise to promote the belief of Christ's Resurrection, which is the Foundation of
Christianity. An Institution most holy, that would destroy his Altars,
discredit his Oracles, bring Glory to God, and Happiness to Man, to both which
he is eternally opposite. By all which it appears there was no deceit in the
subject nor object.

4. They sealed it with their Blood. This last proof confirms all the other. If
a person of clear fame assert a thing, which he is ready to maintain with the
loss of his Life, there is no reason to doubt of the truth of his Deposition.
It Is no wonder that Philostratus, a bold Grecian, to show his Art, painted
Apollonius Tyanaeus as a Demi-god, exempted from death, and clothed with
immortality. But if he had been drawn from his Study, where he dressed that Idol
of Iniquity, to appear before the Magistrates, to give an account of the truth
of his Relation, he certainly would have renounced his pretended Hero, rather
than have given his Life for a Lie. Now the Apostles endured the most cruel
Deaths to confirm the Truth of their Testimony. And what could possibly induce
them to it, if they had not been certain of his Resurrection? Could love to
their dead Master animate them to suffer for the honor of his Name? This is
inconceiveable* For He promised that He would rise the third Day, and ascend to
Heaven, and make them partakers of his Glory: So that if He had lain in the
rot^enness of the Grave, What charm, what stupidity was able to make them
preserve so high a Ven^ration for a Deceiver? Nothing could remain in them but
the memory and indignation of his Imposture. Now if it be the dictate of
natural Reason, that the concurrent Testimony of two or three credible Persons,
not weakened by any exception, is sufficient to decide any Cause of the
greatest moment, that respects Life, Honor and Estate, how much more should
the attestation of the Apostles put this great Truth beyond all doubt, since
they parted with their Lives, the most precious possession in this World, for
it; and which is infinitely more, if Deceivers, they would certainly be
deprived of Eternal Life in the next. In short, Since the Creation never was a
Testimony so clear and authentic, the Divine Providence so ordering the
circumstances, that the Evidence should be above all Suspicion. Neither did it
ever happen, that any thing affirmed by so many and such worthy Persons, was
ever suspected, much less found, to be false. It Is the most unreasonable
stifness not to yield an entire Assent to it. For there would be no secure
Foundation of determining innumerable weighty Cases, if we should doubt of
things reported by the most credible circumspect Persons, since we can be
certified by our own Senses but of a few Objects.

I shall only add, That the Apostles did many and great Miracles in the Name of
Christ, which was the strongest demonstration that He was raised to a glorious
Life. They were invested by the Spirit with the habits of various Tongues. This
kind of Miracle was necessary for the universal Preaching of the Gospel: For
how difficult and obstructive had it been to their Work, if they must have
returned to their Infant-state, to learn the Signification of foreign
Languages, to pronounce the words in their original Sound, and the Accents
proper to their Country? Therefore the Holy Spirit, according to the promise
of Christ, descended upon them, and became their Master, and in a moment
impressed on their Memories the forms of discoursing, and on their Tongues the
manner of expressing them. Wherever the Doctrine of Jesus was preached, God
bare them witness both with Signs and Wonders, Heb. 2.4.
and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
will. When St. Peter passed through the streets, filled with persons diseased
and half dead, he caused an universal resurrection by touching them with his
reviving shadow. They tamed Serpents, and quenched the malignity of their
Poison; they commanded Death to leave its prey, and Life to return to its
mansion that was not habitable for it. And that miraculous Power continued in
their Successors so long as was requisite for the conviction of the World.
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, mention diverse Miracles
performed by Christians in those times. Tertullian offers to the Emperor, to
whom he addressed his admirable Apology, to compel the Devils that possessed Humane
Bodies to confess themselves to be evil Spirits, to constrain the Prince of
darkness to enlighten his own Slaves. And Cyprian assures the Governor of
Africa, that he would force the Devils to come out of the Bodies they
tormented, lamenting their ejection. Now we cannot imagine they would so far
discredit their Doctrine and Reputation, as to pretend to such a Power without
they had it. In short, To deny the Miracles wrought by the Primitive
Christians, were as great rashness, as to deny that Caesar conquered Pompey, or
that Titus succeeded Vespasian. For we have the concurrent Testimony of the
gravest and best Men, of Understanding and Conscience, who were Eyewitnesses,
and which was not contradicted by those of the same Age. Briefly, There are
such clear characters of the Divine Hand to render the Gospel authentic, that
to deny it to be true, is to make God a liar.

The Conclusion is this, We see how reasonable it is to give an entire assent
to the truth of Christianity. The Nature of the Doctrine that is perfecty
Divine, declares its Original. It Is confirmed by Supernatural Testimonies. The
Doctrine distinguishes the Miracles from all false wonders, the illusions of
Satan, and the Miracles confirm the Doctrine. What doubt can there be after the
full deposition of the Spirit in raising Christ from the Grave; in qualifying
the Apostles, who were rude and ignorant, with Knowledge, Zeal, Courage,
Charity, and all Graces requisite for their great enterprise, and in converting
the World by their Ministry and Miracles? If we believe not so clear a
Revelation, our Infidelity is desperate. When our Savior was upon the Earth,
the Meanness and Poverty of his appearance lessened their Crime, who did not
acknowledge and honor him in the disguise of a Servant: Therefore they were
capable of favor. Many of his bloody Persecutors were converted and saved by
the Preaching of the Apostles. But since the Holy Ghost has convinced the
World by so strong a Light, of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; viz. That Jesus
whom the Jews most unworthily Crucified was the Son of God, that in dying He
purchased the Pardon of Sin; since He is risen and received to Glory, That all
power in Heaven and Earth is given to Him, the effect of which is most visible:
For spiritual Wickednesses trembled at his Name, were expelled from their
Dominions, and sent to their old Prison to suffer the Chains and Flames due to
them: To refuse his Testimony, is a degree of Obstinacy not far distant from
Malice of of the Devils, and puts Men without the reserves of pardoning Mercy.
And it is not a slight, superficial Belief of this great Truth that is
sufficient, but that which is powerful in making us universally obedient to our
Glorified Redeemer, who will distribute Crowns to all his faithful Servants. We
cannot truly believe his Resurrection, without believing his Doctrine, nor
believe his Doctrine without unfeigned Desires after the eternal Felicity it
promises, nor desire that Felicity without a sincere compliance to his Commands
in order to the obtaining it. In short, It Is Infidelity approaching Madness,
not to believe the Truth of the Gospel, but it is Madness of an higher kind and
more prodigious, to pretend to believe it, and yet to live in disobedience to
its Precepts, in contempt of its Promises and Threatenings, as if it were a mere
Fable.

CHAP. XXII.
The Honor of God's Truth with respect to the Legal Threatening, was preserved
in the Death of Christ. The Divine Truth with respect to the Promises and Types
of Christ under the Law, was justified in his Coming, and the accomplishment of
our Redemption by him. Some special Predictions considered that respect the
time of his Coming. The particular Circumstances that respect the Messiah are
verified in Jesus Christ. The Consequents of the Messia's Coming, foretold by
the Prophets, are all come to pass. The Types of the Law are completed in
Christ. A particular Consideration of Manna, the Rock, and the brazen Serpent,
as they referred to him. The Paschal Lamb considered. A short Parallel between
Melchisedec and Christ. The Divinity of the Gospel proved, by comparing the
ancient Figures with the present Truth, and Predictions with the Events. The
Happiness of Christians above the Jews in the clear revelation of our Savior
to them. From the accomplishment of Prophecies concerning the first Coming of
Christ, our Faith should be confirmed in the Promises of his second.

THe Original Law given to Man in Paradise had a severe Penalty annexed, that
upon the first breach of it he should die. The end of the threatening was to
preserve in him a constant reverence of the Command. After his Disobedience,
the honor of the Divine Truth was concerned as to the inflicting the
punishment. For although the Supreme Lawgiver has power over the Law to relax
the Punishment as to particular persons; yet having declared that according to
that Rule He would proceed in judgment with Man, the Perfection of his Truth
required, that Sin should be punished in such a manner, that his Righteousness
and Holiness might eminently appear, and the reasonable Creature for ever fear
to offend Him. Now the God of Truth has by the Death of his only Son so
completely answered the Ends of the legal Threatening, that the glory of that
Attribute is broke forth like the Sun through all the Clouds that seemed to
obscure it. Mercy and Truth meet together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each
other. Of this I have so largely treated before, that I shall add nothing more
concerning it. There is a Secondary respect wherein the truth of God is
concerned, as to the accomplishing our Redemption by Jesus Christ, which I will
briefly explicate. God having decreed the sending of his Son in the quality of
Mediator to purchase our Salvation, was pleased by several Promises to declare
his merciful purpose, and by various Types to show the design of that glorious
Work, before the exhibition of it. This was the effect of his Supreme Wisdom
and Goodness: First, To comply with the weakness of the Church, when 'twas
newly separated from the World. For as a sudden strong Light overpowers the Eye
that has been long in the dark, so that full bright Revelation of the Gospel
had been above the capacity of the Church when 'twas first freed from a state
of Ignorance: Light mixed with Shadows was proportionable to their Sight.
Therefore he was pleased by several Representations and Predictions to exercise
the Faith, entertain the Hope, and excite the Desires of his People before the
accomplishment of our Salvation by his Son: Secondly, To render the belief of
it easy and certain afterward. Now for the honor of his Truth he was engaged
to make good his word: For although pure Love and Mercy is the Original of all
God's Promises to Man, yet his Truth and Fidelity are the reasons of his
fulfilling them. Not that God is under the obligation of a Law, but his own
righteous Nature is the inviolable Rule of his actions. Accordingly the Apostle
lays it as the foundation of our Hopes; That God who cannot lie has promised
eternal Life. Tit. 1.2.
The Divine Decree alone concerning our Salvation by Christ, is a sure
Foundation: For God is as unchangeable in his Will as his Nature. In Him there
is no variableness, Jam. 1.17.
nor shadow of turning. But the Promise determines the Will of God to perform
it upon another account: For it is not single Inconstancy but Falsehood, not to
perform what is promised, from both which He is infinitely distant. St. Paul
alleges this for the reason why the Covenant of Grace is unchangeable and of
everlasting Efficacy, in that the counsel of God was by his Promise and Oath
confirmed, Heb. 6.17, 18.
That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation. For the Promise gives a rightful claim to the
Creature, and the fulfilling of it is the justification of God's Fidelity. In
this Sense it is said, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17.
i. e. the Grace of the Gospel is the substantial and complete accomplishment
of the Types and Promises under the Law. I will not enter into the discussion
of all the Prophecies concerning the Messiah in the Old Testament, to show how
they are verified in Jesus Christ; But briefly consider some special
Predictions that concern the time of the Messiah's Coming, his Person and
Offices.

1. The Prophecy of dying Jacob. Genesis 49.1.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
till Shiloh come. By the Scepter and Lawgiver are meant diverse Forms of
Government: the first being the mark of Regal Power* the other title respects
those whose Power succeeded that of their Kings, in the person of Zerobabel and
his Successors. Jacob prophetically declares two things; their establishment in
Judah, and their continuance till the coming of Shiloh. This Oracle does not
precisely respect the person of Judah, for he never ascended the Throne, nor
possessed the Empire over his Brethren; nor solely his Posterity as a Tribe
distinguished from the rest, although it had special advantages from that time:
Numb. 2.3.
For the Banner of Judah led the Camp in their march through the wilderness:
That Tribe had the first possession of the land of Canaan; these were the
beginnings of its future Glory. And from David to the Captivity, that Tribe
possessed the Kingdom; But the glory of his Scepter was lost in the person of
Zedekiah: Therefore the full meaning of the Prophecy regards the People of
Israel, in the relation they had to the Tribe of Judah: For that Tribe alone
returned entire from the Captivity with some relics of Levi and Benjamin, so
that the Nation from that time was distinguished by the title of the Jews in
relation to it; and the Right to dispose of the Scepter was always in the
Tribe of Judah: For the Levites that ruled after the Captivity received their
Power from them. 'Till Shiloh come, that is, the Messiah, as the Chaldee
Paraphrase, and the ancient Jewish Interpreters expound; So that the intent of
the Oracle is, that after the establishment of the Supreme Power in the Family
of Judah, it should not pass into the hands of Strangers but as a certain
Presage, and immediate Forerunner of of the coming of Shiloh. And this was
fully accomplished. For in the Captivity there was an interruption rather than
extinction of their Government. Their Return was promised at the time they were
carried Captives to Babylon. But at the coming of Christ, Judea was a Province
of the Roman Empire, Herod an Edomite sat on the Throne; and as the Tribe of
Judah in general, so the Family of David in particular was in such a low state,
that Joseph and Mary that were descended from him, were constrained to lodge in
a stable at Bethlehem. And since the blessed Peacemaker has appeared on the
Earth, the Jews have lost all Authority; their Civil and Ecclesiastical State
is utterly ruined, and they bear the visible marks of infamous Servitude.

2. The Second famous Prediction is by an Angel to Daniel, Dan. 9.25.
when he was lamenting the ruin of Jerusalem, who comforted him with an
assurance that the City should be rebuilt: And further told him, That from the
going forth of the Commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, Numerus iste
praeter allusionem ad 70. annos captivitatis, non sine mysterio intra se
occultet and semitas, and annos Jubilaeos praecise exhauriat; 70. enim
Hebdomadae sunt totidem semitae, and denos continent Jubilaeos. Jam quia annus
Sabbatarius and Jubilaeus infallibiles sunt characteres Chronologiae sacrae, ex
iis certa potest peti ratio connectendi 70. Hebdomadas cum annis Mundi. Fuit
enim annus secundus Darii Sabbatarius and Jubilaeus: Rursus annus praecedens
excidium Hierosolymorum and ipse Sabbatarius fuit and Jubilaeus postremus;
inter quos velut terminos 70. Hebdomadae decurrunt. Vid. Helvi^. Diatrib. de
Hebdom. Daniel.
unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two
Weeks the streets shall be built again, and the wall even in troublesome times.
And after threescore and two weeks shall the Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself, and the People of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City
and Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and to the end of the
war desolations are determined. The clear intent of the Angels Message is, That
within the space of seventy Prophetical Weeks (that is four hundred and ninety
years according to the Exposition of the Rabbis themselves) after the issuing
forth the order for the rebuilding Jerusalem, the Messiah should come, and be
put to Death for he sins of Men which was exactly fulfilled.

3. The time of the manifestation of the Messiah is evidently set down in the
Haggai 2.6, 7, 8, 9. I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations
shall come, and I will fill this house with Glory says the Lord of hosts. The
Silver is mine and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts. The Glory of the
latter shall be greater than that of the former, says the Lord of Hosts, and
in this place will I give peace. The Prophet to encourage the Jews in building
the Temple assured them that it should have a surpassing Glory by the presence
of the Messiah, who is called the Desire of all Nations, and being the Prince
of Peace his coming is described by that blessed effect, and in this place will
I give Peace, says the Lord of Hosts.

The second Temple was much inferior to Solomon's as in Magnificence and
external Ornaments, so especially because defective in those Excellencies that
were peculiar to the first. They were the Ark of the Covenant, and the
appearance of Glory between the Cherubims, the fire from Heaven to consume the
Sacrifices, the Urim and Thummim, and the Holy Ghost who inspired the Prophets.
But when the Lord came to his Temple, and performed many of his Miracles there,
this brought a Glory to it infinitely exceeding that of the former. For what
comparison is there between the shadowy presence of God between the Cherubims,
and his real presence in the humane Nature of Christ, in whom the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily. How much inferior were the Priests and Prophets to
him, who came from Heaven, and had the Spirit without measure, to reveal the
Counsel of God for the Salvation of the World.

2. The particular Circumstances foretold concerning the Messiah are, all
verified in Jesus Christ. It was foretold that the Messiah should have a
forerunner; Esaias* 40. Mal. 3.1, 7. Isa. 14. Sam. 12.7. Psalm. 11.9. Micha. 1.
Hos. 11.1. Isa. 9.1. Zech. 9. Isa. 3.3.4, 5, Isa. 9.6. Isa. 3.1. Isa. 56.6, 7.
Zech. 11.12. Psalm. 22.7, 4.15, 16. Psalm. 69.22. Psalm. 22.19. Psalm. 16.10. Psalm.
65.9. Psalm. 110.1. Isa. 53.
to prepare his way by preaching the Doctrine of Repentance, that he should be
Born of a Virgin, and of the Family of David and in the Town of Bethlehem that
he should go into Egypt, and be called forth from thence by God, that his chief
residence should be in Galilee the region of Zebulon and Nephthali, that he
should be poor and humble, and enter into Jerusalem on the Fool of an Ass,
that he should perform great miracles in restoring the Blind, the Lame, the
Deaf and Dumb, that he should suffer many afflictions, Contempt, Scorn,
Stripes, be Spit on, Scourged, betrayed by his familiar Friend, sold for a
sordid Price, that he should be put to Death, that his hands and feet should be
bored, and his side pierced, that he should die between Thieves, that in his
Passion he should taste vinegar and gall, that his garments should be divided
and Lots be cast for his Coat, that he should be buried, and his Body not see
corruption but rise again the third day, that he should ascend to Heaven and
sit at the right hand of God, and all these Predictions are exactly fulfilled in
the Lord Christ.

3. The consequents of his Coming are foretold.

1. That the Jews should reject him because of the meanness of his appearance.
They neither understood the Greatness and Majesty, Isai. 53.
nor the Abasement of the Messiah described in their Prophesies: not his
Greatness, that the Son of David was his Lord, that he was before Abraham, who
rejoiced to his Day: for they did not believe the Eternity of his Divine
Nature, They did not understand his humiliation to Death: Therefore 'twas
objected by them that the Messiah remains for ever, and this Person says he
shall die. They fancied a carnal Messiah shining with Worldly pomp, accompanied
with thundering legions, to deliver them from Temporal Servitude, so that when
they saw him without form and comeliness, and that no Beauty was in him to make
him desirable, they hid their Faces from him, they despised and esteemed him
not. Thus by their obstinate refusal of the Messiah, they really and visibly
fulfilled the Prophecies concerning him.

2. That the Levitical Ceremonies and Sacrifices should cease upon the Death of
the Messiah, Daniel 26.27. ^ Jer. 3.16.17.
and the Jewish Nation be dissolved. Although the legal Service was established
with great solemnity, yet there was always a sufficient indication that it
should not be perpetual. Moses who delivered the Law told them that God would
raise another Prophet whom they must hear. Psalm. 110.3.
And David composed a Psalm to be sung in the Temple, containing the
establishment of a Priest, not according to the order of Levi but Melchisedec,
who should bring in a Worship Spiritual and Divine. And we see this
accomplished, all the Ceremonies were buried in his grave and the Sacrifices for
above sixteen hundred years are ceast. Besides the destruction of the Holy City
and Sanctuary, the Jews are scattered in all parts, and in their dreadful
dispersion suffer the just punishment of their Infidelity.

3. It was Prophesied that in the time of the Messiah Idols should be ruined,
Zeph. 2.11. Mal. 1.15. Genesis 49.10,
and Idolaters converted to the knowledge of the true God. That he should be a
Light to the Gentiles, and to him the gathering of the People should be. And
this is so visibly accomplished in the conversion of the World to Christianity,
that not one jot or title of Gods Word has failed; so that besides the Glory
due to his Power and Mercy, we are obliged to honor him as the Fountain of
Truth.

I will now make some short reflections upon the Types of the Law to show how
they are completed in Christ. The Mosaic Dispensation was so contrived as to
bear a resemblance of the Messiah in all its parts. The Law had a shadow of
good things to come: Christ was the end of the Law: Heb. 10. Romans 10.
the substance of those shadows.

The main design of the Epistle to the Hebrews is to show, that in the ancient
Tabernacle there were models of the Heavenly things revealed in the Gospel. The
great number of Types declares the variety of the Divine Wisdom, and the
admirable fullness of Christ in whom they are verified. Three sorts were
instituted.

1. Some were things without Life, whose qualities and effects shadowed forth
his Virtues and Benefits. 2. Things endued with Life and Sense. 3. Reasonable
Persons that either in their offices, actions, or the memorable accidents that
befell them, represented the Messiah. Of the first sort I will briefly consider
the Manna that miraculously fell from Heaven, the Rock that by its stream
refresht the Israelites in their Journey to Canaan, and the Brazen Serpent:
premising two things. 1. That in comparing them with the Truth we are to
observe the design of God, and not to seek for Mysteries in every thing. As in
Pictures some strokes of the Pencil are only for ornament, others for
signification. Besides, when Superlative things are spoken of them exceeding
their Nature, and that cannot be applied to them without a violent figure, the
full and entire Truth is only found in Jesus Christ.

1. Manna was an eminent Type of him. Accordingly the Apostle declares of the
Israelites, they did all eat the same Spiritual meat, not in respect of its
Material but Symbolical Nature. The express Analogy between Manna and Christ,
is visible in respect of its marvelous production. The Mosaical Manna was not
the fruit of the Earth procured by humane industry, but formed by the Divine
Power, and rained down upon them: therefore it is called the Corn of Heaven.
This typified the celestial original of our Redeemer. He is the true bread from
Heaven, given by the Father. Psalm. 78.24. Joh. 6.32.
He is called the gift of God eminently, being the richest and freest, without
any merit or endeavor of Men to procure it. And we may observe the truth
infinitely exceeded the Type; for Manna descended only from the Clouds,
therefore our Savior tells the Jews, Moses gave ye not that bread from Heaven.
But he really came from Heaven, where the great and Glorious Presence of God is
manifested, and appeared under a visible form in the World. Manna was only
styled the Bread of Angels, to signify its excellency above common food, but
the bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven.

2. Manna was dispenst to all the Israelites equally* not as the delicious
fruits of the Earth that are the portion of a few, but as the light and
influences of the Heavens that are common to all: and herein 'twas a
representation of Christ who is offered to all without distinction of Nations,
to the Jews and Gentiles, to the Graecians and Barbarians; and without the
distinction of quality, to the Honorable and Mean, the Rich and the Poor, the
Learned and Ignorant. And here we may observe the excellency of the Spiritual
Manna above the Mosaical: for that ^ed but one nation, but the bread of God
gives life to the World; his infinite merit is sufficient for the Salvation of
all.

3. Manna was a delicious food: the Taste of it is described to be like wafers
mixed with honey that have a pure chaste sweetness: this typified the Love of
Christ shed abroad in the hearts of Believers. Such an exalted ravishing
pleasure proceeds from it, that the Psalmist breaks forth in an ecstasy, Taste
and see how Good the Lord is.

4. Manna was their only support in the Wilderness; Psalm. 34.9
strengthening them to vanquish their Enemies, and endure the hardships to which
they were incident in their passage to Canaan. In this regard 'twas a lively
image of Christ who is our Spiritual food, wh^e we are in the desert of the
lower World, the place of our trial, exposed to dangers. By him alone we shall
be finally victorious over the Enemies of our Salvation. And in this also the
Truth is infinitely above the Type that prefigured it. For Manna could only
preserve the Natural Life for a time. As our Savior tells the Jews, your
Fathers eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead. But Jesus Christ is the
living bread that came down from Heaven, and has a Supernatural Virtue, Joh.
6.51.
to convey a Life incomparably more noble and answerable to the quality of his
Original. It Is incorruptible as Heaven from whence He came. If any man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for ever. Death is so far from extinguishing, that it
advances the Spiritual Life to its perfection.

2. The Apostle testifies that the Israelites drank of that Spiritual Rock that
followed them, and that Rock was Christ. That the Miracle was mysterious is
evident from the circumstances related of it. 1 Cor. 10.4.
When the Israelites were in great distress for water, The Lord said to Moses,
I will stand before thee there upon the Rock in Horeb, and thou shall smite the
Rock, Exodus 17.6.
and there shall come water out of it, that the People may drink. If there had
been no other design but the relieving their necessity, that might have been
supplied by rain from Heaven; or if only to give a visible effect of the Divine
Power, that had been discovered in causing new Springs to rise from the Earth,
or the Command of God had been sufficient to strike the Rock; But he went to it
to signify the respect it had to himself. He was the Son of God that spoke to
Moses, and conducted the People: For this reason He is styled the Angel of Gods
presence, not with respect to his Nature, but Offices.

I will briefly observe the parallel between the Rock and Christ.

1. A Rock is the ordinary Title of God in Scripture, to represent his
unchangeable Nature, and infinite Power, whereby He upholds the World. And in a
special manner it resembles the Messiah. Deuteronomy. 4.42. Psalm. ^.42. Psalm. 15.22. 1
Pet. 2, 7, 8,
He is called The Stone which the builders refused, that was made the head of
the corner. He is the Rock upon which the Church is built, and secured against
the violence of Hell. Now Israel was not supplied from the Clouds or the
Valleys, but the Rock; to show that the mystical Rock, the Son of God, can only
refresh the Spiritual Israel with living Water.

2. The quality of the Rock has a proper Signification: For although it had in
its Veins a rich abundance of Waters, yet to appearance nothing was more dry
and hard. In this it was a Figure of the Spiritual Rock: The effects have
discovered in him unfathomable depths of Righteousness, Grace and Salvation;
yet at the first view we had no hopes. For if we consider Him as God, He is
infinitely Holy and Just, encompast with everlasting flames against Sin, and
how can we expect any cooling streams from Him?

If we consider him as Man, he is resembled to a root out of a dry ground; the
Justice of the Divine and the infirmity of the Humane Nature did not promise
any comfort to us. Isai. 53.
But what cannot infinite Love, united to infinite Power, perform? Divine
Goodness has changed the Laws of Nature in our favor, and by an admirable act
opened the Rock to refresh us.

3. The Rock was struck with the Rod of Moses a Type of the Law, before it sent
forth its streams: thus our Spiritual Rock was wounded for our Transgressions,
bruised for our Iniquities, and then opened all his treasures to us. Isa. 53.
Being consecrated by Sufferings, he is the Author of Eternal Salvation. In
this respect the Gospel propounds him for the object of saving Faith. I
determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ and him Crucified. The
Sacraments, the Seals of the New Covenant, have a special reference to his
Death the Foundation of it.

4. The Miraculous Waters followed the Israelites in their Journey, without
which they had perished in the Wilderness. This represents that Indeficiency of
the Grace of Christ. A Sovereign stream flows from him to satisfy all
Believers. He tells us, Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well
of Water springing up unto Everlasting Life. Joh 7.37. Joh. 4.14.


3. The Brazen Serpent sensibly expressed the manner of his Death and the
benefits derived from it. Therefore Jesus being the Minister of the
Circumcision chose this Figure for the Instruction of the Jews. As Moses lifted
up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up:
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal Life. Joh.
3. Number. 21.
The Sacred Story relates, that the Israelites by their rebellious murmuring
provoked God to send Serpents among them, whose Poison was so fiery and mortal,
that it brought the most Painful Death. In this affliction they addressed
themselves to the Father of Mercies, who World by their Repentance, Commanded
Moses to make a Serpent of Brass, and erect it on a Pole in the view of the
whole Camp, that whosoever looked on it should be healed. By this account from
Scripture we may clearly understand something of greatest consequence was
represented by it: For the only Wise God ordains nothing without just reason.
Why must a Serpent of Brass be elevated on a Pole? could not the Divine Power
recover them without it? Why must they look toward it? could not a healing
virtue be conveyed to their wounds but through their eyes? All this had a
direct reference to the Mystery of Christ. For the biting of the Israelites by
the fiery Serpents, does naturaly represent the effects of Sin, that torments
the Conscience, and inflames the Soul with the apprehensions of Future
Judgment. And the erecting a Brazen Serpent upon a Pole, that had the Figure
not the Poison of those Serpents, does in a lively manner set forth the lifting
up of Jesus Christ on the Cross, who only had the similitude of sinful flesh.
The looking toward the Brazen Serpent is a fit resemblance of Believing in
Christ Crucified for Salvation. The Sight of the eye was the only means to
derive virtue from it, and the Faith of the heart is the means by which the
Sovereign efficacy of our Redeemer is conveyed. This is the will of him that
sent me, says our Savior, that every one which sees the Son and believes on
him, may have Eternal Life. As in the camp of Israel, whoever looked toward the
Brazen Serpent, whatever his wounds were or the weakness of his sight, had a
present remedy: so how numerous and grievous soever our Sins be, how infirm our
Faith, yet if we sincerely regard the Son of God suffering, he will preserve us
from Death. For this end he is presented in the Gospel as crucified before the
eyes of all Persons.

2. Things endued with Life and Sense prefigur'd the Messiah.

[I] Shall particularly consider the Paschal Lamb, an illustrious Type of him.
Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us. The whole scene, as it is laid down
in the 12th of Exodus, shows an admirable agreement tween them.

1. A Lamb in respect of its natural innocence and meekness, that suffers
without resistance, waas fit emblem of our Savior, whose voice was not heard
in the street, who did not break the Bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.
He was oppressed and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his Mouth. He is
brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb,
so he opens not his Mouth.

2. The Lamb was to be without Spot, to signify his absolute perfection. We are
Redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and
without Spot. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18.


3. The Lamb was to be separated from the Flock four days: the Lord Jesus was
separated from Men, and consecrated to be the Sacrifice for the World, after
three or four years spent in his Ministerial office, preparing himself for that
great Work.

4. The Paschal Lamb was sacrificed and substituted in the place of the
Firstborn. The Levitical Priesthood not being instituted at their going forth
from Egypt, every Master of a Family had a right to exercise it in his own
House. Our Redeemer suffered in our stead, to propitiate Gods Justice toward
us.

5. The Blood was to be sprinkled upon the Posts of the door, that Death might
not enter into their Houses. That sacred Ceremony was typical: for the sign it
self had no resemblance of sparing, and certainly the Angel could distinguish
between the Israelites and the Egyptians without the bloody mark of Gods
Favor: but it had a final respect to Christ. We are secured from destruction
by the blood of sprinkling. They were to eat the whole Flesh of the Lamb, to
signify our entire taking of Christ upon the terms of the Gospel to be our
Prince and Savior.

6. The effects attributed to the Paschal Lamb, viz. Redemption from Death and
Bondage, clearly represent the Glorious Benefits we enjoy by Jesus Christ. The
destroying Angel past over their houses, and caused the Egiptians to restore
them to full liberty. That which all the dreadful signs wrought by Moses could
not do, was effected by the Passover; that overcame the stubbornness of
Pharaoh, and inspired the Israelites with courage to undertake their journey to
the promised Land. Thus we pass from Death to Life, and from bondage to the
Glorious liberty of the Sons of God, by virtue of Christ's Blood.

3. Reasonable Persons represented our Savior either in their Offices,
actions, or the memorable accidents that befell them. Joseph the beloved of his
Father, sent by him to visit his Brethren, by them unworthily sold to
strangers, and thereby raised to be their Lord and Savior, was a lively type
of him. Jonach three days and nights in the Whales belly, and miraculously
restored, was a type of his lying in the Grave and Resurrection. Moses in his
Prophetical, David in his Kingly Office, praefigur'd him. The Priestly Office
being the Foundation of the other two, and that upon which our Salvation
principally depends, was illustrated by two Glorious types. Melchisedec and
Aaron. The one the high Priest in ordinary, the other the Priest of God by
extraordinary designation. I will briefly touch upon the resemblance between
him and Christ. Although Sacrifices were offered from the Beginning; yet he is
the first to whom that Title is given, as called to that office in a special
manner. The Divinity of Christ's Person, the Eternity of his Office, and the
Infinite Value of his Oblation were shadowed forth by him. Melchisedec is
introduced into the Sacred story as one descending from Heaven and ascending
thither, without any account of his Birth or Death. The silence of the
Scripture is Mysterious: for the Spirit conducted Holy Men in their Writings.
The Levitical Priests descended by Natural Generation from their predecessors,
and had successors in their Office, which was annexed to the race of Levi. But
Melchisedec is represented without Father and Mother, without Beginning and End
of Days, whose Priesthood was permanent in himself. For things and Persons have
a double being, real in themselves, and notional as they exist in the mind; so
that no mention being made of his coming into the World or leaving it, the
silence of the Scripture is equivalent to his continual duration. Now in this
was an adumbration of Christ who was the Eternal Son of God, and really came
from Heaven to execute his office, and ascended thither. And although his
oblation was finished on the Earth, and his intercession shall cease in Heaven;
yet the effects of it shall be Eternal in his People, and the Glory of it in
himself. The Apostle observes an other resemblance between the Supreme Quality
of Melchisedec King of Salem and Jesus Christ: He was King of Righteousness and
Peace, He Governed his Subjects in Righteousness, and never stained those hands
with humane Blood that were employed in the Sacred office of the Priesthood.
And by those Glorious Titles are signified the benefits our Savior conveys to
his People. He is the true King of Righteousness: By which is not intended the
Righteousness that justifies before God, in which respect he is called the Lord
our Righteousness, and is said, to have brought in Eternal Righteousness, for
that respects his Priestly office: in that quality he acquired it. But that
Title signifies his giving most Righteous Laws for the Government of the
Church, and his dispensing Righteous Rewards and Punishments, Eternal Life and
Death, by which he preserves the Majesty of his Laws, and secures the obedience
of his Subjects. And he is King of Peace, by which we are not to understand his
temper and disposition, nor our peace with God, for reconciliation is grounded
on his Sacrifice; nor peace with Conscience the effect of the other, but that
which depends on his Royalty. As the King of Peace he keeps his Subjects in a
calm and quiet Obedience; all their Thoughts and Passions are regulated by his
Will. The Laws of secular Kings are only exposed to the eyes, or proclaimed to
the ears of their Subjects, but His are engraven in their hearts. By the inward
and Almighty efficacy of his Spirit he inclines them to their Universal Duty;
and will bring them to Eternal Peace in his Glorious Kingdom.

Inferences.
First, From hence we have an irrefragable Argument of the Truth and Divinity
of the Gospel: For it is evident by comparing the ancient Figures with the
present Truth, the Copies with the Original, the Pictures with the Life, that
Eternal Wisdom contrived them. For no created Understanding could frame so
various Represen^ations of Christ, and all exactly agreeing with him at such a
distance before His appearance? And if we compare the Predictions with the
Events, it is most clear that only the Divine Knowledge could reveal them. For
otherwise how was it possible, that the Prophets, so many Ages before the
Coming of Christ should predict those things concerning Him, that exceeded the
foresight of all the Angels of Light? What Intelligence could there be between
Moses and David and Isaiah, that lived such a distance of time from one
another, to deliver such things as meet in him as their Center? And these
Prophecies are conveyed to us by the Jews, the most obstinate Enemies of
Christianity, who although they reverence the Letter, yet abhor the
accomplishment of them; So that there can be no possible suspicion that they
are feigned, and of a later Date than their titles declare. Their successive
fulfilling is a perpetual Miracle to justify the truth of our Religion. Our
Savior used this Method for the instruction of his Disciples. Luke 24.44.
These are the words which I spoke unto you, that all things must be fulfilled
which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, Act. 17.2.
and in the Psalms concerning me. And St. Paul framed a powerful Demonstration
from the Scriptures to prove that Jesus was the Christ. In his Writings he
deciphers the riddles of the Law, and removes the Veil, to discover the Face of
Christ engraven by the Divine Artificer. Briefly, by showing the consent
between the two Testaments, he illuminates the Old by the New, and confirms the
New by the Old. Now what Religion is there in the World whose Mysteries were
foretold by the Oracles of God, and figured by his Institutions above two
thousand Years before 'twas exhibited? Whose Doctrine perfectly accords with
the most ancient, venerable and Divine Writings? Can that Religion be any other
than Divine, which God did so expressly predict, and pourtray in such various
manner, for the receiving whereof He made such early Preparations in the World?
Certainly without offering the greatest violence to our rational Faculties,
none can disbelieve it. He degrades himself from the dignity of being a Man,
that refuses to be a Christian.

2. From hence we may understand the incomparable Happiness of Christians, not
only above the Heathens, who by Divine Desertion were wholly Strangers to the
Covenants of Mercy, but above God's peculiar People. The Messiah was the
expectation and desire of Heaven and Earth. Before his coming the Saints had
some glimmerings of Light, which made them inwardly languish after the blessed
Manifestation of it: But that was reserved for Believers in the last Ages of
the World. That ancient Promise (the Morning Blush of the Gospel-Day) That the
Seed of the Woman should break the head of the Serpent, and the Serpent bruise
his heel, signified the bloody Victory the Messiah should obtain over Satan,
but how little of it was understood? One may as well from the sight of the Root
foretell the dimensions of a Tree, the color, figure, and taste of its Fruits,
as from that Prediction have discovered all the parts of our Mediator's Office,
and the excellent benefits resulting from it. The Incarnation, Crucifixion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ are in the Types and Prophecies of the
Old Testament, as Corporeal beings are in the darkness of the Night; they have
a real existence, but no Eye is so clear as to enlighten the obscurity. The
most sharp-sighted Seer might say, I shall see him, but not now. The Ministry
of the Law is compared to the Light of a Candle; 2 Pet. 1.12.
that is shadowy, and confined to a small place. That of the Gospel is like the
Sun in its strength, that enlightens the World. The Prophets who were nearer
the coming of Christ had clearer Revelations, but did not bring perfect Day. As
some new Stars appearing in the Firmament increase, but do not change the
nature of the Light. Isaiah who is so exact in describing all the Circumstances
of our Saviors Death, and his Innocence, Humility, and Patience; that he seems
to be an Evangelist rather than a Prophet, ^et the Ethiopian Proselyte, who
certainly was a proficient in the Jewish Religion, understood not of whom the
Prophet spoke. We see what they were ignorant of, not that our sight is
stronger, but our light is more clear. The full discovery of these Mysteries
was reserved as an honor to our Saviors Coming. He is the Sun of
Righteousness, and the Light that He has shed abroad excels that of all the
Prophets in brightness, as well as his Person transcends theirs in dignity. And
how should the Evangelical Light warm our hearts with thankfulness to God for
this admirable Privilege? The dim foresight of the Messiah, two thousand years
before his Coming, put Abraham in an ecstasy of Joy, how should the full
Revelation of Him affect us? Many holy Prophets and Kings desired to see the
things that we see. They embraced the Promises, we have the blessed effects;
They had the Shadows, we have the Light. They only saw the veiled face of
Moses, We all with open face as in a glass see the Glory of the Lord? Now what
is our Duty becoming this Privilege, But to be transformed into the same Image
from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord? The Life of every Christian
should be a shining Representation of the Graces and Virtues of Christ that are
so visible in the Gospel. Their Holiness and Heavenliness, their Hopes and Joy
should as much exceed the Graces and Comforts of Believers under the Legal
Dispensation, as their Knowledge is incomparably more clear and perfect.

To conclude; From the accomplishment of the ancient Prophecies in the first
Coming of the Messiah, we may confirm our Faith in those glorious Promises that
are to be fulfilled at his second. For it is the same Divine Goodness, the same
Fidelity, the same Power still, upon which we are to build our Hopes. And the
Consideration, that the Perfection of our Happiness is reserved till that time,
should inflame our desires after it.

'Twas the character of Believers of the Old Testament, They waited for the
consolation of Israel: It Is the description of the Saints in the New, they love
the Appearance of Christ. If they longed for his Coming in the Flesh, though it
was attended with all the circumstances of Meanness and Dishonor, the effects
of our Sins; with what ardent and impatient Desires should we hasten His Coming
in Glory, when He shall appear the Second time to them that look for him, Heb.
9.28.
without Sin, unto Salvation? Then He will put an end to all the disorders of
the World, and begin the glorious State, wherein Holiness and Righteousness
shall be crowned, and reign for ever. The Christian Church joins in that ardent
Address to our Savior; Isa. 46.1, 2.
Oh, that thou would rent the Heavens and would come down, that the
mountains might flow down at thy Presence. As when the melting fire burns,
the Fire causes the waters to boil: to make thy Name known to thine
adversaries, that the Nations may tremble at thy Presence. Although the Beauty
and Frame of this visible World shall be destroyed, yet that dreadful Day shall
be joyful to the Saints: For then all the Preparations of Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness; The things that Eye has not seen, ver. 4.
nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, shall be the
everlasting portion of those who love God. Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 48. l. 23. r. desipiendum. P. 85. l. 26. r. Causality. P. 111. l. 1. f.
and. r. ar^ P. 251. l. 23. f. their. r. the. P. 249. l. 7. r. revenge. P. 264.
after person dele h^. P. 317. l. 31. f. lust. r. taste. P. 374. l. 2. after
proceeds dele and. P. 356. after necessity, dele of it. P. 453. l. 31. f. from.
r. of. Other smaller faults are left to the Candor of the Reader to mend.


