A DISCOURSE ON MY Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY's AND MY Lord Bishop of
LONDON's LETTERS TO THE CLERGY TOUCHING CATECHIZING, AND THE Sacrament of the
Supper; WITH What is Required of CHURCHWARDENS and MINISTERS in Reference to
Obstinate RECVSANTS. Also a Defense of EXCOMMUNICATION, as used by the Church
of ENGLAND against such. PREACHED March the 9th and 16th in the Parish Church
of St. Swithins.

By WILLIAM BASSET, Rector of St. Swithin, and St. Mary Bothaw, London.

London, Printed for Tho. Basset at the George in Fleetstreet, 1684.

1 Epist. Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme.
TIME was, when this, and all other Scriptures, which teach us our Duties to
Superiors in Church, and State, have been treated as Malignants; being
miserably racked, and tortured; to make 'em speak the Language of a
Commonwealth. And that Reformation so much talked of, ought to have begun with
the Reformation of this, and diverse other Texts, which stand so stubborn, and
irreconcilable Enemies, to all opposition of Kings, and Monarchical
Governments. I have met with them, who have dealt with this very Scripture, as
some would persuade the Devil does with the Bodies of Witches, molding 'em to
the forms of Beasts, that in terrible Appearances, they may infatuate, and
destroy.

There is one in his Appeal to Fairfax, and his Army, looking on this place as
a Spy, that came to discover the nakedness of his Pamphlet; deals with it, as
Hanun did with David's Ambassadors; shave its beard, and cut its clothes to its
buttocks, then send it away with Shame, and Ignominy. He flies to the Greek
(...), which literally rendered is, to every Humane Creature; and because it
follows, whether to the King; he concludes that the King is an Humane Creature,
that is, as he explains it, a Creature of the People, who have Power over the
work of their own hands, and may unmake him at pleasure; by stripping him of
that Regal Authority, and Power, which they gave him. Much like his gloss on
Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, i. e. says he, to
the Lower House, viz. the Commons; who are the Fountain and Original of all
Power, whence that of Kings, and Nobles do spring; and, Non dat, quod non
habet, it cannot give more than it has it self, and what it does give, it may
recall again. Principles fit to debauch the most wretched Libels; and suited to
the mouths of none, but a Scotch Cargelyte: and so meet to be spoke in no
place, as at Scaffolds, and Gibbets, where they come to receive a just
Recompense for such confounding, and destructive Tenants.

But it is a common rule in expounding Scripture, that that cannot be the
meaning of one Text, which is contradictory to another: But this sense is
contradictory, not only to many Particulars; but to the concurrent Doctrine,
and Practice of Christ, his Apostles, and all Apostolic Men. Nor can that be a
due, and regular Deduction from a Text, which directly contradicts the very
scope, and design of the place, it is deduced from: but such is the case before
us; For it is the very business, and design of this, and the following Verses,
to engage our Submission to Every Ordinance of man; whether to the King, as
Supreme; or to them, that are sent by him: Therefore to conclude from hence,
that Kings may be resisted, and deposed; makes the same Scripture to contradict
it self, viz. That we must submit, and yet may resist 'em: obey, and yet depose
'em.

Therefore we must seek for some more Natural, and honest Explication: (...),
that is, (...), to Order, and Government; or to that disposition of Civil
Government, which is in every Nation; including all the particular Ordinances,
Statutes, and Constitutions of a Society. And it is called an Humane Creature;
Quod ab hominibus ordinetur, and constituatur; because it is ordained, or
appointed by Men: but yet not without a Divine Sanction, in that God himself
Commands us to be subject to it.

Now Monarchy is the first, and most Noble Government in the World; being
founded originally in Families; the first of all Societies. For Monarch, as the
word imports, is the sole Governor in a Society: and therefore is agreeable to
a Paterfamilias, a King, and an Emperor, who have in themselves the same Power
over their Subjects; so far as they are not limited by a Superior Power, as the
Paterfamilias by a King, and Kings by an Emperor; which limitation so far as it
reaches, destroys the Notion of Monarch in the lesser, and transfers it to the
greater. Where there is only one Family, or if many, so far as one is
independent, so far the Paterfamilias, the Father, or Head of it, is a Monarch.
Where there is a collection of several Families into one Body, the chief is a
Monarch still, but yet disterenced from a Paterfamilias by the Title of King.
And where several Kingdoms are United, and Subject to one Head; that Head has
the Title of Monarch in common with the other; but is distinguished from both
by the Title of Emperor. Whence it is said of Nimrod, Genesis 10. 10. that the
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the
land of Shinar: implying that the Families of those places being United under
him, made up a Kingdom; and gave him the Title, and Dignity of a King. And at
the Confusion of Babel, when the World was divided into many Bodies, according
to the number of Tongues, and Languages; every Captain was really a King, or
sole Ruler of that Body. Whence we read Genesis 14. 9. of Nine Kings joined
together in one Battle. The degeneracy of which Government into Aristocracy,
and base Democracy, was a Creature, not existent from the beginning, but arose,
like the Mule, from the Unnatural conjunction of an Horse, and an Ass: and
scarce ever obtained in any place, but by a Rebellion. Therefore it was,
perhaps, from the Nature of the Government, as well as that it was at this time
the Government of the World; that St. Peter proceeds from Government it self,
viz. the Ordinance of man, to the Form, and Modus of it, which is Monarchical,
to the King as Supreme -- Had some Men as much to Plead for Commonwealth, Free
State, or Parliament, they would long since have boasted the jus Divinum of 'em.

2. Having found the meaning of this Ordinance of man; we shall observe the
Command to submit to it; for it is spoke Imperatively (...), Be ye subject: But
we have no Precept, or Example to the contrary; and therefore must yield either
Active, or Passive Obedience. Which is agreeable to the Doctrine, and Practice
of our Blessed Savior; who paid Tribute, rather than make a Disturbance: He
submitted to the High Priest, and Jewish Synedrium; to an Heathen Pilat, and
the most unjust, and unreasonable Sentence. This was not only taught by St.
Peter, and St. Paul, under Nero, the Monster of Mankind; but was sealed by
their Blood under the same Emperor. To this did the Fathers, and Primitive
Churches all agree; whose steps the Church of England follows both in Doctrine,
and Practice. This is so great, and evident a part of Christian Religion, that
it was as Catholic as the Church it self, till first Popery, and from thence
Presbytery, began to appear, and disturb the World.

This is implied in the very Nature, and Reason of Society; which is an Union,
or imbodying of particulars for mutual preservation. For this very Union is it
self a tacit, and mutual Compact to be governed by the Laws, and Rules of that
Society. The making, and execution of which, must be entrusted into a few
hands; and in case any thing shall be ordained, or imposed, that is unlawful in
it self, or destructive of the first ends of Society; there is no Remedy, but
either Patience, or a quiet remove into some other Society, where those Evils
cannot reach 'em; even as the Members of a Family, as Children, Servants, or
others; must conform to the Rules of that Family, or remove. Whence the same
word [Honor] does import the Duties, we owe both to Civil Magistrates, and
Natural Parents. Thus our Savior ordered the Disciples, that when they were
Persecuted in one City, they should fly to another; and not look there to
complain of Grievances, to make Parties, and Plots upon the Government,
indeavoring to secure the best things, viz. Religion, and Property, by the
worst Methods, viz. Rebellion, and Blood.

Nor is there any other Doctrine, that gives either Magistrates, or People, any
security of their Religion, Estates, or Lives. For leave but any hole for
refusals, resistance, or selfdefence, as some call it, to creep in at; and you
give but an opportunity to every State-Mountebank, and Knavish Politician, to
put tricks upon the People, in persuading 'em to a necessity of slighting, or
resisting the Laws, either for the removal, or prevention of those Evils, which
are supposed to license such refusals, or resistance. By which means all
Government would be set upon hinges; and Men would quickly do only what they
have a mind to do: and a Society would be more dangerous, than many wild, and
ungoverned Parts of the World. Inquire of this, and the Nations about us;
Examine the Times, that are past; and you will find, that this Doctrine of
resistance has made more Differences, Wars, and Bloodshed; than all the
Controversies among Princes, in the like space of time, have done. What
Calamities, and Devaslations, may we then imagine there would have been, and
would yet be, had Men liberty upon any account whatever, to slight, and resist
the Government? Therefore the God of Peace, Unity, and Order, has given us
such Rules, and Precepts of Universal Obedience, that there is no room left for
any reasonable Plea to the contrary.

We must therefore submit either Actively, or Passively:

1. Actively, by doing the thing commanded, where it is not contrary to any
Law, or Ordinance of God. For God bids us submit to every Ordinance, without
exception; and therefore to every thing, which himself has not forbidden. And
if any Plead a Prohibition, it must not be from illogical Inferences, sound of
Words, and misapplication of Phrases; but from a Rule as plain, and
satisfactory, as the Command. And if this be produced, yet it can license,

2. Only to a Passive Submission, in suffering the Penalty of Non-obedience.

Now we have here a Precept directed to us from my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, as one of our Parishes is under this Jurisdiction: and another from
my Lord Bishop of London; as the other Parish is a Member of his Lordship's
Diocese. Which Orders even this very Text does oblige us to observe, and do;
unless you can find any Evil in the things commanded; in which case you are
quietly to submit to those Penalties, with which the Law shall punish your
Refusals, or Neglects. For your Information, and Satisfactions in so important
concerns; I shall observe in these Letters, these three things,

1. What is required of you, 2. What of the Churchwardens, and 3. What of me.
It is required of you,

1. That you frequent the Prayers of the Church. 2. That you send your
Children, and Servants to be Catechized. And, 3. That you receive the Sacrament
of the Supper.
The First of these I intend to discourse on another Subject: And therefore
begin,

1. With Catechizing: where we have,

1. The thing in Command, which is Catechizing. 2. The Parties who, Children,
and Servants; and 3. The Persons, that must Prepare, and send 'em, and they are
Parents, Masters, and Mistresses.
1. It is required that we Catechize,

A thing, as some think, founded on that of St. Paul to Tim. 2 Ep. 1. 13. Hold
fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me. Which (...), or
Exemplar, some have taken to be a System, or short Catechetical Discourse on
the fundamental Points of Religion. However it is certain, it was a thing very
early, and Universally Practiced in the Christian Church. And Origin, with
other Learned Men, condescended to this work. There was an Order of Professors
called the (...), or Catechumens, who were the Persons, that learned these
Catechises. Indeed we sometimes find in the Fathers, and Church-Historians;
that these Catecumens are described to be Christians by Prafession, but not yet
Baptized. Which sort were either Children of Heathen, who were not received
into the Church by Baptism, till instructed in the Christian Religion; which is
the Practice of our Church in the case of Jews, Mahometans, etc. and is
agreeable to our Savior's rule, Mat. 28. 19. that all Nations, being then
Gentile, must be taught, or discipled, before Baptism: Or else the Children of
those Christians, who were newly converted themselves, and deferred Baptism,
till Easter, or Whitsontide, which, in some times, and places, were the stated
Seasons of Baptism: Or of such, who delayed it, till the time of Death, as many
did out of a conceit, that Sins after Baptism are unpardonable. But the
Children even of Christians, whether Baptized, or not, were obliged to this
exercise. And the Sons of Constantine the Emperor were put out to Masters, and
Tutors, to be trained up in the Principles of Christian Religion. Whence it
appears,

2. That the Persons to be Catechifed were Neophytes, or young Professors;
which among us are Children, or younger Servants, as my Lord of Canterbury
expresses it; or Children, and Apprentices, as my Lord of London words it. Or
Persons, whose Age, and Condition, may suppose 'em little acquainted with the
Doctrine of the Gospel: and the less they are so, still the more need of this
instruction. Chtechism is in order to Baptism in the Children of Infidels, who
are yet unbaptiz'd: but it is in order to Confirmation, and the Sacrament of
the Supper in the Children of Christians, who are baptized already, therefore
quoere, whether not only those under Sixteen; but Persons of all Ages whatever,
that have not received Confirmation, and the Sacrament, may not in strictness
be required to this Exercise? The Rubric obliges all Children, Servants, and
Apprentices, who have not yet learned the Catechism; without determining the
Age: but because the Law obliges those above Sixteen to receive the Sacrament,
therefore it is presumed these Servants are under Sixteen: and accordingly our
Orders command those above to the Sacrament; and consequently those called to
be Catechized must be presumed under that term.

3. The Persons required to prepare, and send 'em, are Parents, Masters, or
Mistresses. And the Reasons are, because you have both a commanding Power over
'em, and also a trust reposed in you that way; it being your Duties, not only
to feed, and cloth their Bodies; but to provide things wholesome, and necessary
for their Souls too. Parents, and Masters, stand as Priests to their own
Families; where they are to perform all the Duties, and Offices of Christian
Religion; those only excepted, which are restrained to the Public Ministry, as
Preaching, Administration of Sacraments, etc. Though they be yours, yet they
stand related to God: he says you have born 'em to him, Ezekiel. 16. 20. and v.
21. thou have slain my Children. Whence he aggravates the Sin of ill Education,
and abuse of 'em from this very Topic, the relation they stood in to him --
Thou have taken thy Sons, and thy Daughters, whom thou have born unto me, and
these have thou Sacrificed -- these have thou debauched by wicked Opinions, and
Profaneness of Life: Or left disposed to every evil way, and work, for want of
better Principles. As they are committed to your care; so he will require what
you have done with that Depositum, as one calls it, which he has put into your
hands. Whence Joshua undertakes both for himself, and Family, Chap. 24. 15. as
for me, and my house we will serve the Lord. For which causes, as well as for
the Persuasive Arguments from Natural Affections, even Constantine the Great,
as Eusebius relates, De Vita Constant. lib. 4. cap. 51. not only divided his
Empire amongst his three Sons, but took care to enrich 'em with a better
Portion, viz. of Divine, and Spiritual things; being a Tutor, and Example to
'em himself, (...) walking before 'em in the Paths of Virtue, and Religion: and
he adds, (...): He provided 'em the best Masters, and Tutors. You are as Kings,
and Priests to 'em, having the Power to Command, Teach, and Excommunicate,
those, that are stubborn, and impure; whence both God, and Man require, that at
your own Peril, you see those under your Charge, do perform those Duties, that
do lie upon themselves. For which cause David did resolve Psalm. 101. 7. that
not a wicked man should dwell in his house.

And indeed, they, that do not do so, fall short of that great Duty Prove. 22.
6. of training up a Child in the way he should go. And Ephesians. 6. 4. of bringing
them up in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord.

Such are worse, than the very Heathen, who sent their Children to Isocrates,
and others, to be taught Moral Wisdom, which was their Divinity, and fall short
of a Plutarch, who has left us a Tract (...), about the right Education of
Children.

Such leave 'em unable to judge of Doctrines, whether they be of God: and
therefore liable, like the Apostles Children, to be tossed to, and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine. And this is one reason, as some
think, why the Church of Rome loses few, but gains many Proselytes, viz.
because she is more careful, than others, to Catechize, and settle Youth in her
Faith, and Principles.

Therefore we have here an Ordinance from the most Reverend Fathers of our
Church, that commands only an antecedent Duty; a thing founded on Eternal
Reason: on Scripture, and the Laws of the Land. A Duty so plain, and so
Natural, to train up Children in Virtue, and all laudible Knowledges, that the
very Heathen did Court, and Practice it: and as Plutarch has it, (...), (...),
A good Education out-lives Death, travels beyond the Grave, and abides with us
through all the Tracts of Eternal Ages: and therefore being the greatest, and
most lasting good, we can do 'em, even common Nature prompts us to it. There
can be therefore no objection against the thing it self; the Matter lies only
in reference to that Catechism, enjoined by the Church. Which some object
against, upon the account, it supposes Children baptized with Sureties; which
they cannot away with. This Point we will fully answer, and then consider the
Parts of the Catechism it self.

1. They plead that Sureties undertake more than they can perform; therefore
they can neither make use of them, nor teach a Catechism, which supposes their
use.

We Answer,

That the Primitive Christians, whose Faith, and Martyrdoms, were famous in the
World; thought no such Matters: for then Infants had their Sponsores or
Susceptores, and Susceptrices, Undertakers, or Sureties; and because 'twas
thought there was a Spiritual Relation arising between the Parents, and
Sureties; therefore the Child called 'em Godfather, etc. that is,
Father-in-God; and the ancient Saxons Godsibs, by corruption Gossips, Sib
signifying akin, implying that they were akin, in God. Now these answered, in
behalf of the Child, the very same Questions that are used by our Church, viz.
Do thou renounce the Devil, etc. Do thou Believe in God the Father -- the
Son -- the Holy Ghost? -- This was the Universal Practice in the time of
Tertul. Now those Men, who for a good Conscience, suffered so cruel
Persecutions, that Lactan. de Just. cries out, Quis Caucasus! Quae India! What
place, the most fruitful in Monsters, ever bred such cruel and savage Beasts,
as their Persecutors were! yet never censured this part of Baptism, as a sinful
addition, or corruption of this Institution. But because some Men have cheap
thoughts of Antiquity, I will consider the thing it self, and argue from the
very Nature of it, as,

1. What it is they Undertake, and 2. For how long.
1. They undertake that the Child shall renounce the Devil, and all his works;
and believe God's Holy Word, and keep his Commandments. Whence it follows,
Do thou in the Name of this Child renounce the Devil, etc. Do thou
believe in God, etc. Will thou be Baptized, etc. Will thou obediently keep
God's Holy Will, and Commandments, etc. Which is but the first Matter
explained, and put into the form of Questions. Whence the Child says in the
Catechism, that they did Vow Three things in his Name, viz.

1. That he should renounce the Devil, etc. 2. That he should believe the
Articles of the Christian Faith. 3. That he should keep God's Holy Will, and
Commandments, etc.
The meaning of which is only this, that the Child shall be brought up a
Christian, and not a Jew, or Heathen: and that it shall take this Vow, and
Profession upon it self. Therefore in the Exhortation to the Sureties after
Baptism, the whole Charge is comprised in Two things,

1. That they shall teach the Child what a solemn Vow, Promise, and Profession,
it has there made by them: the Matter of which Vow is contained in the
engagement above, viz. That it shall renounce the Devil -- Believe the Articles
of the Christian Faith, and keep the Commands: as a means to which, they are
directed.

2. To Call upon it to hear Sermons, and provide that it may learn the Creed,
the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments: which things, viz. the Creed, Lord's
Prayer, and Commandments, do comprise all the Matter of this Promise; To which
it is added,

3. That when the Child can say these things, and the Church Catechism (which
Catechism I therefore presume the Sureties are obliged to see it learn) they
shall bring it to the Bishop to be Confirmed.

Now here is the whole Matter of Suretiship: which is confessed by those very
Men, that Dispute against it. For they sometimes Plead, that the reason of
Sureties in the First Ages of Christianity, where there was a mixture of
Christians, and Gentiles together, was that there might be a sufficient number
engaged to see the Child brought up a Christian. Therefore, according to them,
the bringing up the Child in the Profession of the Gospel, does comprise the
whole burden of Suretiship.

Then the time this Obligation lies upon the Sureties, is,

2. Till the Child be of Age to take it upon it self; as in the Public
Baptism: which is at Confirmation, as anon.

We will now see how, and when, the Child takes this Vow from his Sureties upon
himself; and that is,

1. At the very learning of these things, for he declares in the Catechism,
that he looks upon himself bound to believe, and do, as they have Promised for
him; and ingages, that by God's help he will do so: And

2. At Confirmation, where the Bishop asks the Children, and that in order to
Confirmation, Do you here in the Presence of God, and of this Congregation,
renew the solemn Promise, and Vow, that was made in your Name at your Baptism;
ratifying, and confirming the same in your own Persons; and acknowledging your
selves bound to believe, and to do, all those things, which your Godfathers,
and Godmothers, then undertook for you? To which the answer is, I do.

It is evident then, that all that charge, which the Church laid upon the
Sureties at the Child's Baptism; the Church takes off from the same Sureties at
the Child's Confirmation. And because Confirmation of the Child is a discharge
of the Sureties; it follows, that the fitting this Child for, and the bringing
him to Confirmation, does comprise the whole Duty of Sureties. And the Rubric
at the end of the Catechism tells us, that the Child shall be confirmed, when
it can say the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments, and answer the other
Questions in that Catechism: which is adaequate to the Charge given. Ergo the
teaching the Child those things, and the bringing him duly to Confirmation, is
a Plenary and total Discharge of the Sureties.

But it will be farther objected, that the Sureties engage, and the Catechism
does express it, that the Child shall keep the Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of its life. Ergo the Obligation seems to lie on the Surety
so long as the Child does live.

We answer, That that Clause respects the Nature of the Baptismal Vow; the
Covenant the Child makes with God by its Sureties at Baptism; and by it self at
Confirmation; but does not respect the engagement of the Surety any farther,
than that the Child shall take this Vow upon it self; whereof this of
Perseverance is a part.

But in case the Child be incapable, or will not learn; or is not suffered by
Parents, Guardians, or Masters; or that Providence removes the Parties so far
asunder, that there is no means, or opportunity left, of performing such
engagements; the will is accepted for the deed: for God requires no more of any
man than what he is able to do: But where Men have any reasonable prospect of
such Impediments, they ought not to engage: but an honest engagement is not
made Sin by an accidental impossibility of Performance. But if Parents shall,
as in Duty bound, do this of themselves, the Sureties have no more upon 'em,
but to see that the thing be done.

2. It is objected, That Heathenism still abounding in the Christian World, the
Church required Sureties, lest one, or two Persons dying, the Child might fall
into Gentile hands, and be brought up as such: But now amongst us Heathenism is
rooted out, therefore the reason of the thing ceasing, the thing it self ought
to cease too; as it did in that case of abstaining from things Strangled, and
from Blood.

We answer,

1. This runs upon a false Supposition, and is no better than a fallacy called
Petitio Principii; which is a taking for granted what ought to be proved, For
the danger of Heathenism was not the only reason of Sureties. For those first
Ages of Christianity, did ground it much upon that Text, 1 Pet. 3. 21. where he
calls Baptism an Answer of a good Conscience toward God. Whence they
conjectured, he hinted at Interrogatories, and Responses, in that Office. How
truly conjectured is beside my Business to inquire; it is enough to the
Objector, that there were other Reasons, than what he assigns.

2. Though the Prosession of Heathenism is not found amongst us, yet the
Practice of Heathenish Debaucheries does abound: and this Religious Education
of Children was designed to keep 'em, not so much from the Name, as from the
Thing.

3. Suretiship was also designed as a fence against those Schisms, and
Heresies, that perplexed the Church; which things obtain amongst us, perhaps,
as much as in those ancient Times, and Places, where Suretiship was never
scrupled. Therefore the reason of Sureties is as great, as Ever: and
consequently may be as profitably, and prudently continued, as at first used.

3. Object. Some think it absurd, that the Charge is not given to the Parents;
but that others are thrust into their place; and bound to do those Duties,
which themselves owe their Children.

Answ. This is a Plea merely from Ignorance; for Parents have an antecedent
Charge laid upon 'em both by God, and Nature; which they stand as much bound to
perform, as if there had been no Surety at all. Therefore the Church lays the
Charge upon others, who had none before: to the end, that they may not exclude,
or excuse the Parents, but be joined with them, for the more certain, and easy
carrying on of the work. The Parents never matter how many Undertakers the
Child has in Temporal concerns; and that they think otherwise in Spirituals,
must be from Ignorance, or a mighty Prepossession, or from too easy, and
indifferent thoughts of Religion it self.

This is a very Christian, and charitable Work, to be Guides to the Blind,
Teachers to the Simple, and Directors of Poor, and (perhaps) neglected Infants,
into the Paths of Truth, and Life. By this means you may turn some to
Righteousness; and thereby increase your own Rewards for Ever.

It tends mightily to the interest, and advance of Religion; for did Sureties
perform their Vows to God (and it is their Sin, if they do not) we should find
it would quickly give a mighty check to the growing madness of the Age.

But in fine, because Suppositions grant nothing, let us suppose there may be
still some evil in the having Sureties; yet according to Mr. Baxter's
resolution of a like case, that supposed Evil cannot affect the Children, or
Parents. For some of the Inhabitants of Daventre in Northamptonshire, as
themselves have confessed to me, inquiring of Mr. Baxter what he thought of the
Cross in Baptism; or of signing Children with it? He answered, Baptism is a
necessary Duty, and in the Church of England we have all the Essential parts of
it: Now, says he, I bring my Child, as the Law Commands, to be baptized; but
if there be any sinful, or unnecessary Additions, without which I cannot have
Baptism; those Additions are nothing to me; I desire not them, but simply
Baptism; what evil there may be in any Additions, being they are imposed, and
not my choice, lies upon the Church, that Commands, and on the Minister, that
uses 'em. Therefore if we consider either the thing it self, or Mr. Baxter's
sense, Parents have not a sufficient excuse for refusing to have their Children
Catechized, because the Catechism enjoined supposes they are baptized by
Sureties.

Whence we come to consider the Catechism it self; and I doubt not, but I may
speak it, not only short, but easy, most comprehensive, and every way most
sufficient to it is end. For,

1. This Catechism teaches the Nature of our Baptismal Vow, and Covenant; which
is to renounce the Devil, and all his works, the Pomps, and Vanity of this
wicked World; and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; to believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith; and to keep God's holy Will, and Commandments
all the days of our life. Where the whole Duty of Man is comprised in a few
words; and suited to the Capacities of the meanest Learner.

2. It teaches the Apostles Creed; whose Antiquity is such, that some have
thought it was made by the Apostles themselves; and was called (...) from
(...), every one of 'em being supposed to cast in his part toward the composing
the whole. It is observed from the Greek, and Latin Fathers, that (...), or
Traditio Apostolorum, was a Tradition supposed to come from some Apostle: but
(...), or traditio Apostolica, was only a very ancient Tradition; which came,
if not from some Apostle, yet from some other near those Times. Now this has
been usually called the Creed of the Apostles; and so Dr. D. in his Greek
Version of our Liturgy, calls it (...) but whether with respect to this
Observation, I cannot say; or how Universally true it may be, is not to be
determined by any, that have not made their Observations in numerous instances
of this kind. The least we can make of it is (and no man will go to prove any
more) that it is a very ancient one, else, we may presume, it had never been
placed by any in the Apostles times; we can trace it very far; and find it
Universally used in the first Ages of Christianity. It was used by the
followers of the Presbyterian Directory, and the Assemblies Catechism; nor do I
remember any Objection then against it, but in that Article, viz. the Descent
into hell; which they wish was either altered, or left out. Yet the same Men
own that descent Virtually, though not Locally; therefore according to them,
that Article is true, and wants only an Explication.

Now the Ancient, and Universal use of it, speaks the esteem, it has ever had
in the Christian World: and the excellent choice our Catechism has made in
teaching this, rather than that of Nice, or Athanasius; which are longer, and
not so suited to every Capacity. And though the Presbyterian Party cavill'd at
the Descent into hell, yet they used this Creed, rather than the Nicoean, whose
Antiquity is great, and which speaks of no such Descent at all: which is an
Argument of their higher Approbation of the other Parts of it. Here, in the
fewest words, and plainest way, are taught the great Mysteries of our Faith:
what we are to believe concerning God the Father, who made the World: God the
Son, who has redeemed all Mankind: and God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies all
the elect people of God. Which makes up a short, but yet a most plain, and
excellent System of all the Credenda, or Matters of pure Faith.

3. It teaches what we are to do, and that from the Decalogue, or Ten
Commandments, which is the sum, and breviary of all Morality. This is the
standing Rule given to the World. The Lex nata, as Cicero calls it, the Law
born with us, and imprinted on the hearts of all Men by Nature, was a
Counterpart of this: All the Moral Discourses of Moses and the Prophets, were
but Comments upon this Text: the Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, and the other
practical Parts of the Gospels, and Epistles; are but an Explication, and a
Vindication of this, from the false Glosses of the Pharisees, and the
Corruptions of the Gnostics.

Therefore we have here the sum of all Practical Religion, and as it is divided
into two Tables; so our Catechism gives us the most short, plain, and close
Explication of each, under those two Heads, viz. Our Duty toward God, and our
Duty toward our Neighbor, that can well be comprised in so few words.

4. This Catechism teaches the Lord's Prayer; which was given not only a
Pattern for us to Pray by; but as a Form for us to use. Therefore he taught it
the Disciples twice, the first time was Mat. 6. 9. And some time after, as St.
Luke relates, Chap. 11. 2. they come to him again, Master teach us to pray; as
if they looked upon that short form suited indeed to the Infancy of their
Discipleship, but not so fitting, now they were taught farther, and came more
near the stature of Men; but he gives 'em the very same again; a tacit reproof
of their ignorance, and reach after Novels. And if we only suppose he might
design it as a form; he could not well have expressed himself more aptly to
that purpose; for Mat. 6. 9. (...), sic, vel ita orate, Pray thus, viz. in
these very words; which is better rendered so, than as our Translation does,
viz. after this manner, which looks somewhat like a Geneva cast, as if it was
intended only as a Pattern to form our conceived Prayers by. And Luke 11. 2.
when ye Pray, (...), etc. say, Our Father, etc. which seems a confining 'em to
those very words; as well as to that matter. Indeed those Men must think very
highly of themselves, that look upon that Prayer, which was composed by Christ
himself, and given to the Twelve, whom he had chosen, and was training up for
the Discipleing all Nations; to be fit only for Children, if for any; but to
stand much below their own improvements. We do not read, that ever our Savior
made use of any other Prayer himself, unless some short Ejaculation, or
particular Petition, suited to a present exigence, as when in his Agony, and
bloody Sweat, If it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And though there
may be many Reasons given, why Public Service ought to be much longer; yet our
Church uses this very form, in every distinct Part of her Service. Here then
Youth is taught a Prayer, short, plain comprehensive, and suited to the Divine
Will, being given us by the Son of God, and Captain of our Salvation, who best
knew how, and what we ought to pray for; a Prayer suited to all Persons, Times,
and Places; and therefore given for the use of all Posterities; which none but
gifted Men, and Pharisaical Spirits, who love much babbling, ever yet despised.
And this our Catechism does explain in a few words, and to the Capacities of
every Learner; in the Answer to this Question, What desire thou of God in
this Prayer?

5. We have the Explication of the Nature of a Sacrament, that it is an
outward, and visible sign of an inward, and Spiritual Grace, given to us, etc.
Whence it descends to the two Sacraments severally. And tells you, that the
outward, and Visible sign, or form in Baptism, is Water, wherein the Person is
baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
that the inward, and Spiritual grace, is a death unto Sin, and a new birth unto
Righteousness, etc.

Hence it descends to the Sacrament of the Supper, and tells you, that the
outward part, or sign is, Bread and Wine, etc. And that the inward part or
thing signified is, the Body, and Blood of Christ, which are verily, and indeed
taken, and received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper. By which the Child is
led from the conceits both of Transubstantiation, and Consubstantiation at
once. For,

1. It tells you that in the Sacrament, and therefore after Consecration, or
Blessing, for till then it is not a Sacrament; there are two distinct Parts,
viz. the sign, which is Bread, and Wine; and the thing signified, which is the
Body, and Blood of Christ; therefore the one is not changed into the other; but
remain distinct still; because the sign, and thing signified, while such,
cannot be the same.

2. It says that this Body, and Blood of Christ is taken, and received by the
faithful; which is spoke exclusively of all others: but if the Bread, and Wine,
was really changed into the Body, and Blood of Christ; or if they did consist
together, and remain in, and under the outward Elements; although still
distinct; yet this Body, and Blood of Christ, would then be verily, and indeed,
taken, and received, by every Communicant, and not by the faithful only. Ergo
according to our Catechism, there is neither Transubstantiation, nor
Consubstantiation in this Sacrament.

And in the last Answer, you have a full, and most excellent account of what is
required of a worthy Communicant; and that is, to examine themselves, whether
they repent them truly of their former Sins; steadfastly purposing to lead a new
life; have a lively faith in God's Mercy through Christ, with a thankful
remembrance of his Death; and be in Charity with all men.

Here then are Homer's Iliads in a Nutshel; a little Body, and System of
Divinity, that comprises the Substance of mighty Volumes! Here the deepest
Points, and most mysterious parts of our Faith, are by easy, and familiar
Expressions, brought down to puerile Capacities! Whereas the Assemblies
Catechism is longer, and runs upon second Notions, which do themselves suppose
some preceding Knowledges, and therefore Children need an Explication of 'em;
and is burdened with numerous Quotations, which are apt to confound, and tire
a young beginner.

This then ought to be preferred for its own sake, and excellency; which lies
both in the Matter it contains; and it is suitableness, and sufficiency to it is
end, if it had not been enjoined by any Ordinance of Man. But since it is so,
we have a double Obligation, first from it self, and then from the Authority,
that Commands it. Therefore if we refuse, we sin against both at once; and in
one Act we are doubly guilty. And certainly Men have the less reason to do so,
because this very injunction does yet leave room for every one to teach another
at home.

2. It is required of you, that you receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
The Persons under obligation are all above Sixteen, and both the Canon and
Rubric, say, that they shall receive at least three times in the year; whereof
Easter shall be one. There are several Statutes, that oblige the Subject to
this Duty: which Laws the People have made themselves in, and by their
Representatives; therefore they can no more complain of the thing, than they
can, that they have had Parliaments; or at least such, that have brought 'em
under this Obligation.

Nor is this founded merely on Humane Laws, but on a Divine Institution and
Command of Heaven; it being the last Precept our Savior gave his Disciples,
before he was made an offering for Sin; Do this in remembrance of me. Therefore
the observance of it must be a means to Salvation, else he lays a needless
burden upon us: and if Nature does nothing in vain, we cannot imagine that the
God of Nature should give us Laws to no purpose. If men may be safe under the
customary neglect of this Sacrament, why not of the other? And if of these, why
not of any other Rules, and Precepts of the Gospel, since they all come with a
Divine Authority impressed upon 'em? They are his Laws, one as well as another.

But some may plead from the Nature of the things themselves; that the Matter
of some Commands is intrinsecally good, and necessary; and therefore was a Duty
even antecedent to a Divine Precept: but this is a pure Positive, that has no
goodness in it self; and therefore had not been a Duty, unless enjoined; and
consequently though they are all Commanded, yet they are not all alike
obliging: because the one has a double Obligation, viz. both from it is own
Nature, and Precept too; the other from Precept only.

We answer, that some will not allow the two Sacraments to be purely Positive,
but that they are founded partly on Nature, and Reason. But suppose 'em such,
and I cannot see the advantage, they can make of it. For pure Positives under
the Law, such as was Circumcision were as severely punished, as Transgressions
in things morally Good, and Evil. For he, that was not Circumcised, was to be
cut off from his People. And what reason can be given, why the neglect of
Positives under the Gospel should not be severely punished, as well as under
the Law? Why the neglect, or contempt of Baptism should not be a Sin now, as
well as that of Circumcision was then? And this of the Sacrament, as well as
that of the Passover? The Author to the Hebrews does argue it to our advantage,
Chap, 2. 2, 3. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
Transgression received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation, which -- was spoken to us by the Lord --? As the
Son of God is greater, than a Created Spirit, so the Transgression of the Law
given by him, is a greater Sin, than a Transgression of the Law given by the
other, and if it be so as to the whole, it must be so as to the like parts of
each Dispensation. Therefore a man has but little cause to hope he may safely
neglect a Positive institution of Christ, when a like neglect was so severely
punished under the Law. There is a contempt of Divine Authority in the neglect
of a Positive, as well as there is of a Moral Duty: and every Contempt, and
Disobedience must have a due recompense of reward.

This is the nearest Communion, we have with God in this World; therefore the
neglect of it, is the greatest neglect of God himself. It is a means of
conveighing Grace, and Life to the Soul; which is strengthened, and refreshed by
the Body, and Blood of Christ, as the Body is by the Bread, and Wine: and a
contempt of the means, is a contempt of the thing it self. For which reasons,
as well as others, the Duty is great, and indispensable.

But I presume few of us here are against the Duty it self, so much as against
the Modus of it, according to the Use of the Church of England. Therefore I
shall answer the most Common, and material Objections, I have met with; that by
giving reasonable, and satisfactory answers to them, I may leave every wilful
neglect without excuse. And some object,

1. Against the Posture we receive it in, which is Kneeling: against which they
plead,

1. That it is not agreeable to that Posture, which the Disciples received it
in.

To which we answer,

That no Pretenders to Christianity in these Parts of the World do receive it
in that Posture, that the Disciples did; which was not sitting, but rather
lying. The same men plead, that they received it in a Table gesture, which to
them was such; but to us is sitting: therefore, say they, we agree with 'em in
a Table gesture, though not in the same Posture of Body: which is nearer to
'em, than the Church of England goes.

We argue,

1. That no reason can be given, why a Table gesture, which is different
according to different places; should be obliging, and not the very Posture, it
was then given in. There is no Precept, nor Example for choosing the one,
rather than the other. Therefore this is merely Election, and not done upon any
sufficient warrant.

2. Here were many Circumstances considerable, as the gesture, lying; the
Persons, to whom, which were Men only; the number, but twelve; the time, at
Night, and that after Supper. Now if we must observe one Circumstance, why not
the rest? It is perfectly humoursom to make one obliging, and not another; when
the Scripture leaves all alike.

2. It is pleaded, that Kneeling seems an Adoration, either of the Table, we
kneel before, or of the Bread, and Wine.

1. Adoration of the Table was a thing never used in the Christian Church.
There are some indeed, that have bowed toward the East, and therefore toward
the Table, because it stands in the East end of the Church; but the reason of
this was, not because the Table stood there, but because they expected our
Savior should, at the last day; appear first in that part of Heaven: from that
saying, Mat. 24. 27. As the lightning comes out of the East, and shines even to
the West: so shall the coming of the Son of man be. For the same reason they
turned toward the East at the rehearsal of the Creed; and from thence we bury
our Dead with their Faces that way.

2. Others have bowed this way, because as the Jewish Temple had it is Holy of
Holies; so they reckon a Divine Presence in this, above what there is in other
parts of the Church. For though every part has the same Consecration, and the
whole is the House of God; yet this, say they, is as the highest Room, and the
Presence Chamber; here the Christian Sacrifice is offered; here the King comes
down to see his Guests; and is graciously present with every Communicant above
what he is in other places; in regard of the intimate, and extraordinary
Communications of himself. Those, that have made it motivum cultus, have ever
denied, that they make it terminativum. All Christian Professors would ever
have looked upon it to be as vile, and unjust an imputation, as those did, who
were accused to worship an Asses Head; or to kill a Child, and eat his Flesh,
and drink his Blood.

We are all Commanded to a Public Worship, and are here determined to such,
and such parts of the Church: and Kneeling is the very Posture of Prayer, which
therefore all, without lawful impediment, ought to use: whence it may as well
be said, that they worship the part of the Seat they Kneel before, as that they
Worship the Table, who Kneel about it at the Sacrament.

This is such a surprising Objection, that the Church, which has been careful
to remove every scruple, never speaks to; as not dreaming any would be so vain
in their Imaginations, as to make such an Objection. And indeed I must look
upon it, not so much a real scruple, as a malicious slander of the Order of our
Church.

2. Some think Kneeling an adoration of the Sacrament of Bread or Wine.

Indeed the worshipping the Bread is practiced in the Church of Rome; therefore
our Church expecting some scruple this way, does declare at the end of the
Communion, That Kneeling is enjoined, for a signification of our humble, and
grateful acknowledgments of the Benefits of Christ, therein given to all worthy
Receivers --; no adoration is intended, or ought to be done; either to the
Sacramental Bread, and Wine, there bodily received; or to any corporal presence
of Christ's Natural Flesh, and Blood. For the Sacramental Bread, and Wine,
remain still in their Natural Substances, and therefore may not be adored; (for
that were Idolatry, to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the Natural
Body, and Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being
against the truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at one time in more places,
than one.

This is so plain, and rational, that where it cannot please, certainly nothing
can. I am confident, few that make this Objection, know of this Declaration; I
have that Charity as to believe, did Men well study what the Church injoyns,
and her Reasons, and Motives why, they would be ashamed of their own scruples.

2. Obj. Some are against the Administration of it by a set Form of Prayer: for
Christ Blessed the Bread, etc. but the form of Blessing is not set down; Ergo
he never intended it should be given by set forms; but that all should be left
to their own conceptions, in imitation of him.

We answer;

That had he repeated the Sacrament, he might, perhaps, have used the same form
again. For he, that gave a form to his Disciples, and that twice; and did
himself Pray the same words three times in the same day, Mat. 26. 39. 42, 44.
cannot in reason be supposed to be against a form in the Sacrament. If what
Christ has not done in this case be so obliging, what he has done in the like
case must be much more obliging: because there is a fairer Expression of his
Will in this, than can be supposed in that: therefore if, because Christ has
not given us a form for the Sacrament, the Church may not appoint one; it must
needs be, that since he has given us a General Form, and indeed a Common
Prayer, suited to all Times, Persons, and Places, that therefore we may use no
other. Therefore while they argue against a Form, they do but put us in a way
to establish that most perfect Form, Christ has taught us, to the exclusion of
all other. Some private Teachers have, at this very Sacrament, as well as at
Baptism; used the same Prayer, without any material Alterations; of which some
instances may be given; now this, though of their own making, is as much a
Form, as that appointed by the Church: yet these Men never judge this unlawful;
why then should they judge the other so? Unless because enjoined, which brings
the dispute to another Question, viz. from Forms to the injunction of them. Even
Presbyterian Writers, as Calvin, Jenkins, etc. tell us, that where there is the
Word taught, or (as some) sound Doctrine, and Administration of the Sacraments;
there is a true Church: Ergo, according to them, the manner of Blessing is not
material to the being of a Church. The truth is, Christ has given us the
Substance, but has left the Circumstances to the Church, as when, how, etc.
and for several Reasons the Church thought fit to appoint very early Forms; and
Luther tells us, that they of the Reformation still retained the Public
Prayers; and Administration of the Lord's Supper. He speaks this by way of
Purgation, and says that their Church is falsely accused, in that it is said,
she has abolished the Missa. This is one difference he makes between
themselves, and that Spirit of Phanaticism, which he elsewhere says is crept
into the World; that delights in corners, etc. And such was the sense of the
Augustane Confession presented to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, by the Duke of
Saxony in the Name of the Protestant Princes, etc. of Germany. Therefore these
Men do reproach, and condemn not only the first Reformers from Popery beyond
the Seas; whom they pretend to admire, and call the Lights of the World: But
our Reformers, and that Reformation too; which even themselves are apt to speak
the greatest Mercy, that God has done to his Church in these Nations. And
indeed such scruples serve only to evidence to what Unreasonable excesses a
wild, and roving spirit is apt to run Men; and how destructive a lawless
Liberty is to all Religion, and Government in the World. And if any Form for
the Communion be allowed, there can be no Objection against that appointed by
our Church; for however some Parts of our Liturgy be cavill'd at, this has
escaped as free as any. For those Men, who put in their Objections against the
Common Prayer to the Convocation called by His Majesty, An. Dom. 1662. had
nothing material in this Service to fix upon: but that they may say something,
they plead a little impropriety of speech in the Prayer after Receiving, viz.
may be fulfilled with thy Heavenly Grace. Which is but a composition signifying
satisfactory measures of Divine Blessings; a being filled full with thy
Heavenly grace. While Mr. Baxter himself has acknowledged, that he has
sometimes heard such Extempore Prayers from his Nonconforming Brethren, that
no wise man could say, Amen to 'em.

3. Object. Is mixed Communions.

To which we plead; that our Savior, who knew the hearts of all men, gave the
Sacrament to Judas, even after he had Covenanted to betray him. For, Luke 22.
14. he sat down with the Twelve, of which number Judas was one: V. 19. 20. he
institutes, and gives this Sacrament; which done, he faith V. 21. The hand of
him, that betrays me, is with me on the Table: Therefore Judas was present,
when it was given; and consequently did receive with the rest, unless excluded,
or suspended by our Lord; which cannot be supposed; because,

1. There is no mention of any such thing, and we ought not to presume beyond
what the Text may seem to bear. And,

2. When our Savior said, that one of them should betray him; V. 21. they are
surpised, and inquire, Master is it I? But such an Exclusion, and such a
Declaration immediately upon it, would have given 'em a just suspicion, who it
was.

The Condition of the Church in this World is mixed, and therefore is compared
to a field of wheat full of tares: which Argument Calvin speaks largely to in
his Institutions against the Anabaptists, and Novatians. It is contray to that
Right, which Baptism gives to every Person, till suspended by the Minister, or
excluded by the Church. Therefore though the impure Corinthian was
meritoriously Excommunicate upon the commission of the Fact; yet he was not
legally shut out, till it was made the Act of the Church: till which time, he
had a Right still to come. For which reason St. Paul was so pressing to that
Church, to purge out that leaven. And in the interim we do not find any
Precept, or Example, of a Separation from the Communion of that Church, because
that Person was not yet shut out. Nor from the Church of Galatia, where there
was such a defection to Mosaic Rites, that St. Paul says, I am afraid of you,
lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. None from Laodicaea, or Thyatira.
And therefore what Texts soever they found this Opinion on are abused: for we
must not expound any place contrary to the Practice of Christ, his Apostles,
and the Churches of God.

These Men make themselves more pure, than Christ himself; and greater
Precisians than the very Apostles. It is a most Pharisaical Doctrine, that
says to others, like the Hypocrite in the Prophet, stand off, for I am Holier
than thou. The wickedness of this conceit will appear from hence, viz.

1. That it adds to the Commands of God; for which cause Calvin says, that
these Men are rigidiores multo quam Paulus, much more severe, than Paul
himself, who bids every one to examine himself, but not others.

2. It puts men upon Uncharitable censures, and judging of other men; contrary
to the Command of Christ, Judge not that ye be not judged; and contrary to the
Apostle, Romans 14. 4. and James 4. 12. Who art thou, that judge another?

3. It supposes another man's Sin, which I have no way encouraged, or been, in
any point, a partaker of; may pollute the Ordinance to me, though duly
prepared my self; contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, Tit. 1. 15. to the pure
every thing is pure.

4. This Doctrine does unavoidably destroy the Churches Unity, Order, and
Peace; for we can never join with any Church in the World, but we shall find
mixed Communions: and therefore must be always shifting, forming, and gathering
of new Churches. And that cannot be a Duty, which puts men upon the breach of
those Undeniable, and indispensable ones, viz. Charity, Unity, Order, and Peace.

This is a fit Opinion to make men Seekers; but such as shall never find.
Therefore Calvin says, Inst. l. 4. cap. 1. that men do in vain seek a Church
nullo naevo inspersam, that has no blemish, and mixture in it. And if any
pollute this Ordinance, I should think it is these very men, who are so
uncharitable, proud, and censorious, which are the Sins of the Devils; and
stand as directly opposite to the Nature, and designs of the Gospel, as the
grossest lusts of the Flesh.

Calvin says, Institut. l. 4. cap. 1. he has no excuse, qui externam
Ecclesiae communionem deserit: ubi Dei verbum praedicatur, and Sacramenta
administrantur, who forsakes the external Communion of that Church, where the
Word is Preached, and the Sacraments administered. Elsewhere he says, such are
Phrenetici Spiritus, mad hotheaded People. And tanti Ecclesiae suae
Communionem facit Dominus, etc. the Lord so highly esteems the Communion of his
Church, that he reckons those Renegado's, and Desertors of their Religion,
whoever shall alienate themselves from any Christian Society, which has the
Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments. And Poterit vel is Doctrinae, vel in
Sacramentorum administratione -- Vitii quidpiam obrepere, quod alienare nos ab
ejus Communione non debeat. Every Error in the administration of the Word, and
Sacraments, is not a sufficient cause of Separation. Luther on the Epistle to
the Galatians, says they are Apostles of Men, but never sent by God, who creep
into corners, and do not enter into the Public Church. According to whom,
separation upon any of these Pleas is an evidence of a wild, and Fanatic
Spirit. Mr. Calamy himself at last saw the endless Confusions, which
Pharisaical Spirits, that think no Church pure enough for 'em, began to lead
men to; and therefore about the middle of the Epistle to the Godly man's Ark,
endeavors to check this growing Mischief; Take heed of separating from the
Public Assemblies of the Saints. I have found by Experience, that all our
Church Calamities have sprung from this root; He, that separates from the
Public Worship, is like a man tumbling down an hill, and never leaving, till
he comes to the bottom of it. I could relate many sad Stories of Persons
professing Godliness; who out of dislike to Church-Meetings, began at first to
separate from 'em: and after many changes, and alterations, are turned some of
'em Anabaptists, some Quakers, some Ranters, some direct Atheists. But I
forbear, you must hold Communion with all those Churches, with which Christ
holds Communion: you must separate from the Sins of Christians, but not from
the Ordinances of Christ. Take heed of unchurching the Churches of Christ, lest
you prove Schismatics, instead of being true Christians.

When men once have an itch after Novelties, under the notion of Reformation;
every one is finding fault with what others do, till at last they can find no
Church, or Communion pure enough for 'em; because not suited in all Points to
their own humors. Therefore Mr. Calamy in the next Page does wish us to avoid,
as Soul-Poyson, all Doctrines, which

1. Tend to Liberty, --

2. Which hold forth a superstitious strictness, above what is required in the
Word.

3. Which are Antimagistratical, and Antiministerial.

But such is this Doctrine of refusing the Sacrament on pretense of mixed
Communions; and therefore, according to Mr. Calamy, ought to be avoided as
Soul-Poyson. We need no other Arguments against a Separation from our Church,
than the Writings, and Practices of the first Reformers from Popery both beyond
the Seas; and in this Nation. The Puritans against the Congregational way; and
(which differs in terms only) the late Presbyterians against the Independents.

4. Object. is against Compulsion, especially from the Civil Magistrate.

This is no more than Hezekiah did in the case of the Passover, which answered
to this Sacrament. For 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. Proclamation was made from Bersheba to
Dan; that they should come, and keep the Passover: which was occasioned by the
neglect of it, as now amongst us: and this stands recorded to the praise of
this Pious King. Now the Gospel does not lessen the Power, or the care of Kings
over their Subjects. Christ, and his Apostles, never tampered with the Civil
Government. Religion then never stripped the Crown of Prerogatives under
Pretense of the Peoples Privileges. Therefore Kings may Command as much now, as
then. Whence Mr. Baxter himself does grant, that the King may Command the
Subject to his Duty. Else certainly he may Command nothing at all. And in his
Apol. That the Kings Laws bind the Conscience, to a Conscionable Performance of
all his lawful Commands: And therefore to this Duty of the Sacrament in
particular, this being a lawful Command, because commanded by Christ himself.
But let it be on all sides supposed a Duty, yet still we have two Objections
remaining; as,

1. They are not prepared.

We Answer,

There may be a Proximate, and accidental unmeetness even in good Men; for some
emergent occasions, some sudden surprise, etc. may discompose, and disorder
the Soul: at which time we do not censure a forbearance: But an habitual
unmeetness is inexcusable. God, and the King, exact this Duty of you, and if
from one Sacrament, and Year to another; you still cry, you are unprepared; the
Sin is your own. Your neglects cannot null a Duty, and take off the Obligation
of a Law. Should they wait, till you say, you are ready, that day, I believe,
would never come.

Do thou really think, thou art unprepared, and yet make no Conscience of
preparing thy self? This implies the giving up of thy self, as lost for ever.
For if thou art unmeet for this Ordinance, thou art unmeet for the Fellowship
of the Saints: if unmeet to eat, and drink in his Presence, besure thou art
unmeet for the Beatifick Vision. For he, that is not qualified for a remoter,
cannot be qualified for a more intimate Communion.

This brings thee into a necessity of Sin; for he, that is idely unprepared;
sins if he eats; and sins, if he lets it alone; for the one is an abuse, the
other a contempt of this Ordinance.

Can thou plead, thou art unprepared to send thy Children, and Servants, to
be Catechized? yet observe it, the same Men, that neglect the one, do neglect
the other. Which gives me to presume, that this is but a Pretense, not a real
Cause: and that thou think thy self not so much unmeet for the Ordinance, as
the Ordinance unmeet for thy self. Let men comply with their Duty in all
things, but this; and then I shall have some Charity for such a Plea.

2. Object. If it be never so much a Duty in it self, yet it is not so to them;
because their Consciences are not satisfied, and whatever is not of Faith is
Sin.

Answ. If it be thy Conscience, it is such an one, as brings thee into a
Necessity of Sin. For if thou eatest, thou sinnest against thy self: if thou
eatest not, thou sinnest against God, and the King. Now God never brings any
man into a Necessity of Sin: therefore this is not a Conscience according to
Godliness, as some speak, but an Erroneous one. Therefore such men ought to use
all the means of Information, that they may come without prejudice to this
Duty. And in the mean time must be content to suffer. For they must not think,
their Dissatisfactions may supersede the Laws. For if so, all Laws would be
made useless; and no man would suffer for any thing, which they please to plead
Conscience for.

It is but few years, since the Parliament, by way of Jest imposed the
Sacrament, etc. upon all Persons in Places of Trust, or Profit; which Act is
still in force, and was promoted especially by the late Lord Shaf -- and
Presbyterian Party; under Pretense of discovering, and removing Papists. But
not a man then cried out of Compulsion, and Impositions on the Consciences of
Men; nor were any excused from these Pleas, that they are not prepared; or that
it is against their Consciences. Whence they lay that upon others, which they
reckon a grievance themselves. And would not be done by, as themselves do to
others. Down from late Representatives, to Magistrates, and Common Councils,
even to the Petty Offices, and Places of the Kingdom, I have scarce yet met
with a man, but what, for the gaining his Point, could allow of an Occasional
Communion; but when there is nothing but plain Duty in the case, we have noise
about Compulsion, and Tender Consciences; are clogged with Cases, and Scruples;
and hear nothing but touch not, taste not, handle not. Which renders the
sincerity of this Plea much suspefuspected. And because some will never be
wrought upon, we come,

2. To what is required of the Churchwardens: and that is, to Present such as
obstinately refuse. They are sworn to do the Duties of Churchwardens; which
Duties are contained in the Book of Articles to that purpose; where the
Presenting such is expressly required. No man will presume that the Fathers of
our Church will exact that of you, which is not your undoubted Duties: and was
it put upon issue, whether this be so or not; no man will doubt, which way the
trial would go.

Church wardens are the Guardians of the Church; whose Obligations reach not
only to the Vtensils of it; but to Loiterers, and Disturbers of the
Congregation; to all Contemners, and Depravers of the Liturgy: to all
obstinate Neglecters of Public Prayers, Catechizing, and Sacraments, etc.
Whence they are called the Bishops Eyes; by whom he sees the State, and
Condition of every Parish within his Jurisdiction, all which they are Sworn to
do; they have given their Faith; and the Oath of God is upon 'em: and how they
may satisfy their Consciences without performing the Matter of that Oath,
needs a good Casuist to tell us. In this case Pity, and Charity to others, is
the greatest Cruelty, and Injustice to your selves. Such Favors are downright
Perjuries. And there is no man, that desires you to commit this Sin for his
sake, that would willingly bear the Punishment of it in your stead.

3. It is required of us, that, in case of failure; we should Present the
Churchwardens and such as obstinately refuse at once. The Law says, they
shall, but we may Present: we have the Power, but they the Necessity. Yet how
far the Duty of obeying every Ordinance of Man; and the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, may oblige us in this particular: and how far the word [obstinate]
is to be taken, seems worthy our Considerations. And because that term
[obstinate] seems a limitation restraining this Duty of Presenting to some
Neglecters only; that we shall present, not all, but such; I purpose in a day,
or two; to present every Family in both Parishes with a Copy of these
Discourses; that they may peruse, and weigh 'em at leisure: whereupon I hope
that all under Obligation will either receive this Easter, or give me the
reasons of their delays; that we may be able to judge whether they be
Obstinate, or not; and be capable of showing our selves both Sober, and Honest.

The Punishment then of obstinate refusals is Excommunication, which some men
do encourage themselves to the hazard, and contempt of, by pleading,

1. That it was not used anciently, as now, upon light Causes, as differences
in the mere Circumstantials of Religion:

We answer: Differences may be little in themselves, but if they lead to
Separation, they are not to be accounted little; because they then destroy
Unity, Charity, and Peace. Therefore it was decreed of old, that if any keep
Separate Meetings, the Presbyter shall be deposed; and the People
Excommunicate: and there be instances of several, that have suffered
accordingly. The Infancy, and Persecutions of the Church, not only hindered her
Order, and good Government; but kept many things practiced in those times from
our knowledge. If there is uncertainty as to the Succession of Bishops, and
that in the most famous Churches then in the World, as Rome, Jerusalem,
Antioch, and Alexandria; we must not expect an account of all the Uses, and
Reasons of Excommunication in those times. What notices we have are sufficient,
though there was much more done, than recorded. Nor is this Punishment beyond
the Merits of the Cause; For Schism is directly contrary to the Nature, and
designs of the Gospel, which is to Unite us in one Body, to bring us into one
Sheepfold, etc. And has a more direct, and immediate tendency, to the
Confusion, and Ruin of Church, and State, than Lusts of the Flesh have.

2. They plead, that as Excommunication is called a delivering to Satan, so
such Persons were tormented in Body, or Mind, or both; but now we see no such
things, whence, say they, it is not regular, or not done upon due, and
sufficient Causes among us.

We answer, That Miracles were wrought for the more powerful Conviction of the
Gentiles; and the more the Gospel obtained, the less frequent they grew; till
they ceased in the Third Century, unless in some rare instances: So those
sensible Evidences of Divine displeasure upon Excommunicate Persons were
extraordinary, and designed only to make Excommunication terrible to all Ages
of the Christian World, and therefore after some instances ceased too. Now men
may as well argue against the Gospel it self, because not backed by Miracles
still; as against the Validity of Excommunication, because not followed now by
such dreadful Visitations, as before. Korah, etc. for Schism, and Rebellion,
went down alive into the Pit; they, that offered strange fire were consumed by
fire from Heaven: those, that tempted God in the Wilderness were destroyed of
the destroyer, etc. which things were writ for our Admonition, 1 Cor. 10. that
we might learn to avoid those Sins, against which God had so declared his wrath
from Heaven. But after-Ages finding no such Judgments on such Offenders, may as
well conclude these Sins differ in Causes, and Circumstances, and are not the
same in Guilt, though in Fact; as that Excommunication is not valid, and
regular, because Persons are not buffeted by Satan, as soon as cast out of the
Church.

2. They plead, That in after-ages, Excommunication had powerful Effects on the
Minds and Consciences of Men: in either bringing 'em by Repentance into the
arms of the Church, or by leaving 'em under a reprobate sense; but now no such
things. Ergo -- To which for brevity only thus;

1. Those times were many Ages nearer the Apostles, whence those instances of
Wrath upon Excommunicate Persons were more fresh, and warm amongst 'em, and
therefore made more deep impressions upon the Minds of Men, than now.

2. The causes of Excommunication then were Three, viz.

1. Practical Immoralities.

2. Falling to Gentilism; in Sacrificing to Idols, and delivering up their
Bible in time of Persecution; for which they were called Traditores, and were
hardly received into the Church.

3. The falling away to Schismatical, and Heretical Congregations; as appears
from Apostolical Canons, Councils, and the Practice of the Church.

Now the two first sorts, being Excommunicate, had no Church to fly to; nothing
under which they could shelter, and maintain their hopes of Heaven. And
therefore they were easily convinced, and persuaded to return. But now
generally Men do first leave the Church, before the Church does cast 'em out:
they become usually Members of Separate Congregations, where they promise
themselves a more certain way to Heaven; than amongst us; and therefore neither
matter Excommunication, before it comes; nor are capable of seeing their
Dangers, when under it. The case is like that of the Publicans, and Harlots on
the one hand, and the Pharisees on the other: not that I Parallel the Persons
so much as the Case; the former had no Religion to palliate their Sins, and
create an hope; and therefore were easily convinced, and brought to a Savior:
but the other trusting to their own Religion would never be wrought upon.

Then the third sort, that were Excommunicate for Separation; they stood upon
like terms with them amongst us; each were then, and are now, Members of a
Congregation, where they expect Salvation: but here lies a difference, in those
ancient times all men, that were not of their own Party did avoid 'em; and
would hold no Society, and Commerce with 'em, which tended mightily to shame,
convince, and reduce 'em. But now even they, that are of the Church, make
hardly any difference between Excommunicate Persons, and others; as if the
thing were not worthy their Considerations, unless, perhaps, as a Civil, and
Politic instrument of Government; while all others look upon 'em as
Confessors, comfort, and encourage 'em; which naturally tends to the blinding,
hardening, and rendering 'em mightily incapable of seeing the Evil, and Dangers;
they are under.

Now as to the latter part of the Objection, viz.

2. Those, that lay under Excommunication then, were usually given up to a
Reprobate sense; but now they continue as sober, honest, and well-disposed
after, as before it: whence they conclude against the Validity of it as used
amongst us, that it binds not in Heaven.

We answer, That by giving up to a Reprobate sense, and hardening the heart, we
understand two things,

1. God's withdrawing his Grace: And,

2. Men's betaking themselves thereupon to those several Evils, they are
disposed to.

Some to Debaucheries, and Atheism: others to unlawful Schisms, and
Disturbances; in which many become more blind, hardened, and incorrigible; more
satisfactorily, and immoveably fixed in Delusions, after Excommunication, than
before. Which must be imputed to God's departure from them, who depart from his
Church, slight her Admonitions, and contemn her Censures. We may find too many
instances to prove this, that a man may be under a Reprobate sense, and yet
seem Religious to himself, and others; as many Heretics did. Therefore these
Objections can take off nothing from the Weight, and Power of Excommunication;
but leaves it terrible to every Man, that has any regard to his Eternal Safety.

We have now one Argument in the Text, to press us to this Submission to every,
and therefore to this Ordinance of Man; viz. for the Lord's sake: that is,

1. Because the Lord Commands it: therefore out of Conscience of our Duty to
him, we should do it. And,

2. God is the Author, and Defender of all Order, and Government, Romans 13. 1.
The Powers, that are, be ordained of God: and V. 4. He is the Minister of God,
therefore we should Submit to him, for his Sake, who has set him over us. Fear
God, Honor the King, are inseparable Duties; he can be no good Christian, who
is no good Subject, and no good Churchman.

FINIS.

