A Funeral Sermon, PREACHED Upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent Divine
Dr. Thomas Manton, Who deceased the 18th of October, 1677.

By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange, 1678.

1 THESE: 4. 17. The last Clause. -- And so shall we ever be with the Lord.
THE Words are a Consolation, brought by the Apostle from the tbird Heaven,
where he was by extraordinary Privilege raised, and saw and understood how
great a Happiness it is to be with Christ. And they are addressed to Believers,
to moderate and allay their Sorrows for the Death of those Saints, who by their
Conjunction in Blood or Friendship were most dear to them. Thus he speaks in
the 13 Verse, I would not have you be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which
are asleep, that ye sorrow not as others, which have no hope. The Heathens,
that were Strangers to a future State, and thought that after a short Course
through the World, Mankind would be lost for ever in the Dead Sea, might with
some pretense abandon themselves to the Extremity of their Passions. But
Christians, to whom Life and Immortality are revealed by the Gospel; who
believe, that as JESUS died and rose again; So all that sleep in JESUS, that
persevere in Faith and Holiness to the end, GOD will bring with Him, are
forbid, upon the most weighty Reasons, to indulge their Grief in excess. The
Union between Christ and Believers is inviolable; and from thence it follows,
they shall be Partakers with him in his Glory. The Soul immediately after Death
shall be with Christ: vvhiles the Body reposes in the Grave, it is in his
Presence who is Life and Light, and has a vital joyful Rest in Communion with
him. And in the appointed Time the Bodies of the Saints, those happy Spoils,
shall be rescued from the dark Prison of the Grave, and be Sharers with their
Souls in immortal Glory.

This consummate Happiness of the Saints* the Apostle assures from the highest
Authority, the Word of the Lord; and describes his glorious Appearance, so as
to make the strongest Impression on our Minds. For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven, with a Shout, with the Voice of an Archangel, and with
the Trump of God; and the Dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are
alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet
the Lord in the Air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Then Death, the
last Enemy, so fearful and feared by Men, shall be destroyed. And the Captive
Prince of the World, with all the powers of darkness, and all other rebellious
Sinners that obstinately joined with him, shall be brought in Chains before
his dreadful Tribunal: and after the great Act of the Universal Judgment shall
be completed, then shall the Saints make their triumphant Entry with the
Captain of their Salvation, into his Kingdom, and shall ever be with the Lord.

The general Proposition from the Words is this; The Saints after the
Resurrection shall be Completely and Eternally happy in the Presence of Christ.

To make this supernatural Blessedness more easy and intelligible to us, the
Scripture describes it by sensible Representations. For while the Soul is
clothed with flesh, Fancy has such a dominion, that we can conceive of nothing
but by Comparisons and Images taken from material things. It Is therefore set
forth by a Feast, and a Kingdom, to signify the Joy and Glory of that State.
But to prevent all gross conceits; it tells us that the Bodies of the Saints
shall be spiritual, not capable of hunger and thirst, nor consequently of any
refreshment that is caused by the satisfaction of those appetites. The objects
of the most noble senses, Seeing and Hearing, the pleasure of which is mixed
with Reason, and not common to the Brutes, are more frequently made use of to
reconcile that glorious State to the proportion of our minds. Thus sometimes
the Blessed are represented placed on Thrones with Crowns on their heads;
sometimes clothed in White, with Palms in their hands; sometimes singing Songs
of triumph to Him that sits on the Throne, and to their Savior. But the
reality of this Blessedness infinitely exceeds all those faint Metaphors.
Heaven is lessened by Comparisons from earthly things. The Apostle who was
dignified with the revelation of the successes that shall happen to the Church
till Time shall be no more, tells us, it does not appear what we shall be in
Eternity. The things that God has prepared for those that love him, are far
more above the highest ascent of our thoughts, than the Marriage Feast of a
great Prince exceeds in splendour and magnificence the imagination of one that
has always lived in an obscure Village, and never saw any ornaments of State,
nor tasted Wine in his Life. We can think of those things but according to the
poverty of our Understandings. But so much we know that is able to sweeten all
the bitterness, and render insipid all the sweetness of this World.

This will appear by considering that whatever is requisite to constitute the
perfect Blessedness of Man, is fully enjoyed in the Divine Presence.

1. An exemption from all evils, is the first concondition of perfect
Blessedness. The sentence of wise Solon is true in another sense than he
intended, -- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
No Man can be named happy whilst in this valley of Tears. But upon the
entrance into Heaven, all those evils that by their number, variety, or weight
disquiet and oppress us, are at an end.

Sin, of all evils the most hateful, shall be abolisht. And all Temptations
that surround us, and endanger our innocence, shall cease. Here the best Men
lament the weakness of the flesh, and sometimes the violent assaults of
spiritual enemies. St. Paul himself breaks forth into a mournful Complaint, O
wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of Death? And when
harrass'd with the buffets of Satan, renews his most earnest addresses to God
to be freed from them. Here our Purity is not absolute, we must be always
cleansing our selves from the relics of that deep defilement that cleaves to
our nature.

Here our peace is preserved with the Sword in our hand, by a continual Warfare
against Satan and the World. But in Heaven no ignorance darkens the Mind, no
passions rebel against the sanctified Will, no inherent pollution remains. The
Church is without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. And all Temptations that
war against the Soul, shall then cease. The Tempter was cast out of Heaven, and
none of his poisoned Arrows can reach that Purified Company. Glorious Liberty!
here ardently desired, but fully enjoyed by the Sons of God above.

And as Sin, so all the penal consequences of it are quite taken away. The
present Life is an incurable disease, and sometimes attended with that sharp
sense that Death is desired as a remedy, and accepted as a benefit. And though
the Saints have reviving Cordials, yet their joys are mixed with sorrows, nay,
caused by sorrows. The tears of Repentance are their sweetest refreshment. Here
the living stones are cut and wounded, and made fit by Sufferings for a Temple
unto God in the New Jerusalem. But as in the building of Solomon's Temple the
noise of a hammer was not heard, for all the parts were framed before with that
exact design and correspondence, that they firmly combined together. They were
hew'n in another place, and nothing remained but the putting them one upon
another in the Temple; and then, as sacred, they were inviolable. So God, the
wise Architect, having prepared the Saints here by many cutting Afflictions,
places them in the Eternal Building, where no voice of Sorrow is heard. Of the
innumerable Company above, is there any Eye that weeps, any Breast that sighs,
any Tongue that complains, or appearance of Grief? The Heavenly State is called
Life, as only worthy of that title. There is no infirmity of Body, no Poverty,
no Disgrace, no Treachery of Friends, no Persecution of Enemies. There is no
more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor shall there be any more Pain: Rev. 21.
4.
for former things are past away. God will wipe away all tears from the eyes of
his People. Their Salvation is complete in all degrees. Pure Joy is the
Privilege of Heaven, unmixed Sorrows the punishment of Hell.

A concurrence of all positive Excellencies is requisite to Blessedness. And
these are to be considered with respect to the entire Man.

1. The Body shall be awaked out of its dead sleep, and quickened into a glorious
immortal Life. The Soul and Body are the essential parts of Man; and though the
inequality be great in their operations that respect Holiness, yet their
concourse is necessary. Good Actions are designed by the Counsel and Resolution
of the Spirit, but performed by the Ministry of the Flesh. Every Grace
expresses it self in visible actions by the Body. In the sorrows of Repentance
it supplies tears, in Fastings its appetites are restrained, in Thanksgivings
the tongue breaks forth into the joyful praises of God. All the victories over
sensible pleasure and pain are obtained by the Soul in conjunction with the
Body. Now it is most becoming the Divine Goodness not to deal so differently,
that the Soul should be everlastingly happy, and the Body lost in
forgetfulness; the one glorified in Heaven, the other remain in the dust. From
their first setting out in the World to the Grave they ran the same Race, and
shall enjoy the same Reward. Here the Body is the Consort of the Soul in
obedience and sufferings, hereafter in fruition. When the Crown of Purity, or
Palm of Martyrdom shall be given by the great Judge in the view of all, they
shall both partake in the honor. Of this we have an earnest in the
Resurrection of Christ in his true Body, who is the first fruits of them that
sleep. 1 Cor. 15.
He shall change our vile Bodies, Phil. 3. 1.
that they may be fashioned like to his glorious Body, according to the working
of his Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. A substantial
unfading Glory will shine in them infinitely above the perishing Pride of this
World, that is but in appearance, like the false colors painted on the
feathers of a Dove by the reflection of the Light, which presently vanish, when
it changes its posture, or the Light is withdrawn. Indeed what can be more
glorious than to be conformed to the Humanity of Christ, the seat of all Beauty
and Perfection. This Conformity shall be the work of his own hands. And when
Omnipotence interposes, nothing is difficult. The raising the Body to an
unchangeable state of Glory, is as easy to the Divine Power, as the forming it
at the first in the womb. As the Sun labors no more in the Mines in the
forming Gold and Silver, the most precious and durable Metals, than in the
production of a poor short-lived Flower.

II. The Soul shall be made perfect in all its faculties.

1. The Uuderstanding shall clearly see the most excellent Objects. 1 Cor. 13.
Now we know but in part. The naked beauty of Divine Things is veiled, and of
impossible discovery. And the weakness of the mind is not proportionable to
their dazzling brightness. But when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away. In that enlightened state, the glorious
manifestation of the objects shall as much exceed the clearest revealing of
them here, as the Sun in its full luster, one beam of Light strained through a
crevice in the Wall. And the Understanding shall be prepared to take a full
view of them Therefore the Apostle compares the several Periods of the Church
in respect of the degrees of Knowledge, to the several Ages of this Life. When I
was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child:
but when I became a Man, I put away childish things. In Children the organs,
either from an excess of moisture, or their smalness, are indisposed for the
vigorous exercise of the Mind: some strictures of Reason appear, a presaging
sign what will be, but mixed with much obscurity. But when the organs are come
to their just proportion and temperament, the Soul displays its strength and
activity.

All things of a supernatural order shall then be clearly discovered. The
contrivance of our Salvation, the ways of conducting us to Blessedness, which
are objects of a sublime nature, will afford an exquisite pleasure to the
Understanding. All the secrets of our Redemption shall be unsealed. The great
Mystery of Godliness, the Incarnation of the Eternal Son, and his according
Justice with Mercy, shall then be apparent. The Divine Counsels in governing
the World, are now only visible in their wonderful effects either of Mercy or
of Justice, and those most dreadful; but the Reasons of them are past finding
out. But what our Savior said to Peter, What I do, thou know not now, but
shall know hereafter, is applicable to these impenetrable dispensations. All
the original Fountains of Wisdom, as clear as deep, shall then be opened. We
shall then see the beauty of Providence in disposing temporal things in order
to our eternal felicity. We now see as it were the rough part, and Knots of
that curious Embroidery: but then the whole Work shall be unfolded, the
sweetness of the Colors, and proportion of the Figures appear. There we shall
be able to expound the perplexing Riddle, How out of the Eater came meat, and
out of the Strong came sweetness. For we shall know as we are known.

We shall see God. Our Savior tells us, This is Life Eternal, to know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The beginning and
perfection of our Happiness consists in this knowledge. The Deity is spiritual
and invisible to the Eye of the Body, infinite and incomprehensible to the
Soul. But we shall then so clearly understand the Divine Perfections, that our
present knowledge compared to that, is but as the seeing a dark resemblance in a
Glass, to the clear view of a Person in the native beauty of his Face. God is
most gloriously present in Heaven. For according to the degrees of excellence
in the Work, such are the impressions and discoveries of the Virtues of the
Cause. Now all sensible things in the low order of Nature, are but weak
resultances from his Perfections, in comparison of their illustrious Effects in
the Divine World. The Glories of the Place, and of the Inhabitants, the Angels
and Saints, clearly express his Majesty, Goodness and Power. But in a
transcendent manner he exhibits himself in the glorified Mediator. He is styled
the brightness of the Father's Glory, and the express image of his Person; not
only for his equal Perfections in respect of the unity of their Nature, but to
signify that God in the Person of the incarnate Mediator is so fully
represented to us, that by the sight of him we see God himself in his
unchangeable Excellencies. This appears by the following words, that having
purged us from our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high,
for they respect the Son of God as united to the humane Nature, in which he
performed the Office of the Priesthood, and took possession of his glorious
Kingdom. During his humble state, the Divine virtues, Wisdom, Goodness,
Holiness, Power, were so visible in his Person, Life, Revelations, and
miraculous Works, that when Philip so longed for the sight of the Father as the
only consummate Blessedness, Show us the Father, and it suffices; He told him,
he that has seen me, has seen the Father also. But how brightly do they appear
in his triumphant Exaltation. 'Twas his Prayer on Earth; Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my Glory. Inestimable Felicity! whether we consider him in the respect of an
Object, that incomparably transcends all the created Glory of Heaven, or in the
relation of our Head, on a double account; partly because he was debased into
the form of a Servant, and suffered all Indignities and Cruelties of Sinners
for us, has received the Recompense of his Meritorious Sufferings, the triumph
of his Victory, being glorified with the Father with the Glory he had before
the World was; and partly because every Member shall be conformed to him in his
Glory; We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And all Felicity
and Glory is comprised in that Promise. The sight of the Face of Moses when
radiant, had no transforming efficacy; for the light of it was not in him as
its source, but by derivation. But God is Light essentially, and the sight of
his Perfections will be productive of his Likeness in us, so far as it may be
in a restrained subject. When our Savior was upon the holy Mount, and one
vanishing Beam of Glory appeared in his Transfiguration, Peter was so
transported at the sight, that he forgot the World and himself. How ravishing
then will the sight of him be in his triumphant Majesty, when we shall be
transfigured our selves?

2. As they shall behold God's Face, know his most amiable Excellencies; so
they shall love him as perfectly as they know him. To the illustrations of the
Mind, there are correspondent impressions on the Heart. In the present state
our Love is imperfect, and as Fire out of its sphere, dies away, by our neglect
to feed it with proper materials, enamouring considerations of God. But it is
not so in Heaven: there the Divine Sun attracts every Eye with the light of its
beauty, and inflames every Heart with the heat of his Love. The continual
Presence of God is in different respects the Cause and Effect of our Love to
him. For there is no more powerful Attractive to love him, than to see him; And
Love keeps the thoughts undivided from him. God is Love, and will kindle in us
a pure Affection that Eternity shall never lessen.

Our Affections that are now scattered on many things, wherein some small
Reflections of his Goodness appear, shall join in one full Current in Heaven,
where God is all in all. We shall then understand the riches of his Love, that
God who is infinitely happy in himself, should make Man for such a Glory, and
such a Glory for Man. And that when for his Rebellion he was justly expelled
from Paradise, and under a sentence of Eternal Death, God should please to
restore him to his Favor, and give him a better state than was forfeited. We
shall then understand our infinite Obligations to the Son of God, who descended
from the Heaven of Heavens to our Earth; and which is more, from the Majesty
wherein he there reigned, from the Glory wherein he was visible to the
Angelical Minds, and became Man for Men, Redemption for the Lost, to purchase
Immortal Life for those who were dead to that blessed Life. In short, then God
will express his Love to us in the highest degrees that a finite Creature is
capable to receive from Love it self, and we shall love him with all the
strength of our glorified powers.

3. Complete satisfaction flows from union with God by Knowledge and Love. In
his Presence is fullness of Joy, at his Right Hand are Pleasures for ever. The
Causes and Excellencies of the Heavenly Life are in those words expressed. The
Causes are the influxive Presence of God, the revelation of his attractive
Perfections, the beholding his Face, the declaration of his peculiar Favor.
This our blessed Lord himself had a respect to, as the complete Reward of his
Sufferings: Thou shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance. And his
Right Hand, his Bounty, that dispenses, and Power that secures that Felicity.
The Excellencies of this state are fullness of Joy, and that without diminution,
or end.

When the Soul opens its eyes to the clear discoveries of the first Truth, and
its breast to the dear and intimate embraces of the Supreme Good, beyond which
nothing remains to be known, nothing to be enjoyed, what a deluge of the purest
Pleasures will overflow it? We cannot ascend in our thoughts so high, as to
conceive the excess of Joy that attends those operations of the glorified Soul
upon its proper object. But something we may conjecture.

Those who are possessed with a noble Passion for Knowledge, how do they despise
all lower Pleasures in comparison of it? How do they forget themselves, neglect
the Body, and retire into the Mind, the highest part of Man, and nearest to
God? The bare apprehension of such things that by their internal nature have no
attractive influence upon the Affections, is pleasant to the Understanding. As
the appearance of Light, though not attended with any other visible beauties,
refreshes the Eye after long darkness: so the clear discovery of Truths, how
abstract so ever, that were before unknown, is grateful to the intellective
faculty. Thus some have been strangely transported with the pleasure of a
Mathematical Demonstration, when the evidence, not the importance of the thing
was so ravishing; for what is more dry and barren of delight than the
speculation of Figures and Numbers? Solon when near his end, and some of his
Friends that visited him were speaking softly of a Point of Philosophy, by a
sound of Wisdom was awakened from the sleep of Death that was just seizing on
him, and opening his eyes, and raising his head to give attention; being asked
the reason of it? answered, That when Vt cu^ istud quicquid est ^ quo
disput^tis perceper^ moriar. Va^ Max.
I understand what you are discoursing of, I may die. Such was his delight in
Knowledge, that a little of it made his Agony insensible. But here are many
imperfections that lessen this intellectual Pleasure, which shall cease in
Heaven. Here the acquisition of Knowledge is often with the expense of Health:
the flower of the Spirits, necessary for Natural Operations, is wasted by
intense thoughts. How often are the Learned sickly? As the Flint when it is
struck, gives not a spark without consuming it self; So Knowledge is obtained
by Studies that waste our faint sensitive faculties. But then our Knowledge
shall be a free emanation from the spring of Truth, without our labor and
pains. Here we learn by circuit, and discern by comparing things; our Ignorance
is dispelled by a gradual succession of Light: But then Universal Knowledge
shall be infused in a moment. Here after all our labor and toil, how little
Knowledge do we gain? Every Question is a Labyrinth out of which the nimblest
and most searching Minds cannot extricate themselves. How many specious Errors
impose upon our understandings? We look on things by false Lights, through
deceiving Spectacles: But then our Knowledge shall be certain and complete.
There is no forbidden Tree in the Celestial Paradise, as no inordinate
Affection. But suppose that all things in the compass of the World were known
yet still there would be emptiness and anguish in the Mind: for the most
comprehensive knowledge of things that are insufficient to make us happy, cannot
afford true Satisfaction. But then we shall see God in all his Excellencies,
the supreme Object and End, the only Felicity of the Soul. How will the sight
of his Glory personally shining in our Redeemer, in the first moment quench our
extreme thirst, and fill us with joy and admiration? It Is not as the naked
conception of Treasures, that only makes rich in ideas, but that Divine sight
gives a real Interest in him. The Angels are so ravished with the Beauties and
Wonders of his Face, that they never divert a moment from the contemplation of
it.

2. The pure Love of the Saints to God is then fully satisfied. Love considered
as an affection of Friendship is always attended with two desires; to be
assured of Reciprocal Love, and to enjoy the Conversation of the Person
beloved, the testimony of his esteem and good will. This kind of Aristot.
affection seems to be inconsistent with that infinite distance that is between
God and the Creature. But though it is disproportionable to the Divine Majesty,
it is proportionable to his Goodness. Accordingly our Savior promises, He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
my self unto him. And to confirm our belief of this astonishing Condescension,
repeats it, If a Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and make our abode with him. In the present state, the signs of God's special
Favor are exhibited to his Friends. Now he bestows on them the Honor of being
his Sons, the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, the precious Earnests of his
Love, and Seal of their Redemption. But in eminency of degrees, the effects of
his Love are incomparably more glorious in Heaven. Here the Saints are adopted,
there crowned. There he opens all the bright Treasures of his Wisdom, the
Riches of his Goodness, the Beauties of his Holiness, the Glories of his Power,
and by the intimate application of his Presence makes his Love most sensible to
them. O the mutual delights between God and glorified Souls! God looks on them
with an engaged Eye, as his own by many dear titles, and is well pleased in his
own Goodness to them, and ravished with the reflex of his own Excellencies
shining in them. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, ('it is the language
of Divine Love) so their God rejoices over them. And what a blessed Rest do
they find in the complete fruition of their Beloved? All their desires quietly
expire in his Bosom. What triumphs of Joy follow? Can we frame a fuller
Conception of Happiness than to be perfectly loved by infinite Goodness, and
perfectly to love him?

3. The most perfect Joy of the Saints is for the Felicity and Glory of God
himself. For as the holy Soul feels no more powerful motive to love God, than
because he is most worthy of it, as he is God, a Being of infinite
Excellencies, and therefore to be loved above the dearest Persons and Things,
even it self; so the highest Joy it partakes of is from this consideration,
that God is infinitely blessed and glorious. For in this the supreme desire of
love is accomplished, that the most beloved Object is perfectly honored and
pleased. In Heaven the Love of the Saints to God is in its highest Perfection,
and they see his Glory in the most perfect manner, which causes a transcendent
Joy to them. And this is one reason why the Saints though shining with unequal
degrees of Glory, are equally content. For their most ardent Love being set on
God, that he is pleased to glorify himself by such various communications of
his Goodness, is full satisfaction to their desires. Besides, in those
different degrees of Glory, every one is so content with his own, Sic it^
habebit d^num aliud lio minus, hic quoque ^num habe^at ne velit amplius. Aug.
that there is no possible desire of being but what he is.

4. The full joy of Heaven shall continue without diminution, or end. The
number of Possessours cannot lessen it. The Divine Presence is an unwasted
Spring of Pleasure, equally full and open to all, and abundantly sufficient to
satisfy the immensity of their desires. Envy reigns in this World, because
earthly things are so imperfect in their nature, and so peculiar in their
possession, that they cannot suffice, nor be enjoyed by all. But in Heaven none
is touched with that low base passion: for God contains all that is precious
and desirable in the highest degrees of Perfection, and all partake of the
influence of his universal Goodness without intercepting one another. In the
Kingdom above there is no cause for the elder Brother to repine at the Father's
Bounty to the younger, nor for the younger to supplant the elder, to obtain the
Birthright. The Heirs of God are all raised to Sovereign Glory. Every one
enjoys him as entirely and fully, as if solely his felicity. God is a Good as
indivisible as infinite, and not diminished by the most liberal communications
of Himself. We may illustriate this by comparing the Price of our Redemption,
and the Reward. The Death of Christ is a universal benefit to all the Saints,
yet it is so applied to every Believer for his perfect Redemption, as if our
Savior in all his Agonies and Sufferings had no other in his Eye and Heart; as
if all his Prayers, his Tears, his Blood were offered up to his Father only for
that Person. The common respect of it the Apostle declares in those admirable
words, that signify such an excess of God's Love to us, He that spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? But to imagine that the Et totum dedit uni^ersis, et to^um
singulis. ^ per hoc ^uicquid pas^one sua Sal^ator praesti^t, sicut to^um ei
debent ^niversi, sic ^nguli; nisi ^uod prope hoc ^lus singuli ^uam univer^,
quod totum ^cceperunt ^nguli, quan^um universi. ^alvian
propriety of every Believer is thereby prejudiced, is not only false, but
extremely injurious to the Merit and Dignity, and to the infinite Love of
Christ. Therefore the same Apostle tells us, The Life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself
for me: as if he were the sole Object of Christ's Love, the End and Reward of
his Sufferings. And this appropriating of it to himself, is no prejudice to the
rights of all others. St. John describes himself by that truly glorious Title,
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. Could he speak this of himself without the
injury and indignation of the other Disciples? Certainly he might. For if we
consider that incomprehensible Love of Christ, expressed to them all at his last
Supper, after Judas was gone forth; As the Father has loved me, so I have
loved you. We may easily understand, that every one of them might justly
believe that he was singularly beloved of Christ. They were all received in the
Heart, though (with John) they did not all lean on the Breast of their Divine
Master. Thus in Heaven God is the universal Treasure of all the Saints, Si
audia multitudo^ lens, non in^ se particul tim comm^nuunt son^ tanquam ^bos:
sed o^ ne quod so^ and omnibus totum est, singulis totum. Augu^ in Epist. a
volusan.
and the peculiar Portion of every one. As by his Essence he equally fills the
whole World, and every part of it; and by his Providence equally regards all
and every particular Creature; so in Heaven he dispenses the Riches of his Love
to all, that they cannot desire more, if every one of them, were (if I may so
express it) the only begotten of the only begotten himself, the sole Heir of
all the Merits of his Son. Every Saint may with the inflamed Spouse break forth
in that Triumph of Love; My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Nay, the great
number of the glorified Saints is so far from lessening their Joy, that it
unspeakably increases it. The innumerable Company of Angels, and the General
Assembly of the Church of the Firstborn, next to the happiness of enjoying
God, are a chief part of Heaven. An unfeigned ardent Affection unites that pure
society. Our Love is now kindled either from a relation in Nature, or some
visible Excellencies that render a Person worthy of our choice and friendship:
but in Heaven the Reasons are greater, and the degrees of Love incomparably
more fervent. All Carnal Alliances and Respects cease in that supernatural
state. The Apostle tells us, If I have known Christ after the flesh, I know him
so no more. By the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ he was transported into
another World, and had communion with him as an Heavenly King, without low
regards to the temporal Privilege of conversing with him on Earth. The
Spiritual relation is more near and permanent than the strictest band of
Nature. The Saints have all relation to the same Heavenly Father, and to Jesus
Christ the Prince of Peace, and Head of that happy Fraternity. The principal
motive of Love here is for the inherent Excellencies of a Person. Wisdom,
Holiness, Goodness, Fidelity are mighty Attractives, and produce a more worthy
Affection, a more intimate Confederacy of Souls than propinquity in Nature.
David declares that all his delight was in the Excellent. But there are allays
of this Noble Love here. For,

1. There are relics of Frailty in the best Men on Earth, some Blemishes that
render them less amiable when discovered. Here their Graces are mixed
Infirmities, and but ascending to Glory. Accordingly our Love to them must be
regular, and serene; not clouded with Error, mistaking defects for amiable
qualities. But in Heaven, the Image of God is complete, by the union of all the
glorious Virtues requisite to its perfection. Every Saint there exactly agrees
with the first Exemplar, is transformed according to the primitive beauty of
Holiness. No spot or wrinkle remains, nor any such thing, that may cast the
least aspect of deformity upon them.

2. In the present state the least part of the Saints worth is visible. As the
Earth is fruitful in Plants and Flowers, but its riches are in the Mines of
precious Metals, the veins of Marble hidden in its bosom. True Grace appears in
sensible Actions, but its Glory is within. The sincerity of Aims, the purity of
Affections, the impresses of the Spirit on the Heart, the interior beauties of
Holiness, are only seen by God. Besides, such is the humility of eminent
Saints, that the more they abound in spiritual treasures, the less they show.
As the Heavenly Bodies when in nearest conjunction with the Sun, and fullest of
light, make the least appearance to our sight. But all their Excellencies shall
then be in view. The Glory of God shall be revealed in them. And how attractive
is the Divine Likeness to an holy Eye? How will it ravish the Saints to behold
an immortal Loveliness shining in one another? Their Love is mutual and
reflexive, proportionable to the cause of it. An equal constant Flame is
preserved by pure Materials. Every one is perfectly amiable, and perfectly
enamored with all. Now can we frame a fuller conception of Happiness, than
such a State of Love, wherein whatever is pleasant in Friendship is in
perfection, and whatever is distastful by Men's folly and weakness is abolished?
The Psalmist breaks out in a Rapture, Behold ^ow good and pleasant it is for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Love is the Beauty* and Strength of
Societies, the Pleasure of Life. How excellent is the Joy of the Blessed, when
the Prayer of Christ shall be accomplished, that they all may be one; as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. God is
absolutely One in his glorious Nature and Will, and therefore unalterably
happy; And their inviolable Union in Love, is a Ray of the Essential Unity
between the sacred Persons. There are no Divisions of Heart and Tongues, as in
this Babel; but the most perfect and sweetest Concord, an Eternal Agreement in
Tempers and Inclinations. There are no envious Comparisons, for Love that
affectively transforms one into another, causes the Glory of every Saint to
redound to the Joy of all. Every one takes his share in the Felicity of all,
and adds to it. Such is the power of that Celestial Fire wherein they all burn,
that it melts and mixes Souls in such an entire Union, that by Complacence and
an intimate Joy, the Blessedness of all is, as it were, proper to every one; as
if every one were placed in the Hearts of all, and all in the Heart of every
one. If in the Church of the first born Christians in the earthly Jerusalem,
the Band of Charity was so strict that it is said, the Multitude of Believers
were of one Heart, and one Soul; How much more intimate and inseparable is the
Union of the Saints in Jerusalem above, where every one loves another as
himself? It Is recorded of Alexander, that entering with Haephestion his
Favorite, into the Pavilion of Darius his Mother, then his Prisoner, she bowed
to the Favorite, as having a greater appearance of Majesty, thinking him to be
Alexander: but advised of her Error, she humbly begged his Pardon, to whom the
generous King replied, Non (...), M^ter, number hic Alexander est. Curt. lib. 3.
You did not err Mother, this is also Alexander: Such was their Affection, that
whoever was taken of them, the other was taken in him; the less ascending in
the greater, without degrading the greater in the less. This is a Copy of the
holy Love of the Blessed; but with the same difference, as between the
Description of a Star with a Coal, and its Beauty in its proper Aspect. And
where all is Love, all is Delight. O how do they enjoy and triumph in the
Happiness of one another? With what an unimaginable tenderness do they embrace?
What Reciprocations of Endearments are between them? O their ravishing
Conversation, and sweet Intercourse! for their Presence together in Heaven is
not a silent Show. In the Transfiguration, Moses and Elias talked with Christ.
With what excellent discourses do they entertain one another? If David felt
such inward pleasure from the sense of God's favors, that he could not
restrain the expression of it, but invites the Saints, Come and hear, all ye
that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul. Certainly
in Heaven, the blessed with overflowing affections recount the Divine Benefits,
the admirable Methods, whereby the Life of Grace was begun, preserved and
carried on in the midst of Temptations; the continual Succession of Mercies in
the time of their Hopes, and the Consummation of all in the time of their
Enjoyment. How joyfully do they concur in their thanksgivings to God for the
goodness of Creation, in making them reasonable Creatures, capable to know,
love and enjoy Him, when they might have been of the lowest Order in the whole
sphere of Beings; for his compassionate care and providence over them in this
World. But especially for his sovereign Mercy in electing them to be vessels of
honor; for his powerful Grace, in rescuing them from the cruel and ignominious
bondage of Sin; for his most free Love, that justified them from all their
guilt by the Death of his only Son, and glorified them with himself. They are
never weary in this delightful exercise, but continually bless him for his
Mercy that endures for ever. We may judge by the Saints here, when they are in
a fit disposition to praise God, what fervours they feel in their united
Praises of him in Heaven. The Psalmist in an Ecstasy calls to all the parts of
the World to join with him; The Lord reigns, let the Heavens rejoice, and the
Earth be glad; let the Sea roar, let the Fields be joyful, and all that dwell
therein. He desires that Nature should be elevated above it self, that the dead
parts be inspired with Life, the insensible feel Motions of Joy, and those that
want a Voice break forth in praises, to adorn the Divine Triumph. With what
Life and Alacrity will the Saints in their blessed Communion celebrate the
Object of their Love and Praises? The Seraphims about the Throne cried to one
another, to express their Zeal and Joy, in celebrating his Eternal Purity and
Power, and the Glory of his Goodness. O the unspeakable Pleasure of this
Concert! when every Soul is harmonious, and contributes his part to the full
Music of Heaven. O could we hear but some Echo of those Songs wherewith the
Heaven of Heavens resounds, some remains of those Voices wherewith the Saints
above triumph in the Praises, in the solemn Adoration of the King of Spirits,
how would it inflame our desires to be joined with them? Blessed are those that
are in thy House, they always praise thee.

2. The fullness of Joy in Heaven is undecaying; for the causes of it are always
equal. And those are the Beatifick Object revealed, and the uninterrupted
Contemplation of it. Whilst we are here below, the Sun of Righteousness, as to
our perception and sense, has ascensions and declinations, accesses and
recesses. And our Earth is not so purified, but some Vapors arise that
intercept his cheerful refreshing Light. From hence there are alternate
successions of Spiritual Comforts and Sorrows, of Doubts and filial Confidence
in the Saints. It Is a rare favor of Heaven, when an humble Believer in his
whole course is so circumspect as not to provoke God to appear displeased
against him: When a Christian (as those tutelar Angels spoken of in the Gospel)
always beholds the face of his Heavenly Father, and converses with him with an
holy Liberty. And what a torment the hiding of God's Face is to a deserted
Soul, only they know who feel it. External troubles are many times attended
with more Consolations to the Spirit, than Afflictions to Sense; but to love
God with a transcendent Affection, and to fear he is our Enemy, no Punishment
exceeds, or is equal to it. As his Loving Kindness in their esteem is better
than Life, so his Displeasure is worse than Death. How do they wrestle with God
by Prayers and Tears, and offer, as it were, a holy Violence to the King of
Heaven, to recover their first serenity of Mind, the lost Peace of Heart? How
passionately do they cry out, with Job, in the Book of his Patience, Job 29. 2,
3, 4.
O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me: when
his Candle shined upon my head, and when by his Light I walked through
darkness: As I was in the days of my youth, when the Secret of God was upon my
Tabernacle. And sometimes God delays the revealing himself even to his dearest
Children; not that he does not see their Necessities, and hears their Prayers,
or is so hard that till their Extremities he is not moved with Compassion, but
for wise and holy Reasons; Either that they may not return to folly, if by any
presumptuous Sin they forfeited their Peace; or if they have been careful to
please him, yet he may deprive them of Spiritual Comforts for a time, to keep
them humble, and that with an obedient resignation to his Sovereign Pleasure
they may wait for his reviving Presence. And then Joy returns greater than
before. For thus God usually renders with interest what he suspended only for
trial. But the Saints above are for ever enlightened with the vital splendour,
and dear regards of his Countenance, always enjoy his beamy smiles. A continual
effusion of Glory illustrates Heaven and all its blessed Inhabitants.

And their Contemplation of God is fixed. If the Object, though extraordinary
glorious, were transient, or the Eye so weak that it could only see it but by
glances, the height of Joy would not be perpetual. But the mind is prepared
with supernatural vigor, to see the brightness of God's face, and by the most
attentive application always converses with that blessed Object, so that the
Joy of Heaven is never intermitted for a moment. They always see, and love, and
rejoice, and praise him.

It Is possible a carnal suspicion may arise in some, as if the uniform
perpetual vision of the same Glory might lose its perfect delightfulness. For
those who seek for happiness in the vanity of the Creatures, are always
desirous of change, and have their Judgments so corrupted, that while they
languish with a secret desire after an unchangeable Good, yet they conceive no
good as desirable, that is not changed.

But to correct this gross error of Fancy, let us a little enquire into the
causes of Dissatisfaction, that make the constant fruition of the same thing
here to be tedious.

Sensible things are of such a limited Goodness, that not any of them can
supply all our present wants, so that it is necessary to leave one for another.
And the most of them are Remedies of our diseased Appetites, and if not
temperately used are destructive Evils. Eating and Drinking are to extinguish
Hunger and Thirst, but continued beyond just measure become nauseous. Besides,
the Insufficiency of their Objects, the Senses themselves cannot be satisfied
all at once. The Ear cannot attend to delightful Sounds, and the Eye be intent
on beautiful Colors at the same time: the Satisfaction of one Sense defeats
another of enjoying its proper good; therefore the same Object is not
constantly pleasant, but the Heart is distempered from as many Causes, as there
are desires unaccomplish'd. Add further, all things under the Sun afford only
a superficial delight, and miserably deceive the Expectations raised of them:
and many times there is a mixture of some evil in them, that is more offensive,
than the good is delightful. The Honey is attended with a Sting, so that often
those very things we sigh after through vehement desire, when they are
obtained, we sigh for grief. Now all these Causes of dissatisfaction cease in
Heaven; for Vitae nos ^dium tenet, ^mor mortis ^itat omne ^nsilium, nec ^plere
nos ^lla faelicitas ^test. Causa ^utem est, ^od non per^mimus ad ^ud bonum
^nmensum and superabile, ^bi necesse est ^sistat nobis^ luntas nos^a, quia ul^a
summum ^n est locus. ^ence. epist. ^4.
God is an infinite Good, and whatever is truly desirable and precious, is in
Him in all degrees of Perfection. And in his Presence all the Powers of the
Soul are drawn out in their most pleasant exercise, and always enjoy their
entire happiness. The fruition of him exceeds our most raised hopes, as much as
he is more glorious in Himself than in any borrowed Representations. God will
be to us incomparably above what we can ask or think. The compass of our
thoughts, the depth of our desires are imperfect measures of his Perfections.
And as he is a Pure Good in Himself, so he is prevalent over all Evil. It Is
evident therefore that nothing can allay the Joys of Saints when they are in
God's presence.

2. Novelty is not requisite to ingratiate every Good, and make it perfectly
delightful. (...) Arist. ^th 1. 7. ^ ult.
God is infinitely happy, to whom no Good was ever new. It Is indeed the sauce
that gives a delicious taste to inferior things. For Men relish only what is
eminent; and the good things of this World are so truly mean, that they are
feign to borrow a show of Greatness by comparison with a worse estate
preceding. But an infinite Good produces always the same pure equal complete
Joy, because it arises from its intrinsic perfection, that wants no Foil to
commend it. The Psalmist breaks forth, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? This is
no vanishing Rapture, but a constant joyful height of Affection. God, the
essential happiness of the Saints, is always perfectly lovely and delightful to
them.

3. The glorified Saints in every period of their happy state, have as lively a
perception of it as in the beginning. To make this evident, we must consider
that the pleasure of Novelty springs from a quick sense of the opposite terms,
between our condition in the want of some desired Good, and after our obtaining
it. Now the Mind is more intense on the advantage, and more strongly affected
at first. One newly freed from the torments of a sharp disease, feels a greater
pleasure than from a constant tenor of health. Those who are raised from a low
state to eminent Dignity, are transported with their first change, but in tract
of time the remembrance of their mean condition is so weakened and spent, that
it is like the shadow of a Dream, and proportionably their Joy is lessened.
Honors like Perfumes, by custom are less sensible to those that carry them.
But the Saints above always consider and feel the excellent difference between
their suffering and triumphant state. They never lose that ravishing part of
felicity, the vivid sense of past evils. Their reflections are always as strong
on the Misery from whence they were raised to the pitch of Happiness, as in
their first glorious Translation. In what an Ecstasy of wonder and pleasure will
they be, from the fresh memory of what they were, and the joyful sense of what
they are? I was (says the admiring Soul*) poor, blind, and naked; but O
miraculous and happy Alteration! I am full of Light, enriched with the
Treasures of Heaven, adorned with Divine Glory. I was under the tyrannous power
of Satan, but he is bruised under my feet. I was sentenced to an everlasting
separation from the Presence of God, my only Life and Joy; but now am possessed
of my supreme Good. 'O how transporting is the comparison of these wide and
contrary extremes? How beautiful and pleasant is the Day of Eternity, after
such a dark tempestuous Night? How does the remembrance of such Evils produce a
more lively and feeling fruition of such happiness? How strangely and mightily
does Salvation with Eternal Glory affect the Soul? This gives a spritely accent
to their everlasting Hallelujahs. This preserves an affectionate heat in their
Thanksgivings to their Victorious Deliverer. And thus their happiness is always
the same, and always new. Their pleasure is continued in its perfection.

Lastly; The Blessedness of the Saints is without end. This makes Heaven to be
it self. There is no satiety of the present, no solicitude for the future.
Were there a possibility, or the least suspicion of losing that happy state, it
would cast an aspersion of bitterness upon all their delights: they could not
enjoy one moments repose; but the more excellent their Happiness is, the more
stinging would their fear be of parting with it. But the Inheritance reserved
in Heaven, is immortal, undefiled, and fades not away. And the tenure of their
Possession is infinitely firm by the Divine Power, the true Support of their
everlasting Duration. With God is the Fountain of Life. They enjoy a better
Immortality, than the Tree of Life could have preserved in Adam. The
Revolutions of the Heavens, and Ages, are under their Feet, and cannot in the
least alter or determine their Happiness. After the passing of millions of
Years, still an entire Eternity remains of their enjoying God. O most desirable
State! where Blessedness and Eternity are inseparably united. O joyful Harmony!
when the full Chorus of Heaven shall sing, This God is our God for ever and
ever This adds an infinite weight to their Glory. This redoubles their
unspeakable Joys with infinite sweetness and security. They repose themselves
in the complete Fruition of their Happiness. God reigns in the Saints, and they
live in him for ever.

From what has been discoursed we should,

I. Consider the woeful Folly of Men in refusing such a Happiness, that by the
admirable favor of God is offered to their choice. Can there be an
Expectation, or Desire, or Capacity in Man, of enjoying a Happiness beyond what
is Infinite and Eternal? O blind and wretched World! so careless of everlasting
felicity. Who can behold, without compassion and indignation, Men vainly seek
for happiness where it is not to be found, and after innumerable disappointments
fly at an Impossibility, and neglect their sovereign and final Blessedness?
Astonishing Madness! that God and Heaven should be despised in comparison of
painted Trifles. This adds the greatest Contumely to their Impiety. What
powerful Charm obstructs their true judging of things? What Spirit of Error
possesses them? Alas, Eternal Things are unseen, not of conspicuous moment, and
therefore in the carnal Balance are esteemed light, against temporal things
present to the Sense. It does not appear what we shall be: The Vail of the
visible Heavens covers the Sanctuary, where JESUS our High Priest is entered,
and stops the enquiring Eye.

But have we not assurance by the most infallible Principles of Faith, that the
Son of God came down from Heaven to live with us, and dye for us, and that he
rose again to confirm our Belief in his exceeding great and precious Promises
concerning this happiness in the future state? And do not the most evident
Principles of Reason and Universal Experience prove, that this World cannot
afford true Happiness to us? How wretchedly do we forfeit the Prerogative of
the Reasonable Nature by neglecting our last and blessed End? If the Mind be
darkened, that it does not see the amiable Excellencies of God, and the Will so
depraved that it does not feel their ravishing power; the Man ceases to be a
Man, and becomes like the Beasts that perish. As a blind Eye is no longer an
Eye, being absolutely useless to that end for which it was made. And though in
this present state Men are stupid and unconcerned, yet hereafter their Misery
will awaken them, to discover what is that Supreme Good wherein their
Perfection and Felicity consists. When their folly shall be exposed before God,
Angels, and Saints, in what extreme confusion will they appear before that
glorious and immense Theater? Our Savior told the unbelieving Jews, There
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves
turned out. They shall be tortured with the desire of Happiness without
possible satisfaction. It Is most just that those who err without excuse, should
repent without remedy.

2. Let us be excited seriously to apply our selves in the use of effectual
means for the obtaining this Happiness. Indeed the original cause of it, is the
pure rich Mercy of God; the meritorious, is the most precious obedience of our
Savior, by whom we obtain plenteous Redemption. His Abasement is the cause of
our Exaltation. The Wounds he received in his Body, the characters of Ignominy,
and footsteps of Death, are the Fountains of our Glory. Eternal Life is the
gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. But the Gospel declares, that
without Holiness no Man shall see God. An holy change of our Natures, and
perseverance in the course of universal obedience, are indispensibly requisite
in order to our obtaining Heaven. Those who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor, and Immortality, shall partake of Eternal
Life. Now were there no other reason of this Constitution, but the sovereign
Will of God, it were sufficient. But the Foundation of it is laid in the nature
of the Things themselves. Therefore our Savior does not simply declare, that
an unregenerate Person shall not see the Kingdom of God, but with the greatest
emphasis cannot, to signify an absolute impossibility of it. Besides the Legal
Bar that excludes unsanctified Persons from the beatifick vision of God, there
is a moral incapacity. Suppose that Justice should allow Omnipotence to
translate such a sinner to Heaven, would the Place make him happy? Can two
incongruous Natures delight in one another? The happiness of Sense is by an
impression of Pleasure from a suitable Object: The happiness of intellectual
Beings arises from an entire conformity of dispositions. So that unless God
recede from his Holiness, which is absolutely impossible, or Man be purified,
and changed into his likeness, there can be no sweet Communion between them.
Our Savior assigns this Reason of the necessity of Regeneration in order to
our admission into Heaven: That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that
which is born of the spirit, is spirit. According to the quality of the
Principle, such is what proceeds from it. The Flesh is a corrupt Principle, and
accordingly the Natural Man is wholly carnal in his propensions, operations,
and end. The Disease is turned into his Constitution. He is dead to the
Spiritual Life, to the actions and enjoyments that are proper to it: Nay, there
is in him a surviving Principle of Enmity to that Life: not only a mortal
coldness to God, but a stiff aversation from him, a perpetual resistance and
impatience of the Divine Presence, that would disturb his voluptuous
enjoyments. The Exercises of Heaven would be as the Torments of Hell to him,
while in the midst of those pure Joys his inward inclinations vehemently run
into the lowest Lees of Sensuality. And therefore till this contrariety, so
deep and predominant in an unholy Person, be removed, it is utterly impossible
he should enjoy God with satisfaction. Holiness alone prepares Men for the
possession of Celestial Happiness, that is against the corruption, and above
the perfection of mere Nature. Let us then having such a Joy set before us, lay
aside every weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking to Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith. Methinks the sight of worldly Men, so active and
vigilant to prosecute their low designs, should quicken us to seek with the
greater diligence and alacrity the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness
thereof. A carnal Wretch urged by the sting of a brutish desire, with what
impatience does he pursue the pleasure of Sin, which is but for a season? An
Ambitious Person, with what an intemperate height of Passion does he chase a
Feather? A Covetous Man, how greedily does he prosecute the Advantages of the
present World that passes away, and the Lusts thereof? Ah! how do they upbraid
our indifferent desires, our dull delays, and cold endeavors, when such an
high Prize is set before us? Who is able to conceive the excess of Pleasure
the Soul feels when it first enters through the beautiful Gate of Paradise, and
sees before it that incomprehensible Glory, and hears a Voice from Him that
sits upon the Throne, Enter into thy Masters Joy, for ever be happy with him?
The serious belief of this will draw forth all our active powers in the service
of God. The feeding by lively thoughts on this supernatural food, will add new
vigor and luster to our Graces, and make our Victory easy over the World. If we
believe indeed that our Bodies shall be spiritual, and our Souls divine in
their perfections, it will make us resolute to subdue the Rebel Flesh, and
rescue the captived Spirit from all Intanglements of Iniquity. Having the
promise of such an excellent Reward, let us always abound in the work of the
Lord.

3. The lively hope of this Blessedness is powerful to support us under the
greatest Troubles can befall us in this our mortal condition. Here we are tossed
upon the alternate waves of Time, but hereafter we shall arrive at the Port,
the blessed Bosom of our Savior, and enjoy a peaceful calm: and so we shall
ever be with the Lord. Words of infinite sweetness! This is the Song of our
Prosperity, and Charm of our Adversity: We shall ever be with the Lord. Well
might the Apostle add immediately after, therefore comfort one another with
these words.

More particularly, They are a Lenitive to moderate our Sorrows upon the
Departure of our dearest Friends, who dye in the Lord: for they ascend from
this valley of Tears, to the happy Land of the Living. What Father is so
deserted of Reason, as to bear impatiently the parting with his Son, that goes
over a narrow part of the Sea, to a rich and pleasant Country, and receive the
investiture and peaceable possession of a Kingdom? Nay, by how much the
Stronger his Love is, so much the more transporting is his Joy: especially if
he expects shortly to be with him, to see him on the Throne, in the state of a
King, and to partake of his happiness. If then it be impossible to Nature to be
grieved, at the felicity of one that is loved; according to what principle of
Nature or Faith do Believers so uncomfortably lament the Death of Friends, of
whom they have assurance that after their leaving our Earth, they enter into an
everlasting Kingdom, to receive a Crown of Glory from Christ himself? Our
Savior tells the Disciples, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said I
go to my Father; to sit down at his right hand in Majesty. A pure Affection
directly terminates in the happiness and exaltation of the Person that is
loved. I am not speaking against the exercise of tender Affections on the loss
of our dear Friends; and a pensive feeling of God's hand in it; which is an
natural and necessary duty. There is a great difference between Stupidity and
Patience: but violent Passion, or unremitting Sorrow is most unbecoming the
blessed Hope assured to us in the Gospel.

Chrysostom treating of this Argument, and reflecting upon the custom of those
Times, wherein at Funeral Solemnities a train of Mourning Women attended the
Corpse, tearing their Hair and Face, and crying out with all the expressions of
desperate Sorrow, breaks forth, Ah Christian Faith and Religion! that was
triumphant over thine Enemies in so many Battles and Victories by the Blood and
Death of the Martyrs, how art thou contradicted by the practice of these who
profess thee in words? Is this not to be sorrowful as those that have no hope?
Are these the affections, the expressions, of one that believes the blessedness
of Immortal Life? What will the Heathens say, how will they be induced to
believe the Promises of Christ to his Servants of a glorious Kingdom, when
those who are so in title, behave themselves as if they had no steadfast faith
in them?

4. The hopes of this blessed state, is able to free us from the fear of Death.
This last Enemy gives an hot Alarm to Mankind, both as it deprives them of all
that is pleasant here, and for the terrible consequences that attend it. To the
eye of Sense, a dead Body is a spectacle of fearful appearance. He that a
little before heard and discoursed, and with a cheerful Air conversed and
enjoyed the World, now is dead, and all his senses in him: the Eyes are dead to
light, and the Ears to sounds, the Tongue to words, and the Heart to feel any
Affections, and the Countenance to discover them: nothing remains but silence,
horror, and corruption. Besides, after Death comes Judgment, and a state of
unrelenting Torments to the Wicked. But a true Believer that has been obedient
to his Savior, sees things by another light than that of sense, and has living
hopes in his dying Agonies. He knows that Death to the Saints is but a sleep:
and while the Body rests in the Grave, the Soul is as it were all Act,
continually exercising its most noble faculties on the best Objects. Does the
Soul sleep in that all-enlightned World, that sees with open face, the infinite
Beauty of God? that hears and bears a part in the hymns of the Angels and
Saints encircling his Throne? that drinks of the Rivers of Pleasure that flow
from his Presence? that freely and joyfully converses with all the Celestial
Courtiers, the Princes of that Kingdom, the Favorites of God? Then it truly
lives. This reconciles Death to a Christian, who has nothing more in his wishes
than to be with Christ; and knows that diseases and pains, the forerunners of
it, are but as the breaking down the Walls of this earthly dark Prison, that
the Soul may take its flight to the happy Region, and for ever enjoy the
Liberty of the Sons of God. And for his Body, that shall be reunited to the
Soul in Glory. Methinks God speaks to a dying Believer, as he did to Jacob when
he was to descend to Egypt, Fear not to go down into the Grave, I will go down
with thee, and I will bring thee up again. The same Almighty Voice that gave
being to the World, shall awake those who sleep in the dust, and reform them
according to the Example of Christ's glorified Body. O how should we long for
that triumphant day! and with most ardent Aspirings pray, Thy Kingdom come in
its full power and glory?

I Shall now come to speak of the Mournful Subject, the Cause of my Appearing
here at this time, the Deceased, Reverend and Excellent Divine, Dr. Thomas
Manton: A Name worthy of precious and eternal Memory. And I shall consider him,
both in the quality of his Office, as he was an Ambassador of Christ,
declaring his Mind, and representing his Authority, and in the holiness of his
Person, showing forth the Graces and Virtues of his Divine Master.

God had furnished him with a rare union of those parts that are requisite to
form a Minister of his Word. A clear Judgment, rich Fancy, strong Memory, and
happy Elocution met in him, and were excellently improved by his diligent study.

The Preaching of the Word is the principal part of the Minister's duty, most
essential to his Calling, and most necessary to the Church. For this end
chiefly, the several Ephesians. 4.
Orders in the Ministerial Office were instituted, and upon our Savior's
triumphant ascent and reception into Heaven, an abundant effusion of the Spirit
in Graces and Abilities descended upon Men. Now in the performing this Work, he
was of that conspicuous Eminence, that none could detract from him, but from
ignorance or envy.

He was endowed with extraordinary knowledge in the Scriptures, those holy
Oracles from whence all Spiritual Light is derived: And in his preaching, gave
such a perspicuous account of the order and dependence of Divine Truths; and
with that felicity applied the Scriptures to confirm them, that every Subject
by his management was cultivated and improved. His Discourses were so clear and
convincing, that none without offering voluntary violence to Conscience could
resist their Evidence. And from hence they were effectual not only to inspire a
sudden Flame, and raise a short Commotion in the Affections, but to make a
lasting Change in the Life. For in the humane Soul such is the composition of
its faculties, that till the Understanding be rectified in its Apprehensions
and Estimations, the Will is never induced to make an entire firm choice of
what is necessary for the obtaining perfect Happiness. A sincere persevering
Conversion is effected by weighty Reasons that sink and settle in the Heart.

His Doctrine was incorrupt and pure, the Truth according to Godliness. He was
far from a guilty vile intention, to prostitute that sacred Ordinance for the
acquiring any private secular advantage. Neither did he entertain his Hearers
with impertinent Subtilties, empty Notions, intricate Disputes, dry and barren
without productive Virtue: But as one that always had before his Eyes the great
End of the Ministry, the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, his Sermons
were directed to open their eyes, that they might see their wretched condition
as Sinners, to hasten their flight from the Wrath to come, to make them humbly,
thankfully and entirely receive Christ, as their Prince, and all-sufficient
Savior. And to build up the converted in their most holy Faith, and more
excellent Love, that is the fulfilling of the Law. In short, to make true
Christians eminent in Knowledge and universal Obedience.

As the matter of his Sermons was designed for the good of Souls; so his way of
expression was proper to that end. Words are the vehicle of the heavenly Light.
As the Divine Wisdom was incarnate to reveal the Eternal Counsels of God to the
World; so Spiritual Wisdom in the mind, must be clothed with words, to make it
sensible to others. And in this he had a singular Talent. His Style was not
exquisitely studied, not consisting of harmonious Periods, but far distant from
vulgar meanness. His Expression was natural and free, clear and strong, quick
and powerful, without any spice of folly, and always suitable to the Simplicity
and Majesty of Divine Truths. His Sermons afforded substantial food with
delight, so that a fastidious mind could not disrelish them. He abhorred a vain
ostentation of Wit, in handling Sacred things; so venerable and grave, and of
eternal consequence. Indeed, what is more unbecoming a Minister of Christ, than
to waste the spirits of his Brain, as a Spider does his bowels, to spin a web
only to catch Flies? to get vain applause by foolish pleasing the ignorant. And
what cruelty is it to the Souls of Men? Suet.
It Is recorded as an instance of Nero's savage temper, that in a general
Famine, when many perished by hunger, he ordered a Ship should come from Egypt
(the Granary of Italy) laden with Sand for the use of Wrestlers. In such
extremity to provide only for delight, that there might be spectacles on the
Theater, when the City of Rome was a spectacle of such misery, as to melt the
heart of any but of Nero, was most barbarous Cruelty. But it is Cruelty of an
heavier imputation for a Minister to prepare his Sermons to please the foolish
curiosity of Fancy with flashy Conceits; nay, such light Vanities, that would
scarce be endured in a Scene, whiles hungry Souls languish for want of solid
nourishment.

His fervor and earnestness in Preaching was such, as might soften and make
pliant the most stubborn obdurate spirits. I am not speaking of one whose
talent was only in voice, that labors in the Pulpit as if the end of Preaching
were for the exercise of the Body, Si sudare^ aliter non po^tes, est aliud^
and not for the profit of Souls: But this Man of God was inflamed with an
holy Zeal, and from thence such ardent expressions broke forth, as were capable
to procure attention and consent in his Hearers. He spoke as one that had a
living Faith within him of Divine Truths. From this union of Zeal with his
Knowledge, he was excellently qualified to convince and convert Souls. The sound
of words only strikes the Ear, but the Mind reasons with the Mind, and the
Heart speaks to the Heart.

His unparalled Assiduity in Preaching, declared him very sensible of those
dear and strong Obligations that lie upon Ministers, to be very diligent in
that blessed Work. What a powerful Motive our Savior urged upon St. Peter?
John 21.
As thou love me, feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. And can any feed too much,
when none can love enough? Can any Pains be sufficient for the salvation of
Souls, for which the Son of God did not esteem his Blood too costly a price? Is
not incessant unwearied industry requisite to advance the work of Grace in them
to perfection? In this the work of a Minister has its peculiar disadvantage,
that whereas an Artificer how curious and difficult soever his work be, yet has
this encouragement, that what is begun with Art and Care, he finds in the same
state wherein 'twas left: A Painter that designs an exact Piece, draws many
Lines, often touches it with his Pencil to give it life and beauty; and though
unfinished, it is not spoild by his intermission. A Sculptor that carves a
Statue, though his labor be hard from the resistance of the matter, yet his
work remains firm and durable. But the Heart of Man is of a strange temper,
hard as Marble, not easily receptive of heavenly impressions, yet fluid as
Water, those impressions are easily defaced in it; it is exposed to so many
temptations that induce an oblivion of eternal things, that without frequent
excitations to quicken and confirm its holy purposes, it grows careless, and
all the labor is lost that was spent on it. This faithful Minister abounded in
the Work of the Lord; and which is truly admirable, though so frequent in
Preaching, yet was alwas superior to others, and equal to himself. In his last
time when declining to Death, yet he would not leave his beloved Work; the
vigor of his Mind supporting the weakness of his Body. I remember when oppressed
with an obstinate hoarsness, a Friend desiring him to spare himself; he
rejected the advice with indignation.

He was no fomenter of Faction, but studious of the Public Tranquillity. He
knew what a blessing Peace is, and wisely foresaw the pernicious consequences
that attend Divisions. By Peace, the bond of mutual harmony, the weakest things
are preserved and prosper; but where Discord reigns, the strongest are near to
ruin. The heavenly Concent in the primitive Church, was a principal cause of
its miraculous increase and flourishing; but after Dissentions prevailed
amongst Christians, that was destroyed in a short time, which was built by the
Divine Union and Heroic Patience of the primitive Christians. And the glorious
Beginnings that promised the Reformation of all Europe, were more obstructed by
the dissentions of some employed in that blessed work, than by all the power
and subtilty, the Arms and Artifices of Rome it self. How afflictive is the
consideration of our divided Church? Sweet Peace, whither art thou fled?
Blessed Savior, who did by thy precious Blood reconcile Heaven and Earth,
send down thy Spirit to inspire us with that Wisdom that is pure and peaceable,
that those who agree in the same Principles of Faith, in the same substantial
parts of Worship, in asserting the same indispensible necessity of Holiness,
may receive one another in love. I am affectionatly engaged in a matter that so
nearly touches all those that value the Protestant Interest.

Briefly; Consider him as a Christian, his Life was answerable to his Doctrine.

It Is applicable to some Ministers, what is observed of the Carbuncle; by its
color, luster, and fiery sparklings it seems to be actually a Fire, but it has
only the name and appearance of it. Thus some in the Pulpit seem to be all on
fire with zeal, yet their hearts are as cold as a stone, without holy
affections, and their lives are unworthy their Divine Ministration. But this
Servant of God was like a fruitful Tree, that produces in its branches what it
contains in the root; his inward Grace was made visible in a Conversation
becoming the Gospel of Christ.

His resolute Contempt of the World secured him from being wrought on by those
motives, that tempt low spirits from their duty. He would not rashly throw
himself into troubles, nor spreta Conscientia avoid them. His generous
Constancy of Mind in resisting the current of Popular humor, declared his
Loyalty to his Divine Master. His Charity was eminent in procuring Supplies for
others, when in mean Circumstances himself. But he had great experience of
God's fatherly Provision, to which his filial Confidence was correspondent.

His Conversation in his Family was holy and exemplary, every day instructing
them from the Scriptures in their duty.

I shall finish my Character of him, with observing his Humility. He was deeply
affected (...) the sense of his Frailties and Unworthiness. He considered the
infinite Purity of God, the Perfection of his Law the Rule of our Duty, and by
that humbling Light discovered his manifold defects. He expressed his thoughts to
me a little before his Death; If the holy Prophets were under strong
impressions of fear, upon the extraordinary discovery of the Divine Presence,
how shall we poor creatures appear before that Holy and Dread Majesty? Isaiah,
after his glorious vision of God, reflecting upon himself; as not retired from
the commerce and corruption of the World, breaks forth, Woe is me, for I am
undone, because I am a Man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
People of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
It Is infinitely terrible to appear before God the Judge of all, without the
protection of the Blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than the blood
of Abel. This alone relieved him, and supported his hopes. Though his Labors
were abundant, yet he knew that the Work of God, passing through our hands, is
so blemished, that without an appeal to pardoning Mercy and Grace, we cannot
stand in Judgment. This was the subject of his last public Sermon.

He languish'd many months, but presuming he should be too strong for his
Infirmity, neglected it, till at last it became insuperable and mortal. Many
pathetical aggravations heighten our great and dear Loss, that such a faithful
Minister of Christ should be taken away, whose Preaching was so powerful to
repair the woeful Ruins of Godliness and Virtue in a degenerate Age: Whose
prudent pacifick Spirit rendered him so useful in these Divided Times, when
Professors of the same Religion are alienated from one another, as if they had
been baptized with the Waters of Strife: That before our Tears were dried up
for the loss of other worthy Ministers, the Fountain of Sorrow should be opened
again by this afflicting stroke. But it becomes us to receive the dispensations
of Heaven with humble and quiet submission; to reflect upon our sins with an
holy grief, that provoke God to remove such an excellent Instrument of his
Glory from us. Let us pray to the Lord of the Harvest, that he will send forth
faithful Laborers into it. O that surviving Ministers might be animated with a
Zeal more pure and fervent in their Divine Work: And that People would be wise,
while a price is put into their hands, to improve it for their eternal
advantage. The neglected Gospel will at the last be a terrible Witness against
the Disobedient, to justify and aggravate their Condemnation.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for, and sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons,
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Accomplishment of Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses, wherein is showed, how the
Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God, are glorified in that
great and blessed Work: By William Bates, D. D. In 4to.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the future State. To which is now added, the Divinity
of the Christian Religion, proved by the Evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation: For the Cure of Infidelity, the Hectic Evil of the Times. By
William Bates, D. D. In Octavo.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of
Trinity-Colledg in Cambridg, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary. In
Octavo.

The Reconcileableness of God's Prescience of the Sins of Men, with the Wisdom
and Sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations, and whatsoever means he uses to
prevent them: In a Letter to the Honorable, Robert Boil, Esquire. To which is
added a Postscript in defense of the said Letter; By John How, M. A. sometime
Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon. In Octavo.


