REASON AND AUTHORITY: OR THE MOTIVES OF A LATE Protestants Reconciliation TO
THE Catholic Church.

TOGETHER With Remarks upon some late Discourses AGAINST Transubstantiation.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
For his Household and Chapel, 1687.

Reason and Authority, OR THE MOTIVES OF A LATE Protestants Reconciliation TO
THE Catholic Church.
THAT I may pay my due Respects to the Church of England, to which I am
indebted for a considerable part of my Education; I think it just to publish
those Motives which obliged me to take my leave of Her: And if it shall appear,
that I have not rashly quitted her Communion, but have used herein the utmost
strength, and dictates of my most Impartial Reason; I hope She will excuse me,
if I have followed that light, which She her self so pressingly recommends.

I shall therefore (most Reverend Fathers) communicate my Motives to you, in a
short, but plain Method; and if my Brevity in this, shall not sufficiently
express the strength of my Arguments; censure not from thence the Faith which I
profess: For having perused many Excellent Authors, which have treated more
particularly, and fully of it; I purposely avoided a long Repetition of those
things, which you may find more largely, and better handled in the Originals
themselves. I have been guided (I hope) by the grace of God, and reason,
reducing things almost to Demonstration; I have no Charm, nor Conjuration upon
me, that I know of, but shall be always ready to follow the strongest Evidence,
of common Reason. I will not trouble you with all those circumstances which
made me doubt; but only tell you, in short, that by reading, and discoursing
with Catholic Men, and Authors, I did really doubt concerning the truth of my
Protestant profession.

One main Reason of my Diffidence was, this, That I did not find in the Church
of England, a lawful Authority, sufficient to oblige my reason, and conscience
to submit to her Decrees, in matters of Faith, necessary to Salvation. Page 133.
For Dr. Stillingfleet tells me, All men ought to be left to Judge according to
the Pandects of the Divine Laws, because each Member of this Society, is bound
to take care of his Soul, and of all things that tend thereto. And Dr. Page 48,
49.
Fern, in his Case between the two Churches, says further, That in matters
proposed by my Superiors, as Gods Word, and of Faith, I am not tied to believe
it such, till they manifest it to me to be so; and not that I am obliged to
believe it such, unless I can manifest it to be contrary; because my Faith can
rest on no humane Authority, but only on Gods Word, and Divine Revelation.

This is your constant Doctrine, as to our faith, or internal assent, as may be
proved by many of your best Authors; and indeed, the Justice of your
Reformation cannot consist with stricter Principles; for how can you bind our
Consciences, by a late usurpt Authority, (I speak as to declaring Articles of
faith, not of discipline) when you would not submit your own to the greatest
Authority, under which our Ancestors were born; and which was incomparably, the
most lawful, the most esteemed, the most certain, and most universal, that ever
appeared in the Christian Church since the Apostles? And accordingly Mr.
Chillingworth (of the just Authority of Councils, and Synods) says, Any thing
besides Scripture, and the plain, irrefragable, indubitable consequences of It,
well may Protestants hold it, as matter of Opinion, but as matter of Faith, and
Religion, neither can they, with coherence to their own ground believe it
themselves, nor require the Belief of it, of others, without high, and most
Schismatical presumption. Now these plain, irrefragable and indubitable
consequences, must need be plain to every man, who is not mad, or a fool; and
so need no Authority: But in all those which are less plain (and such must be
the Points controverted between Catholics, and your selves) I have my liberty:
for I am fully assured (from the same hand) that God does not, and that
therefore Man ought not to require any more of any Man, than this, to believe
the Scripture to be Gods Word, to endeavor to find the true sense of it, and
to live according to it.

Having therefore (worthy Fathers) been taught English, and Latin, in your
Grammar Schools, and keeping the Holy Bible with me, which contains all things
necessary to Salvation, and to which (according to your Instructions) I must at
last appeal; I resolved to give you no further trouble in this matter;
especially, since (as I said) you could not teach me infallibly; nor impose
your Interpretations, by virtue of any legal Authority, which might ultimately
conclude my Reason, and secure my Conscience.

Finding, that I was not only at liberty, but advised also by your selves, to
work out my own Salvation, and to stand upon my own bottom, I thought it
reasonable that my Enquiry should Set out from the very beginning, and examine
whether there was a God; and indeed I found some learned men, even among the
greatest Philosophers, speaking very doubtfully concerning this matter, if not
denying it. 'Twas not only the Fool had said in his heart, there is no God; but
hear what Cardan Writes of our famous Aristotle; L. 3. de Sap.
Aristoteles (says he) tam callide mundi ortum, and animae praemia, and Deos,
and Daemones sustulit, ut hae^ omnia aperte quidem diceret, argui tamen non
posset. And the great Pontif Cotta to Velleius, upon the same Question
concerning a God, Credo (inquit) si in concione quaeratur: But in private it
seems, he was very easy in his Belief. I will not mention Epicure, and
Lucretius, their names are grown generally too scandalous; but if you examine
Anaxagoras, Anacharsis, Protagoras, Euripides, Diagoras and many others, whose
reputations carry no small Authority along with them, you will observe such a
suspension of mind concerning a Deity, that if they were afraid, positively to
deny; so neither would they confidently affirm.

Next (supposing a Deity) whether the World was governed by God? The Epicureans
totally deny it; nullam omnino habere humanarum rerum procurationem Deos: which
Ennius also plainly professes in these words, Ego Deum genus semper esse dixi;
and dicam Coelitum,
Sed Eos non curare Opinor, quid agat humanum genus.
Which opinion Grotius takes care to confute in his Cap. de poenis. l. 2. And
no wonder if the Heathens denied a Point, full of so many difficulties, since
the Royal Prophet himself was almost stumbled at it. My feet (says he) were
almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped.

Then the Souls Immortality (a very considerable Point) seemed so hard to
Reason; especially when I found it disputed in some Set philosophical
Discourses, and it is Mortality proved, almost to a physical Demonstration; and
besides, that the Christian Doctrine concerning it, had not been determined
above two hundred years in any Council; that truly, Fathers, my reason
(notwithstanding the best assistance I could procure) was put to a great
plunge; I will not tell you how I got off from these, and many other such like
difficulties; but proceed, and acquaint you how I ventured upon the Bible.

When I examined the first Chap. of Genesis, I observed that many great Men
were scandalized at Mose's Philosophy; and yet upon the Truth of his History,
concerning the Creation, and fall of Adam, depends the greatest Mystery of our
Salvation. I proceeded further, and found some strange Mistakes, and (for ought
I could see) irreconcilable Errors in that History; insomuch, that many
Learned men (well read in the Hebrew Language and History of the Jews),
positively affirm, by very strong Arguments, That the Penteteuch, or five Books
of Moses (such as they appear to us) were so far from being writ by Moses
himself, that they were writ (say they) by Esdras the Scribe, many hundred of
years after the death of Moses.

Indeed (Reverend Fathers) when I heard this, I began heartily to wish that God
Almighty, in his Providence, and Goodness to mankind, (infinitely fallen from
that knowledge, in which our first Parent was happily created) would have
pleased (as some reparation for so great a loss) to have left us some unerring
Authority, and Sovereign Guide, who might have conducted all that truly sought
the way, to that blessed Paradise, from whence long since we had been banished.

With great pains, I broke through many rubs (how successfully I cannot say)
and came to the New Testament: Here I hoped that my Reason would find an easier
passage through those Divine Authors, as being of a later date, and the last
Testament of our blessed Savior. I began with the first Chapter of St. Matthew
and found the Genealogy of Jesus, deduc't through Joseph his reputed Father,
from David, out of whose Royal Root, the long expected Messiah was to Spring.
Would not a Man reasonably believe, that the holy Evangelist, to prove Jesus to
be the Messiah, who was to be the Son of David, made him rather appear the Son
of Joseph, than the Son of God? But if he was not the Son of Joseph, neither
does it appear from thence that he was the Son of David. Nay, more, when I
would have proceeded further, I found, that of the New Testament; the 2 Epistle
of Peter; 2 and 3 of John; the Epistle to the Hebrews; the Epistles of James,
Jude, and the Revelations maintained to be Apocryphal by Chemnitius, Luthers
great Scholar; and many important Texts, left out, or something added, or
different Translations by your first great Protestant Reformers. And that some
of these were not received, even by the Orthodox, into their Canon, till nere
Two hundred years after the death of our Savior.

However, I past this by; and, to be short, I read over the New Testament,
(such as we have fit) with great attention. But truly, Fa^hers, either your
Reasons, and the Reason of every particular Christian, is infinitely above my
poor Judgment; or else you must not tell me, that every Christian, upon a
sincere perusal of this holy Book, would certainly have composed the Creed of
St. Athanasius, such as you receive, and profess in your Common Prayer Books.

But, before I examined every particular Point of Faith contained in that
sacred Writ; I resolved to consider what Religion was in general, and in
particular, the Christian; In that, what Faith was, and how esteemed, when
compared with Obedience and good Works under the Gospel, and opposed to Works
under the Law: of Faith; what were the great, and necessary Articles. Then I
presumed to look into the great mystery of the Incarnation, and blessed design
of our Savior, in submitting to the indignities of humane life, and shameful
death of the Cross; and I extended the great benefits of his Passion as
universally, as I judged He himself intended them. Next, I ventured to examine
with my Reason the great Doctrines of the Trinity, Consubstantiality,
Transubstantiation, Predestination and Freewill, and many other main Points of
Divinity: and, as a help to my Reason, I diligently perused your learned
Comments upon particular Texts, and Chapters; as also the Comments of
Catholics, Lutherans, Socinians, Calvinists, Zuinglians; and I did not totally
neglect the Censure of the Jews, and Heathens concerning the whole History in
General.

When I had done all this, I began to make up my account, and drew a Scheme of
Divinity, in which (abstracting from all Authority) I received, and rejected
what seemed most agreeable to my Reason: But I must ingenuously confess, that
this was not done without some kind of force upon my Judgment, in general; for
methoughts, the Authority of General Councils, Ancient Fathers, and the most
universal concurrence of learned Men, ought to sway a private Reason, although it
were not scientifice, or intuitively convinced of every particular Point which
they had determined. However, being taught by your selves to suspect General
Councils; to Judge the Works of the Fathers, whether they were genuine, or
supposititious; and of the truest, to interpret them according to our own
private Opinions, or condemn them, as erroneous, when they differed from our
Sentiments; I stuck close to my Reason, finished my Scheme, and my Reason
subscribed to it.

When this was done, I compared it with your Thirty nine Articles; with the
Catechisms of Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Socinians, and observed, that
in the whole, I disagreed from them All, even in Doctrines (commonly reputed)
absolutely necessary to Salvation. But yet, this my confused Babel of Religion,
was built up with some particular Points, taken from all the Heretics, and
Professors of Christianity, even from Ebion, and Cerinthus to Naylor and
Muggleton.

Now I thought my self sufficiently stockt to set up for a Heresiarch, and a
New Light in the Church; but when I seriously confider'd, how grievously our
poor Nation was already torn and divided with such Sects, and Schisms, to the
great disturbance of our temporal Peace, and Happiness, and scandal to
Christianity; I resolved to keep my Reasons to my self, and censured in my
heart that great Liberty, and Supreme Authority in these matters, which you
your selves, and (as you say) God Almighty had been pleased to allow us. You
may blame my Reason for all this, and extol your own, who (it may be) have
interpreted Scripture otherwise; but I had learned Men to back me, possibly as
learned (tho not so lucky) as your selves, and we thought we had as strong
Reasons to condemn you, as you to accuse us.

I returned then to a Second, and a Third more diligent perusal of my Scheme;
and tho I still found every particular Point corresponding with my Reason, yet
altogether, I soon perceived (by what I had read) that the whole Christian
World of all Sorts and Sects universally condemned it.

I profess, Fathers, I was strangely stumbled at this consideration, and my
Reason began strongly to insinuate, that possibly, and very probably I might be
all this while in the wrong; for I had learnt, that Aristotle, Aristides, St.
Augustine, Grotius and many excellent Scholars, counted it more Madness
(insolentissimae Insaniae est) to contradict the Judgment of All, or the Most,
or the most Wise; and of the most wise, All, or Most, or the most Excellent;
for (says one of them) as in matter of Fact, we ought to believe the most, and
most proper, and credible Witnesses; so in matters of Opinion, we are obliged
to submit to the most, and most Excellent Authors; Now sure, these
praestantissimi Auctores, are those who write with best Authority, and have
Commission from the Highest Powers, so to do.

Yet, notwithstanding all this, I followed my own private Reason, in my
particular Points; until a stronger Reason, I mean, the joint and common Reason
of Mankind, and my Conscience too, daily dictating that my Judgment in
particular Cases, might fail; that all, had not equal strength; that God
therefore had not left the World without Government; nor given us Laws without
lawful Judges and Interpreters; that these Judges ought to be obeyed: These, I
say, and such like considerations, interrupted the quiet of my life, until at
last my united Reason made its last effort, and fully and totally convinced me,
that if any such Authority was to be found upon Earth, I ought in reason, to
submit my particular Reasons to it.

Truly, Fathers, when upon deliberate counsel, I had determined to take this
most reasonable course; Give me leave to tell you, that I began to wonder how
your selves (tho most learned, most reasonable, and most pious Men) could be
satisfied under the conduct of your private Reasons, if there may be found any
legal Supreme Judge which might ultimately, and Authoritatively guide, and
direct you. Pardon me, I do not presume to measure my Reason against the
meanest among yours, for I question not but yours would err much less, than
mine; but yet lest your own should err at all, methinks, it were safest, and by
consequence, most reasonable, to seek some Authority (if any such there be)
under which you might be secured from all Error; at least, as far as humane
nature is capable of it: For my part, my Reason, and Conscience forced me to
take that method, and I resolved, either to find that Authority, and submit to
it, or keep to my own Principles, how erroneous soever they might be esteemed
by others.

My first enquiry after this Authority, was, in the Church of England; for tho
you had often told me, that it was not there; yet I was more inclined to
suspect your Modesty, than condemn your want of Prudence, in pretending to
subsist securely without it. But when I had again examined the holy Scriptures
together with the best Records and Histories concerning your legal Title to
this Supreme Jurisdiction; I found indeed you had reason, and were very
ingenuous in disowning, what did not of right belong unto you,: For if the
Church of England enjoys this Power, by the same Rule, and for the same
Reasons, Holland, Denmark, Swedeland, France, Italy, and Spain, would have the
same Title to it, as your selves; nay perhaps, Turks and Pagans: But my Reason
told me (from the sad effects which we daily see) that this must needs be most
contrary to the Unity of the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.

I then recollected, how you had often told me, that the Catholic Church could
never Err, but that it would always hold the purity of Faith incorrupt. I
remember then to have asked of your Reverences, where this Catholic Church was
to be found; and you told me, That it was dispersed all over the Christian
World. I was troubled that your answer was so wide, however, I resolved to
search; and first I enquired in the Roman Church: Indeed they assured me, that
I should there find what I looked for: It Is true, I found them all of one mind,
in necessaries; but when I examined their Doctrines, I perceived (as you had
often declared) that, if, yours were true; their's was much corrupt; or, if
they dissembled, they must needs be under as great a condemnation: Among them,
therefore, there could be no part of the Catholic Church. Then I went into the
Greek Church, but found there also, the same objections and difficulties.

In a word, I went through the Asian, and African Churches, the Denmark,
Swedeland, Lutheran, and Socinian Churches; yet found nothing but Hypocrisy,
or, the true Faith (according to your Standard) notoriously corrupt. I name not
Holland, because among them, I saw such a Medley of Faiths, that it looked to
me, as Babel might have done, when God confounded their Language; but certainly
if the Catholic Doctrine had been practiced in those parts where I had been;
Holland surely of any Nation, would best have represented the Universal Church:
But believe me, Fathers, it must then have quitted its Titles of Unity, and
Holiness; except Unity can consist with Division; or Holiness with the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil.

At last, I returned to your selves, and acquainted you how unsuccessful my
Journey had been; you still replied that there was undoubtedly a Catholic
Church Militant upon Earth; and that this Church did also hold the true Faith
of Christ, incorrupt; but withal, that it was not necessary it should be
visible; quoting at the same time the complaint of Elijah, that he, only he was
left; to whom God answered, that he had seven Thousand left in Israel (unknown
to Elijah) who had not bent the knee to Baal: And that this was a Type of the
Christian Church. Truly, Fathers (may it not displease you) I began to think,
that you had trifled with me all this while, and pleased your selves to send me
of an April Errand; for to look for a thing which is invisible, is a kind of a
foolish Message. Perceiving that you had not used me kindly, I resolved to set
out once more upon my own strength, especially, since I believed with you, that
there was an unerring Catholic Church; and more than you that this Church was
certainly, and easily visible. This my Belief was also the more confirmed, when
I had well considered the Story of Elijah; for I found, that this defection,
and falling away, from the worship of the true God, was in Israel only, a
rebellious Kingdom, separated from the chosen Tribe of Judah, (God knows, how
like our Case in England); but in Jerusalem, God had a public Temple, a public
High Priest, and public true Worshippers, and so they continued (except some
little time they were punished with Captivity) until the coming of Christ.

I made my first step (as I had done before) into the Church of Rome; and
indeed, I there found, all the marks, and signs of a true Catholic Church. As

1. Universality and Visibility. And it shall come to pass in the last days,
Isa. 2.2.
that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills. Micah 4.1.
And the people shall flow unto her. Mat. 18.17.
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church.

2. Uninterrupted continuance, and Succession. This is my Covenant with them,
says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, Isa. 59.21.
and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
henceforth, and for ever. And he gave some Apostles; and some Prophets; and
some Evangelists: Ephesians. 4.11.
And some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying the body of Christ: Till we all come in the
unity of faith, unto a perfect man, etc.

3. Unity and Uniformity. Now I beseech you brethren, that ye all speak the
same thing, and that there be be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, 1 Cor. 1.10.
and in the same Judgment. That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
Phil. 1.27.
striving together for the faith of the gospel.

4. Holy Fathers, and Martyrs; General Councils, and Synods; a High Priest, and
a Holy Sacrifice; Undoubted Miracles and Divine Sacraments; Holy Orders, and
Religious Colleges, Abstinence, and Penance, Faith and Obedience, Charity and
Good Works: And in a word, fundamental Doctrines, Authoritatively imposed, and
Universally received throughout the whole Christian World. Be not offended,
Fathers, that I speak so largely of their Doctrine, for (having well examined)
I say again, that nere eight parts in ten among Christians, agree in those very
Articles, or most of them which are controverted between your selves, and them:
And these believed from the beginning of their Conversions, whether in Europe,
Asia, Africa, or America.

Having met with these great inducements to persuade me I had found the true
Catholic Church; and believing that a visible Body could not subsist without a
visible Head; I made it my next business to enquire after this Supreme
Vicegerent, or Representative of the whole: And indeed methought there was no
great difficulty in it. I began at the Head, (I mean) Christ Jesus; and found,
1. That he was a High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec: That he
instituted a new Law; and gave Commissions to his Apostles to promulgate, and
interpret it; and promised the assistance of his holy Spirit, to the end of all
Ages.

Next, that of these, he appointed one to be Chief (I mean) St. Peter: so
reputed, and unanimously esteemed by the Fathers in the Eldest times of
Christianity; the Fathers so understood, by many among your selves; and not to
be disputed without manifest injury, and violence to their plain Writings; and
so received by the whole Catholic Church. His Succession, for many years,
delivered to us by St. Augustine, and brought down even to our present Age, and
Pope. These, worthy Fathers, are pregnant Arguments of a lawful Authority. I
wished you could have shown me such another in your own Church.

I next looked into this Ecclesiastical Government (as far as it concerned me)
and found, that all Points of Faith were determined in General Councils, which
represent the Catholic Church assembled, and in which our Savior promised his
holy Spirit should ever assist. That they were always as General as the
Circumstances of Times, and Places would permit; or the weight of the Matters
to be debated, required; and free and indisputable, when secured from violence
and force; that their Decrees were then made with deliberation, and according
to the received Doctrines of the Apostles, and their Successors, preserved in
the Writings of Fathers; or constant Apostolical Tradition, kept inviolable in
the Church: And when thus made, that they were obligatory to bind our
Consciences, and conclude our private Reasons.

I examined further, whether this Vicegerent, and Successor of St. Peter was
received, as such, in these General Councils, or Catholic Church; and found his
Authority owned, and confirmed by them, and that he was many hundred of years
in the peaceable possession of it; no man upon Earth pretending a Superiority;
or, if any did, that he was thereupon condemned, as an Intruder, or Usurper.

Hence, I concluded (as the nature, and necessary Laws of Government required)
that the Pope himself, or General Council, or Both united, could not possibly
grant this Supreme Authority, to any other Mortal Man, or Men, to hold
independently of him, or them; because this must constitute another Supreme
independent Head of the same Body, which is monstrous; or a Head without a
Body, which is ridiculous; or else there would be two distinct Heads, and two
Bodies, which is directly contrary to the Unity, and Essence of Christ's Church,
as frustrating, or obstructing the main End, and design of Christ, (that is) of
preventing Heresies, or condemning them when they arise; for par in parem, non
habet Imperium: Two equal Sovereign Authorities have no Jurisdiction one over
the other: Besides, this Vicegerent, is but a Trustee, or Fidei commissarius:
and can have no greater Power, than what is given him by his Principal, or
Fidei Commissor; now this is a personal Trust, and cannot be alienated, or
divided; because he holds not this Power in his own right, as a Property, or in
pleno Jure Proprietatis; he has only the administration of it, in trust for
another: So neither can he alienate the Patrimonium Ecclesiae; or St. Peter's
Patrimony; all Contracts therefore, in these Cases, would be fraudulent:
Tanquam facti de re aliena, and the Grantees, become malae fidei possessores,
or unjust Possessors, of what they could not lawfully purchase.

Lastly, all Sovereign Power, in the same Government, is Indivisible, and can
only be delegagated, in the Executive part, for the administration of Justice,
but accountable still to the Head, from whence it derives.

The Equal privileges therefore, or (...), granted to the Patriarck of
Constantinople; prove nothing against this Supremacy of St. Peter's Successor:
For First, They were only honorary, in consideration, that Constantinople was
become the Seat of the Empire. Secondly, Patriarchal, or quatenus Patriarcha,
but not quatenus Caput Ecclesiae, or as Head of the Universal Church: And
lastly, it is particularly expressed in the same Canon, that these Honors, or
Privileges should be held, and enjoyed, post Pontificem Romanum, after the
Bishop of Rome; and it appears de facto, that (during the Third General Council
held at Ephesus, and allowed by Protestants) Pope Caelestine the First, did, by
his substitute Cyril, authoritatively, depose, and Excommunicate Nestorius,
then Patriarch of Constantinople.

And Pope Victor who lived Anno Dom. 198. Excommunicated the Bishops of Asia,
for their keeping of Easter, contrary to the Institutions of St. Peter, and St.
Paul, tho tolerated therein by St. John. Nor could Ambition, or Avarice in
those days of Persecution, move the Supreme Heads of the Church to exercise
such Jurisdiction; for they got little by being Eminent and Conspicuous, but
Martyrdom, and so it happened to this Pope Victor, who died a Martyr, Anno Dom.
203.

Now, Fathers, besides these great Marks of the true Catholic Church, I
perceived also, that, (according to the Command, and Institution of our
Savior) his Vicegerent here, did send out his Disciples Preaching, and
Baptizing through all Nations; Insomuch, that since Gregory the Great (before
whose time you tell us, that this Holy Church began to fall) there have been
converted to the Christian Faith (otherwise called the Roman Catholic Faith)
near Thirty great Kingdoms, or Provinces (among which, Our Saxon Ancestors,
help to make up the number) besides infinite multitudes in the East, and West
Indies. And, so much pains should be taken, in obedience to our Saviors
commands, and promise of his assistance; so much blood of holy Martyrs spilt;
and all this, to bring Heathens, and Pagans from the worship of their false
Gods, into another Idolatrous, and damnably corrupted Religion, may possibly to
your Reasons, appear consistent with the Mercy and Goodness of Almighty God;
but pray excuse me, if I tell you, that to my Reason, it seems altogether
repugnant; but this is matter of Opinion.

Having got thus far, toward that Sovereign Ecclesiastical Authority in Matters
of Faith, absolutely necessary to Salvation; and believing, according to the
strongest Evidences of Sense, and Reason, that it must be in the Church of
Rome, or, no where; which last Opinion must dissolve that whole Fabric,
against which our Savior promised the gates of Hell should not prevail; I
resolved to make yet one step further; and enquire, Whether this Ancient
Catholic and Apostolic Church, could have so far forfeited her great
Privileges, and Prerogatives, by the practice of damnable Doctrines, and
pernicious Errors (of which your selves, and others have most greivously
accused her) as to render her, not only unworthy of the name, and Title to
which She pretends; but also to make her Communion most unsafe, and desperately
dangerous to all honest, and pious Christians.

I confess, Fathers, when I considered what some of your selves had often told
me, and what I found in many of your Eminent Authors, concerning the late
Innovation of those Doctrines controverted between the two Churches; I began to
have hard thoughts of the present Roman Catholic Communion: Much more, when
enquiring, how late these Doctrines were introduced into the Church, you
generally told me, that they were not imposed upon the Faithful, before the
Council of Trent, which has not been ended much above an Hundred and twenty
three years: But when I compared the date of your Reformation, with that, of
this Council; I plainly perceived, that the protesting against these Errors was
begun, and well nigh perfected, before these Errors were (as you say) then
imposed: which, (tho it seemed somewhat strange, and might have past with
others for a reasonable Answer to this Objection of Novelty) yet I resolved to
peruse the Councils themselves, and (de point en point) note the time, when
these Doctrines were in Council Established.

1. I began with the Popes Supremacy, which I found confirmed in the Council of
Chalcedon Act. 16. (one of the first four General Councils owned by
Protestants) above Twelve Hundred years since, Six Hundred and thirty Fathers
present, and about the year of our Lord 451. and relation had to the first
Council of Nice. Can. 6. This Supremacy also allowed, professed, and taught by
the most Ancient Fathers after the Apostles, and confessed so to have been by
Melancton, Luther, Bucer, Bilson, Dr. Cooper, Bunny, Fulk, Middleton, Osiander,
the Centurists, and many others too long to mention.

2. Those Books which you call Apocrypha, were taken into the Canon of the Old
Testament, in the Third Council of Carthage, Signed by St. Augustine (Baruch
only not named, because an Appendix to Jeremiah whose Secretary he was) Can. 47.

3. The unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, in the Sixth Council of Constantinople,
a Thousand years, since, Can. 32. And also in the Ninth Council of the
Apostles, Decreed, That a Bishop, etc. shall communicate when Sacrifice is made.

4. Veneration, and worship of Saints Relics (according to Apostolical
Tradition) as also of Martyrs, and holy Images, in the Second Council of Nice,
Three Hundred and Fifty Fathers present, Act. 3. Anno Dom. 780. See more in Act
7. With the general Concurrences of Ancient Fathers.

5. Communion under one kind sufficient in the Council of Constance, Sess. 13.
and practiced in the Church Twelve Hundred years since.

6. Purgatory, and many more, too long to relate, in the Council of Florence,
and believed in the Primitive times.

7. And lastly, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, confirmed in the great
Council of Lateran, in which near Thirteen Hundred Fathers assisted: And in
Seven or Eight other Councils, before that of Trent; and all the controverted
Points, particularly, and by name, declared by some of your selves, to have
been brought into England, by Augustine the Monk, above a Thousand years since.

Indeed, Fathers, when I had diligently examined this Truth, and found it most
Evident, beyond the possibility of any just or reasonable Contradiction; I was
much scandalized at the disingenuity of your Writers, who, whilst they accuse
others of Fallacy, Imposture, and Impudence, dare advance so great, and
demonstrable a Falsehood in Matter of Fact, that nothing but Ignorance can
excuse them; so they expose themselves to the greatest Censure of rashness, and
indiscretion, as uncharitable, and unjust to those whom they call their
Enemies; as also unsafe, and abusing the Credulity of their Friends.

It will not consist with the Brevity here intended, to speak fully of every
particular Point in dispute between us. I shall content my self therefore to
affirm (as I do) that there are but few of them, which have not been tolerated,
and practiced (more or less) by some Eminent Members of the Reformed Churches;
and which have not undeniable Authority, and Antiquity to support them. I shall
fix therefore upon two only; and consider how far they may bear, and appear
reasonable to an Impartial Reader.

1. The Authority, and Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church.

2. The Doctrine of Transubstanpiation.

For the two firsts I think them so necessarily involved one within the other,
that, in proving one, we prove both; for if the Supreme lawful. Ecclesiastical
Authority resides in the Church of Rome, as representing in its General
Councils the Catholic Church assembled; then we have the promise of our
Savior, that his holy Spirit shall ever assist them, and guide them into all
Truth. This I believe not only with a Popish, but with a Protestant Faith; for
you have always told me (and I think you do not now deny it) that the Catholic
Church cannot err in Fundamentals, or hold the Faith corrupt; the difficulty
only lies in finding the Chatholic Church, which, (to avoid some unlucky
consequences that might disturb your quiet) you prudently tell us, Is not
certainly to be found.

It remains therefore, that we find this Supreme lawful Authority which
represents the visible Catholic Church. I have given you my Judgment already:
And that you may not believe I have erred through Popish Affectation, I will
produce also for my Justification the sound Judgment of your best Reformers.
Luther tells us, I do not deny but that the Bishop of Rome is, Resp. tred.
propos.
has been, and ought to be first of all; I believe he is above all other
Bishops, it is not lawful to deny his Supremacy. Melancton (the Phaenix of
learning) says, That the Bishop of Rome is above all the Church, Epist. ad
Card. Belay.
that it is his Office to Judge in Controversies, to govern, to watch over the
Priests, to keep all Nations in Conformity, and Unity of Doctrines. Somaisius.
The Pope of Rome has been, without controversy, the first Metropolitan of
Italy, and not only in Italy, nor only in the West, but in all the: World. The
other Metropolitans have been Chief in their respective Districts; but the Pope
of Rome, Tract. ad Sermondum.
( has been Metropolitan, and Primate, not only of some particular Diocese,
but of All. Grotius (for whom I have a great respect, and think him a very
learned Man) says the same thing, and proves this Supremacy belongs to the Pope
de Jure divino: Annot. Sup. Nov. Test.
This also inferred from Episcopal Government by Jacob Cartwright; Husse, Beza,
and many others.

Now, Fathers, you cannot say, but these Eminent Protestants were Men of great
Learning, and that they had searched, and understood Scripture and History, as
well as your selves; and if my Judgment concurs with them in this Point (as I
profess it does) then have I found that lawful Supreme Authority which I
searched; and where this Authority is, there is Infallibility: Or if you can
show me Infallibility elsewhere, there also I am sure I will believe a
sufficient Authority. The differences between them I cannot easily discern:
Infallibility is from God, and therefore we believe what is dictated thereby,
as from God: Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority is also from God, and therefore
we obey what it commands us, as the Ordinance of God. Infallibility concludes
our Reasons, and binds our Consciences; Supreme Church Authority binds also our
Consciences, and Supersedes all private Reason. Infallibility is above all
humane Authority: The highest Church Authority can have no such Authority upon
Earth above it. Infallibility establishes and supports Authority. Authority
declares, and makes manifest the Infallibility. Infallibility, and the Promises
of Christ fail when Authority is destroyed: Authority lives not, when
Infallibility cease. In a word, were there no Infallibility (as I believe
there is) I would still submit my Reason, and regulate my Conscience, according
to the Decrees of the Supreme, lawful Ecclesiastical Authority: This is my
Belief, pray blame me not, I am humble, and have read Scripture, and upon my
word, I am Sincere. You may believe otherwise, I presume not to Judge you.

After all this (worthy Fathers) I must not forget to tell you, that I still
lay under some Difficulties, before I could thoroughly assent to this Authority
(now believed) in the Church of Rome: For you had often told me, that She had
fallen from her Primitive Purity, and separated her self from that One Holy
Catholic, and Apostolic Church. Answ. to Prot. Quaeries p. 10. Declared also to
be Antichristian, and the true Church Latent and Invisible, by that famous
Napper to King James, Brocard, Fulk, Sebast. Francus, Hospinian, and many
others.

Now, good Fathers, if She was once a pure, and uncorrupted Church, I presume
She remains so still; for, give me leave to tell you, I do not well see, how
She can separate from her self, for Mr. Chillingworth (an Eminent Author among
you) looked upon it, as a thing ridiculous, if not impossible: for, says he, In
the Case of the Church of England p. 174. We have not forsaken, but only
reformed another part of it (the Catholic Church) which part, we our selves
are, and I suppose, you will not go about to persuade us, that we have forsaken
our selves, or our own Communion. Nor yet can She separate from the Catholic
Church; for the same Learned person tells us immediately after. And if you urge
that we joined our selves to no other part, therefore were separated from the
whole; I say it follows not, inasmuch as our selves were a part of it, and
still continued so, and therefore can no more separate from the whole, than
from our selves.

But next, supposing a part may separate from it self, or from the whole, pray
be plain with me, worthy Fathers, and tell me, where that part, or that whole
remained, from whence the Church of Rome separated? For Separation, first
supposes the Existence of the thing, from which Separation is made; and is a
deadly fault and foretold by the Apostles, as a mischief which would happen in
the last days. Remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles,
of our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you, that there should be mockers
in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts; these be they
who Separated themselves, sensual, Jude v. 17, 18, 19.
having not the Spirit. Let us confider one another to provoke unto love, and
to good works, Heb. 10.24.
not forgetting the assembling our selves together, and so much the more, Act.
20.30.
as ye see the day approaching. Also of your selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Now the Church of Rome was
not only visible, but a very Eminent Church; St. Paul tells us, Romans 1.
That her Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World: And certainly, that
pure Church from which She Separated, must needs be by so much the more
Eminent, as Her Apostasy was notorious, which forsook her. Tell me therefore
where that pure Church remained, that we may retrieve the true Christian
Doctrine? If she Separated from her self, then (besides Mr. Chill. answer) I
add, these Contradictions must be reciev'd as Truths: The Church of Rome was at
the same time, Orthodox, and Heterodox; pure and corrupt: sound, but yet
rotten: Or if you can distinguish them, show me the Orthodox, Pure, and Sound
part, which was left by the Heterodox, corrupt, and rotten Church of Rome;
declare the time when the Separation was made, and where both were to be found?
These are plain Questions, and I must have a plain Answer, if it can be had.

If you say She Separated from the Catholic Church; then tell me where that
Catholic Church remained from which She Separated, and where She may be found;
for in good faith, Fathers, my Salvation is highly concerned in this Question
and I must be satisfied. If you tell me She is invisible (as others have done)
you plainly abuse me; for I have long since learnt from your selves, as a Maxim
in Philosophy, that de non apparentibus, and non existentibus eadem est ratio.
It is the same thing not at all to be, as not at all to appear. Besides, excuse
me, if I take the word of our Savior, and his Apostles, and all the Prophets
in a hundred plain Texts (I presume) not unknown to your selves, rather than
your word in this Case. I profess therefore, tho my Reason is not able to cope
with yours; yet I Will sooner suffer my self to be knocked down with a true
Protestant Flayl, than with such a Protestant Answer.

If you say the Catholic Church fell, and was corrupt in Faith and Manners;
then I answer, that Christ failed of his Promise, and so good night to
Christianity: If you say the Catholic Church did not fall, but kept the Unity
of Faith Entire, and Vncorrupt, then I reply again, show me where, and how I
may find her? And from this reasonable, and important Request, you shall never
beat me whilst I live.

If you think fit to persuade me, that the Church of Rome separated from the
Church of England, and that the Church of England is, and ever has been a part
(at least) of the Catholic Church which always preserved the Faith entire, and
incorrupt; make it appear to me, Fathers, and I most heartily promise to become
the most humble and obedient Subject that ever lived under any Government. But
I foresee many Difficulties which I fear will prove invincible; as first, It is
evident, that you separated from the Church of Rome, and that within these few
years; and to prove that she separated from you, will be (I doubt) no easy
Task, nor have I yet seen it done. Next, That you were involved in the same
pernicious Errors with her, ever since Augustine the Monk, above a Thousand
years since: If my Computation be false, blame your own Authors, and rectify
my Judgment.

Now, how you should rise a pure Church, after having been buried so many
Hundred years in a corrupt Church, I do not easily understand. I have heard
indeed of some Rivers, that have fallen into the Earth; and risen up again,
many Miles off; and of others, which for many Miles in the Sea, have still
retained the natural sweetness of their own fresh Waters: If these comparisons
may hold in Religion, yet how will you make them qu^drate with the constant,
visibility, and Demonstration, in one case, and the Succession of the Original
Stream in the other, if you say that that the Catholic Church was invisible, or
totally fell?

If you pretend to derive your Authority from the Church of Rome, when She was
in her Purity and Perfection; let me tell you, here will be a very long
Prescription against you; and I know not how your Jus postliminium can take
place in this case: But if it would, you must be restored by an Act of the same
Supreme Authority: you owned her; you held of her; you reciev'd your Doctrine,
and your Orders from her: Besides (as has been said) She could by no means
grant away her Authority independent from her; show me that lawful Authority
which restored you, and I submit: Show me your extraordinary Calling by those
Marks appointed, and practiced in such Cases, both under the Old and New Law,
even to our own Century (I mean) undoubted Miracles, and I acquiesce.

If you tell me, no time can prescribe against Divine Truth; nor is Authority
necessary to reform an Error: In a general Sense, I grant both. But the
Question here, is, concerning Truth, and Error themselves. No body doubts, but
that a certain Divine Truth is to be reciev'd, and a certain Error to be
avoided; but we are now seeking for that Authority which shall declare this
Truth, and set forth this Error. Error or Sin, is the breach of a Law, for
without the Law, Romans 7.
Sin is dead: whence St. Paul says, That he had not known Lust, except the Law
had said, thou shall not covet. Now, as Sin supposes a Law, so Law requires an
Authority: And as the one, so the other must be visible. And to show that this
Authority is absolutely necessary, we find our Savior giving it to his
Apostles, and themselves exercising, and recommending it to others; so S. Paul
advises Titus, Titus 2.15.
To speak, exhort, and rebuke with Authority.

But what need Instances of this kind? Our Savior has left us a Law of Faith,
which in some of the most necessary Points, is not clear, and self-Evident;
whence the Arians of old (Men of great Learning) denied the Trinity, and
Divinity of our Savior; and they made a very considerable Body; Authority
condemned them, and interpreted the Law, in those Cases, according to our
present Orthodox Faith. The Socinians, and Antitriniturians rebel against it to
this day, and are neither unlearned, nor inconsiderable. Luther tells us, That
Christ is a Savior of vile, and little worth, and wanted himself a Savior,
Christus ille vilis, In Confess. Maj. de caen. Dom.
nec magni pretij Salvator est; immo Ipse quoque Salvatore opus habet. And,
that his Divinity suffered for us: De consil. part 2
pertinacissime contra me pugnabant, quod Divinitas Christi pati non posset.
Tom. 1. prop. 3.
He tells us further, That good Works are hurtful to Salvation, and that Faith
does not Justify, except it be, even, without the least good Works. Calvin
also, Bilsons Survey.
and Beza, That Christ suffered in his Soul the pains of the damned, that he
prayed unadvisedly, and was disturbed in his Senses; That the Divine Substance,
is (not wholly in three Persons, but) distinct really, and truly, from
Everlasting, into three Persons, and that there be three Divinities, as there
be three Persons. Melanct. in loco Com. c. de Christo; Beza 's Confession p. 1.
Anno Dom. 1585. Calvin in Act. Serveti. Whence Neuserus (a Learned Calvinist,
and chief Pastor at Heidelburg) revolting first to Arianism, and thence to
Mahometanism, writ to Gerlachius (a Protestant Preacher) from Constantinople
July 2. 1574. saying, None is known to me in my time made an Arian, who was not
first a Calvinist; and then names several such persons: That God is the Author
of Sin, moving, inclining, and forcing the Will of man to Sin, Calvin Instit.
l. 1. c. 18. and l. 2. c. 4. Zuingl. Bucer, and several of our Eminent English
Reformers, concur with them, in most of these blasphemous, and heretical
Opinions.

Now, Fathers, if these Instances, with many others (which I abhor to mention)
be not sufficient; and weighty enough, to require a Supreme Judge to determine
the right Faith, and to condemn, and silence the wrong; then look nearer (at
home among your selves) and if all cannot prevail with you to believe, That the
Law wanted a Judge, and that therefore Christ was pleased, in his Wisdom, and
Goodness to leave us Judges, as long as he intended his Law should be in force:
Then pray excuse me, if my Reason, and Piety, and the reverent Notion which I
have of a Just God, and a Merciful Savior; totally force my Judgment and
Conscience to dissent from you in this particular; and let us proceed.

If you say the Church of Rome usurpt upon you; I answer, (if such a thing was)
It was in Discipline only, and External Government; and that but in some
particulars, with which I meddle not: If you tell me a story of the Abbot of
Bangor; I answer, the particular ground of it is evidently false, and forged;
and at best (all circumstances considered) of little consequence. The plain
Truth is this; The Britains received the Christian Faith, even in the days of
the Apostles: But (being persecuted at home by the Romans, Picts, and Saxons,)
Religion fled to the Mountains, and bordering parts of Wales. At the same time,
the Church of Rome, was no less afflicted by the Heathen Emperors; and no
wonder, if in these days, and circumstances, there was but little
Correspondence between Rome and Wales. But when the Church (brought forth from
her subterraneous Refuges, and set upon a Hill,) began to enlarge her self, and
propagate the Gospel, according to the Commands of our Savior, Go ye and
Preach unto all Nations: Gregory the Great, sent Augustine the Monk into England
(somewhat before the year Six Hundred,) to see how Matters went here in this
long interval of silence, and distractions. In short, the Britains knew him
not (and no wonder) until he had confirmed his Commission by Miracles, and
such, as none yet ever denied. The great Errors which he found among them, were
chiefly, two; Their Asiatic Error, concerning the keeping of Easter; and
dissent from the use of the Roman Church in the administering of Baptism: And
although in some other Matters, they differed from the Church of Rome; yet
Augustine promised to tolerate those, provided, they would rectify these, which
the British Bishops consented to, and confessed, That it was the right way of
Justice, and righteousness which Austin taught. Si his tribus mihi obtemperare
vultis, ut Pascha suo tempore celebretis; ut ministerium Baptizandi juxta morem
Romans and Apost. Ecolesiae compleatis: Ut genti Anglorum, una nobiscum
praedicetis Verbum Domini, Caetera, quae agitis, quamvis Moribus nostris
contraria, aequanimiter cuncta tolerabimus? Cum Brittones confitentur,
Intellexisse se, veram esse viam Justitiae quam praedicaret Augustinus. Beda
Hist. l. 2. c. 2. Hence we may observe, That the two great faults which Austin
found with the Britains, were, about Easter and Baptism; that the Britains,
at first, highly opposed this Innovation, but, that in all other Substantials,
they agreed. That Austin is severely accused for bringing into England the
Popish Superstition, and all other Points, by name, controverted between us at
this day, is plain, from near twenty Eminent Protestant Authors, both at home
and abroad. And that the British Bishops, did not except against any of these,
save only Easter, and Baptism, is confessed.

Now, after all this, can we believe that the Britains, who earnestly
contradicted Austin in these smaller Points, and were so tenacious of their own
Customs, would have silently recieved so many, and imcomparably much greater
Points of Faith, had they in like manner disagreed from him therein? Credat
Judaeus Apella. The consequence which I draw from all this, is, that the same
Doctrines (these two Points excepted) which Austin taught the Saxons, had been
delivered to the Britains, from the Apostles: If you understand otherwise, I
shall be glad to be better informed; Or, if you can give us a better Authority
than venerable Bede, you will do well to produce it. In the mean time, when we
consider the great Learning, and Holiness of St. Gregory, so esteemed by all
sober men; the Piety of Austin himself, and of Bid (who writes the Story) He
must be a bold man, who (without better proof than I have hitherto seen) dares
accuse these three great Persons, and the whole Christian World, at that time
of Idolatry, and all those other damnable Crimes, then taught, of which you are
pleased to say, the Church of Rome at present is guilty. If you go higher, and
object a Letter of Pope Eleutherius to King Lucius, I demur.

But, I take it for granted, that these old Arguments, are thredbare, and will
not hold Water; otherwise, I would humbly advise you, to insist totally upon
them; for if you can make out your Lawful, Supreme, Independent Authority, in
determining Matters of Faith without Appeal; trouble not your selves, nor abuse
your Friends with Sophistical, Artificial Pamphlets; about Judges and Guides in
Controversies; Reason and Sense, against Faith and Obedience; and, I know not
what, to that purpose; but stick close to your Authority, make it out plain,
and you carry all before you.

In good earnest, Reverend Fathers, I see but one way how you will evade these
Difficulties which press hard upon you, and it is this; That you have an
Infallible Rule, Gods Holy Word, containing all things necessary to Salvation.
And Mr. Chillingworth tells us p. 92. The Scripture is a Rule, as, sufficiently
Perfect, so, sufficiently Intelligible, in things necessary; to all that have
understanding, whether learned or unlearned. Now, if the Scripture be a Guide
and a Judge, as well as a Rule, Then have you been to blame all this while that
you have not told us particularly, where the Catholic Church was; for
certainly, where the Bible is, and where all men that have understanding,
whether learned, or unlearned, by reading it, hold all things necessary to
Salvation, there the Catholic Church is, whether at Rome, or in London: and I
will not believe so ill of any, who, in such Case, read the Scripture, as to
imagine that they wilfully oppose a Truth, which is clear to them; and Mr.
Chillingworth tells me p. 367. That Believing all that is clear to me in
Scripture, I must needs believe all Fundamentals, and so I cannot incur
Heresy, which is opposite to some Fundamental. In a word, wheresoever there
is, or was a Bible, and a Man of understanding, whether learned, or unlearned,
that read it; there was a certain number of the true Catholic Church, pure, and
incorrupt: For the same hand again tells us, p. 101. The Scripture sufficiently
informing me what is Faith, must also of necessity teach me what is Heresy;
that which is straight, will plainly teach us what is crooked: So here is not
only a Member, but (according to my understanding) the Representative of the
whole Catholic Church; for here is Authority and Infallibility, and further
than that, I seek not. But if the holy Bible be a certain Rule, but withal,
that this Person of understanding whether learned or unlearned, be not
sufficiently qualified to find out certainly all things necessary to Salvation;
and of necessity to teach what Heresy is (and I confess I shrewdly suspect,
that there may be many in the World, who cannot, with a wet Finger, perform all
this) then are we to seek again for a Judge and an Authority; and are got no
further than we were sixteen Hundred years since, when the Scripture was first
acknowledged to be the Word of God.

But to do Justice (worthy Fathers) to you, and to my self, let us further
consider, these, and many other seeming Absurdities, which appear (at first
sight) such surprising Doctrines, that they make a Man gape, and stare, as if
he were Thunder struck, or had some strange Apparition. Why truly your great
Champion (the Learned Chillingworth) brings you still off, with flying Colors;
I Will give you his own Excellent words in p. 102. Where he says, For me to
believe further this or that to be the true sense of some Scriptures; or to
believe the true sense of them, and to avoid the false, is not necessary either
to my Faith, or Salvation; for if God would have had his meaning in these
places certainly known, how could it stand with his Wisdom, to be wanting to
his own Will, and End, as to speak obscurely? Or how can it consist with his
Justice to require of Men to know certainly the meaning of those words, which
he himself has not revealed? p. 18. For my Error, or Ignorance in what is not
plainly contained in Scripture, after my best endeavor used, to say, that God
will damn me for such Errors, who am a lover of Him, and lover of Truth, is, to
rob Man of his Comfort, and God of his Goodness, is, to make Man desperate, and
God a Tyrant. But he goes on p. 92. The Scripture is a Rule, as sufficiently
Perfect, so sufficiently Intelligible, in things necessary, to all who have
understanding, whether learned, or unlearned; neither is any thing necessary to
be believed, but what is plainly revealed; for to say, that when a place in
Scripture, by reason of ambiguous Terms, lies indifferent between diverse
Senses, whereof one is true and the other false, that God obliges men under
pain of damnation, not to mistake through Error, and humane Frailty, is, to
make God a Tyrant, and to say, that he requires of us certainly to attain that
End, for the attaining whereof, we have no certain means; What an easy,
compendious, and certain Rule of Faith is this?

But before we proceed, let us consider what our Author understands by -- His
meaning in these places -- speaking obscurely -- plainly contained in Scripture
-- things necessary -- ambiguous Terms lying indifferent between diverse Senses.
By all which he seems to insinuate, that there may be some ambiguous Terms in
Scripture, which, because they are not plain to every Understanding, therefore
not necessary to be truly understood and believed.

Indeed had he told us, what was not ambiguous, and what not necessary, he had
made our work much shorter. I shall presume therefore to reduce the Question;
and affirm, that if he means any thing by all this, he must mean the whole New
Testament to be ambiguous; for let him show me any one Text of Doctrine from
the first of St. Matthew to the last of the Revelations (the Moral Law, and the
Law of Nature only excepted) which he thinks to be the most clear; and I will
produce whole Bodies of learned Christians, who dispute it, and believe
contrary to one another in it. If so, then it appears demonstrably, and by
matter of Fact, that all is ambiguous, and by consequence every Man is safe, in
the Belief of the most opposite Doctrines, if he uses his best Endeavors (to
which also he has given a great Latitude) to understand it aright: For says
he, By my best endeavor, I mean, such a measure of industry, as humane
Prudence, and ordinary Discretion (my abilities and opportunities, my
distractions, and hindrances, and all other things considered) marry, and a
great consideration it is; shall advise me unto, in a matter of such
consequence. Chill. p. 18.19.

The whole Sense (as far as it concerns my purpose) runs thus, There are some
ambiguous Terms which lie indifferent between diverse Senses, whereof one is
true, and the other false; but if a Man of understanding, whether learned, or
unlearned, uses his best endeavor to understand them (that is, by reading
Scripture) he will safely Err, or, not Err at all, or else, God is a Tyrant.
That there are ambiguous Terms, is most certain; for we find many most Learned,
Pious Men, differing from, and contradicting one another in most Points,
generally reputed Fundamental. Secondly, That in Fundamentals, no man can
safely Err, because it is of the Essence of Christ's Church, to hold the Unity
of Faith, in Fundamentals, incorrupt. And Lastly, Most Christians are inclined
to believe, that God is no Tyrant. Our Author, from his own Promises, and by
what has been already said, seems evidently to draw this Conclusion; that
possibly and very probably, a Man may safely Err in Fundamentals, or God must
be a Tyrant. Now, for my part, when I read his excellent Works, lately, and
some years since, I always drew from the same Premises a most different
Consequence; that is, That since there are ambiguous Terms in Points highly
Fundamental, therefore, lest we should damnably Err in these, or, more
impiously think God to be a Tyrant, I concluded, that God, in his Wisdom and
Goodness, had certainly left us some infallible, visible Authority, which might
unerringly deliver to us, the true Sense of these ambiguous Terms.

Now besides the strong Evidences which we have from Scripture to believe this;
As for Example, when our Savior says, Go ye into all the World, Mark 16.15.
and Preach the Gospel to every Creature, He that believes, and is baptized
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. As thou have sent me
into the world, John 17.18.
even so have I also sent them into the world. And again, 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly
Teachers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healing; helps, Governments,
Ephesians. 14.11.
diversities of Tongues: So also. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets,
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. And Lastly, that this
Authority was to continue to the End of the Word. All power is given unto me in
Heaven, and in Earth, go ye therefore and teach all Nations, Mat. c. ult.
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo, I
am with you always, even unto the End of of the World: I say besides this, and
much more to this purpose, let all sober Christians witness for me, whether it
be not more pious, more rational, more comfortable to our selves, and
respectful to God, to conclude as I have done; that God has left us such an
Authority (especially since such an Authority, with good Reason, offers it self
to us) than to agree with our Author, That either God is a Tyrant, or, we may
safely Err in Fundamentals?

Since therefore from our Authors own Premises (notwithstanding the weight and
plainness of them) I should have made so contrary a Conclusion; it may happen,
that in reading the Bible, we might make as different Interpretations; and
whilst he believes Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, Consubstantial, and Equal
with the Father, as to his Divinity; I may affirm Christ to be mere Man, and
only Divinely Inspired. Such things I have heard of; but it may be, worthy
Fathers, you may not think this a necessary Point; then indeed, this Instance
would be impertinent.

But we must not thus leave our admirable Author; for from this his well
considered Doctrine, we may observe,

1. That according to this Rule, there can never be Schism, or Heresy in the
World, until a man can divide from himself; or, a man, condemning himself,
obstinately stand out against his clear Evidence of Scripture, and so sin
wilfully, and without excuse; and in this last Point Bishop Bromhall and Dr.
Still. unanimously concur with our Author. Now believing in Charity, that these
wonders have seldom, or never happened, therefore I ought to conclude, that St.
Paul mistook when he said, 1 Cor. 11.19.
There must be Heresies among you, and St. John much to blame when he wrote his
Gospel (many years after the death of our Savior) against the Heresies of
Ebion, and Cerinthus.

2. That all Men of understanding, whether learned, or unlearned, are in the
direct road to Heaven, and found Members of the true Catholic Church, provided
they be lovers of God, and of Truth, and follow their own Sense of Scripture,
although they differ in some of the most Fundamental Points of Faith. Now (besides
the extravagancy of this Opinion in general) it seems particularly levelled
against the poor Papists, because they often submit their own private
Interpretations (with great reason) to the Judgment, and Interpretation of the
Church: But if this be so damnable a fault in Papists, pray take care not to
exact this resignation from your own Subjects; and so farewell to Authority.

3. And Lastly, That there are some ambiguous Terms which lie indifferent
between diverse Senses, whereof the one is true, and the other false: This, we
readily grant, for the truth of it is so manifest that there is never a Point
in the C^^istian Faith, howsoever by you, and us esteemed Fundamental, but has
been denied by whole Bodies of Learned Men; who (as you do) made Scripture
their Rule. But when you tell us, further, that the true Sense of them is not
necessary to Faith, or Salvation (for if God would have had his meaning in
these places certainly known, why should he speak obscurely?) Then methinks,
Fathers, you not only make the Apostles write Impertinently, and to no purpose;
but you have brought all sorts of Sectaries, Schismatics, and Heretics (if any
such have been) and also the Turks, themselves (provided they read the
Scripture) within the Pale of the Christian Church: Nay, more, you have made
them in such Case, equal with the best true Members in it. And indeed if the
good wishes, and prayers of our Teckelites might prevail as much on one side;
as the Principles of your Champion, have capacitated the Turks on the other
side; I know no reason they have to despair of seeing the Cathedral of St.
Paul, Consecrated by the Mufti of Mahomet. By this time, most Reverend Fathers,
I should think that you, as well as my self, should be very weary of this
Learned Author. Being fixed therefore to my Authority, and the more, from the
Eminent danger of his loose, and pernicious Principles, I am resolved, that
nothing shall move me, except the absurd and monstrous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation (as you are pleased to call it) may have of it self force
enough to ruin, and overturn so solid a Foundation.

REMARKS Upon some late DISCOURSES AGAINST Transubstantiation.
I Must confess that this great Point seemed the most difficult to me, of any
that are Controverted between the two Churches: and for these Reasons; First,
because I did not rightly apprehend the Catholic Explication of the Natural
Body of Christ in the Sacrament. Secondly, Because (from this misunderstanding
of mine) I believed that the Body of Christ being in two places, at the same
time, implied a contradiction, which I supposed the Omnipotency of God could
not support. And lastly, because I thought the Fathers had been express against
this Doctrine.

I applied my self to the reading of Controversies; and discoursing with some
Learned Men, on both sides; and found first from the Catholics, That although they
Profess and Believe the Natural Body of Christ to be truly and substantially in
the Sacrament; yet they tell us, That it is not there after a Natural manner,
as it was upon the Earth, or upon the Cross, but after a Spiritual,
Supernatural, and Unbloody manner. Secondly, That it is indeed a Contradiction
to say a Body is here, and not here at the same time: but to say that the
Glorified Body of Christ, may be by accident, and by the power of God, in many
places, or ubi's at the same time, is so far from a Contradiction, that it
gives it not a more sovereign Existence, than what we allow to Angels, or to
the Soul in a Man's Body, which although it be a Substance, is yet really,
substantially and at the same time, totally in the Finger of a Man, and totally
in his foot, and totally in every part, and yet totally in the whole Body, tota
in toto, and tota in qualibe part.

And Lastly, for the Fathers, I found in them, not only most plain,
demonstrable, and Invincible Authorities asserting the Real Presence of Christ
in the Sacrament after a substantial manner; but also, that those very
Citations produced by Protestants to destroy this Doctrine of the Real
Presence, were most of them (if not all) so fully answered, or so agreeable to
the Catholic Faith, that if any of them remained still obscure, there wanted
not twenty plain places to Interpret them by; But more of these hereafter.

Here I considered the Protestant Arguments against this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and found them generally dissatisfactory, and insufficient;
chiefly upon this account, that they brought continually the same Objections,
which tho they had been answered a hundred times over by Catholics (both
Ancient and Modern) yet I found no Reply tothese Answers, or at least, such as
handled those which were most material; so that I perceived they danced always
in a Ring, without advancing a step toward a substantial and convincing
Demonstration. At last I was recommended to a late Discourse against
Transubstantiation, which treating particularly of that Subject; and being
wrote (as I was informed) by an Eminent Protestant Divine, I resolved to pitch
upon that, and from thence take my Measures, how far I ought to receive this
great Catholic Doctrine. I read it over and over with great attention, and
before I speak particularly of any thing contained in it; I think it Just to
give this Character of it in general, viz. that it seems to be writ without
Modesty, Charity, Sincerity, or Good Manners. Without Modesty, In that a
private Person, upon presumption of his own Parts, and Learning, shall dare to
ridicule so great a Mystery of the Christian Religion (I speak of the Real
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, according to the Doctrine of Catholics,
and Lutherans, excluding at present the Mode (as they term it) or Manner,
Transubstantiation) and this Doctrine owned, and professed not two Hundred years
since, generally through the Christian World, and at present, by at least eight
parts, in ten; and amongst these some persons extremely above him in Place and
Authority; and thousands (for ought we know) equal, if not above him, in
Learning, Piety, and Reason; Thus I say to ridicule, and burlesque so great a
Doctrine of the Christian Faith, is much more dangerous, and scandalous to the
Christian Religion, than that stupid, absurd and monstrous Doctrine (as he
calls it) against which he writes. For my part, I profess, if so many Men of
Sense and Reason, and these improved to the height by Study and Learning, may
not only be deceived in so great a Point of Religion; but mistaken even to
folly, madness, nonsense, and Contradiction; I know not what will become of
Christianity it self; for if these can so grossly Err, in Matters which are as
equally Evident (upon all accounts) to their Sense and Reason, as to the Sense
and Reason of any other; I am sure a Man is much less secure in trusting to
this single Discourser, or any belonging to him; and so farewell to Both.

But Secondly, It is without Charity, for since he has made (as he thinks) the
Catholic Doctrine so demonstrably false and absurd; all Catholics who believe
it, (tho never so Learned, Honest and Pious) must be either Knaves or Fools.

Thirdly, Without Sincerity, because all his material Objections (and many
more) have been Printed formerly above Seventy years since: And Lately, within
these Seventeen years, by Catholics themselves; with their Substantial Answers
to them. Now to have dealt sincerely, he ought to have replied to these
Answers, which would have set us forward, and drawn us to some Point; and not
have run round, as in a Magical Circle, without ever endeavoring to break
through the infatuation of Deluded Reason.

And next, to have dealt Sincerely, he ought not to have produced a scrap of a
Sentence from a Father, and left out those immediate preceding, or succeeding
Words which explicated the whole Sense. For Instance, His first is from Justin
Martyr, whom he produces saying, these Words: Our Blood and Flesh are
nourished, by the Conversion of that Food which we receive in the Eucharist, p.
11. But the whole Sentence runs thus; For we do not receive this as common
Bread, or common Drink, but as by the Word of God. Jesus Christ our Redeemer,
being made Man, had both Flesh and Blood for the sake of our Salvation; just so
are we taught, that That Food over which Thanks are given by Prayers, in his
own Words, and whereby our Blood, and Flesh are by a change nourished, Is the
Flesh and Blood of the Incarnate Jesus: For the Apostles in the Commentaries
written by them, called the Gospels, have recorded that Jesus so commanded
them. This I think altogether, makes little for our Discourser; especially if
he had been sincere enough to have told us, how the Fathers generally, as St.
Irenaeus, Cyril, Chrysostom. Greg. Nyss. and others expound the nourishment of
the Body, and as shall be shown hereafter. So also he quotes Theodoret, saying,
The mystical Symbols after Consecration, do not pass out of their own Nature,
for they remain in their former Substance, Figure, and Appearance: And may be
seen, and handled p. 19. Theoderet goes on: The mystical Signs are understood
to be that which they are made, and they are believed and adored as being those
very things, which they are believed. Now if they may be adored, I suppose they
mean somewhat more than Signs and Figures; or else the Adoration of holy Images
is more Ancient, than Protestants have hitherto allowed: And had our Discourser
been Sincere, he might have told us, how the Catholics interpret all this, to
be most consistent with their Faith, and confuted them if he could.

But Fourthly, His Discourse is writ without Good Manners, for (setting aside
his disrespect to a Religious Duty.) methinks when he knew so many Princes,
Kings, Emperors, Bishops, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, and most Learned Men of
all Sorts, received this Doctrine of the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation;
he ought to have forborne such words as Impudence. p. 2. Nonsense p. 24. Monster
of Transubstantiation p. 25. Monstrous insupportably absurd stupidity of this
Doctrine p. 33. Absurd and Senseless Doctrine, Legerdemain and Juggling Tricks
of Falsehood and Imposture, Hocus Pocus, a cheat and foolish Doctrine p. 34. But
here the Discourser is very angry; and indeed Fathers, I should even from hence
shrewdly suspect that our Discourser is no true Son of the Church of England,
for they are generally more moderate and civil; but we shall have further
occasion to speak of this hereafter: In the mean time I thought fit to take
thus much notice of these things; that we might consider whether such a Writer
(notwithstanding all his Magisterial dashes) be probably endued with that
Christian humble Temper, which we might expect from a Doctor of Christ's Church,
pretending also (without other Miracles than his wonderful Reason) to reform
almost the whole Christian World; but let us see whether his good Reasons will
make us amends by giving us some better Satisfaction.

Several Impertinences, and Quibbles appear in many parts of his Discourse; as
for Instance: He proves in p. 4. That a Sacrament may be instituted by
figurative Expressions, because a Sacrament is a Figare it self of some
Invisible Grace, etc. Now I had always thought, that a Man might deliver a Sign
or Figure, exhibiting some Invisible kindness in the most plain and literal
Terms, that possibly could be invented; for Example, I am persuaded the
Discourser might have exhibited or delivered, his Pamphlet; or Picture (which
are Figures of his Mind, or Person) as a Token of his love to his Friend in a
most plain litteral Speech; without the necessity of a figurative Sentence,
except for the sake of his Quibble: For my part, I think the delivery of a
Figure, or any thing else, is best in plain words. But then the Pains he takes,
and Wit that is spent, first to obtrude upon Catholics the false Belief of a
Miracle (according to his acceptance of a Miracle) and then to laugh at his
own Jest; together with the power of the Priest in being able to work so great
a Miracle, as to make God. Page 31. is really such Stuff, as certainly he never
designed for any other use, than to rub the itching Ears of the most illiterate
among the Vulgar. I confess, Fathers, it workt no good effect upon me, nor
never will (I should think) upon any sober Christian; for every body sure
understands his Fallacy concerning the power (of the Priest, and his Miracles.
But instead of that, had he replied to some solid Discourse of Catholics,
concerning the Doctrine of the Sacrament it self, I know not how far the
Authority, which my Reason had fixed in the Church of Rome, would have supported
me against his Arguments.

Having thus separated the loose Accidents of his Discourse from the more
substantial part; I will now examine that as far as is necessary according to
the best assistance of my impertial Reason and Understanding; and shall follow
him according to his own Method.

He supposes five Grounds or Reasons, for the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
or the Real Presence (according to a literal Sense) which he pretends to
confute: The first is from the Authority of Scripture, and (among other things
as little to the purpose) he tells us p. 7. That he does not believe any
sensible Man, who had never heard of Transubstantiation being grounded upon
these words, This is my Body, would upon reading the Institution of the
Sacrament in the Gospel ever have imagined any such thing to be meant by our
Savior in those words; but would have understood his meaning to have been, --
This Bread signifies my Body, etc. And do this for a memorial of me: Where you
may observe, worthy Fathers, that he excludes also the Real Presence in a
litteral sense (as shall be shown hereafter). He goes on: But sure it would
never have entered into any Man's mind, to have thought that our Savior did
literally hold himself in his hand, and gave away himself from himself with his
own hands. Now although I dare not pretend to interpret all Scripture (a lawful
sufficient Interpreter being the thing I look for) yet, since he has put the
Case, I presume to say thus much: That if a sensible Turk, or Pagan, who had
never heard of the great Mysteries of Christianity, should seriously read the
New Testament; possibly he would not have understood these words, This is my
Body, in a literal sense; neither do I think he would ever have established the
Doctrine of the Hypostatical Union; The Consubstantiality of the Son; The
Trinity; Predestination and Free Will; with many other Mysteries of Christian
Religion (especially if he were governed only by his humane Reason, as our
Discourser seems to be) and yet all this while he might have had a great esteem
of the moral part, and have believed Christ a Person divinely inspired: For my
part, I fear I should never have overcome these Difficulties upon my own
strength; and yet I believe the Trinity as firmly, as I believe there is a God.
Whether the Discourser does so or not, I cannot say: But supposing a Man
already well grounded in the Christian Religion, and having heard that the
Doctrine of the Real Presence, had been believed, in a literal sense, by the
greatest part of most Learned, and Pious Christians through all Ages; And, that
the Scriptures containing this Doctrine, were writ several years after the
death of our Savior, in which time the Sacrament had been celebrated by them;
and by consequence, if the Apostles had not understood this Mystery according
to a literal Sense, they had time, and reason plainly to have expounded it
otherwise, and have given us warning of this difficulty (as was done to the
Carnal Caphernaites) and not all three punctually agreed in the same
Expressions, without any caution of a dangerous Figure in them: In such Case, I
say, the Doctrine of the Real Presence, to such a Person (having laid aside all
prejudices) is as clear in Scripture, as most of those other great Mysteries
are; and that for these Reasons.

First, because I cannot imagine why our Blessed Savior should ever have made
use of these Terms, This is my Body, besides many other such like Expressions,
except he really intended a literal Interpretation; for what necessary relation
has a Body, and Blood, to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, more than to the
Sacrament of Baptism? Why a Consecration in that Sacrament, yet none either in
Baptism or others? Might not Christ (with reverence be it spoken) have said
much more plainly, and yet sufficiently to the same purpose; Take this Bread,
and Cup of Blessing in remembrance of that Passion of mine which is now at
hand, and as often as ye take it worthily, it shall conveigh to your Souls,
invisible Grace, and many other Benefits? Would not this have fully answered
the End of Zuinglius, and our Discourser's Doctrine, concerning this Sacrament?
But why does the God of Mercy and Truth command us to eat his Body, and drink
his Blood assuring us, that, except we eat his Flesh we have no life in us, if
he did not really intend we should do so? But, except he be really and
substantially present in the Sacrament, we can neither eat his Body, nor drink
his Blood; for to take the Figure for the Substance, is idle in any Command,
which positively orders the Substance, if the Substance possibly can be had;
and in this Case, it is impious, because he that commanded the Substance, is
able to give it us; and if he did not design to give it us, we have reason to
believe he would not have commanded it in such express terms: Especially, since
there was no necessity, no, nor convenience of using those words according to
our Discourser's Interpretation: For if by his Body, he meant the Figure only
of his Body, what good does that Figure do us? Or how does it satisfy the
Command, or why should Bread be the Figure of his Body? Since Figures of this
Figure, that is to say, the Paschal Lamb, and Manna descending from Heaven,
were much more noble, and proper Representing, than the thing Represented; and
yet neither was Manna nor the Lamb called his Body, as the Bread is, in the
Sacrament? The Expression therefore of Justin Martyr, saying, This Passover is
our Savior, and our Refuge p. 7. Is nothing at all to the purpose, nor could
the Paschal Lamb be taken really and truly for God their Savior, or their
expected Messian; because there was no such thing mentioned, or ^^^^ted in the
Institution of the Passover. On the contrary, it was instituted in the plainest
Manner, and most intelligible, and so free from all figurative Expressions,
that there are no less than 12 Verses in explaining every Circumstance of the
Action. They shall take to them every Man a Lamb, etc. Exodus c. 12. And can we
believe, that the Passover, which was indeed a Figure of the Sacrament, should
be expressed, and understood, in an unquestionable literal Sense; and that the
Sacrament, which was the Substance of the Figure, should be instituted in such
a prodigious wonderful Figure (according to our Discourser's acceptance) as to
involve the greatest part of the Christian World, not only in most pernicious
Mistakes, but also in the most detestable Sin of Idolatry? Sure, the
imagination of it must be totally inconsistent with the Veracity, Mercy,
Goodness, and the main design of our blessed Savior. To institute a Figure
literally, and the Substance figuratively, is a strange Method, and not easily
supposed in the God of Truth; and Wisdom. Nay, more, our Savior, who
established a Law, and a Church to interpret it, who suffered the Indignities of
humane Life, and Death of the Cross on purpose to save Sinners: He, to whom the
past, and future was always present, and who knew what would happen to his
Spouse the Church, after his Death, had left so great a stumbling block to the
World (had he intended only a figurative Interpretation) that his Cruelty
(which is most impious to imagine) would have exceeded his Mercy; especially if
it be true (as I believe it is, and hope shall be able to prove) that the whole
Christian World for a thousand years together after his Ascension, universally
concurred in the firm Belief of a literal Sense, and practiced accordingly.
Good God! So many reputed Saints, so many Martyrs, and so many holy Men dying
in the guilt, and many of them in defense of gross Idolatry? This to me (to use
the expression of our Discourser) is more than ten Thousand Demonstrations.

He tells us indeed, that some Learned Catholic Authors have declared their
Opinions, that the Doctrine which holds the substance of Bread and Wine to
remain after Consecration, is neither repugnant to Reason nor Scripture. p. 5.
And what then? They do not exclude the Doctrine of the Real presence in a
literal sense, nor do I know that they did ever doubt of Transubstantiation:
But most of them have written particularly in defense of it; and Durandus wrote
a Book consisting of nine parts against Berengarius, who opposed it. Now, tho
this might be the private Opinion of these Men, yet there are (it may be)
thousands as Learned as themselves, of another Opinion; and all this without
either prejudicing, or helping the Doctrine it self.

Our Discourser cannot think any Man so senseless to believe, that our Savior
did literally hold himself in his hands, and gave away himself from himself,
with his own hands; and yet we find a very sensible Father, and one much
esteemed by all parties (I mean S. Augustine) made no such difficulty to believe
all this: For in his Comment upon these words, Et ferebatur in manibus suis;
and he was carried in his own hands, he speaks thus of Christ. And can this be
possible in Man? Was ever any Man carried in his own hands, etc. How this can
be literally understood of David we cannot discover; Comm. in Ps. 33.
but in Christ we found it verified, for Christ was carried in his own hands,
when giving his own very Body he said, This is my Body. But if Christ carried
only the Figure of his Body, it was not only possible for David, but for any
Man else to have done the same. Methinks our Discourser should have replied to
this obvious Answer, when he made his Objection: And thus much for the
Authority of Scripture.

Next he tells us, that this Doctrine is not grounded upon the perpetual Belief
of the Christian Church; and for this, he produces many Authorities of the
Fathers, which may be reduced to these Heads; either where they tell us, That
the Elements are a Sign and Figure of Christ's Body; or that they remain in
their former Substance; or that they go into the Draught, and our flesh
increased by them; or that they are not to be taken according to the Letter;
for all which he brings some Citations. Now although the Fathers have been their
own best Interpreters, showing plainly in other places, how these are to be
understood, agreeable to the Catholic Doctrine; yet, that it may appear more
Evident, I shall instance in some other plain expressions, and leave the
Balance to the Judgment of the Reader.

First then, wheresoever it is said, that the Elements are Signs or Figures,
there no more is said than what the Catholics believe and profess; nay, more,
that it is a part of the Definition of a Sacrament to be a Sign, That is to
say, that the unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, offered in a
spiritual manner, is a Figure, or Sign of the bloody Sacrifice, offered once
for all upon the Cross, after a natural manner; answerable to the words of S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. Ye shall show the Lords death until he come. About the words
we agree; concerning the interpretation our Discourser may dispute as long as
he pleases.

Next, That the Elements remain in their form and substance: This passage of
Theodoret has been in part answered before, where he tells us, That they are
to be adored -- And from thence we may conclude, that he means the nature of
the Accidents; for those words (...) and (...), which this Greek Father uses,
contain every kind of Essence and Nature, as well of Accidents, as of
Substances: And so again he expounds himself, saying, that we may see and touch
(the said Color and Form) which have reference only to those Accidents; and in
this sense, the Elements may admit of Co-adoration with the Body of our
Savior; as when himself was Clothed upon Earth; otherwise not. And Theodoret
is blamed by the Centurists, Cent. 5. c. 10. Because he affirms, That the
Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, after the Invocation of the Priest,
are changed, and made other things than they were before: They mean not Signs I
hope, for more than that they believed themselves.

But let us hear St. Augustine, As with a faithful heart and Mouth we receive
the Mediator of God and Man, Christ Jesus, who gives us his Flesh to be eaten,
and his Blood to be drunk, although it seems to be a thing more full of horror to
eat Man's flesh, than to kill it, and to drink Man's blood, than to shed it. L.
2, Contr. adv. Leg. and Proph. But sure it is not more horrible to eat Man's
flesh in figure, than to kill a man in good earnest, etc. Let us hear him
again, We have heard (says he) our Master, who always speaks truth,
recommending to us our Ransom, his Blood; for he spoke of his Body and Blood;
which Body he called Meat, and his Blood Drink. But there are some who do not
believe; they said. This is a hard saying, who can hear it? It Is hard, but to
the obstinate, that is, incredible, but to the Incredulous. L. de verb. Apost.
Sermon. 2. But is the Figure so hard a saying? I think not.

Next St. Ambrose, a co-temporary, and particular Friend of St. Augustine, It
may be you will say, De his qui Mist. Init. c. 9.
why do you tell me that I receive the Body of Christ, when as I see quite
another thing? We have this therefore yet to prove: How many Examples therefore
do we produce to show, that it is not what Nature framed, but what the
Benediction has Consecrated, and that the force of Benediction is greater than
of Nature, because by Benediction Nature her self is changed. Moses held a Rod
in his hand, he cast it from him, and it became a Serpent: Where he tells of
all those real Transmutations and Miracles made by Moses. After which he goes
on, We see therefore that the power of Grace is far beyond that of Nature, and
yet we have only mentioned hitherto the effects of Grace in the blessing of
Prophets; now if the blessing of men were of so great efficacy, as to change
the Nature of things, what shall we say of the Divine Consecration, where the
very words of Christ our Savior are operative? Then he speaks of the Creation
of the World out of nothing, and goes on, If therefore Christ by his word, was
able to make something of nothing, shall he not be thought able to change those
things which are, into other things which they were not? But what need of
Arguments? Let us propose his own Example, and assert the truth of this
Mystery, by that of his Incarnation. When our Lord Jesus was born of Mary, was
it a Natural generation, etc. This Body which we make in the Sacrament, is that
which was born of the Virgin. Why do ye here require the order of Nature in the
Body of Christ; when as above all Nature Christ was born of a Virgin? The true
Flesh of Christ, which was crucified, which was buried. And are all these real
Transmutations, and Miraculous, Supernatural Examples produced, only to prove a
figurative Change, conferring some invisible Blessing? Can our Discourser
understand it so, and no otherwise? Indeed I think he had best retreat to the
first three Hundred years after Christ (as some others of your late Writers
have done) contrary to what I had ever been taught among you; who generally
extended the Purity of the Roman Doctrine as far as the first Five Hundred
years, and accordingly, in my Discourses with Catholics, I always asserted,
that we did receive the Roman Doctrine, until about that time: but the Truth
would glare too much in our Discoursers Eyes, if he should walk in the light of
those two latter Centuries, when the Church began to be freed from her
Persecutions, and holy Fathers had greater liberty of Preaching, and Teaching
the true Christian Faith, in its Extent. But we shall follow him as high as he
pleases.

We produce next St. Cyril of Jerusalem, who lived in the Age before St.
Ambrose and St. Augustine, his words are these: Do not then consider it as bare
Bread, or bare Wine, for it is the Body and Blood of Christ, according to the
word of our Savior himself: For though sense should suggest this to thee, yet
let thy Faith so confirm this, as that thou judge not the matter from the Taste:
And again, Hoe Sciens, etc. This knowing, and accounting it as most certain,
that this Bread which we see is not Bread, though our Taste do tell us that it is
Bread; but it is the Body of Christ; and the Wine which we behold, though it seem
Wine to our sense of Taste, yet it is not Wine, but the Blood of Christ: Catech.
4. This was spoke after a Catechistical manner, in which, high Metaphors and
Figures are not generally very frequent; he was besides, esteemed by all as a
learned Person, and of this Book, none ever doubted.

We come now to the third Age, in which S. Cyprian, treating of our Lords
Supper, says, The Bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, is changed, not
in outward appearance, but in Substance, and by the Omnipotency of the Word, It
is made Flesh. And as in the person of Christ the Humanity did appear, and the
Divinity lay hid; so in the visible Sacrament, the Divine Essence has
ineffably infused it self. Sermon. de coena Dom. This is so clear a passage, that
some of the Sacramentaries, for want of a better Answer, pretend it was not
writ by St. Cyprian, although at the same time they are forced to confess that it
is of great Antiquity, and had a Learned Author: But something must be said,
and Confidence goes a great way.

I have already spoken of Justin Martyr in the second Age; and come now to the
first Age, even in the days of the Apostles; let us hear then the holy Martyr
S. Epist. ad Smyrnaeos.
Ignatius the Disciple of S. John, who speaking of the Heretics of his time,
says thus, They do not allow of Eucharists and Oblations, because they do not
believe the Eucharist to be the Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
suffered for our Sins, and which the Father in his Mercy raised again from the
dead. A strange concurrence through all Ages of most extraordinary Tropes and
Figures. I name not St. Andrew, because the Authority is suspected: Nor is it
necessary to multiply Testimonies of the Fathers (which we might have done)
because they are in truth but like dead Weights on both sides, until we shall
have put life into them by such reasonable Interpretations, as (reconciling
them first to themselves) may make them plainly speak forth the Catholic
Doctrine, which I refer to the Conclusion.

But what do Protestants think of all these Fathers? Why truly they blame them
All, and tell us, that they were mistaken. Dr. Humphrey says, Gregory and
Austin brought Transubstantiation into the English Church, (Jesuit. part 2. p.
627) The Centurists charge S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and Eusebius, For not
writing well of Transubstantiation Peter Martyr, for the same reason blames S.
Cyril, Vrsinus, S. Cyprian. The Learned Melancton writes thus upon this Subject
( L. 3. Ep. Zuing, and Oecol. f. 132.) There is no care (says he) that has
more troubled my mind, than this of the Eucharist: And not only my self have
weighed what might be said on either side; but I have also sought out the
Judgment of old Writers touching the same: And when I have laid all together, I
find no good reason, that may satisfy a Conscience, departing from the
propriety of Christ's words, This is my Body. Many other Testimonies of Learned
Protestants, I omit at present for Brevity sake. In the mean time, I suppose
all these may be sufficient to balance the Substance of Theodoret, even when
you have made the most of it, that in reason you ought; or else my Reason and
Sense are much more deceived in this Case, than in that of the Sacrament.

But come we to the Third Point, That the Elements go into the draught, and our
flesh increased by them. Hear what St. Chrysostom says, Do you see Bread? Do
you see Wine? Do these go into the draught like other common meat? Far be it
from thee to imagine it. Hom. do Euchar. in Encoen. When our Discourser has
reconciled his passage of Origin, with this of S. Chrysostom; let him then
read any Catholic Author, and he will tell him how he shall understand the
Authority which he has here produced; of which more hereafter.

Now for the increase of the flesh, I find this Explication in St. Greg.
Nyssen. Orat. Catech. c. 36. and 37. Even as a little Leaven does make the
whole Mass like it self; so that Body which is made Immortal by God, entering
into our Body, does transfer, and change it into its self. And after, That Body
is joined with the Bodies of the faithful, that by the Coujunction with the
same Immortal Body, Man may be made partaker of Immortality. So S. Cyril of
Alexandria, As a spark of fire lighting upon Hay or Straw, does presently
inflame it all; so the Word of God joined to our corruptible Nature by means of
the Eucharist, does make it all to rise Immortal, and glorious. The same may be
seen in Iraen. l. 8. contr. Haer c. 34. And many others, who understand the
increase of the Flesh, to be a raising of the Flesh toward a state of
Immortality, and disposing it toward a happy Resurrection; according to that
of S. John c. 6. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has life
Everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day. But if these
Interepretations should not happen to please you, I shall then recommend you to
a late Catholic Author, and leave you to himself, or his Excellent Treatise,
The Defense for the Adoration of the Body and Blood of our Lord, p. 14. For
further satisfaction, his words are these, 'This External Sign, or Symbol, they
(the Catholics) affirm to be all That of the Bread and Wine that is perceived
by any Sense. And though after Consecration, the Substance of the Bread and Wine
is denied to remain, yet is Substance here taken in such a sense, as that
neither the hardness, nor softness, nor the frangibility, nor the savor, nor
the odor, nor the nutritive virtue of the Bread, nor nothing visible, nor
tangible, or otherwise perceptible by any sense, are involved in it. All which
at last we shall endeavor to explain.

The last Head is, That the words of Consecration are not to be taken in a
literal Sense: To prove this our Discourser brings several killing Testimonies,
as he calls them; but I know not whom they hurt, except the Caphernaites; for
all Catholics own both the Authorities, and the Doctrine contained in them, as
absolutely necessary to the true and Orthodox understanding their Doctrine of
the Holy Sacrament. That is to say, That the Body of Christ in the Eucharist,
is not there after a Natural and Corporeal manner, as it was upon the Cross,
that is, specifically, and according to the outward Form, and local Existence;
but spiritually, supernaturally, and without Circumscription, that is, external
Commensuration of, or Co-extension with Place. And if Pascasius meant otherwise
of the Sacrament, than what is here expressed, then Rabanus Maurus did well to
oppose him with all his might, as another Anonymus did (if not the same
Rabanus) in a Tract extant in Codice Gemblacens. Cosnobij cum Heregeri
Opusculo. But that this good Archbishop did so understand him, is plain for
these two Reasons. First, because he has always been acknowledged an Orthodox
Bishop among all Catholics; and next, because his own words have, with good
reason, confirmed Catholics in this their Opinion of him; and they are these,
Who, says he, would ever believe that Bread could be turned into Flesh, or Wine
into Blood, except our Savior himself had said it, who Created Bread and Wine,
and made all things out of Nothing, but it is easier to make one thing out of
another, than all things out of Nothing. L. 7. de Sacris ordin. ad Theatmanum
c. 10.

Now after all these Authorities from the Fathers, and a Hundred more which
might be produced, to show that they believed the Real Presence, together with
the agreeable concurrent sense of them all, running through their whole Works,
besides their constant practice of Adoration, and Belief of an unbloody
Sacrifice; and many Learned Protestants confessing, that they did so believe:
After all this, I suppose I need not enquire of our Discourser, when this
Doctrine of the Real Presence came into the World, for I am convinced that it
was in the very days of the Apostles themselves; or, to use the words of
Sebastianus Francus, and Hospinian (two Eminent Protestants) jam tum primo illo
tempore, and viventibus adhuc Apostolis, etc.

But because our Discourser has made use of the name of the good Archbishop
of Mentz to countenance and support his false Chronology, it is Just that I
take off this scandalous imputation from Rabanus Maurus. Now, although his own
words before recited, are more than sufficient to clear this Excellent Person;
yet at present I shall only make use of our Discourser's own computation to
destroy the probability of his unreasonable Supposition, which he calls a plain
Testimony.

He tells us, P. 21.
That in the Second Council of Nice, Anno Dom. 787. The Sacrament was declared
to be properly the Body and Blood of Christ, and that thence this Opinion got
footing among the Greeks: And that in the year 818. Pascasius first broacht
this Doctrine in the Latin Church, insinuating, that until that time, this
Doctrine was not received among the Latins; and, that thereupon, Rabanus Maurus
in the year 847 wrote against this Pascasius for introducing this new Error.
Thus far the Story is very well laid; but here are these hard difficulties to
be digested before we can give it that credit which he expects: First, it is
certain, that Peter Arch-Presbyter of the Roman Church, and Peter the Monk,
were present in the said Council in behalf of Pope Adrian. That the said Pope
wrote Letters to the Emperor Constantius, and also to Tarasius Patriarch of
Constantinople, which were received by the said Council: And lastly, that the
Popes Supremacy was confirmed in this very Council in these words, Quod
Ecclesia Romana sit Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, Act 2.

Now from this Council to Rabanus Maurus, there was an Interval of 60 years;
from the Council to Pascasius, of one and Thirty years; and can we believe,
that this Doctrine of the Real Presence, which was declared in this Council, in
the presence of the Popes Legates, and confirmed by the Pope himself, should be
one and Thirty years a getting over from Nice into the Latin Church? Or that so
Learned a Man as Rabanus (and so esteemed by our Discourser) should be ignorant
sixty years after this Council was held, That this Doctrine had been there
declared? And so grossly mistake Pascasius for the first broacher of it? Truly
for my part, although Rabanus had not explained himself concerning his Faith,
according to those expressions before related, yet would I not easily have
believed that he could have been so ignorant of the Transaction of this
Council, or would have accused Pascasius of introducing so gross an Error into
the Latin Church, when he knew that he writ no otherwise, than as had been
Thirty years before, determined in a General Council: It is plain therefore
that Rabanus quarreled with some Expressions of Pascasius, as importing the
Erroneous sense before mentioned.

Our Discourser, being confident that he has found out the date of
Transubstantiation, falls a little foul upon Mr. Arnauld, because he cannot
believe that such a Doctrine should have been imposed upon the Christian World,
and yet so universally received, except there had been some extraordinary, if
not an universal Opposition; and indeed our Discourser (of all mankind) ought
to have believed so too; for if every man should have had as ill an Opinion of
it, as himself, its establishment had been impossible. But that he might find a
fit parallel for Mr. Arnauld, he takes a long Journey to Vienna, the rather (I
suppose) that he might pay his respects to the King of France, and his Army as
he returned home again; for he tells us, That by the like Demonstration (as Mr.
Arnauld's) one might prove that the Turk did not invade Christendom, because if
he had, the most Christian King, who had the greatest Army in Christendom, in a
readiness, would certainly have employed it against him.

Now our Discourser, without crossing the Seas, might have given as proper an
instance, even from his own Doors; for who could easily imagine that the Real,
Substantial Presence of Christ's Natural Body in the holy Sacrament, should have
been believed and professed by the Church of England, in the days of King James
the First; and yet, that in the Reign of King James the Second, the figurative
Doctrine, in exclusion of the Real Presence, should be so firmly, and peaceably
established among us, as that not so much as one single Church of England Man
(at least that I have heard of) tho highly dignified by honorable and
profitable Employments, in, and by the said Church of England, should write one
word in Vindication of their ancient Church: Nor one small Pamphlet, to oppose
the Innovation of these usurping Sacramentories? But these things, worthy
Fathers, concern you more than me; and lest you should quite forget that there
ever had been any such Doctrine professed by your Church of England, I shall
humbly take the liberty, by and by, to refresh your memories.

Much more might be said, to show, from what loose Conjectures, our Discourser
would prove the Innovation of the Doctrine of the Real Presence; and that it
entered not into the Latin Church before the Eighth Century. But since I design
nothing of Answer, more than to satisfy you (worthy Fathers) and my self, that
I have not rushly rejected the Authority of so Learned a Person, as our
Discourser seems to be, without good reason and due consideration, this which
is already said, is (I suppose) sufficient for that purpose.

I come now to (what he calls) the Third pretended Ground of this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that is, The infallible Authority of the present Church to
make, and declare new Articles of Faith. First, there is a great difference
between making an Article of Faith, and declaring and Article of Faith. I know
no power upon Earth that can do the first; but certainly the second is within
the Jurisdiction of the lawful Church Governors, or otherwise, General
Councils would be very insignificant Assemblies. Now if Transubstantiation
should prove to be no more than the true Faith concerning the blessed
Sacrament, declared, or explained; then our Discourser has no reason to
quarrel with Church Authority, or fear any Inconveniences should happen from
the Exercise of such a Power.

First, I have sufficiently shown (at least in my Opinion) that the Doctrine of
the Real Presence, that is, of the Natural Body of Christ substantially, truly,
and literally existing in the Sacrament (though not after a Corporal, and Natural
manner,) to have been the constant Doctrine of the Catholic Church, from the
Apostles to the great Council of Lateran; when, in the presence of the
Ambassadors of the Greek, and Roman Emperors; as also of the Kings of
Jerusalem, England, France, Spain, and Cyprus, this word Transubstantiation was
agreed upon by near Thirteen Hundred Fathers, to be a proper Explicative Term
of the Apostolical Doctrine; and belief of the Real Presence, or change of the
Bread and Wine, into the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; of this enough has
been said. But because our Discourser is pleased to call the Doctrine of the
Real Presence barbarous, and impious, p. 35. I have thought fit to add to the
rest, the Testimonies of Bishop Andrews, and the Learned Casaubon in the name
of King James the First, and the Church of England, and some others of the most
Learned Fathers and Professors of the true English Church.

I will begin with Bishop Andrews, Resp. ad Apol. Bell. c. 1. p. 11. The
Cardinal (says he) cannot be ignorant, except wilfully, that Christ said, This
is my Body; but not after this manner, This is my Body. We agree in the object,
and differ only in the manner, Concerning the Hoc est, or this is. We firmly
believe that it is: Concerning the after this manner (i.e. by the Bread
Transubstantiated into the Body) of the manner how it is done, as by, or in, or
with, or under, or through, there is not a word concerning it. We believe the
true Presence, no less than your selves, but we dare not confidently define any
thing concerning the manner of this Presence, nor are we over curious to
enquire into it, etc. Again ib. c. 8. p. 194. Speaking of the Conjunction of
Christ's Body with the Symbols, he says, There is that Conjunction between the
visible Sacrament, and the Invisible Thing of the Sacrament, as between the
Divinity and Humanity of Christ; where, except you would savor of
Eutychianism, the Humanity is not transubstantiated into the Divinity: And a
little further, The King has established it, that Christ is truly present in
the Eucharist, and to be truly there adored: And, we, with Ambrose adore the
Flesh of Christ in the Mysteries. Some possibly may be ingenious enough to
interpret all this to signify a mere figurative Presence, as they have done
many clear passages of the Fathers, but they must interpret for themselves, not
for me.

But let us hear what Is. Casaubon writes to Cardinal Perron by the Kings
Command, concerning the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, who
saying, that the Contest was not about the Truth but only the Manner of the
thing, returns this reply, p. 50. His Majesty wonders, since your Eminence
confesses that you do not so solicitously require, that Transubstantiation
should be believed, as that we should not doubt concerning the Truth of the
Real Presence: That the Church of England should not long since have satisfied
you in that particular, which has so often professed to believe it, in her
public Writings. And then for Explication of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, recites the forementioned words of Bishop Andrews, Quod Cardinalem
non latet. Come we next to Mr. Hooker. Eccl. Polit. l. 5. Sect. 67. p. 357.
Wherefore should the World continue still distracted, and rent with so manifold
contentions, when there remains now no Controversy, saving only about the
subject where Christ is? Nor does any thing rest doubtful in this; but whether,
when the Sacrament is administered, Christ be whole within Man only, or else his
Body and Blood be also externally seated in the very Consecrated Elements
themselves. Again, p. 360. All three Opinions do thus far accordin one: That
these holy Mysteries received in due manner, do instrumentally both make us
partakers of the Grace of that Body and Blood, which were given for the Life of
the World; and besides also impart unto us, even in a true and real, though
Mystical Manner, the very Person of our Lord himself, whole, perfect and entire.

Next we offer the Testimony of Bishop Ridley quoted by Archbishop Laud, set
down in Fox, p. 1598. You (says he, the Transubstantialists) and I agree in
this, That in the Sacrament is the very true, and Natural Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ, even that which was born of the Virgin Mary, which ascended into
Heaven, which sits on the right hand of God the Father, etc. only we differ in
Modo, in the way and manner of being there --

Dr. Tailor, who has written one of the last on this Subject, is very clear
and particular concerning this Real Presence, Sect. 1. N. 11. p. 18. It is
enquired (says he) whether, when we say we believe Christ's Body to be really in
the Sacrament, we mean, that Body, that Flesh, that was born of the Virgin
Mary, that was Crucified, Dead, and Buried? I answer, I know none else that he
had, or has; there is but one Body of Christ, Natural and Glorified: But he
that faith that Body is Glorified which was Crucified, says it is the same
Body, but not after the same manner; and so it is in the Sacrament, we eat and
drink the Body and Blood of Christ that was broken and poured forth, for there
is no other Body, no other Blood of Christ: But though it is the same we eat, and
drink, yet it is in another manner. And therefore when any of the Protestant
Divines, or any of the Fathers deny, that Body which was born of the Virgin
Mary, that was Crucified, to be eaten in the Sacrament; As Bertram, as St.
Heirom, as Clemens Alexand. expressly affirm; The meaning is easy, They intend
that it is not eaten in a natural sense, etc. That Body which was Crucified, is
not that Body that is eaten in the Sacrament, is true, if the intention of the
Proposition be to speak of the eating it, in the same manner of being: But that
Body which was Crucified, the same Body we do eat (is also true) if the
intention be to speak of the same thing, in several Manners of being, and
Operating. Some also, may turn all this into a mere figurative sense, excluding
the Corpus Domini, or Real Presence of Christ's Natural Body in the Sacrament;
and it may be they may think that this Doctor himself (from some other of his
expressions) may have given them just reason so to do. I shall then only
observe these two things; First, that concerning this Real Presence, a Catholic
could not have written more justly, nor more plainly than the Doctor has done
in what has been above recited: And Secondly, That if after all this, the
Doctor should mean no more than a Spiritual efficacy or virtue, excluding the
Corpus Domini, or Substantial Presence of Christ's Natural Body, (though indeed
after a Spiritual manner, as we confess;) then does the Doctors Opinion seem as
contradictory to it self, and as incomprehensible to me, as the great Mystery
of Transubstantiation it self, or as if he had written in Characters totally
unintelligible.

But let us now hear Bishop Forbes de Eucharist. L. 2. c. 2. Sect. 9. The sober
Protestants doubt not but that Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament; for in
the taking of the Eucharist, Christ is to be adored with Divine Worship,
because his Living and Glorious Body is present, by an unexpressible Miracle,
to the Worthy Receiver; and this Adoration, is not due or performed, to the
Bread, or Wine, or the taking, or eating; but to the very Body of Christ
immediately exhibited to us in the taking of the Eucharist. And again. L. 3. c.
1. Sect. 10. The holy Fathers often tell us, That the very Body of Christ is
Offered, and Sacrificed in the Eucharist, as appears by almost innumerable
passages; but not that all the properties of a Sacrifice are properly, and
really observed; but it is done by a Commemoration, and Representation of that,
which being once offered in that only Sacrifice of the Cross, Christ our High
Priest, did thereby consummate all other Sacrifices; and by pious
Supplications, by which the Ministers of the Church (for the sake of the
perpetual Oblation of that one Sacrifice, assisting in Heaven at the right hand
of the Father, and present after an unexpressible manner on the holy Table)
most humbly pray God the Father, that he would please to grant, that the Virtue
and Grace of this perpetual Victim may become profitable and efficacious to his
Church, for helping all the necessities, both of the body and Soul.

The Archbishop of Spalato says much the same thing in his Rep. Eccles. L. 7.
c. 11. Only he will not admit the Body of Christ to be corporally in the Bread,
or under the Bread; but to be taken with the Bread; Sumitur cum Pane, Christi
Corpus reale, illi communioni realiter praesens.

Mr. Thorndyke in his Epilogue to the Tragedy, L. 3. c. 3. Says thus, That
which I have already said, is enough to Evidence the Mystical, and Spiritual
Presence of the Flesh, and Blood of Christ in the Elements, as the Sacrament of
the Same, before any Man can suppose that Spiritual Presence of them to his
Soul, which the eating and drinking Christ's Flesh and Blood spiritually by
living Faith imports. And ibid. c. 2. where it follows, He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lords Body; Unless a man discern the Lords Body where it is not, of
necessity it must there be, where it is discerned to be. And l. 3. c. 5. Having
maintained that the Elements are really changed, from ordinary Bread and Wine,
into the Body and Blood of Christ mystically present as in a Sacrament, and
that in virtue of the Consecration, not by the Faith of him that receives; I am
to admit and maintain whatsoever appears duly consequent to this Truth; namely,
that the Elements so consecrated, are truly the Sacrifice of Christ upon the
Cross, in as much as the Body and Blood of Christ are contained in them, etc.
And then, p. 46. he further collecteth thus: And the Sacrifice of the Cross
being necessarily propitiatory, and impetratory both, it cannot be denied that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, in as much as it is the same Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Cross, is also both propitiatory and impetratory. You may
consult Archbishop Laud, Bishop Montague, Bishop Bilson, and many other Learned
Protestants, too long to be here recited for further satisfaction in this
Matter.

Now, worthy Fathers, what would you advise me to do in this Case? would you
have me follow the Judgments of these Learned and Pious Men, who wrote, not
only their private Opinions, but, some of them, in the Name of the King, and
whole Church of England? Or would you have me believe our Discourser, and some
others of our late Sacramentary Pamphleters? If the first, then
Transubstantiation will not appear so absurd, ridiculous, senseless and foolish
a Doctrine as he has styled it, which I hope to prove hereafter. If the
second, then to use the Argument and Words of our Discourser, p. 30.
Christanity would become a most uncertain and endless thing; for if we may thus
change our Faith in such high and fundamental Doctrines as these are, I know
not what security we have that we shall not in time change our Faith in other
necessaries, and at length lose it all.

But to pin up the Basket (as we say) I shall conclude with the Testimonies of
Calvin and Beza, men to whom the Church of England is obliged for a great part
of her Reformation. Calvin upon 1 Cor. 11.24. (Take, eat, this is my Body) says
thus, Nor does Christ only offer to us the benefits of his Death and
Resurrection, but that Body it self in which he suffered and rose again. And
again, Instit. l. 4. c. 17. Being made partakers of his Substance, we perceive
also the virtue of it in the Communication of all good things. I know no other
Substance he had spiritual or corporal, but that which was born of the Blessed
Virgin. And of the Lutherans he says: If they so explain their meaning, that
whilst the Bread is delivered there is annexed to it the exhibition of his Body,
because the Truth is inseparable from its Sign, I should not much oppose them.

And to strengthen this Assertion of Calvin, I shall add the Confession of
Beza, and others of the same Sect, related by Hospinian Hist. Sacram. part
altera, p. 251. We confess that in the Cup of our Lord, not only all the
Benefits of Christ, but the very substance of the Son of man; I say, that very
Flesh, and that very Blood which he poured out for us, not only
significatively, symbolically, typically, or figuratively, as a remembrance of
one absent; but truly and certainly represented, exhibited, and offered, not as
naked Symbols, but as having (from God himself promising and offering) the very
thing it self, truly and certainly joined to them. Now the manner by which the
thing it self, (i.e. the very Body, and the very Blood of our Lord) is joined
with the Symbols, we say it is Symbolical, or Sacramental; But we call it a
Sacramental manner, not that it is only Figurative, but that it truly and
certainly represents under the Species of visible Things, that which God
exhibits, and offers with the Symbols, that is (as I said before) the very Body
and Blood of Christ. And then he tells us, That he differs with others
concerning the manner of the Presence only, but for the very Thing and Presence
it self he retains and defends it.

And now, Reverend Fathers, I must acquaint you, that whilst I was transcribing
this very last Paragraph, I was informed, that there was an Answer, lately
published, to Two Discourses printed at Oxford, which contained in them the
Testimonies of these Learned Protestants before mentioned. I stopped my Pen,
bought the Book, and read it over with great care. I shall not at present speak
any thing more of it in particular, than what relates to this very Subject; but
in general give me leave to tell you, that me thoughts this Answerer might very
well have spared his Apology at last, p. 125. for not having insisted more
largely upon some points, since I have not seen Twenty two Sheets written with
so much magisterial Confidence, and (in my judgment) with so little Substance,
even among all the Pamphlets that have come out on both sides, from the Death
of the late King to this present day; but I leave the further examination to
the Conclusion of this Discourse.

First, we thank him for his plainness in delivering his opinion concerning the
Real Presence (which is the subject Matter in Debate) and by which he tells us,
is meant no more than invisible Power and Grace, in exclusion of the Real
Presence of Christ's Natural Body, even after a spiritual manner: Whether the
Church of England will thank him for it, I know not: I am sure I was otherwise
instructed, and believed otherwise, whilst in your Communion.

But let us hear what he says to these Testimonies. He endeavors to elude
their most plain indubitable sense, and grammatical construction, (even
according to the common Reason and Understanding of all Mankind) these several
ways.

First, he tell us that Becanus says, the Calvinists deny the Body and Blood of
Christ, to be truly, really and substantially present in the Eucharist. Not (I
hope) according to that sense, which our Answerer would make Calvin, and others
give of those, and such like expressions. But sure our Answerer might have
collected among his other Protestant Relics, an account of a rigider sort of
Calvinists, who reformed even upon Calvin himself, and yet retained the name of
Calvinists. But what does Calvin himself say (as this Answerer recites out of
Hospinian) Why, that Christ is our Food, because by the incomprehensible Virtue
of the holy Spirit he inspires his Life into us, that he may communicate it to
us, no less than the Vital Juice is diffused from the Root into all the
Branches of the Tree, etc. No less than so? then sure it is as substantial a
Communication of Christ's Natural Body after a spiritual manner, as the Oxford
Discourser in that place pretends to; for if Calvin and this Answerer do not
believe that the Vital Juice of a Tree is a Substance, (though whilst a Juice,
more spiritual) and that the very Substance of the Tree, is substantially
nourished and increased thereby; I fear they will both prove as bad
Philosophers as Divines.

But before I proceed any further, I must inform, or mind our Answerer, that
though Catholics believe Christ's Natural Body to be in the Sacrament, yet they
deny it to be there bodily, i.e. Modo Corporeo; and though his Flesh be there,
yet not Fleshly; nor yet does his Natural Body leave the highest Heavens: These
premised (because we shall have occasion to make these distinctions) I come to
next to Beza.

His words (as recited by the Answerer) are these: We do not say, that in the
Eucharist there is only a Commemoration of the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ;
nor do we say that in it we are made partakers only of the Fruits of his Death
and Passion; but we join the Ground with the Fruits, affirming with St. Paul,
that the Bread which by God's appointment we break, is the participation of the
Body of Christ crucified for us; the Cup which we drink, the Communion of the
true Blood that was shed for us; and that, in the very same Substance, which he
received in the Womb of the Virgin, and which he carried up with him into the
Heavens. And afterward: For this honor we allow to God, that though the Body of
Jesus Christ be now in Heaven, and not elsewhere, and we on Earth, and not
elsewhere; yet are we made partakers of his Body and Blood, after a spiritual
manner (i.e. modo spirituali) and by the means of Faith. P. 50.
I am afraid (Fathers) this Answerer plays booty with you; for if this be a
confutation of what was before alleged from Beza, I profess I shall never
quarrel with him about it, nor desire any other hand than Beza's (even in this
very passage) to express my Belief of the Real Presence of Christ's Natural
Body in the Sacrament. What a strange Answerer is this? sure he thinks, because
Catholics submit their Sense and Reason in some things to Divine Revelation,
and the Authority of the Church, therefore they have not Reason enough to judge
in other Cases, that three and one make four, as well as two and two.

Next, he brings in Cranmer and Ridley (when he was among his Geneva Brethren,
I suppose) and he might as well have named himself, and his Eminent Discourser,
against Transubstantiation: And what if these two first were of the same
opinion concerning the Real Presence with these two last? It only proves, that
one at London contradicted himself at Geneva; and the other, Men ten times more
learned than himself. Our Answerer (that he may take breath) before he comes to
our English Divines abovenamed (for I perceive he finds that he is like to
have a tough piece of work on it) charges the Oxford Author with disingenuity,
chiefly in favor of Doctor Burnets History of the Reformation. Alas, I am apt
to believe (though I know neither the Discourser nor this Answerer, not so much
as by Name, but only by their Works) I am apt (I say) to believe, that this
Discourser is much better acquainted with Church History, than the Doctor, and
applies it with much more Sincerity and Truth, than he has done. I confess
(were I worthy to advise) I should counsel this Answerer to flesh himself first
upon some Authors of a lower Classis, for I doubt he is here overmatch'd, and
has got (as we say) a Bear by the Tooth: What the Learned Historian means by
the Wisdom of that time, P. 58.
in leaving a liberty for different speculations, as to the manner of the
Presence; I cannot understand; except that they did in that time generally
believe the Real Presence (as has been before expressed) but would not certainly
determine the manner, that is (as Bishop Andrews has said before) whether it
was per, or in, or cum, or sub, or trans; but if there be no such Real Presence
in any manner, I know not what this Liberty of Speculations signifies, as to
the manner, when the thing is not really after any manner; and if not (as our
Answerer seems all along to affirm) this then might indeed be great Wisdom, or
humane Policy, not too rudely to choke the tender Ears of their late established
Reformation: But how it can consist with true Piety, and a Church pretending to
reform Errors, we shall best find by this consideration.

If Men had liberty to believe that Christ was really present after any manner,
it follows necessarily, that Christ was adorable there, where he was so
present. But if the Church, in its Wisdom, did certainly know, that Christ was
not really present after any Manner; then the Church, in its Wisdom, gave Men
liberty to be Idolaters; for our Answerer has been pleased to deliver us his
Opinion, from Doctor Tailor, p. 69. who there says, That to give Divine worship
to a Non Ens, must needs be Idolatry. For Idolum nihil est in mundo, says St.
Paul, and Christ as present by his Humane Nature in the Sacrament is a Non Ens,
for it is not true, there is no such thing; he is there by his Diviner Power
and Blessing, etc. but for any other presence, it is Idolum. And that the
practice of the Learneder part of the Church of England, nay, of the whole
Church of England it self (if we will believe the Articles of Henry the Eighth,
in the beginning of the Reformation, or King James in the strength of the
Reformation) was accordingly Idolatrous; I am most abundantly satisfied; until
some stronger Pen than our Answerers, shall fully confute, what is already
extant to that purpose. In the mean time (leaving the Matter of Fact to the
Doctors Conscience) we will follow our Answerer.

He is come now to Bishop Jewel, who tells us, p. 60. That Christ's Body and
Blood, indeed, and verily is given unto us; that we verily eat it, that we
verily drink it, etc. yet we say not either that the substance of Bread and
Wine is done away, (that is, Transubstantiation, which is not our Dispute) or
that Christ's Body is let down from Heaven, or made really or fleshly present
in the Sacrament: If by really he means fleshly, I subscribe to all this (as to
the Real Presence.) He goes on: That spiritually (i. e. modo spirituali), and
with the mouth of our Faith, we eat the Body of Christ, and drink his Blood,
even as verily as his Body was verily broken, and his Blood verily shed upon
the Cross. If the Bishop was not an Eutychian, then certainly his Body was
verily, that is, substantially and truly broken upon the Cross. Thus far then,
we punctually agree: But the Bishop explains himself: The Bread (he tells us)
is an earthly thing, and therefore a Figure, as Baptism in Water is also a
Figure. It Is confessed: Now lest we should think that by this Figure the Bishop
intended to exclude the substance; he adds immediately, But the Body of Christ,
that thereby is represented, and is there offered to our Faith (most true) is
the thing (i. e. the Body of Christ) it self, and not the Figure. As much of
this as the Answerer pleases, we have reason to be thankful to him for it.

But he now comes to Answer for the venerable Mr. Hooker. You have heard what
has been offered from the Discourser. The Answerer tells us from Mr. Hooker p.
61. That the parts of the Sacrament are the Body and Blood of Christ, because
they are causes instrumental, upon the receipt whereof the participation of his
Body and Blood ensues: And that the Real Presence of Christ's most blessed Body
and Blood, is not therefore to be sought for in the Sacrament, but in the
worthy Receiver of the Sacrament: All this is most consistent with the
Protestant Notion of the Real Presence here contended for.

Next Bishop Andrews comes upon the Stage; and first the Answerer tells us (as
from himself only) that this Bishop insinuates, P. 62.
That the Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, was much the same as in Baptism;
the very Allusion which the Holy Fathers were wont to make, to express his
Presence by, in this holy Sacrament. That the Bishop and the Holy Fathers might
mean, that Christ is present in the Sacrament, as in Baptism, Catholics do not
deny; for they also constantly affirm the same thing, as much as either: But if
our Answerer pretends to persuade us, that either the Bishop, or Fathers, or
Catholics, mean him only so present, as to exclude the presence also of his
natural Body in the Sacrament; that remains to be proved, which has not been
done by himself, nor any Man yet, that I have met with; let him therefore learn
to understand the Catholic Faith, before he writes such magisterial
Impertinences against it: But let us hear the Bishop himself; who, telling us,
That the Sacrament of Christ's Body is not meant of his glorified Body, but of
his Body when it was Offered, Rent, and Slain, and Sacrificed for us; he goes
on, We are (says he) in this action, not only carried up to Christ (sursum
corda); but we are also carried back to Christ, as he was at the very instant,
and in the very act of his offering. So, and no otherwise does this Text teach:
So, and no otherwise do we represent him. By the Incomprehensible power of his
Eternal Spirit, not he alone, but he, as at the very act of his Offering is
made present to us, and we incorporate into his death and invested in the
benefits of it. Our Answerer (to do him Justice) is modest enough in this place
to say, he thinks the Real Presence cannot be otherwise meant than, either
figuratively in the Elements, or Spiritually, in the Souls of those who
worthily receive him: But I think, that had this Learned Bishop believed the
manner (as they call it) of the Real Presence, Transubstantiation, No man could
have written more Orthodoxly of it, than this Bishop here has done. P. 64.
The Answerer includes the Opinions of Casaubon and the Archbishop of Spalato,
in the sense of this passage of Bishop Andrews; but why not in that produced by
the Discourser? However if it will gratify him, I willingly so accept them. He
makes Archbishop Laud to sing much after the same Tune: He says little to
Bishop Hall, Montague, and Bilson, because he has not their works by him; but
how he will excuse their pacific design as he calls it, we shall consider by
and by. Bishop Forbe's Charitable undertaking, has made him too favorable to
many corruptions of the Church of Rome, p. 65.

And now he tells us but of two of all the Divines left to prove this new
Fancy, which the Discourser would set up for the Doctrine of the Church of
England; one, is Doctor Tailor, whom he makes say a great deal more, than I am
willing to Transcribe, for I am very weary of the Employment; and besides, all
signifies no more (at most) than to prove Doctor Tailor contradicts himself; or
is otherwise (as I hinted before) the most unintelligible Writer that ever put
Pen to Paper: The truth to me seems to be this; the Doctor in some places meant
very plainly that which he as plainly wrote; in others that he was over
cautious (considering the times, and circumstances in which he lived) to write
more plainly that which he truly meant. However, upon the Balance of the
whole, I take him to have been much rather a Defender, than an Opposer of the
Real Presence we speak of. And now we are got to Mr. Thorndyke, where I cannot
but smile at the confidence of our Answerer, who is not ashamed to say
(notwithstanding his own pretended confutation is a strong confirmation of that
Real Presence asserted by the Discourser;) that he fears his Cause will be
desperate except Mr. P. 69.
Thorndyke can support it. Well, what says Mr. Thorndyke? The Answerer tells
us, first of a certain Answer to one T. G. in which he seems to say, That if
the Church (I suppose he means the English Church) did ever pray the Flesh and
Blood might be substituted instead of the Elements, under the Accidents of them
(which is plain Transubstantiation) then he is contented to call this the
Sacramental Presence of them in the Eucharist: What is this to the purpose? He
then tells us, P. 70.
that Mr. Thorndyke had a particular Notion in this Matter, and a long Story,
in which he seems to deny Transubstantiation: We do not affirm it of him. And
at last a great way off in p. 90. he puts Bishop Forbes and the Archbishop of
Spalato into a Sack together, and makes them as errand Knaves in a reconciling
way, as his Protestant Minister, whom just before he mentions; but with this
difference, the Protestant Minister, only dissembled his own Opinion, that is,
concealed it; but these two great Men have strenuously defended the Real
Presence; and, not by consequence, but positively, an Adoration due; when as
our Answerer would persuade us that they did not believe the Real Presence; but
did believe the Adoration of it to be Idolatry. That a pacific design, and a
charitable undertaking might engage some Men to relax somewhat of Ceremonies,
or Discipline, I neither wonder at, nor censure; but that there should be any
justifiable cause to oblige Men wittingly and willingly to profess and teach
Idolatry, is, I confess, beyond my understanding. I shrewdly suspect that our
Answerer, from his rare Historical Relicts, may have imbibed some of Monsieur
De Marolle's Principles, and from thence think damnable Hypocrisy in Religion,
no great Sin; otherwise I cannot imagine how, with Charity, he can suppose it
in these two great Men, who (I am persuaded) were they alive, would spit in his
Face for so scandalous an Imputation, unworthy either of a Christian, or a
Gentleman.

His last stroke, P. 90.
is at the Learned Mr. Thorndyke, whom he leaves to shift for himself, with
this Brand upon him, as deep as he can make it, That his Notion of the Real
Presence, was widely different both from theirs, and ours, (and by consequence
from the Truth); but give me leave to tell you Sir, had you been worthy to have
carried Mr. Thorndykes Papers after him (at least as far as I may judge by
these twenty two Sheets) you would have writ much less, and yet much more to
the purpose.

Thus, Reverend Fathers, I have given you a Taste of this fresh Author, I fear
it has not proved a boccone Saporito; but it was necessary in Vindication of
my Testimonies, and by Consequence, of that Learned Oxford Discourser, upon
whose Authority I produced them. Begging your pardon then for this Digression,
I return to my first Discourser.

If it be true, that the Doctrine of the Real Presence, in a literal Sense, was
believed from the Primitive Times to this great Council of Lateran; let us
consider whether this Council exceeded its just Authority, or introduc't any
Erroneous Doctrine into the Christian Church: For the clearer understanding of
this Matter, we are to note, that one Berengarius about the year 1060. (besides
other Errors) maintained, that the Eucharist was not truly and Substantially
the Body and Blood of Christ, but only a Figure and Shadow of them; and that
the Bread and Wine upon the Altar, were not Substantially converted into the
real Flesh and Blood of Christ, by the Mystery of holy Prayer, and the words of
our Redeemer. Upon this; several Learned Men employed their Pens against this
new and strange false Doctrine, as Adelmannus Bishop of Brixia, formerly
Schoolfellow of Berengarius; Hugo Lingonensis, Epis. Durandus,
beforementioned; Lantfrancus, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, who, among
other things, has these words, This Faith (speaking of the Real Presence
according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation) the Church (which being spread
over the whole World, is called Catholic) now holds, and has held from the
Primitive Times. But you (says be to Berengarius) believe that the Bread and
Wine of our Lords Table, remain unchanged, as to their Substance after
Consecration, etc. If this be true, which you believe and maintain concerning
the Body of Christ; then that is false which is believed and taught of it by
the Church over the whole World; for as many as own the name of Christians, and
are really such, do profess, that, in the Sacrament they receive, the true
Flesh of Christ, and his true Blood; the same, which he took of the Virgin.
Most wonderfully strange, that so absurd a Doctrine should have spread so
universally in so short a time as our Discourser is pleased to allow it.
Guitmundus, Rupertus, Algerus, and other Learned Men writ against him to the
same effect: And moreover, this his Doctrine was condemned as false, and
himself as an Innovator, in no less than Eight Councils and Synods before that
of Lateran; which miserable Synods (as the Answerer proudly calls them) may be
supposed to have had as much Learning, and Honesty, and I am sure, much more
Authority, than Twenty two such Sheets as his, though stamped with an Imprimatur
before them.

Now let us observe; This Monstrous, Absurd, Barbarous, and Impious Doctrine of
Transubstantiation (as our Discourser calls it) in somewhat more than two
Hundred years, was so thoroughly established all over the Christian World; that
these Learned Authors, and the Fathers of these Eight Councils, assembled in
several Kingdoms, were so totally ignorant, that their own Doctrine had its
date from the Council of Nice, or that the Opinion of Berengarius had been ever
before publicly professed, that they make no scruple of alleging, the
Antiquity, Universality, and Constant Practice of their own Doctrine, as a most
convincing and unanswerable Argument against his; Interroga Graecos, Armenios,
(says Lantfranc) seu cujuslibet nationis quoscunque homines, uno ore hanc fidem
(i. e. Transubst.) se testabuntur habere.

I profess, that if after this my most serious, and impartial Enquiry
concerning the Belief of the Ancient Fathers and the Catholic Church touching
the Real Presence, it should possibly be true, that they all, or generally,
agreed with our Discourser, and his figurative Interpretation, excluding the
Substance; I would lay aside all my Books, and conclude, once for all, That
even the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it self, is more easy and rational,
than the true sense of the Fathers concerning it, intelligible, or attainable.
And tho I will not say with the Booksellers Wife at Paris, That if the
Primitive Fathers believed Transubstantiation, She would no longer believe
Christianity; yet I may say, if they did believe it, and were mistaken, a
Christians Faith, any further than it may be productive of good Works, is the
most indifferent thing in the World.

Our Discourser tells us of one John Scotus, and Ratramnus, and I know not who,
writing I know not what, against this Doctrine of the Real Presence, at least
according to his Interpretation (tho I know many Catholics understand some of
them in a very Orthodox sense): But to me it seems as impertinent to bring two
or three private persons, advancing their private Opinions, against the
Concurrent Testimonies of all Authors, prior, present, and others (since they
wrote) posterior to them; besides the Definitions and Decrees of General
Councils; as it would be among us, to produce the Authorities of John Milton,
and Junius Brutus, to prove that it was lawful among the Jews for the People,
by their own Supreme Power, to murder their Kings; and that in all Governments,
the People have the same Sovereign Authority, to judge, and punish, even by
Death, their lawful hereditary Kings, and Governors, if they shall so think
fit.

Now, having the History of the Bible, as well as they, together with the
express Command of God, and constant Testimony and Practice of Learned Men
through all Ages, and public Laws, with Acts of Parliament to the contrary;
these Men may write till their Hands, and Hearts ache (to use out Discourser's
expression) before they shall persuade me to renounce the strongest Evidence
imaginable, in favor of their private Sentiments. Whether our Discourser be of
my mind, or not, I cannot tell; but if he be, I see no greater reason to
believe John Scotus than John Milton.

Come we now to the Church Authority, which so much offends him. Our indulgent
Mother (according to her favorable Discipline) permitted the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation (as she had done for many years, that of the
Consubstantiality) to pass upward of Twelve Hundred years, without any other
judicial determination of the Modus (as they call it) than such as had been
Originally planted in the hearts and minds of the Faithful, and cultivated in
every Age, by Pious and Learned Men, in their Sermons, Catechisms, and other
Discourses, as occasion happened. But Berengarius (a Man fond of his own Notions,
and valuing himself much upon his own Reason) resolved to set up for a new
Light of the Church; and (among other Errors) taught the figurative acceptance
of the Words of Consecration, as has been before related.

Upon this, he was admonisht by several Pious and Learned Catholics, to retract
betimes so new and pernicious a Heresy. But the Arguments of sense, procuring
him a party among the Vulgar, he prosecuted his design with great vigor, until,
at last, he was taken notice of by the Supreme Church-Governors; and in a
Council at Rome, An. Dom. 1050. his Doctrine was condemned, and himself
excommunicated: At length, having several times abjured this his Heresy, and
as often returned to his Vomit, he burnt the Book of Scotus, from whence he
confessed to have sucked part of his Poison; renounced (for the last time) with
all Sincerity, his former Opinions; and spending the residue of his days in
Piety and Devotion, died in the Unity of the Roman Catholic Church, full of
sorrow and repentance, Jan. 6. An. Dom. 1088. as may be seen in Membranis
Taureacens. in Chronic. Clarii Floriacens. Monach. S. Petri vivi. in Will. of
Malmesbury, l. 3. de gestis Reg. Angl. In Baldrico Burgaliensi Abbate, and in
the Manuscript B. Martini Turonensis.

Notwithstanding all this, the Seeds of Heresy thus sown, were not easily
rooted out: And besides, some Catholics themselves (taking occasion from this
Heresy) had writ-concerning this great Mystery, according as they best
apprenended it; But sometimes the obscurity of their Expressions, the double
sense which they admitted, and not clearly showing what they themselves
believed (Misfortunes which happen to most men, who write concerning such high
Mysteries without Authority) the Governors of the Church thought fit (as the
best means to obviate these Inconveniences) to call a General Council under
Pope Innocent the Third, which was the greatest that ever had been since the
Apostles; and therein, it was determined by near 1300 Fathers, that (according
to the Doctrine of the most Ancient and Holy Fathers, Tradition of the Church,
and former Councils) the Conversion of the Substance of Bread and Wine, after
Consecration, into the Substance of the Natural Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
the Accidents of Bread and Wine only remaining, should thenceforward be called
Transubstantiation; which had been sufficiently before expressed and explained,
by that wonderful Transmutation, and Transelementation asserted by the Fathers.
This our Discourser believes (with Scotus) to have been the necessary
consequence of the Council of Lateran, p. 21. and so do I too: Though in truth
this explicative Term was (I think) more particularly established (as here
expressed) in the Council of Trent.

Now, to me, the Church seems so far from being worthy of blame, for decreeing
what appears almost the necessary consequence of the real Presence (I mean)
Transubstantiation, that (as the Case and Circumstances then stood) the Church
had been very negligent, if she had not so decreed. For it being always
believed (which I think is also fully proved) That the Elements of Bread and
Wine, after Consecration, were most wonderfully, and by the Omnipotence of God
converted into the Body and Blood of Christ; It is clear then, that either the
Accidents, or the Substance of Bread and Wine must be changed into the
Substance of the Body of Christ; But the Accidents are not so changed,
therefore the Substance.

Besides, the Substance of the Body of Christ is in the Blessed Sacrament,
either with the Substance of Bread, or without the Substance of Bread. If the
first, then Catholics, and our Discourser are in the wrong. If the last, then
Luther, and our Discourser are in the wrong: So which way our Discourser should
happen to be in the right, I cannot comprehend, except Zuinglius should have
been more than Athanasius, and our Discourser (the Disciple of Zuinglius)
greater than St. Andrew the Apostle of our Lord. Now besides that the choice is
easy in this Case, even from the Authority of one side, greater than of the
other; yet whosoever shall endeavor to reconcile the Real Presence, with the
Doctrine of Consubstantiation, or Impanation, will find harder difficulties in
these, than of that of Transubstantiation, so much condemned. The Authorities
therefore which he brings from Durandus, Erasmus, Tonstal, and some others, to
show that before this Council of Lateran, Men were at liberty concerning the
modus, or manner of Christ's Real Presence in the Sacrament, might have been
some kind of Argument for a Lutheran; But how our Discourser becomes concerned
in it, I see not; since quite through his Discourse, and more particularly in
p. 35. he has (with scorn) excluded Both.

Our Discourser has yet one Argument relating to the time, when he supposes
this Doctrine of Transubstantiation to have come into the World, which is very
remarkable. He tells us, That the Iconomachi (or opposers of Images) were very
zealous against the Reverence due to them, in the Synod of Constantinople,
about the year 750, arguing, That our Lord having left us no other Image of
himself, but the Sacrament, in which the Substance of the Bread, is the Image
of his Body, we ought to make no other Image of our Lord; But in the year 787.
in the Second Council of Nice these scrupulous Greeks, in thirty seven years
time, were grown so hardy in their Faith, and so extremely fond of this new
Doctrine, concerning the Corporal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, that
they swallowed it immediately, and from that time were very solicitous and
careful to admonish us, that the Eucharist is not the Figure or Image of the
Body of our Lord, but his true Body, as appears from the seventh Synod; and he
brings Bellarmin to vouch for him, p. 21, 22.

Here we see these nice Greeks, who were so very exact and curious in smaller
Matters, were contented to make so great a passage in one Council, as, from the
Figure of Christ in the Sacrament, to admit of his Substance; nay, and were so
pleased with it, that from thence, and that time they took care to admonish us
concerning it. But the squeamish Latins (notwithstanding the Greeks had
advanced so far in one single Council) were little less than three hundred
years according to our Discoursers computation, licking this misshapen Monster
of Transubstantiation (such is the Elegancy of his Style) into that Form, in
which it is now settled in the Church of Rome. Indeed he has been over generous
to the Latins, in allowing them so considerable a time to relish and digest
only the Mode of a thing, when the easse Greeks at one sitting had dispatched
the thing it self, in which (according to our Discoursers Opinion) the great
Barbarousness and Impiety consists. For (says he) The Impiety and Barbarousness
of the thing is not in truth extenuated, but only the appearance of it, by
being done under the Species of Bread and Wine; for the thing, they
acknowledge, is really done, and they believe, that they verily eat and drink
the Natural Flesh and Blood of Christ. In truth, the Latins are obliged to him
in confessing them to have been so extreme cautious about the lesser part; but
how he will come off with the Greeks, for being so rash and inconsiderate about
the greater and principal part, must be his care, if he pleases.

I am persuaded, had Bellarmin said this, to have proved that the Greeks did
then, and not till then, receive the Doctrine of the Real Presence; Our
Discourser, could he make any advantage of it (with good Reason) would have
cast it out, as the most improbable, and ridiculous conjecture, in the World:
And yet here, because he thinks it may help to favor his false account, he
produces it with as much gravity, as if he knew Catholics had less sense to
see a blot, than himself, rashness to make one.

I come now to his fourth pretended Ground of this Doctrine, that is, The
necessity of such a Change in the Sacrament, to the Comfort and Benefit of
those who receive it, p. 30. To this, my Answer at present, is very short. If I
be satisfied, that our Savior commanded the thing, I am convinced there was a
good Reason for it, without over-curiously examining what, or why, in this
Case, more than why he cured not those who touched the Hem of his Garment,
without that Ceremony; or the blind; with out clay and spittle: And yet the
Fathers, and many late Authors, will furnish those who are more inquisitive,
with many very good Reasons, why this Change in the Sacrament, is more
advantageous to the worthy Receiver, than the Figure would be, and I shall say
somewhat of it my self, hereafter.

The last pretended Ground of this Doctrine, is (as he tells us) to magnify
the Power of the Priest, in being able to work so great a Miracle. Indeed, if
the great Council of Lateran, did make this a Ground of introducing
Transubstantiation, never did 1200 Learned Men take wronger Measures; For
notwithstanding a due respect be generally paid by all good Catholics to
Priests (as their Character requires) yet I will be judged by all such as have
traveled abroad, Whether a Presbyterian Parson in his Conventicle, or a London
Minister in his Parish, or a Calvinist Predicator in Amsterdam, who make
nothing of the Sacrament; Do not yet pretend (both Males and Females) to have
as much respect paid them, as ere a Priest, of equal quality, in France, Italy
or Spain, who nevertheless are the Instruments by which this unexpressible
Change is made? But our Discourser labors hard here, to prove that this Change
is no Miracle to Sense; But, had he advised with any Catholic, he might have
spared his pains, for I will engage they would have confessed it to him at the
first word.

Our Discourser having hitherto (with great success) destroyed the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; yet (to make sure work) he kills it again with four deadly
Objections drawn from the infinite scandal of this Doctrine to the Christian
Religion; As, 1. The Stupidity. 2. The Real Barbarousness of this Doctrine,
supposing it be true. 3. The bloody Consequences. And, 4. The danger of
Idolatry, if it be not true, p. 33.

To prove the Stupidity of this Doctrine, our Discourser produces two Learned
Heathens, Tully and Averroes, wondering that any Men should be so stupid, as to
pretend to eat their God. Now, that there is Stupidity in the Case, is most
certain; But, whether it be in the Doctrine; Or in Tully and Averroes; Or in
our Discourser, who brings two Heathens Testimonies against a Mystery of the
Christian Religion, I leave to Judgment. I suppose he may have heard of such an
Epistle, as the first of St. Paul to the Corinthians, I would recommend to him
the first Chapter, and particularly, Verse. 18.19, 20. where it is written, For
the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness. Where is the
wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of this world? has not God
made foolish the wisdom of the world? And verse. 27 God has chosen the foolish
things of this world to confound the wise. Now whether Averroes, and our
Discourser were the Wise Men, or the Foolish, here intended, I must leave again
to Judgment.

But I have not yet done with Averroes, for his words cited by our Discourser,
p. 34. are very observeable. I have traveled (says he) over the world, and have
found diverse Sects; but so sottish a Sect, or Law, I never found, as is the
Sect of the Christians, because with their own Teeth, they devour the God whom
they worship. What ill luck it was, that this great Philosopher should not have
met with the Disciples of Rabanus Maurus, or some One other of our Discoursers
Predecessors in Opinion, at least, in some Corner of the World, who might have
convinced him of his mistake, and reconciled him a little better to the
Christian Religion! But not to have found one Christian over the whole World
(near six Hundred years since, after Rabanus had writ against Pascasius) less
sottish than the rest; will serve (at least) to prove a Sottishness also in
this Case; but whether in those Christians, or, in our present Discourser (who
has brought so strong a Testimony, to prove the Universality of this Doctrine
of Transubstantiation, even of so learned a Man, who had traveled all the
World over) I must once more leave to Judgment.

But sure I am, from Averroes his own Works, and the knowledge which he had of
that vast difference between Bodies in their Natural, Gross, and Earthly
Composition; and the pure Substances of these Bodies separated from their
foeces, or accidents, by corruption, or putrefaction, distillations,
digestions, and sublimations, until they become Essences, or pure Principles; I
say, from his Experimental Philosophy of Common Bodies thus altered, and
sublimated, he would have made no difficulty to have solved most of our
Discoursers absurdities concerning this Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and yet
there is no Comparison between these Common Bodies, tho never so purely
defoecated, and exalted, which can bear any proportion with the glorified Body
of our Savior united with his Divinity: So that I am verily persuaded, had
Averroes been satisfied concerning the other Mysteries of Christian Religion,
and rightly informed concerning the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, he would
have been as good a Christian in that Point, as Pope Innocent 3d. or Pius 4th.

But our Discourser tells us; that the stupidity of this Doctrine breeds
Atheists and Infidels: Even so the warmth of the Sun breeds Maggots, and many
other Insucts, but the Matter must be first disposed to Corruption. Now although
the Sun be much hotter in France, Spain, Portugal, and Italy, than in England,
or in Holland, yet I appeal to all Men who have any knowledge of those
Kingdoms, whether there be not as many reputed Atheists in these two last
Governments, where the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not so publicly, nor
generally professed, as in any other part of the Christian World proportionably
where it is? And what indeed have been the true parents of Atheism, and
Infidelity, but the devilish pride of Sense and Reason, set up against the
blessed Humility of Faith and Obedience? But our Discourser in this Page begins
to be very seriously idle, and impertinent; out of some respect therefore to
himself, we will pass it over, and come to p. 35. where he most grievously
accuses this Sacrament of Barbarousness, upon the Supposition of the truth of
this Doctrine: But sure if this Doctrine be true, then it is impossible that it
should be barbarous, except our Savior himself, who commanded it, and is there
voluntarily present in it, should have instituted a barbarous Sacrament; which,
whether our Discourser can believe, I know not; but sure I am, if the Doctrine
be not true, it cannot be barbarous to eat him in imagination only, except our
Discoursers opinion be also barbarous. He tells us, it is very unworthily done
to our friend, and barbarous to feast upon his Flesh and Blood. I am glad to
find our Discourser capable of so much Tenderness: But he might have read of
very many Provinces in the East, and West Indies, who count it their greatest
glory, to eat their best deceased Friends, persuading themselves, that thereby,
they do (as it were) regenerate, or reanimate those to whom they were first
obliged for their own lives, by transforming them thus into their own Nature,
and Substance. With indignation therefore they reproach our manner of Burials
as most inhumane. O pauvre Gens (says my Author) comment laissez vous manger
cette chair precieuse aux Sales verse de la terre? Et que monument plus digne
lui pouvez vous donner, que celuy de vos propres entrailles? And upon this
consideration it was, that the renowned Artemise drank the Ashes of her dear
departed Husband. The Barbarousness therefore objected by our Discourser
(suppose this eating were according to his false Conceptions) proceeds from the
narrowness of his own thoughts, who would judge, and measure the Civility and
Reason of the whole World, according to the Customs (it may be) of his own
little Province.

But, tho no Catholic thus pretended to eat the Body and Blood of Christ (for
that they all know he is immortal, and incapable of Death, or Suffering, or
Corruption, or any other indignities) yet our Discourser will needs compare
this eating in the holy Sacrament, to the violent hacking and slashing of our
living Friends, and carnally devouring their raw Flesh, like the worst of
Cannibals: What an odious and disproportionate Comparison has he made, on
purpose to deceive his Friends, and revile, and scandalize those, whom he
supposes, his Enemies?

But before I quit this Page, I must pay my respects to one main Demonstration
of his, which (he says) is worth a thousand; and it is this; That the Heathens
objected no such Custom to the Christians, therefore no such Doctrine believed.
Now this piece of Malice might have past undisturbed, with many others which I
have not taken notice of, had he not had the confidence (I will not use his own
expression, Impudence) to have provoked an Answer by producing the half
Testimony of Justin Martyr in p. 11. to countenance his own Error; where, that
very Father, in that very place, is making an Apology to the Heathen Emperor
Antoninus, and is so far from mincing the Matter, or explaining it by a
figurative Sense, That he there tells the Emperor, We are taught that the Food
(speaking of the Sacrament) being Consecrated by the Prayer of the Word. Is the
Flesh and Blood of Christ Jesus himself Incarnate. Illius incarnati Jesu, and
Carnem, and Sanguinem esse, edocti sumus. Apol. 2. It is most prodigiously
strange, and inexcusable in this holy Father, to have used this scandalous
Metaphor to a Heathen Emperor (which they cautiously expressed to the Christian
Catechumens) if he intended nothing more than a figurative Sense: For I will
refer my self to any Man, whether it had not been more prudent, and (it may be)
pious, to have softened and moderated the expression to a Heathen, tho the
Father had truly believed the Real Presence, than thus to have exposed himself,
and laid an unnecessary stumbling block before the Emperor, if indeed he did
not believe it.

But our Discourser (not satisfied with this) tells us a Story p. 12. That the
Heathen Greeks, having taken some Servants of the Christian Catechumeni, urged
them by violence to tell them some Secrets of the Christians; who confessed, That
they had heard from their Masters, that the Divine Communion was the (Body and
Blood of Christ; and, that they (i. e. the Catechumeni) thinking that it was
really Flesh and Blood declared as much to the Greeks. And yet our Discourser
in p. 35. will not admit, that any such thing was ever objected by the Heathens
to the Christians, although by violence the Christians themselves confessed it.
What a bold, conceited Discourser is this who whilst he manifestly confutes
himself, thinks his Adversaries so impotent, as not only, not to have any
defensive Arms of their own, but also not to dare to make use of his, when he
so fairly offers them against his own false Arguments? His mis^ application of
the whole Story, from the Answer of Blandina (which he strangely mistakes) is
very silly; For what Catholics ever thought that the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Sacrament, was a breach of their Fast? If any had, by
mistake, some such thoughts (as Tertullian seems to insinuate) the breach of
their Fast must be imputed to the receipt of the Symbols, or Accidents of Bread
and Wine, which indeed may nourish; but not to the Body and Blood of Christ.

Now had not our Discourser thus demonstrably answered himself, and saved us
thereby a further labor, I could have recommended him to S^. Greg. Nazian. St.
Augustine, and several others of the Fathers, where he would have found these
Objections made to the Christians, and their Answers to them, much after the
manner of Justin Martyr. And nothing is told us more plainly in the Histories
of those times, than, that the Heathens, having a confused Notion of the great
Mystery of the Sacrament, did commonly accuse the Christians of eating Man's
Flesh, or young Children, or sometimes their God. Sure our Discourser intended
to prevent us from using this Argument our selves, for this Objection of the
Heathens has ever been accounted a kind of Demonstration of the Antiquity of
our Doctrine.

His third Objection is, from the bloody Consequences of this Doctrine: But he
gives us no particular instances, and he does well to grow more wise (...)
last; for he has been very unlucky in them: Since therefore he is pleased only
to affirm in general, I am contented to deny in general, and so we are upon
even ground.

His last Objection is, from the danger of Idolatry, if this Doctrine be not
true; and I add, the danger of our Discoursers most execrable Blasphemies if
this Doctrine be true; let us therefore both consider seriously of it, since
the danger on both sides is very great: However we have the Authorities of many
Learned Church of England Men (as may be seen at large in the Oxford
Discourser) who have acquitted us of Idolatry. Whilst our Discourser stands
almost single, in the scurrilous bitterness of his rude and unmanly expressions.

And here I thought our Discourser would have ended his dire wrath against
Transubstantiation; but to be yet more secure (and with good Reason too) that
it may never rise up in Judgment against him; he comes back again, and in p.
37. gives it four wounds more for the absurdity of its Doctrine; and these are
performed by way of Four very considerable Questions; As First, p. 38. Whether
this Doctrine does not contradict his Senses? Secondly, Whether it can be
proved by his Senses? Thirdly, Whether it be not against the certainty of his
Senses? And Lastly, Whether it be not against the Evidence of his Senses? Now
because to me these retail'd Questions seem to import much the same thing; I
will take the liberty (for the sake of a speedier Conclusion) to give my
Opinion concerning them in gross.

Before we consider the monstrous Absurdities of this Doctrine, set forth in
these four great Questions; it is reasonable that we seriously think with our
selves, upon what account this Senseless Doctrine should happen to get such firm
footing in the World, as to have spread (in a very short time as our Discourser
supposes) over the face of the whole Christian Church: Nay more, That in all
probability it might have been universally received, even at this day, had not
the extraordinary Learning, Reason, Sense (and I know not what other
qualifications) of John Scotus, Berengarius, Zuinglius, and our Discourser,
opened the Eyes of poor blinded Christians, and shown them, how their Senses
were lead Captivity Captive by the Juggling tricks, Hocus Pocus, and Cheat of
this Doctrine (for so he is pleased to call) Transubstantiation p. 34.

I name not Luther among the great Reformers, as to this Point, for he agrees
with Catholics, as to the Real Presence, though he differs in the Modus; and with
his whole heart Anathematizes and Curses the Doctrine of our Discourser (under
the name of Zuinglius) and all his Adherents, Epist. contr. Art. Iovan. These.
27. Tom. 2.
in these words, We censure in earnest the Zuinglians and all the
Sacramentaries, for Heretics, and alienated from the Church of God. And again,
Cursed be the Charity, and Concord of the Sacramentaries for ever, and ever, to
all Eternity, Tom. Wittemb. fol. 381.

Now upon the best enquiry I could make concerning the Establishment of this
Doctrine, I found but Four tolerable good Reasons how it came to get so great
credit among Christians. The First is, because our Blessed Savior (who is the
Fountain of Wisdom and Truth) did institute this Sacrament in such plain words,
as, This is my Body, That no Proposition upon Earth can be made to us in more
express and positive Terms. Secondly, Because the Apostles did believe our
Savior spoke in earnest, and really meant as he said (at least) if we will
believe the aforenam'd Justin Martyr, who tells us, That the Apostles in the
Commentaries written by them have recorded that Jesus so commanded. Thirdly,
Because all the Ancient Fathers, who have written of the Holy Eucharist, have
expressed themselves so fully concerning their firm Belief of the Real Presence
in a literal Sense, That I defy Zuinglius and all his Works (allowing me some
Sense, or preserving that little which I have) to understand them totally in a
figurative Sense. And Lastly, Because General Councils (taking notice that some
vainglorious self-conceited Men, had impudently presumed to interpret those
words of our Savior contrary to the sense of the Apostles, and Primitive
Fathers, and practice of the whole Christian Church) had authoritatively
decreed, That the Judgment of the blessed Apostles, and holy Fathers should be
followed in this Matter, that is, That the Substance of Bread and Wine, after
Consecration, was converted into the Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ;
and that the Heresy of these new Upstarts should be condemned, and themselves
excommunicated.

Now these Reasons, methinks, might be sufficient to show that a Doctrine thus
instituted, and recommended to us, might very probably be generally received
among Men, who own the Authority of the Institutor, and Fidelity of those, who,
being Witnesses of the Action, have assured us of its meaning.

Nor can I persuade my self there is any Man so prejudiced and uncharitable
upon Earth (except those whose Charity Luther cursed) as to believe, That so
many Learned Men, in such August and Sacred Assemblies, should solemnly,
wittingly, and willingly impose upon the World so pernicious, and damnable a
Doctrine, if they themselves knew, or could believe that this Doctrine was
false: Except some vast, and wonderful temporal Interest should prevail with
these Fathers, and Doctors (whose reputations have been high in the World) thus
dangerously to expose their own Souls, and the Souls of all who belonged to
them, or depended upon them, for the obtaining this supposed worldly
Satisfaction.

A learned Protestant, in his Answer to some Queries, seems to have a great
respect for General Councils, but tells us, p. 3. That Men are liable to hopes
and fears; and therefore we cannot depend upon them. Now hopes and fears in
this place relate only to Temporal Concerns, which we will suppose Interest in
its largest acceptance. But, in the name of God, what Interest is this, for
which so much is thus desperately engaged? Why truly our Answerer says nothing
to it; But our Discourser, who has left no Stone unturned, but flies at all,
tells us at last, p. 30. That it is to magnify the power of the Priest in
being able to work so great a Miracle. I have already hinted how much these
Fathers have been all along mistaken, if this was their design. But Secondly,
from the disproportion between the poorness of the reward, and inestimable
price that is paid, even eternal Silvation, I might most convincingly argue the
impossibility of the design, and fix it only in the mean and unworthy thoughts
of our trifling Discourser. But that I may clear these holy Fathers, and
Councils, beyond all further doubt or dispute; I do affirm this little design
to have been so far from their thoughts, that they have constantly declared
this wonderful transmutation to proceed, not from any power of the Priest, but
by the sole Omnipotency of Almighty God. And because our Discourser seems to
have some value for St. Augustine, I shall produce his Testimony as it is cited
be Consecratione Did. 2. c. 72. His words are these, In the Mystery of the
Body of Christ performed within the holy Church, there is nothing more done by
a good Priest, and nothing less by a wicked one; because what is wrought there
is not by the Merit of him who Consecrates, but by the word of our Creator, and
the power of the Holy Ghost; for if it were by the merit of the Priest, 'twould
not at all belong to Christ, etc. If St. Augustine could have prophesied that a
malicious Discourser Twelve Hundred years after his death should have proposed
such a foolish Cause, to have produced so absurd a Doctrine (in the Language
of our Discourser) I know not how he would have answered him more pertinently.
I shall not trouble you therefore with the Authorities of Justin Martyr, Apol.
2. St. Ambr. l. de his qui mist. init. and several other Fathers, together with
General Councils, particularly that of Florence, de Sacram. Euch. to the same
purpose; but conclude, that the Apostles, Fathers, and Councils, having no
design or prospect, of any valuable consideration, for so great a risque, as
their Eternal Salvation; must have imposed this Doctrine upon mankind, either
through gross Ignorance, or mere wilful, and devilish premeditated Malice: But
having no manner of reason to believe the first, and from my heart detesting so
cursed a thought as the last, we will next consider, what inducements they
might have had (from the consideration of Spiritual advantages, arising from
thence to the Christian World) to have pressed this Doctrine (believing it to be
true) with the greater earnestness. And indeed the advantages are very many,
and very great. As,

First, That the Eucharist is a pledge of our Salvation. Secondly, That we are,
not only by Faith, but even Corporally united with Christ. Thirdly, That, in
regard of this Union, the Eucharist is a Seal to us of our Resurrection.
Fourthly, That through it, we are made partakers of the Divine Nature. Fifthly,
That by being thus truly, and really united with Christ, we cannot be
altogether divided from such influences as proceed from Christ. Sixthly, That
our Faith is increased proportionable to the difficulties which encompass this
Doctrine. Seventhly, That our Hope is raised hereby to a sublimer pitch; for by
the participation of the Body of our Lord, and his Presence in the blessed
Eucharist, we anticipate, as it were, the Joys of Heaven, even in our mortal
Bodies; Homil. 24.
whence St. Chrysostom tells us, that, Dum in hac vita sumus, ut terra nobis
coelum sit, facit hoc mysterium. Eighthly, That from the Consideration of our
blessed Saviors Love, who being touched even in the Bowels of Tenderness
toward us, left us at his departure, his Sacred Body to nourish our Souls and
Bodies unto Life Everlasting; we also might return the purest Love and
Affection toward him, and Charity toward one another, who are thus
substantially united by the Communication of this Spiritual Food according to
that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.
For we being many are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that
one Bread. And, Ninthly, That it is a Commemoration of our Lords Passion, a
Confirmation of his Testament, and a propitiatory Sacrifice, not only for the
living, but for the dead.

These, and many more weighty Considerations of this kind together with the
Testimony of the Fathers, Authority of General Councils, and universal practice
of all Christians until these two last Centuries, will enable us I hope to
encounter the supposed absurdities of our Discourser: We shall engage therefore
this uncircumcised Philistine, (I mean) this Goliath Argument, with all its
boasting train of senseless Questions. And

First, I know not how Philosophy can be much concerned on either side; for
what Philosopher will tell me, how the Divine Nature, identified in the Person
of the Father, should be Communicated to the Son, without also communicating
the Person? Or how the Unity, or Individuality of Nature, should be in a
diversity of Persons, neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substance? How in the Mystery of the Incarnation God separateth from the
Humanity of Christ, his manner of subsistence, inserting it in his Divinity?
How the Son should be Consubstantial, and Coeternal with the Father? How
something may be made out of nothing, and that something reduced again to
nothing? How Eternity, which is instans durationis non fluens, an instant of
duration, may be demonstrated to subsist without respect to time past, or time
to come? How God Almighty, who is one simple, and indivisible Being, should be
at once substantially present in all places, and things? A Mystery so
inexplicable, that it forced St. Augustine to say, Miratur hoc Men's humana, and
quia non capit, fortasse non credit. Nay more, how our Soul, which is the Light
of our Bodies in this our Pilgrimage upon Earth, can be totally in the Head,
and totally in the Feet, and totally at the same time in the whole Body, and in
every part of it; Or how the Needle, which is our Common Guide through the
paths of the deep, should point always toward the North; or if sometimes it
varies, whence should proceed its variation? When Philosophy has explained all
these, with many more hitherto invincible Difficulties, I make no doubt, but
She will then free also Transubstantiation from the Calumny of our Discoursers
monstrous Absurdities.

In the mean time, that we may the better deal with them, we shall divide them
into such as seem to appear so, First to Reason, and Secondly to Sense.

For the First, our Discourser seems to have been modest, since of a thousand
insinuated; he is pleased to name but two, First, the gross contradiction of
the same Body being in so many several places at once; And Secondly of our
Saviors giving away himself with his own hands, and yet keeping himself to
himself, p. 37. The latter has received a particular Answer from S. Augustine
in his Comment upon Psalm. 33. as has been already shown, and I shall not
presume to mend it. Nor, will this Fathers own quodammodo, in another place; or
that of Bedes upon the same Psalm. 33. help him in the least; for all Catholics
willingly accept the word and most justly interpret it to be modo Spirituali,
which manner they all profess and teach.

But for the First, which as much concerns the Real Presence (a Doctrine owned
by Bishop Andrews, and the Church of England, and at present by all Lutherans)
as Transubstantiation believed by Catholics, I shall speak of That, and the
rest of his Questions about Sense (which are common Objections in all
Protestant Authors against this Subject) when I come to the Conclusion, to
which I hasten.

Our Discourser has one Argument more to countenance the Novelty of
Transubstantiation, which, being more particularly urged by himself than some
others, I shall endeavor to give a reasonable Answer to it, and so take my
leave of him, until we meet again in the Conclusion, backed with the Objections
of some other late Authors, which are common to them all.

He tells us, p. 26. That the first-rise of this Doctrine was about the
beginning of the Ninth Age, tho it did not take firm root until toward the end
of the Eleventh; And this time (he says) was the most likely of all others, it
being by the consent of their own Historians, the most dark and dismal time,
that ever happened to the Christian Church both for Ignorance, and Superstition
and Vice. And then illustrates all this by the Parable of the Tares, which he
conceives the Enemy might have sown in so dark and long a night. The Conjecture
is very plausible until it be well considered, and then (I am persuaded) his
Argument will not only vanish, but be turned against himself (as many others
have been) with no small advantage to our Cause.

I readily grant, that some part of the time assigned by him for the
introducing of this Doctrine, was dismal enough, upon those three accounts
mentioned by him: But I also affirm, That such a Doctrine could never have met
men in Circumstances more contrary and averse to its establishment, than to be
thus overwhelmed with Ignorance, Superstition and Vice. And first for
Ignorance, It is Evident to all Mankind (and therefore the more strongly
Objected against us by our Discourser, and all Protestants) That
Transubstantiation is a Doctrine which highly contradicts our Common Senses.
Now as such, the abuses of it, must needs have been, First, most notoriously
visible to the most Vulgar and illiterate, for they (seldom looking further
into things than the Common appearances) would certainly have taken the first,
and strongest Alarm, upon the Proposition only, of so new, and insupportably
senseless a Doctrine (as our Discourser calls it) if they had not from Age to
Age, sucked it in with their first nourishment, and seen it so universally
received, that they no more considered the consequences of it, than they did
those of some other Mysteries of their Religion, which they equally alike
received as matter of Faith from the Authority and veracity of their Spiritual
Guides, and Governors.

But when as Berengarius (about the Tenth Century) was bold enough to teach,
and write against it, showing the strong difficulties which he thought
encompast it; we then see a Party of the Vulgar coming in to him apace, whilst
nevertheless, the Learned, Disc. of the Holy Euch. p. 31.
from many parts of the World, judiciously and strenuously opposed him. The
same thing may be observed from the Waldenses, whose Ringleader Waldo, a most
illiterate Merchant of Lions (as all Historians confess) procured also a
miserable Crew, who, from their poverty were ignominiously called, the poor Men
of Lions; and their Posterity fixed themselves among the Barbarous and ignorant
Mountancers, about, and upon the Alps, who have remained obstinate Opposers of
this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, even unto this present Age. The last
Instance I shall give, is of the Wicklissists, Ibid.
who following in a great measure the Doctrines of Berengarius, and some other
Heresies, had got together two Hundred Thousand of the Rabble, who with
Rebellious Arms in their Hands, had well nigh reduced the King himself to the
last extremities: However his Heresies were condemned by the learneder part of
the Universities, as far as the Circumstances of those distracted times would
permit, and the interest which (upon some other account) Wickliff himself had
gotten in the Duke of Lancaster, and some other Persons of Quality. The same
might be said of the Hussites, Ibid.
and many more too long to mention, who became irreconcilable Enemies to this
Doctrine. Whence it is most Evident, even by undeniable matter of Fact, that
the Establishment of Transubstantiation; could hope for no advantage from an
ignorant Age; since the ignorant have been the first, and greatest Opposers of
it, and the most Learned Men, generally its Defenders.

Neither Secondly, can a vicious Generation possibly be favorers of this
Doctrine: For, whether it be true, or false, yet whilst it is believed to be
true, it is certainly the greatest promoter of Piety, and Devotion, of any
Article (it may be) in the Christian Religion: For when we consider, That
Christ was not only pleased once to die, but to become also a daily Sacrifice
for us, and to offer his very Body to us, for the nourishment of our Souls and
Bodies unto Everlasting Life; How is it possible that Men should be less
sensible of Gods great Goodness toward us, and our own unexpressible Love and
Duty toward him, believing this Doctrine to be true, than not believing it at
all? Vice therefore could have no hand, either in the contriving, or settling so
pious, so venerable, and so comfortable a Doctrine.

Lastly, let us consider whether Superstition could probably have introduced
this supposed damnable Error. I cannot deny that Superstition is it self an
Error, yet totally inconsistent with what we call formal Vice; for it is rather
an Erroneous excess in Devotion, and is the effect of an unreasonable fear; at
least, if we will believe Mr. Hobs, who thus distinguishes it from Atheism.
Superstitio (says he) a metu sine recta ratione: Atheismus a rationis opinione
sine metu proficiscitur: So that although it be an Error, yet it is such a one, as
is accompanied with fear; whereas Vice proceeds from a want of that due fear,
which we ought to have of Gods Justice, and the punishment due from thence to
our Sins: And by consequence Superstition and Vice can never meet (according to
our Discoursers acceptance of Vice) together in this place.

Thus I have endeavored to show, by the plain, natural consequences of
Ignorance, Superstition and Vice, that they could not have given any
encouragement to impose a Doctrine, which has ever been the Subject of the
most Learned Pens, in magnifying, or explaining its Mystery; and in its
Practice, one of the greatest advancers of a virtuous, and a holy Life.

But having already frankly confessed, that Ignorance and Vice reigned more
powerfully during some part of those Centuries, than (it may be) in any others
since, or before; let us now (complying with our Discoursers Historical account
concerning the temper of those times) examine what real effect they might have
had upon this great Article of Faith, Transubstantiation.

Let us then Suppose (what I hope is sufficiently proved) that this Doctrine
had been implicitly believed from the Apostles days: It is then confessed by our
Discourser, that about the Eighth and Ninth Century, some Men began to write
copiously for, and against it, and also down to the Eleventh and Twelfth. And
here, whilst we truly lament, so must we justly apply the Vice, and Ignorance
of those unhappy times, to the great scandals, and difficulties under which
that Apostolic Doctrine lies, even in our own Age.

The Vices of some, and affected Noveltie of others, might probably have
induced some well meaning Men to write concerning this great Mystery; but
whilst nothing had been Authoritatively determined concerning (what they call)
the Modus, or manner of Christ's Real Presence in the Sacrament; some, by
endeavoring to explain it, made the Text (by their private Notions) become ten
times more obscure than before: Other good Men, building still upon the first
false Foundation (I mean Comment) and endeavoring to maintain a ground which
was not firm at Bottom, The Council of Trent most judiciously, and (if I may
say) divinely Decreed (what some call the Modus) Transubstantiation; and that
in such admirable terms, and words, that I am convinced the Divine Wisdom in
the thing determined, exceeded the Natural Knowledge of the persons
determining: But no sooner were the Canons established, and this Council
dissolved; but some Men (in Opposition to these Heresies which have disturbed
the Church ever since) fell to work again in explaining these holy Mysteries;
but nothing having been explicitly decreed in this Council, more than what had
been always implicitly believed before; they generally kept to former Notions,
and instead of reconciling this Divine Truth to Sense, to Reason, and to the
Word of God, have made it almost incompatible with all three; whilst
nevertheless the Doctrine it self remains inviolably true, and against which
the Gates of Hell shall never prevail. Thus we see how Vice and Ignorance may
have accidentally introduced an erroneous Explication, but could not possibly
have admitted the Doctrine it self (much less the Comment) had it been guilty
of so much Novelty as it is accused of, by our Discourser.

Having thus finished (with all plainness and sincerity) my Remarks upon such
particular Objections as he has offered against this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; I must now reassume the Consideration of our late Answerer,
and some others, who have emptied their whole Quivers of sharpest (tho
fruitless) Arguments against an Article of Faith, securely placed by the
Promises and Providence of the Almighty, far above the reach of humane Malice,
or Power.

First, our Answerer has a particular Notion, and (very ingeniously) has made
a Parallel between many Circumstances in the Institution of the Jewish
Passover, (or rather the Memorial of it) and that of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: And indeed, could he have reconciled the plain literal Institution of
the Passover, with his figurative expression in the Sacrament, he had gone
somewhat farther toward the Point he aimed at; But if we take them both in a
literal sense (and so in reason the Parallel ought to run) Alas! his
consequence is confounded, and all his Parallels come to little or nothing. But
granting him the benefit of his Clerkship, and Reading, in its utmost Latitude,
will this save him? truly I think not, for these Reasons. First, it has been
the received Opinion of all Parties, that the Jewish Passover, was a Type of
the Christian Sacrament, and my self was present when a Learned Bishop of
Rochester.
Bishop made a whole Sermon before the late King at White Hall upon this
Supposition: If so, how comes it then to pass, that this Type or Figure should
be no more than a Figure of a Figure? It was what the Fathers could not endure
to hear. But, Secondly, according to our Authors Parallel, the Sacrament is no
more (at most) than a Figure (of the Memorial, that is) of the Figure, of this
Figure (that is) the Passover. But in truth it appears not clear to me, that
the eating of unleavened Bread, had any particular relation to the Passover it
self; but that they were the Memorials of two distinct, and different actions:
The one, That God did Pass over, or spare the Children of Israel, when he slew
the Children of the Egyptians: The other, That God brought them forth out of
the Land of Egypt, which is thus fully expressed in Exodus 13. v. 8. and 9. And
thou shall show thy Son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which
the Lord did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt: And it shall be for a sign
unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the
Lords Law may be in thy mouth; for with a strong hand has the Lord brought
thee out of Egypt. This our Author confesses himself in his Introduction, p.
4. and it is again set forth in Exodus c. 12.

If this be so, (and with submission I am apt to believe it is) what then
becomes of our Answerers Parallels? Since now they have no relation to the
Passover, or Paschal Lamb? Why, since they lie thus fair for us, we will
presume to make use of them, to prove still further the undoubted Truth of the
Catholic Doctrine.

The Body of Christ then in the Sacrament, is the Substance signified by the
Paschal Lamb, which was a Figure of it; by means of which holy Sacrifice, God
is pleased to spare us, and pass over us, as he did the Children of Israel, and
take us into his particular Protection.

The Elements, Symbols, or Accidents, may be the Substances signified by the
unleavened Bread, and (among other significations) are the Memorials of our
deliverance from the bondage of Sin and Satan. Thus the Parallels run right
upon all four, and when our Answerer shall have better considered of it,
possibly he may not think so well of what he calls, almost a Demonstration,
Introd. p. 6.

The next Remark from our Answerers Discourse, is this, That he has brought
several Learned Catholics (professedly remaining such) not only, not to have
believed, but also to have written against Transubstantiation. If this be
really true (as I perceive he imagines it is) then surely (if their Judgments
were no greater than their Honesty) their Testimonies will not do him much
honor; for, to profess a Doctrine of that Importance, and yet not to believe
it, must unavoidably convince the World, that they were false, interested,
hypocritical Knaves; and in this Character will I include the late Author of
the Communion of the Church of Rome, but with this additional aggravation of
partiality; that he admits of the English Real Presence, Consubstantiation,
Impanation, Zuingli^^^s^, or any thing, rather than Transubstantiation: And had
he been honest and sincere, he should have produced the Authorities of the same
Fathers plainly asserting what he would make them deny; and have reconcll'd
them to his Interpretation, if he could.

But Secondly, we have nothing but his word for the truth of his Protestant
Relics, now if we should ridicule those as most probably he has done some
Popish Relics, which he might have met withal in his Travels, I know not how he
will help himself; we shall have reason to question his own Sincerity, as
immediately shall be shown.

Thirdly, It is a great question, whether all these Eminent persons whom he
has named, did really deny the Doctrine of Transubstantiation it self, or
rather, some particular manner among the School. Men of explaining it; which is
a considerable difference, and may render them totally excusable.

And Lastly, it is Evident, That some of these persons did certainly believe
the Doctrine it self, and moreover, have explained it most conformable to the
Canons of the Council of Trent: And First, Monsieur de Marca, the Learned
Archbishop of Paris (taking our Answerers own Account in his Preface, p. 13.)
has given an admirable Explication of it, and however Mr. de Baluze, or the
Sorbon Doctors might misunderstand him, my Opinion as there set down is much
the same with Monsieur de Marca's; and in the Conclusion, I shall endeavor to
make it consistent with Scripture, the Fathers, and General Councils, and most
agreeable to Sense and Reason. The same I believe of Cardinal Perron, rather
than make him such a Villain as Drelincourt (a professed Enemy) has represented
him to the Lantgrave of Hesse. Our Answerer, for want of a right understanding,
mistakes Monsieur de Meaux, and others, whose Reputations he has ignorantly
(not to say maliciously) endeavored to blast, which if it were much to my
present purpose, I would further make appear.

The last particular which I shall observe (for others who shall think it worth
their pains may enlarge if they please) is his great disingenuity, and
partiality in his Answer to the Learned Oxford Discourser, concerning the
Adoration of our Blessed Savior in the Holy Sacrament. The Discourser
proposes (and one would think with very good Reason) That Catholics (here our
Answerer tells us, P. 99.
he means Papists still, and this he childishly repeats so often, that it is
ten times more insupportable, than the Crambe bis cocta, or Cabbage twice
boiled which (the Poet says) was so nautious to the Masters). The Discourser, I
say, proposes, That Catholics, grounding their adoration not upon
Transubstantiation, but on a Real Presence with the Symbols, which in general
is agreed on by the Lutherans, together with them, ought to be freed from
Idolatry therein, as well as the Lutherans. What says the Answerer? That if by
this assertion, he means only to make this discovery, That Christ's Real
Presence, together with the Substance of the Bread and Wine, is, in his Opinion
as good a ground for Adoration, as if he mere there only with the Species of
the Bread, the Substance being changed into his Body: I have no more to say it.
Here then he grants it, for the one is as good as the other. But if (he goes
on) he would hereby make us believe, That it is all one whether Christ be
adored, as supposed here by the Lutherans in this holy Eucharist, and as
imagined there by the Papists; P. 100.
I must then deny his Assertion: What ill luck is this -- but why? Truly
because the one offers more violence to the Senses, than the other. I could
wish our Answerer would offer less violence to his own, and his Readers Senses;
for what have Senses to do with an equal supposition of Christ's Invisible
Presence, tho after a different manner? For Instance, Suppose one man should
adore Christ under a Veil, believing, that, that which Supported the Veil, was
the real Natural Body of Christ; the other, equally adored Christ under the
some Veil, but upon the Supposition, that Christ's Natural Body was under it, or
with it, but together with some other Substance which totally Supported this
Veil, would not any Man judge that the first is (at least) as excusable as the
latter?

But Secondly, He tells us, That the Lutheran do undoubtedly right in the
object, and in that he is not mistaken; But the Papist (although he terminates
his Adoration upon the same Object, Christ, as supposed really Present, and no
otherwise would adore, yet) he is mistaken; so the one, only adores Christ as
in a place where he is not, the other as in a thing in which he is not; and
this makes the vast difference. A difference there is, I confess, for one
adores nothing for Christ; the other, Christ believed in, or under something;
but both upon the same Supposition, of Christ's Invisible Presence, and this is
the State of the Case in Short. The question is, Whether they be both equally
excusable or guilty of Idolatry? Here the Answerer passes Sentence clearly
against the Papist; but had he writ less, and closer, he would not surely have
so easily forgot what himself (from Bishop Tailor) was pleased to urge in p.
68. Where he lays it down for a Rule (and gives reasons for it) That to worship
Christ where he is not, is to worship nothing, a Non Ens, which must needs be
Idolatry. Well, but still it may be the Bishop, (says the Answerer) does not
intend to exclude the Corpus Domini, but only the Corporal, or Natural manner
of that Body: Let us therefore hear how he goes on; P. 69.
for Idolum nihil est in Mundo, says St. Paul, and Christ as Present by his
Humane Nature in the Sacrament (or with the Sacrament) is a Non Ens: For it is
not true; there is no such thing. What (says the Answerer) not as Christ there,
no way as to his Humane Nature? No, he is (says the Bishop) present there, by
his Divine Power, and his Divine Blessing, etc. But for any other Presence, it
is Idolum; It is nothing in the World. It seems then, to worship nothing for
Christ, in the Bishops Judgment (produced by the Answerer) is Idolatry; The
Question is only concerning Idolatry, therefore sure both are equally culpable,
or equally innocent of that Crime. What a deal of Stuff then has our Answerer
heapt up, to no other purpose, than to snew himself a partial Scribler? Let him
not be offended then, if I most justly apply to himself, what he produces in
reference to another; P. 96.
That for a Book which carried a great appearance of Reasoning, it has the
least in it of any I ever met with. But I leave the Learned Oxford Discourser,
to manage his own Defense against this Answerer, if he shall think it worthy of
a thought.

The last public Enemy to Transubstantiation that I shall mention, is, The
Defender of the Dublin Letter. I must confess he seems to be a Man of Learning
and Judgment, tho equally unknown to me as the rest; but because his Defense
depends chiefly upon the Authorities of Fathers, whose Sense (I humbly
conceive) he mistakes, or misapplies; I shall endeavor to reconcile them, in
the Conclusion, to other expressions of the Fathers, and all, to the Catholic
Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Thus, Reverend Fathers, I have made such particular Remarks upon these Authors
against Transubstantiation as I thought necessary toward the clearing our way
to the right understanding of that great Mystery; and if I have said ought
which might hitherto offend you, or them, I know not how to ask your Pardons;
for as (being ignorant of their Persons) I can have no malice toward them; so
when I find Men writing magisterially, and pragmatically against Learned Men,
and Christian Doctrines, when (as I believe) they are themselves in the wrong,
I thought it a part of my Duty, to present the Glass, to them that by seeing
how ill their Reflections appear, they might call to mind that admirable Rule
of Justice and Equity, Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris.

The CONCLUSION.
HAving endeavored to remove some prejudices against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, which every Author had kept, as particular Reserves, over
and above those Vulgar Objections, which are common to them all; I should now
totally apply my self to the reconciling part, and I have made some
considerable Progress in it; but finding that I have already exceeded the
limits which I at first proposed to my self, and that the weightiness of this
Subject, together with the variety of Objections against it, and of Opinions
concerning it, will engage me in a larger Discourse than is proper for this
time and place, I resolved to make a Treatise of it by it self, and this I am
the rather inclined to do, because we may probably see something of this kind
in public, done by a better hand, which likely, may save both you and me a
further labor. I shall content my self therefore at present to say something in
General, and for Particulars, must refer you to what I further design, if need
require, and God shall enable us.

The main Objections against Transubstantiation are chiefly these two.

I. That the natural Body of Christ cannot be in several places at the same
time.

II. That it is against the Evidences of our Senses to believe, that what we
see, and feel, and taste, and smell, and which nourishes, should not be what it
seems to be: Or, that Accidents should exist without a Subject after the manner
of a Substance, and yet be nothing. These and many others which are the
consequences of these (bating several gross mistakes) are obvious in most
Protestant Authors.

To the First, The Reasons given why the Natural Body of Christ cannot be in
several places at the same time, are, Because a Body cannot exist after the
manner of a Spirit, That a Body cannot be invisible and impossible, Answ. p.
34. Or, as it is in the Rubric, Because it is against the truth of Christ's
Natural Body to be at one time in more places than one. Now if we can Evidently
show out of Scripture, that the Body of Christ here upon Earth, did sometimes
exist after the manner of a Spirit, and was Invisible, I hope the two first
Reasons will be taken off by consent. And first it is understood (I think) by
all, Mat. 17.
that the Body of Christ when he was transfigur'd, did exist after a
Supernatural manner, and was freed (for the time being) from the clog, and
earthly limitations of common humane Bodies.

Secondly, It is plain that after his Resurrection Jesus made his Body become
Invisible. The Text tells us, That he appeared in several Forms. After that he
appeared in another Form unto two of them, Mark 16. v. 12. Which I suppose is
somewhat above Nature: Also the third time when Jesus showed himself to his
Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, he had changed again his Form, for they knew
him not, John c. 21. Nor was he known the first time by Mary Magdalen, but was
mistaken by her for the Gardener. But in Luke 24. It is clearly expressed, That
Jesus appeared to his Disciples after the manner of a Spirit, for it is said in
v. 36. And as they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
said unto them, peace be unto you, But they were terrified and affrighted and
supposed that they seen a spirit. Now although the Circumstances in this Text
sufficiently denote, that our Savior came not to his Disciples progressively
after the manner of humane Bodies, but that eodem instante he appeared in the
midst of them, which was the cause of their fear (for they were told before
that our Lord was risen): Yet the preceding v. 31. of the same Chapter, leads
so manifestly to this Interpretation, that there is no color left to doubt;
for it is there written, That after our Lord had been ignorantly entertained by
the two Disciples, at Emmaus, at last, Their eyes were opened, and they knew
him, and he vanished out of their sight. This agrees also with the account
which we have from St. John, c. 20. v. 19. Where it is said, The same day at
Evening when the Doors were shut, came Jesus and stood in the midst of them.
The same Circumstance is also repeated in v. 26.

In vain do ye therefore so often Object to us, Worthy Fathers, the necessity
of believing our Senses, in all things, and upon all Occasions, since you see
how the Apostles themselves were deceived by them, even concerning the real,
visible, corporal Presence of Christ upon Earth. As for St. Thomas, and the
Confirmation from the Evidence of his Senses, our Savior reproacht his want of
Faith, and suffered him to put his doubting hand into his Sacred Wounds, not so
much to show him that he was mere Man, as to convince them that he was God and
Man: God, from his infinite Power, in being able to make his Natural Body exist
after the manner of a Spirit, which they had seen before, and were terrified at
it: And Man, in that nevertheless he had the shape and Substance of that very
Body in which he suffered.

Nor must we think that these Supernatural changes were done by chance, or
without the blessed design of the Divine Wisdom; for the Disciples, who
hitherto had doubted concerning the great Article of the Resurrection of the
Flesh, were not only hereby convinced of this necessary truth, but were also
taught after what manner their Bodies should be raised from the dead; Or, as S.
Paul says, 1 Cor. c. 15. What Bodies they do become: S. Paul gives them their
Answer, v. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
die. Then telling us of the several differences between Bodies, some more, and
some less glorified, he proceeds v. 42. So also is the Resurrection of the
Dead: It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption* It is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; It is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power;
It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. And this our Savior
had before experimentally taught them, by the differing, and Spiritual manner
of the Existence of his own Body; confirming also has Divinity, by that Power
which he exercised upon it, according to that of S. Matthew, c. 28. v. 18. All
Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. If then our common Sinful Bodies
shall have this Glory, Power and Spirituality, when they are raised from the
Dead, and probably be subject then to the Soul, as the Soul is now to the Body,
who will dare to prescribe Laws to the holy and spotless Body of our Lord,
united to his Divinity?

However it be, the vindication of the Real Presence seems to concern your
selves, worthy Fathers, or at least many other Protestants, no less than
Catholics; and if that be admitted, methinks Transubstantiation should not be
so rudely refused Entrance: For give me leave to ask you, from what Authority
you pretend to tell us, That Christ is really Present in the Sacrament, except
you mean, as in all other pious Duties? If you deny this real Presence, you
stand separate from the whole Christian World, Lutherans, as well as Catholics;
which is no very good Argument that you are in the right. If you confess it,
solve these difficulties your selves, for it concerns you, no less than us. But
if again, you do not confess it, then tell me (I say) what ground you have from
Scripture to name those words, except as a consequence from these, This is my
Body, and upon the Supposition, that (at least) the Substance of the Bread is
become, after Consecration the very Body of our Lord?

You tell us again, That we do verily, truly, and indeed receive the very Body
of Christ, That, born of the Virgin Mary, which suffered for us, and rose from
the Dead: Let me enquire again, what Authority you have to use those words, if
you do not literally intend the thing? Spiritual Graces proceed not from his
Humanity, but from his Divinity: Faith is one of these Spiritual Graces, and
the immediate Gift of God, and signifies only this (at least in this place)
That Christ was the Son of God; that he became Man; that he died for us, and
rose again from the dead. What has this to do with eating his Body, and
drinking his Blood?

A Commemoration only of his Death it cannot mean, nor could the Apostles so
understand it, except you can show me some such like Metaphor used to express
the memorial of a Man after his death: But if neither before our Saviors
Passion, nor since, amongst Jews, Heathens, or Christians such an Expression
was ever used, why must we believe that, Christ spoke, or the Apostles
understood different from all the expressions of mankind since the Creation of
Adam? When the Master of the House, in Celebrating the Paschal Supper, said,
This is the Bread of affliction which our Fathers eat in Egypt; true Bread was
really delivered, and the Memorial was proper. When Moses said, Behold the
Blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you, It was very Blood
which Moses sprinkled on the People, Exodus 24. v. 8. But to tell us we eat and
drink the Body and Blood of Christ, as a Memorial of him, when you profess we
do no such thing, is the most extravagant of all Metaphors, and unparalleled
in History.

That some have eaten their deceased Friends, and that others have drank their
Ashes, I have already hinted; but to say, eat and drink the Body and Blood of
King Charles, that is, remember that he was Martyred, would be such an
expression as stands single (at least as far as I have read) from all the
Allegories of the most fantastical Poets. Why then do you tells us, That we
indeed eat and drink his Body and Blood, and not rather, and only say that we
break Bread in remembrance that Christ was so broken, and pour forth Wine, as a
Memorial that his Blood was so shed for us? Give me leave to return the Answer;
I fear, that whilst you want Faith to believe the truth intended by the words,
you are ashamed to neglect the words themselves, lest you should become a
scandal and reproach to all sober Christians, who had ever read the Holy Bible
or the best of Fathers. Deceive not therefore your selves and those poor Souls
who depend upon you, but either give them in truth the last Sacred Legacy of
our most dear and ever Blessed Master, or tell them plainly, he is departed and
has left them nothing; for a Body, which is no Body, and Blood which is no
thing, is (at least) as absurd and senseless a Proposition, as your so often
objected Smelling, Tasting, nourishing Accidents without a Substance.

The Answerer has given us a long Beadroll of Objections in p. 32. Et sequent.
Which he says contradicts right Reason: I could have furnished him with a great
many more, and much more pertinent, from an Ancient Catholic Author, called,
The Christians Manna, where he would also have found their Answers, to which I
must recommend him. In some of his repugnancies (as he calls them) he shows
himself so ignorant, or malicious, that he is, either way inexcusable: So p.
35. In p. 33. he seems neither to understand Catholic Divinity, nor common
Philosophy, but talks so crudely of both, that he deserves not a sober Reply.
What he (from Blondel) tells us of the Fathers, p. 34. I do not rightly
understand, nor did I think it worth my pains to procure Blondel upon that
account; but if either of them would make us believe, that the Fathers thought
it absurd, and impossible, that God should act beyond and above the Power of
Nature, the Fathers are much obliged to them for their good Opinion; but if he
would make them say, that naturally a thing cannot exist, act, or be produced
contrary to, or above Nature, he has made a wise Speech for them, which he may
keep for his own use.

In his 36 P. he is come to his Senses; but because he has only a slight touch
of them, and those the same with our first Discourser, I shall consider them
(as far as I intend at present) together.

The first Objection is, that what we taste, and smell, and see, and touch, and
which nourish our Bodies, should be Nothing; and as it is reduced to an
Objection against Sense, it runs thus, That what we see in the Sacrament is not
Bread, but the Body of Christ. I have told you that I must defer my more
particular Answer, to a particular Treatise upon that Subject, in which I hope
to reconcile all difficulties, not only to Sense and Reason, but to the words
of Consecration, to the Canons of the Council of Trent, and to the Fathers, and
the Fathers to themselves, quite throughout: In the mean time I will give you
the general Faith of all Catholics, and so conclude.

The indispensable Faith of all Catholics is this. That the Substance of the
Bread and Wine, after Consecration, is converted into the Substance of the Body
and Blood of Christ united with his Soul and his Divinity: No good Catholics
dispute this although several Opinions also there are concerning the manner how
this is done. The great Question is concerning the Accidents which remain, and
it is the more received Opinion, that they are real (though not properly called
substantial) things; and that, as such, they may nourish the Body, suffer
digestion and corruption, and are the true Objects of our Senses, in which (we
say) all the virtues and qualities of Bread exist: This we are told is
consistent with Aristotle's Philosophy; but if you think otherwise, dispute your
Opinion as long as you please, and (if you can) oblige your Adversaries to find
out some more satisfactory Answer, for there are some others, as I shall show
hereafter. The Faith in the mean time remains inviolably among all, which,
their different Opinions pretend not to destroy: All believe the Substance is
converted; but for the Accidents, whether they be more, or less; whether they
exist with, or without a Subject; what that Subject is; or whether they may not
have Substances of themselves, these are Matters of Opinion and Philosophy, and
we must remember, that Christ came not to teach us Philosophy, and Logic, but
Faith and Obedience unto Good Works.

But I shall enter no further upon this Discourse at present; nor shall I here
answer our Discoursers four last Questions, which, depending upon the Doctrine
of Accidents, shall be considered together with them, in our designed Treatise:
I shall only therefore add my hearty Prayers, that you would once lay aside
your prejudices, and affections, and many other temporal considerations, and
sincerely and calmly endeavor with us, to find where the truth lies. I know no
Body intends any harm to you, or other good to themselves, than that we might
be all United under one Head, Christ Jesus, holding the Unity of Faith, in the
Bond of Peace.

It would be a defect of Charity not to be pardoned, should you believe all
Catholics to be Knaves, or Fools; or that they did not see, and know, or would
not know what can be said against them, as well as Protestants; since your
greatest Objections which I have ever read against us, are found in our own
Authors, and their Answers to them, of which you are pleased to be silent. It
were besides, a strange Instance of Spiritual Pride, to think yourselves the
only Children of Light, and this, grounded upon no other Authority, than your
own private Opinions, and a partial Judgment past upon your selves, against the
much greater part of the whole Christian World.

The Glorious Epinikeas, and lofty Triumphs which you sing in all your Papers,
might become the Buskins of a Pagan Conqueror; but in me, they move only my
Compassion to see you so wonderfully pleased, and insulting in the wrong. Alas,
you mistake the Sc^^^ for in our Case, the Conquered wins the Priz^^ and yet
the Victor loses not his honor. What would it profit him (says our Savior) If
a man should gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? It is a serious
consideration, and deserves a sober thought or two, free from passion, or
prejudice. Now whether it be advisable to venture so great a Treasure upon the
single Bottom of every man's private Opinion? Whether our Savior Christ would
leave his own Church in a much more dangerous condition, than that in which he
found the Jewish Church? Whether Certainty was to be had among the Jews from
the Chair of Moses, concerning what they were to believe, and do; but no
Certainty to Christians from the Chair of S. Peter, or any other Christian
Church upon the face of the Earth? Whether Heresy and Schism be terms to
affright us, and only different names for Knavery, and Hypocrisy? Or, whether
a man who truly believes himself to be in the right, may not be desperately,
and dangerously in the wrong; and highly punishable for his presumption, and
disobedience to lawful Authority? And Lastly, whether you will tell us roundly
and plainly. That to believe Christ to be the Son of the Living God, and to
live a moral Life, be all that is required of us, as some of you have very
boldly insinuated? These things I recommend to your pious and ingenuous
Examination, until we meet again.

FINIS.

