THE Best of Remedies, FOR THE VVorst of Maladies: OR, Spiritual Receipts and
Antidotes for the Preservation of a Plague-sick Sinful Soul.

Wherein is shown, Sin is the Cause, and Repentance the Cure of the Pestilence.

Seasonably Published by a Lover of Peace and Truth; and one that desires,
that all would (though the Lords hand seems to be withdrawn, as to the late
universally raging Pestilential Disease) forsake those Provoking Sins, which
call for Vengeance and Judgments on the Sons of Men. R. A. LONDON, Printed
Anno 1667.

THE CAUSES and CURE OF THE Pestilence.
THe first Sin which I shall insist upon, so highly provoking unto the Lord, to
send the destroying Pestilence among a people, is the sin of Oppression: When
the Supreme Powers and Authorities of a Nation, do exercise a Usurpation or
Oppession over the Bodies and Consciences of the people of God. This was the
sin of Pharaoh, who tyrannized, not only over the Bodies, but over the
Consciences also, of the Children of Israel; He sets Taskmasters over them, to
afflict them with their burdens; And the Egyptians made the Children of Israel
to serve with rigor, and made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in Mortar
and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the field; all their service
wherein they made them serve, was with rigor. By reason of which bondage, the
Children of Israel sighed and cried, and their cry came up unto God, Exodus
1.11, 13, 14. comp. with Chap. 2.23. So Chap. 3.7. The Lord said, I have surely
seen the afflictien of my people which are it Egypt, and have heard their cry,
by reason of their Taskmasters, for I know their sorrows; And in the 9th.
Verse. Behold the cry of the Children of Israel, is come up unto me; and I have
also seen the Oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them. This was an
oppression that Pharaoh and his cruel Taskmasters did exercise over their
bodies.

The oppression that he exercised over their souls and consciences, did
evidently appear in this. The Lord he called, and commissionated Moses to go
unto Pharaoh, and he with the Elders of Israel, were to say unto him; The Lord
God of the Hebrews has met with us, and now let us go (we beseech thee) three
days journey into the Wilderness, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God,
Exodus 3.18. This they often pressed upon him: And the reason wherefore they so
much urged it is very observable, in the 3d. Verse. of the 5th. Chap. Let us go
we pray thee three days journey into the Desert, and sacrifice unto the Lord
our God, lest he fall upon us with Pestilence, or with the Sword; That is, Lest
he slay us and destroy us with Pestilence, and with the Sword, as in Judges
8.21. Pharaoh he hardens his heart, and is disobedient unto the word of the
Lord. And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let
Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. They be idle
(says he) therefore they cry, saying; Let us go and Sacrifice unto our God,
Exodus 5.2, 8, 17. But the Judgments of God pursuing him at the very heels, and
the grievous swarm of Flies coming into his house, and into his servants
houses, and into all the Land of Egypt; so that the Land was corrupted by
reason of the swarm of Flies: then he calls for Moses and Aaron, that they
might go and Sacrifice to God; but where? in the Land, that is, in his own
Land, the Land of Egypt. But what said Moses? It is not meet so to do, for we
shall sacrifice the abominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God; Lo,
shall we Sacrifice the abominations of the Egyptians before their eyes, and
will they not stone us? We will go three days journey into the Wilderness, and
Sacrifice unto the Lord our God, as he shall command us. It is not meet, or it
is not right so to do, as being not so appointed of God, who called into the
Wilderness to Sacrifice, Exodus 3.18. Shall we Sacrifice the abominations of the
Egyptians? That is, The Beasts which the Egyptians do worship, and do abhor to
kill, or to see killed for Sacrifice. And the Sentence twice repeated, may
imply two senses.

1. Shall we Sacrifice to our God, such things as the Egyptians Sacrifice, that
would be an abomination to the Lord?

Or, 2. Shall we Sacrifice such things as God requires, that would be an
abomination to the Egyptians.

The Scripture often calling the Gods and Services of the Heathens,
Abominations; As Deuteronomy. 7.25. and 12.30, 31. 2 King. 23.13. Ezra 9.1. Isa.
44.19. Now the principal Sacrifices of the Hebrews were Oxen and Sheep, Genesis
15.9. And all Shepherds, or Sheep-keepers were an abomination to the Egyptians.
Genesis 46.34. For the Egyptians abstained from Sheep, and Sacrificed Goats. By
all which it is very evident, that Pharaoh denying the Israelites to Worship,
as God had appointed them, did oppress them, not only in their bodies, but in
their Consciences likewise; which drew down the dreadful Judgments of God upon
him and his Land; among which; this of the destroying Pestilence. For proof
whereof, see Exodus 3.19, 20. I am sure (says the Lord) that the King of Egypt
will not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand And what follows? I will stretch
out my hand and smite Egypt with all my wonders, etc. So Exodus 9.13, 14, 15.
Thus says the Lord God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve
me; for I will at this time send all my plagues upon thy heart, etc. and
especially in the 15. Verse. For now will I stretch out my hand, that I may
smite thee and thy people with Pestilence, and thou shall be cut off from the
Earth. And in the 12. Chap. and 29. Verse. See what a dreadful slaughter the
Lord made accordingly in the Land of Egypt. And it came to pass, that at
Midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the Land of Egypt, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his Throne, unto the firstborn of the
Captive that was in the Dungeon, and all the firstborn of Cattle; and there
was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a House where there was not one
dead. See further the severity of God in punishing this sin of Oppression, Jer.
34.17. Therefore, thus says the Lord, ye have not hearkened unto me in
proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor;
Behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, says the Lord, to the Sword, to the
Pestilence, and to the Famine, and I will make you to be removed into all the
Kingdoms of the earth. So highly displeasing it is unto the Lord, for a people
to be oppressed, either in their civil or spiritual liberties and enjoyments,
according to that in Psa. 12.5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing
of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him at safety from
him that puffs at him. And further, in Isa. 49.25, 26. A dreadful place to
all cruel Oppressors of Gods people; says the Lord there, I will contend with
him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy Children; And I will feed
them that oppress thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with
their own blood, as with sweet wine; And Amos 2.6. Thus says the Lord, for
three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment thereof; Why? Because they sold the righteous for silver, and the
poor for a pair of shoes. So Isa. 52.4, 5, 6. Thus (says the Lord) my people
went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian oppressed
them without cause; Now therefore what have I here, (says the Lord) that my
people is taken away for naught? they that rule over them, make them to bowl,
(says the Lord) and my name continually every day is blasphemed. Therefore my
people shall know my name, therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he
that does speak, behold it is I. By which it is very evident that the Lord does
not only intimate unto us, how sorely he plagued the Egyptians, because they
had grievously afflicted and oppressed his people, which voluntarily, and of
their own accord went down into Egypt, but also that he will much more
grievously plague the Assyrians that carried them away out of their own Land,
the Land of Canaan, which he had given them for an Inheritance, and there dealt
so cruelly and unmercifully with them.

So sorely displeasing is it unto the Lord, when those that rule over his
people, shall make them to howl; that is, to cry bitterly, to mourn and lament
so ely, as it is rendered, Jer. 4.8. and Ezekiel. 21.12. To this agrees that in the
50th. Chap. of Jeremiah, and the 33, and 34. Verses. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts. The Children of Israel, and the Children of Judah were oppressed
together, and all that took them Captives held them fast, they refused to let
them go. Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his name, he shall
thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest unto the Land, and disquiet
the Inhabitants of Babylon. What we may understand by the Lords pleading of the
cause of his people here, and disquieting the inhabitants of Babylon that
oppressed them, that of Jerem. 51.35, 36. does evidently declare. The violence
done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon shall the Inhabitants of Sion say,
and my blood upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say. Therefore
thus says the Lord, behold I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for
thee, and I will dry up her Sea, and make her Springs dry. When the Lord shall
plead the cause of Sion, then will he take vengeance for her, that is, he will
avenge himself of his and her cruel oppressing enemies; According to that which
the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel speaks in Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will
ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. This is the time
when he will make his Arrows drunk with blood, and his Sword to devour flesh.
And then what follows? Rejoice O ye Nations, with his people: for he will
avenge the blood of his Servants, and will render vengeance unto his
Adversaries, and will be merciful unto his Land, and to his people; As it is in
Deuteronomy. 32.42, 43. This is that time which is called by the Prophet Isaiah, The
day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversies
of Sion, Isa. 34.8. called by Jeremiah, the vengeance of the Lord our God, the
vengeance of his Temple, Jer. 50.28. And take notice then how severe the Lord
will be. He tells us, that his Sword shall be bathed in Heaven, and it shall
come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of his curse to Judgment. By
Idumea, we are to understand Edom, or the Edomites, who were the highest
Kindred of the Israelites, but notwithstanding they were their greatest enemies
and oppressors; And therefore said the Lord, by the Prophet Obadiah, Verse. 10.
For thy violence (meaning the Edomites) against thy Brother Jacob, shame shall
cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever. And these are a Type and Figure
of all the enemies of the Church of God, who indeed do boast and brag that they
are descended and born of the Church, crying up the Temple of the Lord, The
Temple of the Lord, setting up a Worship of their own devising, and are in the
practice of Sacraments and Ordinances, as the true Church and Spouse of Christ,
yet, indeed, and in truth, do hate, persecute, and oppress the true spiritual
and sincere worshippers of Jesus. Whereby it is very evident, what dreadful
plagues and punishments the sin of oppression does bring upon a Land and Nation.

2. The second Pestilential sin, is the sin of Persecution, and hatred against
God and his people: As God has his Arrows of his deliverance for the
preservation of his people against their enemies, 2 King. 13.17. So he has the
Arrows of his Indignation and wrath, which Job being under a spirit of
desertion and temptation apprehended were within him, the poison whereof he
said did drink up his spirit, Job 6.4. So David in the like condition, That the
arrows of the Lord did stick fast in him, and his hand pressed him sore, Psalm.
38.2. And the Prophet Jeremy in his Lamentations; He has bent his bow (says
he) and set me as a mark for the Arrow. He has caused the arrows of his quiver
to enter into my reins, Lam. 3.12, 13. I say whatever might be the
apprehensions of these holy and righteous men, yet surely the Lord has his
arrows of his sore displeasure and wrath, which as the instruments of death, he
has prepared and ordained against the Persecutors, Psalm. 7.13. And this of the
destroying Pestilence is one of the sorest and sharpest of them, as reckoned
amongst his four sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21. And as the wicked do bend their
bow, and make ready their arrows upon the string, that they may privily shoot
at the upright in heart, Psalm. 11.2. So the Lord he has his bow and arrows, and
his Bow is bent also, and his arrows he has ready, Psa. 7.12. which he sends
out and scatters his enemies with, Psalm. 18.14. With these he breaks their
bones and pierces them through, Number. 24.8. yea, makes them drunk with their
blood, Deuteronomy. 32.42. These are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, Psalm.
45.5. The Instruments and means that the Lord makes use of against his enemies
are piercing, yea so piercing, that the heart, the closest and strongest part,
even that wherein life consists, shall be peirced thereby. The arrows of the
Lord are like the swords of Saul and Jonathan which did execution and returned
not empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. You think by flying away and hiding your selves in the
thickets of the forest, you shall be secured from the stroke of these arrows
of Gods vengeance; but know, if you are Gods Enemies and persecutors, his hand
will find you out, yea his right hand will find out those that hate him; and
he will make you as a fiery oven in the time of his anger, Psalm. 21.8, 9. For
wickedness burns as fire, and it shall devour the briars and thorns, and
shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up as the
lifting up of smoke; for through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts the land shall
be darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire, no man shall
spare his brother, Isa. 9.18, 19. I say, if you be the Lords Adversaries, then
if the Scriptures be true and cannot be broken, you shall assuredly be broken
in pieces, yea out of heaven will the Lord thunder upon you, 1 Samuel 2.10. And
if that will not do, he will throw you into the deeps, as a stone into the
mighty waters, as he dealt with the persecutors of his people, Neh. 9.12. I
cannot let pass those dreadful imprecations which the Prophet David thundereth
out against his and the Lords Adversaries, under the person of Judas; Set a
wicked man over him (says he) Let Satan stand at his right hand; let him be
condemned and his prayer become sin, and his days few, and his children
fatherless, and vagabonds, begging their bread; and such like prophetical
direful wishes; And why all this? Because that he remembered not to show mercy,
but persecuted the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in
heart, Psa. 109. to ver. 17. so Psa. 69. verse 22. and onward; Let their table
become a snare before them, and that which should have been for their welfare,
let it become a trap: Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, and make
their loins continually to shake. Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let
thy wrathful anger take hold of them. Let their habitations be desolate, and
let none dwell in their tents. Add iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not
come unto thy righteousness: Let them be blotted out of the book of the living,
and not be written with the righteous. Now what is the reason that David
devoteth his and the Lords enemies to such dreadful destructions? why? even for
this cause; For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and talk to the
grief of those whom thou have wounded. By all which he means, that the wicked
laid grievous afflictions and punishments upon such, whom the Lord in his
fatherly love had chastised, whether you understand it of Christ or of his
afflicted and persecuted members: This is a sin that is highly provoking unto
the Lord, drawing down the wrath of God to a Kingdoms inevitable desolation and
destruction; as upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. where it is said,
That the Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, or prophets,
rising up betimes and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on
his dwelling place. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, till there was no remedy, or no healing; because on the one side the
people repented not, and on the other side Gods Justice required that their
impenitency should be most severely punished. Its a similitude taken from sick
bodies that are incurable; For (as Stephen said truly, whom they stoned) which
of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them
which showed before of the coming of the Just one (meaning Christ) of whom
(says he) ye have been now the betrayers and murderers, Acts 7.52. And
therefore it was that our blessed Savior took up that sad lamentation and
complaint; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not? And what follows? Behold your house is left unto you desolate, Matthew.
23.37, 38. Persecution is the certain forerunner of a Nations desolation and
destruction. And God does usually retaliate the sin of persecuting and
destroying men upon their own heads; Let their way be dark and slippery, and
let the Angel of the Lord persecute them, Psalm. 35.6. As the fire burns the
wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on fire, so persecute them with
thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm: Fill their faces with shame
that they may seek thy name: O Lord, let them be confounded and troubled for
ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish: That men may know, that thou,
whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth, Psalm. 83.15,
16, 17, 18. And who are they whom the Psalmist imprecates these dreadful
judgments to fall upon, but Gods Enemies and Persecutors? For lo, thine enemies
make a tumult, and they that hate thee have lift up the head, they have taken
crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They
have said, Come, let us cut them off from being a Nation; that the name of
Israel may be no more in remembrance. God has his hidden ones, such whose life
is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. whom the Lord esteems as his jewels,
keeping them in faithful and safe custody, hiding them in the secret of his
presence from the pride of man, which betake themselves to the Lord for refuge
to be hid and secure under his tuition and protection, Psalm. 27.5. and 31.20.
And these are they that the enemies of God did consult and conspire against,
even to extirpate them, and to root them out of the land. But see how just the
Lord is in the exeution of his righteous and terrible judgments upon such:
Thou shall take up this proverb (says the Lord) against the King of Babylon
and say, How has the Oppressor ceased? the golden City ceased? the Lord has
broken the staff of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rulers. He that smote
the people in wrath with a continual stroke (mark that) he that ruled the
Nations in anger is persecuted, and none hinders, Isa. 14.4, 5, 6. O that
this were seriously laid to heart by the persecuting spirits of this
generation; whether Gods controversy with the Kingdom at this time, in this
sore visitation of the Plague among us, does not in a great measure spring from
this evil and bitter root; so heinous and provoking sin it is unto the Lord.

3. The third pestilential destroying sin, is the sin of Murder and Bloodshed
that is exercised upon the people of God. See Jer. 50.11, 12 13. the dreadful
threatenings of the Lord against Babylon for this very sin: Because ye were glad
(says the Lord) because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because
ye aro grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls: Mark, they were
the destroyers of Gods heritage, that was their sin; and now what must be their
punishment? Your mother shall be sore confounded, she that bare you shall be
ashamed; behold the hindermost of the Nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land
and a desert; because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not be inhabited, but
it shall be wholly desolate, every one that goes by Babylon shall be
astonished, and hiss at all her plagues. So in Jer. 51.34, 35. The Church
complains there, that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon had devoured her, and
crushed her, and made her an empty vessel, and had swallowed her up like a
Dragon, and filled his belly with her delicates and cast her out. What then is
the Churches dreadful imprecation hereupon? but that which was mentioned
before, The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall the
inhabitants of Sion say, and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea shall
Jerusalem say. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I will plead thy cause,
and take vengeance for thee, etc. And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling
place for Dragons, an astonishment, a hissing without an inhabitant. And in the
33. Verse, The Daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor, it is time to
thresh her, yet a little while and the time of her harvest shall come. So Rev.
18.4. God calls his people there to come out of Babylon, and wherefore? that ye
be not partakers of her sins (says the voice from Heaven) and that ye receive
not of her Plagues. So in the 8th. Verse, Therefore shall her Plagues come in
one day, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with
Fire, for strong is the Lord who judges her. And what was Babylons great sin?
They have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood
to drink, for they are worthy, said the Angel of the waters. Rev. 16.6. So Rev.
17.6. And I saw (said John in a Vision) the woman drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: And in her was found the
blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth,
Rev. 18.24. And what follows? Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and
power, unto the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his judgments; for he
has judged the great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication,
and has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand And again they said,
Allelujah, and her smoke rose up for ever.

For the speedy execution of which righteous judgments of God, upon this
insatiable and blood-thirsty Whore, it is, that the souls under the Altar, that
have been slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they held, are
said to cry with a loud voice, saying, How long Lord, holy and true, do not
thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? To which
answer is made, That they should rest yet for a little season, until their
Fellow Servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they were,
should be fulfilled, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. That is, slain by Antichrist and his
Ministers, who having Apostatized from the faith, should arise in the Church of
Christ soon after this, and by their spiritual pride and tyranny, oppress the
Church, and persecute and kill the Lords faithful Witnesses, in like manner as
the Gentiles the Jews, and other false Christians had formerly done, Rev. 11.7.
and 12.15, 17. Yet this is very observable, as that which may minister matter
of strong consolation to the Saints suffering under Antichrists bloody
persecutions, that there is the determinate time of Gods appointed Judgments,
and that however for a while the Lord defers his punishments, yet he certainly
hears the Prayers of his faithful servants, and at last will be fully avenged
on their Adversaries. And though Antichrists rage and tyranny is very great,
yet it is limited according to the purpose and decree of God, who has
determined the number of Martyrs, which number being once accomplished, not one
drop of blood shall be more spilt by that man of sin, that Son of perdition;
who (Satan like) works with all his power, compelling men by Fines,
confiscation of Goods, Imprisonments, Banishments, and the like, to submit unto
his ways and laws, 2 These. 2.3, 9. and that under fair and glorious pretenses
too, for the suppressing of Errors and Heresies, for the beating down of sin,
for the working of men to conformity and uniformity, and the bringing of them
into obedience unto the Church; which to do, if the Ecclesiastical power is not
sufficient, the Magisterial power must be made use of. But it is very evident,
that the Antichristian religion, consisting for the most part in Will Worship,
and in humane traditions and inventions, could never have subsisted to this
day, had it not been supported by an Arm of flesh; when as our Lord Jesus with
his Apostles and Disciples, never sought to the Civil Magistrate, or Powers of
the World upon that account, nor is the Kingdom of Christ to be erected and
established in this way of humane force and power. The weapons of our warfare
(says the Apostle) are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. It is the powers of the world
that shall destroy the holy people, Dan. 8.24. It is the Little Horn, the
Romish Antichrist, that shall make War with the Saints, and prevail against
them, until the Ancient of days come, and that judgment be given to the Saints
of the most high, and that the time come that the Saints shall possess the
Kingdom, Dan. 7.21.22. It is he, that shall speak great words against the most
high, and shall wear out the Saints of the most high, etc. Until the Judgment
shall sit, and then they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to
destroy it unto the end, Dan. 7.25, 26. And in one day shall Babylons Plagues
come, death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with
fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges her, Rev. 18.8. The severity of
the Lord against this sin of bloodshed and cruelty, that is exercised on the
Saints of God, is further set forth in that of the Prophet Amos Chap. 1. Verse.
11. (Thus says the Lord) for three transgressions of Edom, and for four I will
not turn away the punishment thereof; and why? Because he did pursue his
Brother with the Sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear
perpetually, and kept his wrath for ever. For this also has the Lord a
controversy with the Land; because, by killing and stealing, etc. they break
out, and blood touches blood. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one
that dwells therein shall languish, Hosea 4.1, 2, 3. So in the Psalm. 94.5, 6.
They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage, they slay
the widow, and the stranger, and murder the fatherless; yet they say, the Lord
shall not see. And what then? O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, show thy
self: Lift up thy self thou Judge of the earth, render a reward to the proud.
So highly provoking is it unto the Lord, for any to have a hand in the
destroying of Gods heritage; As the Psalmist says, When the Lord shall make
inquisition for blood, he will remember them, and not forget the cry of the
humble, or of the afflicted.

4. The fourth pestilential and highly provoking sin, is the sin of Idolatry,
which is the worshipping of false Gods, or the true God in a false manner. This
is that sin, that has greatly incensed the Lord to send this sore Judgment of
the Plague or Pestilence, and the Sword among a people, Judge. 5.8. It is said,
they chose new gods, then was war in the gates. When Israel forsook the Lord,
and his true worship, and fell to the worshipping of the Idol-Gods of the
Heathen, then the Lord ever and anon punished them with war. And as the Sword,
so the Pestilence brake in among them for this very sin, Psalm. 106.28, 29. They
joined themselves also to Baal-Peor, and eat the sacrifices of the dead; Thus
they provoked him to anger with their inventions, and the Plague brake in upon
them. See Number. 25.2. to which this in the Psalms does refer. It is said,
they called the people to the Sacrifice of their Gods, and the people did eat
and bowed down to their gods. And Israel joined himself to Baal-peor, and the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; so that there died in the Plague,
no less then four and twenty thousand, and many more had been destroyed had not
Phinehas stood up and executed judgment, and turned away the wrath of the
Lord, and so the Plague was stayed, as in the 30. verse of that 106. Psalm
comp. with Number. 25.11. Baal-peor was the Idol-god of the Moabites, and the
Daughters of the Moabites they called or invited the people to the sacrifices
or offerings of their gods; they allured the people by fleshly baits to defile
their bodies and souls with whoredom and idolatry, and the people they
participated or communicated with them in their idolatry, which sin God in a
special manner had forewarned them of, Exodus 34.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Take heed to thy self, lest thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the
Land, whither thou go, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee. But ye
shall destroy their Altars, break their Images, and cut down their Groves. For
thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord whose name is Jealous, is a
jealous God. Lest thou make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land, and
they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice to their gods, and one
call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice, and thou take of their Daughters unto
thy Sons, and their Daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy Sons
go a whoring after their gods. And hence it was, that the Apostle Paul dehorted
the Corinthians, lest they should be guilty of the like sin, and so incur the
like punishment, 1 Cor. 10.8. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of
them committed (meaning spiritual as well as corporal uncleanness) and fell in
one day three and twenty thousand, though there was four and twenty thousand
fell in all, but three and twenty thousand of them fell or perished in one day.

So when Moses was in the Mount with God, and the People had made them a Molden
Calf, and gave it Divine Adoration, saying, These be thy gods O Israel which
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt; How did the wrath of the Lord begin
to wax hot against them for to consume them, had not Moses (his chosen) stood
before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them;
yet, says the Lord, Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them.

And the Lord plagued the people, because they made the Calf which Aaron made.
See Psalm. 1^.23. comp. with Exodus 32.4. and 35. verses. (...) whence was that
dehortation of the Apostle likewise in that 1 Cor. 10.7. Neither (says he) be
ye Idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, the people sat down to
eat and drink and rose up to play. The word is used for laughing or rejoicing,
Genesis 21.6. here it is meant of their singing and dancing about the Golden Calf
they had made, as in the 18. and 19. verses of Exodus 32. as aforesaid. So Jer.
19.3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will
bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever hears, his ears shall tingle.
And wherefore will the Lord be so severe? Because they have forsaken me, says
the Lord, and have estranged this place, and have burnt incense in it unto
other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the Kings of
Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of Innocents; they have built
also the high places of Baal to burn their Sons with fire for burnt offerings
unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind:
Therefore, behold, the days come says the Lord, that I will cause them to fall
by the Sword before their enemies, etc. and their Carkases will I give to be
meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and I will
make this City desolate and an hissing: every one that passes thereby shall be
astonished and hiss, because of all the Plagues thereof. So Ezekiel. 33.25, 26,
27. Wherefore (thus says the Lord) ye eat with the blood and lift up your eyes
toward your Idols, and shed blood, and shall ye possess the land? etc. Thus
says the Lord God. As I live, surely, they that are in the wastes shall fall
by the Sword, etc. and they that be in the Forts, and in the Caves shall dye of
the Pestilence. For I will lay the Land most desolate, and the pomp of her
strength shall cease. Hence it is said, that in Horeh they provoked the Lord to
wrath, so that the Lord was angry with them to have destroyed them, Deuteronomy. 9.8.
And Deuteronomy. 32.16, to 21. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger. They sacrificed to Devils, not to God;
to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers
feared not. Of the Rock that begat them they were unmindful, and had forgotten
God that formed them. What then? And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them,
because of the provoking of his Sons, and of his Daughters. And he said, I will
hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be.

For this sin of Idolatry it was that the Lord brought evil upon the house of
Jeroboam, smiting all his house, in so much that he left not to him any that
breathed, but took them away, as a man takes away dung, till it be all gone;
for says the Text, He made him other gods, and molten Images, to provoke the
Lord to anger, and did cast the Lord behind his back. See 1 King. 14.9. comp.
with Chap. 15.29. and 30. etc. Add to this, that in the 44. of Jeremiah the 7.
and 8. Verse. Thus says the Lord, the God of Hosts, the God of Israel,
Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man
and woman, child and suckling out of Judah, to leave you none to remain; In
that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense
unto other gods, etc. that ye might cut your selves off, and that ye might be a
curse and reproach among all the Nations of the earth. So highly provoking is
this sin of Idolatry unto God, as you many see further Exodus 20.4, 5. Deuteronomy.
6.14, 15. and 32.21. which I say (that we may not be mistaken concerning it)
does consist, not only in the worshipping of Idols and false gods, but of the
true God in a false manner.

It may be, thou will not be so gross, to fall down and give divine Adoration
to an Image, yet if thou do worship God before and by an Image, thou art an
Idolater. The Image which the Jews made of the true God, is condemned of God
himself Exodus 32.8. and they that made it were punished as Idolaters 1 Cor.
10.5, 7. It (...) a dotage in Popery, to distinguish between Idol and Image,
and to make the Picture of a false god only to be an Idol; not considering,
that the making of an Image, or the likeness of God, or of any Creature in
Heaven or Earth for a religions end, to give it divine adoration and worship,
or to worship God by it, is Idolatry, forbidden by the Scriptures, even by the
Lord himself, Deuteronomy. 5.8, 9. Thou shall not make thee any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing, etc. Thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, nor
serve them.

2ly. Idolatry may be said to be all humane inventions and traditions of men,
thrust into the divine worship and service of God, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I
command you, says the Lord, that observe and do, thou shall not add thereto,
etc. So said our blessed Savior, In vain they do worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men. And you transgress (or reject; frustrate and
make void) the commandments of God by your traditions, Matthew. 15.3, 9. Mark.
7.9. Therefore all traditions and superstitions contrary to the Word of God,
are to be avoided and abhorred by all who will be found worshipping of God in
spirit and in truth, according to his own institution and prescription.

3ly. The setting the heart inordinately upon any creature, by fearing, loving,
and trusting in it more then in God, and above God, is Idolatry in Gods
account. Phil. 3.19. The Apostle complains of some, whose God was there belly;
and the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of setting up of Idols in the heart. Ezekiel. 14.2,
4.

4ly. The Immoderate love unto, and the distrustful care for the things of this
life, falls under this denomination of Idolatry. Hence it is that the Apostle
says, That no unclean person, or covetous man who is an Idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. the one makes his
lust, the other his money his God. And the Apostle in Col. 3.5. among other the
sins and lusts of the flesh, calls Covetousness Idolatry; For which things sake
(says he) the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. All these
kinds of Idolatries by the Apostle Peter are expressed I conceive, under the name
and title of abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4.3. Hence it is, I suppose, that
John in the conclusion of his Epistle has this exhortation to the beleivers of
his time, Little children keep your selves from Idols. Now all Idols being
vanities, and the work of errors, which in the time of their visitation shall
perish, Jer 10.15. Then it must needs follow, That they that observe lying
vanities, forsake their own mercy, Jon. 2.8. And this is the fourth
Pestilential sin, so highly provoking the Lord:

5. The fifth pestilential destroying sin, is the sin of Covetousness,
consisting in a greedy inordinate desire after gain, unto which evil whosoever
is subject is the servant and slave of all other sins. So insatiable and
unsatisfied he is, that like the man that has the Dropsy, the more he
drinks, the more he thirsts. This sin of Covetousness is called Idolatry,
Col. 3.5. and Ephesians. 5.5. Because the covetous person not only prefers his
treasure, before God, but does place the happiness and felicity of his life in
his substance; like the fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.15, 16. And what sin is
there that is more provoking unto the Lord, or that pulls down more the wrath
of God upon a Nation or Kingdom, as I instanced before, then the sin of
Idolatry? For which things sake the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience, Col. 3.6. So abhorring a sin it is unto the Lord, Psalm. 10.3. The
wicked blesses the Covetous, whom the Lord abhors. And therefore I find it
rankt with those other aforementioned so highly provoking sins of Bloodshed,
Oppression and Persecution, Jer. 22.17. But thine eyes and thine heart are not
but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression,
and for violence to do it. And what before? Woe unto him, that builds his
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong: Shall thou reign because
thou closest thy self in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do
judgment and justice, and then it was well with him? etc. Jer. 22.13, 15. The
like woe or denunciation of judgment against this vile provoking sin, you have
in Isa. 5.8, 9. Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to
field, till there be no place; that is, for the poor to dwell, that they may be
placed alone in the midst of the earth. And mark what follows, In mine ears
said the Lord of Hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great
and fair without inhabitants. O that our great Builders and Inclosers of our
times, would seriously lay this Scripture to heart. How many houses now has
God made desolate in City and Suburbs? how many great and fair dwellings now
stand empty without an inhabitant? You have the like woe denounced in Micha.
2.1, 2, 3. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds, etc.
and they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses and take them
away, so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage; And
what follows hereupon? Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold against this
Family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither
shall ye go haughtily, for this time is evil. Mark, I pray you, its said they
covet fields, and houses, and take them by violence; If they do but fancy or
get a mind to such and such a piece of Land, to such a House, or such like
possessions, they will have it, and force it away from the owners thereof; As
Ahab in the case of Naboths Vineyard, 1 King. 21. And thus they oppress, or
practice violence upon a man and his house, even a man and his heritage, or his
inheritance, that is, they make him poor and sad, dispossessing and bereaving
the Proprietor thereof, which God would in no wise allow to be taken away, or
alienated from the heir. Therefore, says the Lord, Behold I devise an evil
against this Family, or against this generation: Even as they wickedly devise,
contrive and practice the evil of sin, so do I now devise the evil of
punishment, that shall be executed upon them; from which ye shall not remove
your necks; the yoke of bondage which ye shall be made to undergo, shall be so
close and strong upon you. And from whence proceeds all these evil
encroachments, these violent oppressions and practices, but from this evil and
bitter root of covetousness? Against which the Prophet Habakkuk comes forth
with the like woe, and denunciation of judgment; Woe to him that coveteth an
evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may
be delivered from the power of evil. And mark what follows? Thou have consulted
shame to thy house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy
soul; For the stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the beam out of the Timber
shall answer it. Woe to him that builds a Town with blood, and establishes a
City by iniquity. Behold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the people shall
labor in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves for very vanity,
Hab. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness, that
he may set his nest on high, that is, that seeks and practices by all manner of
base, unworthy, and unwarrantable ways, to enrich himself, his wife, children,
and posterity, that he and his family may rise and become great and famous in
the world, and live secure and safe. A similitude taken from the Eagle and such
Birds, as love to build their Nests in high places. Obad. 4. Well, but consider
a little what thou art doing all this while in contriving to be so great; Thou
have but consulted shame to thy house, says the Lord, as if he had said, Thou
have (setting all honor and honesty aside) raked much riches together, and
raised great and stately Palaces and Places, and filled and adorned the same
with all manner of rich and sumptuous furniture, yet all this speaks but thy
own shame and infamy, because thou have accumulated, and heaped all this
together, by thy covetous and unworthy practices. And thou have sinned against
thy own soul in all that thou have done. And therefore the stone out of the
Wall shall cry; The very Stones wherewith thy Palaces are built, shall testify
against thee, namely, that thou have built them unrighteously, by wronging, and
injuring of others, which call aloud to God for vengeance against thee. And
therefore woe to him that builds a City with blood, or bloods, as it is in
the Original; that is, with murder, or with the goods of him or them that are
slain or murdered, or with the sweat and blood of the people. Ezekiel calls it
the bloody City; Woe to the bloody City, I will even make the pile for fire
great, Ezekiel. 24.9. So the Prophet Nahum; Woe to the bloody City, or City of
bloods, it is full of lies and robberies, the prey departs not. And
therefore, Behold, it is not of the Lord, that the people shall labor in the
very fire, and weary themselves for vanity? It is of the Lord surely, it comes
to pass by the secret counsel of God, that these Houses and Cities which they
build, shall either come to be consumed by fire; And what dreadful fires has
happened amongst us of late days? or else the people shall weary themselves in
vain, for vanity and to no purpose; seeing it comes so soon to be destroyed and
ruinated, what they build.

Therefore says the Lord, Behold I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain
which thou have made, and at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee,
Ezekiel. 22.13. intimating an abhorring of their wickedness, and a purpose to
proceed against them in fury, as is expounded in Ezekiel. 21.17. I will smite my
hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest; I the Lord have said it. All
holding forth the Lords great displeasure against this sore evil, which is more
evidently manifested, by consulting some few Verses more in that 22. of
Ezekiel, beginning at the 24th. Verse. Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the
land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation. As if the
Lord had said, Thou art the Land that is not amended or reformed by my
Judgments, and punishments, that has not had her showers of rain to cleanse
thee; my judgments will not cleanse thee. As a great shower of rain (you know)
is wont to cleanse and wash away the filth and dirt of the streets; Thy
filthiness remains still unwashed away: But how comes this to pass? There is a
conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring Lion ravening
the prey: they have devoured souls: And what else? They have taken the Treasure
and precious things: they have made her many Widows in the midst thereof. They
did devour the godly men's estates, and bereaved the Women of their Husbands, by
their false accusations, and evil practices, causing them to be put to death.

This was that devouring of Widows houses, which our blessed Savior so sharply
reproved, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Hypocrites of those days, and all
under a pretense of making long Prayers. Therefore, said he, ye shall receive
the greater damnation, Mat. 23.14. Much like to what the Prophet Micha spoke of
in his day, Micha 3.10, 11, 12. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem
with iniquity. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof
teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money; Observe that, Yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? none evil can
come upon us. The Priests taught for hire, that is, out of a covetous
disposition, they suffered themselves to be drawn for money to Teach and Preach
according to men's Pallates, like to those which Paul spoke to Titus of, who
subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucres
sake, Tit. 1.11. Whereas they should have been content with Gods allowance, and
held forth the pure Word of God without regard to men. In whose mouths the Law
of truth should be, and in whose lips iniquity should not be found, Mal. 2.6.
Thus for the Priests; Then for the Prophets, they did divine for money, meaning
the false Prophets. The Lord implying here, that both in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical State among his people all was corrupted, and to be bought and
sold for money; According to what the Prophet Isaiah complained in his time,
Isa. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of Thieves; every one
loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they Judge not the Fatherless,
neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them.

Or as he proceeds further in Ezekiel. 22.26, 27. Her Priests have violated my
law, and have profaned my holy things; they have put no difference between the
holy and profane, nor between the unclean and the clean. Her Princes in the
midst thereof are like roaring wolves, ravening the prey, to shed blood and to
destroy souls, and to get dishonest gain. And yet says the Prophet Micah, They
did lean upon the Lord. How lean upon the Lord? not with a holy trust and
confidence (which is ever accompanied with godliness) but in hypocrisy, out of
an impudent arrogance, and a vain, bold and carnal presumption; as if God was
engaged to protect them, let them live and do what they pleased; Like those
that the Prophet Isay speaks of, That swore by the name of the Lord, and made
mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness; And yet
they called themselves of the holy City, and stayed themselves upon the God of
Israel, Isa. 48.1, 2. Or like unto them in the Prophet Jeremies time, that
cried The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet in the mean time
they oppressed the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed innocent
blood, and did steal, and murder and commit adultery, and swore falsely, Jer.
7.4, 6, 9. But how intolerable this was with God, the sequel makes it evident;
Therefore shall Sion for your sakes be ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall
become heaps, that is, shall be utterly destroyed and laid waste; So little
care and regard had God of Sion and Jerusalem, and of his holy Temple it self,
being thus polluted and defiled. And therefore says the Lord (in Ezekiel 3, 2.
ult.) have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them with
the fire of my wrath: Their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, says
the Lord. So again, for this does the Lord threaten, That their houses shall be
turned unto others, with their fields and wives together. And he will stretch
out his hand upon the inhabitants of the land. For (says he) from the least of
them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to Covetousness, and
from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one deals falsely, Jer. 6.12, 13.
Which avaricious or covetous disposition was so predominant in them in the
Prophet Isaiah's time, Isa. 56.10, 11. That he termed the Watchmen then (which
were the Priest and Rulers of the people, as Jer. 8.10. and Eze^. (...) not
only blind, and ignorant, and dumb do^^ that could not bark, etc. but greedy
dogs also, th t could never have enough. Like dogs strong in desire, in lust,
in appetite, greedy and unsatiable, that could not be satisfied with money or
large revenues. And what follows in the next chapter v. 17. For the iniquity of
his covetousness was I wroth, said the Lord, and smote him; and whether this
might not be a smiting with the pestilence, Deuteronomy. 28.22, 27. comp. with Ezekiel.
33.27. and 31. verses; I shall leave it to the wise to judge. How did he smite
Gehazi with the Plague of Leprosy for this thing? 2 King. 5.27. so highly
provoking a sin, is this sin of Covetousness unto the Lord. And oh, that this
were wisely considered and applied by the men of this Generation, yea by the
carnal and earthly minded Professions of our times. For sure it is, That the
love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10.

6. The sixth Pestilential destroying sin, is the sin of Cursing, and Swearing,
and False-swearing. This was the sin of Shemei that cursed David, mentioned in
the 2 Samuel 16.5. And see how the Lord did return his wickedness upon his own
head, being slain by the Command of King Solomon, 1 King. 2.44, 46. This the
Psalmist lays down as the certain Character of a wicked man, that his mouth is
full of Cursing and deceit: And what imprecations does he use in his Prayer
against him? Break thou the Arms of the wicked, and the evil man: Seek out his
wickedness till thou find none, Psalm. 10.7, 15. Romans 3^ 14. So in the 109.
Psalm. Let Satan stand at his righthand, and when he shall be judged, let him be
condemned, and let his prayer become sin, let his days be few, his Children
Fatherless, his Wife a Widow, his Children Vagabonds, and beg their bread: Let
their be none to extend mercy unto him, let his Posterity be cut off, and in
the generation following, let their name be blotted out, let the iniquity of
his Fathers be remembered with the Lord, and let not the sin of his Mother be
blotted out, and let the Lord cut off the memory of them from the earth. And
mark what follows. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him; as he
delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. As he clothed himself
with cursing like as with a Garment, so let it come into his bowels like water,
and like oil into his bones. Let it be unto him as the garment which covers
him, and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continually. It is true the
Apostle Peter does apply something of this to Judas, who betrayed our Lord
Christ, Act. 1.20. But it cannot exclude all other the cursed enemies of
Christ, who love cursing, and cloth themselves with it as with a garment. So
Jer. 23.9, 10. Mine heart within me (says he) is broken, because of the
Prophet, all my bones shake, etc. because of the Lord, and because of the
words of his holiness. For the Land is full of Adulterers, for because of
Swearing the Land mourns. To this agrees that of the Prophet Hosea Chapter
4.1, 2, 3. verses. Where it is said, That the Lord has a Controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of
God in the Land. By swearing and lying, etc. they break out and blood touches
blood: Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall languish. The dreadfulness of this sin is further set forth by Zacharies
flying roll, Zach. 5.3, 4. This is the Curse that goes forth, over the face of
the whole earth, for every one that steals shall be cut off, and every one
that swears shall be cut off, etc. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of
Hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the Theif, and into the house of
him that swears falsely by my name; and it shall remain in the midst of his
house, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof.
And in the 3. of Malachy and the 5. I will come near to you to Judgment, and I
will be a swift witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and
against False-swearers.

O that these things were seriously laid to heart by the profane Cursers, and
Swearers, and Falseswearers, and the Damme-creatures of our times. O that they
would consider, how their cursed hellish hideous, new-invented, unheard of,
Diabolical oaths, do now make the Land mourn, and those that dwell therein to
languish! and how near the Lord is come unto them in the terribleness of his
judgment! Is it not very evident that the Lord for these things has a
controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land?

7. The seventh Pestilential destroying sin, is the sin of Adultery,
Fornication, and such like corporal uncleanness. See this in that 25. of Number.
1, 6, 7, 8. verses. When Israel abode in Shittim, it is said the people began
to commit Whoredom with the daughters of Moab. And Zimri and Cosbi being taken
in the very act of uncleanness, Phinehas the Son of Eleazar, the Son of Aaron
the Priest, when he saw it, he rose up from amongst the Congregation, and took
a Javelin in his hand, and he went after the man of Israel into the Tent, and
thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her
belly: So the Plague was stayed thereupon from the Children of Israel, yet
those that died in the Plague, as was mentioned before, was no less then Twenty
and four Thousand. So in the 12. of Genesis 14, 15, 17. When Abraham came into
Egypt with Sarai his wife, a fair woman to look upon, and she was no sooner
beheld by the Egyptians, and the Princes of Pharaoh, but they commended her
before Pharaoh; and says the Text, the woman was taken into Pharaohs house,
that is, she was taken away from Abraham, into the Royal Seraglio or Palace, to
be fitted and prepared there, according to the Custom of those Countries, that
the King might take her to Wife, as Hest. 2.9. In the mean time God provided
for Abraham's entertainment, and his Wives chastity together; for Pharaoh
entreated Abram well for her sake. And in the 17. verse is is said, The Lord
plagued Pharaoh and his House with great Plagues, because of Sarai, Abrams
wife. What kind of plagues those were is uncertain, but doubtless they served
as well to hinder and obstruct the abusing of Sarai's body, as to punish the
King, and his Domestics, and Courtiers trespass. This great deliverance David
celebrateth in Psalm. 105.14. When they went from one Nation to another, from
one Kingdom to another People. He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he
reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm.

But this is observable, that if the Lord was so severe to punish this filthy
sin of Adultery, or Uncleanness, when it was but designedly or intentionally
committed (and Pharaoh knew not that Sarai was Abrams wife) with what severity
may we think will he proceed against such, who deliberately, knowingly,
delightfully and impudently live in the perpetration and commission of it? and
when did this sin of Whoredom, Adultery and Fornication ever walk upon down so
brazen-faced, with such an imperious worish forehead, as in the men and women
of our generation? so unsatiable they are in their filthiness and uncleanness.
Upon which account may not the Lord say to this City of London, yea to the Land
and Nation in general, as he did to Jerusalem in the Prophet Jeremy's time? How
shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them
that are no gods: When I had fed them to the full, they then committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses. They were
as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after his neighbors wife;
Through lustfulness, like wanton horses: And mark what follows? Shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? Go ye up upon her walls and destroy, but make not a full
end; take away her battlements, for they are not the Lords, etc. Jer. 5.7, 8,
9, 10. And may we not think the Lord may justly have a controversy with the
inhabitants of this Land, as he had with the children of Israel in the Prophet
Hosea's time; And wherefore? Because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the land; But by swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing Adultery they break out, and blood touches blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
languish, etc. Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. So that good Prophet Jeremy, Mine heart (says
he) within me is broken, because of the Prophets, all my bones shake, I am like
a drunken man, and like a man whom wine has overcome, because of the Lord, and
because of the words of his holiness. For the Land is full of Adulteries, Jer.
23.9, 10. And in Jer. 13.27. I have seen thine Adulteries, and thy neighings,
the lewdness of thy Whoredoms, etc. What then? Woe unto thee O Jerusalem. This,
though it may have reference to their sin of Idolatry, as before, which may be
called spiritual Adultery, yet it cannot exclude that which is corporeal, which
God will severely punish; For Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, as
such, who shall have no inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God, Heb.
13.4. and Ephesians. 5.5. Thus we see how highly provoking this sin of uncleaness is
for the bringing down of National judgments, even this of the Pestilence among
a people.

8. The Eighth Sin that provokes the Lord to send the Pestilence among a
people, is the sin of Infidelity, distrust and murmuring against God,
notwithstanding the great and mavelous works which the Lord has wrought for
the salvation and deliverance of his people. See to this purpose the 13, and
14. chapters of Numbers; There were certain men, the heads of the children of
Israel, who by the commandment of the Lord was sent to search and spy out the
land of Canaan, and being returned they made a rehearsal thereof to Moses and
Aaron, and to all the congregation, and brought an evil report upon the land
which they had searched, saying, The land through which we have gone to search
it, is a land that eats up the inhabitants thereof, and all the people that
we saw in it are men of a great stature: And there we saw the giants, the sons
of Anak, which come of the giants, and we were in our own sight as Grasshoppers,
and so were we in their sight. This evil report caused all the congregation to
lift up their voice and cry, and to murmr against Moses and Aaron, saying,
Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt, or would God we had died in
this wilderness. And wherefore has the Lord brought us into this land to fall
by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not
better for us to return into Egypt? and they said one to another, Let us make a
Captain, and let us return into Egypt. But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the
son of Jephunneth, which were of them that searched the land, rent their
clothes, and they spoke unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying,
The land which we passed through to search, it is an exceeding good land, if
the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us, a
land which flows with milk and honey, Only rebel not ye against the Lord,
neither fear ye the people of the land: for they are bread for us: Their
defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us; fear them not: this so
greatly incensed the congregation, that they badestone them with stones. But
see how highly provoking was this unto the Lord: And the Lord said unto Moses,
How long will this people provoke me, and how long will it be ere they believe
me, for all the signs that I have showed among them? And mark what follows; I
will smite them with the Pestilence and dis-inherit them, verse 12. I the Lord
have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are
gathered together against me; in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and
there they shall die. And further it is said, That the men which Moses sent to
search the land, who returned and made all the congregation to murmr against
him, by bringing up a slander upon the land, even those men that did bring up
the evil report upon the land, died of the Plague before the Lord, verse. 35,
36, 37, of the 14. of Numb. And the Lord renders the reason why their carcasses
should fall in the Wilderness, v. 22. Because all those men which have seen my
glory (says he) and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the wilderness,
and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice,
surely, they shall not see the land, which I swear unto their fathers, neither
shall any of them that provoked me see it. So greatly displeasing it is unto
the Lord, for a people who have seen the wonderful works of the Lord, and his
miraculous preservations, to cherish a murmuring, distrusting and unbeleiving
spirit against the Lord; not beleiving his promises, nor relying on his mighty
power, and outstretched arm to defend them. And therefore says the Psalmist,
was the Lord wroth, and a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came
up against Israel, Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his
salvation, Ps. 78.21, 22. So in Heb. 3.17, 18, 19. With whom was he grieved
forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the
wilderness? And to whom swore he that they should not enter into his rest, but
to them that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of
unbeleif. For this cause it was that the Lords wrath was kindled against them,
so that he excluded them out of the good land, Because they believed not in
God, nor hearkened unto his voice, but murmured against him, after they had seen
his glory, to wit his glorious works, and the miracles that he did in Egypt and
in the wilderness. See Exodus 16.2, 3. comp. with Nehem. 9. from the 10th. to
the 18th. verse. O then that this might be seriously laid to heart, by all
such, who having seen the wonderful outgoings, and appearances of God in this
latter age of the world, and had a deep share in the glorious deliverances
which God had wrought have yet through a heart of infidelity and distrust
departed from God, and thereby brought up an evil report upon the good land,
even the good and honorable ways of the Lord, shaking hands again with a
carnal, corrupt interest, and longing after the fleshpots, the Onyons and
Garlic of Egypt, have turned again to the weak and beggarly elements or
rudiments of the world, whereunto they are, as in Egyptian bandage, again
captivated and enslaved.

For I intend not here by this spirit of Infidelity and Unbeleif, such carnal,
unbeleiving and regenerate persons, to whom, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4.3,
4. the Gospel is hid, and are lost, and whose minds the God of this world has
blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ cannot shine into
them; but such rather, who with open face, having beheld as in a glass the
glory of the Lord; even the glory of his grace in the Gospel, and the glory of
his great and wonderful works in the world, do yet through base fear, and
distrust of his power and promises, suffer their hearts to depart and turn
aside from the Lord. And this was the sin of Asa, who when the Lord had
delivered into his hand a huge host of the Ethiopians and Lubims, because they
relied on him, did afterward rely on the Kings of Syria, and not on the Lord
his God; For which he received so sharp a rebuke from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16.7,
8, 9.

9. The ninth Pestilential sin, is the sin of Discontent, accompanied also with
a spirit of distrustfulness and unbeleif; When a people will not be content
with Gods allowance, but will loath his blessings and his provisions, and fall
a lusting after evil things to satisfy their inordinate desires. This was
Isreal's provoking sin, Numb. 11.4. The multitude that was among them fell a
lusting, and they wept and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember
the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely, the Cucumbers, and the Melons, and
the Leeks, and the Onyons, and the Garlic; but now our souls is dried away,
there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes: Though it was the
corn of heaven, and Angels food that they eat, and such as did prefigure Christ
himself, his word and grace, Joh. 6.31, 32, 33. and 1 Cor. 10.3. yet now they
look upon it, and count it but as a despicable thing; and nothing no^ would
satisfy them but flesh, and this to satisfy their lust. And therefore it is
said in the 78 Psalm and the 18th. verse. They tempted God in their heart by
asking meat for their lust; yea they spoke against God and said, Can God
furnish a table in the Wilderness? Behold, he smote the rock that the waters
gushed out, and the streams overflowed; Can be give bread also? Can be provide
flesh for his people? Therefore the Lord heard this and was wroth: So a fire
was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel, etc. Well,
nothing would satisfy their lusts but flesh, and flesh they shall have with a
witness, till it come out at their very nostrils, and was loathsome unto them,
so they did eat and were filled; for he gave them their own desire: they were
not estranged from their lust; but while the flesh was yet between their teeth,
ere it was chewed, The wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and
the Lord smote the people with a very great plague: And the name of that place
was called Kibroch-hattanah (that is, the graves of lust) because, there they
buried the people that lusted.

Hence it was that the Apostle treating of the bountiful dealings of God with
the children of Israel, said, That with many of them God was not well pleased;
for they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things (says he) were
our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also
lusted, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6. This is a sore evil, an intestine evil, a sickness
indeed, that gnaws and torments the very heart, called therefore the Plague of
Discontent, which many of the people of God themselves, as well as the men of
the world are too too often infected with, when not contenting our selves, I
say, with the mercies and blessings which God affords us, we fall a lusting
after evil things, as the Israelites hereafter flesh, to satisfy their lusts,
loathing the heavenly Manna which God gave them: And our desires oftentimes are
so inordinate after them, that like unto Rachel in the case of her barrenness
(though otherwise blessed with many comfortable enjoyments) we are crying out,
Give me children or else I die, Genesis 30.1. I cannot live, my life will be a
burden unto me if I have not this or that; I must have it whatever it cost me,
though I part with half of my estate; nay, with Herod, it may be to the half of
the Kingdom, for his Herodias sake, because she pleased him; and to satisfy
this lust, Off must go John Baptists head, Mark 6.22, 23, 24. Or like unto
Haman, who though he was so highly promoted in King Ahasuerus Court, Yet (says
he) all this avails me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at
the Kings gate, Hest. 5.13. Mordecai could not bow the knee, nor do him that
reverence, as his proud ambitious heart panted after, and this sowres all other
his great advancements and enjoyments, and now nothing will satisfy him less
then his destruction, and the total destruction of all the Jews, Hest. 3.9.

So violent are persons set upon the satisfying of their lusts oftentimes,
though it be to their own hurt: This was the sin of the Israelites, they could
not content themselves that God was their King, and that he should reign over
them, but they must have a King to reign over them, like unto other Nations;
rejecting the Lord and his Government, who himself had saved them out of all
their adversities and tribulations, 1 Samuel 8.5, 6, 7. and chap. 10.19. And how
great this wickedness of theirs was in the fight of the Lord, the signal
testimonies of his displeasure did evidently declare it, 1 Samuel 12.17. So is it
not just with God when a people falls a loathing of the heavenly Manna of Gods
Word (and where has the Gospel been more powerfully preached, and more
obstinately contemned then in England?) that the Lord should send a famine in
the Land, if not a famine of bread and a thirst for water, yet a famine of
hearing the Words of the Lord, Amos 8.11. O that this was seriously laid to
heart, and fruitfully applied both by Professors, as by the propbane persons of
this Nation. So dangerous and destructive a thing it is to cherish a carnal
dissatisfied and discontented spirit against the Lord.

10. A tenth Pestilential and God-provoking Sin, is the sin of Pride and
Ambition, and a trusting in an Arm of flesh, not relying on the mighty power
and faithfulness of God. This was David's sin in of numbering the people, which
was followed with a sore Prstilence among them. See the second of Samuel 24.
Chap. comp. with 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan he provoked David to number the people,
that he might know how many valiant men there were in Israel, that could draw
the sword. And questionless David's heart was lifted up hereby, when Joab gave
up the sum of the number of the people unto him, there being in Israel eight
hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword, and the men of Judah were
five hundred thousand. And what should move David to such a thing but a proud
ambitious desire to know the strength and number of his men of war, accompanied
with a distrustfulness of the mighty power of God, and his All-sufficient arm,
which had so often saved and delivered him out of the hands of Saul, and from
the hand of all his enemies. As in the 18th. Psalm. wherein he praises God for
his manifold and mavelous deliverances. For this David's heart smote him,
acknowledging that he had sinned greatly in what he had done, and prays that
the Lord would take away his iniquity, for he had done very foolishly. Yet the
Lord would show his justice, and make all the world to see and know, that he
will not indulge sin, no not in his dearest Servants, and most beloved Saints;
but if they sin they must expect to suffer and smart for it. As Amos 3.2. You
only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities. And therefore he puts David upon his choice of three
things, whether the Famine, the Sword, or Pestilence he would make choice of,
and this did put him into a great straight, but he chose rather to fall into
the hands of God, then into the hands of men, for that the mercies of the Lord
are great. So the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel, from the morning even to
the time appointed, and there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba,
Seventy thousand men. And when the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem
ready to destroy it, it is said, the Lord repented him of the evil, and said to
the Angel that destroyed the people, It is enough, stay now thy hand. This also
was Edoms sin, Jer. 49.16, 17, 18. Thy terribleness has deceived thee, and the
pride of thine heart, O thou that dwell in the clefts of the rock: That
hold the height of the hill: though thou should make thy nest as high as
the Eagle, I will bring thee down from thence says the Lord. Also Edom shall
be a desolation, every one that goes by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss
all at the plagues thereof. As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
neighbor Cities thereof, says the Lord, No man shall abide there, neither
shall a Son of Man dwell in it. This was King Asa's sin before mentioned, in
the 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 8, and 9. verse. so sharply reproved and punished by the
Lord. For this was a dreadful woe denouned against the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Isa. 30.1, 2, 3. Woe to the rebellious children (says the Lord) that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit,
that they may add sin to sin. That walk to go down into Egypt (and have not
asked at my mouth) to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to
trust in the shadow of Egypt. And mark what follows. Therefore shall the
strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your
confusion. Which caused the Lord to take up that bitter complaint, Jer. 2.12,
13. Be astonished, O ye heavens at this, and be horribly afraid: Why? what is the
matter? My peo- have committed two evils: They have forsaken me the Fountain of
Living Water, and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no
water. All other things to rely upon besides God, will prove but as broken
Cisterns. Therefore said David at another time, when his faith and confidence
was strong in God. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.
Through thee will we push down our enemies, through thy name will we tread them
under that rise up against us, Psalm. 44.5, 6. Yea, we have the Lord himself
declaring, that the salvation of his people must proceed from himself, and not
from any secondary causes, Hos. 1.7. But I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow,
nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

Take we heed then of any presumptuous relying on our own strength, or of
strengthening our selves in the strength of any creatures, whether Armies, or
Parliaments, or Navies, or any sinful confederacies or Associations of men
whatsoever, Isa. 8.9. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm; and whose heart departs from the Lord, Jer. 17.5. But let us say
with the Church, Hos. 12.3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon
horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods.
As if they had said, We will not put our trust any more in men, we will confide
no more in any humane means, nor send abroad for help and confederacies, all
besides thee being vanity, and the relying on it apparent ruin. Therefore we
will trust in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. For he brings down them that dwell on high, the lofty City he
lays it low, he lays it low even to the ground, he brings it even to the
dust. The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of
the needy, Isa. 26.4, 5, 6. So dangerous and destructive a thing it is to have
a heart lifted up, putting confidence in an arm of flesh, and not relying on
the Lord our God. For it is he that shows strength with his arm, and that
scatters the proud in the imagination of their hearts, Luke 1.51.

11. The eleventh provoking Pestilential destroying Sin, is the sin of
Apostasy, Backsliding, and Revolting from God, Jer, 2.18, 19. And now what
have thou to do (says the Lord) in the way of Egypt to drink the waters of
Sihor? or what have thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of
the river? Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backsliding shall
reprove thee: Know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the
Lord of Hosts. So in the 36. verse. Why gaddest thou about so much to change
thy way? thou also shall be ashamed of Egypt. And now behold, how the Lord for
this did threaten, that his judgment, even this of the Pestilence should
overtake them, Jer. 42.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. We will not dwell in this land (say
they) nor obey the voice of the Lord your God; No, but we will go into the land
of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor
have hunger of bread, and there will we dwell. And now therefore hear the Word
of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah, thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn
there. What then? Then it shall come to pass, that the Sword which ye feared
shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the Famine whereof you were
afraid shall follow close after you there in Egypt, and there ye shall dye; so
shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn
there, they shall dye by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence, and
none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.

And says further, that as his anger and fury had been poured forth upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, so should his fury be poured forth upon them, when
they should enter into Egypt, and they shall be an execration, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach, and should see the place (meaning
the land of Judea) no more. So in the 19. verse, O ye remnant of Judah, go ye
not into Egypt; and now I have this day declared it unto you, but ye have not
obeyed the voice of the Lord your God, etc. Now therefore know certainly that
ye shall dye by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence, in the place
whither ye desire to go and to sojourn. So in the 44. Chap. of Jer. 13. ver.
For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished
Jerusalem, by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. To which I shall
add that in the 14. of Jer. 10. and 12. verse. Thus says the Lord unto the
people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet:
therefore the Lord does not accept them, he will now remember their iniquity,
and visit their sins. Then said the Lord unto me; Pray not for this people for
their good. When they fast, I will not hear their cry, and when they offer
burnt-offering, and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume
them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. So dreadful and
dangerous a thing it is, for a people brought out of Egyptian bondage and
darkness, to long after the Fleshpots, the Leeks, and the Onions, and the
Garlic of Egypt again. For if any man draw back (says the Lord) my soul shall
have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. And as for such as turn aside unto their
crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, but
peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm. 125.5.

O that this were well considered by all such who have Apostatized and Revolted
from the Lord and his ways, in this sinful and backsliding generation. Who as
the Prophet Hosea says, Are profound to make slaughter, though the Lord is a
Rebuker of them all, Hos. 5.2. Who once did appear to be forward Assertors of
the Cause of righteousness and truth; but now say a Confederacy, with all such
as say a Confederacy, Isa 8.12. Who once did seem to escape the pollutions of
the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; but are
now again entangled therein and overcome, turning with the Dog to his own vomit
again, and with the Sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire. Let such
know, That their latter end will be worse with them then the beginning, 2 Pet.
2.20, 21, 22.

12. The twelfth Pestilential and highly provoking Sin, is the sin of
Rebellion, and Obstinate Disobedience against God and his Commandments, Levit.
26.23, 24, 25. And if ye will not be reformed by these things (says the Lord)
but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and
will punish you yet seven times for your sins. And I will bring a sword upon
you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant; and when ye are gathered
together within your Cities, I will send the Pestilence among you, and ye shall
be delivered into the hand of the enemy. So Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 20, 21. If thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
Commandments, and his Statutes, etc. These curses shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee; Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed shall thou be in
the field, etc. The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke in
all that thou set thy hand for to do until thou be destroyed, and until
thou perish quickly. And wherefore? Because of the wickedness of thy doings
whereby thou have forsaken me. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto
thee until he has consumed thee, and the Lord shall smite thee with a
Consumption, and with a Fever, and with an Inflammation, and with an extreme
Burning, and with the Sword, and with Blasting, and with Mildew, and they shall
pursue thee until thou perish. So in the 58, and 59. verse. If thou will not
observe to do all the words of this Law, that are written in this Book, that
thou may fear this glorious and fearful name; The Lord thy God. Then the Lord
will make thy Plagues wonderful, and the Plagues of thy seed, even great
plagues, and of long continuance; and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.
So Deuteronomy. 29.22, 23, 24, 25. The Generations to come when they shall see the
Plagues of the Land, and the sicknesses which the Lord has laid upon it; and
that the whole Land is Brimstone, and Salt, and Burning, etc. like the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, etc. with the Lord overthrew in his anger, and
in his wrath.

Even all Nations shall say, Wherefore has the Lord done this? What means
the heat of this great anger? Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken
the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, etc. To this agrees that of the
Prophet Jerome. 29.17, 18, 19. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will send
upon them the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence, and will make them like
vile figgs, that cannot be eaten they are so vile. And I will persecute them
with the Sword, with the Famine, and with the Pestilence, and will deliver them
to be removed to all the Kingdoms of the Earth, to be a Curse, and an
Astonishment, and a Hissing, and a Reproach among all the Nations, whither I
have driven them. And wherefore will the Lord be so severe against them?
Because they have not hearkened to my words, says the Lord, which I sent unto
them by my servants the Prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye
would not hear, says the Lord. So Ezekiel. 6.11. Alas for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel: for they shall fall by the Sword, by the
Famine, and by the Pestilence; He that is far off shall die of the Pestilence,
and he that is near shall fall by the Sword, and he that remains, and is
besieged, shall dye by the Famine. Thus will I accomplish, says the Lord, my
fury upon them, Ezekiel. 7, 11. The Sword is without, and the Pestilence and the
Famine within, he that is in the Field shall dye with the Sword, and he that is
in the City, Famine and Pestilence shall devour him. And why? Violence is risen
up into a rod of wickedness, v. 11. The rod has blossomed, pride has budded.
So Ezekiel. 14.19, 21. If I send a Pestilence into that Land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut from it Man and Beast, though Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in it; As I live, says the Lord, they shall deliver neither Son nor
Daughter, they shall but deliver their own souls, by their righteousness. For
thus says the Lord God, How much more when I sent my four sore Judgments upon
Jerusalem, the Sword, and the Famine, and the noisome Beast, and the
Pestilence, to cut off from it Man and Beast? And when will the Lord execute
this great severity, and be so inexorable the 13. verse. declares it, When the
land sins against me, says the Lord, by trespassing grievously.

I shall conclude with that in the Prophet Amos Chap. 2. ver. 4, 5. Thus says
the Lord, For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away
the punishment thereof: Because they have despised the law of the Lord, and
have not kept his Commandments, etc. And what follows? I will send a fire upon
Judah, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem. So Amos 4.10. etc. I have
sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, your young men have I
slain with the Sword, and have taken away your horses, and I have made the
stinck of your Camps to come up into your Nostrils; yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord. So incorrigible hard-hearted and un-reformed were they
under all the sore Judgments, that the Lord had inflicted upon them: Yet
before he will make an utter destruction, he invites them once again to
repentance. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.

Thus you see what a high provoking sin it is to rebel against God, and his
Commandments. As Samuel said to Saul, when he disobeyed the Word of the Lord.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and Stubornness is as Iniquity and
Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.23. And if God was so severe to punish the transgressions
of the law, with what severity will Christ proceed against the willful
contemners, and disobeyers of his Gospel? according to that of the 2d. of the
Heb. 2, and 3. verse. If every transgression and disobedience, received a just
recompense of reward, that is, of punishments inflicted on them: How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation? that is, the Gospel, which is called a
Ministry of the spirit and of life, whereas the law is a killing letter, or the
ministration of death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. And the wrath of God
comes upon the children of (Gospel) disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6.

13. The thirteenth pestilential and highly provoking sin, is the sin of
Insurrection and rising up against the Lords lawful Governors and Government,
whether Civil or Ecclestastical, in Church or Commonwealth. This was the sin of
Corah, Dathan and Abyram and their copartners, mentioned in Number. 16. God had
chosen Moses and Aaron to be the chief Leaders and Governors of his people, and
placed the Government in their hands, both as to the Civil and Religious
administration thereof; Korah and his companions gather themselves together
against them, and told them they took too much upon them, seeing all the
Congregation was holy, every one of them, and that the Lord was among them,
wherefore then should they lift up themselves above the Congregation of the
Lord? But see how highly incensing and provoking was this unto the Lord;
Separate your selves (says he to Moses and Aaron) from among the congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment; and now the Lord he will show who are his,
and who are holy, and a strange work will he do; these men must not dye the
common death of all men, nor be visited after the visitation of all men, but a
new thing will the Lord make, The earth must open her mouth and swallow them
up, with all that appertain unto them, and they must go down quick into the
pit; and so they did, and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from
among the Congregation.

Nor did the punishment of this Insurrection end here, but the Lord causes a
grievous Plague to break in upon the Congregation. And Moses said to Aaron, in
the 46. verse, Take a censer and put fire therein from off the Altar, and put
on Incense, and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an atonement for
them; and why all this haste? For there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the
Plague is begun: And Aaron did so, and stood between the dead and the living,
and the plague was stayed. Now they that died in the plague, were fourteen
thousand and seven hundred, besides them that died in the matter of Corah; So
highly displeasing is it unto the Lord, for persons to oppose his lawful
Authority and Government which he has put into the hands of his faithful
Ministers and Servants. Under which consideration undoubtedly must those
Scriptures be comprehended that enjoin subjection and obedience, whether to the
Lords Civil or Ecclesiastical Rulers and Governors, Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7, 17. O that this were seriously and
timously considered and laid to heart, by all such who fly in the face of
Christ, and carry themselves contemptuously against his lawful Governors and
Government which he has set in his Churches, I mean the Churches of Christ,
making unjustifiable and dishonorable rents, schisms and divisions in the body
whereof they are members, which should be as the seamless coat of Christ, woven
from top throughout, Joh. 19.23.

Of such who despise the Lords Government or Dominion, I may say without
wronging or injuring of them, as Peter of some scandalous backsliding
Professors in his time, who were spots and blemishes in their feasts of
Charity; Presumptuous are they and self-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10, 13. And while they promise themselves liberty,
they themselves are the servants of corruption. verse. 19. They despise
Dominion; The word it seems signifies, a removing of a thing from its place,
with some scorn and indignation: They would remove the Lords Governors or
Rulers over them, with scorn and indignation; And whereas they are said to
despise dominion, that is more then to despise their Rulers; for they despise
not only the Lords Governors, but the Government it self. And to speak evil of
Dignities, or to reproach Dignities, is in the Original it see us to blaspheme
Glories, to speak reproachfully of Dominions which are placed in glory amongst
men, or which are set over them by the Lord, in eminency, power, honor and
authority. Hence it is that lawful Magistrates ruling in the fear of the Lord,
are said to be Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And the Lords Ministers and Messengers of
Churches, are said to be the Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. And as stars in his
right hand are the Angels of the seven Churches, Rev. 1.20. All holding forth
that Glory and Dignity which the Lord has conferred upon them. And for any
persons to rise up, as Korah and his accomplices did against Moses and Aaron,
though it be in a presumption of their own holiness, Numb. 16.3. Such are like
to perish in the gainsaying of Core, as Jude expresses, verse. 11. of his
Epistle. It being very observable, how the Psalmist does express this act of
Korah's Insurrection, or rising up against Moses and Aaron, to be no less then
an envying of them; They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the Saint of
the Lord. The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of
Abiram. And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burnt up the wicked,
Psa. 106.16, 17, 18. That example also of Miriam and Aarons speaking against
Moses is not to pass without its due observation neither, Numb. 12.1, 7, 8, 9,
10. The Lord giving that testimony of Moses his servant, that he was faithful
in all his house; Wherefore then (says he) were ye not afraid to speak against
my servant Moses? And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and
Miriam became leprous, as white as snow. Let such therefore who are guilty in
this matter, consider how provoking a sin this is unto the Lord, and whether
they may not have a hand in pulling down this sore visitation among us.

14. A Fourteenth Pestilential, and highly provoking sin, is the sin of
Profanation of Gods holy things, and an Overcurious, presumptuous
speculation, and prying unwarrantably into the Secrets of God. This was the sin
of the men of Ashdod, for which the hand of the Lord was so heavy upon them,
visiting them with grievous plagues, when they took the Ark and brought it into
the house of Dagon (the Temple of their Idol-god) and set it by Dagon; so sore
was the hand of God on them that he smote them with Emrods, and destroyed them,
and such a deadly destruction there was throughout all the City, insomuch that
the cry of the City went up to heaven, 1 Samuel 5. The Ark was a Chest or Coffer,
which was made of Shittim or Cedar wood, overlaid round about with gold, whose
cover, called the Mercy-seat was also of pure gold, on which was two glorious
Cherubs of gold, from whence God gave his oracle, Numb. 7.89. These Cherubims
were placed at the the two ends of the Mercy-seat. and they spread out their
wings on high, which covered over the Mercy-seat, with their face, one to
another, Exodus 37.1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9. In this were the two Tables of the Law or
Testimony put, written with the finger of God, Exodus 25.16, 21. Deuteronomy. 10.3, 4,
10. Between the Cherubims God was said to sit, Psalm. 80.2. There will I meet
with thee (says the Lord) and will commune with thee from above the
Mercy-seat, between the two cherubims, which are upon the Ark of the Testimony,
verse 22. Now this Mercy-seat on which God did thus sit between the wings of
the Cherubims was a figure of Christ, by whom our transgressions of the law are
forgiven and covered, who is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. And
therefore called the Propitiatory, Romans 3.15. To this glorious seat, where Gods
presence with his Church was manifested, the Throne of God is answerable in the
Christian Church, in the presence of which Throne his people are, and serve him
day and night in his Temple, Rev. 7.15, 17.8.3.21.3, 5. Now this Ark being thus
a type or figure of Christ and of his Church, and of his glorious presence with
the same, its no wonder if the Lord shall so severely punish the profanation
of it, when men shall set it in the Temple of Dagon. Surely if the Ark stand
there Dagon must fall, yea and it shall fall before the Ark of the Lord, which
is called the Ark of his strength. Psalm. 132.8. And when the Ark set forward,
then Moses said, Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee flee before thee. God cannot endure to have his holy things
profaned, that the abomination of desolation shall stand in his holy place;
that men shall set their thresholds by Gods thresholds, and their posts by Gods
posts, by defiling his holy name with their abominations, Wherefore (says the
Lord) I have consumed them in mine anger; No surely, the place of the soles of
his feet, where he will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever,
and his holy name he will not suffer to be defiled, but he will beautify the
place of his sanctuary, and make the place of his feet glorious, Isa. 60.13.
comp. with Ezekiel. 43.7, 8. Let men take heed then of offering strange fire
before the Lord, which he commands them not, lest there comes out fire from
the Lord and devoureth them; as in the case of Nadab and Abihu the sons of
Aaron, who for this cause died before the Lord. And what said Moses to Aaron
thereupon, This is that that the Lord spoke saying, I will be sanctified in
them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified, Lev.
10.1, 2, 3. So likewise when men will be presumptuously and unwarrantably
prying into the secrets of God, see how severely the Lord has punished this
evil; as in the case of the men of Beth-shemesh said, whom the Lord sorely
smote, because they looked into the Ark of the Lord, even he smote of the
people Fifty thousand and threescore and ten men, and the people lamented,
because the Lord had smitten many of the people with a great slaughter. And the
men of Beth-shemeth said, Who is able to stand before the holy Lord God? 1 Samuel
6.19, 20.

So dangerous a thing it is to be over-curiously presumptuous in looking into
the Areana Dei, the secret and hidden things of God, which he has not
revealed. Therefore it was that the Lord had commanded, that Aaron and his
sons, even they, and not others, should take down the covering vail, and cover
the Ark of the Testimony with it. And thus do unto them (says the Lord) that
they may live and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things, Aaron
and his sons shall go in and appoint them every one to his service and to his
burden. But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest
they dye, Numb. 4.19, 20. See also Levit. 8.35. So exact was the Lord for the
keeping of his charge. It is sad to consider, how wise some men have seemed to
be above that which is written, calculating persons, and things, and times for
the meridian of their own brain; like those lying Prophets which the Lord sent
not, nor spoke unto, wherefore he complained that they prophesied unto the
people a false vision and divination, even a thing of naught and the deceit of
their heart, Jer. 14.14. So in Ezekiel. 13.6, 7, 8, 9. They have seen vanity, and
lying divination, and they made others to hope, that they would confirm the
word; See now the severe punishment of the Lord against such; Behold, I am
against you, says the Lord God, and mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that
see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the Assembly of my
people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel,
neither shall they enter into the land of Israel. But setting aside such gross
lying Prophets, it is sad to think how many professing the fear and knowledge
of God, have been over-curiously prying into Gods secret counsels, and the
hidden purposes of his mind, limiting, and prescribing the holy one of Israel,
advancing, and extolling the idle fantasies, and enthusiasmes of their own
brains, more then the declarative mind and will of God, contained in the
Scriptures of truth. But whatever may be men's pretensions to high, inward
unscriptural revelations of God, let us not be believing every such spirit, but
trying the spirits, whether they are of God or no; and for this reason, Because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. And what says
Peter, We have also a more sure word of prophecy (more sure then the voice,
which they heard to come from Heaven, when they were in the Holy Mount)
whereunto ye do well (says he) that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place, until the Day dawn and the Day Star arise in your hearts, 2
Pet. 1.19. Ever remembering that in Deuteronomy. 29.29. That secret things belong unto
the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to
our children for ever.

15. The fifteenth and last thing, that I shall briefly speak of as a
Pestilential destroying sin, is that of Adding or Diminishing from the Word of
God; for which the Lord Jesus has threatened such dreadful plagues and
punishments. For I testify (says he) unto every man that hears the words of
the Prophecy of this Book. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall
add unto him the plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall
take away from the words of the book of this Prophecy; What solloweth then?
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City,
and from the things which are written in this book. That man may be said to
add, that shall mix other things, besides what the Lord Jesus has revealed by
his Angel; He adds, that adjoyneth a lie: For whatsoever is patched to the
Scriptures of men's inventions, that it might be accounted as divinely revealed,
or the pure Oracles of God, is a lie. Such are the Papal unwritten traditions,
or other writings of men whatsoever, which are made with them of like Authority
with the written word of God, and which added to the Scriptures are lies. So he
takes away, that not only derogates from the Divine Authority of Gods book;
but he also, that any ways changes, or maliciously perverteth, or
contradicts any thing therein written. Christ will have the integrity,
sincerity, and sacred Authority of this Prophecy to be faithfully preserved in
the Churches, and that the contemners, falsifiers, and corrupters thereof, be
no way suffered under the pain of Anathema, or dreadful curse. For if
falsifyers of Coin are liable unto the civil curse of the law: much more shall
the Anathema of eternal damnation be inflicted upon the corrupters of the
Scriptures, which are the words of God. These with the Beast, and the false
Prophet, shall the Lord cast into the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, Rev.
19.20. This is a dreadful sin, drawing down the Lords severest plagues and
punishments. Therefore take we heed that we add not unto the word which God
commands us, nor diminish ought from it, but that we keep the Commandments of
the Lord our God which he commands us, Deuteronomy. 4.2, And mark well the reason
that Solomon gives: Every word of God (says he) is pure, he is a shield to
them that put their trust in him. And consider what follows.

Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a lier,
Prove. 30.5, 6.

Having now spoken of the several Sins which so highly provoke the Lord to pour
down his sore Judgments, even this of the Plague or Pestilence among a people.
I shall now come to speak of some special spiritual Remedies, which may be
fitly applied, and made use of, as Sovereign Antidotes and Preservatives to
prevent the further spreading of this pestilential contagious disease among us.

1. THe first spiritual Receipt, that I shall then prescribe unto thee, who
ever thou art that gettest in thy hand, and read this little tract,

Consider seriously, and let thy thoughrs dwell long upon those Sins, that I
have insisted on, as such which are the procuring Cause of this so sore a
visitation from the Lord; and entering into a diligent scrutiny, and examination
of thine own heart and ways: Consider how far thou have been, or art a partaker
of those sins, which have so highly provoked the Lord to send down this
National Judgment of the Plague and Pestilence among us. For if we stand
guilty of the same Sins, how then shall we think to escape the like punishment?
This was the way and course the Apostle took, when speaking of Gods displeasure
against the Israelites, whereby many of them were overthrown in the Wilderness;
how does he bring it home by way of special application. Now these things
(says he) were our Examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things as they also lusted. Neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of them, etc.
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one
Day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them
also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. Neither murmr ye, as some of
them also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Now all things
happened unto them for enamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6, to the 11, and 12. ver. So
say I as from the Lord. As to the first Pestilentiall sin of Oppression. Did
the Lord plague Pharaoh, and his Land, with sore and dreadful plagues, even
this of the destroying Pestilence, for his cruel oppressions, which he
exercised over the bodies and consciences of Gods people; Take heed then that
thou art not found an Oppressor of the true worshippers of Jesus, the spiritual
Israel of God: Take heed of exalting thy self against God, in seeking still to
hold the spiritual Seed under Egyptian captivity and bondage. See, that thou
lets them go to sacrifice to the Lord God, as he has commanded them. Take heed
of ruling over them with rigor, and making their lives bitter with hard
bondage. Take heed ye rich men, that ye do not oppress the poor. Know that the
Lord surely looks upon the afflictions of his people, and hears their cry by
reason of their Taskmasters, and will come down to deliver them, Exodus 3.7, 8.

So to those that are the Bishops, Elders, and Overseers, the Spiritual Rulers,
and Leaders of the flocks of Christ. Take heed that ye be not Lords over Gods
heritage, but examples to the flocks: See that ye feed the flocks of God,
taking the oversight of them, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Take heed that ye do not exercise a
dominion over their faith, but are helpers of their joy, 2 Cor. 1.24. Take heed
that ye do not eat the fat, and cloth you with the wool, and kill them that
are fed: Take heed that with force and cruelty, ye rule not over them. So then
to all that oppress, whether in one kind or another, see that ye undo heavy
burdens, and let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke; else, surely the
Lord will visit for these things, and his soul will be avenged on such a Nation
as this.

2. So for the Sin of Persecution, and Hatred against God, and his people. Has
the Lord ordained the Arrows of his Indignation, even the Instruments of Death
against the Persecutors? and will he strike them into the hearts of his
Enemies? O, then take heed, that thou art not found a hater of God, and a
Persecutor of the people of God, lest the Arrow of the destroying Pestilence,
that flies at noon day, do light upon thee, and the Angel of the Lord
persecute thee.

3. So for the Sin of Murder and Bloodshed. Has the Lord threatened his sore
plagues against the Destroyers of his heritage? and will he avenge the blood of
his Servants, at the great whore of Babylons hands? and is there a time when
the Lord will make inquisition for blood? Then beware that thou have not a hand
in killing, and destroying the Saints of the most high God. And take heed, that
thou partake not of Babylons sins, lest thou receive of her plagues. For the
Lord will avenge the blood of his Servants, and will render vengeance to his
Adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people, Deuteronomy. 32.43.

4. So for the fourth Pestilential and highly provoking Sin of Idolatry. Was
the anger of the Lord so kindled against Israel, when Israel had joined himself
to Baal-peor, that no less then four and twenty thousand died in the plague.
And did the Lord plague the people, because of the Calf they had made? Then
beware that ye be not Idolaters as were some of them, and provoke the Lord to
anger with your inventions. For surely the Lord our God is a jealous God, his
glory he will not give to another, neither his praise to Graven Images, Isa.
42.8.

5. So for the Sin of Covetousness, and a greedy desire after gain. Is it a sin
so abhorring unto the Lord? does the wrath of the Lord come upon the Children
of disobedience, because of it? Has the Lord denounced so many woes against it?
and threatened to smite with his plagues, and punishments for it? O then beware
of Covetousness, and being greedy of gain, lest thou be a troubler of thine
house, Prove. 15.27.

6. So for the Sin of Cursing, and Swearing, and False-swearing. Is it, that
because of Swearing the Land mourns, and the Lord had a Controversy with the
Land, because of it? And that the Curser shall be clothed with his Cursing, as
with a Garment? and it shall come into his bowels like water, and the Curse
shall enter into the house of the False-swearer? O then, beware that thou art
not found in these sins, lest these dreadful Judgments of God fall upon thee.

7. So for the seventh Pestilential destroying Sin, namely, the sin of
Adultery, Fornication, and such like corporeal filthiness and uncleanness. Did
the Lord so severely punish the sin of Zimbri and Cosby who were taken in the
act of uncleanness, that no less then twenty four thousand died in the plague?
And did the Lord plague Pharaoh and his house with great plagues, because of
Sarai, Abrams wife? Then beware thou beastly Adulterer, thou filthy Fornicator,
and unclean Liver, lest the like severity of God take hold of thee. Even as
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, in like manner, giving
themselves over to Fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jud. 7.

8. So for the Sin of Infidelity, Distrust and Murmuring against God, the
eighth provoking Pestilential sin. Did those men that brought up an evil report
upon the good Land (distrusting God for all the Signs that he had showed among
them) dye by the plague before the Lord? And did the Carcasses of those who
murmured against the Lord fall in the Wilderness, so that that they could not
see the promised Land? O then take heed how thou cherish a murmuring
distrusting, and unbeleiving heart against God. Take heed of rasing up an evil
report upon the good land, thereby weakening the hands, and discouraging the
hearts of those, who would be found walking in the beautiful paths of the Lord,
and be faithful in their generation.

9. So for the Sin of Discontent, loathing Gods blessings, and his provisions,
and lusting after evil things, to satisfy their inordinate desires, the ninth
provoking Pestilential sin. Did the Lord smite the people with a very great
Plague, for this very evil? Then take we heed that we lust not after evil
things, as they also lusted.

10. So for the Sin of Pride, Ambition, and Vainglory, trusting in an arm of
flesh, and not relying on the mighty power and faithfulness of God. Did the
Lord for this sin of David, send a Pestilence among the Children of Israel, so
that there dyed of the people Seventy thousand men? O then take we heed of a
proud, vainglorious spirit, and that we trust not in an arm of flesh.

11. So for the Sin of Apostasy, Backsliding, and Revolting from God. Did the
Lord often threaten that for this sin he would consume them by the Sword, the
Famine, and the Pestilence? O then take we heed that we do not Apostasy, and
Back-slide in our spirits from the Lord.

12. So for the Sin of Rebellion, and Obstinate Disobedience, against God and
his Commandments. Did the Lord for this sin threaten, that he would send the
Pestilence among them, and make it cleave unto them, until he had consumed
them? O then beware, that thou sin not against God, and his Commands, with an
Obstinate, Rebellious, and disobedient heart.

13. So for the Sin of Insurrection, and rising up against the Lords lawful
Governors and Government. Did the Lord so severely deal with Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, and their Accomplices, and Copartners for this evil; not visiting
them after the common visitation of men, causing also the Plague to break in
among them, so that there died thereof, Fourteen thousand and seven hundred? O
then take we heed of this so highly provoking Pestilential sin.

14. So for the Sin of Profanation of Gods holy things, and an Overcurious,
Presumptuous speculation, and prying unwarrantably into the secrets of God. Was
the hand of the Lord so heavy upon the men of Ashdod, and also upon the men of
Beth-shemish for this sin, so that he smote them with a deadly destruction,
even of the people, Fifty thousand and threescore and ten? O then see that we
are not guilty of this so highly provoking Pestilential sin.

15. So for the last Pestilential destroying Sin of Adding or Diminishing from
the word of God, for which the Lord has threatened such dreadful plagues and
punishments. O take thou heed of this so highly provoking sin, lest the Lord
add unto thee his plagues, and take away thy part out of the Book of Life.

Having now seriously considered, what those sins are, that so highly provoked
the Lord to send down this sore visitation, of the Plague or Pestilence among a
people see I say, that thou enter then into a diligent search, and examination
of thine own heart and ways to find out the sin or sins, which thy Conscience
shall tell thee thou stand guilty of before the Lord: Whether it be the sin
of Oppression, Persecution, Murder, Idolatry, Adultery, Covetousness, Cursing
or Swearing, Infidelity, Discontent, Pride, Apostasy, Disobedience, or any
other of the forementioned provoking evils. And see that thou art very exact,
and not slight, and superficial, in this manner of self-examination. This is
the exhortation of the Lord, by his Prophet Zephaniah, Chap. 2.1, 2. Gather
your selves together, yea; gather together, O, Nation not desired: thus is it
rendered in our Translation, but other Traslations read it thus: Search your
selves narrowly, yea search your selves narrowly, O people, not worthy to be
desired. Before the Decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff,
before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you. I find the Hebrew word
signifies thus much; First, To gather your wits together, that was before
dispersed upon vanity. Secondly, To frame your selves to purge away your
spiritual chaff. Thirdly, To search narrowly, as for a lost jewel, or hid mine.
The true sense is, Enter into your selves; search, try and examine all your
ways and doings, that ye may rightly understand how heavily and greivously God
must needs be offended with your great and manifold sins. And mark the reason
why they should be so diligent and industrious in this work; Before the Decree
bring forth: That is, before that does come to pass, which is decreed by God
against you; Gods Decree is then said to bring forth, when it comes to be
executed. As the bringing forth of a woman does not follow presently after the
conception, but in the appointed due time: So also is the Decree of God not
brought to light, by the execution of it, until the time determined and
appoined by himself.

Before the day pass as the chaff] that is, very swiftly, suddenly, like chaff,
the day is passing away, therefore whiles ye have time yet, before the day that
runs and wears away so fast, does bring forth the Decree, produce and make
appear what God has decreed against you. O Nation undesirable, search your
selves, yea search your selves very narrowly, whiles the heat of the Lords
wrath does not yet come upon you; whiles the day of the Lords wrath does not
yet take hold of you. This is further inculcated and pressed by the Lord in the
Prophecy of the Prophet Haggai, chap. 1.5, 7. Is it a time for you, O ye, to
dwell in your ceiled houses (that is, in your stately and sumptuous houses, for
pleasure and delight) and this house lie waste, or desolate, meaning the Lords
house: Now therefore, thus says the Lord of of Hosts, Consider your ways; Or
which is more agreeable to the Original, Set your heart upon your ways: Observe
and consider well how it fares with you, by reason of your sins. Had they
considered, or set their hearts aright upon their ways, this might have
prevented the execution of Gods judgments mentioned the 9, 10, and 11, verses
thereof. For want of this the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah chapter 1. takes up a
bitter lamentation and complaint; Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth; for the
Lord has spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me. The Ox knows his ower, and the Ass his masters scrib:
but Israel does not know, my people (says he) does not consider. They were
more brutish and void of understanding then the beasts or brute creatures. For
want of this consideration it was, that every one turned to his course of sin,
as the horse rusheth into the battle, breaking and running through like a water
flood, as the word is properly used. And why? Because no man said What have I
done? And the Lord complains further, That the Stork in the Heaven knew her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow did observe the
time of their coming, but his people knew not the judgment of the Lord, Jer.
8.6, 7. This is that consideration which we ought to have of our selves: But
what strangers are most men and women to their own hearts? who enters into such
a serious thought as to say, What have I done?

Seneca reports of Sexius, how every night before he slept he asked his own
heart, What evil this day have thou amended? what vice have thou resisted? in
what part art thou bettered? Surely such a course as this, would prevent the
fearless and heedless running into many gross enormities and sins; and so
prevent the ruin and destruction of many a poor sinful soul. This course the
Church took in the Lamentations, Wherefore does the living man complain? a man
for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again
unto the Lord, Lam. 3.39, 40. Fall then in good earnest upon this work of
self-examination; and think it better to know thine own infirmites, and thy
soul-sicknesses and sores, then to know the whole world, and all the wonders
thereof; It is one of the best parts of wisdom to know thy self: This will beat
down thy pride, and keep the humble, and lead thee to the true knowledge of
God; It will cast out and keep out sin, and preserve thee from many
temptations; It is the beginning and foundation of grace and repentance, Lam.
3.40. And will prevent the severe stroke of Gods judgments, as in that of
Zephany 2.1, 2. And says the Apostle, If we will judge our selves, we shall
not be judged of the Lord, Surely did we but know what the heart of man is,
while unregenerate and in its natural estate; what a sink, a sea of sin and
filthiness it is; how deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, as
Jeremy has it, Jer. 17.9. what infinite intricate windings and turnings there
are in the dark laborinths of man's heart; what a multitude of vain thoughts do
lodge within it, Jer. 4 14. What swarms of lusts and uncleaness issue out from
this corrupt and putrified fountain, Mat. 12.34. comp. with chap. 15.18, 19,
verses. What a deal of self-sophistry and imposture is wrapped up there, by which
millions of souls are inwraped in the snares and shackels of Satan; I say did
we rightly know, and were not strangers to these things, it might put us on
with all seriousness and readiness this so weighty and profitable a work.

But O where is the man almost, that knows, or sets himself in good earnest for
to know and find out the Plague of his own heart! O what a many of
Plague-sores, and running issues are in the hearts of men and women at this
day, and yet they are insensible of them. Every one almost is sensible of the
Plague-tokens, or sores when they seize upon the body, and most people fear and
dread this contagious disease, because of the loathsomness of it, but for the
Plague of the Heart, the Soul-sickness and sores, O where is there any
knowledge or discerning of it! where is there any sense of the loathsomness and
infectiousness of it! And yet without this, how can we expect a healing? and
the removal of this severe stroke of the Lord? according to Solomon's prayer, at
the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. If there be in the land
famine, if there be pestilence, etc. whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness
there be: what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or by all the
people Israel (and mark what follows?) which shall know every man the plague of
his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house: Then hear thou in
Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according
to his ways, whose heart thou know (for thou, even thou only know the
hearts of the children of men.) Now this prayer of Solomon had its confirmation
from the Lord, 1 King. 9.3. So that this knowledge of the Plague of the heart,
is a necessary qualification or ingredient to go along with that prayer, which
shall be prevailing with the Lord for the removal of the Pestilence out of the
land or Nation wherein it is. But if the men of this generaration are still
unacquainted with the plagues or sores of their own heart, if they be still as
vain, as proud, as oppressing, as Superstitious, as Idolatrous, as Adulterous,
as Murderous, as Blasphemous, as Rebellious and Disobedient against the Lord
and his commands, as reviling and persecuting the way of truth and holiness as
ever, can it be expected that the hand of the Lord should be removed, or the
fire of his his indignation, which now burns so very hot among us, should be
quenched?

Set thy self then in good earnest upon this heart-searching work, whoever thou
art that would escape this severe stroke of the Lord. And if thou know not
how to deal with thy heart, it is so treacherous and vile, put up David's prayer
unto the Lord. in Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me O God, and know my heart, try me
and know my thoughts; And see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting. If there be any pernicious, hurtful, or oppressing
way in me; and lead me upod the way of eternity, upon that way which may lead
me to eternal life. But know, that if thou will be careless and neglectve still
of this so necessary a work, and put the Lord upon it, he will then make a very
strict and diligent search, and see what will be the sad event and consequent
of it, Zeph. 1.12. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search
Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that
say in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. And
what follows? Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a
desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. Then the mighty man shall cry
bitterly. And God will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk as blind
men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood shall be poured
out as dust, and their flesh as the dung, and at that time, neither their their
silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords
wroth, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: For
he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land. And
when is this time that the Lord will make this strict and diligent search as
with candles? ver. 7. declares it, It is in the day of the Lord, when he
prepares a sacrifice, and shall bid his guests. And in that day of the Lords
sacrifice, then will be punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all
such as are clothed with strange apparel, that leap on the threshold, and fill
their Masters houses with deceit. O England, then be exhorted to consider thy
ways, that thou may find out thy hideous provoking abominations before the
Lord make a speedy riddance. This is the first spiritual Receipt I would
prescribe unto thee.

The Second Receipt.
Having, made this diligent search lnto thine own heart, and found out thy
soul-pestilent sores, then the next spiritual Receipt I shall prescribe unto
thee, Is a good draught of a sound and sincere Repentance: Which if sound and
sincere will operate these four things in thee;

First, A kindly mourning in secret before the Lord, 1. For thine own
iniquities. 2. For the sins and abominations of the times.

Secondly, It will breed a hatred and abhorrency in thy heart against those
evils, together, with an humble confession and acknowledgement of them.

Thirdly, A willing forsaking, and renunciation of them.

Fourthly, A returning unto the Lord with all thy heart. Surely as to this
Receipt, we may write a Probatum est, its a tried Receipt, a sure Remedy, a
sovereign Plaster for this running sore. Repent and turn your selves from all
your trangressions (says the Lord) so iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel.
18.30. So in v. 32. Turn your selves, and live ye; for why will ye die O house
of Israel? But more particularly to the several branches of Repentance as they
are laid down.

First, then see, that the true sense of thy sin does work thy heart to a
kindly mourning and sorrowing for the same in secret before the Lord. This
sorrow and contrition for sin, will I say, evidence the soundness and sincerity
of thy Repentance, when thou can mourn before the Lord, not only in respect
of the danger which thou have incurred by reason of thy sins, to wit, the
curses of this life, temporal death, and eternal plagues and torments in
another world, but also that thou have so unkindly grieved and provoked so good
a God, so compassionate a Father, so gracious a Redeemer, so blessed a
Sanctifier, and incurred the loss of so great a God, even the favor of so good
and gracious a God, that takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel.
33.11. This is that godly sorrow, that the Apostle Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 7.10,
11. that works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; the notable
effects whereof are there also demonstrated and declared; which will be of such
singular efficacy and force to quench the fire of the Lords indignation and
wrath, now broken out among us. In the seventh of Ezekiel, the Lord threatening
the final desolation of Israel, telling her that her end was come, and that he
would judge her according to her ways, and recompense upon her all her
abominations; That the Sword was without, and the Pestilence and Famine within;
and that he that was in the field, should die with the sword; and that he that
was in the City, Famine and Pestilence should devour him. In verse 16. he tells
us That they that escape of them (meaning those that should escape the common
calamity of the Sword, Pestilence and Famine) they shall be on the mountains
like Doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his iniquity:
that is, for his own iniquity shall every one mourn as Doves of the valleys.
The word signifies a making a stir by sighing, whining and howling.

So Hezekiah in the time of his sickness, tells us, That he did mourn as a
Dove, Isa. 38.14. Such will be the gracious temper and disposition of soul of
the Lords escaped ones: They shall mourn every one for his own iniquity, as
Doves in the Valleys, in their secret retirements with the Lord; the sense and
remembrance of their sins, in dishonouring and grieving so good and gratius a
God, will make them to sob and sigh, and even to howl before the Lord. So did
Ephraim, when he repented, and turned unto the Lord. I have surely heard
Ephraim (says the Lord) bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.18. In this spirit and
temper will the Loeds escaped remnant be found in.

So in Isreal's restoration, when the Lord shall gather them from the Coasts of
the Earth, in what spirit shall they then be found? They shall come with
weeping (says the Lord) and with supplications will I lead them, as in the
9th. verse. of the same Chap. with weeping for their sins, and with
supplications or petitions unto the Lord for mercy and pardon. And suitable to
this, is that in the 3d. of Zephan. 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful
(says the Lord) for the solemn assembly, to whom the reproach of it was a
burden.

Those that are sad and sorrowful, because they are obstructed and hindered
from meeting in the Temple of God, in the Assemblies of his Saints, for the
solemn worship and service of God; when they must converse with and among such
scoffing Companions, which make but a mock and derision of God and his Word. In
this gracious temper and frame of spirit was David in, when he could not
perform the fervent desire he had to serve God among the faithful. How bitterly
does he bemoan his being deprived of the comfort of the public worship of God,
during his exile, and the blasphemies of his enemies, which caused his spirit
even to be overwhelmed? As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants
my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when
shall I come and appear before God. Meaning in the House of the Lord, the
Tabernacle where the solemn worship of God was celebrated, and the Ark of the
Covenant was, where God dwelled, 2 Samuel 6.2. or where the Lord gave visible
signs of his presence. And mark what follows? My tears (says he) have been my
meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God? His
tears were as his bread, he fed and fillid himself with tears, as if they were
his only food and sustenance, according to that in the 80. Psalm. 5. Thou
feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them tears to drink in great
measure. Meaning his own people oftentimes, who are at his very foot, praying
and supplicating at the throne of grace.

And such a frame of spirit shall be found also in them, as shall ask the way
to Zion, with their faces thitherward; They shall be going and weeping, and in
this spirit of mourning they shall go and seek the Lord their God. All which
does evidently shows forth, what will be the temper and spirit of all
right-repenting souls, and what a frame of spirit the Lord expects his people
to be found in, when his hand is lifted up, even in this time, when he sends
the destroying Pestilence among us.

Now consider in what frame of spirit art thou before the Lord this day; Have
thou found thy heart broken as it were into shivers for thy sins? Has the sight
of thy sins made thee to sigh for thy sins, and to mourn kindly before the Lord
for thine iniquities? Have thou ever shed a tear before the Lord for thy secret
sins? or thy more open and notorious abominations? Surely, if in such a day as
this, when the Arrows of the Lords Indignation are flying abroad, if thou shall
be found in a Carnal, Light, Frothly, Frolic, Voluptuous, Vain-spirit; a lover
of thy pleasures more then a lover of God, putting far away from thee the evil
day, and causing the seat of violence to come near; like those the Prophet Amos
complains of, Who were at ease in Sion, and trusted in the Mountain of Samaria,
That lay upon Beds of Ivory, and stretched themselves upon their Couches, and
eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall,
That did chaunt to the sound of the viol; and invent to themselves instruments
of Music: like David, That drank wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with
the chief ointment, but were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. I say,
if in such a day as this, under such a severe and sore visitation as this, thou
shall be found in such a spirit and temper as this, sad and deplorable will thy
condition be.

For mark what the Lord threatened those carnal, fleshly, sensual rejoicing
ones. Therefore now shall they go captive, with the first that go captive, and
the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed, Amos 6.1. to
the 8. verse. So dangerous and highly provoking a sin, when the present
dispensations of God, together with thine own personal evils, do call for a
mournful frame of spirit, that then thou should be found in a spirit of
carnal merriment and rejoicing. As the Lord complained by the Prophet Isa.
Chap. 22.12. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold joy, and
gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep; eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

This they spoke in a scoffing manner, as if they had said, our Prophet tells
us, that we shall soon be destroyed, and slain, or carried into captivity; let
us then be jovial and merry, as long as we may. But mark, how hainously did the
Lord take it at their hands. And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of
Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye dye, says
the Lord of Hosts* Meaning that it should never be forgiven unto them, unless
they did cease from sinning. For so the word till, or until, in Scripture
phrase does usually hold forth, Genesis 28.15. 2 Samuel 6.23. Matthew. 1.25.

I shall add hereunto that in the Prophet Joel, Chap. 2d. where the Prophet
setting forth the terribleness of Gods approaching Judgments, in the 12th.
verse. he exhorts them to this repenting, and relenting frame of spirit, as
the only means to pacify the Lords wrath and indignation, from breaking out
against them, or for the removal of it. Therefore also now, says the Lord,
Turn ye even to me, with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning: and rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil. So in the 15. verse. Blow the Trumpet
in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the people, sanctify
the Congregation, etc. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between
the Porch and the Altar; and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give
not thy heritage to reproach. And mark what follows, Then will the Lord be
jealous for his land, and pity his people.

This was that spirit also that was found in the people of Nineveh, when
destruction was threatened upon Jonahs preaching, Jonah 3.5, 6, 7, 8. It is
said, they believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloth from the
greatest of them even to the least, yea, the King himself arose from his
throne, and laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in
ashes; and caused it to be proclaimed, that man and beast should be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, and turn every one from his evil
way, and from the violence that was in their hands: and (says he) who can
tell, if God will turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we
perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

See what signal demonstrations were there here, of the inward sorrow and
compunction of their hearts. O how will this Example of Nineveh repenting and
sorrowing for their sins, rise up in judgment against the men of this
generation! Luke 11, 32. Where is the covering of sackcloth to be seen? Any
outward demonstrations of a relenting spirit to be discerned? Where can we see
the mournful soul that is deeply afflicted for its sins, under this sore
visitation of the Lord? Are not men and women as proud, and vain, and carnal,
and jovial now as before? Is there any crying mightily unto God? Any turning
from their evil way, or from the violence that is in their hands? Do we see any
loosing of the bands of wickedness? undoing the heavy burdens? the letting the
oppressed go free? and the breaking of every yoke? And where are any bowels of
compassions drawn out toward the poor and needy? but in vain are all fastings,
and formal devotions, if these things are neglected which are essential as to
that acceptable fast which God has chosen, Isa. 58.6, 7. See then that ye be
true mourners in Sion, and let the sense of thine inquities work in thee a true
contrition, and brokenness of heart. For the Lord is nigh unto them that are of
a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit, Psalm. 38.18. This
is the heart that he will heal, Psalm. 147.3. The heart that he will bind up,
Isa. 61.1. That Evangelical sacrifice which he will not despise, Psalm. 51.17.

Now to get thy heart melted into this mournful frame. Take these helps.

1. Be looking up unto Christ, whom by thy sins thou have peirced, Zach. 12.10.

2. Apply the New Covenant-promises, for the taking away of the stony heart out
of thy flesh, and the Lords giving of thee an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. and
36.26.

3. Get a sense of the unspeakable misery thou art liable unto by reason of thy
sins, Romans 6.23. whether it be Pride, Oppression, Idolatry, Adultery, Apostasy,
Cursing, and Swearing, or such other of those pestilential sins before
mentioned; or whether they be lies, railings, scoffings at Gods people, rotten
speeches, bedlam passions, goods ill-gotten, time ill-spent, profanation of
the Lord's Day.

4. Consider also, that thy heart has been the Fountain, or rather the Sinck,
from whence has issued many foul streams, where all ill has been forged, all
evil words, and wicked thoughts engendered, then by the rule of proportion let
thy heart be a fountain of sorrow for sin.

5. Consider the heart of Christ, he had not taken a heart of flesh, but for
sin; which for thy sake was filled with that unexpressible sorrow and grief,
that if all the godly sorrow of all the righteous souls, from the beginning of
the world to the end thereof, in heaven and in earth, dead or alive, were
collected into one heart, they could not countervail the depth of his anguish.
And shall his blessed soul fall asunder in his blessed breast, assaulted with
all the wrath of God, and the most dreadful torments of Hell? shall his soul be
like a scorched hearth, and so pressed with the flames of Gods revenging wrath,
which wrung from him those bloody drops, and ruful cries. My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And shall thy heart be as a stone within thy breast, and
never be moved? Oh, prodigious hardness, and worse then heathenish ingratitude!

6. Consider if thy heart be not wounded here in this world, in some measure
truly, it shall hereafter be filled with such endless honor, that it would
grieve and break ten thousand hearts to imagine or think of it. Is it not
better then, to mourn a little here in this life for sin, then to have our
hearts enlarged to endure to all eternity, the extremity of the wrath of God,
in the unexpressible horror of hell? Is any man so senseless, to think he shall
go to heaven in a bed of down, and never be touched for his sins? When
Hezekiah, a man of a perfect heart, complained and chattered like a Crane, Isa.
38.14. When David a man after Gods own heart, roared all the day long, Psalm.
32.3. When Job a perfect and a just man, complained that the Arrows of the
Almighty were within him, and that the venom thereof did drink up his spirit,
Job 6.4. Nay when Christ himself, that holy and just one, that pure and
immaculate Lamb, did so cry our, in the agony and bitterness of his spirit.

7. Consider again, that if thou getst this broken heart into thy breast, thou
shall bring down the glorious Majesty of Heaven, God Almighty with his Chair of
State to sit in thy soul. For he has a twofold habitation, to wit, heaven, and
the humble heart, Isa. 57.15.

8. Add hereunto the practice of the Saints of God. They poured out tears as
men do water out of Buckets, 1 Samuel 7.6. Mary Magdalen washed Christ's feet with
her tears, Luke 7.14. The Publican struck on his breast, with a sorrowful
acknowledgment of his sins, Luke 18.13. And surely, if thy hands and eyes, and
tongue and heart, have been instruments of Gods dishonor; then by the Rule of
proportion, thou should have the works of thy hands, instrumental
demonstrations of repentance. Thine eyes fountains of tears, and thy tongue
uttering, and thy heart suffering grief. And if for outward lolles and crosses,
thou can weep tears, as David for his Son Absalom? and with what wringing of
hands, tearing of hair, bitter crying, do many express the inward, and
intolerable sorrow, and grief of their hearts? Then certainly the loss of
Christ, and of the favor of God, which is infinitely better then Husband,
Wife, Child, or any the most desirable thing in the world, how should this
break thy heart, and draw tears from thy soul?

Thus having got thy heart melted into this mournful frame, out of a deep
sense, and apprehension of thine own sins. Then,

Secondly, Thou will come to mourn kindly, upon the account of the common sins,
and abominations of the times. As David in the 119. Psalm. 136. verse. Rivers of
waters (says he) run down mine eyes, and why? because, they keep not thy law.
Or as others read it. Mine eyes gush out with rivers of waters, I weep and shed
abundance of tears, even for the wickeds sake whom I pity; and especially, for
the law of God, which greiveth me to the heart to see violated and broken. So
the Prophet Jeremy, Oh that my head (says he) were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night, for the slain of the
Daughter of my people. O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of
wayfaring men, that I might leave my people and go from them; Why? what is the
matter good Jeremy of this so sad and mournful a wish? and that thou would
leave thy people, and go from them? Why? there is cause and reason enough,
might he say. They be all Adulterers, an Assembly of treacherous men. And they
bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the
truth upon the earth, for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me,
says the Lord, Jer. 9.1, 2, 3. So deeply was the soul of this good Prophet of
the Lord affected and afflicted, upon the account of the public National
abominations, and defilements.

In like manner it is said of righteous and just Lot, that he was vexed with
the filthy conversation of the wicked (meaning the Sodomites, among whom he
lived.) For that righteous man dwelling among them (says the Text) in seeing,
and hearing, vexed his righteous soul, from day to day, with their unlawful
deeds, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. He lived among abominable men, that cared neither for
right nor reason, and this greived and tormented his righteous soul, as if it
had been upon a rack, as the word implies. So it is said of our dear Lord, that
he was greived for the hardness of their hearts, Mark. 3.5. But to bring it
more close to the present visitation of the Lord, and what a special
preservative and antidote this gracious qualification of soul is for the
keeping off, of this severe stroke of the Lord: Look into Ezekiel. 9. even the
whole Chapter; there you shall find, that the Man who was clothed with linen,
which had the Writers Inckhorn by his side, was commissionated from the Lord,
to go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
Mark upon the Foreheads of the men that did sigh, and cry for all the
abominations that were done in the midst thereof. And after him follows the
men, who had the slaughter weapons in their hands, and they were to go through
the City and smite, and slay utterly old and young, both Maids and little
Children, and Women, but not to come near any man upon whom was the Mark. God
had a remnant among this wicked and backsliding generation, and they must be
first marked, and these are described to be such, as did sigh and cry for all
the abominations of the times, and all that time the iniquity of the House of
Israel and Judah was exceeding great, the Land was full of blood, and the City
full of perverseness, and what other their abominations were, the Chapter before
does evidently declare it.

In like manner when the Passover was to be instituted was the blood of the
Lamb to be a token to the children of Israel upon the houses were they were; So
that the Lord seeing the blood that was struck upon the door-posts did pass
over them, and suffered not the Destroyer to come in and smite them, when he
smote the land of Egypt. The Plague was not to come upon the Israelites to
destroy them, Exodus 12.12, 13, 22, 23. Well then, will thou be of the number of
Gods marked ones, that the Destroying Angel may pass over thee, and the plague
come not upon thee, when God is smiting the land, as now he is, by the
destroying Pestilence: O see then that thy heart is brought into this holy
frame, to sigh and mourn not only for thine own personal evils, but also for
the crying sins and abominations of the times. But surely, if thou can swim
down with the stream of the times, and hear the holy and precious name of God
dishonored and blasphemed daily, his Spirit derided, his Saints and Ordinances
villified and defamed, his Messengers abused, and the way of Holiness
reproached. Or if thou can behold wickedness walking up and down with a bold,
impudent forehead, and men and women of a filthy, impure, spotted conversation,
and not shed one tear, nor sigh and mourn under such National abominations;
surely it argues, that the grace of saving and sound Conversion and Repentance
was never yet effectually wrought in thy soul; if so, thou can not but mourn
under the sense of sin, whether in thy self or in any other. The want of which
temper and spirit, in the case of the Incestuons person, made the Apostle Paul
to reprehend the Church of Corinth, telling them, that they were puffed up, and
had not rather mourned, that be that had done that deed, might be taken away
from among them, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. Well then if you would be Gods marked ones, see
that you be Sions mourning ones, remembering what our dear Lord has left on
record, for the abundant satisfaction and refreshment of such sorrowful souls,
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. It is taken
generally for a mourning or sorrowing for sin, as it stands in opposition with
a spirit of jollity and voluptuous living, Luke 16.19, 25. Such shall be
comforted, they shall never miss of outward and inward comforts. They that sow
in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. Their sorrow shall be recompensed
with gladness. For to this end was Christ anointed to his Office of
Mediatorship; That he might comfort all that mourn, whether upon the account of
sin on the miseries of Sion, To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give
unto them beauty for ashes; beautiful garments, goodly apparel, instead of
ashes, which they were wont to strew upon their heads, and sit in them when
they mourned, as a testification of their excessive sorrow and grief, Job 1.8.
Jonah. 3.6. Mat. 11.21. The oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for
the spirit of heaviness; by which we are to understand, the beautiful,
resplendent, refreshing gifts and graces of the spirit of God, Heb. 1.9. That
they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he
might be glorified, Isa. 61.2, 3. Oak-trees of righteousness, trees of the
greatest strength and duration, by which is meant, that those that are
ingrafted into Christ by faith; and such are all true mourners in Sion, they
shall not only bring forth fruits of righteousness, but they shall also have
firm, durable, and permanent consolation, and strength in Christ. Everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow, and mourning shall flee away, Isa.
51.11.

Secondly. If thy repentance be sincere, and sound, and such as will stand thee
in stead in a calamitous day; It will then work in thee a true hatred, and
abhorrency of all manner of evil. Job abhorred himself, and repented in dust
and ashes, Job 42.6. ^o in the 40. of Job and the 4. verse. Behold I am vile,
what shall I answer thee; I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Woe is me (says the
Prophet Isaiah) for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. But to come more
close, as to the present dispensation, and visitation of the Lord. In the 6th.
of Ezekiel, The Lord having threatened the Pestilence among other his sore
destroying Judgments, and how the slain should fall in the midst of them, He
promises nevertheless, that he will leave a remnant that should escape the
Sword among the Nations. And how must this remnant be qualified? What thoughts
and apprehensions shall they have of themselves, by reason of their abominable
sins? See the 9. verse of that Chapter. And they that escape of you (says the
Lord) shall remember me among the Nations, whither they shall be carried
Captives; because, I am broken with their whorish heart, which has departed
from me; and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their Idols. And what
follows? They shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed in
all their abominations. So in the 36. of Ezekiel, speaking of the restoration
of Israel, how that he will take them from among the Heathen, and gather them
out of all Countries, and bring them into their own Land, and save them from
all their uncleanness, in the 11. verse. Then (says he) shall ye remember
your evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves
in your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations. This shall
be the temper and spirit of the Lords escaped remnant, they shall loath
themselves in their own sight for their iniquities, or for all the evils that
they have committed, as it is Ezekiel. 20.43. They shall even abhor and detest
themselves for their iniquities, which will appear so odious, filthy, and
abominable in their sight. As the Israelites loathed the Manna in contempt,
counting it base or vile, in comparison with other meats, Number. 25.5. Or as Job
loathed his own life, when his soul would choose strangling and death rather
then life, Job 7.15, 16. This indignation or bitter hatred against sin, is made
a fruit, or note of true repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11.

Now soul, examine the soundness and sincerity of thy Repentance hereby. Did
the sighs of thy sin, ever work in thee a hatred, and abhorrency in thy soul
against sin? Did it ever make thee to abhor thy self in dust and ashes? to
loath thy self in thine own sight? An impenitent person may refrain from sin,
but a true converted, and penitent person will hate sin. An impenitent person,
may forbear to swear; but a true convert, fears an oath, Eccles. 9.2. A
wicked person, may abstain from some gross evils; but the godly person, will
abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. A wicked person, may leave
some evil; but the godly, and such as love the Lord will hate evil, Psalm.
97.10. A wicked person, may abandon some evil way; but the truly repenting
person, hates every false way, Psalm. 119.104. A wicked and an impenitent
person, may refrain from telling a lie; but the godly and such as are truly
converted, will hate and abhor lying, verse. 163. A wicked man, may perhaps
check himself for his unclean thoughts; but the godly man, hates vain
thoughts, verse. 113. And as David in the case of a wicked person, so will the
godly say upon the account of all and every sin. Do not I hate them, O Lord,
that hate thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Now to
work this hatred, detestation, and aversion in thy will against sin: Take these
helps.

Consider, First, What sin is in it self.

Secondly, How God is provoked with it.

Thirdly, How thou art hurt and prejudiced by it.

First, Consider then, what sin is in its self.

Sin in its self is fouler then any Fiend or Devil in Hell; because, it made
that so, as fire is hotter then water that is heated.

2ly. It is extremely ill, nothing comes nearer it; for take sin in the
abstract, so its a greater ill then the damnation of a man's soul: For when two
ills fight together, that which conquers must needs be the greater. Now when a
man has lain in Hell ten thousand years, he is as far from coming out as ever,
for the eternal duration in Hell cannot expiate sin.

3ly. It is most infectious, and therefore compared to a Leprosy; For the
first sin that peeped into the world stained the beauty of it. No sooner was
sin committed by Adam, but the Stars seemed impure in Gods sight: the creatures
were all at variance, the earth full of Briars and Thorns, and all things
subjected unto the Curse.

4ly. It is most filthy, and therefore compared to the most vile things that
can be named, To menstruous rags, To the vomit of Dogs; and whereas no dirt or
filthy thing, can stain a Sunbeam; sin stains a more glorious creature, which
is the soul of man.

5ly. It is of a hellish nature, that it draws out, and takes into it self, the
wrath of God, being full of cursed consequences. 1. Privative, the loss of Gods
favor, the blood of Christ, the guard of Angels, peace of Conscience; then
which, what can be more obnoxious? 2. Positive, It brings all misery spiritual,
hardness of heart, blindness of mind, horror of conscience, despair, etc. with
all temporal losses and crosses here, and hereafter eternal torments both of
soul and body, in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone forever more,
Rev. 21.8.

Secondly, Consider how God is provoked with it.

For 1. Each sin is the only object of Gods infinite hatred; what infinite of
infinites of hatred have thou then upon thy soul, with all thy sins, when each
sin has the infinite hatred of God upon it.

2. Each sin is against the Majesty of that dreadful God of Heaven and Earth,
who can turn all things into Hell; nay, Heaven and Hell into nothing by his
word. Now against this God thou sinnest; and what art thou but dust and ashes,
a lump of filth, and of uncleanness, and all that is naught? And what is thy
Life, but a Span, a Bubble, a Dream, a Shadow of a Dream, and shall such a
thing offend such a dreadful and glorious Majesty.

3. Every sin strikes at the glory of Gods pure eye, which cannot look upon
iniquity, Hab. 1.13.

4. Sin is that which killed his Son, the least sin could not be pardoned, but
by Christ's carrying his heart blood to his Father, and offering it for sin.

5. Each sin is an offense to all his mercies. This aggravated the sin upon
Ely, 1 Samuel 2.29. and upon David, 2 Samuel 12.8, 9. Mercy is the most eminent
Attribute of God, and therefore the sin against it is the greater. With what
aggravations then are our sins committed in the time of the Gospel?

Thirdly, Consider how thou art hurt and prejudiced by it. Each sin (I mean
unrepented of) kills thy soul, which is better then all the world. It robs thee
of abundance of joy and comfort, and will cause thee to walk heavily in the
bitterness and anguish of thy soul perhaps all thy days; as David and Hezekiah
did. And how dreadful was that example of Francis Spira, who after his
backsliding lived a while in exquisite horror, and after died in despair? And
know, that thine own conscience will one day accuse thee for every sin thou
live wilfully in, though now it seems hid unto thee, and thy conscience is
more then a thousand witnesses. And for the sins which peradventure thou now
live in, and accountest but petty and venial, many poor souls are at this
instant burning in hell fire. By all which thou may clearly see what misery
and hurt does attend on thee continually for the same: And therefore when any
bait of Satan, or old companions would allure thee to sin, take this Dilemma;
Either I must repent, and then it will bring more sorrow, then the pleasure or
profit did good, or, if I repent not, it will be then the damnation of my soul.

These few things, among many others, may, if seriously pondered upon, be an
effectual means to work thy heart to this hatred and detestation of sin, and a
loathing of thy self for the same, which as it will evidence the truth of thy
repentance, so will it be an excellent preservative against the now
pestilential destroying Sickness. Now when the sight and sense of thy sins has
wrought thy soul to a kindly mourning and sorrowing for the same before the
Lord, and that for all kinds and sorts of sins, to wit,

1. The weaknesses, frailties and pollutions of thy nature, even thy proness
and inclination to sin; for though these being unconsented unto are no actual
sins, yet are they matter of true sorrow, grief and humiliation to a sincere
Christian, that he is such a polluted and unclean creature, and so apt to fall
into all sin, if he be not restrained and prevented by Gods grace.

2. For the sinful acts and habits of thy unregenerate life, with all the
aggravations belonging to them.

3. The slips and relapses of thy most regenerate life, and the infinite
frailties and infirmities that still adhere to it; And that thy soul is wrought
also to a real hatred and destation of all sin, so that now thou beginest to
loath sin, as a thing not only hurtful, but ugly and abominable; a soul and
beastly thing, and that which is most contrary, not only to the pure and
unspotted essence and being of God, but also contrary to, and unbefitting the
nature and excellency of a reasonable creature, as man is. I say when these
gracious dispositions of soul, of grief and hatred for sin are wrought in thee,
then will thou not be ashamed from a contrite and wounded heart, to make an
humble confession and acknowledgement thereof before the face of Almighty God,
our heavenly Father, begging pardon and forgiveness for them. Then will thou
own thy self a vile sinner, who have worthily deserved his wrath; then will thou make an ennumeration of the particular sorts of thy sins, of which thou
know thy self guilty: Then will thou aggravate those sins upon thy self, by
all the circumstances and heightning accidents of them; comprizing all thy
unknown and unconfest sins under some such penitentiary speech and expression
as that of David's, Who can tell how often he offends? cleanse thou me from my
secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. And as thou art to confess unto God, and give glory
unto him, Josh. 7.19. whom thou have chiefly and principally offended; so art
thou commanded also to confess unto men, James 5.16. Confess your faults one to
another. And that for these reasons.

1. That so we may be capable of one another prayers.

2. Because it may be our sins are such as have injured others, and then
confession unto them, is the first degree toward reconciliation, Matthew. 5.24.
Or if they be only against God, yet the confession of them to the Lords
faithful Ministers and Servants, will not be improper, but in some kind
necessary to such as desire the absolution and forgiveness of them, Jam. 5.15.

3. Because in sin there is the guilt and the corruption, the one to be
pardoned the other cured. The first being confessed to God to obtain his pardon,
ought also, if it have been offensive and scandalous to the Congregation, to be
acknowledged to them, that, that expression of repentance may make satisfaction
to them for the ill example, and avert and deter from sin, whom it had invited
to it. And surely, the disclosing of the particular state of thy sinful sick
soul, and advising with others, especially the Physicians of the soul, how and
by what means a cure may be wrought; how a raging sin may be subdued, the
occasions and temptations to it avoided, cannot but be very profitable,
comfortable and advantageous, as to the prosperous constitution, and health of
thy soul. The necessity of which confession and acknowledgement of sin will
further appear, not only from the practice of David, Psalm. 51.3, 4. Psalm. 32,
5. Ezra Chap. 9.6, 7. Nehemiah Chap. 9.32. Job 40.3. Jer. 14.7. Daniel 9.4, 5.
and other holy men in Scripture; but also from such express Texts of Scripture
as these, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin, Psalm. 32.5. So Prove. 28.13. He that covers his Sins shall not prosper,
but who so confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy: And this leads me
to the Third particular, as that which will evidence the soundness and
sincerity of our Repentance.

Thirdly: If thy Repentance be sound, there will be a willing forsaking and
renunciation of all sin, an abjuring of all thy former evil ways, both of the
sins themselves, and the occasions which were wont to bring thee to those sins,
1 Thessalonians. 5.22. For, all thy fear and trembling at the wrath of God to come for
sin, thy sorrow for sin, thy hating and loathing of sin, will not make thy
Contrition full and perfect, unless thy will also do his part, and resolve to
forsake and leave it. For true Contrition or dying unto sin, is such a
compunction of the heart for the same, as is joined with a purpose, will, and
resolution to leave, and forsake it. The gracious soul will hate every false
way, Psalm. 119.104. and not tolerate or allow it self, in any known evil or
bosom corruption whatsoever, Psalm. 18.23. It will not say, as Lot said of
Zoar, Is it not a little one? Genesis 19.20. Or as Naaman the Syrian, The Lord
pardon thy Servant in this thing, when I bow down my self in the House of
Rimmon, 2 King. 5.18. It will not account any sin little, which will bring upon
us the great wrath of so infinite a Majesty. It knows and beleives, that the
weight even of little sins, as it were small sands, will sinck the ship of our
souls, as well as our greater and grosser sins. That small leaks in Ships, and
small breeches in Walls being neglected, will endanger the loss both of Ships
and Cities: And that such Tradesmen, as in their accounts regard not small
sums, will quickly prove Bankrupts.

Disobedience, though in never so small matters, as in eating of an Apple, and
gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath, looking into, and touching of the Ark,
are yet in Gods account no small matters: For how severly has he punished all
these, then which what can we imagine slighter? But gracious souls know, that
it is not the smallness of the thing, that lessens either our obedience or
disobedience, but that it is Gods Commandment, that ties to obedience in lesser
things as well as in greater, which Command of his is despised, as well in the
breach of the lesser, as of the greater. I say then, the truly repenting soul,
will not allow it self in any known sin, though accounted never so little,
since the very least are committed against so great a God, and bring upon us so
great a danger. It will not excuse, extenuate, mince, or hide sin as Adam, nor
cast it off himself upon others shoulders, as Saul, 1 Samuel 15.21. But it would
willingly be divorced and separated both in spirit, conversation, and
affection, from all and every the pollutions, and defilements of sin; which if
wilfully and willingly lived in, he knows will expose his soul to inevitable
ruin and destruction.

Consider then, has the wrath of God Almighty, and the everlasting woe
denounced to all impenitent sinners made thee fear and tremble? Have thy
tremblings been seconded with a true and hearty sorrow for thy sins? Has thy
sorrow been such as has brought forth hate and loathing of sin, so that sin
has appeared ugly and abominable unto thee? Has there then followed an humble
confession, and laying open of thy sins before God? begging pardon and
remission of them, with a desire to be rid of them, and a real purpose and
resolution, to abandon them and forsake them? This will evidence, that thy
service of sin has given up the ghost, and that thou have a firm resolution
of leading a new life, and returning unto the Lord with all thy heart; which is
the fourth and last particular to be insisted on, in this subject of sound
Evangelical repentance. For what is Repentance indeed, in the true definition
of it, but a change of the mind, or a coming to a man's self again, to a right
understanding after a man has erred; consisting, in a turning of the whole
heart from Satan and Sin unto God, that is, to serve God in newness of Life,
because he that lives in sin, serves the Devil, and belongs to his jurisdiction.

This definition you shall find full and whole in our Saviors words to Saint
Paul, when he appeared to him going to Damascus, Act. 26.18. as Paul himself
reports them; namely, That he would send him to the Gentiles, to open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
that are sanctified; Which voice Paul theresaith, he was obedient unto and
thereupon went and showed first to the Jews, and then to the Gentiles, That
they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. So, that
according to the definition, Repentance has two parts, An Aversion or turning
away from Satan and Sin, that is the first; then a Conversion or turning unto
God by Newness of Life, that is the second part: but I proceed.

Fourthly, The last thing that will evidence the sincerity of that Repentance,
which will be prevalent with the Lord, to avert his wrath, and quench the fire
of his indignation that is broken out among us, is, a returning unto the Lord
with all the heart, Jer. 3.12. Return thou backsliding Israel (says the Lord)
and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful (says the
Lord) and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity,
that thou have transgressed, and repent and turn your selves from all your
transgressions (says the Lord) so iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel.
18.30. In the 2. of Joel, the Lord threatening the terribleness of his
Judgments, in referenece to his great Army, how that the Earth should quake
before them, and the Heavens should tremble, the Sun and Moon should be dark,
and the Stars should withdraw their shining; In the 12. verse, the Lord
exhorts them to a thorough repentance, as the only means to stop the current
of this devouring and sweeping Judgment: Therefore also now (says the Lord)
turn ye even to me, with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning. And rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord your God; for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil.

And this Exhortation is urged by diverse Arguments,

1. By promise of temporal blessings, namely, plentiful fruits of the earth,
even to the reparation of all their former losses, by the Famine, and removal
of the Northren Army from them, verse. 18. to 28.

2. Of spiritual Evangelical privileges, whereof those temporals were but an
imperfect pledge, viz. plentiful pourings out of his spirit, and his gifts upon
all flesh, Gentiles as well as Jews, ver. 28, 29. Salvation and deliverance of
an elect remnant in his Church, after the Lord has manifested, by dreadful
signs, the terror of his coming, verse. 30, 31, 32.

2ly. This Exhortation is urged, by threatening of destruction against all the
oppressing enemies of the Church. These are the blessed fruits (among others)
of that repentance, that is, a returning unto the Lord with all the heart.
Suitable to which, is that of the Prophet Jeremy, If thou will return, O Israel
(says the Lord) return unto me, and if thou will put away thine abominations
out of my sight, then shall thou not remove, Jer. 4.1. Then shall thou not
wander, thou shall not go into exile. Which foregoing places do imply, that God
is not pleased with shows, or flying thoughts, or loose purposes, or half a
heart, but requires an upright turning away from evil, and a thorough
conversion to himself, and that which is good, and not to idols, or any other
vanities whatsoever. There is a special place to this purpose, in Deuteronomy. 4.29,
30. It speaks of the Lords scattering of them among the Nations, and how they
should be lest few in number among the Heathen, whither the Lord should lead
them; But if from thence (says the Lord, by his servant Moses) thou shall seek
the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul. When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are come
upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou turn unto the Lord thy God, and
shall be obedient unto his voice. For the neglect whereof, see what a bitter
complaint the Lord took up against Israel, Amos 4.6. How he had given them
cleanness of teeth, and want of bread in all places, and had sent among them
the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, and had overthrown some of them, as
he overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and they were as a firebrand plucked out of
the burning, yet did they not return unto the Lord. But mark what follows?
Therefore, thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. And what did he threaten he would do
unto them, for their obstinacy and incorrigableness if they repented not? The
2. verse declares it. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that lo, the
days shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks and your
posterity with fish-hooks. What Is the meaning of that? understand, that like as
great fishes are pulled and drawn up out of the Sea with hooks, so he would
cause them to be pulled out of their Land by the enemy, how loath and unwilling
soever they were to quit it. To prevent which, the Lord exhorts them that they
would prepare to meet him with true conversion, as a special means to appease
his wrath, and prevent their ruin. When Ephrahim was turned, and had repented,
how was the heart of the Lord taken with it? Jer. 31 18, 19, 20. Hos. 11.8, 9.
O then what shall I say; what arguments shall I make use of to excite thee, O
England, to a speedy return unto the Lord? surely, thou have had many gracious
invitations in the day of thy prosperity and peace; but thou would not
hearken thereunto: Many premonitions and forewarnings of this day that is now
come upon thee by the mouths of the Lords faithful Messengers and Servants.

And upon this account may it not be said of thee as is recorded and declared
concerning the Lords merciful dealings with his own people, and City of
Jerusalem, where he had placed his name and worship, notwithstanding their
great and manifold provocations; Yet the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them
by his Messengers, rising up betimes and sending, because he had compassion on
his people, and on his dwelling place. But (now how did they requite the Lord
for all his kindness and long sufferance toward them?) they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16. no healing, no help, their sores were so putrified and festred, that
they grew incurable. As the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah complained, chap. 1.
verse 4, 6. The whole head became sick, and the whole heart faint: From the
sole of the foot even unto the head (from the lowest to the highest, from the
Beggar upon the dunghill, to the King upon the throne) there was no soundness in
it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, which could not be bound up,
nor mollified with ointment. The whole body of the State and Nation was so
universally corrupted and depraved, that the Lord calls them, A sinful Nation,
a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that were
corrupters, and such as had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the holy one of
Israel unto anger, and had gone backward. And tells them further, that the was
even weary with smiting and punishing of them; Why should ye be stricken any
more? ye will revolt more and more: Yet see for all their great and grievous
provoking sins, and that general depravation and corruption that was among all
sorts, from the highest to the lowest of them, as the 21, 22, and 23 verses of
that Chapter do clearly demonstrate the truth of it; How does the Lord
notwithstanding invite them again to repentance, by gracious promises of
pardon, and the bestowing of all good things upon them? Wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow; intimating wherein they should manifest the
sincerity of their repentance, and returning unto the Lord: And then mark what
follows; Come now let us reason together (says the Lord) though your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be like crimson, they
shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land: But if ye refuse, and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword. O the
great indulgence and forbearance of the Lord toward this so generally
depraved, corrupted and unreformed a people! Which is further notably set forth
in that of the third of Zephany; Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the
oppressing City, she obeyed not the voice: she received not correction, she
trusted not in the Lord: She drew not near to her God. Her Princes within are
roaring lions, her Judges are evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the
morrow. Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons: Her Priests have
polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law. And what follows? I
have cut off the Nations, their towers are desolate, I made their streets waste
that none passes by, their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that
there is no inhabitant. I said, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive
instruction; (thou will now be warned by my judgments upon the Nations round
about thee) so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them,
but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.

The filthy leprosy and contagion of sin had so overspread and infested the
whole Nation, whereby she became now ripe for destruction. And therefore did
the Lord wound her with the wound of an enemy, and with the chastisement of a
cruel one, for the multitude of her iniquity, because her sins were increased,
Jer. 30.14. And now the wrath of the Lord breaks out, and it could not he
appeased; For he brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slew their
youngmen with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion
upon young man or maiden, old man or him that stooped for age; he gave them all
into his hand, 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. They would not take example by the
judgments of God which he executed upon the heathen round about them, and now
God will make them the examples of his fierce indignation and wrath: Patientia
loesa fit furor. His abused and worn out patience is now turned into implacable
anger; His Spirit will not always strive, Genesis 6.3. Jerusalem had her day, Luke
19.42. God would have gathered her, but she would not, and now her house is
left unto her desolate, Matthew. 23.37, 38.

Will thou then, O England, take a view of thy sins: and see whether they do
not equal, if not overpass the sins of that Nation? Are not thy sins grown
epidemical, and spread through the whole body? may it not be said of thee as of
that Nation, that the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint? Can the
Throne plead an exemption from this universal contagion? Can the Prince or
Peasant, the Nobility or Gentry, the Laick or Ecclesiastic? Have not all sorts
and degrees of men and women deeply corrupted themselves, and turned aside from
following the Lord? When did sin and transgression more abound then in this our
age and generation? when did it walk up and down with a more impudent and
brazen face? when did you ever see Pride to be prouder? Oppression more
oppressive? Adultery more adulterous? Luxury more luxurious? Cruelty more
cruel? Unrighteousness more unrighteous, and all manner of disobedience to God
and his commands, more disobedient? When was Drunkeness and Prodigality,
Swearing, Cursing and Blaspheming, Ranting and Roaring, Atheism and Epicurism,
more abounding? When was there a more profanation of Gods holy things? a
greater pollution of his Sanctuary? more violence done to his law? a greater
contempt of Godliness, under the form and outward appearance of it? when was
their more scoffing at Holiness, and deriding the Spirit of God, and a more
open opposition of the pure way and Worship of God, then now in our days? And
was there ever a greater Apostasy and falling away from the Faith, even by
such, who once did shine as stars in the firmament of the Churches Heaven,
making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, to preserve a little airy
honor, and a temporary perishing estate? And how has the treacherous dealers
dealt treacherously? and the Brother betrayed and delivered up the brother to
death, the Fathers the Children, and the children risen up against their
Parents, and causing them to be put to death? according as was foretold by our
dear Lord, Matthew. 10.21. And surely, we may take up the same doleful
lamentation and complaint, with the Prophet Isaiah, namely, That truth is
fallen in our streets, and equity cannot enter, yea truth fails, and he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey, Isa. 59.14, 15. Yea, has not
wickedness been established by a law? and will not that woe be the portion of
some who have decreed unrighteous decrees, and write grievousness which they
have prescribed; To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor of Gods people, that widows may be their prey, and that
they may rob the fatherless? Isa. 10.1, 2.

And what shall I say to the generality of the late professing people of this
generation, when Religion was in fashion, and the ready way and step to
preferment? was it not made even a stalking Horse, by many to obtain their base
sinister, most vile and unworthy ends? How furiously did many drive on
Jehu-like, under the most specious and plausible pretenses of piety, and doing
great exploits for God; Come see my zeal for the Lord, breaking down the
Images, and destroying the Worshippers of Baal, 2 King. 9.20. and 10.16, 19,
26. And all this, but to accomplish and bring about their own ambitious and
vainglorious designs, the better to get up into the saddle, and that the Crown
of all earthly glory might be set the faster and firmer upon their own heads?
And when they had obtained that which their covetous and ambitious hearts, so
eagerly hunted after, enriching themselves by the spoiling, and impoverishing
of others, what a requiem did they then sing unto their souls? what a lullaby
to their earthly satisfactions and contentments?

How did they hug themselves in their great and large territories, and new
obtained possessions? And now farewell Profession, Religion, and Conscience, but
as it may be made serviceable to promote and maintain a carnal selfish interest
and end. And it is lamentable to consider what a vain, secure, proud, formal,
fashionable, temporizing, self-seeking, self-admiring, self-exalting spirit,
did most Professors then grow into. O, the hatred, variance, emulations,
seditions, the debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings,
swellings, tumults, grudgings, evil speakings, rash and uncharitable
censurings, and most unchristian condemnings of one another, that was then
found among them.

O the breakings and rendings, the separatings and dividings that sprang up
from these roots of bitterness, whereby many sincere souls were troubled, and
others thereby became greatly defiled. Surely, upon a serious and sad
reflection hereon, it may be said as concerning the Divisions of Reuben, Judge.
5.15. that for these things there were great thoughts of heart, great
impressions upon the spirits of many that did truly and sincerely fear the
Lord. Nay, what shall we say to those furious, blind, zealous, pharisaical
spirits of those times, who did breath out threatenings, persecutions and
slaughters even against the Disciples and servants of the Lord, because they
could not conscienciously (and not factiously, as they termed it) conform to a
public Directory for worship, or submit to some unwarrantable and unscriptural
impositions and injunctions, whereby many were cast into Prisons, their goods
violently taken away, and themselves and families exposed to great misery,
necessity and want? So little did appear, and (much to be lamented it is) so
little does still appear of that wisdom that is from above, that is pure and
peaceable, and gentle and easy to be entreated, Jam. 3.17. So little of that
spirit, whose fruit is demonstrable by its meekness, gentleness and goodness,
Gal. 5.22. So little of that charity that suffers long, and is kind, that
envieth not, that vaunteth not it self (or is not rash) and puffed up, 1 Cor.
13.4.

And, O that I could say, there was not the same spirit still, under several
forms of profession, that is, lusting to pride, envy, censoriousness,
separation, domination, and persecution. How violently do most men seek to
advance, and set up their own opinion still? What a Babel, and confusion of
languages are there still among us? Some crying, Lo here, others, Lo there.
What force and compulsion is there still exercised upon Conscience, to beat men
as it were into Religion, the certain Mark and Character of Antichrist, that
Man of sin, who Satan-like, works with all powers, signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Whereas Religio docenda, non coercenda, Religion is to be taught,
and not to be forcedly thrust and imposed upon the Conscience. When the
Scripture tells us, that fervent Charity should cover a multitude of sins, 1
Pet. 4.8. But alas, it is not large and long enough, to cover one sin or slip,
or perhaps but an infirmity, or weakness in a Brother. When the Scripture tells
us, We ought to bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ,
Gal. 6.2. And that nothing should be done through strife, or vainglory, but
that in lowliness of mind, each should esteem others, better then themselves,
Philip. 2.3. When the Scripture tells us, That (as the Elect of God, etc.) we
should put on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, Col. 3.12,
13. And that with all lowliness, and meekness, etc. we should endeavor to keep
the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.2, 3.

When the Scripture tells us, That it is a Diotrephes spirit, to love to have
the pre-eminence in the Church, 3 Epist. Joh. of 9. verse. that is, who out of
ambition shall exalt himself above his fellow brethren, seeking to Lord it over
them, and to draw all the respect to himself alone. Contrary to that of Peter,
who forbids the Elders, to be Lords over Gods heritage, but to be Example to
the flock, 2 Pet. 5.3. And most disagreeable to the pattern and example of that
blessed Apostle Paul himself, and other the faithful Ministers of Christ, who
in his Epistle to the Church of Corinths, declares, That thee had not a
dominion over their faith, but were helpers of their joy, 2 Cor. 1.24. And that
the weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but mighty through God, 2 Cor.
10.4. The weapons which they used, by the Gospel of Christ to convert men, and
to bring them under the Kingdom and obedience of Christ, were not carnal, that
is, such as natural, and worldly men are wont to make use of; either by
eloquence or deceit, or by force to bring others in subjection under them; but
mighty or powerful through God, in moving and convincing of the hearts of men
by his Spirit, Act. 16.14. Surely, if these things were seriously laid to
heart, we must needs acknowledge that the sins of professing people, as well as
others, have been highly provoking unto the Lord, as to the drawing down of
this sore visitation of the Plague among us.

And this may put us to silence, that we murmur not, and will justify the
righteousness of God in the way of his severity, as he now comes forth against
many of his own people. For we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, Romans 3.23. And what says the Lord by the Prophet, Amos. All the sinners of
my people shall dye by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor
prevent us, Amos 9.10. So the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy complains: For among
my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that sets snares, they
set a trap, they catch men. As a Cage is full of birds, so are their houses
full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich. They are waxen
fat, they shine, they overpass the deeds of the wicked, they judge not the
cause, the cause of the fatherless: yet they prosper: and the right of the
needy do they not judge. And mark what follows? Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this,
Jer. 25.26, 27, 28, 29. And who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the
robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not
walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. And consider well
what follows. Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew not,
and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart, Jsa. 42.24, 25. So Jeremy the
12.7. I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have given the
dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies.

And what may we gather from all this? Surely thus much, That no near relations
as to God, or any external privileges, can yield a protection, from a
sin-deserved correction. Remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32. Vengeance closely
waits on disobedience: Punishment does dog impiety. For this cause many are
weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, says Paul to the Church of
Corinths, speaking of eating and drinking unworthily at the Lords Table, 1 Cor.
11.29, 30. God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, with any approbation
or tolleration as to his own peculiar people. If his children forsake my law
(speaking of David and his seed, as a Type of Christ and the true spiritual
seed) and walk not in my judgments: If they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: What then says the Lord? Then will I visit their transgression
with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89.30. The Lord has laid
righteousness to the rule, and waighed his justice in a balance; and his
judgments are right, and in faithfulness he does afflict, Psalm. 119.75. His
sentence is past forth, and stands irrevocable: Tribulation and anguish upon
every soul that does evil, Romans 2.9. If we sin we shall suffer. How? Aut a Deo
vindicante, aut ab ipso homine penitente, as one says excellent well; Either
from God revenging, or themselves repenting. For he that repents himself of
his sins, does punish himself for his sins.

And now, O England, if thou repent not, let me say unto thee, as the Prophet
Isaiah Chap. 10.2. to the men of that generation. What will thou do now in the
day of thy visitation, and in the desolation that shall come from far. To whom
will thou flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? O then bethink thy
self yet, before it be too late, before the wrath of the Lord break out, so
that their will be no remedy. O gather thy self together, O Nation not
desirous, before the Decree bring forth, before the fierce anger of the Lord
come upon thee, before the whole Land be devoured by the fire of his jealousy,
before he make a speedy riddance of all that dwell in the land. As the Lord by
the Prophet Zephaniah exhorts, Chap. 1.18. Chap. 2.1, 2. O then return unto the
Lord thy God, for hou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take unto you words, and
turn unto the Lord, say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, Hosea 14.1. Suitable to which is the Churches exhortation, Come,
and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up, Hosea 6.1.

This is the way the Lord himself propounds for the removal of his sweeping
devouring Judgments, Turn ye, even to me with all your heart, and with fasting,
and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your heart, and not your
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, who knows if he will return, and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him, Joel 2.12, 13. Let the King lay his
robe from him, and cover him with sackcloth, and sit in ashes; let man and
beast be covered with sackcloath, let there be some demonstrative tokens of a
more then ordinary sorrow and humiliation, for each and every ones so highly
provoking sins. Let all cry mightily to God* yea, let them turn every one from
his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God
will turn, and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
This will move Gods repentings toward us, this will divert his wrath, Jonah 3.
and the latter end, Jer. 31.20. And that you may not question the truth and
certainty of it in the least, will you consider, that the Lord stands engaged
by his unalterable word and promise to make it good. If I shut up heaven (says
he) that there be no rain, etc. Or if I send Pestilence among my people: if my
people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and seek
my face, and turn from their wicked ways: What then will he do? Then will I
hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. Wherefore let that counsel be acceptable to all, which Daniel
gave to King Nabuchadnezzar. O King break off thy sins by righteousness, and
thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of
thy tranquillity, Dan. 4.27. As if he had said, If thou will follow the counsel
that I give thee, then there is hope, that God will have mercy upon thee, and
lengthen thy peace, rest, and prosperity. And if thou will break off thy sins
by righteousness, then thou must not only loose the bands of wickedness, but
thou must undo the heavy burdens also, and let the oppressed go free, and break
every yoke. Thou must deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are
cast out to thy house; when thou see the naked, thou must cover him, and not
hide thy self from thy own flesh, Isa. 58.6, 7.

And surely, if this counsel be timously accepted, O people of England! O City
of London! though thou have trespassed greivously against the Lord, and broken
the Covenant of thy God, and the hand of the Lord is gone out against thee, and
death is come up into thy Windows, yea, even entered into thy Palaces, Jer.
9.21. Yet know, that if thou humblest thy self and repentest, there is hope in
Israel, concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. And O, that thou may know, even in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, before they are hid from
thine eyes.

And think not that your flying away can secure you, his hand knows how to find
you out. Whether can thou go from his spirit, or whether can thou flee from
his presence, Psalm. 139.7. And know assuredly, that if thou art still an enemy,
and a hater of God and goodness, his hand will find thee out, Psalm. 21.8. Thine
hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall find out those that
hate thee. Thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger, the
Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. And as
Job says, His eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.
There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may
hide themselves, Job 34.21, 22. And though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle,
and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down,
says the Lord, Obad. verse. 4. And know whosoever thou art, though thou
rufflest it in thy gallantry and pride, if yet thou puts far away from thee the
evil day, and causest the seat of violence to come near, that lie upon thy
bed of Ivory, and stretches thy self upon thy Couch, and chaunts to the sound
of the viol, and drinks wine in bowls, and anoint thy self with the chief
ointments, but greivest not for the afflictions of Joseph, that the judgment of
God will pursue thee at thy very heels. And if thou repentest not, but shall
still bless thy self in thy heart, saying, Thou shall have peace, though thou
walk in the imaginations of thy own heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The
Lord will not spare thee, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy
shall smoke against thee, and all the curses that are written in the Book of
God, shall lie upon thee, and the Lord shall blot out thy name from under
heaven, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

The Third spiritual Receipt.
When in the conscionable use of the former means, thou find that this
bitter pill or potion of Repentance, has begun to operate upon thy heart, so
as to cause it to melt and mourn kindly before the Lord; then in the next
place, take a good draught of Faith in the blood of Christ, and put therein
also a good quantity of Belief, in the power, faithfulness, and promises of God
in Christ. This through the blessing of God, will make this bitter pill to work
strongly and effectually, to the expelling of all those virulent, obnoxious,
and malignant humors that are such great enemies to a healthful and sound
constitution of soul and body, which if unexpelled, that they grow to some head
and strength, they will have a very strong influence upon thy spirits, to
contract this sore Pestilential distemper, to the endangering oftentimes of the
loss, and ruin of the whole man, soul, and body to all eternity.

First, Then this Faith in the blood of Christ, rightly applied unto thy soul,
is and has been always a very sovereign Receipt, and a precious Antidote to
expel, 1. All the fiery assaults of Satan. 2. The venom and malignity of sin.


And therefore, among all the several choice pieces of our spiritual Armory,
laid down in the 6th. of the Ephesians: This is recommended, as the most choice
and principal piece among them all; Above all, taking the shield of faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Some
translate it (in all) as if he had said, in all things whatsoever you do, see
that you use the shield of faith; (to all) as if he had said, to all other
Graces add this; (above all) which is more emphatical, for hereby all the
imperfections of the rest of the Arms are covered, and we are best defended
against all the fiery darts, and assaults of Satan, that is, his poisonous
darts: which by their venom inflame the soul. The Apostle alludes to the
custom of old, in times of war, who by their darts shot fire; or else, when
they dipped the heads of their arrows in poison, and shot them at their
enemies, they even fired their flesh: To prevent which, it is said, that the
Soldiers made them large sheilds of raw Neats-leather, which might cover the
whole body, so that when the fiery venomous darts lighted upon them, they were
presently quenched. All which agrees well with the nature of Satan's
temptations, which as poison and fire, do wound and pierce the soul, if they be
not stopped and quenched by the shield of faith, when they hit upon it.

So in the 1 Pet. 5.8. The Apostle directs to the making use of this most
excellent piece of a Christians armor of proof, speaking of our adversary the
Devil, who as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour; This
counsel he gives, That we resist him steadfastly in the faith. Resist the Devil
(says James) and he will flee from you, Jam. 4.7. Resist him, when he tempts
and enticeth thee to fulfill thy fleshly lusts, and to seek after the
freindship of the world. And he will flee from thee, he will run away; if thou
withstand him, oppose him, and set thy self, as it were, in battle array
against him; thou will find him as very a coward, as ever any that handled a
weapon; thou will make him run away presently.

But that you may resist him and foil him, you must be sure to resist him, and
that steadfastly in the faith; if you make use of this weapon, he will never be
able to encounter with you: Faith will foil him. By this weapon, the Saints
always overcame him, Rev. 12.11. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb. And how by the blood of the Lamb? Satan will tell thee, thou art a vile,
filthy, polluted, and abominable wretch; a great and heinous sinner: but faith
in the blood of Christ will tell him, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners; yea, the greatest and chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And that
God has set him forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood for the
remission of sins, Romans 3.25. And though thou art naturally unclean, and have
contracted much defilement by reason of sin; yet that Christ has loved thee,
and washed thee from thy sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5. That in him thou have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1.14.

Satan will tell thee, thou have broken the Law, and incurred Gods anger,
wrath, hell, and eternal damnation: Faith will tell him, that Christ has
perfectly fulfilled the Law, satisfied divine justice; taken away the curse,
and freed thee from condemnation, Romans 8.1. and that Jesus Christ by his blood
has pacified Gods anger toward thee, Romans 3.25. Faith will tell him, thou art
not under the Law now, and so not under the Curse; and that though the Law does
pronounce thee accursed for the breach of it, yet Christ has redeemed thee
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.10, 13. Satan will
tell tell thee still thou art unrighteous, and the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; but faith will tell him, that thou art washed, that
thou art sanctified, that thou art justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6.11. And that Christ was made sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor.
5.21. And as he was made sin, so of God also is he made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. Does Satan tempt thee ^o
evil? Faith will tell him, that he so tempted Christ, but Christ vanquished him
in all his tempttaions, Mat. 4. And we are more then Conquerors through Christ
that has loved us, Romans 8.37. Does he yet tempt thee to be proud? tell him,
that God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5 5. Does
he tempt thee to passion? tell him, that the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God, Jam. 1.20. Does he tempt thee to uncleaness? tell him,
thy body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, and thou art not thine one, but art
bought with a price, and therefore thou must glorify God in thy body, and in
thy spirit which is Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

Does he tempt thee to be a servant of men? tell him thou art bought with a
price, and so freed from that servitude, 1 Cor. 7.23. would he have thee to
please men? tell him, if yet thou should please men, thou should not be the
servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Does he tempt thee to the love of the world? tell
him, that if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. Does he tempt thee to an indifferent, lukewarm spirit in the things
of God? tell him, that the Lord testifies against such a spirit, that is
neither hot nor cold, that he will spue it out of his mouth, Rev 3.16. Does he
tempt thee to fall away, draw back and renounce thy profession; tell him, that
such as so fall away, shall not be renewed again unto repentance, Seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame,
Heb. 6.6. And that if any man draws back, the Lord will have no pleasure in
him, Heb. 10.38. You see what a most excellent weapon this shield of Faith is
to repel the temptations and assaults of Satan upon all accounts.

Secondly, And it is of like force and efficacy to expel the venom and
malignity of sin. Art thou stung with it at any time; look up by faith unto the
brazen Serpent, there is healing, Numb. 21.9. Are thy sins of a scarlet dye?
Faith in his blood can make them as white as snow; are they red like crimson?
it will make them as wool, Isa. 1.18. Are they many and multiplied
transgressions? Faith will tell thee, that where sin has abounded, there grace
has much more abounded; that as sin has reigned unto death, even so might
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 5.20, 21. Have thou abundantly sinned? this faith will tell thee, that God
will abundantly pardon (he will multiply pardons, Isa. 55.7.) Do thou fear
the reigning, domineering power of sin? This faith will assure thee, That sin
shall not have dominion over thee, for that thou art not under the law, but
under grace, Romans 6.14. Do thou yet fear that thy sins shall stand on the
file, and that God will remember thine iniquity? this faith in Christ's blood
will assure thee, that he will blot out thy transgressions for his own name
sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25.

But perhaps thou art afraid of Death, and of the power of the Grave; this
Faith will assure thee, that death is swallowed up in victory, his sting taken
out, that Christ has ransomed thee from the power of the grave, and has
redeemed thee from death, that he is deaths plague, and the graves destruction,
Isa. 25.8. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54. So that we may triumphantly say, Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he
that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay the gracious
beleiving souls may be persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate them from the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus their Lord, Romans 8. and some of the last verses
thereof. Will thou not then fear this severe stroke of Gods visitation. O get
more of the blood of sprinkling on thy soul, this speaks better things then
the blood of Abet. The blood of the Paschal Lamb was to be struck on the two
side posts, and on the upper door post of the houses of the children of Israel,
when God did intend to smite the firstborn in the land of Egypt, and execute
his judgment against all the Egyptian gods, and says the Lord, When I see the
the blood I will pass over you, meaning the children of Israel, and the Plague
sholl not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the Land of Egypt. What did
this typifie and hold forth, but Christ the true Passover or Paschal Lamb,
whose blood besprinkling the conscience, cleanses us from all sin, and
delivers us from the stroke of the destroying Angel, even from wrath to come,
1 John 1.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

See then that thou exercise thy self continually in that only heaven upon
earth, and sweetest sanctuary to a hunted, troubled and afflicted soul, The
life of Faith, in reference to thy Salvation, Sanctification and Preservation.
As to thy Salvation; Let the truly-humbled soul, grieved and graoning under the
heavy weight and burden of sin, throw itself into the meritorious and merciful
arms of Jesus Christ, wounded, broken and bleeding upon the Cross, and there
let it hold and hide it self for ever, in full assurance of eternal life, by
virtue of that promise, Joh. 3.36. He that beleiveth on the Son has
everlasting life.

2. As to thy Sanctification; If thou keep thy Faith, the fountain, root and
heart, as it were, from which all thine other Graces spring, in life and
vigor, thou will pray more comfortably, be more courageously patient, hear the
Word more faithfully, receive Christ's Ordinance of Breaking bread more
joyfully, spend the Lords day more delightfully, confer more cheerfully,
meditate more heavenly, and walk in all the ways of new obedience, with more
strength and conquest over corruptions. For ordinarily every one shall find the
exercise of other graces, to be comfortable or cold, according to the
liveliness, or languishing of his faith.

3. As to thy Preservation both temporal and spiritual; in crosses,
afflictions, and all Gods outward angry visitation, let thy Faith be exercised
in the power of such Promises as the, Psa. 89.33: and 50.15. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8,
11. 1 These. 3.3. 1 Timothy 2.11. Act. 14.22. Luke 9.23. Isa 63.9.

Secondly, Act Faith in the power, ability allsufficiency, and omnipotency of
God. Power can do much, but omnipotency can do all, and is above all. He is
able to do whatsoever he pleases, Psa. 115.3. He is wise in heart, and mighty
in strength, who has hardened himself against him, and has prospered? Job
9.4. The Angels which excel in strength are at his command, Psa. 104.4. and
subject unto Christ, 1 Pet. 3.22. The Devils apprehending the power of God, do
tremble, Jam. 2.19. All the power that men and devils have, it is given them
from above, Joh. 19.11. And for other creatures, he says to the deep be dry,
Isa. 44.27. He commands the earth and it opens her mouth, Number. 16.30, 31. The
consideration of whose mighty power, made the Psalmist thus to break forth; O
Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord, like unto thee, or to thy faithfulness
round about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof
arise, thou stillest them; thou have broken Rahab in pieces as one that is
slain, thou have scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm; Thou have a
mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand, Psa. 89.8, 9, 10,
13. At his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to
abide his indignation, Jer. 10.10.

Beware then how we call into question the power and all sufficiency of God;
How we speak against God; This was the sin of the Israelites, and it was highly
provoking unto the Lord. Its said they spoke against God and said, Can God
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Behold he smote the rock, that the waters
gushed out, and the streams overflowed, can he give bread also? can he provide
flesh for his people? therefore the Lord heard this, and was wrath, Psa. 88.19,
20, 21. Moses also, he falls expostulating the case with God. The people
amongst whom I am (says he) are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have
said, I will give, them flesh, that they may eat a whole month; Shall the
Flocks and the Herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the Fish
of the Sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them? And what Argument
does the Lord use to convince Moses of his carnal, if not incredulous
reasonings, But this, Is the Lords hand waxed short? thou shall see now whether
my word shall come to pass unto thee or not, Numb. 11.21, 22, 23. And the Lord
rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered Fowls like as the sand of the
Sea, though it was given as a great judgment unto them, Psa. 88.27. The same
Argument does the Lord make use of, when he falls a reasoning with his people
the Jews, upon the account of their dereliction or rejection, and that they
might yet have sound ground of hope still of their restoration, though they
had sold themselves for their iniquities, and could not produce any Bill of
Divorcement of the Lords putting of them away, in Isa. 50.2. Is my hand
shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? Behold,
at my rebuke I dry up the Sea: I make the Rivers a Wilderness; their Fish
stincketh because there is no water, and dies for thirst. I cloth the Heavens
with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering: So Isa. 59.1. Behold the
Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that it
cannot hear; Which may be an excellent support to our faith. Let thy Faith then
be exercised in the mighty power of God, in these following particular cases
and seasons.

1. In times of great difficulties and streights.

2. In times of sore sicknesses.

3. In times of great sinning.

4. In times of Worshipping and Serving the Lord.

5. In times of great suffering for the Lord.

1. In times of great difficulties and streights; Know that the same Almighty
power, who could smite the Rock, and cause the waters to gush out, and the
streams to overflow, can furnish a table in the Wilderness, can give bread, and
provide flesh for his people. Take heed now of such irrational, absurd, and
preposterous reasonings; The Lord smote the Rock, and gave water in abundance,
but can he now furnish a table in the Wilderness? I remember the time when I
was in great streights, for bodily and soul refreshments; and the Lord smote
the Rock in a strange, miraculous, and unexpected way, and the Waters gushed
out, and the streams over-flowed; I had comfortable supplies for soul and body,
and that in a plentiful manner. But can he now help me in my streights, and
supply my necessities? now all conduit pipes are cut off, and all visible means
of supplies and supports are taken away, Taxes are multiplied and increased,
our Trade is gone, the Gentry gone, and such as gave life and being thereunto,
have laid aside, and betook themselves to a retired life; many gone beyond the
Seas, because they could not follow their callings, and be suffered to enjoy
the freedom of their consciences too; God has smitten some of my dear friends
or relations, who were instruments in his hand of my comfortable sustentation
and supportation, and now, my Wife, and Children, begin to stare me in the
face, to sob and sigh, and I have not wherewith to relieve them; The sight and
thoughts of these things do even break my heart, and wound my very bowels
within me; what shall I do? what course shall I take for a livelihood? Methinks
I hear such doleful complaints among thousands destressed Families in the City
at this time. Is it not a time and season then to be acting faith in the mighty
power and providence of God? Surely it is an easy matter to trust God, when we
have Meal in the Barrel, and Oil in the Cruse, and Money in our Purse; but will thou trust God, and rely upon his power, in the want and absence of all; As the
Prophet Habakkuk, when the Fig Tree did not blossom, nor fruit could be found
in the Vines, when the labor of the Olive did fail, and the Field did yield no
meat, when the Flocks were cut off from the fold, and there were no Herd in the
stall, when there was an utter consumption and deprivation of all things; then
to be rejoicing in the Lord, and joying in the God of our salvation. Then to
say, the Lord is my strength, and he will make me to walk on my high places.
Then to say, the Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want; as David, and though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for thou
art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me, Psalm. 22. then to live
beleivingly, trustingly, and dependingly upon God.

This is a high Act of Faith in the Power of God. And O that I could minister a
word of support unto thy soul in such a condition: Well, be not faithless, but
beleiving; live still in the faith of the all sufficiency of God: That his hand
is not shortened, that it cannot help; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot
hear; there is no diminution of his power, or is there any unwillingness in God
to hear and help in a time of need: Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil
(says the Psalmist) when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about,
Psalm. 49.5.

So say thou, thou poor, doubting, and disponding soul. Why should I fear in
this evil day? why should I distrust that God, and doubt of his power and
all sufficiency to help me now, who has fed me, and clothed me, and sustained
me all the days of my life? Why should I not be casting my care upon him, who
has not only promised, but is able also to take care of me? 1 Pet. 5.7. Why do
I not cast my burden upon the Lord, who has graciously promised (and he is
able also) to sustain me, and will never suffer the righteous to be moved?
Psalm. 55.22. This was a great stay and support to Abraham's faith, when God
promised to make him a Father of may Nations; He considered not the deadness of
his own body, being about 100. years old, nor the deadness of Sarai's womb. He
staggered not at the promise of God through unbeleif, but was strong in faith
giving glory to God; and being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he
was able also to perform. Mark I pray you, he did not only believe the promise,
but the ability of God also, he fixed his faith in the power and all sufficiency
of God, Romans 4.19, 20, 21. He was assured, that God was as able, as he was
faithful in the performance of his promise. God had said unto him, but a little
before, Abram, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect; and
now Abram would not question it in the least, he knew his grace was
all-sufficient for him, and that his strength could be perfected in his
weakness.

As the Lord told Paul in another case, 2 Cor. 12.9. And has left it for ever
upon record, as a most precious cordial of comfort, to refresh and support the
most fainty, distressed, and disconsolate soul: To wit, When the poor and needy
seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them; And that they may
not think he wants power to perform what he has promised (says he) I will
open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the values: I will
make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water, Isa.
41.17, 18, 19.

Surely, this promise is very applicable to poor, needy, thirsty, hungry souls,
upon the account of temporal or spiritual refreshment. And the Saints have
believed it: Though I walk (says David) in the midst of trouble, thou will
revive me, thou will stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine
enemies, and thy right hand shall save me, Psalm. 138.7. Yea, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, (though I should be in the most
dark, dismal and uncomfortable condition) yet I will fear no evil, thou art
with me, thy presence shall support me, thy rod, and thy staff, they shall
comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. Though he slay me (says Job) yet will I trust in him:
I will maintain mine own ways before him. He also shall be my salvation, Job.
13.15.

So when the enemies of God are high, and the Church of Christ very low. O this
acting of faith in the power of God is of great use. O God, how long shall the
adversary reproach, shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why
withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand (and that's the hand of power and
strength surely) pluck it out of thy bosom. For God is my King of old
(consider it I pray you) working salvation in the midst of the earth. Thou
did divide the Sea by thy strength: thou breakest the heads of the Dragons in
the waters. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be
meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness. Thou did clean the fountain and
the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers, Psalm. 74.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. What
cannot the Lord do, when he has a purpose to save his people, and to destroy
his enemies? Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a god as our
God? Thou art the God that do wonders: thou have declared thy strength among
the people. Thou have with thine own redeemed thy people, the Sons of Jacob and
Joseph, Psalm. 77.13, 14, 15. Will thou not revive us again, that thy people may
rejoice in thee, Psalm. 85.6. This raised up the Churches hopes, in the stormy
and tempestuous times of persecution; and why? The Lord reigns, he is
clothed with majesty, the Lord is clothed with strength, wherewith he has
girded himself, etc. The floods have lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted
up their voice: the floods lift up their waves. What then? The Lord on high is
mightier then the noise of many waters; yea, then the mighty waves of the Sea.
And so said Jethro, when Moses had told him what the Lord had done unto
Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians for Isreal's sake, and all the travel that had
come upon them by the way, and how the Lord delivered them. Now I know (says
he) that the Lord is greater then all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt
proudly, he was above them.

This is the Churches comfort, that though their enemies are high, and proud,
and imperious, yet the Lord is above them, Ezod. 18.8, 11. This was the
Argument that good King Jehosophat used in prayer with the Lord, when a great
multitude of enemies came against him. O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou
God in heaven? and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen; and
in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand
thee? Art not thou our God, who did drive out the inhabitants of this land
before thy people Israel, and gave it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for
ever? O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have no might against this
great company that comes against us: neither know we what to do, but our eyes
are upon thee. And the Lord did thereupon show forth his mighty power, and that
this great multitude was not able to withstand him. For he set ambushments
against the Children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, that came against Judah,
and they were smitten, and every one afterward helped to destroy another, 2 Chronicles. 20.

O then be acting faith, in this great and powerful Jehovah, that he would make
bare his holy arm, in the eyes of all the Nations; that all the ends of the
earth, may see the salvation of our God, Isa. 52.10. Fear and tremble before
him, whose mighty power has limited, and bounded the proud and imperious waves
of the Sea; that hitherto shall they come and no further, and here shall its
proud waves be stayed, Jeremiah 5.22. comp. with Job 37.11. Fear him, that can
cast both body and soul into hell, Matthew. 10.28. It is he that makes the
pillars of heaven to tremble, and to be astonished at his reproof, Job 26.11.

And learn to depend on this Almighty being for preservation in all streights
and exigents whatsoever, who can preserve without means, as Elijah, forty days
and forty nights, 1 King. 19.8. by strange and miraculous means, even by the
help of Ravens that fed him, 1 King. 17.4. by the ministry of Angels, verse.
the 5. and the 6. of that 1 King. 19. Chap. By small means, as the widows meal
in the barrel, and her little oil in her cruse, 2 King. 17.14. Against means,
as Daniel in the Lions den, Dan. 6.22. By ordinary means, wherein his powerful
blessing is to be desired; else, we may eat, and not be satisfied, Hag. 1.6.
And let us praise him withal our strength for his almighty power, Rev. 4.11.
Worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power. Thine O Lord,
is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. And let us be
speaking of his power, to make known to the Sons of men, his mighty acts, and
the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom. Whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
and whose dominion endures throughout all generations. And for the adversaries
of the Lord, let them know, that they shall be broken to pieces, and that out
of heaven God shall thunder upon them, 1 Samuel 2.10. And that his power, and his
wrath is against all them that do evil, Ezra 8.22. And let it be matter of
consolation and encouragement in our prayers, that we call on that God, who is
able to do exceedingly abundantly, above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20.
In our perseverance; That the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the
ends of the earth who faints not, neither is weary, will renew our strength,
that we shall run and not be, weary, and walk, and not faint, Isa. 40.31.
Because he upholds us in our integrity, Psalm. 41.12. The Garrison that keeps
us, is the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. And none can take us out of his hand,
because he is greater then all, Joh. 10.29.

In times of Temptation, For our strength is in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, Ephesians. 6.10. it is he that strengthens us in the inward man. And when
God shall help us with a little help, Dan. 11.34. then our strongest
temptations shall not prevail, but we shall be more then conquerors, through
him that loved us, Romans 8.37.

In times of Affliction, Know that he that is Almighty orders them for the
kind, whether on our souls or bodies, names or estates, Amos 3.6. For the
measure, whether great or small, Jer. 30.11. The time, sometimes but an
evening; heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the mourning,
Psalm. 30.6. Sometimes ten days, The Devil shall cast some of you into prison,
and ye shall have tribulation ten days, Rev. 2.10. Sometimes our sorrows shall
be for years, Psalm. 90.15. Make us glad, according to the days wherein thou
have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

He orders the Deliverance; there is an appointed time for that also. Joseph's
feet must be hurt with fetters, and lie in irons, until the time that the word
of the Lord came and tried him, and then the King sends and loses him, and
makes him Lord of his house, and Ruler of all his substance, Psalm. 105.19, 20,
21. There is a time when the Prisoners shall be loosed out of their pit, and
turn to their strong hold, even the Prisoners of hope, Zach. 9.10, 11.

Lastly, what great consolation does this minister in respect of death; our
bodies shall not always rot and consume; we must awake and sing, though we
dwell in the dust, Isa. 26.19. And our vile bodies shall be chaanged and
fashioned like unto his glorious body (even by the mighty and absolute power of
Christ) according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things
unto himself, Phil. 3.21. All created powers being derived from him, and
subordinate unto him, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. and 2 Chronicles. 14.11.

2. Act faith in the mighty power of God, and that in times of sickness, and of
this sore visitation of the Lord. Know that this is the Lords prerogative
royal, to kill and to make alive, to bring down to the grave and to bring up
again, 1 Samuel 2.6. This the Lord challenges, as his own sovereign, peculiar
right, I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me; I kill and I make alive,
I wound and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand, Deuteronomy.
32.39. In Psalm. 90.1, 2, 3 Says the Church there, Lord thou have bin our
dwelling place in all generations, Before the mountains were brought forth,
etc. even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. And what follows? Thou
turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye children of men. The
consideration of this mighty power and the Churches acting faith in the same,
did put her upon pious thoughts of returning unto the Lord; Come, and let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up. And what follows? After two days will he revive us, in
the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.1, 2.

Consider then in the first place, whoever thou art, that art thus under the
chastising hand of God, that affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither
does trouble spring out of the ground, yet man is born unto trouble, as the
sparks fly upward, Job 5.6, 7. But if sores and sickness comes not forth of
the dust, from whence come they then? Surely, from the powerful immediate
overruling hand of God. So said Eliphaz, Job 17. Behold, happy is the man whom
God corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: For,
he makes sore and binds up, he wounds and his hands make whole. So Job
himself acknowledged, chapter 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my
friends, for the hand of God has touched me. So David, Thine arrows stick fast
in me, and thy hand presses me sore, Psalm. 38.2. And consider, that as a
sparrow falls not to the ground without Gods providence, so the Plagve and
Pestilence, and all other Sicknesses and diseases are guided by his own
immediate hand, and he only does smite when and whom he pleases; and know,
that the same Powerful hand that took away thy health, can in a moment take
away thy breath, and then thou die aad returnest unto thy dust, Psalm. 104.29.
This should make thee lie down patiently at the foot of God, and with all
willing and cheerful resignation of spirit, with good old Ely, say, It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. And with Job, Shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil, Job 2.10. But
whatever affliction he lays upon thy loins, or what strokes soever upon any
of thy dearest relations, see that thou murmur not, nor charge the Lord
foolishly or unjustly; say not with the King of Israel, Behold, this evil is of
the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 King. 6. ult.

2ly. Let the sense of the mighty hand of God which is upon thee, humble thee
deeply; So says Peter, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6. This will evidence it self inwardly in a
sight and sense of thine own great unworthiness, in an abhorring thy self in
dust and ashes, and loathing thy self for all thy abominations, in a tender
sense of temptations either in thy self or others, in a hatred of Hypocrisy, a
willingness to suffer affliction, and a contentation in some measure to the
will of God, in what estate soever it shall please God to bring thee to.
Outwardly toward God, it will keep thee lowly in the use of means, and in a
continual fear and awfulness of Gods presence, not caring to be counted vile
for the service of God. And in carriage toward men, it is such a grace as is
not affected in words or gestures, nor is it censorious, arrogant or
contentious, but makes a man go before in giving honor, and not to think much
to equal himself with them of the lower sort. This is the time now to be
narrowly searching into thine own heart and mourn under it, and bewailing now
thy want of love unto the Lord, and thy abounding love to sin; do thou cover
with sorrowing, what breach thou have made with sinning; and remember, That had
thy sin never been so sweet, then thy sorrow had never been so bitter. And know
that God is now awaking thee from all thy secure sleeps, that every minutes
breathing he lends thee more, may be spent in preparing to meet Jesus Christ at
the Judgment of the great Day; which that thou may effectually do with all
thy might, with fear and trembling, as before the Lord, remember that the next
step (from this life) thou take is into eternity.

3ly. Thus waiting till thy change come, Be further in the exercise of Faith in
the power of thy mighty Redeemer, as to a glorious resurrection of thy body,
when laid asleep in the grave; Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus,
shall raise up thee also by Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.14. and then this corruptible shall
put on incorruption, and then this mortal shall put on immortality, and death
shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.53, 54.

3. Act Faith in the mighty power of God in times of great sinning, and
profanation of the name of God: So Jeremy speaking of the customs of the
people that they are vain, and of their Idol-gods, that they are altogether
brutish and foolish; and the stock is a doctrine of vanities; he sets the
great and mighty Jehovah against all their Heathenish gods; Forasmuch as there
is none like unto thee, O Lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in might.
Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? Jer. 10.6, 7. So in the 10. verse.
But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King: At
his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation.

So the Prophet Habakkuk, he sets Faith on work in the mighty power of God, in
a time of great sinning, and of treacherous and cruel dealing. Art thou not
from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One? we shall not dye: O Lord thou
have ordained them for judgment, and O mighty God, thou have established them
for correction, Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look
on iniquity. Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous
then he?

Think upon the mighty power of God, when men grow bold and impudent in
sinning, do they oppress the poor, and crush the needy, Amos 4.1 Know that this
mighty God can soon crush them under his feet, Lament. 3.34. and feed them that
oppress thee with their own flesh, and then they shall know the Lord to be the
mighty one of Israel, Isa. 49.26.

Does the horrible impieties and wickdness of men greive and wound thy heart;
Know, that he that is thy God is the God of salvation, and he shall wound the
head of his enemies; and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his
trespass, Psalm 68.20, 21, verses. And what says Solomon; If thou see the
oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of Judgment and Justice in a
Province, Marvel not at the matter: For he that is higher then the highest
regards; and there be higher then they, Eccles. 5.8.

4. Act faith in the mighty power of God, as in times of great sinning, so in
times of serving and worshipping of God. So did Daniel, when Nebuchadnezzar the
King had made an Image of gold, and set it up to be worshipped, and that whosoever
fell not down and worshipped the said Image should be cast into the midst of a
burning fiery surnace: And who is that God (says he most blasphemously) that
shall deliver out of my hand? What said Sadrach, Meshaoh and Abednego. O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so,
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and
he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. They served God, and they knew
that God was able and of power sufficient to protect them in the service of
him, Dan. 3.1, 11, 16, 17. To this purpose, when our dear Lord would encourage
his Apostles, and the subsequent Ministers of the Gospel, to be faithful in the
execution of his commands, and the trust committed unto them; He tells them,
that all power was committed unto him in Heaven and in Earth. And therefore go
teach all Nations, and Baptize them, etc, And teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you allway, even unto
the end of the World, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. As if he had said, Do you faithfully
and courageously execute the Commission I have given you, and be assured, you
shall never want my all-sufficient power and presence to support you. I will
make all the power I have in heaven and earth, concurring in a way of
serviceableness unto you.

O come, let us sing unto the Lord, says the Psalmist, let us make a joyful
noise to the Rock of our salvation. Shall we fear to serve that God who is the
Rock of our Salvation? Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, etc.
Why? For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods; in his hand
are the deep places of the earth, the strength of the hills is his also; the
sea is his, and he made it, and his hands formed the dry land. If the Lord whom
we serve is so great a God, so great a King above all Gods, above all Angels,
Princes, and Potentates of the World, and above all that is called God; O then
with what thankfulness and cheerfulness of spirit should we come into his
presence! O come let us Worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker; Why? for he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands, whom he makes to lie down in green Pastures, and leads
besides the still waters, Psa. 95.1, to 7. So in Psa. 96.6. it is said, Honor
and Majesty are before him, strength and beauty are in his sanctuary; Where is
the beauty of Gods face seen, and his power and strength displayed, as in his
Sanctuary? to wit, his Tabernacle, his Temple, the Congregations and Assemblies
of his Saints. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints: and
to be had in reverence by all them that are about him: and why? why? who in
Heaven can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the mighty can be
likened unto the Lord? Psa. 89.6, 7. And therefore it is, that the Lord has
spoken, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, Lev. 10.3. When
a fire went out from the Lord, and destroyed Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of
Aaron, for offering strange fire before the Lord, Lev. 10.1, 2, 3. To which I
suppose that place in the Hebrews has a special reference, where the Saints
being exhorted to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear, urges
this as a strong motive thereunto, for our God (says he) is a consuming fire,
Heb. 12.28, 29. Thus you see how requisite it is to be acting Faith in the
power and sovereignty of God, when we draw nigh to him in the solemn duties of
his Worship and service; and what an encouragement it is, to be fearing the
Lord, and serving of him in sincerity and truth, with all our hearts,
considering what great things he has done for us, 1 Samuel 12.24.

5. Act faith in the mighty power of God in times of suffering. So the Apostle
James, speaking of the cruelties that were exercised against the Saints in
those days, how they had condemned and killed the just, and they could not
resist them; He exhorts them to be patient to the coming of the Lord; and why
to the coming of the Lord? Because when he comes, he will come with power and
great glory, Mat. 24.30. When he comes, he will take to him his great power and
reign, Rev. 11.17. When he comes, he will come with ten thousand of his Saints;
What to do? To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, etc.
Jude, verse. 14, 15. When he comes, he will come with fire, and with his
chariots, like a Whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with
flames of fire, Isa. 66.15. When he comes, he will come with vengeance, even
God with a recompense, he will come and save you, Isa. 35.4. And then the hand
of the Lord, (the power of God) shall be known toward his servants, and his
indignation toward his enemies, Isa. 66.14. So the Author to the Hebrews, when
he exhorts the Saints to a patient suffering and undergoing of the Cross of
Christ; what Argument does he use? even this, For yet a little while, and he
that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. The Apostle would
have all the suffering Saints to be acting faith in a powerful Redeemer, even
in him who is mighty to save, That will tread down the people in his anger, and
make them drunk in his fury, and will bring down their strength to the earth,
Isa 63.6. So the Apostles, (when the Priests and Rulers of the people had laid
hands on them, and put them in hold, for teaching the People, and Preaching
through Jesus the resurrection from the dead, and had further threatened them
for speaking any more in the name of Jesus, and had let them go) what Arguments
in Prayer do they use? Lord thou art God, which have made Heaven and Earth, and
the Sea, and all that in them is. Who by the mouth of thy servant David, have
said, why did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The Kings
of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord,
and against his Christ. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel, were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand, and
thy counsel determined before to be done. And now Lord behold their
threatenings, Act. 4. Though they had to deal with great and potent Adversaries,
yet they well knew, that God was above them, and that their rage and fury was
not so much against them, as against the Lord Jehovah himself, and against his
Christ, whom he had anointed to be the chief Priest, and Prophet, and King of
his Church, who could easily break them with his rod of Iron, and dash them in
pieces like a Potters Vessel. They knew that the Lord whom they served, was
able to deliver them, as Daniel out of the Lions mouths. So it is said of
Moses, and laid down as a singular act of Faith in him, that he forsook Egypt,
and feared not the wrath of the King, for he endured as seeing him who is
invisible, Heb. 11.27. Now this was an act of Faith in the power of God. He
knew, that though he might incur the wrath of an enraged King by refusing the
honors and dignities of his Court; yet his eye being fixed upon a most powerful
invisible Lord God, that was sufficient to uphold him under all the sufferings
he might undergo for his sake. And that this Lord was able to strike through
Kings in the day of his wrath, Psa. 110.5. In which spirit of faith and
confidence David brake forth, when he said, Though I walk in the midst of
trouble, thou will revive me, thou shall stretch forth thine hand against the
wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me, Psa. 138.7. So Paul
that tried Apostle, and courageous sufferer for Christ; For which cause (says
he) I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom
I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day. He acts faith in the ability and
all sufficiency of God, to carry him through all difficulties and hardship for
Christ, 2 Timothy 1.12. And upon this score it was, he so much encouraged his Son
Timothy in the faith, as to a suffering state for Christ. Be not therefore
ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner, but be thou
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of God, as in
the 8. verse. of that Chap. Whether he meant Christ the power of God, 1 Cor.
1.24. Or whether he would have him bear those afflictions patiently, as God
afforded him power and strength; yet surely, it cannot exclude, but take in the
exercise of his faith in the power of God, in all his sufferings for Christ,
whose power will ever be manifested in weakness. And therefore it is, that we
are exhorted to be looking up unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith,
who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God, at the right
hand of Gods power. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.

Now this looking up unto Jesus, is not only a looking up unto him as a pattern
and example of patience, in our sufferings and persecutions, for his and the
Gospels sake; but we must look upon him also, as made perfect by suffering, who
for the suffering of death is now crowned with glory and honor; as him, whom
God has highly exalted, and set at the right hand of the throne of God, where
he must sit and reign till all his enemies be made his footstool, or as the
Apostle expresses it, Till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor.
15.25 Thus you see how necessary it is to be Acting faith, as in the blood of
Christ, so in the power of God.

And that First, In times of great difficulties and straights.

2. In times of sore sicknesses and deaths.

3. In times of great sinning.

4. In times of serving and worshipping of God.

5. In times of suffering for God.

Thirdly, We are to Act Faith in the faithfulness of God. Know therefore (says
Moses) that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps
covenant and mercy, with them that love him, and keep his commandments to a
thousand generations, Deuteronomy. 7.9. The consideration whereof, made the Psalmist
break forth into this pious interrogation or expostulation rather, Psalm. 89.8.
O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

Consider then that this Faith in the faithfulness of God is to be acted upon
several accounts.

First, Upon the account of the unchangableness of Gods love, and the
immutability of the Covenant of Grace, which he has made with us in his Son,
and which he has ratified and confirmed unto us in his most precious blood.
See the 89. Psalm, speaking of David as a Type of Christ, The Lord promises
there, That the enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness
afflict him; And that he will beat down his foes before his face, and plague
them that hate him. But my faithfulness (says he) and my mercies shall be with
him, Ver. 22, 23, 24. So in the 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34. Verse. of that Psalm. If
his Children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments. If they break my
statutes, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. But what follows? Nevertheless
my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness
to fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips. So David in the 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet
he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure.
Now that Gods love in Christ is unchangable, as it is founded upon the
immutability of the New Covenant of Grace, appears.

1. Because it is dearer then a Mothers love to her sweetest, and most tender
Babe, Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet I will not
forget thee.

2. It is stronger then the Mountains, Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall
depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has
mercy on thee.

3. It is as constant as the courses of the Sun, Moon, and Sars, of the Day,
and of the Night, Jer. 31.35, 36. Thus says the Lord, which gives the sun for
a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon, and of the stars for a light by
night, which divides the sea when the waves thereof roar, the Lord of Hosts is
his name. If those ordinances depart from before me, says the Lord, then the
seed of Israel also shall cease from being a Nation before me for ever.

4. It is as sure as God himself, Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and
his throne as the sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the Moon,
and as a faithful witness in heaven. We give much credit to the word of an
honest man, much more when we have his oath for it. This the Author to the
Hebrews makes the ground or foundation of a Beleivers strong consolation.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, That by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie we might have a strong
consolation* who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set hefore us,
which hope we have as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, etc. Heb.
6.17, 18, 19. And this was it without all question, that made the Apostle break
out with that holy boldness, and exultation of spirit. Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ, shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more
then Conquerors through him that loved us. For I am persuaded (says he) that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord, Romans 8.35. to the end. Now this stability, and firmness of Gods love,
grounded upon the faithfulness of God, may be a great support to the poor
doubting soul, that is apt to question the Love of God, and the certainty of
its eternal estate in Christ.

2ly. This Faith in Gods faithfulness, is to be acted upon the account of our
Vocation or Calling to, and confirmation or establishment in the Grace of God.
God is faithful (says Paul) by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And therefore will he confirm you unto the end, that
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. That
God who has called you unto the communion, or fellowship of his Son; not
externally only, in point of Ordinances, Church Fellowship, and
Publique-worship, whereby we profess to have communion with Christ, and his
benefits; but internally in a special manner, whereby we are really united to
him by faith, and by the spirit of Christ, and so are made partakers indeed of
all the glorious benefits, privileges, and advantages of his death,
resurrection, ascension, intercession, Romans 8.32. Ephesians. 3.17. 1 John 1.3. This
God who has so called you, is the faithful God, faithful in the performance of
all his promises he has made, to confirm you unto the end, not to leave you,
nor forsake you, Heb. 13.5. as many friends do in time of adversity; not to
cast you off, Romans 11.1, 2. as many Parents do their Children; not to forget
you, as many cruel and unnatural Women do their sucking children, Isa. 49.15.

No surely, he will not do it, his faithfulness is engaged to stand by you;
fear not, he will be with thee: be not dismayed, he is thy God; he will
strengthen thee, yea, he will help thee, yea, He will uphold thee with the
right hand of his righteousness, Isa. 41.10. And make an everlasting Covenant
with thee, that he will not turn away from thee to do thee good, but will put
his fear into thy heart, that thou shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. So
the Apostle Paul praying for the Thessalonians, that the very God of peace migh
sanctify them wholly, and that their whole spirit, and soul, and body, might
be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ: He makes this
the ground of his confidence, Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do
it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23, 24. So 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you and keep you from evil. Why should thou then fear of falling
away, or of thy persevering in the grace of God, when Gods faithfulness is
engaged forthy establishment?

3ly. This faith in Gods faithfulness is to be acted upon the account of a
Christians temptations and conflictings with sin and Satan, 1 Cor. 10 13. There
has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God is faithful
(observe that I pray you) who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it. Thou poor tempted soul, thou think perhaps, that no
temptations are like unto thine, but thou art mistaken, thy temptations are not
singular, but in common with others, other men have been exercised with the
like. And thou art apt to think, thou shall sink under thy temptations, thou
find so little strength to undergo them, but what says the Apostle, God is
faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength, but will
proportion suitable strength, according to your trials. Gods Faithfulness is
engaged to help you and to support you under all your temptations and trials.
Would Satan then make thee believe that thy sins are of that nature and
magnitude that they shall not be forgiven, think upon Gods faithfulness then
who is engaged to pardon thee. So says John, 1 John 1.9. If we confessed our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. It would be an act of unfaithfulness and injustice in God,
if he should not pardon and forgive poor penitent sinners who confess and
forsake their sins. But God is faithful and just, and cannot falsify his word;
If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.

4. This acting of faith in Gods faithfulness is of excellent use in order to
our standing fast in the faith, and continuing in our public faithful
testimony for the Lord, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering (and why?) for he is faithful that has promised,
faithful in performing what he has promised, Josh. 23.14. And what has he
promised? Surely, as has been declared before, to establish and keep us from
evil, and confirm us unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. According to that also in 2 Thessalonians. 3.3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall establish you, and keep you
from evil: Stablish you in the faith, lest you fall from it; and keep you from
evil, to wit, the Devil, lest he subvert your faith by evil men, as the
instruments of his art; or it may be taken more generally, for any evil; as the
Apostle declares in the 2 Timothy 4.18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every
evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom. And therefore we may
upon this consideration be much encouraged to hold fast our profession, and not
to be staggaring or wavering in our honorable and faithful testimony for the
Lord.

5. This acting of faith in Gods faithfulness is of excellent use to encourage
us as to a suffering state for Christ, and to Christian contentation under the
Cross. It is a faithful saying (says the Apostle) that if we be dead with him,
we shall also live with him; If we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy
2.11, 12. Rule or reign as Kings, so the word it seems imports, if we endure
all manner of tribulations with patience and stedfastness in the faith. And it
is a faithful saying (says he) a certain, sure, firm, credible, irrevocable
word, not to be questioned or doubted. Or we shall be glorified together with
him, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 8.17. and Gods faithfulness is engaged
to make it good; whence is that exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.16, 19. In
the 16. verse he tells them, That if any man suffer as a Christian (and not as
an evil doer) let him not be ashamed (says he) but let him glorify God on
this behalf. And then in the 19. verse. Wherefore let them that suffer
according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. God is not only a powerful Creator,
(...) also a faithful Creator, a sure Preserver, who will faithfully recompense
all your hard services and sufferings you undergo for his sake.

He is as faithful as he is able; according to that of Paul to Timothy,
encouraging him to be a partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, and speaking
of his own sufferings upon the same account; Nevertheless (says he) I am not
ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him against that day, 2 Timothy 1.12. And
what was that which he had committed to Gods custody? His Soul, says one;
himself (which is all one) says another; his works, says a third; a fourth
says his sufferings; a fifth his salvation. All which put together, he
committed unto God his soul, himself, his doings, his sufferings, his
salvation, his all.

And he was persuaded he was as able as faithful, and as faithful as able to
keep that which he had committed unto his trust; The Gospel, that the Lord had
committed to his keeping, and his Soul he had committed unto Gods keeping: And
because the Apostle Peter knew that God was a faithful Creator, therefore did
he encourage the Saints suffering according to the will of God, to commit the
custody of their souls unto him; who as he had created them immortal souls, so
he would not leave them as Masons and Carpenters leave their houses which they
build, but would faithfully keep and and preserve them. As the Lord himself
declares, speaking of his Vineyard of red wine, his Church, whether red, upon
the account of the preciousness of its fruits, or else of its bloody
sufferings, I the Lord do keep it (says he) I will water it every moment, lest
any hurt it, I will keep it night and day, Isa. 27.2, 3.

Fourthly and lastly, We are to act faith in the Promises of God, whether they
are such as are of a temporal or of a spiritual and eternal concernment; and
know for thine everlasting comfort, thou beleiving Soul, that as the promises
of God are the ground of our hope, and the object of our faith, Psalm. 119.49.
Heb. 10.35.36. and chap. 11.11. So are they all firm and irrevocable in Christ;
For all the promises of God in him (that is in Christ) are yea, and in him are
Amen, unto the glory of God, etc. 2 Cor. 1.20. They are not yea and nay, but in
Christ they are yea; that is, true in the event, and as to their performance:
And Amen, that is stable and firm, being made and performed in and for Christ.

For even as Christ is always the same in Gods promises which are unchangeable,
so are all Gods promises of our salvation firm and certain in Christ: and as
certain, so are they general and indefinite, and made to all that shall
believe, excluding none but those that are finally impenitent. Consider a few
of them to this purpose; He every one that thirsts, Come ye to the waters,
and he that has no money, Come ye, buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk
without money and without price. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear and
your souls shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David, Isa. 55.1, 3. So Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. Mark 16.16. He that
beleiveth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that beleiveth not shall be
damned. 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever beleiveth in him,
should not perish but have everlasting life.

Joh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say unto you; He that hears my word, and
beleiveth on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. Joh. 6.37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come unto me, and him that comes to me I will in no
wise cast out, v. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son, and beleiveth on him, may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day, verse. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that beleiveth on me has everlasting life, Act 40.43. To him (meaning Christ)
give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever beleiveth in
him, shall receive remission of sins, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save
sinners, of whom I am chief, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified
in due time, Isa. 43.25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. So Chap. 44.22. I have
blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins:
return unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Heb. 8.8. Behold the days come (says
the Lord) when I shall make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah, For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel, after those days (says the Lord) I will put my Laws into their mind,
and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people, and in the 12. verse, For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more.
These are some of those sweet soul-supporting promises, which are made
indefinitely to all, and have their, yea, and Amen in Christ, excluding none,
but the wilful and final impenitent, and unbeleiving sinners. But perhaps thou will say, thou have relapsed and fallen into sin again, after repentance, and
thou think thy relapses cannot be pardoned. Remember that men who have not a
drop of mercy, in comparison of God, are obliged to forgive the repenting
offender, though he offend seventy seven times; God much more, who is infinite
in mercy, has bound himself, by his most firm and faithful promises, 1 John
1.9. and 2.1. Upon true and renewed repentance, often to forgive and forget the
same sin, iterated again and again, Luke 17.3, 4. That though thy sins were as
Crimson, they shall be made as white as Snow; And he calls to back sliding
Israel to return, and promises to heal their backslidings, and love them
freely, Jerem. 3.14. comp. with Hosea 14.4.

So in pangs of the New Birth, spiritual infancy, weakness of Faith, Prayer,
Godly sorrow, and other graces, let such cordial refreshing Promises, as these
dwell upon thy heart, Rev. 21.6. Mat. 5.6. Isa. 42.3. and 57.15. and 40.11.
which import; How God will satisfy the hungry soul, tender the weak and feeble
soul, dwell with the humble soul; yea the exercise of faith also in the promises
is of singular use in all kinds and varieties of temptations, spiritual
desertions, deep and almost despairing apprehensions of thine extreme vileness
and nothingness in grace, in which dark, dismal and disconsolate estate, let
thy faith be exercised on such precious soul-supporting promises as these, 1
Cor. 10.13. Jam. 1.2. Isa. 30.18. and Isa. 43.25. Which speaks to this effect;
That God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength.
That we should count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations. That all
they are blessed that wait for the Lord. So that if thou eiest in this waiting
state, thou shall be certainly saved, for the holy spirit pronounces thee
blessed. And further, for the exceeding great comfort and support of thy soul,
that, it is the Lord, and he only that blotteth out thy transgressions for his
own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

So in the Hail-storms of slanderous Arrows, and empoysoned Darts of disgrace,
how should thy Faith be fixed upon such precious Promises as these, 1 Pet. 4.18.
Mat. 5.11. Yea, in the valley of the shadow of death, by an assurance of Gods
merciful omnipotent presence, Psa. 23.4. And in the extremity and depth of such
desperate distresses and perplexities, wherein in thy present feeling, thou
can see and find no possibility of help from Heaven or Earth, God or man, but
art both helpless and hopeless, as the Church complains, Lam. 3.18. Let thy
meditations dwell upon such like precious promises as these, Isa. 33.9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Exodus 14.13. Psalm. 78.65, 66. Genesis 22.14. All which import, that
in the Mount of the greatest difficulties, God will be seen. Well, in every
thing, or any thing that shall or can possibly befall thee, prosperity or
poverty, cross or comfort, calmness of conscience, or tempests of terror, life
or death, thou may by Faith extract abundance of unconquerable patience and
peace of soul, from those three heavenly golden conduits of sweetest comfort,
Romans 8.18. and 28.32, to wit, That the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

2. That all things shall work together for good to them that love God.

3. That he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

Object. But may I act faith in the Promises for things temporal, as for
spiritual? Yea, for godliness has the Promise of the life that now is, as of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Yet consider withal, that temporal things
are not promised absolutely, but conditionally.

1. With limitation to expediency.

2. By way of commutation and compensation with spiritual; If he gives thee not
peace, he will give thee patience, if not wealth, yet contentment, which may be
far better.

3. With exception of the Cross, Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Lands
with persecution, Mark 10.30. So then we may believe, we shall have temporal
blessings, which God has promised conditionally, so far forth as will stand
with these conditions, his own glory, our spiritual good, and everlasting
salvation. This life, is but, via advitam, the way to life, and whatsoever God
promises us in the way, is, but to help us to the end of our journey. There is
no temporal thing of this life falls within the compass of Gods promise, but so
far forth as it shall be a help and furtherance unto us, as to our eternal
life. I shall therefore present unto thy view, a few of those Promises, which
are of a temporal concernment, as having reference to long Life, Children,
Lands, Riches, Honor, and external Peace and Plenty; See to this purpose, Genesis
22.17. and 49.15. Le^. 25.18, 19, 21. and 26.4, 5, 6, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.16. and
28.4, 11, 13. Psa. 112.3. and 128.2, 3, 4. and many such like, which are
propounded upon the diligent and exact observation of Gods Law, and the fear of
the Lord. So for the duties and works of thy particular calling, which if by
prayer thou do conscienciously and diligently discharge, thou may go on
with comfort, contentment, and freedom from carking cares, and racking,
torturing, thoughtfulness, and leave the success, issue, and event of all thy
labors and undertakings, unto the Lord, whatsoever it may be, resting sweetly,
and ever relying upon this gracious promise, Heb. 13.5. I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee. The like in ordering and guiding the affairs of thy Family,
depend by faith upon Gods blessing, the strength and sinew of all sound
comfort, and true contentation that way, Psa. 127. So, in the loss of outward
things, for thy love and service unto God, by beleiving that Man of God, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. The Lord is able to give thee much more then this; yea, in the
loss of all earthly things in every kind, by applying that promise in Hab.
3.17, 18. And that of Jobs patient blessing of God upon the surprise of all his
substance, and the concurrence of an universal misery, should not pass without
a serious consideration, if God should exercise thee with the like condition,
Job 1.21.

But I shall forbear to enlarge further, and recommend to thy consideration
some of those promises for thy faith to be exercised in, which have a special
relation as to the present visitation of the Lord, as Exodus 23.5. Ye shall
serve the Lord your God, etc. And I will take sickness away from the midst of
thee; So Deuteronomy. 7.12, 15. If ye hearken to these judgments, and keep and do
them, the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and the mercy which he
swear unto thy Fathers; And he will love thee and bless thee, and multiply
thee. And in the 15. verse. The Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and
will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt upon thee, but will lay them upon
all them that hate thee. So in the Prayer that Solomon made, at the Feast of
the Dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. If there be in the Land
Famine, if there be Pestilence, etc. Whatsoever Plague, whatsoever sickness
there be, what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, which shall
know the plague of his own heart; Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place,
and forgive, and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart
thou know; And the Lord graciously promised, that he would do according to
his prayer and supplication that he had made, 1 King 9.3. So Psa. 41. Blessed
is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.
The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the
Earth, and thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies. The Lord
will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all his bed in
his sickness; So Psa. 91.3, 6, 7, 10. Surely, he shall deliver thee from the
noysom Pestilence, Thou shall not be afraid of the ^estilence that walks in
darkness: nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday: A thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come
nigh thee. Art thou sick then? apply; The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed
of languishing; Tbou wilt make all his bed in his sickness. Art thou there
where the sick are? apply; I will take away all sickness from the midst of
thee. Fear thou the Pestilence? I will deliver thee, says the Lord, from
the noisome Pestilence. So that of Eliphaz to Job; He shall deliver thee in six
troubles, yea, in seven, there shall no evil touch thee; in Famine he shall
redeem thee from death, and in War from the power of the Sword. Thou shall be
hid from the scourge of the Tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of destruction
when it comes, etc. And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace,
Job 5.19.20, 21, 24. So in Isa. 43.2. The Lord promises he will be with us in
the fire, and in the water, the waters shall not overflow us, nor the fire
devour us; And in Heb. 13.5. he has promised likewise, that he will never
leave thee nor forsake thee; The labor of the Olive may fail, as Habakkuk
speaks; our nearest and dearest friends and relations may fail, our eyes may
fail, our tongue may fail, our strength may fail, our flesh and heart may fail,
our spirits may fail; yet says the Lord, I will be with thee, I will not fail
thee nor forsake thee; When the poor and the needy seek water, and there is
none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God
of Israel will not forsake them, Isa. 41.17. What can be more refreshing and
supporting to the poor languishing fainting, sinking soul? Thus in any trouble
of soul, body, good name, outward state, present or to come, thou may by the
sovereign power of says, working upon the word of his promise, not only draw
out the sting, and expel the poison of it; but also procure a great deal of
comfort to thy truly humbled soul, and maintain it in despite of all mortal or
infernal opposition, in a constant spiritual gladness. Considering, that all
those Promises whereupon thy heavy and disconsolate heart in such cases may
repose and refresh it self, have their being and confirmation from the blessed
name Jehovah it self, see Exodus 6.3. and therefore as sure as God himself; they
are sealed with the bloody sufferrings of his only Son, and therefore as true
as Truth it self; and if thou art in Christ, are all as certainly thine, as the
heart in thy body, or blood that runs in thy veins. Nay, and a little more for
thy comfort, the glory of Gods Truth is mightily advanced, and himself
extraordinarily pleased, by thy more resolute, steadfast and triumphant cleaving
unto them. What a blessed, sweet and heavenly life then is the Life of Faith,
as it is exercised in the Promises of God?

O then be encouraged to be acting Faith in the Promises, and to be storing up
a good stock of Promises every day. They are of excellent use in all estates,
in all conditions, in all kind of distresses whatsoever. By beleiving the
Promises we shall prosper, by beleiving and applying of them, we shall come to
participate of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. And therefore they are called
exceeding great and precious promises, That by these (says the Apostle) you
might be partakers of the Divine Nature; not of the substance, but of the
quality. Non transformatione naturae humanae in divinam, sed participatione
donorum, quibus conformes efficimur divinae naturae, as one distinguishes very
well; not by the transformation of the humane nature into the divine, but by
the participation of gifts whereby we are made conformable to the Divine
Nature. And so it notes a fellowship with God in his holiness, and a fellowship
with God in his blessedness, that is, in the beatifical vision and brightness
of glory; upon which account, as to the excellent use and nature of them, one
terms them a Christians Catholicon, a general purging Medicine, a Salve for
every sore, being a help to all duties, a quickner of all graces, and a comfort
in all distresses. And like a well-fill'd Apothacaries shop, there is contained
in them, heavenly receipts of all sorts, wholesome physic of every kind, for
expelling and curing all sorts of diseases and sicknesses incident to Saints,
and for the corroborating and strengthening of the new nature, and keeping the
spiritual man in a good healthful constitution, lusty and strong, able for Gods
Service, and for working out his own salvation with fear and trembling.

Would thou then have thy faith like the Light in the Lords Sanctuary, never
to go out? then acquaint thy self with Gods Promises, know them well, meditate
on them, confer about them: let them be continually in thy mind, memory, heart
and tongue. Satan labors in nothing more, then to keep us in unbeleif,
especially of particular promises; for he knows, if we believe them, we shall
in all things have the victory: Come before God with boldness, carry peace in
our own bosoms to our graves, and do, and suffer any thing for God.

Oh, the abundance of sweet cordial comfort, which all humble beleiving souls
draw by faith out of every promise. And these precious promises (our breasts of
consolation) whereupon our comfort and happiness so much depend, lie hid in the
holy Scriptures, as veins of gold in the earth. How then should we be searching
into those rich mines that bring to light such heavenly treasures? and how
should it stir us up to go to God in prayer, for the accomplishment of them
unto us, and waiting in the diligent use of all means for the gaining of them?
you shall find God not only making you heirs of Promises, but you shall be
comfortable possessors of those many good things, which God has promised to
beleivers. And the more you meditate, and the oftener you pray upon them, the
more good will you see in them, and find to flow from them. And this leads me
to the next Spiritual Receipt and Sovereign Antidote, and that is Prayer.

The Fourth Spiritual Receipt.
4ly. The fourth special Receipt and preservative against this contagious
disease, or which may be of excellent force and efficacy for the removal of it;
is faithful and fervent Prayer. This is a tried receipt, an approved remedy; of
which I may say, as David said to Abimelech the Priest, concerning the Sword of
Goliath, There is none like to it, 1 Samuel 21.9. A most incomparable weapon, if
we have skill to use it.

Let us consider a little then what Prayer is, as to the derivation and
definition of it. I find that Prayer comes of a word in the Hebrew, which
signifies, Appeal; whereby we refer the Cause of our selves or others unto
God, as unto the Supreme Judge; calling upon him, appealing unto him for right,
presenting our selves and our cause unto him, as to one who has power to
determine Causes, and to whom appeals may be made. And if you would have a
brief description of it, it is the pouring out of the humble, penitent,
beleiving soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel: 1.15. Or as one very pithily defines it,
It is Devotae animae cum Deo colloquium, that is, It is the talk or conference
of the devout soul with God. For a man barely to speak in the air, and his
heart have no approaches unto God in it, this is no Prayer in Gods account. I
cannot therefore let pass, that excellent saying of Bernard, Cum oramus, cum
Deo loquimur, cum legimus, Deus nobiscum loquitur: Si vis cum Deo semper esse,
semper ora, and semper lege; that is, When we pray, we speak with God; when we
read, God speaks with us: If thou will always be with God, then always pray,
and always read. More plainly and fully: It is a work of the spirit of Christ
in the beleiving soul, by which we desire of God alone, things lawful and
needful, with confidence to obtain them, through the alone mediation and
intercession of Christ, to the praise and glory of his name.

So then, if thou will pray aright, and find acceptance with God therein; thou
must pray to him, and to him alone; in the name, and through the alone
mediation and intercession of Christ, by the powerful, and immediate help and
assistance of his own spirit; and that beleivingly, from the heart, with
understanding, and feeling of our wants, in fervency of spirit, forgivingly,
reverently and perseveringly: Without which ingredients, never think of putting
up an acceptable Prayer unto God, with any confidence or assurance to be heard
at the throne of grace.

I shall touch a little upon the particulars, for the help of such poor souls,
whose desires are to grow into a more spiritual acquaintance with God.

First then, If thou will pray aright, thou must pray to God, and to him only,
and that in the name of Christ. God alone is to be invocated and prayed unto,
not Saints, nor Angels. Christ in his prayer which he taught his Disciples,
would have us direct our Petitions unto God our Father which is in Heaven, Luke
11.2. Mat. 6.9 And why to God alone?

1. Because God onley is Omni present, every where present, in all places, and
at all times. But this is inconsistent to any creature to be ubiquitary, or
present in all places. But that God is so, see Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at
hand (says the Lord) and not a God a far off? Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and
earth, says the Lord? see Psalm. 139.7, 8. God is not only the God of the
hills, but of the valleys also, 1 King. 20.28.

2. Because God as he is Omni-present, so he is Omniscient; he knows all
things; all the hearts of the Sons of men. So said Solomon in the prayer he
made at the Dedication of the Temple. For thou, even thou only know the
hearts of all the children of men, 1 King. 8.39. So Jer. 17.9. I the Lord
search the heart, and try the reins. Neither is there any creature, that is not
manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and opened to the eyes of him,
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. For the ways of man are before the eyes of
the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5.21. Does he not see my ways,
and count all my steps, says Job? Chap. 31.4. There is no darkness, nor shadow
of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job 24.21, 22. So
Psalm. 94.9, 10, 11. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed
the eye, shall he not see? he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know?
the Lord knows the thoughts of man that they are vanity.

3. God is styled a God hearing prayers, Psalm. 65.2. and this David could speak
experimentally; Verily, God has heard me: he has attended to the voice of my
prayer: blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy
from me, Psalm. 66.19, 20.

4. As he is a God hearing prayer, so he is most able to help, Psalm, 52.2. I
will cry unto God most high: unto God that performs all things for me He
shall send from heaven and save me, Ephesians. 3.20. Now unto him that is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power
that works in us: Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout
all ages world without end, Amen. So Asa, when a mighty host came against him,
in his prayer, lays hold on Gods power and ability to help. Lord (says he) it
is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no
power: help us O Lord God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against
this multitude, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. So Jehosaphat, when a great multitude of the
Moabites and Amonites came against him, he sets himself to seek the Lord, as
able and all-sufficient to help him. And said, O Lord God of our Fathers, art
not thou God in heaven, and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the
Heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able
to withstand thee? O our God, wilt not thou judge them? for we have no might
against this great company that comes against us, neither know we what to do,
but our eyes are upon the? 2 Chronicles. 20.6, 12.

5. Prayer is a Divine Worship and a Spiritual Sacrifice. God would have us to
call upon him in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. And if we should be seeking
help from any other, he will take it very ill at our hands. If we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god
(says the Church) shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of
our hearts, Psalm. 44.20, 21. In every place Incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering (says the Lord.) Mal. 1.11. So Psalm. 141.2. Let my
prayer be set forth before thee as incense: and the lifting up of mine hands as
an evening sacrifice. There was given to the Angel that stood at the Altar,
having a golden censer, much incense, That he should offer it with the prayers
of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the throne of God. And
the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended
up before God, out of the Angels hand, Rev. 8.3, 4. By this Angel, we are to
understand Christ our Mediator, called the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant,
or the Angel of Gods presence, Mal. 3.1. and Isa. 63.9. who alone is the High
Priest of Heaven, and offers and presents our prayars with the incense of
his merits and intercession upon the golden Altar, that is, upon himself, unto
God, for a sweet smelling savor, as is testified, Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 5.2. Heb.
14.14. See also Rev. 5:8.

6. In God only we ought to believe, therefore he only is to be called upon.
He that comes to God must believe that he is, etc. Heb. 11.6. The same Lord
who is ever all, is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.12, 13. Again, we are to pray
unto God in the name of Christ, which is not rudely and customarily to say
these words, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc. but in confidence of the
merits and intercession of Christ to call on God our heavenly Father: For since
the fall of man none are called to come to God, or have promise to speed, but
in the name of a Mediator. I am the way, the truth and the life, says Christ,
no man comes to the Father but by me, Joh. 14.6. And there is one God, and
one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.15. John calls
him the Advocate (he who pleads our cause) with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. In Christ
alone we have access to the throne of grace; Or as the Apostle expresses it,
Through him we have an access by one spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. In
whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him, Ephesians.
3.12. And what says Christ himself? Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name he will give it you, Joh. 16.23. So Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word
and deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the
Father by him. Angels or Saints departed do not, nor cannot present our prayers
before God. Abraham is ignorant of us, Isa. 63.16. Christ only is our Mediator
and High Priest, who gets an acceptatation of our prayers before God, Heb.
4.14. Rev. 8.3.

Again, We are to pray in the name of Christ through the spirit: Likewise the
Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God, Romans 8.26, 27. But ye beloved, building up your selves in your
most holy faith, praying in the Holy ghost, Jude ver. 20. Praying always with
all prayer and supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. No praying aright but
in and by the Spirit; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship
him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.14. And prayer surely is a principal part of
his spiritual worship. Is it not sad then to consider how carnal and formal
worshippers do deride and make a mock at the Spirit of God! O say they, you
cannot pray, but by the spirit.

So for Faith, that also is a necessary ingredient in prayer. James speaks of
the prayer of faith that shall save the sick, Jam 5.15. So also 1 Timothy 2.8. and
Matthew. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, beleiving ye
shall receive; Now this faith will work to the purifying of the heart. For if
we regard iniquity in our hearts, God will not hear us, Psa. 66.18. We having
therefore gracious promises from God that he will grant our requests, that he
will be very gracious unto us at the voice of our cry, Isa. 30.19. That when we
call he will answer, Isa. 58.9. and deliver us out of all our afflictions,
Psalm. 34.19. We must come unto God, beleiving his word, for that he is true and
faithful; as Sarah, who received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered
of a child, when she was past age; because she judged him faithful who had
promised, Heb. 11.11. But if hope to speed does not accompany our prayers they
are vain. Let not the doubting and wavering man think that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.6, 7. Yet know withal, that this hope sometimes is
very weak and feeble, and many times seems to be overwhelmed in the godly, Ps.
13.1, 2.31.22. and 77.7, 8, 9.

Again, As it must be a prayer of Faith, so it must be from the heart, with
fervency of spirit. Prayer is not a lip labor, nor a formal devotion; but it
is the sighs and groans of a broken and penitent heart. Hanna spoke in her
heart when her voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1.13. Moses is said to cry unto the
Lord, when we find not one word that he uttered with his mouth, Exodus 14.15.
Hence is the exhortation that we be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans
12.11. And it is said, that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, Jam. 5.16. As the things we beg are of more excellent use for
us, so must we be more eager and importunate with the Lord for the obtaining of
them. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, with my voice unto the Lord did I
make my supplication. I poured out my complaint before him. I showed before him
my trouble, Psalm. 142.1, 2. This showed the earnestness and ferventness of his
spirit in prayer. So Ps. 80.1. Give ear, O shepherd of Israel, thou that
dwell between the cherubims, shine forth. Before Ephraim, Benjamin and
Manasseh, stir up thy strength and come and save us: This arises from the
consideration of the necessity and excellency of what we desire, as also from a
burning zeal of Gods glory, and hearty love of our brethren, in opposition to a
spirit of hypocrisy, formality, sluggishness and vain-babling; Thou shall
arise and have mercy upon Zion: For the time to favor her, yea, the set time
is come. And what then? For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Jerusalem sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns, Ps. 102.13. com.
with Isa. 62.1.

Again, when we pray, we must pray with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. Blind
devotion is no way pleasing to God. The soul without knowledge is not good,
Prove. 19.2. God will not be superstitiously and ignorantly worshipped, Acts
17.22, 23. The blind and the lame was not to come into the house of God. If ye
offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and
sick, is it not evil? Offer it unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? Mal. 1.8. God requires to be served with the mind,
Matthew. 22.37. We must therefore know the will of God, as he has revealed it
unto us, by his commandments, promises, threatenings, the approved practices of
the Saints, and that we must desire and pray for, and only so as we know Gods
word does warrant us. This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us, 1 John 5.14. And whatsoever
we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things
that are pleasing in his sight, 1 John 3.22. So said the blind man that had his
sight restored to him again; Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if
any man be a worshipper of God and does his will, him he hears, Joh. 9.31.

Again, We must pray with a feeling of our wants. Christ's invitation to come
unto him, is to all that labor and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. In prayer we
should feel sin as a burden, and mourn under the sensibility of our want of
grace. So Ephraim bemoued himself, Jer. 31.18. And the Church, Isa. 63.17. O
Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our heart from
thy fear? return for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thine inheritance. So
David being made very sensible of his great fall, after what manner is his
spirit led forth in prayer? Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy
holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me
with thy free spirit, Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. Now this arises from the
consideration of Gods judgments due to sin, and of the necessity of saving
grace. So Ezra; O my God I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my
God, for our iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown
up unto the heavens, Ez. 9.6. And the Apostles being sensible of the imbicility
and weakness of their faith, pray unto the Lord for the increase of it. And for
this thing, said Paul, I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me.
So sensible was he of the thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan that
buffeted him, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.

Again, our Prayer must be accompanied with a spirit of love and forgiveness,
Mark 11.25. And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any
man, that your Father also which is in Heaven, may forgive you your trespasses:
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you; But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your father
forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15. And as we must forgive our enemies, and
such as have offended us, so must we bear a hearty affection to the Children of
God, Ephesians. 4.32. and Collos. 3.12, 13.

Again, our Prayer must be accompanied with fear and reverence, in respect of
the purity and Majesty of that presence we come into. So says Solomon, Be not
rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God; for God is in Heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few,
Eccles. 5.2. And we are to serve God acceptably with reverence, and godly fear,
Heb. 12.28. Surely, did we seriously consider Gods most excellent Majesty, we
should not rashly conceive, or utter any thing before him, but with reverence.
So Abraham, Behold said he, I have now taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
which am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. This reverential fear, is an unfeigned
abasement of the mind, proceeding from a consideration of Gods divine Majesty,
and our own indignity. So the Prodigal, Father I have sinned against Heaven,
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, Luke 15.21. So
Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth
which thou have showed unto thy servant, Genesis 32.10. Job abhorred himself, and
repented in dust and ashes, Job 42.6. The Prophet Isaiah cries out he is
undone, woe unto him, for his eyes had seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, Isa.
6.5. and Ezra also, he did blush and was ashamed to lift up his face to God,
for that their iniquities were increased, and their trespass grown up unto the
heavens, Ezra. 9.6.

Lastly, our Prayer must be with perseverance, without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17.
The Parable concerning the importunate Widow, was to this end, that men ought
always to pray and not to faint, Luke 18.1. That is, that we should be constant
and earnest in prayer, use all importunity with the Lord, and not to faint;
this is that which will distinguish us from being Hypocrites, and false-hearted
before the Lord; For what is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God takes away his soul? will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon
him? Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? No,
he will not, Job 27.8, 9, 10. But the gracious soul loves to draw nigh to God,
and takes delight always in his approaching to him.

Thus having spoken of the several ingredients that will make up an acceptable
Prayer unto the Lord; I shall speak a little as to the singular worth
excellency, and efficacy of it; and the worth and excellency of it appears in
this: Because, it is a sweet privilege which Christ has purchased of the
Father for us, Ephesians. 2.18. It is through him that we have an access unto the
Father, so as to come with boldness unto the throne of his grace, Heb. 4.16.
Hereby we do and may continually commune with the Lord after a familiar manner,
and lay open our griefs into his bosom.

As David, Who am I O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? And is this the manner of man O Lord God? 2 Samuel 7.18. So again, From
the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed; lead
me to the Rock that is higher then I, for thou have been a shelter for me, and
a strong Tower from the enemy, Psa. 61.2, 3. Hereby we testify our dutiful
affection to him, as the Prodigal to his Father, Luke 15.18. And become helpers
to others, Romans 15.30. Phil. 1.19. Col. 4.12. 2 These. 3.1. This adds strength
to our faith, and gives life to the graces of God that are in us. By it we
obtain at the hand of God whatever good we stand in need of, Mat. 7.7. Isa.
65.24. And do grow into a better acquaintance with God. As Abraham, Genesis 18.23,
27. For such is the Promise, that if we draw nigh to God, he will draw nigh to
us, Jam. 4.8. By it we fight manfully against our in bred unmortified
corruptions, Ephesians. 6.18. By it Crosses are prevented, removed, or sanctified,
yea, all things are sanctified unto us, and we are so kept and preserved, that
we fall not into temptation, 1 Timothy 4.5. Mat. 26.41. Yea, often times we obtain
much more good then we desire or expect. Solomon begged only of the Lord, an
understanding heart, and God gave him both riches, and honor, which he asked
not, 1 King. 3.13. So able is the Lord to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. So that of Prayer, we may say, it is a
Key to open the door of Gods treasure house, a present remedy for an oppressed
mind, a giver of strengh to the weak, and an especial means to make a man fit
to live knowingly, fruitfully, and serviceably to God in every state and
condition, Col. 1.9, 10. What shall I say of it? but as one says well and
truly; It is, Consolatio flentium, cura dolentium, and sanitas aegrotoraem. A
Comfort for them that mourn, the joy of the sorrowful, and health for those
that (...) force and efficacy what will (...) has it not done? It goes through
the (...) and cease not until it come unto the Lord; and if entreaties will
not do, it will (with reverence be it spoken) lay commands upon him, Isa.
45.11. Yea, it does as it were, bind up the hands of the Lord, and hinder him
from executing his judgments, overcoming him that overcomes all things, Let
me alone, says the Lord to Moses, or suffer me that my wrath may wax hot
against them, (to wit) the Israelites, that I may consume them, Exodus 32.10.
Abraham's prayer had saved Sodom from being destroyed, had there been found ten
righteous persons therein, Genesis 18. Yea, it is very observable, that the Lord
did not leave granting, till Abraham left off petitioning. By prayer Jacob was
delivered from the wrath and fury of his Brother Esau, Genesis 32.11. Jonah out of
the Fishes belly, Jonah 2.10. The three Children from the fiery Furnace; Daniel
from the Lions Den, Dan. 3.6. Jonahs, and Paul's Mariners from the danger of the
Seas; and Joseph, and Paul, and Silas, and Peter, and others out of Prison,
Act. 5.16. By Prayer Eliah stayed the Rain three years and six months, and
again obtained Rain, so that the earth yielded her fruit, James 5.17. By Prayer
Elisha had the spirit of Eliah doubled upon him, and procured Bears to destroy
the mocking Children, 2 King. 2. raised from death to life the Shunamites Son,
So Chap. 4. Had the eyes of his Servant opened, so that he saw Mountains full
of Horses, and Chariots of fire round about him, and smote the Syrians with
blindness, which came to take him, Chap. 6. By Prayer Joshua commanded the Sun
to stand still in the midst of Heaven, until the people had avenged themselves
upon their enemies, Josh. 10.12, 13. By Prayer Isaiah brought back the Sun ten
degrees in the Dial of Ahaz, 2 King. 20 11. By Prayer David frustrated the
wicked counsel of Achitophel, and often put his enemies to flight, 2 Samuel
15.31. and 16.23. and Psa. 56.9. by Prayer Hezekiah was delivered from the King
of Assyria, and his health restored unto him again, Isa. 37. and 2 King. 18.
The Ninevites were delivered from the judgments threatened against them, Jonah
2. Peter raised Tabitha, and Paul Eutichus, that had fallen down by sleeping,
Act. 9.40. and 20.10. The Cent^rians Servant, the Cananites Daughter, and
Lunatic persons were healed; men blind received their sight; the stammering
and deaf were made to hear and speak; Lepers were cleansed, and certain persons
being dead, were restored to life again. So much avails Prayer with the Lord,
if it be servent. But to bring it a little more close as to the present
visitation of the Lord; See of what force and efficacy it has been with the
Lord to appease his wrath, and stay the execution of his judgments. When the
Children of Israel fell a murmuring, and had greatly provoked the Lord by their
unbelief, insomuch that, the Lord threatened to smite them with Pestilence, and
disinherit them; Moses falls a pleading and interceeding with the Lord for
them. Pardon I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according unto the
greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even
until now. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word, Numb.
14.12, 19, 20. So that only those men who brought up the evil report upon the
land, dyed by the Plague before the Lord, verse. 37. So in the case of Korah
Dathan and Abiram, when the Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying, they killed the people of the Lord, This so
greatly incensed the Lord, that he bad them go up from the congregation, that
he might consume them in a moment; Hereupon the Text says, they fell upon
their faces, and Aaron according to the command of Moses, takes his Censer and
puts fire therein, from off the Alter, and put on Incense, and made an
atonement for the people, for there was wrath gone out from the Lord, the
Plague was begun. And Aaron stood between the dead and the living, and the
Plague was staid, Numb. 16, 45, 46, 47. This shows how greatly the Prayers
and actions of Gods Servants do prevail with him, when they are faithful,
fervent, and according to his will, Jam. 5.16. 1 John 5.14. and foreshewed also
the power and efficacy of Christ's meditation for poor sinners, who is
represented by the Angels standing at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and
much Incense given unto him, to offer it with the prayers of all Saints, Rev.
8.3.

For God hears him always, John 11.40. And he it is that makes intercession
for the transgressors, Isa. 53.12. and is the atonement or propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 2.1. and for his sake God before whom the Pestilence goes, in
wrath remembers mercy, Hab. 3.2, 5. And as the blood of the Paschal Lamb
(figuring the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.7.) stayed the Angel which destroyed
the Egyptians from touching the Israelites, Exodus 12.23. Heb. 11.28. So the
smoke of Aarons incense (figuring the meditation of Christ, Psa. 141.2. Rev.
8.4. Stayed the Plague here from the Israelites which survived. That as it is
written of the Pestilence in David's time, The Lord repented him of the evil,
and said to the Angel that destroyed the people; It is enough, stay now thy
hand, 2 Samuel 24.16. So in this verse, the further efficacy and effect of
faithful fervent prayer, for the removal of this sore visitation of the Lord,
is clearly held forth in that Prayer of Solomon at the Temples dedication; If
there be in the Land Famine, if there be Pestilence, whatsoever Plague,
whatsoever Sickness there be, what Prayer and Supplication soever be made by
any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of
his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house. Then hear thou in
heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, etc. 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39. And
the Lord gave approbation to this prayer of his, as you have heard. Thus you
see in what way the Lord has usually been found for the diverting of his
judgments, and in which he has engaged himself to hear, and to be entreated.

Shall we consider a little then, what is the general spirit of the Nation at
this time; now that the hand of God lies so heavy upon it. Is there any
preparation now of meeting God, in this way of humble and faithful
supplication? O England where are thy tears, where are thy strong cries unto
unto the Lord? Will not the King of Nineveh rise up in judgment against thee,
and condemn thee? He commanded that Man and Beast should be covered with
sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, and turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that was in their hand; and God was entreated, and turned
away from his fierce anger, that they perished not.

What think thou, O England, of thy sins? Have they not been crying sins?
May not the Lord speak unto thee, and say, as unto Cain; Who slew his Brother,
what have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the
ground, Genesis 4.10. Or as James in his time, to the rich ungodly men of that
generation: Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped down your
fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Ye have lived in
pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts as in a
day of slaughter: Ye have condemned and killed the just, and be does not resist
you, James 5.4, 5, 6.

May it not be said of thy sins, as is said of the sins of Babylon, That her
sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities, Rev.
18.5. Surely thy sins have been crying sins, they have entered into the ears of
the Lord, they have reached unto heaven: God has heard thy hideous Oaths, thy
new hellish invented Oaths, thy horrid execrations and cursings, thy revilings
and blaspemings. But whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom
have thou exalted thy voice? and lifted up thine eyes on high? may it not be
said of thee, as of railing Rabshekah; Even against the holy one of Israel? And
if thy sins have cried so loud, may thou not think that thy tears and cries
for pardon should found as loud in the ears of God?

But where are thy repentings and mournings? where are thy weepings and
supplications? Surely, I tremble to think, what still mine ears do hear and
mine eyes see, how few of those sins are left, which cause the Land to mourn,
and the Lord to have a controversy with the inhabitants thereof. May it not be
laid to thy charge, even now when thousands are swept away by this destroying
judgment, that when God calls to weeping and mourning, to fasting and praying;
behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and
drinking wine, playing and gaming, ranting and roaring, cursing and swearing,
pride and voluptuous living? And what said the Lord? Surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you, till ye dye, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. Nay, is it not most
sad and lamentable to consider, as it is very credibly reported, that some
under the hand of Gods visitation, do dye swearing and cursing, in a most
dreadful and desperate manner.

Well then, consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver, before the whole land be devoured by the fire of his
jealousy, and that he make a speedy riddance of all such as dwell in the land.
But for you, who have received an anointing from the holy one, and are
acquainted with the divine art of prayer, and holy conference and familiarity
with God; be much in the exercise of this heavenly skill, be now improving to
the utmost your interest in God; lift up your voice with strength, stir up your
selves and take hold of him. And if your consciences tell you, you have fallen
by your iniquities, even in the late Apostasy. Take with you words, and turn
unto the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously.
Say unto him, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither
will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods, Hosea 14.1, 2,
3. Say unto him, O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it
for thy names sake, for our backslidings are many, we have sinned against
thee. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why
should thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man, that
turns aside to tarry for a night? Why should thou be as a man astonished,
as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and
we are called by thy name, leave us not, Jer. 14.7, 8, 9. Say, We are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags, and we all do
fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us away; But yet, O
Lord, thou art our Father: we are the clay, and thou our potter, and we all are
the work of thy hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember iniquity
for ever: behold, see we beseech thee, we are thy people, Isa. 64.6, 8, 9.
Thine enemies roar in the midst of the Congregation, they set up their ensigns
for signs: They have east fire into thy Sanctuary, they have defiled, by
casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground. They said in their
hearts, let us destroy them together: O God, how long shall the Adversary
reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thy
hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom. Will thou refrain thy
self for these things, O Lord? will thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very
sore, Psalm. 74. And let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not
thy heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore
should they say among the people, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be
jealous for his land, and pity his people, Joel 2.17, 18. Yea, let the Lords
Watchmen, whom God has set upon the Walls of Jerusalem, never hold their peace
day nor night; even those who make mention of the Lord, and are the Lords
remembrancers, let them not keep silence. And give him no rest, till he
establish and make his Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62.6, 7. Till the
heavens drop down from above, and the skies pour down righteousness, and the
earth open, and bring forth salvation, and righteousness spring up together,
Isa. 45.8. Till the Lord of Hosts be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy
be sanctified in righteousness, Isa. 5.16. Thus much for the fourth sovereign
Receipt.

The Fifth Spiritual Receipt.
5ly. The next Spiritual Receipt, and especial preservative against this
Pestilential sickness, which I shall recommend unto thee, is this. Have thy
dwelling now in the secret place of the most high, Psalm. 91.1. or as it is
further expressed in the 9. ver. of the same Psalm, Make the Lord thy refuge,
even the most high thy habitation.

In Pestilential and contagious times, and when the sickness comes near to our
own houses, most men and women's thoughss are busied about their habitations and
dwellings; where they shall remove and have their beings, so as they think they
may be most safe and secure from the stroke of Gods Visitation; and therefore
they will choose (especially such as are more able and wealthy) the best country
where is the best air, and most healthful soil, and the best company, and
food, and such other accommodations, as may probably conduce to the keeping of
themselves in a sound and healthful constitution. In some cases such provisions
as these may be necessary, expedient, and lawful. And therefore it is upon my
heart now to direct thee where thou may take up a most secure and safe
habitation, and that is in God, in the secret place of the most high, under the
shadow of the Almighty; and let me tell thee, whoever thou art that seek
security and protection elsewhere, and take not up thy dwelling in God, thou will be frustrated in thy expectation. Should thou hid thy self in the top of
Carmel, Amos 9.3. Or take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea, Psalm. 139.9. even there his hand will find thee out, and the
stroke of his indignation will light upon thee. The only way then to secure thy
self, is not to be flying from, but to be flying unto God; to be living and
dwelling in God. God as he is a secret place, so he is a secure place. Every
man would be there (especially in times of danger) where he may be most secret
and secure. But what may we understand by making God our habitation, or by
dwelling in the secret place of the most high. The words are very
comprehensive, and of a large extent, but I shall reduce them under some
following heads; after I have touched a little by way of explanation, or opening
of them.

By the secret place of the most high, we may understand Heaven, the seat and
throne of God, which the Scripture holds forth under these three denominations
or expressions.

To wit, His high place, his holy place, his secret place.

His high place, Psalm. 93.4. The Lord on high is mightier then the noise of
many waters, Psalm. 97.9. Thou Lord art high above all the earth, above all
people, Psalm. 99.2. The Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above the
heavens, Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high, Psalm. 113.5.
heaven is a high place.

So it is his Holy place, in Psalm. 46.4. they are joined both together: The
River, the streams whereof make glad the City of God; is said to be, the holy
place of the tabernacles of the most high. So in Isa. 57.15. Thus says the
high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy; And mark what
follows? I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, etc. In Psalm. 68.5. A Father of the fatherless, and
a Judge of the widows, is God in his holy babitation, that is, in heaven his
holy habitation, or the habitation of his holiness, and of his glory, as it is
termed, Isa. 63.15.

So here it is called his Secret place, the secret place of the most high; and
heaven may very fitly be called Gods secret place, as well as his high and holy
place; because God and Christ, and the things of heaven and eternity, they are
secret, hidden, and mysterious things. Great is the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. So in Col. 1.26. The Apostle calls it, The mystery hid from ages and
generations, but now (says he) is made manifest to his Saints; and the Saints
themselves they have hut an imperfect sight of God. We see but his back part,
Exodus 33.23. but as through a glass darkly; We know but in part, but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1
Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. Hence it is, that God is said, To dwell in that light which
no man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, or can see, 2 Timothy 6.17.

2. Jesus Christ may be said to be Gods Secret place.

1. In that he is said as before, To be the mystery, which was kept secret
since the world began, Romans 16.25.

2. In respect of that incomprehensible union that is betwixt the Father, and
the Son, Joh. 17.21.

3. Because the declaration or revelation of the Father is from Christ, who is
in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. and that's a Secret place. And the
Apostle speaks of a life that is hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3.

4. In respect of Christ's eternity with the Father. The Lord possessing him in
the beginning of his way, before his works of old. Then was Christ by him, as
one brought up with him, Prove. 8.22, 30.

5. Christ himself is said to be, A hidding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest, Isa. 32.2.

3. The Church (which was figured by the Tabernacle) may be said to be Gods
Secret place, his dwelling place. God has desired it for his habitation; This
(says he) is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it, Psalm.
132.13, 14. To which purpose is that in Psalm. 27.5. where we read of the secret
of his tabernacle, In the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; which has
reference to the Sanctuary or Ark, the place of Gods abode or visible presence,
so to be hid in his pavilion, the Prophet declares the assurance he had, being
shrouded under Gods protectio;n hide me or keep me safe, as in the most holy
place of thy Sanctuary, Where none might enter, but the High Priest, and that
alone, once every year, and not without blood neither, which he offered for
htmself, and for the errors of the people; Heb. 9.7. And this is called Gods
secret or hidden place, Ezekiel. 7.22. As his Saints are called his hidden ones,
Psalm. 83.3. So Psalm. 31.20. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence,
or thou hidest them in the hiding place of thy presence, where thou always
looks unto them, in secret favor, which the world knows not of. So then to
dwell in the secret place of the most high, is to dwell in God, in Heaven, in
Christ, in his Church, to have a conversation with God in the heavens; As the
Apostle expresses it, Phil. 3.20. For our conversation is in Heaven; To have
our affections on things above, Col. 3.2. to live a life of fellowship and
communion with God, as the Apostle John expresses it, 1 John 1.3.

Again, To make God our habitation, includes these four or five particulars.

1. A man's habitation is the place of his constant residence and abode.

2. It is the place of his safety, security, and strength.

3. It is the place of his secrecy.

4. It is the place of his recreation, delectation, or delight.

5. It is the chief place of his negotiation, commerce and converse.

Under these five heads, or several senses, may we understand our dwelling in
God, or making God our habitation.

1. Then the place of a man's dwelling, is the place of his constant residence
or abode. When we would speak with a man, we enquire where he dwells, where his
habitation is, for there we suppose he is resident; So then, if thou dwell
in God, if God is thy habitation, thou will have thy constant abode with him,
thy residence with him; this holds forth a fixed station or habitation in and
with God. Thou will not be as a stranger in a foreign Land, and as a wayfaring
man, that turns aside to tarry for a night, as Jeremiah expresses it, Chap.
14.8. Thou will not take up a nights lodging with him, and then away, and be
gone, as Travelers and wayfaring men use to do, but thou will abide with him,
set up thy dwelling with him; many will out of a complement, now and then go
and give a Friend or an Acquaintance a visit: or for diversions sake, being
tired it may be in their Shops, through multiplicity of business, and their
worldly negotiations, they are willing to take a little recreation, when they
can best dispense with it. Even so do many deal with God, they will give him,
it may be, a complemental visit now and then; Some, they will go to Church now
and then, and hear Divine Service (as they call it) or it may be if they hear
where an able powerful man Preaches, they will perhaps out of a humor, or
some itching desire, go and hear him; And others they will give God a visit now
and then, if it be but to stop the mouth of conscience, they will pray now and
then, and hear now and then, when their worldly occasions will give them leave,
they will be serving God when they know not how to serve themselves. Nay, it
may be, they will go a strain higher, and express some kind of delight in what
they do, it shall be some kind of recreation unto them now, and then to come
among the assemblies of Gods Saints, like those whom the Lord reproves in the
Prophet Ezekiels time, forward hearers they were, they spoke one to another,
every one to his Brother, saying, Come I pray you, and hear what is the word
that comes forth from the Lord; And (says the Lord) they come unto thee as
the people comes, and they sit before thee (...) as my people, and they bear
thy words, but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love,
but their heart goes after their covetousness. And lo, thou art unto them as a
very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32.
O he is a gallant man, a learned man, say they, how excellently did he speak?
even like a lovely song, that sounds pleasantly. So is it said of Herod, that
he heard John the Baptist, and observed him; yea, did many things, and heard
him gladly, yet rather then he will part with his Herodias, his darling sin,
off must go his head, Mark 6.20. But this is not to dwell with God. Some people
they have their fits in Religion, they will be seemingly devout now and then,
and especially if their religion swims along with the times, and is in fashion,
and a step to worldly preferment, so long they will follow Christ; but these
not having root in themselves, endure but for a while; for when tribulation or
persecution arises, because of the word, by and by they are offended, Mat.
13.21. See then that thou have thy dwelling, in God thy fixed habitation and
abode in God. So had the Church in Psa. 90.1, 2. Lord, Thou have been our
dwelling place in all generations; Before the Mountains were brought forth, or
ever thou had formed the earth; even from everlasting to everlasting, thou
art God. This Psalm is said to be a Prayer of Moses the man of God, in which
Moses does acknowledge the Lord to be their dwelling place, their habitation or
mansion house, or place of retreat in all generations, in all their travails
through the terrible Wilderness, wherein God lead them; God was a refuge unto
them in their greatest streights, and troubles at all times; He had promised
that his presence should go with him, and that he would give him rest, Exodus
33.14. and Moses did experience the truth of it. And therefore in Deuteronomy. 33.26,
27. It is said, There is none like unto the God of Jesuran, who rides upon the
heavens for thy help, and in his excellency on the sky; The eternal God is thy
refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms; So in the 29. verse. Happy
art thou, O Israel; Who is like unto thee, O people, saved by the Lord, the
shield of thy help, and who is the Sword of thy excellency, and thine enemies
shall be found liers unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places;
And then indeed may thou be said to dwell in God, to have a constant abode
with him.

1. When (as David) thou art continually with him, Psa. 73.23. and set'st the
Lord allways before thee, Psa. 16.8. This will awe us when we have
opportunities and temptations to secret sins, Genesis 39.9. This will possess us
with more reverence and godly fear in duties of his worship and service, 1 Cor.
11.10. This will provoke us to diligence in every good work. The eye of the
Master makes a diligent Servant, Col. 3.22. This will comfort us in our
afflictions, and encourage us against fears; If we walk through the Valley of
the shadow of death, we shall fear no evil, if the Lord is with us, Psa. 23.4.
And he will be with us while we be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If we set the Lord
always before us, we shall not be moved, Psa. 16.8. Moses endured, as seeing
him who is invisible, Hebr. 11.27.

2. Then may thou be said to dwell in God, and make him thy habitation and
constant place of abode, when thou make him thy chiefest good, when thou
chosest him as thy portion, and chief happiness, and live wholly upon him as
thy All in all, Romans 11.36. When his name and glory is first inscribed on thy
heart, chiefly in thine eye, and principally as thine end and aim, in all thy
actions and undertakings, 1 Cor. 10.31. When thou can say with the Psalmist,
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee: My flesh and my heart fails; but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever, Psa. 73.26. Then will thou not know, nor desire,
nor love any creature, but purely, as subordinate to God. If this were but
settled in our hearts, how would it ballast them, and keep them steady, that
they would not be tossed up and down with the various occurrences of this life,
neither lift up with Prosperity, nor cast down with adversity, for whether we
have more of these things, they make no considerable addition to us; God is our
happiness, and not the creature; or whether we have less of these things, it is
no diminution to our happiness; we still have our portion: We are but as a man
that has turned his estate into money, though he has not houses, nor lands,
nor flocks, nor herds; yet he has that which answers all things, Eccles.
10.19. So it is with one that has God for his portion, whose is the earth and
the fullness thereof; He can with Habakkuk, rejoice in God, in the deprevation
and absence of all other things, Hab. 3.17, 18. And say with Paul, As
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having
nothing, yet possessing all things; 2 Cor. 6.10. Give twenty pounds to a poor
man, and you make him; take so much from him, and you undo him; but it is
nothing in a rich man's Purse, that has thousands coming in yearly; Let an
unbeleiver loose the World, and he loses all; he complains with Laban that
his gods are gone, let him have these things in abundance, and he is
transported like Haman, but these are small things with him, whose portion is
the Lord; And therefore call nothing prosperity or pleasure, but his love, and
nothing adversity or misery but his displeasure. When any thing would seem
lovely and desirable which is against him, call it Dung; And hear that man, as
Satan or the Serpent, that would entise thee from him; and count him but
vanity, a worm and dust, that would affright thee from thy duty to him.

3. Then may thou be said to dwell in God, to have thy constant abode with
him; When thou shall prize all opportunities of communion with God in his
Ordinances; as Prayer, Reading, and Hearing, the Word of God. So David, As the
Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God, Psa.
42.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.
To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary, Psa.
63.1, 2. and 84.1, 2. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts? my soul
longs, yea, even faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh
cries out for the living God. So Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto
me; let us go into the House of the Lord. This to do is our Duty, and our
Privilege.

1. It is our Duty, and part of that homage which we owe to God, as our Lord
and Lawgiver, by prayer to acknowledge our dependence on him, Psalm. 65.2. and
our subjection to him, by sitting down at his feet, to receive the Law from his
mouth, to take our instructions from him, Deuteronomy. 33.3.

2. It is our Privilege, which cost two of the greatest gifts which heaven
could afford, Ephesians. 2.17. the Son of God, that we might have acceptance; The
Spirit of God, that we might have assistance. What greater privilege are we
capable of? then at any time to go and reveal our cause to God, and to pour out
our complaints before him, Jer. 20.12. To have leave to beg any thing of him,
Luke 11.13. To ask Counsel of him, Psalm. 119.24. There being in our communion
with God a transfusion of spirits, the Lord communicating his Spirit or Divine
Nature to us therein, 2 Cor. 3.18. Besides our own pressing necessities, which
should daily provoke us hereto. And the oftener we come to God, the more welcome
shall we be, Cant. 2.14. and the more boldness, and liberty, of access we shall
have; dis-use and in-frequency, breeding a strangness betwixt God and the Soul,
and deading the heart to communion with him.

2. A Man's House is the place of his safety, security, and strength: We use to
say, a man's House is his Castle; then we make God our habitation, when we make
him our refuge and our strength. So did David, I will love thee, O Lord, my
strength The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my
strength in whom I will trust, my buckler, the horn of my salvation, and my
high tower, Psalm. 18.2. God was his strength, his defender in all adversities;
God was his rock, where he fled for refuge, when hunted and pursued by his
enemies, his fortress or strong hold, wherein he was safely kept and preserved;
his shield to overshadow and defend him. The horn of his salvation, that is,
the strength of his deliverance, and the high tower or strong tower of his
protection, wherein to his righteous soul did run and was safe, Prove. 18.10. In
the 61. Psalm. 2. and 3. David prays, That God would lead him to the rock,
that was higher then he. For thou have been a shelter for me (says he) and a
strong tower from the enemy. So in the Psalm. 71.3. Be thou my strong
habitation, whereunto I may continually resort. Be thou to me for a rock of
habitation, where I may continually fly unto in all my difficulties and
distresses. See also Psalm. 31.2. With what confidence in God was the Chuch
carried forth upon this account; God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the earth he removed, and
though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters
thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof, Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3. By the changing of the earth, and removing of
mountains, are often meant the alteration of States and Polities, Hagg. 2.21,
22. Jerem. 51.25. Rev. 6.14. By which we are given to understand, That in the
time of the greatest mutations and revolutions in time of the greatest toffings
and tumblings, turnings and over-turnings, the Church would not be dismayed,
but confidently expect deliverance from God.

Well then, if thou will make God thy habitation, thy place of security and
strength, thy rock and thy fortress; Thou will make him thy only rock, thy only
stay and trust; thou will seek help and deliverance in all thy streights and
trouble from him, and from him only. He only (says the Psalmist) is my rock
and my salvation, he is my defense, I shall not be moved. And from hence it is
that he encourages his soul, To wait only upon God, telling us that his
expectation was from him, Psalm. 62.6, 7. Nor would he trust in his Bow, nor on
his Sword to save him. Psalm. 44.6.

Now then do thou make God thy only rock, thy only refuge? Do thou fly
unto him in all thy streights, and to him only? or have thou recourse to some
other rock? to some other refuse? Take heed of trusting in man and making flesh
thine arm: There Is a curse denounced against such, Jer. 17.5. Do thou go down
into Egypt, to strengthen thy self in the strength of Pharaoh? know then, that
thou trustest but upon a broken staff, and a bruised reed, as Rabshekeh said to
Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.21. even in a shadow. And that the strength of Pharaoh
shall be thy shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt thy confusion, Isa.
30.2, 3. Do thou put thy trust in Princes, or in the Sons of Men? know that
thou trusts but in a shadow likewise, Judge. 9.15. and that there is no help in
them; their breath goes forth, they return to their earth, in that very day
their thoughts perish, Psalm. 46.3, 4. And that its better to trust in the Lord,
then to put confidence in man; yea, then to put confidence in Princes, Psalm.
118.8, 9. Do thou trust in graven Images, and say to the molten Imares; ye
are our gods? know thou shall be turned back, and be greatly ashamed, yea,
confounded, Isa. 42.17. Psalm. 97.7. Is thy trust such as is the hope of
hypocrites? know that the hypocrites hope shall perish and be cut off, and his
trust shall be as a spiders web, Job 8.14. Do thou make gold thy hope, and
say to the fine gold, thou art my confidence? trusting in the abundance of thy
wealth, and strengthening thy self in thy wickedness: know that this is an
iniquity to be punished by the Judge, for that thou deniest God that is above,
Job 31.24, 28. Yea, further know, That God shall destroy thee for ever, and
take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of
the land of the living. And the righteous shall see, and fear, and laugh at
thee (and say) Lo this is the Man that made not God his strength, Psalm. 52.5,
6, 7. Do thou trust in thine own beauty, and play the harlot, and pour out
thy fornications? know that God will judge thee, as women that break wedlock,
and shed blood are judged, and will give thee blood in fury and jealousy, and
throw down thine eminent places, and break down thy high places, and strip thee
of thy clothes, and take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare, and
execute judgments upon thee, Ezekiel 16.15, 36, 38, 41. Do thou trust in lying
words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord are these; and notwithstanding Steal, Murder, and Commit Adultery, and
Swear falsely, and Burn Incense unto Baal, and Walk after other gods, and stand
before the Lord, and say, thou art delivered to do all these abominations? know
that these are lying words, that will not profit; but consider rather, what the
Lord did to Shiloh (where he set his name at the first) for the wickedness of
his people Israel, Jer. 7.4, 8, 12. Do thou trust to thine own righteousness,
and commit iniquity? know that all thy righteousness shall not be remembered,
but for thine iniquity, which thou committest, thou shall dye for it, Ezekiel.
33.13. Do thou trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men? know,
that therefore a tumult shall arise among the people, and all the fortresses
shall be spoiled, Hos. 10.13, 14. Do thou trust in thine own purity, and say,
stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou? know that
thou art but a smok in Gods Nose, and a fire that burns all the day, Isa.
65.5. and that the Lord has put no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he
charged with folly. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth, Job 4.18, 19.

But after all this, perhaps thou will say, Thou will trust in thine own heart,
for that will not deceive thee; will thou do so? know then thou art but a fool
for thy labor in Gods account, Prove. 28.26. Thy heart will deceive thee, for
it is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer.
17.9. Thus you see that God alone is to be trusted in, and to trust in any
thing else, will be but as an Egyptian Reed to lean unto.

And as God alone is to be our rock and our refuge, so are we to make him our
rock and our trust at all times. So is the Exhortation: Trust in him at all
times; ye people, pour out your hearts before him: God is a refuge for us,
Psalm. 62.8. So Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength: At what time I am afraid (says David) I will
trust in thee (when his enemies were ready to swallow-him up) In God I have put
my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.3, 4. And what
said Job? Though be slay me, yet will I trust in him: I will maintain mine own
ways before him, Job 13.15. Is it a time of evil tidings, thou will not be
afraid, if thy heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. Do thou
fear the Lord, and yet walk in a dark disconsolate estate? even then art thou
to trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon thy God, Isa. 50.10.

And as thou art to make God alone thy rock, and thy refuge, and trust in him
at all times, so with all thy heart, Not leaning to thine own understanding,
but in all thy ways acknowledging him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove.
3.5, 6. Yea, the Lord shall help thee, and deliver thee: he shall deliver thee
from the wicked, and save thee, because thou trustest in him, Psalm. 37.40. This
David acknowledged Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our Fathers trusted in thee: they trusted,
and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered: they
trusted in thee, and were not confounded.

Well then, would thou have God to be a help and defense unto thee? Trust in
him. He is a Buckler or a shield, to all those that trust in him. Psalm. 18.30.
Prove. 30.5. For who is God save the Lord? or who is a rock save our God? Psalm.
18.30, 31. 1 Samuel 2.2. He is the rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways
are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity; just and right is he, Deuteronomy.
32.4. Would thou be steadfast and unmovable, as the rock whereupon the Church
is builded, against which no storms, nor tempests; no, nor the gates of hell
shall ever prevail. Trust in God: They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever, Psalm. 125.1. Would thou
possess the land, and inherit Gods holy Mountain; see that thou trust in him,
Isa. 57.13. Would thou be fat and flourishing, and not cease from bearing of
fruit? and that blessedness shall be thy portion. Trust in the Lord. Blessed is
the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be
as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her roots by the river,
whose leaf shall be green, and shall not cease from yiedling fruit, Jerem.
17.7, 8. Pro. 28.25. And as David Psalm. 40.4. Blessed is the man that makes
the Lord his trust: and respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to
lies.

3. A man's House or Habitation is the place of his Secrecy. Where does the
Husband and the Wife, or a man and his friend, unbosome themselves, communicate
their thoughts, and the very secrets of their hearts each to other; but usually
and for the most part in their Houses, in their private Chambers and Closets?
So it is with the Man or Woman that makes God their habitation. They Will go to
God, and in their Closet and close retirements with the Lord, how will they
unbosome themselves, and lay open their very hearts, and most secrets thoughts,
and spread them before the Lord.

So did Hanna in the bitterness of her soul, she prayed and wept sore, and in
her secret retirements she poured out her soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.10,
15. meaning the trouble and anguish of her heart. So David when his spirit was
overwhelmed within him, then he cried unto the Lord, and poured out his
complaint before him, and showed him all his trouble, Psalm. 142.1, 2, 3. So
Jeremiah 20.10, 11, 12. when he lay under evil reports and defamation, and his
familiars watched for his halting, what course does he take? He goes to God,
and opens his cause unto him, or discovers his cause unto him, as to an
Advocate or Patron. O Lord of Hosts (says he) that triest the righteous, and
see the reins and the heart; let me see thy vengeance on them, for unto thee
have I opened my Cause. So is it said of Hezekiah, when he had received the
Letter of railing Rabshekah and read it, he goes up into the House of the Lord,
and spreads it before the Lord, in this manner. O Lord God of Israel, which
dwell between the Cherubims; thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the
kingdoms of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth. Lord bow down thine ear
and hear: open, Lord, thine eyes and see: and hear the words of Sennacharib,
which has sent him to reproach the living God. This has been the manner of
the Servants of the Lord, who have made God their habitation; they go to God in
secret, and pour out their souls before him. O (says Job) that I knew where I
might find him, that I might come even to his seat? I would order my cause
before him, and fill my mouth with arguments, Job 23.3, 4. Holy Job (even now a
Proverb, or a Prodigy rather) perceiving his friends discourses, were fuller of
reproaches then consolations, neglects to answer them, and resolves to get him
to God, the only support and refuge of the miserable.

The soarest strokes, cannot drive away gracious souls from God, but rather
draw them nearer unto him; they seldom or never think themselves near enough
unto God, its Sun, and Shield, and Center. O that I knew where to find him,
that I might come even to his Seat. And Gods Judgment Seat, where he sits to
hear and determine Causes, is not terrible or unapproachable to a Beleiver, who
knows it to be a Throne of Mercy, as Job did here. And happy are all that can
say so; For we must all appear defore the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10,
11. and it will be terrible to all those that do not often resort thither
before hand. And it is good to have our hearts and mouths filled with
Arguments, when we come to plead, and expostulate, and reason out our great
concernments with our God; who has all good things lying ready by him, and
waits only for Prayer to come and fetch them away. Not that God stands in need
of our informing him concerning our necessities, which he knows better then we;
but because hereby we give some proof, that we are not altogether strangers at
home (as many careless ones are) but know something of our selves and our own
cases, and of him and his dealings toward us. If our mouths then be filled
with arguments, we may be sure of an Answer. God will not sit still and say
nothing, he will not sit like an Image, like a dumb Idol, as the Abominations
of the Heathens, their Dii Stercorei, their Dunghill Gods (as they are called,
Deuteronomy. 29.17.) must of necessity do, they can do no otherwise, though men fill
their mouths with Arguments, and empty their veins of their blood before them,
1 King. 18.28. Go boldly then to the Throne of grace, plead with God, and fill
your mouths with arguments; spread thy complaints before him, and open thy
cause unto him, for when ever you do so, beyond all, peradventure, God will
answer; There Is no fear that he will interpret this sawciness and presumption
in thee, and so answer thee with his fists about thine ears, or with his foot
to kick thee out of his presence; there is no fear that he will smother thee
under the weight of his greatness, or dazzle thee with his beams, or burn thee
with his flames, or drive thee from the judgment seat, as Gallio did the Jews,
Act. 18.16. No, he never beats his people lower then their knees, and thence
suffers them, yea, helps them to rise again; nay, he will lay his hand upon thy
head; yea, under thy feet to do thee good; he will stroke rather then strike a
pleading soul; He will strengthen thee, and put mettle into thee; He will not
plead against thee with his great and absolute power.

So he dealt with Daniel a man that had great intimate acquaintance with God,
Chap. 10.19. How was he strengthened when the Angel touched him; The Righteous
may plead and dispute with him, even at the bar of Equity and Justice, and the
Judge cannot but pronounce and pass sentence in their favor; Thus righteous
Jeremiah pleaded with him; Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee,
Jer. 12.1. And he invites his people to come and plead freely, Isa. 43.26. Put
me in remembrance, says the Lord, let us plead together, declare, that thou
may be justified; if thou haste any thing to say for thy self, say on. Yea,
Idolaters shall have this permission, to plead for themselves and their dumb
Idols, if they have any thing to say for them, Isa. 41.21. Produce your cause,
says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob, Shall
Idolaters have this liberty, and not the true Worshippers, that worship him in
Spirit and in truth? The wicked shall they have it, and not the righteous? Yes
doubtless, this is that boldness of speech, 2 Cor. 7.4. mentioned as the great
privilege of the Saints, especially now under the new Testament, Heb. 4.16.
Accedamus cum loquendi ubertate ad thronum gratiae Letus come boldly unto the
throne of grace, Heb. 10.19. Having therefore boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, (a right and freedom to enter in with our
persons hereafter, and now by our Prayers) let us draw near with a true heart,
with full assurance of faith; He has given us two great friends of his for our
Advocates, the one at his own right hand in heaven, moving and negotiating, and
always appearing for us; the other seated in our breasts, his holy spirit,
making intercession for us. Yea, the Fathers own heart is full of love, brim
full, and running over, and he loves to hear his children reason it out with
him; and he does of set purpose delay to grant their requests sometimes,
because he loves to hear often from them, to hear their voices, and see their
faces, Cant. 2.14. to hear what they can say for themselves: and so he dealt
with the woman of Canaan, in those several repulses he gave her, Mat. 15.22,
23. Acquaint thy self then with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come
unto thee, Job 22.21. O the secret, intimate, and heavenly familiarity, that is
betwixt God and the gracious beleiving soul; It is said of Moses, that the Lord
spoke unto him face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend, Exodus 33.11.
That is, plainly, familiarly. The like phrase is used of speaking mouth to
mouth. My servant Moses (says the Lord) is not so, who is faithful in all mine
house; With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches, Numb. 12.7, 8. Well then, if thou make God thy habitation, thou will not, thou can not be a stranger to God, thou will have some intimacy
with him, some secret talk and communion with him; thou will ever and anon be
opening thy heart unto him, and be pleading and expostulating the case with
him. Daniel could not be restrained from this, though he knew the decree or
writing was signed, that whosoever should ask any petition of any God or Man
for thirty days, save of the King Darius, he should be cast into the Den of
Lions. But he goes into his House and kneels upon his knees three times a day,
and prayed, and gave thanks before his God as he did aforetime, Dan. 6.10. he
would rather dye then omit his wonted Worship, and that close intimate
communion he had with the Lord in prayer. And it must needs be so; for
howsoever natural men and worldlings, out of their obnoxiousness and secret
terror do slavishly retire, and do not willingly, neither dare they draw near
to that God, which to them is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. Yet all these, who
have truly tasted how gracious the Lord is, shall find their hearts out of a
secret sense of Gods love unto them first, kindly inflamed with infinite desire
to live under the comfortable influence of his pleased countenance, to enjoy
his holy Majesty with constant peace, and an humble spiritual access and
acquaintance continually. His spirit of Prayer, infinite love, yea, all his
loving kindness, protections, preservations, bounty, patience, divine
illuminations, spiritual blessings, exercise of repentance, temptations and
troubles from Satan, pressures and oppressions from the world, loss of inward
peace, faintness of faith, want of spiritual strength, assault of some special
sin, sweetness of meditation, daily favors showred down without number, and
above measure, the forethought of the great and last account, motions of the
blessed spirit, spiritual desertion, etc. but above all, the unutterable, and
inexpressible blessedness, goodness, and excellency of that highest Majesty it
self, are, and should be quickening and powerful motives to drive us frequently
and incessantly unto God.

Object. But perhaps thou will say; It is true, the righteous may be thus
familiar with him, plead with him, and not be cast in their suit; But where are
those righteous ones? And who are they? for it is not so with me; God be
merciful to me a grievous sinner; I dare not be so bold with him; Mine iniquity
stops my mouth.

Answ. I answer, Every one that has a share in, yea, a sincere desire after
the righteousness of Christ, is righteous before him, and may in that
righteousness plead and prevail, and as a Prince have power with God: For this
is his own righteousness, of his own contrivance and appointment. The
righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. A righteousness spun and
woven out of his own bowels, and the obedience of his dear Son, a better then
ever came upon the back of Angels; for which the personal and legal
righteousness of a Paul, of an Angel is to be abandoned; Evangelical being far
better then Angelical righteousness. Thou can not miss a blessing in his
garments, who is not ashamed to be called thine Elder Brother; who came to
change clothes and places with thee, and to take all upon himself, that thou
might escape. The Father cannot but be well pleased with the smell of his
Sons raiment: and he sits too upon a Seat of Judgment, and must do thee right;
and Justice it self (which will not be twice paid) is as much for thee, as much
thy friend as Mercy, Romans 3.26. He is just, and yet (nay therefore) a justifier
of him that beleiveth in Jesus. So that if thou art not utterly shut up in
unbeleif, if there be but the least spark of true faith alive in thy heart,
thou may go boldly, and plead, and prosper.

Object. 2. But I have nothing to say for my self, my heart is dried up like a
Potsheard, and withered like grass; I have sinned away all arguments, and must
never open my mouth any more before him.

Answ. True, not to boast, but to plead thou may. And have thou nothing to
offer? not a sigh? nor the groanings of thy soul? Let the sighings of the
Prisoner come before thee (says David) Psalm. 79.11. And for the oppression of
the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise (says the Lord
himself) Psalm. 12.5. I will set him at safety, from him that puffs at him. We
own help from the spirit, when we are enlarged. He helps us, even when we are
straightned. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought (no not Paul and the Apostle) but the
spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8.26. with unutterable straightnings: Our enlargements may be but
the flowings of the Gifts of the Spirit, but our inward pinchings and
coarctations, may be the Intercession of the Spirit it self, the more immediate
operations of the Spirit.

And we forget that there is such a Prompter behind the Hangings, such an
Interpreter (as his Title signifies, as well as a Comforter; Ille suggerit
vobis omnia, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, Joh. 14.26.) such an Interpreter, I say, to make known the mind of
God to us, and ours to him; and as he betrays the secrets of God to the
Saints, so he rips up their hearts before God, and fills there mouths, not only
with windy words, but weighty arguments. Have thou nothing then to complain off
before thy Maker? No Sin, no Devil? no Diabolical Temptations? no strong
unmortified corruptions? no Spiritual Plunderers? no Egyptian Taskmasters? no
Cruel Bondage, that makes thy life bitter to thee? no Enemy coming in as a
flood to oppress and do the wrong? No Iron-yoke that galls thy shoulders? no
violence and spoil to cry out and complain of? Sure thou have not studied thine
own case, thou have not ordered thy cause aright, if this fountain fail thee.

Object. But all Complaints are troublesome, men cannot endure them.

I Answer, God will. Out of the abundance of my complaint, and grief have I
spoken hitherto, says Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.16. and you know how she sped.

4ly. A Man's House is the place of his Recreation, Delectation or delight.
Where do men recreate and delight themselves so much (I speak as to ordinary
and daily recreations and delights) as in their own Habitations and Dwellings?
Where are those intercourses of delights between Man and Wife, but in their
Domestic habitation? where are those reciprocal actions of Conjugal affections
demonstrated so much as at home in their own houses? they eat and drink
together, they commune and converse together, they sleep and solace themselves
together, they joy and rejoice together; yea, where true conjugal love is, they
would not only live, but they would dye together.

Even so it is with the Soul, that makes God his habitation. O the intercourse
of delights that is betwixt God, Christ, his Spirit, and the gracious beleiving
soul. What else does the Book of the Canticles or Song of Solomon hold forth?
What does it contain as the chief matter thereof, but a most excellent Marriage
Song, by way of Dialogue between Christ and his Church? Christ as the
Bridegroom, and the Church as his Spouse or Bride; under the Type or Figure of
Solomon, and his Spouse or Bride: In which Song, in flourishing Allegorical and
Rhetorical words; the true hearty love, and the most excellent benefits and
favors of the Lord Jesus Christ the Bridegroom, unto the Christian Church his
Spouse or Bride. And on the other side, the earnest and hearty longings of the
Spouse his Church, after her beloved Bridegroom the Lord Jesus Christ, is
singularly demonstrated and held forth.

In it the Bridegroom and his Bride do highly extol and praise each other. The
Bride to set forth his excellent dignity, his riches, and glory, with all those
sweet things that flow unto her from him; she does bring in all the stateliest,
the richest, the goodliest, and the sweetest things under heaven. The like does
He in praising her beauty, and her delectable sweetness.

From hence does spring the great delight and pleasure, which the one takes in
the other, where they do (as it were) unfold the vehement passions of their
Love with that fervent desire which she has to be most nearly joined unto him,
and to dwell with him for ever. Also there do many goodly tokens pass between
them: For he bestows upon her very rich jewels and heavenly ornaments, to
deck and to beautify her withal; and she again renders unto him, the sweet
fruits of her love. Let him kiss me (says the Spouse) with the kisses of his
mouth for thy love is bteter then wine. Because of the savor of thy good
ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love
thee. Draw me, we will run after thee: the King hatb brought me into his
Chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more
then wine: the upright love thee. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where
thou feedest? Then in the 8th. verse. Christ highly commends her beauty, terming
her the fairest among women, and under several comparisons he does highly
praise and extol her, Chap. 1. So Chap. 4. even the whole thereof, save a verse
or two, is the speech of the Bridegroom, consisting in praises and
commendations of the Bride, in declaration of his love toward her. Behold thou
art fair my Love, behold thou art fair, thou have Doves eyes within thy locks,
verse. 1. Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee, verse. 7. Thou
have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou have ravished my heart with
one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck, verse. 9. How fair is thy love,
my sister, my spouse, how much better is thy love then wine? and the smell of
thine ointments then all spices? Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb:
honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the
smell of Lebanon, verse. 10, 11. So Chap. 6, 7. How does the Lord Jesus give
forth very great and singular commendations of his spouse, testifying his great
love and hearty affection toward her: Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as
Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, etc. My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the
only one of her Mother, she is the choice one off her that bare her, etc. How
beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes daughter? the joints of thy thighs
are like jewels, and so goes on in a description of the Churches graces. And in
Chap. 7.6. How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights? And
having praised the beauty and comeliness of his Spouse by several parts, he
breaks forth into an admiration and great wonderment of her beauty, in the
whole or in all laid together. They be rare things, that Princes upon earth do
wonder at: most rare which the Kings of Kings has in admiration. I instance
this, to let you see the mutual solace and delight, that is betwixt Christ and
the gracious soul.

And surely, if thou have tasted that the Lord is gracious thou can not but
take sweet delight, contentation and delectation in him. Cant. 2.3. I sat down
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. The
shadow of a tree (as all men know) is very comfortable, and does refresh those
that are parched with the scorching heat of the Sun. When the Church is under
hot persecutions and fiery temptations of Satan, and the burning heat of Gods
wrath for sins guilt in the conscience; what, but Christ can be as a shadow to
refresh, Mat. 11.20. There shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time
from the heat, Isa. 4.6. Thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to
the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat,
when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall, Isa. 25 4.
And this was not all, but says the Souse, His fruit was sweet to my taste, or
to my palate.

She does not only receive comfortable refreshing shadow from this fruitful
tree, but she eats of the Apples also which it bears, and the same are
sweet and pleasant to her taste: Which is another benefit the Spouse enjoys
by Christ; To wit, that she is not only freed and delivered from evil, but made
partaker of his goodness; in that all the works of his Prophecy, Preisthood,
and Kingdom; his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and all the fruits of them are
communicated unto her by the Gospel; which she feeds upon by faith, to the
abundant refreshing and satisfaction of her soul.

Fruits signifying good works and the Graces of Gods Spirit, which are to the
benefit of our selves and others, Mat. 3.8, 10. Gal. 5.22. which is also
applied to the Doctrine of the Gospel, Joh. 15.16. and signifies a comfortable
reward, Psalm. 58.11. and Prove. 27.18. So David he expresses his delight in
God, by the Delight he took in his words or promises rather, How sweet are thy
words unto my taste? yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. How
sweet? I am not not able to express the sweetness of them. How sweet unto my
taste, unto my mouth? that is, unto the mouth of my heart and soul, for
otherwise the spiritual promises yield but little sweetness unto the bodily
mouth. They are more sweet and pleasant unto my mind, then honey is to my
mouth. He means, that he never tasted any meat with his mouth, how good or
pleasant soever it were, as he felt Gods word sweet and comfortable to his soul.

To which agrees that in Psalm. 19 8, 10. The statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart. More to be desired are they then gold; yea, then much fine
gold, sweeter also then the honey, and the honeycomb. And in Psalm. 119.11. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an heritage forever: for they are the rejoicing of
my heart. Yea, so delighted was he in the Lord, that he would never think of
him, but his meditation of him should be sweet, Psalm. 104.34. His soul should
be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and his mouth should praise him with
joyful lips; when he remembered God upon his bed, and meditated on him in the
night watches, Psalm. 63.5, 6. What more pleasant and delectable to the palate
then marrow and fatness? and such was the meditation of God to his soul, even
in the night watches, in the darkest and most dismal season of Gods
dispensations.

To this agrees that in Psalm. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house: and thou shall make them drink of the river of thy
pleasures. There Is a river of pleasures and delights that flow from God, which
as a well of living waters, and an ever-springing in-exhaustible fountain of
life and all divine graces, can never be drawn dry; but the streams thereof are
always running, To make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. Hence it is that the
souls Communion with Christ, and its spiritual participating of Christ in his
Ordinances, is held forth under the term of Supping with Christ. If any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him,
and he with me, Revel. 3.20. I will communicate my self unto him; have mutual
fellowship with him; I will dwell in him spiritually, really, operatively by my
grace; and he shall dwell in me by faith, feed upon me, receive strength and
nourishment from me, and so come to participate of my divine nature.

Hereby then may thou come to know whether thou make God thy Habitation or
not: Men take delight in their habitations, there they solace and recreat
themselves; and Husband and Wife take mutual comfort and contentation in each
other. Consider then what delight thou have in God, in Christ's in his way and
worship, his ordinances and holy appointments, Job 27.10. Do thou take
delight in approaching to God? Is thy delight in the Law of the Lord, and in
that Law do thou meditate day and night? Psalm. 1.2. Romans 7.22. Are his
testimonies thy delight and thy counselors? Psalm. 119.24. Is his word unto
thee, the joy and rejoicing of thine heart? as it was to that good Prophet
Jeremiah, Jer. 15.16. And do thou delight to do the will of God, as Christ
did his Fathers, Psalm. 40.8. What fellowship and society is there betwixt
Christ and thy Soul? Our fellowship (says John) is with the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. The baptized and new added members to the Church,
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking
of bread, and in prayers, Act. 2.41, 42. They held communion with Christ, and
each with other in breaking of bread, 1 Cor. 10.16. They assembled together,
prayed together, praised God together, sung together, suffered and rejoiced
together, Act. 4.31. and 2.47. and 16.25. and 5.41.

Consider then, what entertainment thou have with Christ, does he invite thee
to come unto him? and does he bid thee welcome when thou come? does he bid
thee eat that which is good? and that thy soul should delight it self in
fatness? Isa. 55.1, 2. Wast thou never at dinner or supper with him, when he
killed his beasts, mingled his wine, and furnished his table? and has he not
bade thee to eat of his bread, and drink of the wine which he has mingled?
Prove. 9.1, 2, 5. Christ keeps a plentiful table, you will hardly find such another
noble and generous housekeeper. When he prepares a dinner, he kills his oxen
and his fatlings, Mat. 22.4. and will entertain thee with a second course also;
He has his fruit that's very sweet to the taste, his flagons and his apples, the
one to stay thee, the other to comfort thee. And as Princes and great Persons
have, he has a noble Banqueting house too, or house of wine for to welcome
thee; and if then he finds thee but a little sick of love, he will not shun to
put his left hand under thy head, and with his right hand to embrace thee; yea,
his Banner over thee shall be love, Cant. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.

But now if their be no such intercourses of love and mutual delight betwixt
Christ and thy soul? If thou art still a stranger unto him, and know not what
it is to have communion with him, or to be supping with him? If when he has
bidden thee to the wedding, and has made all things ready, and sent out his
servants to call thee, and thou shall make light of it, and refuse to come, and
choose rather to go to thy Farm or Merchandise, and be feeding still upon thy
husks, or be making excuses, and telling him thou have bought five yoke of
oxen, and thou must go to prove them; or have married a Wife, and therefore
thou can not come: Or if thou should do worse then this, take his servants
and entreat them spightfully and slay them, Mat. 22.5, 6. comp. with Luke
14.16. Let me tell thee, thou will incense him greatly, even to send forth his
Armies to destroy thee. I say, if thy heart is dead, and drowsy, and estranged
to God; and void of love, and dutiful affections to Christ; thou art far from
dwelling in the secret place of the most high, and making him thy habitation.

5. A man's house is the chief place of his negotiation and commerce; where does
a man drive his trade, and utter his commodities, but at home, in his house or
in his shop? So it is with the soul that makes God his habitation; he drives a
special trade and commerce with God; makes Religion his business; Christ
invites all to come and buy of his Commodities, and he exposes rich commodities
to sale, and there are souls that do trade and traffic with him, Isa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money, and without
price; Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor
for that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which
is good, etc. Christ excites and stirs up all that do thirst, and greatly long
after righteousness, being sensible of their own sins, their nothingness and
unworthiness to come unto him, as to the fountain of living waters, that is, by
faith to believe on him, and then out of his belly (says he) shall flow rivers
of living water, but this spoke he of the spirit, Joh. 7.37. He invites all, I
say, that are money-less, and poor worthless, helpless, and meritless
creatures, to come unto him and buy those heavenly goods which he offers unto
us by the Gospel; namely, wine and milk, that is, all things requisite and
necessary for our spiritual life; the graces and fruits of the spirit, which
are sweet and delightful as wine; and which are as necessary to a heavenly
life, as milk is to this natural life, and may take in also forgiveness of
sins, and the pure and unspotted righteousness of Christ (which are given us of
God in him, and that freely for naught, and without any merits and deserts of
ours) together with life eternal. And wherefore (says he) do ye spend money
for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? or
weigh out your money for that which is not bread? Wherefore are ye at so great
cost and charges in vain, and take pains and toil to no purpose, for dry,
empty, husky, unsatisfying, unfruitful and unprofitable things? which when you
have them, and enjoy them, will minister no true comfort, nor satisfaction unto
your soul. How vain and profuse was the Prodigal, to waste his substance with
riotous living, to purchase to himself a few husks, unsatisfying food, which
the swine did eat; which when he had them, was ready to perish with hunger,
Luke 15.13, 17. Of such the Lord complained by the Prophet Haggai, Ye have sown
much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are
not filled with drink: ye cloth you, but there is none warm: and he that
earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag of holes, Hag. 1.6. A sore
judgment to bestow ones labor and pains for that which satisfies not. Will thou set thine eyes (says Solomon) upon that which is not, Prove. 23.5. what is
that which is not? the verse. before tells us. He exhorts that we labor not to
be rich, and that we cease from our own wisdom. What are riches nothing? nor a
man's own wisdom nothing? which the world so highly esteems of, and so eagerly
pursues after: No, they are nothing, that is, as it were nothing, they are not
matters or things of any great importance, for thee to set thine eyes upon; and
therefore thou should not so greedily gape after them, or set thine eyes or
heart upon them; because, when thou have attained them, thou have got as much
as a thing of nothing: And adds another reason, taken from the uncertainty of
riches. For riches certainly make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle
toward heaven: that is, they fly swiftly away. The Eagle flies so swiftly on
high toward heaven, as that he is soon vanished away out of a man's sight, so
do riches suddenly perish and vanish away; being subject to fire and water,
evil debtors, and many other casualties. And therefore cease from thine own
wisdom, which may rather be called distrust in God, and covetousness then
wisdom; when it shall violently carry thee away with a desire after riches,
which are so transitory and vain. And therefore it is that Jesus Christ does
invite these foolish traders to come and buy of his wares, of his commodities,
that are not fading and perishing. Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear
and come unto me, hear and your soul shall live. As much as if Christ did say,
if you will come and trade with me, you shall be sure to have good substantial
commodities, no braided wares; you shall have that which will stand by you, and
be of special use and advantage unto you. Hear and your souls shall live, and I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David, 2
S^m. 23.5. And these commodities of mine, you may have for the fetching, I
don't expect ready money for them, I Will let you have them upon trust, and see
how well you will improve them; but be assured they are lasting commodities,
sound wares that will not fail you; Riches and honors are with me, yea,
durable riches and righteousness; my fruit is better then gold, yea, then fine
gold; and my revenue then choice silver; I lead in the way of righteousness, in
the midst of the paths of judgment; That I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures, Prove. 8.18, 19, 20, 21.
Mark, I pray you, Riches and honors are with me, says Christ, that is, true
riches and honor, such as will not fade and fly away, and they are with me,
in my power to give and bestow them, when and upon whom I lift; even durable
riches, such as shall continue, when other men's shall melt away as wax before
the Sun; And those that love me, that is, those that do unfainedly love me,
shall inherit substance, that which is durable; meaning such wealth or
substance as is such really and indeed, and brings to man the greatest
happiness and prosperity, even eternal life, that endures for ever. Thus you
see, there is a trade, that Christ and the beleiving soul does drive together,
and all Christ's commodities, they are rich substantial commodities, whoever
have them shall inherit substance; not shadows but substance, like unto the
Merchandise of Tire, whose Merchandise and hire shall be holiness to the Lord,
and shall be for them that dwell before the Lord (whose habitation the Lord is,
mark that) to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing, Isa. 23.18. What can
be better then satisfying food, and lasting clothing, like the Israelites
clothes in the Wilderness, which waxed not old, Deuteronomy. 29.5. The necessity and
excellency of which, the Lord Jesus sets forth in that exhortation of his to
the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in
the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment, that thou may be
clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine
eyes with eye salve, that thou may see. I counsel thee to buy of me (says
Christ) from whence observe that; all true spiritual riches and graces, (all
substantial commodities) are to be fetched from Christ alone. Christ sends us
not to our own works, or to his blessed Mother, or to any other Saint departed,
with so many Ave Marias, to many Pater Nosters, or so many Vows, and
Pilgrimages, to buy them at their hands, but he bids us; Come buy them of me;
Christ alone is the great despenser of his Fathers treasure, all power is given
into his hands, and in vain it is to seek the Kingdom of God, or the treasures
thereof, but i^, by, and through the Son; and it is most just it should be so,
it being the purchase of his death and passion, he powered out his soul unto
death for us, that he might have power to heal our souls of all their
infirmities; therefore he is made unto us, both wisdom, justification,
sanctification, and all in all. And what are those precious commodities that
Christ would have this Church of Laodicea, and us also (if we be found in the
same vainglorious, yet beggarly condition, as she was in) to buy of him?
Surely, even such as might be a remedy proportionable to her disease.

1. Here is gold, not outward glittering, or pretended gold, but tried gold
offered, to help her of her poverty.

2. Here is white raiment, a glorious raiment, of Christ's righteousness
offered, to cover her shame and nakedness.

3. Here is eye salve offered, even true knowledge and wisdom from above, the
spirits divine illumination to cure her of her blindness, that she might see
the way to everlasting happiness. And the manner of seeking and obtaining these
rich commodities is as it were by bargain and sale; I counsel thee to buy of
me; And let us inquire a little how this bargain is made up.

First, Understand in all legal contracts, there is an agreement of both
parties, or else it cannot be a bargain.

Secondly, In some bargains and contracts, there is a legal consideration,
given for the thing bargained for, either to the full value, or somewhat
equitably, proportionable thereunto; Or,

Thirdly, There are other absolute bargains and sales of Lands and Goods,
disposed therein freely, only on the consideration of the Donors or Granters,
love, affection, and preferment to the parties beloved, and so given freely to
them and their heirs for ever, without so much as paying a Penny by way of
legal retribution for it; Yea, the Donor often is so free in his deed of gift,
that the Donee is freed of all fear of forfeiture of his estate; for there is
not reserved so much as a Rose or Pepper-corn by way of Rent, that for
non-payment thereof the state should become forfeited. And that party that
would not be thankful to such a free-giver, is worse then an Infidel.

Now to apply this to our heavenly bargain: If we will buy of Christ gold and
heavenly treasure, we must first come unto him, and strike up the bargain with
him. He will not sell unto us against our wills (though he himself must make us
first willing) and therefore he cries, as before, Isa. 55.1. Come unto the
waters, come ye, buy and eat. And Revel. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride
say, Come, and let him that is a thrist, Come; and whosoever will, let him take
the water of Life freely. And they now that will not be obedient to the
commands and laws of this gracious Donor, by way of gratitude and thankfulness,
for so glorious and free an Inheritance bestowed upon them; are not worthy of
the least mercy in his kingdom.

If this inheritance were entailed on us, on condition of payment or
performance of a small petty grain of Corn, or the like, as is the mite of our
faith and obedience, we should be in bondage, fear and danger all our lifelong,
if not, at least forfeit all by our non-payment and performance: Therefore
blessed be God, that has not left our salvation in our own hands, but founded
it on Christ, the rock which cannot be removed. Now he that goes about to buy a
great Treasure, is very careful, diligent, and his affections intense upon it,
that none put him by of his bargain: So it must be here for this Heavenly
Treasure, we must be earnest with Christ to strike up this bargain, we must not
let him alone by our prayers, until we have obtained this precious pearl at his
hand. It Is true, Christ will sell us this pearl freely, yet we must agree with
him for it; though we have nothing to give him in the least, by way of legal
compensation for it, yet me must buy it, receive it in his own way and method.

If you will buy any goods, that you want, you must repair to the Fair, House,
or Place where it is to be bought: So if you want tried gold to enrich you, or
garments to cover you, or eye salve to inlighten you; you must come to Christ,
who is the Merchant of these heavenly wares, upon his Fair-days, or when he
opens shop, when such precious wares are set to sale: To his Ordinances, in his
Assemblies on the public days of his heavenly Bartering, if you will attain
unto this heavenly Treasure?

And these are Commodities worth the buying, the tried gold that comes from
Christ is such that makes the soul truly gracious where it is; and it is truly
refined gold, because it is the wisdom and way of God, which is as gold
refined, Prove. 8.10. and Psalm. 12.6. It is tried, and therefore will hold
water; we may become rich in the eyes of the world, in parts, abilities, and
humane learning; and they may shine like gold in the eyes of the in-judicious,
simple and ignorant: but alas, if Christ does not sanctify them unto us, they
may make us the worse, not the better for them. So for the white garment that
must cloth us. Christ's garment is such a garment that will reach us from top
to toe, that no part of our shame or nakedness shall appear.

Sin brings shame, and sin brings contempt and nakedness upon us; and Christ's
raiment is a white raiment, an innocent raiment, a glorious honorable raiment;
which will not only cover all our shame and nakedness, that the pure eyes of
God shall not behold it, Isa. 61.10. but therein also (he having granted thee
to be arrayed therewith) will present thee therein glorious to himself, without
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. and therefore surely it is
worth the buying: our own raiments are spotted, defiled, and will not serve the
turn, but Christ's is white all over. If we expect to appear perfectly
righteous, holy and just before God (or otherwise we shall never appear before
him to approbation and absolution, for no unclean thing shall enter into his
presence) then we must be sure to cloth our selves in the white raiment of
this our Elder Brother.

So for the Eye Salve, with which our eyes must be anointed, if we will be
cured of our blindness, and see the way to everlasting happiness. Surely this
is of excellent use, and worth the buying, and where are we to get it but from
Christ? He is given for a Covenant to open the eyes of the blind, and to bring
out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
Prisonhouse, to lead them in the paths of life, Isa. 42.6, 7. and Pro. 8.20.
Its in vain to go to our own prudence or carnal wisdom, that will more entangle
us, and darken us, and lead us out of the way, according to that of Christ,
Joh. 9.39. I am come into this world for Judgment, that they that see not,
should see; and that they that see (that is, in their own wisdom) should be
made blind. Christ made an Eye Salve for the cure of the blind person, Joh.
9.6. of his spittle and clay, a compound matter, proceeding from his mouth and
the earth, whereby he made the blind man see: Christ somewhat follows the same
method, in his compositions of Eye Salve, which he uses toward his spiritual
blind souls that he takes to cure:

First, He gives us the knowledge of our selves, and of our own earthly matter,
and that we savor in our unregeneracy, nothing but of earth and earthliness.

Next he brings us to the knowledge of himself and his word, which proceeds
out of his mouth; and so makes us a happy composition and Eye Salve; whereby we
come to see our poverty, our shame and nakedness, and all our spiritual wants;
and also where remedy is to be had, to heal and to save us from all our
maladies.

And indeed, this is as great a blessing as Christ can bestow upon us, to be
truly sensible, and to have a clear sight of our condition, it is the next stop
to amendment, it is ignorance and blindness that makes us err and go astray;
but true saving knowledge will keep us close to Gods Commandments. If we take
any other Eye Salve to anoint our eyes with, save what Christ has prepared for
us in the Treasury of his Word, we may take Bird-lime instead of Eye Salve,
which will close our eyes the faster. They are not the traditions of men, nor
the wisdom and understanding of the wise that will make this precious ointment;
but it is a spiritual extraction and ointment, drawn out by the spirit of
Christ, out of the holy Limbeck of his Word, and applied by him unto the blind
patient; that will make him see the glory of God and his grace, and to praise
him for it to all eternity.

Thus you see there are rich and precious commodities to be had in Christ, and
Christ sets them to sale, and invites us to come and buy them of him; and there
is a spiritual and heavenly commerce that is driven betwixt Christ and the
beleiving soul: And no marvail, for where else shall the soul in all its
exigents and straights have recourse, if not unto Christ? In whom are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. And in whom dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, verse. 9. And as he is full of grace and truth,
so it is, Of his fullness that we all receive, and grace for grace, Joh. 1.14,
16. Thus I have showed you in several particulars, what it is to dwell in the
Secret Place of the most high, and what it is to make God our Habitation.

1. To have our fixed Habitation and Abode in God.

2. To make God our Refuge and Strength.

3. To make God the place of our Secret Retirement.

4. To make him the Place, or Object of our delight.

5. To make him the Place of our Negotiation and Commerce.

Which to do, will assuredly entitle and interest us in the promises of
protection and preservation, even from this sore Visitation of the Lord, the
noisome Pestilence, Psalm. 91.1, 3. He that dwells in the secret place of the
most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Surely, he shall
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler: and from the noisome Pestilence. He
shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust: his
truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror
by night: nor for the arrow that flies by day: nor for the Pestilence that
walks in darkness: nor for the destruction that wastes at noon day. So in
the 9, 10. verse. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the
most high thy habitation: There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any
plague come nigh thy dwelling. Which promises, though it cannot be denied, but
they had a special reference unto Christ, yet so to Christ, as not excluding
his members.

For the head cannot be severed from the body, but head and members make one
perfect and entire body. Now if we are the Body of Christ, and Christ the Head
of this Body; as so it is, Col. 1.18, 24. then surely all the good and comfort
that the head partakes of, cannot but be communicable to the rest of the body.
For from the head, all the body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered and knit together, increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. So
that I conceive there is not a promise in the Word of God, that is made unto
Christ the Head, but all the members of his Body are interessed and concerned
in it. And so much does the prayer of our deer Lord import. That they all may
become one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one
with us. I in them, and thou in me, that thy may be made perfect in one, Joh.
17.21, 23.

Is it promised to Christ that he shall have a kingdom, and that all People,
Nations and Languages shall serve him? Dan. 7.14. Psalm. 72.11. The same is
promised to the Saints, that shall outlive Antichrists rage and tyranny, Dan.
7.2^, 27. Isa. 60.14. Is it promised unto Christ, that they that dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust? Psalm.
72.9. The same is promised unto the Saints, who shall continue faithful to
Christ in the latter day, Isa. 60.14. and 49.23. and Revel. 3.9. Is it promised
that those that will not, he shall reign over them, shall be destroyed? And
that God will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate
him? Luke 19.27. Psalm. 89.23. The like is promised to the Jewish and Gentile
Gospel Church in the latter day. To wit, That the Nation and Kingdom that will
not serve her shall perish, yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted, Isa.
60.12. Is it promised to Christ, That he shall break his enemies with a rod of
Iron, and dash them in pieces, like a potters vessel? Psa. 2.9. Rev. 19.15. The
very same is promised to the Gospel-suffering, enduring, overcoming Saints in
the latter day, Rev. 2.26, 27. Is it prophesied or fore-spoken of Christ, that
out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, even a two edged sword, that with it he
shall smite the Nations? Revel. 1.16. and Revel. 19.15. The same is prophesied
and foretold of the Gospel-Saints in the latter day, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9. Is
it promised to Christ, that God will answer him when he calls upon him, that he
will be with him in trouble, deliver him, and honor him, And with long life
will satisfy him, and show him his salvation? Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16. If this
should be applicable only to Christ in that place, which I conceive ought not
to be; yet are the same promises made to Gospel beleivers, in other places of
Scripture, Psalm. 50.15. Isa. 42.2. and 65.24. Mat. 7.7. Job 5.19. Psalm. 34.17,
19. Joh. 12.26. Ephesians. 6.2, 3.

Object. But these promises of temporal preservation and deliverance, of honor
and long life, were made upon the account of Legal Obedience.

Answer. True, If upon the account of Legal, then surely upon the account of
Evangelical obedience. For Godliness has the promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. If therefore thou dwell in the
secret place of the most high, thou may believe, thou shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty, and be delivered from the noisome Pestilence. That is,
thou may believe thou shall have glorious protections, and sweet heavenly
refreshments from the Lord. Shadow signifying both protection and refreshment,
as here in this place; so Numb. 14.9. Isa. 30.2. Psalm. 121.5. Isa. 51.16. and
49.2. and 4.6. and 25.4. and 32.2. Psalm. 17.8. and 36.7. And in particular, a
preservation from the noisome Pestilence. So then, if thou make God thy
Habitation, thou may believe that no evil shall befall thee, nor that any
Plague shall come nigh thy dwelling; that is, no punishment or plague, no
affliction, cross or calamity, shall come unto thee from the Almighty, as to
hurt thee. This is the fifth Spiritual Receipt, and special preservative against
this Pestilential Sickness.

The Sixth Spiritual Receipt.
6ly. The sixth Sovereign Antidote and Preservative against this Infectious
Disease, is this, Get a merciful, tender, pitiful and compassionate heart.
This, as it, will demonstrate us to be like unto God himself, who is the
fountain of mercy. Be ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful, Luke 6.36.
So it will denominate us to be such as are righteous before God, Psalm. 37.21.
who live in the power of that Religion, that is pure and undefiled before God.
And surely if thy heart is melted with the sense of Gods everlasting mercy to
thy self, thou can not but have thy heart drawn forth compassionately toward
such as are in misery, necessity and distress.

But if the world has locked up thine heart, and congealed the bowels of thy
compassions toward thy poor brethren; let the blaze of thine outward
profession shine never so fair, and manage the duties of external holiness
never so demurely, and keep the times and tasks of daily duties with never so
great austerity; nay, though thou be able to amuse weaker Christians with some
affected, strained, and artifical fervency in Prayer (for by the mere power of
hypocrisy and vainglory, a man may pray sometimes to the Admiration of
others, especially less judicious) I say, for all this, if the holy heat of
Brotherly love does not warm thine heart, and upon occasion work affectionately
in thy soul, thou will discover thy self to be rotten at the heart-root, and
that there is little of the true love and grace of God in thee, or hope of
salvation.

For the dissolving therefore of thy frozen heart, and the enlarging of thy
bowels of pity toward the poor Brethren of Christ Jesus; without which, never
think hereafter to look him in the face with comfort, or to find mercy at the
great day. Consider well that place, in 1 John 3.17. Who so has this worlds
goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? And above all other
motives of mercifulness to the poor necessitous and distressed members of
Christ, methinks that Argument which Paul presses to this purpose, in 2 Cor.
8.9. should melt the most flinty heart; For ye know (says he) the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be rich. Shall the only dear innocent Son of
the All-powerful and ever-blessed Lord and King of Heaven and Earth, dis-inrich
as it were, and disrobe himself of the Royalty and Majesty above, and become so
poor, that whereas the Foxes have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests,
yet he not where to lay his head; that through his poverty, and pouring out his
heart-blood, he might crown us with the inestimable riches of heavenly glory,
with joys and pleasures for evermore; And shall not we worms and wretches, most
unworthy the least bit of bread we put into our mouths, part with something of
our superfluities, to relieve the fainting soul of him for whom Christ died,
and which he will take as done unto himself, Mat. 25.40. Though it be but a cup
of cold water only? Mat. 10.42.

Besides, the last and everlasting doom at that great and dreadful day, to wit,
either the glorious sentence of absolution, Come ye blessed; or the dreadful
sentence of condemnation, Go ye cursed, etc. shall be pronounced upon the
godly, according to the effect and fruit of their faith, which works by love;
Or pass upon the Reprobates for omission and neglect of this most excellent
duty of mercifulness to the poor members of Christ, Mat. 25.40, 41.

Consider withal, as an inflaming Motive to draw forth the bowels of thy
compassions to poor needy and necessitous souls, that by laying out thy self
cheerfully, seasonably, liberally, and yet but according to thine ability,
toward such, Deuteronomy. 15.10. 2 Cor. 9.7. Prove. 3.27, 28. 2 Cor. 9.6. Prove. 11.25.
2 Cor. 8.13, 14. Act. 11.29. Thou shall hereby become a Creditor, even to thy
most glorious and bountiful Creator. For he that has pity upon the poor,
lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again,
Prove. 19.17. Now what a Motive I say is this, to be merciful, that we shall
make God himself our debtor, the ever-springing fountain of bliss, and Lord of
all goodness, who does all things like himself, omnipotently, bountifully,
above all expectation, as becomes the mighty Sovereign of Heaven and Earth? If
he works, he makes a World; If he be angry he drowns the whole face of the
earth; If he love, the heart blood of his dearest Son is not too dear; If he
stand upon his peoples side, he makes the Sun to stand still, and the Stars to
fight; If he repay, he gives his own all-sufficient self, with the overflowing
torrents of all pleasures and glory through all eternity. But to bring it a
little nearer to the thing in hand; Consider a few of the Promises of God, as a
further provocation to this so pious and profitable a work and service for the
Lord.

Would thou be in a thriving and prosperous state in this world, whether as
to the outward or inward man? Surely, to be compassionate this way, is the very
ready way; If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry (says the Prophet) and
satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and break
forth as the morning, and thy darkness be as the noonday; and thy health shall
spring forth speedily; Mark that, The Lord shall, guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy soul in drought and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a
watered Garden, and like a sping of water, whose waters fail not, Isa. 58.10.
and 8.11. Thine horn shall be exalted with honor, and thou shall not want,
Psa. 112.9. Prove. 28.27. Yea, for this thing, the Lord thy God shall bless thee
in all thy works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15.10. It
will be then a profitable inquisition amongst others; when a man finds himself
to go backward in his estate, whether upon the temporal or spiritual account,
and Gods secret displeasure to blow upon his wealth, or afflict his body with
painful diseases, to examine well, whether he was not ordinarily wont to shut
up his bowels of compassion, then to pour out his soul to the poor. For he
shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2.13. But
with the merciful, God will show himself merciful, Psa. 18.25. Yea, says our
Savior, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. Which
brings to my remembrance that pious and most affectionate wish of Paul, in 2 Timothy 1.16, 18. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, Why? for he
often refreshed me, said he, and was not ashamed of my chain. The Lord grant unto
him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day; and in how many things he
ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowost very well. It seems he was a very
charitable soul; He did not (as many professors of our times do, talk much and
do little, have their mouths open, but the bowels of their compassions shut
fast enough, his readiness to distribute, and willingness to communicate, did
clearly and plainly demonstrate, his care to lay up in store for himself a good
foundation against the time to come, that he might lay hold on eternal life.
According to the counsel that Paul gives to the worldly rich men of his time, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. To which concurs that of Solomon, Prove. 11.17. The merciful
man does good to his own soul, but he that is cruel, troubles his own flesh.
The merciful man, the Hebrew it seems renders it, a man of mercifulness, of
bounty, liberality; So a man of knowledge, that is, a knowing and understanding
man; a man of truth or faithfulness, that is, a true or faithful man, Neh. 7.2.
A man of peace, that is, one that is peaceable; Men of holiness, that is, holy
men, Exodus 22.31. This man that is merciful to others that are necessitous, and
in distress; or as James expresses it, that visits the Fatherless and Widows
in their affliction, and hides not himself from his own flesh, Isa. 58.7. (For
what is mercy but a pitying of others that are in misery? Mercy and misery
being relatives, were there no want nor trespass, there needed no mercy;) This
man, says Solomon, does good to his own soul, or as other translations have
it, he rewards his own soul, he does good unto himself, as well as unto
others, for it pleases God to reward the good works of his poor Servants,
according to that of Solomon, Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters, shall be watered also himself. And of that of our blessed
Lord, in Mat. 10.42. who brings it down to a cup of cold water only, that this
merciful man shall give to drink to one of his little ones, which Mark expounds
to such as belong to him, Mark 9.41. Verily, I say unto you, says our dear
Lord, he shall in no wise loose his reward; which gives us some light into that
expression of Paul to Timothy, in his advice, as before, to rich men. Of laying
up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come; Some
reads, for in store, laying up for a Treasure, a good foundation, that is, a
foundation of hope; Not that the liberality of the rich does merit it, but
because it is a fruit of faith, and God has promised to reward the same grace
for Christ's sake; It being a sacrifice with which he is well pleased, Heb.
13.16 Or as Paul expresses it, in Phil. 4.18. An odor of a sweet and fragrant
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God. For as sweet odours are a
refreshing of the senses, so our refreshing of the Saints bowels, is in a
manner a refreshing of Gods own sense and Spirit. A term borrowed from the
perfumes which were made upon the Altar of Incense. I shall add further, but
that in, Psa. 41.1, 2, 3. which I judge very pertinent to the thing in hand;
Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble; The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed
upon the earth. And thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make his bed in
his sickness.

David being now fallen into a heavy sickness, or some other great distemper or
straight, he describes here the happiness or blessing which they shall obtain
at Gods hands, that carry themselves piously and compassionately toward the
afflicted. Blessed is he that considers the poor, that judges wisely of the
poor, and will not rashly condemn him as a Malefactor whom God does visit. The
poor here is taken for a miserable one, one that is thinn, exhausted of his
abilities; whither of the body, and so a sick one; or of goods and means, and
so a poor one. The Lord (says he) shall deliver him in time of trouble. The
Lord shall preserve him and keep him alive, the Lord shall revive, quicken,
heal him or make him whole, and make him happy on the earth; and will not
deliver him, or give him over into the desire or will of his enemies. The Lord
will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, or the bed of sorrow, others
read it. The Lord shall under-prop him upon his sick bed, upon his bed of
faintness, weakness, feebleness; yea, make his bed in his sickness, or change
his bed, which may admit of this twofold sense. As if he had said, speaking in
a prophetical manner; Thou, O God, shall as surely turn his sickness to the
best, as if I saw it already performed. Or thus, thou shall supply all humane
helps unto him, that is used to be bestowed upon sick, diseased and distempered
persons.

Now what a comfortable promise is here for our faith to take hold of, in such
a languishing and dying time. O how should it encourage and stir up the rich,
especially in this world, To be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Yea, all of us that can make out our
Election of God, as holy and beloved; To be putting on bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another; if any man have a quarrel against any, even at
Christ has forgiven us, so also should we do: And above all these things
(says the Apostle) put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness, Col.
3.12, 13, 14. He wishes them, as they would be sure of their Election, and have
a sound note or mark of their holiness, and that God loved them to be putting
on bowels of mercies; as if he had said, let these be your robes and coverings,
wear them as you wear your garments; let them be as tender and inward unto you,
as your own principal and most vital parts. Such a measure of pity and
compassion, as makes the inward bowels to yearn; and this is proper to such as
are in affliction and misery.

But Kindness extends further, and reaches to all, whither in prosperity or
adversity, which is a sweet and loving disposition of the heart, and a
courteous affection to all, showing it self in pleasing, and good speech, and
behavior toward all. But because Love is the root of all, he does therefore
compare Charity to the most precious garment, which is or can be put upon all
others; Calling it, The bond of perfectness, or the most perfect bond, which is
among men to unite them together. Vinculum perfectionis, is, Vinculum
perfectissimum, quo plures inter se colligantur. I shall conclude this point,
with that faithful saying and affirmation of, Jud. 8. and 14. That they which
have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works for necessary
uses, that they be not unfruitful; they should learn to be eminent in good
works above others. The Vulgar has it, Curent bonis operibus prae esse: They
should go before others in good works. And gives this as his reason therefore.
These things are good and profitable unto men. Thus much for the Sixth
Sovereign Remedy.

The Seventh Spiritual Receipt.
7ly. The seventh and last Sovereign Receipt, for the prevention or curing of
this Pestilential disease; Is an Evangelical universal obedience to the Gospel
of Christ: Called by the Apostle in Romans 16.26. The obedience of Faith,
consisting in a readiness to do the Will of God, in things commanded or
forbidden, be they never so troublesome or contrary to our reason or liking. I
call it Evangelical, to distinguish it from that which is Legal; which required
an absolute universal conformity, not of our actions only, but of our
affections also to the will of God, exactly in every point and title thereof,
upon pain of Eternal Damnation, Gal. 3.10, 13. And therefore by the Apostle
called, The ministration of death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.7, 9. This
Evangelical Obedience, consists in beleiving the Gospel, and subjecting our
selves thereunto; whence it is, that it is put for faith or the receiving of
the Gospel, Romans 1.8. Comp. with Chap. 16.19. and to obey Christ, for beleiving
in Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. and to obey the truth for beleiving the Doctrine of the
Gospel, Romans 6.17. 1 Pet. 1.22. Which evangelical or Gospel obedience is to be
performed unto God, in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, who as he is held
forth to be the pattern of our obedience, 1 Cor. 11.1. So is he the Author of
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. And through his
obedience only it is that we are made righteous, Romans 5.19. This I say does
consist in a readiness and cheerfulness to do the will of God. Lo I come (says
Christ) to do thy Will O God, Heb. 10.7. My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34. And it must be performed from the
heart, out of love unto Christ, Romans 6.17. Upon this hing all Gospel obedience
hangs, Romans 13.10. This is the spring from whence it originally flows, 2 Cor.
5.14. The love of Christ constrains us; The force and efficacy of which will
make difficult things easy; The Saints loved not their lives unto the death,
for the love they bore unto Christ, Rev. 12.11. Jacob served seven years for
Rachel, and (says the Text) they seemed unto him but a few days, for the love
he had unto her, Genesis 29.20. Charity suffers long and is kind, it bears all
things, beleiveth all things, hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor.
13.4, 7. Much water cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it, Cant.
8.7. When the soul is mounted upon the wings of faith and charity, it makes it
like the Chariots of Aminadib, Cant. 6.12. It will make the soul cleave unto
Christ, as Ruth unto Naomi her Mother-in-law, not to leave him, nor return from
following after him. It will say then unto Christ, Whither thou go I will
go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people, shall be my people; and
thy God, my God; where thou die, will I dye; and there will I be buried; the
Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me, Ruth
1.16, 17. Lord if thou go into a Prison, says the gracious, loving
beleiving, obeying soul, I will go with thee; if thou lodgest there in a
Dungeon, I will lodge with thee; I am resolved in thy strength not to leave
thee, go where thou will; It will say as Paul, None of these things shall move
me, nor shall I count my life dear unto my self, so that I may but finish my
course with joy; and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God, Act. 20.24. Mount-Sion Saints will
follow the Lamb whither-soever he goes, Rev. 14.4. They have an inseparable
communion, an individual society with the Lamb, which referred to the state of
their warfare, notes the sincerity and constancy of their faith and obedience
under Antichrists persecution; they follow not the Beast, but the Lamb,
wheresoever he goes, that is, they exactly walk in the precepts and steps of
the lamb, wheresoever he leads them, and he leads them to the Fountains of
living waters, Chap. 7.17. These suffers not the decres and Idols of the Beast
to be obtruded upon them, but wholly cleave to Christ their guide, and like
Caleb and Joshua, they will follow him fully, Numb. 14.24. This indeed is very
difficult in it self, and in our strength so to do. Our own experience tells
us, that Gospel obedience is an up-hill way, and its hard to get a great weight
up an hill; therefore when the Apostle presses Gospel-obedience, he bids us
lay aside every weight, that we may run with patience, Heb. 12.1. The old Adam
is a clogg to our obedience, and weights easily pull us down; and if down, to
rise again, it is up-hill work.

What a do have we to get up our hearts unto true Gospel-sorrow for our sins?
Oh, what a hard work it is to bring our hearts up to a belief of the promises?
to trust God in difficulties, etc. Oh, how difficult to get up the hill of
Gospel-obedience? what pains must we take to get to communion with God in the
Spirit? Gods call for our obedience, is like his command to Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.49,
50. Go up to Mount Nebo, and dye there. So, go up into thy Closet, and kill thy
corruptions there, let thy dearest lusts dye there, pluck out thy right eye
there, and cut off thy right hand there; and we had as live die, as do such a
thing, such verily is our natural stubbornness against God.

When God bids us up and do this, or that; oh, how irksome and unpleasing is it
to flesh and blood. When the Gospel bids us look above all things; Father,
Mother, Wife, Children, Lands, Houses, Life; and and leave, forsake and hate
them all, and then thou shall be a Disciple of Christ, upon the account of
Gospel-obedience. Are we not ready to say with those Disciples of Christ, This
is a hard saying, who can bear it? Joh. 6.60. Yet I say, the soul that is
carried upon the wings of faith and love, and strengthened with might by the
Spirit of the Lord in the inward man, can cheerfully and willingly conform to
such harsh, difficult and unpleasing commands, considered as to flesh and blood.

But I shall come a little closer as to the thing in hand, to excite thee to
this evangelical obedience.

Consider first, how acceptable and well-pleasing a thing it is unto the Lord,
in that he prefers it above legal Sacrifices whatsoever. As Sumuel said to
Saul, Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
hearken then the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Hos. 6.6. So Jer.
7.22, 23. For I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that
I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings and
sacrifices; But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will
be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk ye in all the ways that I have
commanded you, that it may be well with you. But they hearkened not, nor
inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and imaginations of their evil
heart, and went backward, and not forward, etc. And because they rejected the
Lords Prophets, he sent among them, and would not hearken unto the Lord, nor
incline their ear, but hardened their neck, and did worse then their Fathers;
Therefore the Prophet Jeremy was to say unto them, This is a Nation that
obeys not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives correction, truth is
perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

Object. But did not the Lord command their Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices
after he had brought them out of the Land of Egypt? were they not things of his
own appointment?

Answ. Yea, Surely the Lord did command and enjoin their sacrifices, and it was
their sin to omit them; but the meaning is this, as if the Lord had said, This
was not the chiefest thing that I commanded them, as ye Hypocrites do conceive
and imagine, but it was their sincere obedience, which they have not yielded
unto me, and you have yielded me less then they; I did expect that your
forefathers should have obeyed my voice in all other things that I had enjoined
and commanded them to do, as well as in matters of burnt-offerings and
sacrifices, but seeing they disobeyed my voice, and yet would come and
sacrifice unto me with impure hands, and unclean hearts, rebellious and
disobedient spirits, their Sacrifices and Offerings to me were as if I had not
commanded them at all, my soul did loath them and abominate them, and so they
do yours, so long as you hearken not to my voice, but walk in the counsels and
imaginations of your own evil hearts. The Prophet Hosea gives much light into
this understanding of the mind of God, in Hosea 6.6. and so do; our blessed
Savior, referring his speech thereunto; For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,
and the knowledge of God, more then burnt-offerings, See Mat. 9.13. and 12.7.
that is, I preferred works of mercy, before Sacrifice, and the knowledge of
God, as it is joined with obedience to the will of God, before burnt-offering.
The outward bare offering; considered in it self, without faith and repentance,
the Lord highly reproved and rejected; See to this purpose, Psa. 50.12, to 17.
So Isa. 1.11, to 15. See there how the Lord did abominate their offerings,
notwithstanding he had instituted and appointed them. To what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices unto me? says the Lord, I am full of the
burnt-offerings of Rams, etc. bring no more vain oblations, incense is an
abomination unto me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I
cannot away with; it is iniquity, even your solemn meeting, your new Moons, and
your appointed feasts, my soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary
to bear them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you; yea, when ye make many prayers I will not hear: And why? Your bands are
full of blood, will ye kill and murder my servants the Prophets, and shed the
blood of mine innocent ones? and come and think to appease my wrath with your
hypocritical offerings? And therefore he exhorts them to repentance; Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow; Come now and let us reason together, says
the Lord; when these things are done, then come unto me, then bring your
offerings unto me, then shall they be accepted by me, then we will reason
together, then I will hear your prayers, and pardon your sins, and not before.

Hence it is, that Solomon says, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8. So Prove.
21.27. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination how much more, when he
brings it with a wicked mind. It is always evil, but how much more abominable
is it, when he brings it with a wicked mind? or with a wicked intent, expressly
intending to effect or accomplish some wicked act or enterprise thereby; and as
it were calling upon God to be an help to advance and set forward, their
villainous and mischievous designs; As Balaam and Balaack did, Numb. 23. Will
ye steal murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye know not, (says the Lord) And come and
stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, we are
delivered to do all these abominations, Jer. 7.9, 10. As if the Lord had said,
are ye not ashamed to deal so hypocritically and wickedly. I do as much esteem
of such services and sacrifices, as the cutting off of a Dogs neck, or the
offering of Swinesblood: as his expression is, in Isa. 66.3. I accept not of
such offerings; Take away from me the noise of thy songs, for I will not hear
the melady of thy Violls; But let judgment run down as waters, and
righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5.22, 23, 24. Their vocal and
instrumental music, was at that time a part of Gods instituted outward
worship, but by them corrupted together with the rest, through their hypocrisy
and wickedness, and especially through their heinous Idolatry, whereunto they
abused their Music, Amos 8.3. The songs of the Temple shall be howling in that
day; I wish these things might be rightly considered, and applied in this day;
I am afraid; there is such kind of service and worship performed now adays,
which will come under the sharp rebuke and reprehension of the Lord; such as
God will abominate, and especially if the same be offered with a wicked mind.
To cry up the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Church of God,
the House of God, etc. Will be but a trusting in lying words, if the men of
this generation do not thoroughly amend their ways and their doings. This will
not privilege them, nor deliver them to do all those dreadful abominations, as
are perpetrated and acted in these times. God will say, take from me the noise
of your Songs, or Singing-men, and I will not hear the melady of your Organs.
They are to me but as the howling of a Dog; So on the other hand, for such as
are in a congregational way, and have separated from the public national
worship. Let them take heed that they rest not in the external part of Gods
worship in outward ordinances, and Church-fellowships, and so grow secure, and
formal and carnal, heartless and spiritless, and think they have a dispensation
hereby for any close hypocrisy or iniquity. I would let such know, that if
they are not in the life and spirit of ordinances, in the spirit of faith and
prayer, and a holy communion of Saints, beautified with a practical, holy,
humble, heavenly, fruitful Gospel conversation, that they sin against the Lord,
and be sure their sin will find them out, as Moses said to the Reubenites, and
Gadites, Numb. 32.23. I say it is Gospel Obedience that is so acceptable unto
him. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former
lusts in your ignorance; but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. And that it is so well pleasing
a thing unto the Lord, and of such special efficacy and force, to stay or
divert the Judgments of God from falling upon a Nation or people; that
pathetical, or rather paternal wish of the Lord, seems to imply so much, Psa.
81.13, to the end. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had
walked in my ways; What then? I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned my hand against their adversaries; The haters of the Lord should have
submitted themselves unto him; but their time should have endured for ever. He
should have fed them also with the finest of the Wheat, and with honey out of
the rock should I have satisfied thee. What an ardent desire of the Lord was
here, as to his peoples hearkening unto him, and walking in his ways, and see
what the Lord would have done for them thereupon; He would have subdued their
enemies, and so consequently procured their peace; As Nathan told David, that
they should dwell in a place of their own, and move no more, and that the
children of wickedness should not afflict them any more, as before time, 2 Samuel
7.10. He would have turned his hand against their Adversaries; What Is that? the
hand of his Plagues and punishments; he would have taken off his Plagues and
Punishments from them, and laid them upon his adversaries; so said Job,
Withdraw thine hand from me, and let not thy dread make me afraid, Job 13.21.
that is, put thy Plague and visitation far from me, So Judges 2.15. It is thus
rendered. Whither-soever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them
for evil, as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them, and they
were greatly distressed, and what hand was this, but his sore judgments, and
among the rest, this of the destroying Pestilence, Lev. 26.25. which he
threatened should cleave unto them, until he had consumed them, Deuteronomy. 28.21. So
in 1 Samuel 5.6, 11. It is said, the hand of the Lord was heavy upon the men of
Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with Emerods, See also, Ruth
1.13. Lam. 2.8, 9. and Act. 13.11. The haters of the Lord should have submitted
themselves, those that oppressed them, should have subjected unto them, either
willingly, or constrainedly, choose them whether. But their time should have
endured for ever; his peoples time, the time of their prosperity and
flourishing estate should have endured for ever; The meaning is, they should
have had and enjoyed a long blessed and happy life. He would have fed them also
with the finest of the Wheat, with the fat of the Wheat, the Flower of it, or
the best and chiefest Corn, they should have had whatever was best for the
maintenance of their life, as Numb. 18.12. Deuteronomy. 32.14. and Psa. 147.14. He
makes peace in thy borders, and fillest thee with the finest of the wheat; And
what more? With honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee, Deuteronomy.
32.13. The Bees in the Land of Canaan used much to harbor in the rocks. But
spiritually this rock does signify Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. and the honey, that
sweetness of speech, and those savoury and gracious words, which did issue from
his mouth, being sweetness to the soul, and health to the bones, Psa. 19.10.
Prove. 16.24. Cant. 4.11. Noting by this manner of speech, that they should have
had all things, both pleasant and profitable for the maintenance of their life,
if their wickedness and disobedience had not stopped the course of his goodness
and mercy. Take that concurrent place also, in Isa. 48.18, 19. O that thou
had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace been as a River, and
thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea; thy seed also had been as the sand,
and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof, his name should not
have been cut off, nor destroyed from before me. What a promise was here also
upon the account of their obedience? their peace or prosperity rather should
have been as a River, that is abounding and always lasting, as a River flows
continually and stops not; And their righteousness as the waves of the Sea;
that is, the blessed and happy estate of their Government; as the fruit of
their righteousness; should as the Waves of the Sea, been exceeding abundant,
flowing and flourishing; and their seed should have been as the Sand of the Sea
for multitude; So Isa. 1.12. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the
good of the Land; But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
sword; If ye obey my commandments, ye shall eat the best things of the Land,
Job 21.25 So Elihu in his speech to Job, If they obey and serve him, they shall
spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures; But if they obey
not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall dye without knowledge, Job
36.11, 12. See also, Lev. 26.13. Deuteronomy. 6.3. and 11.22. and 26.27. and 28.15.
What promises the Lord made upon the account of their obedience. More
particularly to the thing in hand, that in Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13, 14, 15. Is worthy of
our best observation, where among many other things which the Lord promised as
great and singular blessings upon that score, this is not the least nor
meanest; The Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of
the evil diseases of Egypt upon thee, but will lay them upon all them that hate
thee. What the evil diseases of Egypt were, is well known to most; This of the
noysom destroying Pestilence being one, Amos 4.10. Let me add two or three
places more in the New Testament, and then I shall draw to a Conciusion; John
8.12. I am the light of the World, says Christ, he that follows me, shall
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life; He that embraces my
Doctrine with a true faith, and obeys the same, shall not walk in the
darkness of error and sin, but shall have the light of life to bring him to
everlasting life; So John 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me; and
where I am, there shall also my servant be; if any man serve me, him will my
Father honor; Can that man be in a miserable or uncomfortable condition to be
where Christ shall be? and what honor can be comparable to that which God the
Father shall confer upon those who serve the Lord Christ? I shall only add,
Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the City, to
wit, of the new and Heavenly Jerusalem, which descends out of Heaven from
God, and comes down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband, Rev. 21.2. Whereof see the description, verse. 10. And what this
Tree of life is, See Rev. 22.2. By this Tree of life is meant the Lord Jesus
Christ; Fitly called the Tree of life, in respect of his vivifying, conferring,
and preserving life unto them that eat thereof, which is but one; though he is
said to stand in the midst of the street, and of either side of the River, that
is, his leaves and roots, is on both sides of the River, so that there is no
want on either side. Hence Christ said, to him that overcomes, I will give to
eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. This I
say is Christ himself, the Fountain and Author of our life; The Bread of Life,
Joh. 6.51. The Water of Life, Joh. 4.7. The Resurrection and Life it self, Joh.
11.25. And he stands by the River, because he never withers, or is fruitless.
A Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, is always green and fruitful; Christ
alone is sufficient for life unto all, and to quicken all his elect for ever
and ever. This Tree has twelve manner of fruits, and yeildeth her fruit every
month, and the leaves of the Tree are for the healing of the Nations; What
does this hold forth, but the quickening virtue of Christ's merits and spirit,
which is vigorous and efficatious throughout the whole year; that is, for ever
and ever, to preserve always this spiritual life, and this blessed refreshing,
for the Israel of God, without any weakening or enseebling, Joh. 15.16. And
mark in the close of this discourse, that the leaves of this Tree have a
medicinal use for to preserve the health of the Nations; Not that there shall
be any infirmities any more in the New Jerusalem, but that the healing of all
infirmities which was wrought here by the merits and spirit of Christ, shall be
thereby the same power for ever kept and preserved inviolate for all beleivers.
See Ezekiel. 47.12.

Now blessed are they that do his commandments, as touching, the not
worshipping of the Beast and his Image, the forsaking of Babylon, and the
faithful following of the Lamb, subjecting and submitting to all his holy,
heavenly, pure, evangelical institutions, appointments, and commands, patiently
and cheerfully suffering for his sake, in bearing witness unto the truth, if
called thereunto, persevering in the grace of Christ; doing justly, loving
mercy, and walking humbly with God, such shall have right to this Tree of Life,
and enter in through the gates into the City. They shall have a right of
enjoying Christ and his unspeakable benefits, and be perpetual and most happy
Inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem; And he that sits on the throne shall
dwell among them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither
shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst
of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
water; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. I
shall add no more, but that of Paul to Timothy, Consider what I say, and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7.

FINIS.

