Corporal Worship Discussed and Defended: IN A SERMON Preached at the
VISITATION April 21. 1670. In Saviours-Church Southwark. And Published to
prevent farther Calumny.

By W. B.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George near Cliffords-Inne in
Fleet Street, 1670.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Mondeford Bramston Knight; Dr. of Laws; and one of
the Masters of his Majesty's High Court of Chancery; and Chancellor of the
Right Reverend Father in God George by Divine Permission Lord Bishop of Winton,
my Diocesan.
Right Worshipful,
COnsciousness of my own weakness sufficiently deters me from public censure:
therefore I should not have entertained one thought of appearing abroad, had
not this discourse been made both a Chimney, and (as I may speak) a
Pulpit-talk, amongst the froward Enemies of our Church: yet, had they any thing
of truth, and modesty, in their reflections, I should have layn unconcerned
beneath them: but as it is their practice to load whatever makes against them
(to speak modestly) with all the aggravations it is capable of receiving; so it
is the peoples pleasure to embrace whatever they say as Folia Sibyllae,
articles of faith, or undoubted maxims of truth: be pleased to take one
instance, I have heard several particular persons affirm (I am loath to say one
of their Preachers too, who pretended he had read, and understood the book)
that the Author of the Eccles. Pol. declares it more excusable for any man to
be guilty of all manner of debauchery, than to go to a private Meeting; and
though I knew it was so grand an abuse of that Ingenious Author, yet could by
no means drive them from that persuasion, some of their Leaders had brought
them to: and if they had the confidence to abuse that piece, that was offered
to the view of any, that would give themselves the trouble of reading; how much
more will they abuse my Notes, if not suffered to speak for themselves! These
considerations put me upon some inlargements in transcribing the first Copy, a
task You was pleased to lay upon me: but since your commands of making it
public have brought my wavering thoughts to a fixed resolution: and since it
is abroad, I wish them more candor, and ingenuity in the reading, than some
had in the hearing of it: shall they think fit to oppose, I am ready (as much
as in me lies) to strengthen those assertions, which too much have has hudled
over: but as you was pleased to call this piece to skirmish from the Pulpit;
and since to face its Enemies in the open Field; I leave it under your Conduct,
and Protection; wishing your Authority may be both its Encouragement, and also
a Bulwark to secure our Church against the assaults of her peevish Enemies: so
having fought for Religion in this Church, which they have made Militant more
than in a figure, you may be a Member of that, which is Triumphant, is the
Prayer of

Your Humble Orator W. B.

1 Epist. Cor. 6.19, 20. -- Ye are not your own;

For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and your
spirit, which are Gods.


MAn being a rational Creature, we should deal with him by reason; not
endeavoring to affright him into the worship of a Deity, or the closer
embraces of Virtue and Religion, by some thundering speeches, which have (it may
be) neither sufficient ground to stand on, nor are strengthened with any
considerable arguments; which is a folly, that would certainly be not only
decry'd, but easily amended too; if (in this) all would frame their discourses
by the Apostles pattern, who lays down such arguments, that the duty he
presses to, does flow as a necessary consequence from them: for dissuading the
Corinthians from fornication, he shows they belong to God by dedication and
redemption; and consequently by that double tie, are obliged to all manner of
virtue, and religious worship: For,

Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and

Ye are not your own;

For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and your
spirit.

The Text is a perfect Enthymeme, or, if you will, an imperfect Syllogism;
with an argument inserted between the proposition, and conclusion.

1. A proposition: Ye are not your own. 2. An argument to prove it: For ye are
bought with a price. 3. A conclusion from that proposition, which is ushered in
with the Illative [therefore]
Therefore glorify God in your body, and spirit, which are Gods.

The meaning of the proposition is clear; Ye are not your own, i. e. not
proprii juris, to live as you please your selves: for it is contrary to the law
of reason, as well as the express law of the land, that any man should employ
that, which is, alienum, belonging to another, as he thinks fit himself.

But lest the proposition should be denied, the Apostle brings an argument to
prove it;

Ye are bought with a price; and therefore belong to him that purchased you.

But certainly there is another way, at least in order of time, before that of
redemption or dedication, by which we belong to God: and that is Creation.

He made, he redeemed us, therefore we are not our own.

Seeing our duty of glorifying God will follow more strongly from both, I shall
discourse on each.

That we belong to God by creation is evident, for man, and all the world, must

Have been from Eternity,

Or be made by chance,

Or be the makers of themselves,

Or else be made by another, which can be none but God, to whom they belong.

No other way, surely, can be imagined, how things could possibly come to an
actual existence: therefore the three first being evidently false, the last
must needs be true, that we belong to God by creation; and therefore are not
our own.

Had the world been from Eternity, Unless from Scripture.
what is the reason that we have no certain knowledge of any thing done before
a few of the last Generations; nor any monuments of Antiquity, whose beginning
is not either known, or shrewdly guest at? If we come to the Pyramids in
Egypt, they were thought by Josephus to have been built by the Jews during
their bondage there; and by others more probably since: whereas --

It is but of late years, since many parts of the world were discovered; and no
longer since, than in the time of Alexander the Great, that little which was
known, was so poorly fortified, and thinly inhabited by unskilful and timorous
people, that he soon made himself Master of it all.

Many ingenious Arts are but of late invention; and Seneca tells us it was not
in his time one thousand years since ingenuity and learning began to flourish
in the world: therefore if any savor this opinion, they must have very high
thoughts of this, and some few of the last Generations, and but little or no
charity at all for millions before them; in leaving them like Bruits without
understanding, and be beholding to a few of the last for whatever is worthy of
notice.

Hence the world seems but of late crept out of her infancy, not yet ascended
to the Meridian of ingenuity and learning: whence we may as rationally
conclude, that it is not of so long a standing, as that a youth by his looks,
and parts, has not attained the age and experience of a full-grown man.

The Heathens did generally believe that all things had a beginning: and though
some fly to Aristotle as the great Patron of the worlds Eternity; yet,
whatever arguments he might lay down to prove it, Barlow in his Metaphysical
Exercitations, denies him to have been constantly, if ever purely of this mind:
by reason (particularly) of his speaking of an (...), a being from whence all
other beings flow: but if this seems not prevalent enough, the world is
composed of parts, and the parts must of necessity be before whole, in order
both of time and nature; but was the world Eternal, either the whole must have
been as soon as the parts, or else the parts must have been before Eternity it
self: neither of which reason can allow.

It is as evident too, that things could never be made by chance, or the
fortuitous union of some straggling attomes, as Epicurus says: for though
matter, and motion, may do something, yet it is impossible they should ever
produce a world so admirably seated, and fitted for the entertainment of so
many creatures; and then furnish it too with such variety of beings, which are
all (in a manner) necessary; and seem not only intended for some end, but are
so exactly fitted for the several ends they seem to be made for: all the wit in
the world can never contrive how things should be better; neither the whole,
nor any part, wants any thing necessary, nor has any thing superfluous: the
Sun, Moon, and other Stars, for so many thousand years together, are so
constant and regular in their motions, that day and night, Winter and Summer,
are always exactly at their wonted seasons; all which (with much more, that
might be named) can never be the work of mere matter, and a fortuitous motion.

It is also as apparently contrary to reason, that man, or any thing else,
should make it self: for the cause must act before the effect be produced:
therefore if man be the maker of himself, he must be both the causa, and the
causatum, and consequently must act in order to his own being: and hence it
will follow that he must have a being before he is made, else he could not act
in order to his own being; for action necessarily pre-supposes being: and so he
must be, and not be at the same instant; which is so repugnant to reason, that
we may safely conclude we were all made by another, which can be none but God.

He made us, and not we our selves; we are the work of his hands, and the sheep
of his pasture: in the beginning God made Heaven, and Earth, and whatever is
contained in either, himself only excepted: and that, which Moses calls the
void and formless earth, was the materia prima, out of which all earthly beings
were produced; neither was this any Eternal matter, but was created by him, and
made fit for the reception of any manner of forms, as preparatory (if I may so
speak) to the great work of Creation: hence, though things were made of
pre-existing, yet not of co-existing matter: and consequently there never was
any thing, but what lies under the notion of a Creature: and therefore we
belong to him by Creation,

And are not our own. But the express argument the Apostle uses to prove the
proposition is Redemption.

Ye are not your own;

For ye are bought with a price.

This supposes man's fall by sin; for unless he had revolted from his Creator,
there had been no need of Redemption; for none buy that, which is their own:
and as it supposes man's sin, and folly, so it proclaims Gods goodness, and
mercy, in not leaving him to perish in his own devices; but in laying help upon
one, that is Mighty, and able to rescue us from the paw of the Lion: For

We are bought with a price. As Justice could be satisfied with no price of
less than an infinite value; so we are bought not with corruptible things, as
gold, and silver, but with the precious blood of the Son of God: though it be
impossible there should be in God any potentia passiva; yet there being so near
an union between the Divinity, and Humanity of Christ, that what was done too,
or suffered by one, was attributed to the other, we are truly said to be
redeemed by the blood of the Son of God: this is the (...), or price in the
Text.

Ye are bought with a price. Now we cannot in reason doubt, but that we are
bought, the price already paid, and that by him too, whom we own to be the
Messiah, having so many things, that may serve as very strong preparatories to
bring us to this belief; and others, that do more clearly evince it.

Among the preparatories I might reckon some of the Prophesies both of Sybilla
Cumaea, and Sybilla Erythraea; and also the ceasing of Oracles, mentioned by
Plutarch, though by his strange sancies in that discourse, he plainly shows, he
knew not the reason of it; which we must fetch from the Prophet, not the
Philosopher: as likewise the confession of the Jews themselves, and some of the
Heathen, as Cornel. Tacitus in particular, lib. 15. Annalium. par. 44. who own
that there was such a person as Christ, and that he suffered death under
Pontius Pilate, which is agreeable with one of the Articles of our Faith: and
should we from hence cast an eye upon the world, which lay groaning under the
bondage of sin, some of the Heathen being puzzled, and non-plust, in conceiving
how divine justice should be satisfied; and the Apostles also telling us that
we were without strength, spoiled of all power of doing any thing in order to
our own recovery, we shall be much helped toward this belief, that

We are bought with a price. But there are other things, that do more clearly
evince it, as

Types under the Law, both persons, and things, which were shadows of things to
come, and like so many fingers, point out him to be the Messiah; and all the
Prophesies, like so many lines, do meet in him, as in their proper center.

Then his Birth was set off with a train of wonders, as an extraordinary Star,
supposed by some to be hinted at in Balaam's Prophecy; and a Quire of Angels
singing, To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given.

Next, behold his works, which being real miracles, must have been wrought by a
supernatural power; as dispossessing of Devils, raising the dead etc. only by a
word, which he wrought both to prove his Divinity, and also the end of his
coming to be the Redemption of the world.

His Death likewise was not only followed by a praternatural Eclipse, cleaving
of Rocks, opening of Graves, and rending the Vale; which made the Centurion
say, Truly this was the Son of God.: but also in all points agreed with the
Prophesies in the Old, and his own words in the New Testament: after which,
having rose again according to the Scripiure, he appeared to above five hundred
at once; and having commanded his Apostles to teach, and baptize all Nations,
he fitted those illiterate men for so great a task, by extraordinary gifts of
the Holy Ghost, by which they spoke in so many tongues, as wrought admiration
in all the Proselytes that heard them: all which, both proves his Divinity, and
shows he came to

Buy us with a price. Now God having such an absolute Sovereignty over, right
to, and propriety in us, as he is our Creator and Redeemer: the conclusion very
strongly follows:

Therefore glorify God in your body, and spirit, which are Gods.

As man is compounded of matter, and form, so God commands us to glorify him
in both: glorify God in your body, and spirit: the Spirit (...) is the same
with the Soul (...).

The meaning of which words we may take thus; Glorify, i. e. declare the
divine perfections, and excellencies of God; which is done several ways.

By intention of the Soul in all the duties, In Spirit, and Body.
or exercises of religious worship.

By innocence, and purity of life, which is opposed to the Corinthians
fornication.

And also by decent gestures, reverent behavior, and corporal adoration in all
places, and times of divine worship.

Without intention of the Soul, you give God but the husk and shadow.

Without such reverence and adoration, you offer him but an imperfect service:
Therefore those which God has joined together, let no man put a sunder: but

Glorify him in your body, and spirit, which are his. In all the several
factions, and parties amongst us, there is scarce a man, that will not grant it
a duty to glorify God in the Spirit; and indeed they separate from us merely
upon pretense of setting up a more pure and spiritual worship: and when we
speak of such reverence and adoration, they think to stop our mouths with that
Text, John 4.24. The true worshippers shall worship in spirit and in truth: if
we take the words as much in their sense as we can, they do not exclude such
reverence and adoration; for this is in, and flows from a spiritual devotion:
they may as well hold that he, that prays, or sings, should not speak at all,
because the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 14.15. That he will do both in the spirit,
and in the understanding: but though this be a Text very illy, and absurdly
applied to their purpose, as having quite another design; for by this Christ
shows the Samaritan woman, that the time is coming, when the true worshippers
shall worship, not with types, and shadows of things to come, as in the Old
Testament, but according to the verity of things exhibited in Christ: yet their
quoting and wresting of this Scripture, does plainly show, that as on the one
hand, they seem very zealous of glorifying God in their spirits; so, on the
other, they are very averse from, and resolute against glorifying him in their
bodies: I need not therefore insist on the chiefer part, it being owned, not
only by our Church, but by all those, who would make themselves our Adversaries
too; consider them under what notion or terms you please: and will therefore
discourse on glorifying God in our bodies, by decent gestures, reverent
behavior, and corporal adoration.

They cannot deny but that God made the body, as well as the soul; for else the
body can be no creature, or part of the creation.

Neither can they deny but that God redeemed both, for else the body can never
partake of future happiness, seeing without redemption there is no salvation:
and consequently if there be any glorified souls, they shall never be reunited
to their bodies after the resurrection, but remain in perpetual separation: and
if so, what reason can they give for denying God that glory, and worship, which
is due from one; seeing he has the same right and title to both!

They likewise, as well as we, expect, and hope, that their bodies should be
saved in the day of our Lord Jesus: and we know that a reward does necessarily
presuppose a duty: upon what ground then can they hope that God should glorify
their bodies hereafter, if they refuse to glorify him in their bodies here?

Should they say, they do it sufficiently by keeping their bodies, as much as
in them lies, from being instruments of sin; as fornication, or the like.

I think, I may answer, this is but a negative devotion, which alone cannot
denominate any man religious, for -- ex puris negativis nihil concluditur: as
there is a positive happiness for body, and soul; so there are positive
commands and consequently positive duties to be performed by each.

But because they may instance in some positive duties, they perform with their
bodies, as well as the soul; such as be singing, praying, and preaching.

I therefore add,

As God has by Creation, Redemption, Preservation, Promises, and the like,
laid all the obligations upon us, that can be, to be religious; so we should
use all means, or ways possibly of glorifying him; and if such reverence, and
adoration, be not one, I hardly know what is: for as the soul is the chiefer
part of man, but yet is no man, till it be joined with the body; so the
internal devotion of the soul is the chiefer part of religious worship; but yet
this worship is imperfect, till it be accompanied with the reverence and
adoration of the body, and that exercise of the body before mentioned, in
singing, praying, and preaching, if there be any other such small things, do
make up but a very lame service; whilst reverent gestures, and corporal
adoration is wanting: they throw in their Annis, and Cummin, whilst the greater
matters of the body are still neglected.

Let me urge for adoration; which being proved, decent gestures, and reverent
behavior will be proved too: as omne majus continet minus: or as they are
smaller parts of such adoration.

God did forbid the Jews, Exodus 20.5. to bow down to any graven Image: which
corporal adoration is a part of divine worship, else it would not be forbid to
be done to Idols; whence it appears that this bowing the head, or body, is
unlawful only when terminated to wrong objects, as Images; and consequently is
lawful, and necessary too, when terminated to the right, as the true God; and
therefore this manner of worship must needs be (at least) lawful, nay
necessary, if done to the true God only; or out of reverence to him, toward the
place where he is most especially present: and accordingly we find that this
was practiced by the Jews without any imputation of sin: as I shall show anon.

Neither can they say, that this was abolished by Christ.

For the morality of this command does sufficiently show it is perpetuity: as it
is a perpetual prohibition, Thou shall not bow down to any graven Image; so it
is a perpetual obligation, Thou shall bow down to the true God: for so long as
corporal adoration of Images remains forbidden, so long corporal adoration of
the true God is a part of divine worship, and so remains our duty: and, I hope,
you will be unwilling enough to take away this command, when you consider the
consequences of it; for the command being taken away, that, which is forbid by
it, will become lawful, and so we may worship Images.

They cannot possibly wind off this by saying they do it sufficiently in
kneeling to him in prayer; for this is but a part of corporal adoration: but
(to come so far to them) should they answer thus, they must allow kneeling to
be a duty: and if so, why (I wonder) should it be a duty in their private
families, and none in the public Congregation: where their practice shows,
that they think it enough, forsooth, to sit upon their tails, with their hats
(it may be) half on their heads.

We read of such manner of adoration, before there was any law in the world,
beside that of nature, and special revelation: for Abraham bowed himself before
God, and the Gentiles in all parts of the world did the same to those things,
which they owned as Gods; which shows that this is natural, and consequently
perpetually obliging: for as reason, and conscience, tells us that there is a
God, so they oblige us to worship that God with all reverence, and adoration
imaginable: and as many Authors build an argument upon the former to prove the
existence of a Deity; so we may build as strong an argument on the latter to
prove corporal adoration: for the law of nature binds as strong in the one, as
in the other: and though in that first age of the world, God appeared by
created Angels, or otherwise, in visible shapes; which some (possibly) may
think required such special reverence, and adoration; yet we have his promise,
that when two, or three, are gathered together in his name, he will be in the
midst of them: and the Apostle likewise, 1 Cor. 11.10. tells us that Angels are
present in places, and times of divine worship, and therefore we are as much
obliged to pay this reverence, and adoration, as if God by those Angels, or any
otherwise, was visibly amongst us; being undoubtedly assured both by his
promise, and the Apostle too, that he is present (especially) in consecrated
places, at such times of worship.

As this is a part of worship, and therefore necessary in it self, so it is
necessary, not only as it speaks the internal devotion of the soul; for how can
I declare this, or any awe, or fear of God, without reverence and adoration:
words are not sufficient, for many will hardly believe words, unless they see
suitable actions: nor yet is a sober, virtuous life enough, for some of the
Heathen were eminent for moral virtues, and yet were very slack, or no
worshippers of any God at all: and we find it no great rarity to see virtue
shine very bright in some, whom the Presbiterians themselves confidently brand
for carnal men: but also as it heightens that internal devotion, for a being
bare, standing, kneeling, bowing, and the like, must needs affect man with
thoughts of his own vileness, and the awefulness of that Majesty he is before;
like Abraham, who falling on his face said, I am but dust, and ashes: it being
natural to man to ascend from things sensible to those, that are purely
intelligible: and certainly it is a part of prudence, as well as duty, to use
all means possible of raising our devotion as high as we can.

That men may not still think this a late invention of our Church, or an old
error of Rome, from whence they fancy we have whatever is decent, and comely,
they may see the Apostle himself very pressing to this purpose; 1 Cor. 11.
where he both tells the men their duty in Churches, and likewise reproves the
women's irreverence there: verse 4, 5. Every man praying, or prophesying, with
his head covered, dishonours his head; and every woman, that prays, or
prophesies, with her head uncovered, dishonours her head: where by prophesying
we must understand singing, which has commonly that term put upon it, not only
in the Old Testament, but amongst the Heathen too, who sometimes called their
Poets Prophets, as the learned Mede does very largely show: for women were not
suffered to speak in the Church in a way of teaching: now the fault was the
same in the women to be uncovered, or the men to be covered: and the argument
he uses to dissuade them from those undecent customs to this more reverent
behavior, is, because of the Angels, verse 10. they being present in places,
and times of divine worship, we ought to behave our selves reverently; and as
they are there all the time, so should we be reverent all the time too: which
is very poorly practiced by those, who are willing to be so far reverent, as to
be uncovered at the singing Psalms, which are almost spoiled in Hopkin's
Poetry; or, as one speaks, in Meeter, and good meaning; but are unwilling to be
uncovered at the reading Psalms, or any other parts of Scripture, which they
have purely from the original: which being covered, and uncovered, we may
extend to other parts of external reverence, and corporal adoration: for it is
impossible there should be too much of decency, reverence, and adoration, where
God is present by his Angels: as Jacob having seen them ascending, and
descending in a vision, said, when he waked, how dreadful is this place, it is
no other than the house of God! so methinks their presence in such places
should awe us into the greatest of internal devotion, and external reverence
too; for how dreadful are such places, because of the Angels!

It is very strongly held by some, the fore-quoted Author in particular; that
some, or other of the Angels are constantly in consecrated places, and
therefore when ever we enter into, or pass through those places, we ought to
show something of reverence, whether it be at time of Service, or no, and that
upon the same reason, because of the Angels.

Suppose we cannot undoubtedly prove this so, yet, I am confident, we can bring
far better arguments toward the undeniable proof of it, than can possibly be
brought against it; therefore this must needs be the safer way: and certainly
except men out of a spirit of contradiction, were grown foolhardy in matters
of Religion, they would never run the hazard of irreverence, and contempt of
holy things, and places: but in time of service it is undeniable from the
Apostle's words, that we ought to be reverent, because of the Angels.

I may urge farther,

Churches ought not to be profaned, or put to common uses, as the Apostle
shows by an allusion in the next preceding verse; viz. know ye not that your
bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? which he urges as an argument to
dissuade them from polluting themselves by fornication: for as Temples are
dedicated to God, and upon that very account ought to be set apart from all
common uses, which are a profanation of them: so man being dedicated to God,
by his baptismal vow, beside voluntary engagements he lays upon himself after
he comes to years of discretion, which I suppose at one time, or other, to be
done by all; ought likewise upon that account, as well as others, to keep
himself from pollution by sin: by this allusion it is undenyably evident, that
Temples ought to be kept holy; but if any should say the Apostle alludes here
chiefly, if not only, to the Jewish Temple, the non-prophanation of which was a
part of the ceremonial law, which is abrogated by Christ: I think it very
improbable he should allude to that place, which, with all the ceremonies
belonging to it, were very imperfectly known to these Corinthians; but to put
you quite out of doubt, you may see the same Apostle speak more plainly, and
expressly of Christian Churches, there being some even in St. Paul's time, in 1
Cor. 11.22. where he reproves the Corinthians for feasting in those sacred
places, Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? Or despise you the Church of
God? The Church, though it be (...), which most commonly signifies the people,
yet we must here understand it of the place; it being opposed to house: Have ye
not houses to eat and drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God? Which
exposition is very agreeable to Mr. Vine's sense on the place, about the
beginning of his second Chapter of his Treatise on the Sacrament: whom I name,
because his authority is very prevalent with those, I have to do with: which
manifestly shows, that a putting Churches to any common use, is a profaning,
or despising of them; even according to Scripture, as well as the Canon: from
whence I argue:

If we ought not to put those places to common uses, certainly we ought not to
come into them with common gestures, and behavior: for I can see very little,
if any difference at all, between one, and the other: because the sin lies in
making consecrated, or separated places, common with others; which is done by
common gestures, rude behavior, and want of corporal adoration, as well as by
eating, and drinking.

Though not many years since, Churches were turned to Stables; and even now a
profanation of all things Sacred is made a piece of Religion, and accounted a
charectiristical letter to distinguish the good people (as they call
themselves) from others; yet if eating, and drinking, which is good, and
necessary in it self, was unlawful only upon this account, because done in that
place, to be sure rude, and unseemly behavior is unlawful too upon the same
account; because a needless doing any thing, that is common in the Church of
God, is a despising it, it being set a part for holy uses.

Questionless holiness is most fit for holy places; the greatest reverence, and
adoration, best becomes the house of the great God.

But I am confident I might have spared all this pains, If I could persuade
these men to be as zealous of glorifying God in their spirits, as they profess:
for, as out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks; so internal devotion,
if it be intense, will certainly discover it self in external reverence, and
adoration: for it seems very near an impossibility, very improbable, I am sure,
that any man should come into the house of God, affected as he ought with the
greatness, and awfulness, of that Majesty he appears before, and not show it in
such external worship.

The most they have to say against is Idolatry; which is enough indeed, if they
could prove it so; but this sufficiently shows either their ignorance, or ill
natures: for the proper notion of Idolatry consists in a giving that honor,
and religious worship, to any creature, which is due to God only: now I would
fain know of these men to what creature we pay any thing of religious worship
in any act before mentioned: suppose we proceed to a bowing at the name of
Jesus, I am confident we may prove this full as lawful, and necessary, as
standing up at the Creed, which some of them do allow: for the former was
sometimes used in some places in opposition to the Arrians, who denied the
Divinity of Christ, that by this act they might show they owned him to be God
as well as man, by allowing him a fit object of divine worship; which they held
the Arrians could not do without Idolatry, as they denied him to be any more
than a creature: and the latter was practiced by some to show that they gave a
full assent to all the Articles of the Christian Faith, in opposition to those,
who denied some of them: now if we look barely upon the action, it is almost
the same in both; if upon the reason, or end of it, it is wholly the same in
each; the one owns the truth of Christ's Divinity; the other the truth of those
Articles rehearsed: why then should one be more Idolatry, than the other?

If they say the former has a bow added to it: If we stand up to show our
assent to the truth of the Articles of our faith; certainly reason will oblige
us to add a bow, when we stand up in token of assent to the truth of his
Divinity, who is the Author, and Finisher of our Faith.

Should they reply, that that bow alters the nature of the action, as making
this an act of adoration, whilst the other is but a bare token of assent.

I add (to run so far with them) suppose we should ground it on some place of
Scripture, and so make it more strictly a duty: I would fain know here again to
what creature do we in this give any thing of divine worship? I am sure not to
any Image, or the like, as the Papists do, and therefore cannot see how there
should be any thing of Idolatry in it.

Should we do the same toward the Altar, yet we make this only motivum cultus,
not terminativum: but because the Papists have the same plea for their bowing
to Images; take this, we do not bow toward this, as the Papists do toward their
Images, as any representation of any thing in Heaven, or Earth, or under the
Earth: neither was it ever made for any such intent; and therefore is not at
all against the second Commandment: but only in regard of Gods especial
presence there, which if you grant, you may as easily allow adoration toward
this place, as reverence in other places of the Church: but should you doubt of
this, because every part of the Church has the same consecration; I referr you
to the learned Mr. Mede, who about the latter end of his first Volumne, has
much to this purpose, which, I am persuaded, will give any man some reasonable
satisfaction, that does not read him with a prejudice, and resolution not to be
swayed by argument, and reason: we find that the Jews did the same toward their
Altar, and that upon the command of Hezekiah too, in the 1 Chronicles. 32.12. which
Hezekiah is recorded in chap. 29. verse. 2. to have done that, which was right
in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his Father had done; and
therefore could be no Idolater: our Altar is the very same with theirs, they
offered Sacrifice on that, we offer the Christian Sacrifice on this; the
difference lies only in the Sacrifice it self, which is changed for the better,
not for the worse: upon which account the same was practiced by the Primitive
Churches; and why should this be any more Idolatry in us, than in the Jews, and
Primitive Christians? I hope you will not make that Idolatry in Hezekiah, for
which the Scripture commends him: nor condemn those Primitive Christians, which
were generally so eminent for Piety, and many dyed Martyrs too.

Should others more modestly say we are Superstitious, they would charge us
with a lesser crime, but with as little reason as the other: for Aquinas in his
Sum. Theol. arguing about Superstition, comes at last to that 22. Quest. 93.
Art. 2. which our opponents will be most ready to catch at, viz. to show that
whatever is superfluous in the worship of God is Superstitious: now in this
case he tells us a thing is superfluous, secundum quantitatem proportionis,
when so needlessly thrust into the worship of God, that the end of this worship
does not require it; now the end of Divine worship is (according to that in my
Text) that men might glorify God in their body, and spirit; but what external
reverence, and adoration, our Church enjoins, is not only a duty by the Law,
both of God, and Nature; (as the former Arguments prove) but is also necessary
as it heightens, and declares our spiritual devotion; without which the Soul
can very hardly be so intense as it ought, neither can we sufficiently make a
visible profession: therefore there can be nothing superfluous, and
consequently nothing Superstitious in this manner of worship.

Neither can they run from our subject by this to condemn Ceremonies: for he
concludes a few lines after, that that is needless, and so superstitious, which
is not of some good use: for our Ceremonies are of considerable use, as they
are decent, and gain reverential thoughts of the worship of God: and adds
farther, which is done, praeter Dei, and Ecclesiae institutionem: whence it
appears, that as God has appointed the substance of his service; so he has
left to the Church to appoint the external form, manner, and circumstances of
it: as is evident also from the Apostle, who commands that all things should be
done decently, and in order; but he not showing what this decency and order is,
has left it to the discretion of the Church to appoint: therefore whatever
lawful, and decent thing, the Church thinks fit to enjoin, becomes necessary;
and consequently can be neither superfluous, nor Superstitious.

But others very strongly hold that Superstition is in the opinions of men
about things, not in the things themselves: as when any think it a sin to do
those things, that may lawfully be done; or not do those, that may be lawfully
let alone: see the Friendly Debate, part 3. page 118. whence the Author does
notably prove, that it is they, not we, that are Superstitious: others (to the
same effect, though differing in words) hold it a placing Religion in the
doing, or not doing those things, that are in themselves indifferent: which
likewise removes Superstition from our Churches to their Conventicles; for the
Church commands Ceremonies not as parts of Religion; but only as things decent,
and comely, whereas they make a refusal of such things a necessary piece of
Religion it self.

But we are here treating of decent gestures, reverent behavior, and corporal
adoration, which are not things indifferent, but necessary parts of religious
worship, (as is before proved) and therefore cannot possibly be brought under
that notion.

Should they say it is a worshipping God after any unseemly, or unbecoming
manner: they will yet be as far from their end, as before: for these gestures,
and adoration, are expressions, or signs, of the greatest honor, and reverence
imaginable, according to the custom of the place, we live in; and therefore
are the most becoming the greatest Majesty.

They are daily crying Superstition, Superstition, among their followers; but I
could never perfectly understand what they will have it to be: would they be
pleased to give us a definition of it, we should know the better how to handle
them.

Let me argue thus,

If Superstition be not in the opinions of men about things, but in the things
themselves; then it must be either in Ceremonies, or in these gestures, and
adoration.

But it cannot be in our Ceremonies, for they being in themselves indifferent,
may be imposed, which imposition makes them necessary: as our men have
abundantly proved, see Eccles. Pol. chapter 6.

Neither can it be in these gestures, and adoration; for then they must either
condemn all manner of bodily worship, the highest act of adoration, our Church
injoyns, being founded on Scripture, and reason, as well as the lowest; and so
refuse to glorify God in their bodies by any positive duties, which will
exclude their bodies from all positive happiness, for a negative duty can
receive no more than a negative reward; and withal must condemn themselves
too, who sometimes use some postures of reverence, as a sitting bare at the
singing Psalms, and kneeling in Prayer in their private families; or, should
they be unwilling to do this, they must acquaint us with some more fit, and
becoming modes of external worship; which they can never do; because these we
use (as is above hinted) are, according to custom, signs of the greatest
reverence, which is most fit for the greatest being.

In a fewer words thus,

If this bodily worship be Superstitious, they must either change it to better,
which is impossible; or take away all, which is contrary to Scripture, and
their own practice: for taking one part, and refusing another, is irrational,
and humorsome, seeing the whole stands upon the same foundation of truth, and
reason: wherefore we disown the Brat, they have laid at our door, and return
it back to be Fathered by themselves.

But for the comfort of tender Consciences, our Cannot does not oblige men to
bow toward the Altar, but leaves it ad libitum; neither do I press any to it,
but endeavor to prove it is no Idolatry in them, that think fit to do it:
wherefore I may with the less offense speak my thoughts to be these, that there
is nothing, that can rationally bar any from entering into the arms of our
Church, and joining with us both in body, and spirit to glorify God.

To wind up all:

It lies upon all sorts of men, whether Ministers, or people, as much as they
can, to promote the glory of God, and interest of Religion: and

First for you, Fathers, and Brethren; (if I may assume the confidence of
speaking to those, who are so much my Seniors) as we are set over, so we should
be both Teachers, and Leaders of the people, by Doctrine, and Example, bringing
them into these paths of Religious worship.

As the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, so we should enable our selves,
not only to show, but also to defend the lawfulness, and goodness of that Old
way, in which our happy Fathers walked, before our late unhappy divisions; as
Cicero speaks of some points of Philosophy, so may we of some of Divinity:
there is so great obscurity in the things themselves; so much weakness in our
own judgments, that we may almost despair of finding out the truth, and idely
fall into a Socratical dubitation: but this path of religious worship is plain,
and easy, in which the Primitive Churches all along did walk: only of late
years it has met with so many adversaries, who have made it their design, and
business, to lay stumbling blocks before the dim-sighted people, and to bury it
in the mire of frivolous objections, and nicer scruples; that now the
generality look upon it, as on Vaults about antiquitated Monasteries, which
were made, and used only by the Sons of Rome; therefore we should make it our
business too, to remove the filth of these objections, and make it again plain,
and passable: but because most, if not all of us, are blessed with such a people,
that will hate us, if we tell them the truth; we should therefore prudently
insinuate these things by degrees, and by this innocent lenocinium, unawares
steal their affections into all the paths of truth: for I cannot see how it is
consistent with our duties to conceal any part of religious worship, which is
necessary to be known, and practiced: much less should we tread in the dirty
steps of those worse than Nonconforming Brethren, who to gain the affections
of the giddy, and injudicious vulgar, and make their low parts seem tall, and
reverend, discover a dislike of that innocent Garment, and those Rites, and
Ceremonies, which they have voluntarily obliged themselves to wear, and
observe: by which means they work a kind of averseness in those, who were in a
fair way to be brought to all the parts of divine worship; and confirm those,
who have already forsaken them, and our Church together.

And because many are more easily led by example, than drawn by the sweetest
strains of Rhetoric, or strongest arguments in Divinity, we should therefore
be ensamples to others; not only pointing out, but leading our people into the
paths of duty: Cicero lib. 2. Tuscul. Quest. speaking of some of the
Philosophers, says we may see, alios pecuniae cupidos, gloriae nonullos,
multos libidinum servos, cum quorum vita mirabiliter pugnat oration; quod quidem
mihi videtur turpissimum: and with good reason too; but let it not be so with
us: for sad observation tells, that this present age makes such things as these
a main argument, upon which they build the lawfulness of a separation from us:
our Adversaries round about have so much charity as to proclaim us all either
Swine, or Asses, that either know, or practice nothing: that by this means they
may gather the more Disciples, and the better color their own separation:
which should teach us (especially in these perilous times) to abstain not only
from those things, which are really evil; but from those too, that have any
appearance of it: that so the people having our precepts, and seeing our good
examples, may be brought both in body, and soul, to glorify our Father, which
is in Heaven.

And as We should teach, both by Doctrine, and Example, so You ought to be
followers of us, as we are of Christ.

Especially those, who are chosen Officers in the several Parishes, should be
careful to walk in all the parts of religious worship: for the meaner sort are
ready to shelter themselves under your wings; and think the example of those,
whom they style the Masters of their Parish, a sufficient authority, either in
good, or evil.

And know, that a separation from us is far from glorifying God: for how can
that, which rends the seamless Coat of Christ into fractions, and divisions,
tend to his glory, or the interest of Religion! Whilst one says, I am of Paul,
another, I am of Apollos, a third, I am of Cephas, are you not carnal?

But whilst we press all to Uniformity, the leaders of these people do make
them err: who being deposed, as I may speak, like the Priest at Jerusalem,
presently fled to Samaria, and set up a worship in opposition to ours, and ever
since cry, the Mount of the Lord! the Mount of the Lord! being like those
spirits, which some fabulous stories tells us, have pulled down Churches in the
night, as fast as they were built in the day; undoing in private, what we
endeavor in the public: for they affright men by making a noise about
Idolatry, though none of them are able to prove it; nor (as far I as can hear)
^^er seriously endeavored it amongst their people: and especially since this
last Act past against them, some of their meetings have sounded as loud with a
-- Take ye joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, as some of their Pulpits have
done formerly with a -- Curse ye Meroz, Curse bitterly! Wonder will hardly
suffer me to proceed! to think that men, who make so great a show of Purity,
and holiness to the people; that wrap up themselves in Doublets of Zeal, and
write Precifian on their Brow; should have the confidence, nay impudence
rather, so miserably to wrest the Sacred Scriptures! for we know, that then the
Church was Persecuted by the Heathens, and constrained either to suffer, or to
part both with a good Conscience, and the totum of Religion together: whereas
we differ only about decent Ceremonies, and reverent Gestures, which best
become the house of him, who is the God of decency and order: now I wonder how
any man can tell the ignorant people, that they may take as much joy, and
comfort in the spoiling of their goods; because they unjustly refuse to
satisfy authority in securing the peace of the Nation, and comply with some
things, that are but decent ceremonies; and others, that are necessary parts of
worship; whilst they are suffered freely to embrace all the Fundamentals of
Religion; as those Primitive Christians did, who must otherwise have parted
with the whole substance of Religion, and have embraced Heathenisme it self!
but though some Jehu's drive thus furiously, yet I hope the most have more wit,
and reason, than to talk at this rate: but as I would not have these men charge
us with Idolatry, before they can prove it amongst us; nor press the people to
persevere to the spoiling of their goods; and a resisting unto blood, with I
know not what beside, unless they can prove that we are all in the wrong, and
themselves only in the right: for if salvation may be had from the public
Ordinances, as well as from private Preaching, which none of them dare deny, I
think it their prudence to secure their peace, and estates, by coming over to
us: so neither would I have the poor people regard what is spoken out of a
loose, ungrounded zeal, without a sufficient foundation of arguments to stand
on: we may easily handle them with their own weapons; for I can instance in
some of the chief of their party, who speak a separation, or any thing, that
tends that way, utterly unlawful; as Mr. Baxter in particular about the end of
his reasons of the Christian Religion, denies it lawful for any man to
separate, though he finds he can really profit more elsewhere; which is but
pretended, or sansied by most of our Separatists; and the reason he gives for
it is, because we should prefer the good, and peace of the Church in general,
above our own particular profit: and to press the people to this necessary
duty, he tells them in the same Paragraph, That if any do, out of such an end,
deny themselves some present advantage, there is no question but that God will
make him amends one way, or other: what, I wonder, can be spoke more rational,
and advantageous to our cause than this! And yet these are the words of your
great Father Mr. Baxter: and Vine's on the Sacrament, denies it lawful for any
one to separate from the Sacrament, much less from the Church, which is not so
barred, and fenced about, as the Table of the Lord; upon any thing less than
flat Idolatry: and gives the challenge to any man in the world to bring one
place of Scripture, that does in the least favor the contrary: understanding
those places, which many wind to their own cause, such as be -- have no
fellowship with them, that walk disorderly, -- be ye separate, and the like, of
a moral, not a local conjunction: and adds further, that such Principles tends
to the utter overthrow of the Church; and I wish I may not add, of the State
too, if not timely prevented.

Wherefore, if our Arguments can prevail nothing, let a Presbyterian Authority
oversway you: unless you can prove us Idolaters, be persuaded, as we have all
but one Creator, but one Redeemer, as we agree (I hope) in all the Fundamental
points of Religion, and expect to meet together in a blessed Eternity, to join
with us, and walk hand in hand, in

Glorifying God both in our bodies, and our spirits, which are his.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce I Preached this Sermon, I met with an excellent Book (newly Published)
Entitled, A Persuasive to Conformity, Written by way of a Letter to the
Dissenting Brethren; which I wish all Dissenters would peruse.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Tompkins R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dom. Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Episc. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Ex Aed. Lambethani^, Apr. 29. 1670.

