THE DIVINITY OF THE Christian Religion, PROVED By the Evidence of Reason, AND
Divine Revelation.

By WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange, 1677.

The Divinity of the Christian Religion, Proved by the Evidence of Reason, and
Divine Revelation.
CHAP. I.
Religion is necessary for the honor of God, and happiness of Man. Among the
variety of Religions in the world, it is the highest point of Wisdom to consider
which is pleasing to God. God alone is to prescribe the way of his Worship. He
has revealed it. The truth of Christian Religion is made evident by comparing
it with all other Religions. Gentilism convinced of falsity by its
contradicting Natural Light in mistaking the object of Worship, and in the
manner of it. The Idolatry, the impure and frivolous Rites, the cruel
Sacrifices of the Heathens considered. Philosophy was ineffectual to redress
those evils. Judaism considered. The ceremonial part of that Religion contains
nothing morally good. 'Twas of impossible performance to all Nations. 'Twas
enjoined the Jews for special reasons. The carnal Law was to expire at the
coming of the Messiah, and give place to the Christian Religion, that is all
life and spirit. The falsness and absurdity of Mahometism discovered by the
quality of the Author, and its nature; by the fraudulent and violent means
whereby 'twas propagated; by the quality of those who received it, ignorant
barbarous Nations; by the quality of the Reward it propounds, neither becoming
God to bestow, nor Man to desire.

HAving in some former Discourses established and cleared the Foundations of
Religion, I shall proceed to raise the Superstructure. That God is the Maker of
the World; that he observes our moral Actions, and will require an Account of
them in the future state, and distribute eternal Recompenses accordingly, has
been proved by such invincible Evidence that Reason cannot resist. It follows
therefore that Religion is necessary both for the honor of God, and in order
to the happiness of Man. For we cannot conceive, but that the wise Creator in
making all things, designed his own Glory, both in the manifestation of his own
Perfections, and that they should be acknowledged and reverenced, loved and
praised by intelligent Creatures. This is a natural duty, to which Mankind with
an unforced consent agrees. For, as Honor in the general is the homage paid to
conspicuous Excellencies, and specially to beneficent Virtues; so Religion,
that is the highest Honor, is justly due to God, the most Sovereign Being in
all Perfections, and our Sovereign Benefactor. And it is equally clear that the
happiness of Man depends on Religion. For if God regards the Actions of Men,
not to have a naked speculative knowledge of them, but with an Eye of Providence
and Judgment; if He will accept and reward our services not as profitable to
Him, but as the just expressions of our love, thankfulness, and obedience to
Him, it is requisite our prime care should be to serve Him. In this the greatest
Duty and supreme Interest of Men are inviolably united: for what obligation can
possibly be equal to that of pleasing our Maker and Preserver? and what is
comparable to the Interest of Eternity? From hence there is a general
inclination in Men to worship the Deity, impressed from the Author of Nature; but
the ways are diverse. Religion changes its shape in several Countries, and the
Rites that are observed by some Nations as sacred, are rejected by others as
impious, or vain. Now, in this variety of Religions, and every one contrary to
the other, it is necessary to consider which is that special Way of serving God
that is only pleasing to Him. If a Traveller be distracted between several
Ways, he will enquire which leads to his Journeys end, and not go on with
uncertainty. And is it not infinitely reasonable to do that in the most
important Affair, which any person will do in the most ordinary? To be
indifferent in a matter so deeply concerning us, is prodigious above all
wonder. For if the means we use to obtain the Favor of God, provoke his Anger,
our misery is remediless. But alas! no rashness is so common, as that of Men's
preferring one Religion before another.

How many false Religions are defended by whole Nations with that Zeal as if
they were the most assured Persons? when the Foundations of their Belief and
Adherence are so weak, that did they call Reason to Counsel, they must be
convinced of their Errors. They are led by vain respects to their Progenitors
from whom their Religion is derived; and what they receive at first without
discerning, they never distrust; As if the first Instructions were always
true. They resign up their Judgments to their Princes: And if humane Authority
were a sufficient motive in this case, then every Religion will be saving in
the Country where it is established by Law. Nay the Christian Religion, though
shining with an extraordinary luster, which justifies it to every one that will
but open his eyes to consider it, yet is as injudiciously and carelessly
received, as the vainest Religion in the World. Innumerable are Christians in
title, without any solid conviction in their minds, or divine change in their
hearts, the effects of its truth and goodness. They are Disciples of Christ, as
the Turks are of Mahomet, by the sole impression of Example.

In the discussing this matter I shall proceed upon such Principles as are
evident to the humane understanding. It Is a common Principle acknowledged by
all Men, That God alone is to prescribe that Way and Order of Service wherein
He will be honored. For this Reason those who in any Nation introduced a Form
of Religion, always pretended to have Divine-Direction for it. Now that God has
signified his Will to Men in this most important Matter, it is most reasonable
to believe. The Arist. Me^tap.
Philosopher observes that such is the providence of Nature, that the most
necessary Arts for the support of life are easily learnt of all. In the rudest
Ages men were skillful to cultivate the Earth, to govern their Flocks, to dress
their Provisions for food. But those Arts that were only for delight, not
absolutely useful; as Music, Painting, Perfuming, Embriodery, etc. required
more study and skill, and therefore were more modern. And if the Divine
Providence has such a tender care of Man, as to make the knowledge of such
things easy, as are requisite for the Temporal life, it is reason to believe he
has not left him destitute of those means that are necessary for the obtaining
Eternal Life. Now that the Christian Religion alone is true, will fully appear,

1. By comparing it with other Religions, that upon trial are convinced of open
falsity, or that they are infinitely excelled by the Christian in those things
wherein they have any resemblance, or degrees of Truth and Goodness. 2. By
considering it directly, as to its intrinsic excellencies, and those External
Supernatural Operations, that are the express Characters of Gods hand, which
afford an infallible testimony of his approving it.
Before the coming of Christ into the World there were two sorts of Religions,
Gentilisme, and Judaisme. The first is utterly excluded upon the account of its
gross and palpable contrariety to the Principles of sound Reason.

1. By a fundamental error in the Object of Worship. Idolatry then spread
through all the Regions under both the Hemispheres. Now it is evident by Reason
there is but one true God, an Infinite Being, the Maker and Governor of all
things, that has alone Divine excellencies in himself, and a Divine Empire over
us, and consequently is alone worthy of Supreme Honor. And what greater
indignity can be offered to Him, than the placing of Idols in His Throne? He is
a jealous God, sensible and severe; and will not suffer any partner in his
Worship. His Honor is eminently concerned to vindicate His despised Deity.
It Is a pitiful shift to alledg, that they honored their inferior Gods with a
lower and imperfect worship: for all divine Worship is supreme, and to be given
only to the supreme God. Besides, what more debases Man than to consecrate the
flower of his esteem and affections to unworthy Objects, and many times to
things wherein were no signs of Life, much less any Ray of Divinity? It Is
evident therefore that the numerous Sects of Superstition were involved in the
most wretched ignorance of God and themselves. And it is observable, that no
quarrels were raised amongst the Heathens about the several Gods they
worshipped. For the Devil, the irreconcilable Enemy to God's Glory and Man's
Happiness, was pleased with their deadly Errors. Let them adore the Host of
Heaven, or of the Earth, it was alike to him: for they all diverted the minds
of Men from the sole Object of Divine Worship, the true God.

2. Gentilism was equally culpable in the manner of Worship. Those who made
Gods to themselves, ordained their service according to their fancies. But the
true God that made Man will be worshipped according to his own appointment. Now
if we consider that unintelligible variety of Religions amongst the Heathens,
we shall have reason to conclude, that there is no instance wherein the excess
of Man's native blindness and depravation is more astonishing, than in the ways
he has devised for the serving of God. This will appear by taking a short
general view of the ways of Worship in practice among the most learned and
polite Heathens.

The Grecians and Romans had Tanta Gentium in rebus frivolis plerunque Religio
est. Plin.
more Art and Improvement than the rest, yet how frivolous and extravagant, nay
how impious were their solemn Mysteries? The Eleusinia sacra, the rites of
Cybele, the Floralia, etc. were mixtures of Folly and Filthiness. Their
Auguries by the flight of Birds, their Presages by inspecting the Magis ex
alieno jecore Sapiebant, quam ex suo.
Intrals of Beasts, and the Smoke of the Incense, were so fantastic, that if
one had designed to invent things ridiculous without the least show of Reason,
it had not been possible to exceed them. They were very curious about Trifles,
and careless of real Virtue: And what is more unworthy of God than to imagine
that He is pleased with little senseless observances solemnly performed? They
were afraid to soil themselves with imaginary pollutions, and insensible of the
deepest defilements. Their most sacred Mysteries were a covert for (...). Clem.
Alex. Protrept.
Uncleanness, and under the mask of Religion the basest Villainies were
disguised. But I will not rake in those sinks of filthiness. Now what is more
impious than to imagine that God is pleased with the most sordid Lusts, that
cannot be named without violating Modesty, nor thought of without defiling the
Mind with their infamous Ideas? But it is no wonder that such pollutions were
esteemed Religious Rites, for they attributed to their Gods such actions as
were most unworthy a virtuous Man. The Poets were the chief Doctors in their
Church. Their tales of the Rapes and Incests, and secret Amors of their
reputed Deities, were the rule of their Faith. And what a pernicious influence
this kind of belief had upon them, and how dishonorable it was to their Gods,
the wiser sort then discovered. It was Cicero's just censure of Homer, that
whereas he should have raised up Earth to Heaven, instructed Men to live
according to the purity of the Gods, he forced down Heaven to Earth, and made
the Gods to live like Men in this Region of impurity. It Is the highest Glory of
Man to be made the Image of God in moral excellencies, and it is the vilest
contumely to God to fashion him to be the Image of Man's vicious affections.

Add further, that Man was a sinner, and under the righteous displeasure of
Heaven, all were compelled to acknowledge by the Stings of Conscience. But what
miserable work has been made from the ignorance and guilty fears of the
Heathens, to render the Deity propitious, is manifest in several instances, and
especially in their cruel sacrifices of Men. This was their practice in extreme
dangers, to purge their Cities, and avert Divine Judgments. As if some eminent
acts of Sin had the virtue of expiation. In short, the design of Religion is to
procure the favor of God, and to sanctify Man, both which are necessary in
order to his Blessedness; but how in sufficient Gentilism was for these great
effects is manifest. Nay, on the contrary, such a prodigious mixture of folly
and wickedness makes it sadly evident, that the variety of Religions among the
Heathens, were but several ways of dishonouring God, and perishing for ever. It
is further to be observed, that the Philosophers of greatest reputation,
admired as Oracles of more than humane Wisdom, did not cure these destructive
evils. They should have expressed an Heroic Magnaminity (to which they vainly
pretended) in resisting the dreadful torrent of Idolatry that everflowed the
World. But they basely temporiz'd with the vulgar Heathen. 'Twas their declared
Principle, that a wise Man should follow the Religion of his Country, and
conform in his external practice with established customs, if he reserved his
mind free for Philosophy. Thus they extinguished the most radiant beam of the
Deity, and robbed him of his most glorious Attribute, the Unity of his Essence.
And by this we may judge how unfit they were to instruct and correct the
degenerate World, and make it truly better, when they suffered Religion, the
fountain of all Virtues, to be corrupted, and the Worship of the only true God,
the prime and chief part of Piety, to be given not only to inferior objects,
but to evil Spirits. Miserable Physicians! whose care was applied to redress
some lesser evils that concerned Societies, and neglected this mortal wound in
the Heart. It Is a killing aggravation of their connivance and compliance with
ignorant Idolaters, that they held the truth in unrighteousness; and when they
knew God, they glorified Him not as God, but changed the Glory of his
Incorruptible Nature, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and Birds,
and fourfooted Beasts, and creeping things. This was the state of the Pagan
World till the Gospel appeared, and directed the natural religious inclination
of mankind into its proper channel, to the only true God.

2. The Religion of the Jews is to be considered. This the Christians
acknowledge with them, was Divine in its Authority, Doctrine, Moral part,
Worship and Promises. God himself was the Author, and confirmed it by many
illustrious Miracles. It Is delivered in the most ancient authentic and
venerable Writings in the World. It instructs us concerning the Nature of God,
his Works of Creation and Providence, and the Judgment to come. It commands the
love of God, and to serve him only, and the love of our Neighbor as our
selves. The ceremonial part was a full conviction of the guilt of Sin, a
visible discovery of the rights of eternal Justice, and a powerful means to
humble Men before the Infinite and offended Majesty of the Creator. It
propounds temporal rewards, as the marks of Gods favor suitable to the Church
then in its minority, but under that Veil the most excellent and eternal
rewards. This Religion in its Ceremonial external part was to continue till the
coming of the Messiah, and then to be abolished. To make this evident, I shall
thus proceed:

1. That the ceremonial part contained nothing that was morally and
unchangeably good, for then it had been obligatory to all Nations, and from the
beginning; whereas it was prescribed only to the Jews, and after a long space
of time, wherein many holy Men, though ignorant of that part of the Law, yet
received a Divine testimony that they pleased God. 2. 'Twas of impossible
performance to all other Nations; as appears by the Precepts concerning
Sacrifices that were to be offered only in Jerusalem, and by the Levitical
Priests, and their solemn Festivals so many times in the Year. Now the Worship
of God being an essential Duty of the reasonable Creature, it is absurd to
imagine that it necessarily consists in such things that cannot be done by all
Men. 3. God himself often declared that the Rituals of the Law were Jsa. 1.
Psalm. 50.
of no price with him absolutely considered. 4. They were enjoynd the Jews for
peculiar reasons, principally that by those imperfect rudiments they might be
prepared for the times of Reformation. God had drawn in the Legal Ministration,
numberless Images of the Messiah; their Temple and High Priest, their Ark and
Offerings, with all their Ceremonial Service did signally point at him. And
this is a ninfallible evidence, that a mind superior to Moses's designed all
that Work with a final respect to Christ, that the Jewish Nation having the
Idea of him always present might not mistake him when he should appear. And
that heavy yoke of Ceremonies, with the spirit of servile fear that attended
it, was to excite in them earnest longings after the Messiah, the Desire of all
Nations, that with unspeakable joy they might receive him at his coming.
Now that the Legal Institution should expire for the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof, and a Divine Sacrifice be offered up of infinite
value and virtue to reconcile God, and purify the Consciences of Men, was
declared whilst the service of the Temple was performed with the greatest Pomp.
Thus the Messiah spoke by the mouth of David, Sacrifice and offering Psalm. 40.
thou do not desire, my heart have thou opened; Burnt-offering and
Sinoffering have thou not required; then said I, lo I come; in the volume of
the Book it is written of me; I delight to do thy will O my God. And the same
inspired Prophet declared when the Levitical Priesthood was in the greatest
splendor, that there was another order of Priesthood than that of Aaron,
established in a more solemn manner, and of everlasting efficacy: The Lord has
sworn, Psalm. 110.
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec. That this Prophecy respected the Messiah, even the Pharisees could
Mat. 22. 42.
not deny. For when Jesus Christ asked them whose Son Christ was to be? they
answered, David's. And demanding again, why David called him Lord, in those
words of the Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand till
I have made thine enemies thy footstool? they could answer nothing. Their
silence was a clear acknowledgment that the Messiah was the Person there
intended. The Apostle also who Heb. 5. 5.
wrote to the Jews, takes it for granted by the universal consent of that
Nation, that that Psalm respected the Messiah, and proves it was accomplished
in Jesus Christ. Besides, 'twas foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah, that another
Covenant should be made, wherein the real benefits of the pardon of Sin, and
true Holiness that were tipified by the Legal purifications and observances,
should be conferred on God's People. Behold, the days come, says the Lord,
that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, different from that
made with their Fathers when they came out of the Land of Egypt, I will put my
Law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their
God, and they shall be my People. And they shall no more teach every Man his
Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall
know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord: for I
will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sin no more. In short,
there are abundant Declarations in the Prophets, that the carnal Religion of
the Jews should expire, and a Religion all Spirit and Life should succeed in
its place, and be diffused among all Nations. This was to be introduced by the
Messiah. Thus Moses foretold, The Lord thy God shall raise up a Prophet from
among thy Brethren like unto me, Him ye shall hear. 'Twas the singular
prerogative of Moses above the rest of the Prophets, that he was a Lawgiver,
and Mediator of the Covenant between God and Israel, and accordingly the
Messiah was to be a Lawgiver and Mediator of a new Covenant. Now if the Mosaic
Institutions were to remain after his coming, the Parallel would not hold
between them in those principal respects. Besides, 'twas prophesied that the
Messiah should be a King sitting on the Throne of David, and commanding the
Kings of the Earth. By which it is evident that his Laws must be of another
nature than those of Moses, that were proper only to the Church whilst confined
to the Jewish pale, but not for the government of the World. And whereas the
Jews object, that some of their Rites were ordained to continue for ever. The
answer is clear, That was only to distinguish them from some temporary
injunctions, that were of force only while they were in the Wilderness, or when
they were inhabitants of Canaan, but were to be practiced in all places, till
by a new signification of the Divine Will they were forbidden. And it is
observable that in the Jewish Law the term for ever, when applied either to a
Man's right, or to servitude, imports only a continuance to the Jubilee: so that
those Rituals were to continue in their vigor during that entire period, and
to be determined after the coming of the Messiah, the great Jubilee of the
World. And that Jesus Christ is the promised Messiah is most evident, in that
his coming was exactly as he was designed, and was to be expected; that he had
the power of working Miracles to authorize him to change the externals of their
Worship and Service. Briefly, Judaism now is but the Carcass of a dead
Religion, and the obstinate adherers to it, are become so sottishly blind, as
to believe the most prodigious fables, as divine Revelations. Their Talmud, so
reverenced by them, contains intolerable follies, nay Blasphemies against God.
It regulates his hours in the day. It relates that he spends three in studying
the Law, and three more in the instructing Children that dyed in their
minority, and that he employs three in taking the accounts of the World, and in
the three last diverts himself with Leviathans, and that the night being come,
(for they imagine that the Sun sets in Paradise) he ascends a Chariot drawn by
the swiftest Spirits, the Cherubims, and visits the eighteen thousand Worlds he
created. I shall not instance in any more of their extravagant tales, not to be
defended by the pretense of solemn Mysteries, and by strained Allegories. This
is sufficient to show that by the Righteous Judgment of God, for their
rejecting the Truth of the Gospel they are given up to believe Lies.

Since the comeing of Jesus Christ, Mahumetanism has overspread a great part of
the Barbarous World. But this carries in it such apparent and certain marks of
falsity, that it can be no temptation to any person in whom there is but a
spark of good. Hence whether we consider,

1. The Author from whom it was derived: a robber, one drencht in sensuality,
and therefore utterly unqualified to be the revealer of the Will of the Holy
God to Men. 2. The quality of its doctrines; some are ridiculous and
extravagant above the vanity of a feverish dream: some are pernicious,
flattering both the lower Appetites; the concupiscible, by loosing its natural
restraints from exorbitant fleshly pleasures; the irascible, by commending the
violent oppression of others for the advancement of Religion. 3. The means by
which it had its rise and was propagated: It sprang from imposture; Mahomet
erected an Oracle in his own Fancy, and pretended that the Holy Ghost descended
there to give his inspirations. Thus he seduced at first: but having got a
strong party, Force succeeded Deceit. The Sword cut its way through many
Countries. And is it strange that the People so fiercely taught should follow
the Religion of the cruel Conqueror? Thus it was planted, thus it increased,
and is still maintained by the same causes. 4. The quality of those who
received it. They were Barbarous Nations, and absolutely forbid to make an
inquiry into the matters of Religion. And how easy is it to make an impression
on the rude lump of the multitude? what wonder is it that pleasant follies
should usurp the belief of the ignorant vulgar? 5. It promises in the future
life a Paradise fit for Swine, most unworthy the glorious Rewarder God, and the
excellence of Man. This is so evident, that Avicen, a Saracen Philosopher, and
Mahumetan in profession, speaks with abhorence of those dreggy low delights,
and on the contrary asserts, that the height of happiness is in the
perfections of the Soul united to God; and thus vertually condemns their Faith,
as repugnant to the dictates of clear Reason.
CHAP. II.
The Christian Religion directly considered* Previous Considerations, That
there was such a person as Jesus Christ who converst in the World, and
instituted that Religion, is most credible from the uniform testimony of
Christians in all Ages. It Is equally certain the Books containing the Doctrine
of Christ, are transmitted without material alteration. The proofs of Christian
Religion, though not equal in clearness to sense or science, yet are sufficient
to convince unprejudiced minds of its truth. The intrinsic Excellencies of the
Christian Religion considered. The Doctrines of the Gospel illustrate Natural
Truths concerning God, and reveal what is further necessary for his Glory and
Man's Happiness. The entire Agreement between them. The Gospel discovers the
misery of Man in its causes and degrees; and the means of his recovery. It
represents a full and glorious Image of God's Perfections in the manner of our
Restoration. Therefore it is worthy of all acceptance. The Christian Religion
sets before us a Rule pure and perspicuous, in nothing superfluous or
defective. The Promises of the Gospel are worthy of God, and suitable to the
wants and desires of Men. They offer the pardon of Sin upon the condition of
Repentance and Faith. The supernatural Assistance of the holy Spirit: The
supply of our temporal wants, and support under Afflictions. The reward of
Eternal Life.

I Will now consider the Christian Religion directly in it self. It has this
noble prerogative above the rest, the more one searches into it, the more its
Divinity appears. Whereas other Religions may please a sudden Eye, but cannot
endure a serious trial. Some things are to be premised.

1. I shall suppose it as a Principle above all doubt, there was such a Person
as Jesus Christ, who conversed in the World, consigned the Christian Doctrine
to the Apostles, and by them it is conveyed to us in the New Testament. For in
asserting it we have the uniform deposition of all that profess this Religion,
from its rise till the present Age, and in all parts of the World. Though in
other things of different opinions, yet they agree in this, that Jesus Christ
was their Founder. Now who can better know the Author of an Institution
Ecclesiastical or S^cular, than those who were admitted into its beginning, and
those who have succeeded in that order from age to age without interruption?
Besides, we have the consenting and constant testimony of Jews and Heathens,
the obstinate opposers of the Christian Religion, that its name as well as
original was derived from Christ. We may with more Reason suspect, there were
never such Philosophers as Plato and Aristotle, or that the Books which from
their times by universal persevering fame have been attributed to them, were
made by others and put forth under false titles, than to question what is so
generally received concerning the Author of the Gospel. It Is the perfection of
folly and madness to oppose such evidence. 2. It Is equally certain that the
Books of the New Testament are transmitted to us in their original purity,
without any material alteration. For it is incredible that the societies of
Christians should neglect the preserving incorrupt and entire, those Writings
which they esteemed a most sacred treasure, on which they built their hopes of
eternal blessedness. It cannot be supposed they would transmit them to their
Children, whose Salvation must have been dearer to them than the World,
otherwise than they received them. This were to charge them with the most
supine carelessness, and unnatural cruelty. Besides, the great number of Copies
dispersed through all places, and translated into many Languages, and read in
all Christian Assemblies, make the attempt to falsify them in things of moment
to be morally impossible. This will be more clear, if we consider that among
Christians there have been so many persons wise and good, of excellent learning
and virtue, and of diverse Countries, that by their office were established the
Depositories of those precious Writings. And is there any colorable pretense to
imagine, that they should suffer any notable alteration in them, much less
conspire to make a change in any Doctrines of Faith or Life therein delivered?
To give reputation and credit to a lie, intitling it to Divine Revelation,
especially in matters of Eternal consequence, is such a black crime, that none
can be presumed capable of, but one that has utterly lost his Conscience. I
shall not here urge, that the Immortal Providence of God is eminently
interested in preserving the Scriptures in sufficient purity. It were a vile
imputation upon his Wisdom and Goodness, to believe that he would permit them
to be undiscernably corrupted in points important to his own Glory, and Man's
Salvation. Thus a snare would be laid without possibility of prevention, and
the embracing Error instead of Truth would be innocent. But this Argument
though incomparably the best, supposes that the Christian Doctrine descended
from Heaven, the proofs of which are to be considered. 3. I will not insist on
the proofs of all the mysterious points of the Christian Faith singly
considered, but propound the Arguments that evince the truth of that Religion,
wherein they are expressly and clearly contained, and from thence conclude that
it is most reasonable to believe them. As in besieging a Town, the Assailants do
not attack every particular House, but vigorously press on to possess
themselves of the Citadel that commands the whole, and with that all the Houses
are conquered. That Divine Revelation is infallible, is an acknowledged
Principle by all Men: for natural Reason dictates that unerring Wisdom, and
infinite Goodness, are essential perfections of God; so that he cannot be
deceived, nor deceive those that trust in his Word. 4. The proofs of the truth
of Christian Religion are of a moral nature; and though not of equal clearness
with the testimonies of Sense, or a Mathematical Demonstration, yet are so
pregnant and convincing, that the considering dispassionate spirit fully
acquiesces in them. A Mathematical Demonstration brings so strong a Light that
the Mind cannot suspend its assent, but is presently overcome by the naked
propounding of the Object: And hence it is that in Mathematical matters, there
are neither Infidels nor Heretics. But the motives of Faith are such, that
although the Object be most certain, yet the Evidence is not so clear and
irresistible, as that which flows from Sense, or a Demonstration. And it is the
excellent observation * De verit. Rel Christ.
of Grotius, God has wisely appointed this way of persuading Men the truth of
the Gospel, that Faith might be accepted as an act of Obedience from the
reasonable Creature. For the Arguments to induce belief, though of sufficient
certainty, yet do not so constrain the mind to give its assent, but there is
prudence and choice in it. Not that the Will can make a direct impression upon
the Mind, that it should comply with its desire, and see what it does not see.
It cannot make an obscure Object to be clear to its perception, no more than it
can change the color of visible things, and make what appears green to the Eye
to seem red. But the mind enlightened by sufficient Reasons that the Christian
Religion is from God, represents it so to the Will, and the Will, if sincere
and unbiast by carnal affections, commands the Mind not to disguise the Truth,
to make it less credible, nor to palliate with specions colors the pretenses
of Infidelity. And thus the belief of it results from conviction and love.
This moral evidence is as convincing as is requisite to make us steadfastly
believe and obey the Gospel. Moral Arguments produce as satisfying certainty,
though not so palpable as those drawn from Sense. When there is a concurrence
of Reasons proper to the nature of things, and the strongest they are capable
of, by their united light they dispel all doubts and fear of the contrary. For
after the Understanding has deliberately and impartially compared the Motives
and Arguments in favor of the truth of a thing, and those that contradict it,
and finds the most weighty moments of Reason in one scale for it, and in the
other nothing but Air and emptiness, it concludes without hesitation or
suspense that such a thing is real. And as it is impossible that a Physical
demonstration concerning the existence of a thing should be deceitful, because
the two parts of a contradiction, as of the being and not being of a thing,
cannot be true: so there is as it were an equal repugnance, that a moral
Demonstration, formed upon the best Arguments the matter will admit, should
deceive the Mind. It presents the object without a cloud, so that the
Understanding has an undoubted assurance of it.

To proceed; the intrinsic excellencies of the Christian Religion will appear,
by considering the Doctrines, Precepts, and Promises it contains, which are the
essential parts of Religion. And of them in general we may observe,

1. The Gospel illustrates and establishes all the natural Principles of truth
and goodness that are common to mankind, the rule of moral actions: and reveals
all supernatural things requisite for the Glory of God, and the supreme
happiness of Man, that rectified Reason upon the discovery, must acknowledge it
came from Heaven, and infallibly leads those who believe and obey it to Heaven.
2. There is such an entire agreement between all the parts of the Christian
Religion for the accomplishing its great end, as affords a clear conviction
it is no humane invention, but from God. As the Harmonious Composition, the
beautiful order, and uniform preservation of the World, is a sensible
demonstration that it proceeds from a most wise powerful and good Cause.
In particular, the Doctrine of the Gospel contains besides what may be known
of God, and of Man by Natural Light, two principal points: An account of the
corruption and misery of mankind in its first causes: And his Redemption
effectually accomplished by the Son of God. The discovery of both is equally
necessary to Man. The first makes him understand the depth of his guiltiness,
that he is incomparably more wretched than he feels himself, clears the Purity
and Justice of God in his dealings with Man, and prepares him by the afflicted
sense of his condition for Mercy. And the knowledge of the Divine Redeemer
powerful to restore him, is as necessary in order to his Duty and Happiness.
For without it he would be always tormented with the mournful remembrance of
his lost felicity, and hardened in despair.

1. The Christian Religion gives a full account of the depravation and misery
of humane Nature in its first Causes. The Heathens felt an insuperable
permanent discord in Man between the upper Faculties and the lower Appetites,
but were utterly ignorant of the Cause of it. Now the Scripture reveals that
Man in the original frame of his Nature was regular and holy, a piece of
workmanship worthy the Perfections of his Creator, but he abused his liberty to
break the first Command, which was given for the trial of his Obedience. He
yielded to the inticements of a fallen Spirit, who was a Liar, that he might be
a Murderer, and by his revolt from God lost his Holiness, and made a forfeiture
of all the privileges of his happy State. Thus the Fountain was tainted; and
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? By the offense of one Judgment
came upon all to condemnation. Every Man is now born a slave of Sin, a
tributary of Death. From hence it follows, that the most deformed Monsters in
villainy, the most fierce enemies of Religion serve to confirm its Truth, as
well as the most eminent Saints. These show the virtue of Redemption by the
sanctity of their Lives, the other the corruption of Nature by their obstinate
wickedness.

2. The Christian Religion instructs us that God sent his own Son into the
World in the humane nature, that he might offer up himself an expiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of Men, to restore them to his Favor. This is a Mystery
above the flight of any created understanding; yet it is so tempered and framed;
there is such an uniformity of Wisdom in all its parts, it presents such a full
and glorious Image of the Deity in all his perfections, that it causes the
highest admiration, and commands belief in those who duly consider it. The
whole economy becoms the Majesty, the Goodness, the Holiness and Justice of
God. His supreme Majesty appears in his pardoning the guilty for the sufferings
of another. For this is an infallible proof that he is above Law. And his
inconceiveable Mercy is the only principle and fountain of our Pardon. For Man
was absolutely incapable to merit the Favor, or to repair the Honor of God,
so injured by his inexcusable disobedience. Repentance cannot produce such
great effects. What merit can there be in the sorrowful sense and confession of
that which deserves Eternal Death? Besides, an extreme hatred of Sin, an ardent
love of Holiness, serious Resolutions to follow it what ever it costs, (which
is the best part of Repentance) was due to God before the commission of Sin,
therefore cannot be satisfaction; So that pure Mercy is the cause of our
forgiveness. Moreover, God to glorify his Holiness in declaring his vehement
and irreconcilable hatred to Sin, and to preserve the Rights of Justice, was
pleased to appoint an all-sufficient Mediator, capable to offer himself an
expiatory Sacrifice for Sin, and to give an infinite value to it. This was done
by the Incarnation of the Son of God. The Flesh and Blood he took of our
humanity, was made Divine by union with him, and offered on the Cross was full
payment for our offenses. Thus Justice and Mercy triumph with equal Glory,
being equally Victorious. For what is more honorable to Justice than
satisfaction equal to the offense? And what can more commend Mercy than the
most free and undeserved bestowing the high price requisite for it? Thus the
Gospel affords to us a just and complete Idea of the Divine excellencies in the
Redemption of Man. The design, manner, and the effect are most worthy of God.
Where might such a contrivance of Wisdom be framed but in the Divine mind?
where could such an excess of compassion be found but in the heart of God? Thus
it became God who is Love, to magnify his Love, to advance his dearest Glory,
and overcome our guilty disaffection to himself. For while terrible
apprehensions of the Deity possess the heart it is frozen with a stony rigor,
which the hope of Mercy only can dissolve. Thus it appears that the Doctrine of
the Gospel is worthy of all acceptance.

2. The Christian Religion sets before us a rule of life, pur and perspicuous,
in nothing superfluous or defective, but comprehending the entire duty of Man.
This was necessary in order to his recovery. For in his fallen state the Law of
Nature is active in some things, but dormant in others. The best Morals of the
Heathens are dashed with impure permissions. But the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, teaches us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. It forbids all Sin
in all its degrees, not only the consummation of it in the act, but the first
conception of it in the thoughts, and desires. Which argues that the Lawgiver
was more than a Man, having an inspection into the heart, which is only visible
to God and only accountable to him. It teaches us to worship God the supreme
and purest Spirit with the highest esteem, and with purity of affections. It
enjoins all relative duties to Men in a most perfect manner. What things we
would have others to do unto us, supposing our selves in their circumstances,
we are obliged to do to them. This one Law of Christ eminently contains all
others that respect society. This is the primitive rule of commerce, and
directs our carriage toward all persons with justice and equity, kindness and
decence. The Gospel also with respect to our selves gives a perfect rule to
make us holy and blessed. It teaches us the contempt of the World, the
valuation of Heaven, the restraint of corrupted sense, and the Angelical
exercise of our affections. In short, it commands the practice of all Virtues,
and that we should aspire to the most eminent degrees in them. But especially
it enjoins humility and love to God, the foundation and perfection of all
virtues, of which the precepts of Philosophy take little notice. Humility, that
is, a lively deep sense that nothing is properly ours but sin and misery,
arises from the consideration of our absolute dependence upon God for our
being, and all the benefits we enjoy in Nature or Grace. From hence gratitude
springs. It Is most reasonable that our lives should be a continual expression
of Obedience from a noble and free principle of love to God, and be designed
for his Honor, and that for all our advantages temporal or spiritual we should
only glory in him. In this Philosophers were very defective: They considered
Man with respect to himself, or to other Creatures without him, and accordingly
the product of their Precepts, was a certain moral honesty, to do nothing
unbecoming the reasonable Nature, nor to break the civil Peace. But they did
not consider duly his relation to the Creator, in whom he lives, moves, and has
his being, from whom proceeds every good and perfect gift. And by neglecting
him, all their glittering actions were but a weak counterfeit, a dead
resemblance of real virtue. In their most eminent public works the praise of
Men was their Nullam Virtus aliam mer cedem laborum periculorumque desiderat,
praeter hanc laudis and gloriae: quae quidem detracta, quid est quod in hoc tam
exiguo vitae curriculo, and tam brevi, tantis nos in laboribus exerceamus?
Cicer. per Arch.
ultimate design; and as some appear bold from Fear, they were Virtuous from
Vanity. If God be not the Principle, the Motive, and the End of what we do,
there are wanting the essential Ingredients of moral Goodness. Now all these
Precepts shine with their native light, and carry such evidence of their
rectitude, that our obedience may come from an ingenuous filial spirit
satisfied with the reasonableness of our Heavenly Fathers Commands, and not be
servile, only performed to the absolute will of a Master. And can there be a
more convincing proof of the truth of Christian Religion, of its Divine
descent, than the Image of Gods Holiness so clearly impressed upon it? Add
further; these Precepts are delivered with that plainness, and so proportioned
to the capacity of all, and yet with that sovereign Authority, that it is
reasonable to believe that God himself speaks, and it becomes Man to hear with
reverence and submission. The Gospel is without the ornaments of Art, yet its
sweet facility is tempered with that Majesty, that it is a sensible caracter
that Divine Wisdom composed it.

3. The Promises of the Gospel are so worthy of God, and suitable to the wants
and desires of Men, that it is perfectly reasonable to assent to their truth and
goodness. This will appear by a particular consideration of them.

1. The Promise of Pardon to penitent Believers. And in this we are to consider
the conditions, and the ground of its assurance to us. The conditions are
Repentance and Faith.

1. Repentance is a peculiar Command and Privilege of the Gospel. The Law
considered in it self did not admit of it, nor give the least hope of pardon:
for it supposes Man in the integrity of Nature, and accordingly directs him how
to please God and preserve his Love, but propounds no means of reconciliation
after an offense. There are no seeds of Grace to temper its rigor. But the
Gospel is the Declaration of Mercy to the guilty and miserable, upon such terms
as God may be capable to give Pardon, and Man qualified to receive it. It Is not
more true that God is the Judge of the World, and that all Men shall appear
before his Tribunal, than that Sin without Repentance shall not escape
Punishment. To forgive the unreformed sinner would stain his purest
Perfections, the inviolable beauty of his Holiness, the incorruptible rectitude
of his Justice. Such Lenity would have a pernicious influence on the corrupt
World, by encouraging Men to Sin without fear, and outragiously to break his
Laws in confidence of Pardon. Therefore in the Evangelical Promise, Repentance
and Remission of Sins are inseparably joined. Repentance is a preparative in
order to our receiving Divine Mercy, and a strong preservative against Sin for
time to come. The Remembrance of those sorrows and fears, the anxieties and
indignation against himself that Sin caused in a true Penitent, will make him
jealous for the future of his Heart, and ci^cumspect against all Temptations
that may betray him. As one that has narrowly escaped consuming by Fire,
retains the idea of his danger so deeply impressed on his mind, that upon any new
occasion his ancient fears revive, and make him very watchful. Besides, the
apprehension of Just and Eternal Vengeance, makes the Mercy of God so
admirable, the sense of his tender compassion so sweet, that an humble Believer
cannot forget or neglect it. The forgiveness of Sin in this way is not only an
engagement, but an infallible cause of fearing to offend a God so great and
good.

And Faith is a qualification as requisite for the obtaining pardon; that is, a
cordial, entire receiving Jesus Christ as he is presented to us in the Gospel:
to resign our minds to his Doctrines as our Prophet, to have reliance on his
Sacrifice and Mediation as our Priest; to yield universal cheerful and constant
Obedience to him as our King. And how congruous is it that all who receive so
unvaluable a benefit as forgiveness of Sin, should thus honor him who procures
it?

And the Gospel affords the strongest assurance that God is most willing to
pardon humble and contrite sinners. This is necessary for the relief and ease
of true Penitents. For when the enlightn'd Conscience reflects upon the number
and enormity of its Sins, the presumption in committing them, it is ready to be
swallowed up with despair of recovering the lost favor of God. It cannot
devise any means how to appease his incensed Majesty, and satisfy violated
Justice: how a Rebel should become his Son; how one condemned to everlasting
Punishment, should be restored to the unfading inheritance of Life. The case is
most intricate and hopeless. Now the Gospel propounds means of Universal
Sovereign efficacy to reconcile God to us; The most precious Blood of his Son
offered up a Sacrifice to expiate Sin. This sprinkles all Nations, and in all
Ages retains an undecaying virtue. This affords solid and everlasting comfort
to all sensible returning Sinners.

2. The sending of the holy Spirit of God to renew us according to his Image,
and to confirm us against temptations in this mortal life, is another Promise
of the Gospel, and most requisite to make us capable to serve and enjoy him. A
happy temper of Nature, the Precepts of Philosophy, virtuous Examples, the
severity of humane Laws, are not powerful to regenerate a Man, and transform
him into a new Creature. They may restrain the exorbitancies of carnal
appetites, but cannot thoroughly change the mind and affections. Were there any
vital spark within, any seed of Holiness in Man's corrupted Nature, such
assistance might cherish it; but he is dead to the truly Spritual Life, tho not
to the merely Moral, and no less than an Omnipotent efficacy can produce a new
spring of life, a divine Nature, the principle of willing Obedience to God. And
after conversion, while in the state of trial here, the best are subject to
innumerable surprises by their own frailty, and exposed to new dangers every
hour by temptations that foment and heighten the relics of Sin in them, so
that without supernatural assistance they would be quite discouraged and foild
by the enemies that war against the Soul. Now in the Gospel God has promised to
give the holy Spirit to those that ask it: in the most hazardous and difficult
conflicts, he assures those who ardently address themselves to him for help,
that his Grace shall be sufficient for them.

3. The Gospel contains many gracious promises with respect to supplying the
wants, and giving support and refreshment under the troubles of the present
life. Temporal blessings are in the lowest rank of good things, and are
promised as they should be desired subordinately to our chief good. First seek
the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof, and all other things shall
be added, says our Savior. And to relieve us in the troubles of this mortal
state, the Gospel assuresus of their blessed issue at the last. The main design
of Philosophy was to reconcile the mind to every condition; that nothing might
be able to discompose its tranquillity. As some high Mountains that ascend
above the middle Region, whiles Clouds charged with Thunder break upon the
sides, and Storms encompass it below, yet the top has a pure Sun, and calm Air.
Thus the Philosophers pretended to raise Man to that height of virtue, that the
superior part the mind, should be serene and undisturbed, what ever was done
to his lower part the body. But their Principles were insufficient on which
they built their Persuasion. Some pretended that Men were abused by words, and
that was the cause of their misery. The loss of Estate, of Relations, of Health
were not real evils, but only called so. Sottish Wisdom! as if things by the
change of names would alter their qualities. Call them by what soft titles you
please, still they are injurious and afflictive to our nature, and to persuade
the contrary is to deprive us of Sense. Others tell us that the evils we suffer
are fatal, and to resist inevitable destiny is to no purpose. But this is to
exasperate instead of allaying our sorrows. This is to turn our fears into
despair, to make an afflicted condition absolutely uncomfortable. Others direct
us to look abroad into the wretched World, and compound a Medicine of the
miseries of others for our own griefs. But this as it is vicious in its
Principle, so it affords no true relief. For that another suffers in the same
or different manner does not lessen the evil that oppresses me. Nay if humane
affections are not extinguished, by a sorrowful influence increases it. Others
discourse of the vanity of Riches, Pleasures, Dignities, and Life it self, to
make us quietly to part with them. But this discourse, though true and useful,
yet cannot afford contentment unless to a Christian, whose hopes extend to a
future state of blessedness. For how mean so ever these things be, yet, if we
know no better, they are our felicity. Some attribute to naked Virtue a power
sufficient to support a Man under the heaviest troubles. This they affirmed to
be the true Philosophers Stone, that purifies and exalts the basest Metals,
turning them into fine Gold; that enables a person not only to be content in
every state, but to enjoy torments, and be pleased with the greatest disasters
that befall Vereor, ne ille plura tribuit virtuti, quam natura patiatur. Cicer.
lib. 4. Acad. Quaest.
him. But they took so high a strain, that humane Nature could not uphold. The
indifference and equality of mind they so much pretended to, was but an empty
appearance. One might discover unquiet agitations under all that feigned
insensibility, and true servitude under that imaginary sovereignty of their
wise Man. Indeed without the steadfast belief of another Life, the reflection
upon unhappy virtue inflames the wounded spirit, and kindles in the breast
murmurings against Providence, so that it is so far from making the Titus
Imperator febrim nactus, cum lectica transferretur, suspexisse dicitur dimotis
plagulis Coelum, multumque Conquestus Eripi sibi vitam immerenti, * neque enim
extare ullum suum factum poenitendum, excepto duntaxat uno. Sueton.
afflicted happy, that it is rather the seed of new misery for the unequal
distributions here. Christian Religion alone affords us solid and everlasting
comfort. It does not disguise the nature of things, but allows that present
afflictions are not joyful but grievous. It does not promise an exemption from
misery: Nay it foretells that besides the common troubles that rain upon
mankind, there are some proper to sincere Christians, to which they are exposed
upon the account of their holy Profession. But it assures them that all things
shall work together for the good of those that love God. As in mixed bodies the
Divine Power is admirable, in tempering the qualities of the fighting Elements
in such a manner, that what in it self is a destructive contrariety, becomes
only a diversity, to preserve the compounded beings that result from them. Thus
the wise and gracious Providence of God makes all things, even the most
adverse, to conspire for the final happiness of his faithful Servants. Their
light Afflictions that are but for a moment, work out for them a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. This makes them to possess their Souls
in patience, to rejoice in hope, and to be triumphant conquerers over the
greatest outward troubles. Who can dispute felicity with that person who is
upon certain grounds persuaded that nothing shall separate him from the love of
God? Nay that the worst evils he suffers promoet his supreme happiness. For the
afflictions that befall a Christian upon the account of Religion, render him
more dear to God: and those that are the effects of his Sins, if humbly
submitted to, and improved for holy ends, confirm his Faith in the Divine
Mercy. The Gospel is that Paradise wherein the Tree of Life is, whose leaves
are for the healing the Nations.

4. Christian Religion promises for the reward of Obedience a Blessedness most
becoming the glorious goodness of God to bestow, and the reasonable Creature to
desire; that is, the perfection and satisfaction of his most noble Faculties,
in the clear vision and full enjoyment of God himself in a perfect eternal
state. The Heathens wretchedly mistook in their opinions about the last end of
Man. There is a secret instinct in the humane nature toward a felicity suitable
to the more excellent and divine part, but stifled under darkness and
concupiscence, that is become a second nature. Reason is misled by Sense after
the fickle appearances, the deceitful vanishing colors of Good. And this is a
certain indication that Man is fallen from the degree of his Original
Perfection. For if he had been never corrupted, he should enjoy with assurance
true and complete happiness: if he had been always corrupted, there would be no
glimmering Idea of an happiness above what this present World affords, no
inclination toward it. This is the spring of his misery and sin, that the
spiritual eternal good is undiscerned, unregarded, whilst he seeks for
happiness in numberless vanities. The Philosophers themselves were extremely
divided, and mistaken in this main point. This was indeed the masterpiece for
which all their Philosophy was designed, and their pretenses to make this
discovery gave them reputation. From all parts some came to Athens, as the
universal Mart, to be furnished with felicity. From hence sprung the variety of
Sects among them: by this Livery they were distinguished. For Philosophy being
the rule of life, is specified by the end to which it leads. From hence arose
their sharp contentions, every Sect being concerned to defend their Palladium.
And as the Wasps fly about with noise, and sting those who provoke them, and
make combs like Bees, but without Wax or Honey: Thus the Philosophers were full
of glorious presumptions, were vehement against dissenters, and had the
appearances of Wisdom, but afforded no certain light to direct the Mind, no
Heavenly motives to allure the Will. They were not competent nor sincere
searchers after true Happiness. For, I. The darkness wherein all Men are born,
involved them, and without supernatural light could not be dispelled.

2. They were ambitious of superiority: every great Spirit was desirous to
raise a Sect, to act the part of a King in the Scene of Fame. Now by
propounding a new Object as the blessedness of Man, they had the reputation of
sovereign Masters.

3. They drew a Picture of happiness every one according to their different
conceptions and desires. Epicurus set up the pleasure of Sense, as the chief
object. And that Reason might be flexible to his inclinations, that his Roses
might have no Prickles, to prevent any melancholy reflections after carnal
enjoyments, he denied the Divine Providence, and the future state. It Is said by
some in his favor, that he intended a calm and peaceful temper of mind, a
felicity refined from the dregs of sensuality. For this they allege Epicurus
himself depreciating carnal pleasures, and extolling Virtue as the great
composer of the Soul. But in vain they wash this voluptuous Swine: For,

1. Those Sentences of a more noble and generous strain, might, as flashes of
Lightning from a black Cloud, break forth of his Conscience in the midst of the
darkness that covered it, yet Sense might be his predominent Principle.

2. He was a crafty Spirit and made use of some beautiful expressions Dulces
voluptates Epicurus interdum sic extenuat, ut Curium loqui putes, interdum ita
laudat, ut quid praeterea sit bonum neget se posse suspicari. Cic. lib. 2. de
fin.
to lessen the horror that his Doctrine, nakedly proposed, would cause in sober
Persons. Sometimes he speaks with a grave air as a Philosopher, That true
happiness consists in the pleasures of the mind. At other times, That there is
no solid happiness but what might be tasted and enjoyed by the Senses. He was a
Politician, and would not scandalize the severe, nor alienate the dissolute
from him. Quaedam arcana apud se habuisse, neque se permittere Omnibus,
Tully observes that the secrets of his School, the pernicious lessons of
sensuality were not communicated to all: But those who had intimate
conversation with him, had a free indulgence for their lusts.

Aristotle places happiness in all the perfections of the Body and Mind, with
the confluence of all External things as necessary Ingredients of it. But this
only respects Man in the present state in the World: and were his opinion true,
yet his description would cause despair of obtaining that happiness. For how
could any single Person expect an entire union of all such perfections in
himself, as are not to be found in all Men together?

The Stoics asserted felicity to consist only in Virtue. But this is contrary
to Reason and Humanity. For the union of the Physical good with the Moral is
requisite to give satisfaction to the faculties of man.

Plato and his followers, in whom Sympos.
Natural Reason ascended as high as in any of the Gentiles, had a glimpse of
the true blessedness of Man, as consisting in his likeness to God and the
enjoyment of him But their knowledge was shadowed with much ignorance, their
hopes mixed with doubtful fears. They had rather suspicious and wandering
desires, than solid apprehensions and firm expectations of it.

Briefly, no sparks struck out of humane intellectuals were sufficient to give
light or heat, to direct in the clear way, and to animate against the
intervening difficulties that hinder Men in the pursuit of blessedness. This
was the state of the Pagan World, till Light and Immortality were brought to
light through the Gospel. The quality of this life is therein revealed; it is a
pure and holy felicity consisting in the perpetual exercise of the most
excellent actions the intelligent Nature is capable of: That is, in the perfect
Knowledge and Love and Praises of God himself. The subject of it is the entire
Man, for this end the Body shall be raised from its dead sleep to an eternal
Life. The place is the highest Heavens, framed by the Divine power for the seat
of his Majesty, the Kingdom of his Love, wherein he will manifest himself to
his Favorites. And can there be a stronger attractive, a more noble inducement
to make us holy? Secular rewards, as Riches, and Honors, and the like, are
extrinsecal to the nature of Goodness; and to do our duty with such low aims
and expectations, is to be defective in the best part of it, the love of Virtue
for its inherent excellence. But the Divine reward is the perfection of
Holiness, the glory of the Soul; and the belief and regard of it has a powerful
influence to make us truly good. The Faith in this makes us victorious over all
the charms and all the cruelties of the World. For what can possibly come into
competition with a happiness infinite in its greatness and duration?

I will only add, that though Heaven be so rich a Jewel, that it needs no foil
to set off its luster, to those who are clear sighted to behold it; yet in a
merciful compassion to Man the Gospel reveals what will be the recompense of
wilful continued disobedience, an eternal Hell, wherein the Justice and Power
of God are terribly glorified. And what is more powerful to excite the sensual
and secure, who despise the blessed hope, than the fear of an Immortal Death?

Now after this short delineation of the Christian Religion, let Reason judge
whether it is the invention of Men. The Doctrine of it shines with so clear an
evidence, the Precepts are so pure, able to inspire us with true Holiness, the
Promises are so Divine, that every one who does not wilfully shut his eyes, or
turn them to other things, may discern its original to be from above; that it
comes from the Fountain of Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness. What are all the
productions of the Earth to this sacred Present of Heaven? If there be any
shadow of Virtue in other Religions, here the reality is in the highest
perfection, and separate from all vicious mixtures. Christianity enjoins
universal sincerity, and purity of Heart and Life. It instructs Man to appear
what he is, by an humble acknowledgment of his sinful unworthiness, and to be
what he appears, by an inward love and real practice of that Religion of which
he makes a public profession. It impresses a more noble Character upon moral
Virtues, by enjoining them from a principle of love to God, and directing their
performance to his Glory, than Philosophy did, that commanded them only as
agreeable to humane reason. What are all the most beautiful excitations of
Philosophy to the high motives of the Gospel? To apply our selves to the
Writings of the wisest Heathens in order to our happiness, and to neglect the
Scriptures, is to he guilty of worse folly than the barbarous Indians at
Mexico, who Pet. Mart. Hist. Ind.
though their Woods abounded with Wax, the labor of the Bees, yet only made
use of Brands, that afforded a little light with a great deal of smoke. Upon
the most impartial inquiry, and exact search, Reason will conclude, either
there is no blessed end for which Man was designed by his Maker, or the Gospel
only has revealed it, and the effectual means to obtain it. So that we must say
with the zeal and affection of the Apostles to Jesus Christ, Lord, to whom
shall we goithou have the words of Eternal Life.

CHAP. III.
The External proofs of the truth of Christian Religion considered. Miracles
are only performed by God. Why Christianity was confirmed by them. The number
of Christ's Miracles, the manner of his performing them, and their certainty,
considered. The Miracles done by Christ to confirm his Doctrine, are an
authentic Testimony that God approved it. The pretense of Libertines, that the
Heathen Religion was confirmed by Miracles, clearly disproved. The rational
assurance we have that the Apostles were sincere and certain of the Miraculous
things related by them of Jesus Christ. His Resurrection attested by sufficient
evidence.

WE are next to consider those external proofs of the truth of Christianity,
the works of God himself, that seal our full assurance of it. I shall instance
in two; Miracles, and the accomplishment of Prophecies.

1. A Miracle is a supernatural work that requires an extraordinary Divine
Power to effect it. For none can derogate from the Universal Laws of Nature,
prescribed from the beginning of things and time, but the Author of it. Indeed
we do not exactly know the compass of that Circle wherein the spirits of
darkness exercise their power. They may by the application of natural means
unknown to us, produce things that may astonish, or by lying Wonders deceive
Men: but a true Miracle is a work reserved to God, and possibly to no less than
Infinite Power. Whether it be a first or second Creation, the forming a new
Eye, or the giving a visive power to that that was naturally blind, it can only
be done by his hand. If we respect Omipotency, there is the same facility; if
the thing done, there is the same difficulty in the performance. If the Devils
had such a power, they might create a separate Kingdom, and reign there.

Now Miraculous Testimonies were given to confirm Christianity, that there
might be a just correspondence between its Doctrines and their Proofs. The
mysteries of the Gospel in their existence are above all natural power, and in
their belief above the natural understanding. All that Nature can do or know,
does not make them credible. Therefore 'twas requisite those things should be
confirmed by the Divine Power, that transcend the comprehension of humane
Reason. Besides, as the Mysteries of the Gospel are sublime, so the Rewards are
future; and that the Gentiles might not pretend that the Preachers of the
Gospel feigned another World, and a Heaven and a Hell, wherein the Souls and
Bodies of Men shall be glorified or tormented according to their actions in
this life, supernatural Evidence of the truth of those Promises and Threatenings
was necessary. In short, herein the Divine Goodness appeared, That as the true
Religion is necessary to the Salvation of all Men, so 'twas discernible by such
signs as may convince all. For upon the sight of those Divine Works, the
simplest people were led by the outward Sense, to an inward firm Faith in Jesus
Christ.

These things being premised, I will take a brief view of the Miracles wrought
by our Savior to give Faith to his Doctrine.

It Is recorded of Moses, who was a type of Christ, that after his familiar
converse with God, as a Man with his Friend, descending from the Mount, his
Face shone with such an excessive brightness, as it were by reflection from the
Face of God, that coming to the Israelites to deliver to them the Divine Laws,
he was fain to cover it with a vail: yet some rays of that miraculous splendour
were visible through that mysterious Vail, to assure them it was Moses himself
that directed and governed them according to God's Will.

Thus when the Son of God came down from the Heaven of Heavens to instruct the
World, he shaded the light of the Deity with a vail of Flesh; yet he was not so
absolutely concealed under his humanity, but that from time to time some beams
of the Divine Nature appeared in works so proper to God, that the Apostle says,
We saw his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God. In the
representation of our Saviors Miracles by the Evangelists, we may consider
their number and variety, his manner of performing them, and the certainty of
them.

1. Their number and variety. He went about all Galilee healing all manner of
sicknesses and diseases, even the most incurable; the Blind, the Deaf, the
Lame, the Paralitic, the Hydropic, the Leprous, the Lunatic were cured. He
raised the Dead, and cast out Devils. Besides his miraculous feeding so many
thousands, his commanding the enraged Winds and Seas to be still, and a great
calm followed; His Transfiguration before his Disciples, when the Beauty of
Heaven descended on his Countenance to be there more beautiful, discovered the
sensible Presence of the Deity in him.

2. The manner of his performing them is very considerable. They were done in
an instant, by absolute dominion over Nature. Thus when he said to the Leper, I
will, be thou clean, immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. Thus when the
faithful Centurion addressed himself to him, -- only speak the word, and my
Servant shall be healed. He answered, Be it done unto thee as thou believe;
and his Servant was healed, etc. both expressions of Command and Empire. And
his words to the Blind-Man, Receive thy Sight, had the same creating efficacy
with those, Let there be Light, and there was Light. Thus with Authority he
commanded the unclean Spirits, even the most furious and obstinate, and they
were expelled from those Mansions wherein they had revelled a long time. Thus
by the mere Act of his Will he reversed the order of Nature. When the Widows
Son was carrying to the Grave, He only said, Young Man, I say unto thee, Arise;
and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. Now in this respect, the
power of Miracles in Jesus Christ was transcendent above that that either
Moses, or the Prophets, or the Apostles had. 'Twas derived to them by favor
and commission from an extrinsick superior principle, the Omnipotence of God;
but 'twas inherent in his Person, the natural proper Attribute of his Deity,
and proved Him to be the Son of God, the Lord of Nature, visible in humane
flesh. In all places this blessed Virtue proceeded from Him.

3. The certainty of his performing them was so great, that no shadow of
suspicion could remain about it. Vitruvius the Master of Architects gives
advice to those who built Temples to Aesculapius, Cum enim ex Pestilenti in
salubrem locum corpora aegra translata fuerint, and a Fontibus, salubribus
aquarum usus sub ministrabuntur, celerius convalescent. Ita efficietur, ut ex
natura loci majores, auctasque cum dignitate Divinitas excipiat opiniones. Lib.
1. cap. 2.
or any other of the Heathen Deities that were invocated by the Sick, that they
should choose such places as were open to the most favorable Aspects and
Influences of the Heavens, where there was a well-tempered Soil, clear Air,
pure Springs of Water, that Diseased-Persons coming from unhealthyplaces might
obtain Recovery; and what was the benefit of Nature might be attributed to the
Divine Virtue of Aesculapius. Thus that Idolater counseled for the honor of
his false Gods. But in this he judged aright, that the power of the Deity was
believed and honored by Men proportionably to the Cures that were received
from him. How much more when done by an undoubted Miracle? Of this the People
the numerous spectators were so convinced, that they said, When Christ comes,
the expected Deliverer, will he do more Miracles than these which this Man has
done? The Pharisees themselves could not deny the Effects, but would not
acknowledge the true Cause. Envy was more powerful in their breasts, than the
clearest Evidence. Therefore to invalidate his Authority, they ascribed some of
his wonderful works to the Prince of Devils. But this pretense was so void of
all Reason, and full of impiety, that nothing but inveterate malice could
suggest it. For would the Devil destroy his own Kingdom? is he such a lover of
Holiness as to authorize the most perfect Master of it by a compliance with his
Will? Those proud Spirits are servile only in appearance, and when they suffer
themselves to be commanded by Men, it is always with design to establish and
increase their own Dominion. Therefore the most famous Sorcerers observe some
Rites by the Devil's prescription, and in the using of them acknowledge his
power. But our Savior had a sovereign Empire over them, and ejected them not
only from the Bodies, but from the Souls of Men, subduing by his holy Doctrine
the power of Sin, wherein the Kingdom of Satan consists. From hence he argues,
If I by the finger of God cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come unto
you. And hence it was, that he charges them with self-condemning obstinancy.
For if the Gentiles were inexcusable for not acknowledging and honoring God,
so clearly manifested in the Works of Nature, The Jews were as inexcusable, for
rejecting Jesus Christ, so powerfully declared to be the Son of God by
supernatural Operations.

Add further, that in his lowest state when he seemd to be utterly forsaken of
God, yet then his Innocence and the Divinity of his Person were miraculously
testified: For at his Death, even insensible Nature as if it had been capable
of Knowledge and Affection, was in the most astonishing disorder, as resenting
the Passion of its Lord. The Sun was eclipsed in a time and place against all
possibility of Nature. For the Moon was then in opposition to it and That
Eclipse might be caused in some other extraordinary unknown manner*
in its Full, and in an instant past a half Circle of the Heavens to interpose
between the body of the Sun and the Earth, that the Air at noon day was darkn'd
as at midnight. This compelled the Roman Centurion to acknowledge that he that
suffered was the Son of God. And his Resurrection from the Grave was a visible
Argument to confirm his Doctrine; for that God would not exert his
extraordinary power to confirm a false Doctrine, in a matter of infinite
moment, that so nearly concerns his own Glory, and the Salvation of Men, there
is sufficient assurance from his Wisdom, Truth and Goodness. Was there ever any
Prince that would permit an Usurper, in his own Presence to make use of his
Royal Seal, to authorize by Commission his Subjects to rebel against him? And
would God have suffered a Deceiver to work Miracles, and thereby obtain Divine
Honor from Men, the incommunicable Right of the Deity? Nay, it had not been a
bare permission, but a positive Act of God himself, it being impossible that
any other should do them. Or, would God who is the prime Verity, work Miracles
to give credit to a Lie, and violate the Honor of his Eternal, most perfect
Veracity? Or, is it consistent with his Infinite Goodness, to make a Delusion
so strong, that the most sincere would be in great danger to be overcome by it?
Therefore the Apostle urges it as an uncontrollable Argument of our Savior's
Divine Mission; Ye Men of Israel hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a Man
approved of God among you, by Miracles and Wonders, and Signs which God did by
him in the midst of you, as you your selves also know. These were proofs of the
greatest vigor, to induce the World to believe that he came from God, to make
known his Counsel for the recovery of lost undone Mankind.

It Is said by Libertines, that the Heathens tell miraculous stories to confirm
their Religion, that their Hero's descended in a right line from some Deity;
and not to instance in many particulars, they boasted of Apollonius Tyanaeus as
one that vied with Christ himself in wonderful works. But this Objection is
easily refuted: for if Paganism had a miraculous Power attending it, why did it
not make use of it to discredit that Power that authorized Christianity in the
time it made fierce War against it? If equal to it in Divine Power, and
incomparably superior in humane aids, how came it to pass that the weaker
proved victorious, and the stronger was put to flight? It Is evident therefore
the pretended Miracles of Paganism, were works of the Devil, not to be compared
with what was done by an Almighty Hand.

If it be again objected, That the relation of the Miracles as performed by
Jesus Christ is from his Disciples, who favored his Person and Cause, and
therefore may be justly suspected. I answer; The vanity of the Pretense is
apparent: for if they had artificially framed a Narrative of extraordinary
things as done by him in that time wherein they wrote, and in the view of many,
how easy had it been to expose them to the just scorn and hatred of all for
their notorious falsehood, and infatuated Impudence? but they were never accused
of this. Nay such was the number, clearness, and greatness of his Miracles,
that the uncontrouled fame of them forced his Enemies in after-Ages to
acknowledge their truth. The Jews in their Talmud confess he did Wonders, but
give such a ridiculous Account of the Means by which they were done, as betrays
the weakness of their Reason, and the strength of their Malice against him. And
his Apostles, with their Successors, in preaching the Gospel, wrought Miracles
so frequently in the face of many Nations, that those who were most obstinately
averse from submitting to it, could not deny what was visible to thousands, and
that Miraculous Power they always ascribed to the Name of CHRIST. So that there
is no color for jealousy, as if his Miracles recorded in the Gospel were not
true.

But because the Resurrection of Christ is the great Principle upon which all
Christian hopes depend, I will show that we have all the rational assurance of
it, that it is capable of. This being a matter of fact done many Ages past, is
to be proved by Testimony. And first, it is worthy of Observation that the
Providence of God is concerned to authorize this manner of proof, that is
absolutely necessary for the preserving humane Societies. It Is of little
importance, whether the truth of things be discovered in speculative Sciences,
or the appearance of it deceive the Inquirer. It Is no wrong to the
Commonwealth, that an Astronomer mistakes in his dimensions of the magnitude of
the Sun; for his error does not lessen its benign influences; still it shines
and causes the Spring and Autumn. It Is of little importance that a Philosopher
is deceived in his search after the principles of mixed bodies: for,
notwithstanding his mistake, Animals still live, and move, and perform all the
Functions suitable to their Nature. But in Judgments that respect matters of
Fact, if the Truth cannot be known by testimonys, the civil felicity cannot
long subsist. For the unjust distribution of Rewards and Punishments is
necessarily ruinous to the Being of the State. And is it credible the Divine
Providence that reaches to the smallest parts of the World in such an admirable
manner, should leave the conduct of humane affairs, even of the greatest
moment, to a deceitful Light? And that after the most diligent search and
caution has been used, the result should be only wavering Conjectures? This
imagination is extremely injurious to his Wisdom and Goodness.

In particular, if we consider the Number and the Quality of the Witnesses of
Christ's Resurrection, and the Circumstances of their Testimony, we shall have
so clear conviction of its truth as may induce us most firmly to believe it. I
do not now speak of a Divine Faith, that supernatural Light that makes us
acquiesce in things because God has revealed them; but of a rational humane
Faith, grounded on just and powerful motives, which is preparatory for the
Divine.

1. The Law admits two Witnesses as a competent number in Causes of greatest
moment. Of this there were many. The approved Integrity of a Witness gives
weight to his Testimony: as on the contrary a known Liar forfeits his Credit so
entirely, that he is not believed when he speaks true. When Demades the Orator
addressed himself to the Athenians, I call all the Gods and Goddesses to witness
the truth of what I shall say: The Athenians often abused by his impudent Lies,
presently interrupted him, And we call all the Gods and Goddesses to witness we
will not believe you. The bare word of an Honest Man in an important matter,
persuades more than the most exquisite Oaths and far-fetched Imprecations, by
which a Liar would give credit to his Imposture. Now we have strong proof of
the Integrity of the Apostles. If an inflexible Fidelity and constant Truth
were qualities so remarkable in the Community of the Primitive Christians, that
the Pagan Plin. in Epist.
Judges themselves were constrained to acknowledge it, certainly they were found
more eminently in those by whose Doctrine and Example they formed themselves.
And as it is impossible to possess this Virtue (so strictly united to Justice)
in an excellent degree, without having all the others; so it is evident they
were adorned with all moral Virtues. For their lives were above the least
reproach and charge of their implacable enemies: so that they were fain to make
express Laws against their Profession, to render them guilty in Appearance.
Besides, the circumstances of their Testimony make it very valuable.

1. 'Twas not built on the report of others. Mere hearsay is very deceitful,
and often like a Contagion passes from Ear to Ear, and blasts the Reputation of
the Innocent with easy and credulous persons. But a Testimony from sight makes
impression on the belief of wise considering Men. Now we have undoubted
Assurance of Christ's Resurrection from the clear and concurrent deposition of
their Senses: What we have heard, and what we have seen with our eyes, and what
we have handled of the Word of Life, says the Apostle St. John.

2. The uniformity of their Testimony renders it convincing. If any material
contradiction be between Witnesses, it is an infallible mark of their Forgery.
But the Apostles agreed not only in the substance, but in the particularity of
the Fact. In vain Porphiry and Julian racked their Wits to find some
contrariety in their Relations. An impartial Inquirer must acknowledge all
their Objections to be mere Cavils, and effects of Malice.

3. There were no motives to corrupt them. For the humane will is naturally
moved either by attraction of some Good, or aversion from some Evil. A Fiction
is not maintained for pure love of it self, but with respect to either of those
objects whether real or in appearance. The Roman Histories report that Julius
Proculus solemnly swore that he saw Romulus ascend to Heaven: but the motive of
his Imposture is visible; for it was to prevent a great disorder among the
People. But it is very evident that nothing desirable in the World had the least
influence upon the Apostles. Nay on the contrary, whatever was terrible to
Nature, discouraged them. They suffered all temporal evils, even Death it self,
for this Testimony. And this last proof confirms all the others; They are
called Martyrs by way of excellency, who have sealed the Truth with their
Blood. Now what can be added to give us full and entire Faith in their
Testimony? In great and difficult Cases, suspected Persons are put to Torture
for the discovery of Truth. The Apostles were tried by the sharpest Sufferings,
yet declared the Resurrection of their Divine Master with unfainting
perseverance. What shadow of doubt can remain after such clear evidence of
their sincerity? Let sober Reason judge: whether the matter is capable of proof
more strong and convincing? If it be said they were deceived with an Illusion,
either being distempered or in a dream; both the pretenses are most absurd and
incredible. For the operations of the External Senses may be infallibly
discerned by their proper caracters from those of the Imaginations. Indeed, if
the mind be in disorder, either from some more fixed and tenacious cause, or
from sleep, the influences of Reason are suspended, or only some faint rays
appear, and are suddenly extingush'd, so that it can make no true judgment of
things. In this state, the Imagination draws all the vigor of the Soul to it
self, and the Phantasms are made so bright by the heat of the Spirits in the
brain, that those painted Scenes seem to be as real as the substantial objects
we see, hear, and touch. But sound Reason can reflect upon it self, and extend
its veiw to the operations of all the other faculties, and observe the just and
certain difference between Chimaeras in the imagination, and things really
existant. It comprehends distinctly and with assurance, that it is not
disturbed, and that the Internal and External Senses are disposed for their
regular operations. It considers that the Pageants of Fancy moving in a dream
vanish in a moment upon waking. But real effects perceived by the Senses in
their full exercise are more constant and durable. One may be wounded in a
dream, yet feel not loss of blood or strength when he is awake. But the wounds
received in a Combat are sometimes rebellious against the most potent remedies.
Now to apply this to the present subject.

Is it in the least degree probable that a vain shadow in a dream should make
an indelible impression on the memories of the Apostles, and their waking
thoughts should not discover the deceit? Nay that it should inspire them with
invincible courage to assert that Christ was truly risen? Or who can with the
least color of reason accuse the Apostles of simplicity or any disorder of
mind, when such are equal, uniform and strong light shines in all their
Writings? whereas the discourses of Fools or distracted Persons are unshapt
Abortions of the mind, beginnings without a regular progress, or if there be
any coherence it is short, and always attended with some notable extravagance.
Besides, the constant order of their Lives and Actions was a certain proof of
the composedness and wisdom of their minds.

To sum up briefly what is convincing that the Apostles were sincere and
certain in their Testimony. How could they be deceived when they say him do
Miracles, or by his power did the like? Did they all dream in a night, that
they saw him appear after his Resurrection? what could impress on them such a
strong belief of that, of which the Senses were the proper Judges? Or could
they conspire to invent such a falsehood, and so easily to be convinced, with
the least rational hope that the World should believe them? How was it likely,
considering the variable humors of Men, but that some of themselves either by
violent fears, or attractive hopes should be prevailed on to discover the
Fiction, and leave their Party? What could inspire them with such a false
security, to despise the greatest Dangers, and such a foolish presumption to
undertake the greatest difficulties? How could they expect to induce the World
to believe in and worship One ignominiously put to death? After such a
convincing evidence, what can Reason, nay suspicion object with any color to
weaken their testimony? The motives of credibility are so strong that we may be
as truly satisfied of the reality of the things related by the Apostles, as if
we had been spectators of them our selves.

CHAP. IV.
The accomplishment of Prophecies concerning the Messiah, in Jesus of Nazareth,
is an unanswerable proof that he was sent from God to redeem the World. The
circumstances of his Birth, the actions of his Life, his Sufferings and Death
clearly foretold. The irreparable destruction of the State of the Jews was
foretold as the just punishment for their rejecting of the Messiah. That
terrible Event is a continual Proof that Jesus Christ was what he declared
himself to be, the Son of God. The Converting of the Gentile World to the
Knowledge and Service of the true God by the Messiah was foretold in the
Scriptures; and is visibly fulfilled. The Accomplishment of this Prophecy by
the most unlikely means, against the strongest Opposition, is manifestly the
effect of Divine Power, and is sufficient to convince the Jewish and Heathen
Infidelity of the truth of Christianity.

THE Accomplishment of Prophecies concerning the MESSIAH his coming into the
World, the Work he should do, his Sufferings, and the Consequences of them,
afford undeniable proof that Jesus of Nazareth came from God for our Salvation.
Prescience of things to come, and independent on the settled course and order of
Natural Causes, is an incommunicable Prerogative of God. His Eye only can
pierce the thick vail of futurity. He has an open unconfined prospect of all
things that were, are, and shall be. Such perfection of Knowledge transcends
Angelical Minds. It Is more easy for the Devil by an adventurous imitation to
counterfeit Miracles, than to give a clear and distinct prediction of things to
come that depend on free Agents. From hence it was that he gave responsals
ambiguously, to conceal his ignorance of future events, and left those who
consulted his Oracles dubious and hovering in what sense to understand them.
God alone could instruct the Prophets to foretell things at such a distance,
especially considering some of them are supernatural, and others contingent
from the wavering of second Causes. Now the several Prophecies of Jesus Christ
if united together, make such an entire description of him, that they seem
rather Historical Narratives of what is past, than Predictions of what was to
come. According to the Prophecies, he was born of a Virgin, a branch of the
almost extinguished Family of David, born in Bethlehem, ushered in by a
forerunner, meek, lowly, just, and a worker of Miracles. Therefore when John
the Baptist sent some of his Disciples to enquire whether he was the Messiah
that should come: Our Savior gave no direct Answer in words, but referred them
to his Works, that gave a full and real testimony concerning him, Go, tell John
the things which ye do hear and see; the Blind receive their Sight, the Lame
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, and the
Poor have the Gospel preached to them: That comparing his Miraculous Operations
for the recovery of humane Bodies, with the Prophecies, there being a perfect
Agreement between them, and both undoubtedly from God, They might by that clear
and certain Caracter acknowledge him to be the Promised Messiah. It Is an
Observation of St. Austin, That the Son of God Praevidens Dominus Jesus impios
quosdam futuros, qui miraculis ejus calumnientur, Magicis artibus tribuendo,
Prophetas ante praemisit. Numquid si Magus erat, and Magicis artibus fecit, ut
coleretur and mortuus, Magus erat antequam natus? O Homo mortue and vermiscendo
calumniose, Prophetas audi, Prop^^tas Lege. Tract. in Joan.
foreseeing the perverse Interpretations that his Enemies would make use of to
darken the luster of his Miracles, accusing him as a solemn Magician that
wrought by force of Enchantment, that such a false Persuasion might not
prevail, sent the Prophets before his coming into the World. From hence the
Saint argues to repress those impious calumnies: If by Magical Arts he did such
Wonders as to conciliate Divine Honor to him even since his Death, was he a
Magician before he was born? and did he know the succession of all things in
his Life before he lived, that by an impossible Miracle he predicted them to
Moses, David, Esaias, Daniel and others? Having thus argued, the Saint turns
himself to those Infidels, as Christ to the Pharisees, looking round about on
them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, and said, O
dead wretch, hear the Prophets.

But above all, His Death and Passion (the substance of the Gospel) is most
exquisitly drawn with the lines of his own Blood. Daniel Dan. 9. 26. Zech. 11.
12.
foretells the time; Zachary as if present at the execrable contract between
Judas and the Highpriests, tells us exactly the price of the Treason, and then
as if transported to Calvary, he saw his Side opened with the Spear, and notes
it in these words, they shall look on Psalm. 22.
him whom they have pierced. David, as if he had stood at the foot of the Cross
in the hour of his Sufferings, relates the manner of them in the Person of our
Crucified Redeemer; They peirced my Hands and my Feet: Then the disjoynting of
his Parts by the Torture; I may tell all my Bones, they look and stare upon me:
His hanging naked on the Cross, they part my Garments among them, and cast lots
upon my Vesture: the bitter draught they offered him, they gave me also Gall
for my Meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink: The blasphemous
derision of the Priests and People the spectators of his Death, All that see
me, laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying, He
trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he
delighted in him: His words spoken in the height of his distress, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? The Prophet Isaiah represents the Ignominy and
Torments of his Passion, I gave my back to the Isa. chap. 52, 53.
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my face
from shame and spitting: and by the eyes of his mind saw him crucified between
two Thieves; He was named with Transgressors: and as present at his most
affectionate dying prayer for his enemies, Father forgive them, they know not
what they do; observe, that he made intercession for Transgressors. Thus as
several Painters that would draw diverse Copies from the same excellent
Original, are intent to view its various Aspects, some directly, some on this
and the other side: so the Prophets, as if they had been the Spectators of his
cruel Sufferings, copied from the life, every one that part that the Holy
Spirit assigned to them. Now how was it possible, if not instructed by
Omniscience, that being so distant in time and place, and so long before the
Accomplishment, they should concur in such an exact description of what should
befall the Messiah? Men are not Prophets by the light of Reason: as Nature is
not subjected to their power to work Miracles, neither is Futurity open to
their view, to compose an History of things to come. The Death of Christ
depended on several Causes; Men, Devils, and God himself concurred for diverse
Ends in the same Event. The two prime Conspirators against his Life, Lucifer
and Caiphas, were moved both from Reasons of State to secure their own. The
Devil to maintain his cruel Empire which for so many Ages he had usurped in the
World. For our Savior having with Authority cast out Legions of his ministering
Spirits from those who were miserably possessed by them, he was in fear of losing
his Power. Besides, he foresaw that if Christ were the Son of God, the killing
of him would bring such a crimson guilt upon the Jews, that no less punishment
than their Rejection would follow: And so God should lose his peculiar People.
Caiaphas excited the Council to devote him as a Sacrifice to preserve their
Nation from ruin: for their safety depending on their homage to the Romans, to
prevent the jealousies that might arise by the fame of his mighty Works, and by
the Peoples attendance on him, that were fed by his Miracles, they concluded on
it as a necessary expedient, that Christ should die, and all suspicions be
removed with him. Thus Men and Devils were the instruments, but God appointed
that great Event. The storm fell from Heaven upon Him for our Sins. It Is
therefore expressly said, He was delivered by the determinate Counsel and
foreknowledge of God; who overruled the train of disorders, the work of their
cruel malice, for contrary ends than were designed by them: For the Devils were
cast out of their Kingdom, the Jews deprived of their Liberty, and the Kingdom
of Christ established for ever. Now who could read in the Mind of God his free
Decrees? even the Angels of Light that always see his face, cannot without a
revelation of them. None but the Spirit that searches the deep things of God,
could make the discovery? And who could foresee that the Messiah so often
promised to the Jews, so impatiently expected, and ardently desired, should be
so fiercely rejected by them? that his Death should be the effect as of his own
love, so of their hatred? None but God to whom all the periods of time are
equally present, and who is more intimate with the Counsels and Passions of Men
than their own Souls are, could predict it. He communicated some rays of his
Prescience to holy Men, who foretold that obscurest Contingency. From hence it
follows that the clear Testimonies of the Prophets exactly fulfilled in Jesus
Christ, are an unanswerable demonstration that He was the expected Deliverer to
restore the World.

2. The universal and irreparable Destruction of the State of the Jews,
foretold as the just punishment of their rejecting the Messiah, is another
illustrious proof of the Divinity of his Person and Doctrine.

To represent all the Characters of that Vengeance as they are set down by
Josephus, an Eyewitness and Historian of it, would lengthen this Discourse
beyond the limits intended. It is sufficient to observe,

1. That all the severe Scourges of God met in a direful conjunction against
them. The most affrighting Prodigies were his forerunners; A flaming-Sword
brandished in the Heavens, and Monsters born on the Earth: And War, Famine,
Pestilence, and Fire were his Attendants. Those who escaped the Sword were
consumed by Famine; and those who were preserved from cruel War and Famine,
were swept away by the Pestilence, or devoured by the merciless Flames.
Wherever they turned their eyes, Death in terrible shapes appeared.

2. All these Judgments were inflicted at once upon them in the heaviest
degrees. The Sword never made a greater destruction of Men than in Jerusalem:
here were Rivers of Blood, there Mountains of Carcasses. In some places nothing
but silence and horror amongst the dead, in others the cries and groans of the
dying. Innumerable were massacred by the rage of Sedition amongst themselves.
And when the mild Conqueror would have spared them, yet by an unparalled
fierceness they would rather perish in an obstinate resistance. The Famine was
so extreme, as compelled even tender Mothers to eat the flesh of their
miserable Children. The Fire consumed the City from one end to the other,
without leaving any part entire. The Temple, the Sanctuary of Religion, and
Image of Heaven, where God so long had dwelt, had been served and praised, and
rendered his Oracles, was not exempted from the fury of the Fire.

3. Their Calamity was extreme and irreparable. The first Desolation by the
Chaldeans, so compassionately recorded by Jeremiah, was not comparable in the
degrees and continuance to this second by the Romans, of which CHRIST himself
was the Chief Mourner, and made lamentation. Then they were transported
together, and not to a very rigorous nor perpetual servitude in Babylon. After
seventy years they recovered their Liberty, and were restored to their Native
Land. But in the last, the Captives were dispersed among diverse People; a sad
Prognostic that they should never be joined again in one Society. The Ruins
of the Nation were so great, that the pieces of it are scattered all over the
World. Where ever a Jew is found, there is a stone of ruined Jerusalem never to
be rebuilt. In short, that wretched Nation is rent into innumerable parts, and
exposed to the contempt and hatred of all. As the Body of a Traitor is
quartered, and the parts hung up in several places of public view, to signify
the horror of his Crimes in the severity of his Punishment: God has taken away
all the marks of his Alliance with them. No distinction of their Tribes remain,
no observance of their legal Ceremonies, no Priests, no Altars, no Sacrifices,
no Prophets nor Miracles; in short, there is no true Worship among them, no God
but angry and revenging their bloody impieties. And which is most worthy of
consideration, the Romans that conquered them have lost their Empire, and the
Nations which were subdued by their Arms, have recovered their Liberty: But the
Jews after sixteen hundred years are still miserable. Now is not this Judgment
of God upon them a dreadful proof of the extremity of their Wickedness in
crucifying JESUS CHRIST, and that consequently he was, as he declared himself
to be, the Son of God, and that his Office and Doctrine were from Heaven. Never
before did the Wrath of God break forth in such a fierce manner against a
sinful Nation. Therefore it is represented under the Image of the final Doom,
when Justice armed with flames shall devour the Ungodly, and the whole World
become a Theater of Terrors. And never was any other Nation guilty of such an
high provocation: for the Son of God descended but once among Men to be
personally crucified. The singularity of the punishment is a visible
instructive sign of their transcendent Crime. Immediately upon their
pronouncing the capital Sentence against him on Earth, their utter Ruin was
pronounced in Heaven. And the execution of the Sentence was deferred no longer,
but till the Elect of that People were brought in, and by the Preaching and
excellent Miracles of the Apostles, the Resurrection of Christ, and the truth
of the Gospel were confirmed, and thereby a beginning and form given to the new
Christian Church. Now they have written on their foreheads in very legible
characters, the Fatal Curse which their Fathers pronounced concerning Jesus
Christ, His Blood be on Us, and our Children. When with indignation for their
Idolatry, broke the Tables of the Law, God reestablish'd them, but when for a
greater guilt God himself broke them, there is no possible Redintegration.

If it be said, that it is not necessary to attribute this Ruin of the Jews to
the particular Vengeance of God, but only to the Instability of humane things,
wherein such disastrous Revolutions sometimes happen.

I answer, That although Divine Justice was so visible in their astonishing
Destruction, that Philost. vit. Apoll. lib. 6.
Titus himself refused a Triumphal-Crown after his complete Victory, declaring
that he was but the Instrument of God's Anger, who was the Invisible Emperor in
that bloody Expedition; yet to force an acknowledgment of it from all that are
not wilfully blind, it was foretold when the Jews were in peace, and their
killing the Messiah specified, as the Meritorious Cause wherein that terrible
Effect was included: Thus our Savior in the Parable of the Husbandmen and
Vineyard, after they had put to death the Master's Son, he adds, What shall
therefore the Lord of the Vineyard do? He will come and destroy the Husbandmen,
and give the Vineyard to others. And upon his drawing near to the City of
Jerusalem, he wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from
thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall cast a
Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side, and
shall lay thee even with the Ground, and shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another; because thou knew not the time of thy Visitation. This was also
foretold by Moses in all the terrible Circumstances: The Lord shall bring a
Nation against thee from far, from the Deuteronomy. 28.
end of the Earth, as swift as the Eagle flies; a Nation whose Tongue thou
shall not understand; a Nation of fierce countenance, which shall not regard
the person of the old, nor show favor to the young: and he shall eat the fruit
of thy Cattle, and the fruit of thy Land, until thou be destroyed; which also
shall not leave thee either Corn, Wine, or Oil, or the increase of thy Kine, or
flocks of thy Sheep, until he have destroyed thee: And he shall besiege thee in
all thy Gates throughout all thy Land which the Lord thy God has given thee,
in the Siege, and in the straitness wherewith thine Enemies shall distress
thee. Such was the Threatening, and the Event was correspondent in all the
degrees of misery. Which as it demonstrates the truth of the Prophecy, so it
may instruct us how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living
God.

3. The converting of the Gentile World to the saving Knowledge of God by the
Messiah was foretold in the Scriptures. The beams of this glorious Truth were
gradually dispensed to the Israelites as their weak understandings could
sustain it. When the Covenant was made with Abraham God declared in express
terms, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the World be blessed. That Seed was
the Messiah, not the people of the Jews descended from Abraham: for they were
so far from being a universal Blessing to the World, that on the contrary, they
vainly presumed that God for their sakes despised the rest of Mankind. And
indeed before the coming of Christ they were an enclosed Garden, the peculiar
People of God, and without the compass of Judea Sin reigned absolutely and
universally. Now that Promise clearly signifies, that the Favor and Blessing
of God that he conferred upon Abraham in making known to him his Will, and
promising to be his God, and of his Posterity, should one day be extended to
all Nations, by calling them to his Knowledge and Service. To this agrees the
Prophecy of Jacob: The Scepter shall not depart from Juda, nor the Lawgiver
Genesis 49. 10.
from between his feet, till Shilo come, and to him shall the gathering of the
People be: that is, the Gentiles shall be converted from their Idols to the
true God by the Messiah, whom the Jews acknowledge to be signified by that
Title. And Moses introduces God as complaining of the Idolatry and Ingratitude
of the Jews, and declaring They have moved me to jealousy with that which is
not God, they have provoked me to Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
anger with their vanities, and I will move them to jealousy with those which
are not a People, and I will provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation. The
external Covenant between God and his People is represented by the union of
Marriage, to signify the Duty they owe to God, the highest honor, the most
ardent affections, and the benefits they receive from him. Therefore when the
Jews gave Divine Adoration, the highest respects of Religion, to Idols, they
provoked God to jealousy; and he threatens he would break his Alliance with
them, and give his Heart and Love to those which were not a People; And by the
Law of Counter-Passion they should be provoked to Jealousy. It Is very visible
these expressions signify the calling of the Gentiles. And David by the same
Inspiration, in many Psalms celebrates the Kingdom of the Messiah. In Psalm. 22.
he is introduced, speaking, My praise shall be of thee in the great
Congregation; all the ends of the World shall remember, and turn unto the Lord;
all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee. And in the 67 Psalm.
God be merciful to us, and blessus, and cause his Face to shine upon us. Selah.
That thy way may be known upon Earth, and thy saving health among all Nations.
Let the people praise thee O God, let all the people praise thee. The Prophet
Esaias in his Revelations clearly speaks of the great design of God to bring the
Gentiles to his service. Thus in the second Chapter it is prophesied; And it
shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords House shall
be established in the tops of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the
Hills. And many People shall go and say, Come ye, let us go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the Lord, and the
Sword of the Lord out of Jerusalem.

And among all the rest none is more clear and express than what is recorded in
Isa. 49. There first the Messiah is represented as declaring his Commission
from God to go to the People of Israel; The Lord has called me from the womb,
from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my Name, and he said unto
me, Thou art my Servant, in whom I will be glorified. And after complains of
the obstinacy of the ungrateful Synagogue; Then I said, I have labored in
vain, I have spent my strength for naught and in vain, yet surely my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with God. And immediately after it is added, And
now says the Lord that formed me from the Womb to be his Servant, to bring
Jacob again to him, though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said, it is a
light thing that thou should be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth. This
Oracle is precise and full; for it speaks of the Nations in opposition to the
Tribes of Israel, and directly foretells that the Jews would neglect the
instructions of the Messiah, and that upon their Infidelity God would by the
Messiah give saving knowledge to all Nations. And in the same sense he speaks
in the 54th Chapter: Sing, O Barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into
singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with Child: for more are the
Children of the desolate than of the married, says the Lord. Who is the
desolate and barren, but the Gentiles without God in the World, whiles the Jews
were honored and blessed in the Mystical Marriage with him? And who are the
Children of the forsaken that should be far more numerous than those of the
married, but the Believers of the Christian Church, in opposition to the Jewish
Church? And the other succeeding Prophets concur in this prediction. Malachy
the last speaks of it in such express terms, as are capable to convince any
that does not wilfully renounce the use of his Eyes and Understanding. After
God is introduced rejecting the Jews, and their Temple Service; I have no
pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an Offering at
your hands. He adds, to signify the calling of a new Church, for from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among
the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered to my Name, and a
pure Offering, for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of
Hosts. Thus that great wonder was clearly foretold by the Prophets, and as a
work to be performed by the glorious Power of God. And accordingly it is
accomplished. For who but God could have inspired the Apostles to undertake an
Enterprise so contrary to Humane Prudence, being equally dangerous and
impossible? And who else could have made it successful beyond all imagination?
When the Pride of Pharaoh was humbled, and his Strength broken by the most
despicable creatures, even the Magicians were compelled to acknowledge it to be
the Finger of God: but his Arm was revealed when the Spiritual Pharaoh with all
his Powers of Darkness were overcome by such weak Instruments. What furious
Winds from all parts of the World conspired to extinguish the first springing
Light of the Gospel? The Heathen Emperors destroyed innumerable Persons,
presuming to drown the Memory of Christ in the Blood of the Christians. But
such were the Faith and Love of Believers of all conditions to their Crucified
Redeemer, that with the same joy they ran to suffer the most terrible
punishments, as if they had been to receive Crowns. In vain the strongest
Combinations were made against the Truth. For the knowledge of the only true
God, and his incarnate Son Jesus Christ, overcame Impiety with all its Idols,
and Ignorance with all its numerous Masters. What is become of all the Heathen
Deities, so honored, so feared, so obstinately defended? Where are their
Altars, their Statues, their Sacrilegious Priests and Sacrifices? They are
buried in the ruins of their own Temples, in the darkness of eternal oblivion.
Where are all the Sects of Philosophers, the Platonists, the Peripateticks, the
Stoics, the Epicureans, and the rest that filled Greece with their Fame, and
so many Volumes with their Fancies and Error? Like a Torrent that rouls down
with great noise from the top of a Mountain; so for a time the Speculations of
their lofty Minds poured along in a flood of swelling froathy Eloquence; but
now (and for how many Ages since?) the very channel is dried up wherein they
ran, so that scarce any visible ruins remain in Athens it self of the Schools
where they taught. The greatest among them, (...) Chrysostom. de laad. Paul 4.
Plato, adorned with the title of Divine, could never see his Commonwealth,
framed by him with so much study, to be established in one City. Whereas if we
consider the Gospel of Christ, it is hard to determine whether the Doctrine be
more simple, or the (...) Ibid.
Apostles the first Masters of it to outward appearance; Yet without Learning
or humane strength, in a short space they triumphed over the Eloquence of the
Greeks, the Power of the Romans, the Rage of Barbarous Nations. They abrogated
Laws, changed Customs, and renewed the face of the World. In this the
Prophetic Parable was fulfilled, The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the
dispensation of the Gospel, is like to a grain of Mustardseed; one of the
smallest grains, but of that spirit and quality that it suddenly springs up and
spreads abroad.

This happy and stupendous success of the Disciples of Jesus Christ, considered
in it self, is an unanswerable proof that the Christian Religion came from
Heaven. For it was only possible to the Divine Power. It Is no wonder the
Religion of Mahomet extended and established its Conquests in many Countries:
For that Seducer persuaded the barbarous People by force of Arms, they must be
his Disciples or Slaves. And can the Mind form a clear Judgment, or the Will
make a free Choice, when under a tyrannous necessity of Compliance, or losing
all the Comforts of Life? Can Violence and Cruelty produce a Rational Faith?
That may force them to a counterfeit compliance, but cannot make Men sincerely
believe; it is apt to breed Form without, and Atheism within. Now that a
Persecuted Religion should live and flourish in the midst of flames, is as
truly admirable as if a little Stream should pass through an Arm of the Ocean,
retaining its Freshness and Purity in the midst of Salt and Turbid Waters. That
when the Minds of Men were prepossest with inveterate Opinions contrary to its
supernatural Mysteries, and their Wills overruled by Carnal Affections utterly
averse from its Holy Precepts, the World was captived to the belief and
obedience of it, is the most noble effect of Omnipotence. For other Miracles,
though above the Laws of Nature, yet were on the lower order of creatures
without life and sense; but this internal Miracle was wrought on the Minds and
Hearts of Men. To raise the Dead, to calm a Storm, to suspend the force of
Fire, to change Waters into Blood, is not so glorious a work as the converting
Rebellious Souls to God, and making them a willing People to his holy Laws. And
if we further consider the Prophecies so many Ages before concerning it, and
observe the Harmony betwixt the Works and Word of God, there results a
Demonstration as clear and strong as is possible. The Prediction and
Accomplishment are equally divine. The success justifies the truth of the
Prophecy, and the truth of the Prophecy justifies the Divinity of the Christian
Religion. For by the Apostles and their Successors the Heathens were turned
from Idols, to the Service of one God the Creator of the World: which was
foretold by the Prophets, not only as a thing that should arrive, but to be
performed by the Power of God. To ascribe then this glorious Work to humane
Artifice, as if his Providence had been prevented by others, from doing that
that he promised should be done by his own Power, is so directly contrary to
his Wisdom and his Truth, that common Reason abhors the thoughts of it.
Therefore the Christian Religion is Divine, having God for its Author. Thus the
Truth of the Gospel is victorious over the Jewish, or the profane Infidel.

It may be argued against the Jews, that their God foretold his Messiah should
convert the Nations. No other but one authorized from above could do it. Jesus
Christ has done it, therefore he is the Messiah. And consequently they are
either blind with prejudice, or maliciously deny the known truth. To profane
Infidels it may be urged, none but the Divine Providence could foretell so great
and mavelous a change of the World, none but the Divine Power could effect
it, therefore 'twas the true God that made the project and event so exactly to
correspond in all things

Add further, that by comparing the Prophecies of Christ and his Kingdom with
their accomplishment, the two sorts of enemies against the Gospel, are made
useful to convince one another. The Pagans by the Jews, that these things were
foretold, the Jews by the Pagans, that these things were fulfilled. Aliquando
Pagani faciunt nobis hujusmodi quaestionem, cum vident quae scripta sunt sic
impleri, ut negari omnino non possint. Audent, ut dicant videstis ita fieri,
and tanquam praedicta sint, conscripsistis. Sermon. 67. Diverse.
St. Austin relates that the Heathens seeing the exact agreement between the
Prophecies in the Old Testament so clear in words, and their accomplishment in
the New so clear in the Effects, had nothing to reply, but that they were
written after the things were done, and feigned to be Predictions of ancient
date. As Virgil weaving Fables of Aeneas, feigned him to be in the Elisian
Fields, and to receive from Anchises a Prediction of his Descendents in a long
succession and order of Men and Times; which was the story of what was actually
past when he wrote it. In answer to this pretense, he breaks out with wonder
and joy, O Gloria Regis nostri! the Cause is gained, and the Victory of Truth
could not be more glorious. For whereas the many Nations in Europe, Asia,
Africa, subdued by the Arms of the Romans, were compelled to observe the Rites
of their Religion: The Jews only were permitted to enjoy their Sacred Books,
and Sparsi sunt ubique Judaei, portantes codices, quibus Christus praedicatur.
Si enim in uno loco essent terrarum, non adjuvarent testimonio praedicationem
Evangelii quae fructificat toto orb terrarum. Sermon. 67. Div. Ambos inde
convinco. Judaeum, quia id prophetatum, et impletum Ego cognovi: Paganu^, quia
ego hac non convici.
their own Worship, and were dispersed into all Countries. And thus by the
admirable Counsel of God, they give credit to the Gospel among the Gentiles.
For if we consider the reverence they bore to the Writings of the Prophets,
that with the greatest care they have preserved them as the most precious
Inheritance left by their Fathers, and their mortal hatred of Jesus Christ and
his Gospel, that willingly they would spend their Blood to deface the Memorials
of it, it is an invincible Argument that the Predictions concerning the state
of the Christian Church recorded in their Scriptures, are sincerely delivered,
and of Divine Authority. This their Malice is an advantage to the Faith of the
Gospel, and by constraint they are the great Confirmers of it. This is
sufficient to reduce the Heathens to silence and confusion. And the Pagan being
convinced by the Books of the Jews, the Jew may be convinced by the Testimony
of the Pagans: for if the Records so jealously kept by that Nation were from
Divine Inspiration, if they contain Ancient Prophecies which the Heathens see
verified in the Gospel and the Christian Church, why do not the Jews
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the promised Messiah? If the Vail were not taken
from Moses's face, and laid on their hearts, they must clearly see that the
Light of the Gentiles is the Glory of Israel. It Is equally unreasonable to
doubt with the Atheist that the Messiah was ever promised, or to believe with
the Jews he is yet to come.

CHAP. V.
The Testimony produced by St. John for the proof of Christianity, briefly
considered. The Witness from Heaven, the Father, Word and Spirit; The Witnesses
on Earth, the Spirit, Water and Blood, conspire in declaring JESUS CHRIST to be
the Son of God, and Savior of Men. An Answer to Objections against the
Doctrines of the Trinity, the Divine Incarnation, and the mean State and
Sufferings of the Son of God in the World. The Conclusion. The Gospel so
proved, deserves our firmest Assent and Adherence to its Doctrines. Carnal or
spiritual Lusts hinder the belief of it. It sets before us the most powerful
Motives to love God. We are obliged by the strongest Reasons to obey its
Precepts.

THe Sum of all that has been said, is comprised in the Testimony that St. John
produces to prove that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Redeemer of the
World. This I will briefly open: There are three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. And there
are three that bear witness in Earth, The Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood,
and these three agree in one. All the Divinity gave testimony of this important
Truth. The Father not only by the Miracles wrought by his Power to confirm the
Mission of Christ, but (which is here principally intended) by a voice from
Heaven: First at his Baptism, This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. And at his Transfiguration before some of his Disciples, a Shining
Cloud, the sign of the Divine Presence, encompast them, and a voice came forth
of the Cloud, This is my well beloved Son, hear him. Upon this glorious Voice
they were struck with such an impression of fear that they fell on their faces.
And when our Savior near his Passion prayed, Father glorify thy Name, a voice
came from Heaven, I have glorified it, and will glorify it. Now can there
remain any doubt after such an high attestation from the most Sovereign
Authority?

The Son also, besides the perfect holiness of his life, the exquisite Wisdom
of his Doctrine, the Wonders of his Works, his Resurrection from the dead, that
were authentic proofs of his Celestial Person and Calling, after his Ascension
gloriously appeared from Heaven in diverse Visions to the Preachers of his
Gospel. To Saul in his Journey to Damascus, calling to him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks. This is an
unexceptionable testimony that he is the Son of God, being risen from the dead,
and returned to Heaven from whence he thus discovered himself. Now that this
was real and no fantastic illusion is evident by the marvelous effects of it.
Those who were companions in the journey were seized with great terror, and
himself struck blind by the overpowering splendour of the Apparition. But
especially the effects of it upon his Soul are convincing, who it was that
spoke to him. For Saul was by Sect a Pharisee, that of all others most
passionately adhered to the Jewish Religion: by Temper hot and violent, by
Profession a persecutor of the Christians. One that breathed forth Threatening
and Slaughter, that excited the Fury of the Highpriests, solicited their
Cruelty. In short, a fierce spirit that envied Nero the title of the first
Persecutor of the Church. Yet this Man by this Vision and Voice from Heaven, of
a furious Persecutor in an instant became a zealous Apostle, of a Wolf became a
Pastor. He presently expressed his entire submission, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? There is nothing so hard to do, nothing so dreadful to suffer, but I
will readily undertake for thine honor, and the propagating thy Truth. Now
from whence came this Change so strange, so new, in a person confirmed in the
opposite party? from whence this resignation of will so entire and perfect, so
unexpected and sudden? What gave him courage to contradict to their faces the
Highpriests, whose instrument he was, and declare that Jesus whom they called
a Deceiver, was the Son of God, and their Judge? What animated him to appear
before Kings and Emperors, to testify this dangerous Truth? What made him
with unparalled activity, with the most ardent affections, propagate the
Gospel, and after a thousand perils by Sea and Land, a thousand disgraces and
injuries, at last to confirm the Faith of Christ with his Blood? It is
therefore past all contradiction that he had the greatest assurance that the
Son of God spoke to him.

Another Vision of the WORD from Heaven was to St. John, when he was pleased to
reveal to him the future state of his Church, its Combats and Victories: He
then appeared in a form expressive of his Majesty, Power, and Providence,
requisite for the ordering all the great Events that should befall it: And said,
I am the first and the last; I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold, I
live for ever, and have the Keys of Hell, and of Death: wherein he appropriates
to himself the incommunicable titles of the Deity; and then declares those two
astonishing Miracles, that the Prince of Life that had an Eternal Principle of
it in himself, was dead; and that one who had been dead, was alive. This Riddle
the Gospel unfolds; The Son of God was made Man, and by that admirable union
allied Eternity and Time, Life and Death together. As it is a common form of
speech, that a Man dies when the Body is deprived of Life, though the Soul be
immortal: So it was true, the Son of God died when his Body was crucified,
though he was incapable of the least diminution of his Divine life. And after
three days he rose by the Divine Power to enjoy an Immortal Life; And have the
Keys of Hell, and Death. The irresistible force of Death all Men must yield to,
and from the Grave there is no redemption by finite power. But Jesus Christ has
Sovereign Authority and Power to open the Grave, and raise the Dead to an happy
Immortality. This glorious Appearance made St. John to fall as dead at his
Feet, and could not recover himself, till assured by the reviving words of his
favor. The Spirit also appeared from Heaven to give Testimony concerning the
divine Person and Office of Christ: First, by descending as a Dove on him when
he was baptized. This was the completion of the Prophecy; The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, He has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, to
publish Deliverance to the Captives. And in the second of the Acts the Spirit
descended in the form of Fiery Tongues upon the Apostles, to qualify them for
preaching the Gospel to the World: And it is worthy of observation, that the
Apostles were before this very defective in Wisdom and Courage, so that their
Divine Master, though Goodness it self, yet taxed them for their stupidity, and
in his Sufferings they all forsook him. But after the effusion of the Spirit
upon them, they were endowed with that admirable Wisdom and Resolution, that
nothing could gainsay and overcome. They presently spoke in various Languages
the things concerning Jesus Christ, that the World was astonished, and many
converted by this Testimony from God, for the honor of our Savior, and others
confounded in their obstinacy. Now since this miraculous descent of the Spirit
was to ratify the Promise that he made to them, If I go away, I will send to
you another Comforter: What more clear and valuable Testimony can we have that
Jesus Christ is the Savior of the World? If Infidelity should reply, If we had
heard these Voices, and seen those glorious Visions, we should be convinced;
but what assurance have we there is no deceit in these Relations? I answer,
There never was clearer Grounds of the belief of any thing done without the
compass of our own senses, than of what the Apostles testify, as has been
evidently proved before. And certainly as those who saw and heard those things,
were by the Divine Characters in the external Objects, and by their efficacy on
their Spirits, fully persuaded they were not deceived; so we have as strong
proofs that they did not deceive us in their Reports.

I shall briefly consider the other Testimonies. And there are Three that bear
witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood; and these Three
agree in one. The Spirit is to be considered in two different manners in the
Testimonies attributed to him, either in respect of those Representations by a
Dove and Fiery Tongues, or in respect of his Virtues and Influences
communicated to the Christian Church: The first was his Testimony from Heaven;
The second his Testimony on Earth. And these were his Extraordinary Gifts, so
liberally dispensed at the first preaching of the Gospel: To one was given by
the Spirit the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, to another
Faith; that is, extraordinary confidence in the Divine Power, for the producing
Miraculous Effects; to another the Gift of Healing, to another the working of
Miracles, to another Prophecy, to another Discerning of Spirits, to another
diverse kinds of Tongues, to another the Interpretation of Tongues. Now because
these Operations more eminently declare the Presence and Power of the Spirit
than his ordinary Graces, they are called by that name. For understanding the
second Witness, the Water, two things are observable:

1. That in the Rituals of Moses's, frequent Washings, were enjoined, for the
purifying of the Jews from Legal Pollutions contracted by them. And as those
Corporal Stains were Resemblances of the vicious habits of the mind; so the
cleansing by Water was typical of sanctifying Grace that purifies the heart.
And for this Reason under the New Covenant to represent the sanctification of
Christians by an outward sign, Baptism in Water was appointed.

2. The Apostle John in the Narrative of the Sufferings of Christ, tells us
that a Soldier pierced his Side with a Spear, so that Blood and Water came
out. This is not recited by S. John merely as a circumstance of the History, or
as a certain proof of his Death, but the following words [ He that saw this,
testifies it, and his Testimony is worthy of belief; and he knows that he says
true, that you may believe] declare it to be of singular consequence. And
accordingly he says, that our Savior came by Water and Blood, with respect to
that which was done at his Crucifixion, which was so ordered by Divine Wisdom
for high ends: that is, the Water issuing out of his Side, was a fit Emblem of
that Sanctifying Grace that is given to all that have Communion with him in his
Death.

3. For the Testimony of the Blood, it is also to be observed, that by the
Mosaic Institution daily Sacrifices were offered up, and a most solemn one, by
the High Priest in the day of Atonement, to expiate the guilt of Ceremonial
Uncleanness, and to restore those who for that were excluded from external
Communion with God in the Sanctuary. Now as that legal guilt arising from those
outward pollutions, and the separation of those who were so polluted, from the
Service of God, was a representation of the Moral Guilt and Punishment that
follows the vicious habits and actions of Men; so the shedding the Blood of the
Sacrifice and Offering, was typical of the true Propitiation that was to be
made by the Blood of Christ. And this is peculiarly remarked by the Apostle,
that Jesus came not only by Water, but by Water and Blood; and it is the Spirit
that testifies of it, and the Spirit is the Truth. By which we must understand
something distinct from the former, i. e. that the flowing of his Blood
signified the reconciling efficacy of his Death, by satisfying Divine Justice,
and consequently the remission of Sins given to those who believe in him. Now
briefly, to show the force of their conspiring Testimony that Jesus is the Son
of God and our Redeemer, These things may be considered absolutely in
themselves, or as the accomplishment of the Prophecies concerning the Messiah.
In the last respect they affor'd us a great assurance of this Truth. For all
was expressly foretold. And it shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I
will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters
shall prophecy, and your young Men shall see Visions, and your old Men shall
dream Dreams: And on my Servants and Hand-Maidens I will pour out in those
days of my Spirit, and they shall prophecy. This promise was universally
acknowledged to refer to the coming of the Messiah. For that of Water, (that
is, Sanctification) not only the washing under the Law were figures of it, but
'twas also clearly prophesied of in many places, and most expressly in Ezekiel,
I will sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
filthiness will I cleanse you. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new
Spirit will I put within you, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my Statutes. And for the third Testimony, besides that the
typical Blood of the Messiah ran down from all the Sacrifices, it was also
foretold expressly by Esaiah what his Sufferings should be, and the Benefits
accruing from them.

Now if we compare the Oracle with the event, who can justly doubt that the
Messiah is come? But if we consider the things themselves they afford an
uncontrollable Testimony of Christ's Divine Mission. Compare the Primitive
Church either with the Jews or the Gentiles, and see the difference between
them. The Spirit that was communicated but as it were in a few drops to the
Jews, after the Ascension of Christ fell in a main shower upon the Christian
Church, enriching them with supernatural gifts: some favored with Revelations
of Sublime Truths, above the discovery of the human Understanding; some
foretelling things to come that were beyond the discovery of the most sharp
sighted Reason; some speaking diverse Languages wherein they had never been
instructed; some having such an extraordinary Faith in the Divine Power and
Goodness, that innumerable Miracles were done by them in the name of Christ. If
we look into the state of the Gentiles, how thick and prodigious was the
darkness that overspread that Chaos of Impiety? In the Roman Empire, that
comprised the flower of Wit and Learning, what foolish and extravagant opinions
of the Deity were commonly received? What Idolatries, what Impurities, what
Abominations were freely practiced? But by the preaching of the Gospel how
clearly were the minds of Men instructed in the true Knowledge of God? And what
a change was made in their Lives' The World that was as a barren Desert, was
suddenly changed into a Paradise, fruitful in all good works. Innocence,
Humility, Purity, Justice, Charity, Love to God, Resignation to his Will, were
eminently visible in all Nations, and all sorts of persons that were converted
to the Faith of Christ. Now who caused such a mavelous and holy Revolution in
the World but God? What less than a Divine Power could raise Men above Sense,
and make them victorious over the Lusts of corrupt Nature, fortified by Custom,
a second Nature? Is it conceivable, supposing the Doctrine of Christ were not
from Heaven, that it should produce such admirable Effects? And is it
conceivable that God would adorn with all his Graces the Image of his own
Excellency, his most precious Benefits, those who did not honor him according
to his Will? Can there be found such astonishing Contrarieties joined together,
as the most impious Error and Depravation of the Mind, with the greatest
Purity and Rectitude of the Will and Affections? For if Jesus Christ were not
the Son of God, those who worshipped him were in a mortal Delusion.

The third Testimony the Apostle produces is the Blood: that is, Peace with God
and Conscience, the blessed Fruit of Justification by Faith in Christ. The
Heathen World was in a dark State of fears, or slept securely in the shadow of
Death. Some were in a Hectic Trembling, continually haunted with the Apparition
of their Sins, as so many Infernal Furies: Others, though guilty of most
fearful crimes, were secure from stupid Atheism: Others were quiet, from a
presumption cherished by Opinions unworthy of God, as if he would neglect his
own Glory to show Mercy to them. Now the Gospel to conquer the fears of
sensible afflicted Sinners, and to establish a lively hope in God's Mercy,
propounds a Means of Universal Sovereign Efficacy to reconcile him to us: The
most precious Blood of the Son of God offered up as a Sacrifice to expiate Sin.
This sprinkles all Nations, and in all Ages to the end of the World will be of
undecaying Virtue. This appeased all the unquiet Agitations of the Spirits of
Believers, and produced the Peace that passes understanding, a Joy unspeakable
and glorious* This delivered them from the fear of Death, under which the World
was so long in bondage. And it is worthy the observing, that no Principles of
Nature ever produced such a generous Contempt of Death, as the Christian
Religion did in the Professors of it. The Alexanders, Scipio's, and Caesar's had
trembled at the sight of these Savage Beasts that were let loose upon the
Martyrs, at the preparations of Cruelty to torment them. Whereas they regarded
them with tranquillity; nay with Joy, as the matter of their Triumph. This was
true Valor indeed, for the Confession of the most important Truth, and
superior to the Courage of those who were called Fulmina Belli, the most
Renowned Soldiers. For in a Battle, by Martial Sounds, by Violent Motions the
Spirits are fired, and Men scarce feel their Wounds, and are inconsiderate of
their danger. But the Martyrs had nothing to heighten their Courage, but in
cool blood deliberately and without alteration encountered that terrible Enemy.
Besides, Soldiers in the sharpest Conflicts have some hopes of Victory, or
else of a sudden and honorable Death, Aut cita Mors, aut Victoria laeta. And
he that rusheth into perils with a seeming bravery, when there is hopes of
escaping, has not resolution to look Death in the face when it is inevitable.
There is an eminent instance of this in a famous Captain of late memory, the
Duke Biron: none was more bold in fight; but when he was to receive the
Sentence of Death for his Crimes, none more disordered by fear: sometimes he
was in a rage against his Judges, and after his passion was evaporated, fell
into the other extremity, unmanly cries, complaints, and low submissions to
obtain favor. But the more than Heroic Constancy of the Martyrs contemned
Death in its nearest approaches, and most fearful pomp. Christian Religion has
often transformed the most tender Women and Children into Men, or rather into
Angels, making them suffer with joy, that which our Nature cannot see without
horror. It changed as it were Flesh and Blood into a Celestial substance,
insensible of Fire and Sword, and the most cruel Violences.

Now this unshaken Resolution in Christians encountering the last Enemy, was
from the lively sense of God's favor reconciled by the most pure and precious
Blood of his Son, and the hopes of everlasting happiness in his presence.

To conclude this Argument, it is to be observed there is no proof more proper
that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the World, than the joint testimony of the
Spirit, Water and Blood: For whereas Sin was the only cause of our Ruin, the
Office of our Savior is to repair that Ruin, and consequently he that
effectually does it, is to be acknowledged, believed, and embraced as our
Savior. Now the worst effects of Sin are the ignorance of the Mind, the
depravation of the Affections, and the terrors of Conscience from the
apprehensions of Vengeance. Therefore since the Gospel of Christ has brought
Celestial Light, Purity, and Peace into the World, it is an infallible proof
that He is the Redeemer of it. The Sun that visits the World with its
refreshing beams, has no clearer marks of the Divine Wisdom in making it, and
ordering its motions, than the Spiritual Light of the Gospel that irradiates
the minds of Men, before in deep darkness. The riches of the Earth in variety
of Fruits is not a more convincing Argument of the Divine Goodness, than to see
the Souls of Men that before were as dead earth, under the curse of Heaven, to
abound in all the fruits of Righteousness. The separating the Sea from the
Land, and setting bounds to its impetuous Waves, is not a greater effect of
God's Power than the calming the tempests of an unquiet Conscience, and
establishing Tranquillity in it. And these Blessings we entirely owe to Jesus
Christ, in whose Name they are obtained, by whose Spirit they are conferred,
and for whose Glory they are designed.

Now what more is requisite to afford us satisfaction that JESUS CHRIST came
from God, and revealed his Will in order to our happiness? Can it be reasonably
expected that new Miracles should be wrought to satisfy every Sceptick that is
still unsatisfied? Indeed the fountain of them is not dried up, the Power of
God is not weakened, nor his Mercy lessened, but in extraordinary Cases, when
the Gospel is first preached to a Nation, it may be expected that to convert
them from Gentilism to the Christian Faith he will make himself known not only
by Word, but Power, in Supernatural Operations. But the vein of Miracles is not
still current in the Church, there being sufficient motives of Belief for the
conviction of all that are not obstinate, without the performing new. Must the
Son of God present himself to all Men in a visible Glory? Or must his Divine
Father give another Majestic Testimony from Heaven concerning him? If we have
not such sensible Evidence, we have as sure: The accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies is a permanent Miracle, a more certain proof to us than
that Oracular Revelation. For God spoke but once in that Voice, but he speaks
by the Prophets to the end of Time. That was more astonishing, but less
instructive to us than Prophecies, that are continually unfolded and verified
by Events.

Before I finish this Argument, I will briefly consider what is objected
against some Doctrines of the Gospel, viz. The Trinity, the Divine Incarnation,
the Mean state and Sufferings of the Son of God in the World. These Points have
been opposed by the Jews, and other Infidels, as mere Impossibilities, directly
contrary to the Reason of Mankind.

To this I answer; We must distinguish between what is incomprehensible to
Humane Reason, and what is repugnant to it; between the things which Reason
cannot perfectly understand how they can be, and the things which it perfectly
understands that they cannot be. Natural Light may not be able to discover the
being of some things, and the manner of their existence, which really are. But
what it sees to involve a contradiction, is absolutely impossible. Now there is
no Point in the whole complexion of the Christian Faith that is repugnant to
Reason. The unity and supreme equality of the Three Persons in the Godhead
transcends our conception, but Reason cannot prove it to be impossible. For the
Essence of God is not of the same condition with created Substances; so that
although in the whole compass of the Creatures there is no like instance, but
one Nature is always joined with one Subsistence, yet it does not follow that
the Divine Nature may not subsist in Three Persons. All the difficulty that is
pretended to be invincible is this; That the manner of it is incomprehensible.
And it is necessarily so; for it is impossible that what is Infinite should be
comprehended by a finite mind.

The Incarnation of the Son of God, wherein the Essence of Christianity
consists, is not contrary to Reason. Indeed it is impossible that the Divine
Nature should be substantially changed into the humane Nature, and God cease to
be God in becoming Man, but the Union of the Deity to the humane Nature is not
impossible. For what repugnance is there, either in respect of God, or the
Creature? Is Aug. Epist. 5 Volus. Demus Deu^ aliquid posse, quod nos fateamur
investigare non posse. In talibus rebus, tota ratio facti, est potentia
facientis.
it impossible that the Supreme Goodness should communicate it self in the
strictest degree of union to the Reasonable Creature, or is the Reasonable
Creature incapable to receive the highest Favor? This is a great Mystery; but
the Divine Omnipotence is not to be limited by our narrow thoughts. It Is most
reasonable to believe that God can do, what we cannot discover how it is
performed. Quare quicquam nobis insolitum est? quia naturam oculis non ratione
comprehendimus, nec cogitamus quid illa facere possit, sed tantum quid fecerit.
Nature Quaest. lib. 6.
Seneca prudently observes that extraordinary effects in Nature are
unaccountable to us, as to their immediate proper Causes, whilst we only
consider the usual Principles by which it works. Nay, in the most common works
of Nature how many things are so perceptible to Sense that none is so stupid as
to deny them, yet imperceptible to Reason as to the manner of their production?
Who understands the admirable conjunction of the Soul and Body in Man? how two
Metals of so precious and so base alloy, Gold and Lead, a Spirit and Matter,
the one celestial the other earthly, should so strictly combine, and
notwithstanding such diversity in their natures and properties, embrace with
such concord in their inclinations? Now if the sharpest Eye, fixed with the
greatest attention, cannot discern the manner of this Natural Union when the
thing is above all doubt, can there be any pretense to disbelieve Supernatural
Mysteries because we are not able to comprehend how they are effected?

3. There being infallible proofs that Jesus Christ was sent from God to make
known his compassionate Counsels for the Salvation of Man, the consequence is
clear and necessary, that the Doctrines of his Gospel are to be received,
though never so incomprehensible to the natural understanding. There is no
Demonstration more sure than the Principle of Faith, God has declared so,
therefore it is true. It Is injurious to his Honor to require any other proof of
his Word than his Word. It Is incomparably more certain that God cannot deceive
us, than that our Understandings are not deceived. Now what is the main subject
of the Gospel? It instructs us that the Word was God, and the Word was made
Flesh. Can there be a more plain Declaration who Jesus Christ is, that we may
conceive aright of his Natures, his Virtues, his Prerogatives and Merits? It is
not possible without violence to interpret the words otherwise than they
plainly signify, that a Divine Being assumed the Humane Nature, and was
God-Man. This was also declared by Jesus Christ. For when the Jews, supposing
him to be a mere Man, taxt him for the violation of the Sabbath, in his doing a
miraculous Cure on that day: he replied to their exception, My Father works
hitherto, and I work: that is, as God is not subject to the Law of the Sabbath,
but uninterruptedly does the Works of his merciful Providence; so I his Son
work in all times without limitation. This expression the Jews truly understood
to import no less than an equality with God, a Son being of the same Nature
with his Father, and therefore charged him with Blasphemy. Our Savior allows
their Interpretation, but vindicates it from Impiety by a further declaring his
Communion with God in his Will and Power, that he performed Divine Works; that
he might receive the same Divine Honor as the Father had. And shall we not
believe this Testimony that Jesus Christ gives of himself? Did not the Aut
forte qui verbum est significationem verbi ignoravit? et qui veritas est, loqui
vera nescivit? et qui sapientia est, in stultiloquio erravit? and qui virtus
est, in ea fuit infirmitate, ut non possit eloqui quae vellet intelligi? Hilar.
lib. 8. de Trinit.
WORD understand the meaning of his own Expressions? could Truth deceive? was
it possible for Wisdom to speak improperly? Was Power defective and unable to
declare what it would have us to understand? How unreasonable is it then to
object how can this be? What pride is it to rebel against the Divine
Revelation? what obstinacy to remain unsatisfied, unless we discover how terms
so distant in themselves, the highest Being, GOD, and the lowest in the Sphere
of Rational Beings, Man, should be so strictly united? How they should be so
intimately joined without confusion of Natures in one Person, that it is truly
said, God was humbled to the form of a Servant, and Man is raised to the
right hand of God. Here it is our duty to subject our noblest faculty the
Understanding to Divine Revelation. In the Doctrines of Faith as well as in the
disposures of Providence, it is sufficient to check presumptuous Curiosity, that
God is the Author.

I shall add one Consideration more: If Jesus Christ was not what he declared
himself to be, the Son of God, he was a most Impious Man. For it is Impiety in
the supreme degree, for any in the pure order of Creatures to assume Divine
Honor: But the quality of his Doctrine, and sanctity of his Life, infinitely
clear him from such a vile Charge. For is it conceivable that a Person guilty
of the highest even Sacrilegious Pride, should be an Instructor of the most
perfect Humility to the World? It Is the special Character of his Religion that
distinguishes it from all other Institutions, that it preserves the Divine
Glory entire that it makes the profoundest impressions in the hearts of Men of
their meanness and vanity, and inspires them with an humble sense of their
infinite distance from God. And for the holiness of his Life, I shall produce a
Testimony that can be liable to no exception; it is of Porphiry a Platonic
Philosopher, who excelled as in Learning and Eloquence, so in Malignity, the
most furious Enemies of Christianity; yet he was by irresistible evidence
compelled to acknowledge, That Jesus Christ was a most pious and Excellent
Person, and that after his Death he ascended into Heaven. And is it credible
that the same Person, whose Life was a glorious Example of Holiness and
Righteousness, should be guilty of the most transcendent Wickedness? It Is not
possible for an unprejudiced mind to entertain such a suspicion.

4. That the Son of God was here below in a mean state, that he was exposed to
the most cruel and ignominious death, if we consider the great end of his
condescending goodness, it will appear to be most worthy of him; and that there
is no contradiction in the things themselves, but in the perverse minds of
Infidels: For,

First, He was to redeem the World not in the way of Majesty, but by humble
Obedience, and Sufferings. Thus it was ordered by Divine Wisdom for the honor
of God's Attributes and Government. Now if he had appeared in sensible Glory,
the design of his coming had been frustrated: who would have dared to condemn
him to the infamous death of the Cross? who would have shed his Blood, the
price of our Redemption? And it is very observable that our Savior made no use
of his Supernatural Power, when the doing a Miracle before Herod would have
struck him with the reverence of him as a Divine Man, and might have preserved
him from Death. Nay, when the glittering Host of Heaven, all the Orders of
Angels were in Arms ready upon his least Call to have come swifter than
Lightning for his rescue, yet he meekly yielded himself up a bloody Sacrifice
to God, and an ignominious Spectacle to Men. For thus it became him to fulfill
all Righteousness.

Secondly; Another great End of his Coming was to found a Spiritual Eternal
Kingdom; He was constituted a new Adam, to regenerate Men to an holy blessed
Life, that were condemned in the first Adam to Death and Misery. Therefore his
Life was a continual exercise of Self-denial, a pattern of Innocence and
Patience, of doing good and suffering evil. Thus he convinces us that nothing
is valuable in God's account but Holiness. Thus by his own Example he instructs
us in the divine Philosophy, to despise the good and evil things here, in order
to our everlasting happiness. He ascended to Heaven by the way of sufferings,
and calls us to follow him. The fruit of Blessedness is ingrafted on the thorns
of Poverty and Persecution for his Namesake. The Laws of his Kingdom are
inscribed on the Body of his Cross, and must be copyed in the Hearts of his
Subjects. And for this Reason when the Apostles, (who after his Resurrection
had some relics of their carnal conceit, that the Kingdom of GOD should come
with observation for its external splendour) asked him, Lord, will thou at this
time restore the Kingdom of Israel? to raise their Thoughts and Affections
above Earthly things, he answered, The Holy Ghost shall come upon you, and ye
shall be Witnesses of me, both in Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and
unto the utmost ends of the Earth. Their preaching his Life and Death should be
attended with the power of the Spirit, to dispense a vigorous Influence into
the hearts of Men for his Imitation. And certainly his Example is of admirable
use and profit. For thus he sweetens and makes honorable those Virtues, the
exercise of which were very difficult and unpleasing either in respect of their
quality, being contrary to fleshly lusts, or as they expose to Contempt in the
opinion of the World. For who can refuse, or be ashamed to practice the most
severe Self-denial, when in that he is made a Copy of so Divine an Original as
the Son of God? Now considering what an influence his Afflicted state has to
procure Eternal Happiness for fallen Man, and to prepare Man for it, was it
unbecoming him to descend thus low? Is it unbecoming that God loves as God?
that as infinite Wisdom and Power appeared in the Creation, so Infinite Mercy
appears in our Redemption? What is more Divine than infinitely to exceed all
the Ideas we can frame of Perfect Love? To do greater things for his Enemies,
than Men are willing to do for their dearest Friends? and where Sin abounds
that Grace superabounds? Thus the Eye of Reason cleared by Revelation, sees
that the voluntary Humiliation of the Son of God for a time, is so far from
diminishing, that it exalts his Majesty. This is the great Argument and Motive
of the Adoration and solemn Praise that Reasonable Creatures shall for ever pay
unto him, wherein his derivative Glory consists.

From what has been discoursed we may see the just grounds of our firm Assent
and perfect Adherence to the Doctrine of the Gospel. There are not only
sufficient but abundant Motives to induce our belief, so that it is an extreme
Wonder that any to whom it is revealed, should not see the Truth so
illustriously visible. The only account of such Infidelity is given by the
Apostle: The God of this World has blinded the eyes of them which believe not,
lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine upon them. The love of some Lust fleshly or spiritual, render Men
averse from receiving it. The Mysteries of Godliness are not confined to the
speculative mind, but are for moral ends, to regulate our lives. From hence it
is that the cordial belief of them very much depends on the temper and
disposition of the Soul. The sincere humble Enquirer has an eminent advantage
in the discovery of the truth and spiritual excellencies of the Gospel, above
those who are overruled by corrupt habits. For the carnal heart either wholly
turns the mind from thinking on those most sacred and concerning objects, or
weakens its intention that it does not seriously and duly consider them. Men
will studiously apply themselves to secular Arts, and can discern the truth of
abstruse Mathematical Theorems, that are not distastful to their evil
affections; yet though the Principles of Christian Faith are as unquestionable
as the clearest Propositions in Geometry, they will not ponder those things
that may convince and persuade them to believe what is directly opposite to
their Lusts. Besides, as corrupt humors vitiate the palate, and make what is
pleasant bitter to the taste; so vicious desires darken and deprave the mind,
and incline it to judge of Doctrines to be true or false as they are favorable
or disagreeing to them. Carnal persons fortify every Objection that may render
the Mysteries of Godliness unlikely and incredible, and will be partial for
Sensuality. Of this we have a great instance in the first rejection of the
Gospel. The Jews expected the Messiah would come with pompous Wonders, and
external Magnificence; that he would deliver them from the Roman Yoke, and
found an Universal Monarchy for them, and according to those carnal fancies
they would understand the Promises concerning him. Now though JESUS CHRIST
approved himself to be the Son of God, the true Messiah, by the Sanctity of his
Life, the Rectitude of his Doctrine, and the Divinity of his Miracles, yet for
the poverty and meanness of his Condition, being without any sensible show of
Greatness and Glory, they despised him as most unworthy that Divine Relation
and Office. Tho in him all the Characters of the Messiah were conspicuous, and
the Scriptures declare expressly, that the Messiah the Prince should be cut off,
but not for himself, but to make reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness: yet they were so prepossest with the Ideas of a
Terrene Felicity, that they would interpret all the Scriptures by that measure,
as if the Messiah should come into the World to repair no other ruins but of
their Temporal State and Liberty: Therefore they spoke of him with scornful
titles; as for this Fellow we know not from whence he is: And, is not this the
Carpenter? Shall the glorious Prophecies of the Messiah be accomplished in him?
Shall he have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the
Earth? Shall all Kings bow down before him, and all Nations serve him? There
was nothing to satisfy their sight in his outward appearance and Retinue, and
his Miraculous Condescension, so much below their expectations, was more
powerful to harden them in unbelief, than all his supernatural Operations to
induce them to believe in him. And as the Jews from their affection to Secular
things, were enemies to the Gospel; so the Heathen Philosophers from Spiritual
Pride: for they vainly affected the praise of Knowledge and Virtue, as the
fruit of their own mind, and the product of their own will. They did not
consider God as the Fountain of Truth; and whether the Ray of his Knowledge
comes directly and immediately into us, or by reflection from others, the glory
of it is entirely due to him. Besides, the great Mysteries of Godliness not
being suitable to their first Opinions, were rejected with disdain as foolish
Impossibilities. And in every Age since, even in the pale of the Church, there
are some secret Infidels that esteem the Gospel a Fable, and some who
peremtorily deny the fundamental Articles of Christianity. Those who are slaves
to their eyes and appetites will raise Clouds to obscure that Truth that
forbids their dear Lusts upon pain of Damnation. The pretended difficulty of
Belief, is but a thin transparent pretense, the difficulty of Practice is the
true cause of their rejecting the Gospel. They would not have the Precepts of
it to be their duty, and therefore are unwilling to acknowledge the Doctrines of
it to be true. And those who set up a Tribunal in their own Understandings to
which Divine Revelation must submit, will not believe what is above their
presumptuous Reason. But that the Soul exempt from passions and prejudice has
no just temptation to disbeleive the Christian Doctrine, is evident; in that so
many Persons in whom the concurrence of Wisdom and Virtue was equally
flourishing and excellent, after the most exact discussion, embraced it as the
Heavenly Truth. If there were falseness in its Principles, or weakness in its
Proof, how could it escape their discovery? And that they were sincere in their
belief is above all doubt; for they willingly sacrificed all that is valuable
and dear in this life for the profession of it. Now was it ever known that any
person would knowingly choose an Error so destructive? The Will seduced by
Sense embraces sometimes that that is condemned by Reason, but it never adheres
to those things that are contrary both to Reason and Sense. By this it appears
that Infidelity has no just plea from the insufficiency of the proofs of the
Christian Religion, which have fully satisfied the wisest, the most
considerate, and sincere part of Mankind. A corrupt Heart is the spring and
principle of the illusions of the mind in things that concern Salvation.

2. The Gospel propounds to us the most proper and powerful motives of love to
God. In the visible World there is a Representation so conspicuous and full of
his Divine Majesty, Power and Wisdom that formed and regulates all things, that
it is not possible but the attentive regarding of it, will make impressions of
reverence and fear, will raise our esteem and admiration. But those are dead
sentiments without Love. And that in the guilty Creature fearful of God's
Wrath, must be first excited by the hopes of his Pardoning Mercy. Now the Love
and Kindness of God our Savior appeared to Man in his Redemption, in the most
eminent manner. Though in that blessed Work the Divine Perfections are relucent
in various effects, Wisdom designed it, Power accomplished it, Holiness and
Righteousness was gloriously declared in it; yet, as it is applied to the
benefit of Man, it is the sole effect of Wise, Almighty, Holy, Tender Love.
Mercy softened God's Bowels, opened Heaven, sent down his Son to be one with us
in nature, that he might exchange his Merits and Blessedness for our guilt and
misery. Miraculous Love! to make his only begotten Son our Brother, to humble
him to the condition of a Servant, that we most unworthy to be his Servants
should be advanced to be his Children: Nay, to expose him to the death of a
Malefactor, equally ignominious and painful, that we Malefactors might obtain
Life and Glory. If ever Love deserved the title of Excess, it is this; for
though not without Reason, yet it is without all bounds and measure. It Is so far
above our thought, that it is hard to have a firm belief of it. What the
Psalmist speaks of the temporal Deliverance of the Church, is more justly
applicable to its Spiritual Eternal Deliverance. When the Lord turned again the
Captivity of Sion, we were like to them that dream. As if a poor man fancying
in a dream that he is a King, adorned with the Ensigns of Royalty, and between
hopes and fears should enquire of himself, Am I awake and in my right mind? Is
this Scepter, this Robe, this Crown real? Or, is it all the pleasant deceit of
Imagination? And how can we reflect upon the amazing Grace of God that brings
Salvation, but such thoughts will arise? Is it true that God did not spare his
most innocent and dear Son to absolve us guilty Rebels? Did he dye for his
Father's Enemies and his own? Unparalled Love! only to be fully conceived by
an infinite Understanding. That the Divine Father should seem to love us more
than his only begotten Son, in giving him up to death for us; that the Son of
God should love us more than his own Life, in dying to reconcile us to his
Father, were incredible, but for the Testimony of God himself. Who can resist
the sweet Violence, the powerful Attractives of this Love? How can any person
that has the use of Reason to consider this great Love, not be inflamed with
affection toward his Savior? How is it possible that these wide extremes
should be found united, The infinite Goodness of God, and the equal
unthankfulness of Men? that they hate and offend whom they are obliged by the
dearest titles to love and serve. Methinks such unnatural Ingratitude should
only be found in Hell; where despair of Redemption has blotted out in those
lost Souls the memory of the Love and Merits of the Redeemer. But that on Earth
where his most precious Blood was shed, and is applicable for the Salvation of
all that will receive him by Faith and Love, that here injuries are returned
for his inestimable Benefits, is the most enormous Impiety. What shall we
render unto him for our Evils which he has suffered, for his Paulin.
Benefits which he gives to us? All that we can endure for his sake, is not
comparable to one Thorn of his bleeding Crown. Let us return Love, that is so
infinitely due to him. Woe to us if we do not love him.

Consider further, that the same most free Love that gave the Redeemer for us,
has revealed him to us. For who could have imagined that the Son of God should
descend from his Throne in Heaven, and from the Bosom of his Father, into the
Womb of a Virgin Mother, and become Man, to save us by his Sufferings? Who
could have any hopes that the human nature, our low and heavy earth, should
ascend above the Heavens? The World by natural light knew no more of his coming
to recover it from misery, than it perceived when the same Word in the Creation
raised it from the Abyss of Nothing. This should make us most sensible of his
favor. But every one will pretend to love his Savior. Now that we may not
deceive our selves with a flashy Affection, the Rule of Trial is plain, Our
love to him must correspond in its kind and quality with his love to us. And
that was declared in doing and suffering what was requisite for our Salvation.
The precious Tree does not heal the Sore by its fragrancy, but must be wounded
to give it Sovereign Balm. Our Savior did not only express in words his
compassionate sense of our misery, that alone had been sufficient, but loved us
and washed us from our Sins in his Blood. After his Resurrection he showed his
pierced Hands and Side to the Disciples, not only the real proofs that he was
Jesus that suffered, but of his Love. They might see his Heart open and Hands
rent for them. And such a love is due to him. That which is only productive of
Leaves and Blosoms, of affectionate words of our Savior, but unfruitful in the
works of Holiness, may deceive Men by a fair appearance, but not his eye, who
judges of the truth and strength of our love to him by our keeping his
Commandments. In short, as an active Heat proceeds by an emanation from the
Fire; so a cheerful Readiness and Zeal to do the Will of Christ naturally flows
from Love consecrated to him. But to enforce this the more, let us further
consider,

3. We are obliged by all the titles of Gratitude and Justice, of natural and
Divine Reason, to walk as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

First, The dignity of the Author requires this of us. The Son of God came down
from Heaven; and if the Allusion may be allowed,

-- circum caput omne micantes
Deposuit radios, propiusque accedere jussit;
laid down his Glory, that he might familiarly teach us our Duty in order to
our happiness: And if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; How shall
we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which as the first, began to be
spoken by the Lord?

Secondly; The perfection and plainness of this Rule. It Is a wise observation,
That those Laws are best for Government, that are so clear and particular that
nothing Arist. Rhet.
is left to the will of the inferior Judge, who is not usually so capable* and
pure from byrespects as the Lawgiver. The Gospel is a Light wherein all Virtues
shine in their bright eminence, and all Vices blush in their odious deformity.
It excludes all obscurity, that the meanest understandings may see the way to
happiness. There can be no palliations and excuses for those who will rather
argue than obey. For the revelation of God's Will is so full and open in it,
that it is direct Rebellion not to yield entire subjection to it: And they who
know their Masters Will, and do it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

Thirdly; To commend it to our practice we have an Example of perfect obedience
set before us. If Jesus Christ had represented in the World no other person but
of the Word and Wisdom of his Father; as a Master to regulate and guide us by
his Commands, had revealed to us the Secrets of another World, and then
ascended to Heaven; the highest Reverence and Observance had been due to his
Laws. But to ^^^^urage and edge our industry he was pleased to exhibit in his
Life a Pattern of universal Obedience. He gave us Rules of such perfect
Holiness, that there seemed no necessity of his practice for our instruction:
And the living image of his Laws was so visible in his Actions, that his sole
Example affords us a Model of entire Sanctity. There is no kind of Virtue from
the lowest to the most Heroic, of which he might not say as he did to his
Disciples in his last Supper, I have given you an Example, that ye should do as
I have done to you. And what should be more powerful in the breasts of
Christians than a sacred Ambition to be like the Son of God, than a dear
Affection to be conformed to their Savior?

Fourthly; To excite us to our Duty, the Gospel offers such a Reward to
encourage Obedience, and threateneth such prepared Plagues against
Disobedience, that unless a Man be miraculously transformed into a stupid
Beast, he cannot but be moved by them.

Now what darkness of mind, or rather what perverseness of heart is it, if the
great Interest of the one and the other Eternity, the Blessed and the
Miserable, be not sufficient to work upon us? But alas! how many who pretend to
be the Disciples of Christ, do not obey him as their Master, love him as their
Redeemer, nor fear him as their Judge? They live as if Christ had commanded
them to please, not to crucify the flesh, and the lusts thereof: as if he had
bid them set all their Affections, their Loves, Desires, Hopes, Joys in present
perishing things, and not in everlasting to come; to labor for the Riches of
this World, as if they were eternal Inhabitants on the Earth, and not strangers
and pilgrims in the way to Heaven. These are worse Enemies of our Savior than
the Heathens that do not know him, or the Jews that deny him. For, wearing the
Livery of his Servants, they Quae cum ita sint, magna videlicet praerogativa de
nomine Christianitatis blandiri possumus, quia ita agimus, ac vivimus, ut hoc
ipsu^ quod Christianus populus esse dicimur, opprobriu^ Christi esse videamur.
defame his most holy Profession, obscure his Glory, and blaspheme him in their
lives. If Infidels that never heard the sound of the Gospel, should see their
conversation, what judgment would they make of the Excellence of Christ, and
the holiness of his Law? They would Aestimari de cultoribus suis potest ille
qui colitur. Quomodo enim bonus Magister est, cujus tam malos videmus
discipulos. 2 Salv. De Gubern. lib. 4.
blaspheme his Goodness without defense. Unholy Christians are the most guilty
Sinners in the World. And their punishment will be heightened accordingly: For
they exasperate Mercy, and make the Blood of Atonement to cry for Vengeance
against them. If it be extreme perverseness to disbelieve the Gospel after so
clear a Revelation from God; what degree of folly and wickedness is it, for
those who believe its Truth, to contradict the evidence and design of it in
their lives, as if there were no doubt of its falsness?

FINIS.
Books sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the accomplishment of Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or, Discourses wherein is showed, how the
Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God are glorified in that
great and blessed Work. By W. Bates, D. D. in Quarto.

Two Sermons of the late Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary
to his Majesty, and Master of Trinity College in Cambridg.

The Reconcilableness of God's Prescience of the Sins of Men with the Wisdom
and Sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations, and whatsoever other means he uses
to prevent them. In Octavo.


