A REBUKE TO BACKSLIDERS, AND A Spurr for Loyterers.

In several Sermons, lately preached to a Private Congregation, and now
published for The Awakening a Sleepy Age.

By R.A. Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

Romans 13.11. It is high time to awaken out of sleep.

Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

LONDON: Printed for John Hancock at the three Bibles in Popes Head Alley over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1677.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THE Case of the Churches of Christ among us is so deplorable, our spiritual
distempers so many and so dangerous, and our decays and languishings under them
so visible, that he has a blind eye that sees it not, and an hard heart who
bleeds not under it. Surely in such a time, the Servants of the Lord should not
keep silence; but Oh how insufficient am I, to speak as I ought to speak, in so
great a case? Some thoughts I had in mine heart to make an attempt, but being
discouraged by the sense of my many infirmities, which have of late exceedingly
grown upon me, I laid aside all such thoughts, and only prepared the ensuing
Meditations for a Private Congregation, resolving against all further
publication of them then from the Pulpit. But when I had gone through what I
intended, I was set upon by many of my hearers, from whose importunities
(seconded by a worthy Minister) I could have no rest, for diverse months
together, till I had yielded to publish what now comes to thy hands.

Perhaps thou will blame me for making this adventure, and so should I my self,
were I not persuaded that there was a special hand of God in it, leading me on
beyond and against my first intentions.

Thou will find this Discourse indigested, but yet it is serious; and though it
has not in it to please thy Fancy, yet may thou find that which may prick
thee to the heart, which will be far better. Let not the composure of it offend
thee, I am in so great earnest, the matter in hand so important, our peoples
necessity so urgent, that thou must abate me conciseness or curiosity. If thou
should be nauseated at my frequent inculcations of the same duties, my
frequent instancing the same sins and corruptions, my frequent putting the same
or the like Interrogatories in diverse parts of it, and should censure me for
using more words then needs, let me tell thee;

1. That I know what narrow mouthed bottles many of those were I had to deal
withal, which would receive but drop by drop, now a little and then a little,
and so had need the oftener pouring in, though of the same liquor. I know what
hard and knotty pieces some of them were, into whom I was fastening my nails,
and must therefore the oftener use the hammer to drive them home; many knocks
at the same nail may do, when one or two will not. I know what forgetful
hearers too many of them were, and therefore thought it requisite to set the
same Glass again and again before them, lest they should soon forget what form
they were of. I was desirous that my hearers should carry upon their hearts an
express sense of my designs, all along from first to last, and therefore have
put them the oftener in remembrance of it.

2. I am persuaded that some of my Readers may have the same need that my
hearers had, and am therefore willing to let it go as it is.

Some imperfections there are, which (I freely confess) I would have helped if
I could, but I cannot do as I would, nor perhaps now as once I could. Whatever
this little work be, I do in all humility of soul offer it up to the Lord, in
hope that he will graciously accept it, and make use of it for some service to
his Name and People, warning thee in his Name (especially if thou be one who
art more particularly concerned in it, either as a Backslider or as a Loyterer)
so to read, as first to take knowledge of thy self, and the case thou art in,
and then to take heed to thy self, that thou make not light of thy disease nor
thy remedy, but carefully apply and improve the counsels and reproofs which are
brought unto thee, even to thee, from the Lord, by the hand of his unworthy
Servant, and

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, R. A.

The Contents.
THE opening of the Text.

Doct. 1. The Churches complaints are especially of the Churches sins.

Doct. 2. It is the property of the people of God, in the confession of their
sins, to give them their due aggravations.

Doct. 3. Consumption in Religion, where it is epidemical, is a Forerunner of
Confusion. Where, 1. What Consumption in Religion is. There is, 1. A partial or
gradual decay: Professors of Religion may grow to a decay, 1. Inwardly, in
their Faith, in their sense of Eternity, in all their graces, and inward vital
operations. 2. Outwardly, in their outward duties and conversations.
2. A total decay, or Apostasy from Christ and Christianity.
2. That a general consumption in Religion is a Forerunner of Confusion.


The chief Doctrines insisted on are,

Doct. 4. It Is the duty of the people of God to stir up themselves in the
matters of Religion.

Doct. 5. Stirring Religion will take hold of God. Both these handled together
in these 5 following generals. I. What it is to stir up our selves in the
matters of Religion. 1. There is a stirring up [to] Religion, which is the duty
of those that are yet short of true Religion; and this stirring stands, 1. In
men's Bethinking themselves of their miserable state. 2. In their crying out for
help out of this wretched state. 3. In their taking the Alarm from the
Watchmen. 4. In their forcing themselves back from their sins, and onwards
toward Christ
2. There is a stirring up our selves [in] Religion, which is the duty of those
that have something of Religion in them. Where, 1. By what acts we should stir
up our selves. 2. To what pitch of Religion we should stir up our selves.
Answered. 1. In general. 2. In particular. 1. To an hunger and thirst after
more of Religion. 2. To a savor and relish of Religion. 3. To solidity in
Religion. To a confirmed, established state of soul; standing, 1. In a firm
resolution for Christ. 2. In a firm trust in Christ. 3. In a firm adherence to
Christ. 4. In a confirmed habit of Religion.
4. To fruitfulness in Religion. 5. To steddiness and evenness in Religion.




II. What need there is of stirring up our selves to, and in Religion. This
made appear from 2 Particulars: 1. Those that fall short of Religion, and those
that carefully maintain not the Religion they have, are like to be lost at
last. 2. Without stirring up themselves, men are never like to attain to
Religion, or to maintain that Religion they have. The necessity of stirring up
our selves upon both these accounts, evidenced: 1. From the distance we are at
from what we should be. 2. From the difficulty of recovering those that are
fallen, evidenced: 1. From the difficulty of discerning their decays in the
beginning. 2. From their ind^sposition and unwillingness to seek out after a
cure. 3. From the opposition that is made against their recovery: By 1. A
stirring Devil. 2. Their stirring Lusts. 3. From the difficulty of holding on,
for those that stand.




III. What it is to take hold of God. Here 3 things: 1. Our happiness lies in
this, That the Lord is within us. 2. Our happiness lies in this, That the Lord
is among us. Our taking hold of God, is our continuing his Presence with us.
Where, 1. God may depart from those with whom he has been present, both 1.
From particular persons; and how he may depart from them, showed in 5
Particulars. 2. From a People or Nation; and how he may be said to depart from
them.
2. It Is woe with those people from whom the Lord departs.

3. Our taking hold of God is our taking an effectual course to continue his
Presence with us. And this, 1. By casting away our Idols. 2. By taking hold of
the Covenant of God. 3. by recovering our Communion with him.

IV. Stirring Religion will take hold of God. 1. What Is meant by stirring
Religion. 2. Stirring Religion will take hold of God and continue his Presence
with us. For, 1. 'Twill work out those evils which provoke him to depart. 2.
'Twill work up and increase those good things in us, which he will not lose or
forsake.

V. How we should stir up our selves; answered in the following Directions. 1.
Make an advantage of stirring Providence. 2. Put upon stirring Thoughts. 3.
Get stirring Affections: In special stir up, Godly Sorrow, Fear, Desire, Hope.
4. Get a stirring Conscience. 5. Be much conversant with stirring Society,
where are directions for the exercise of that neglected duty, holy and
quickening discourse. 6. Be much exercised in stirring Duties; especially in 1.
Prayer. 2. Fasting and Prayer.

The Concusion.


Isaiah 64.6, 7. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and we all do fade as a Leaf, and our
Iniquities like the Wind, have taken us away.

And there is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take
hold of thee.


IN the former of these Verses, we find the Church making a double complaint of
their Sin, of their Affliction.

1. Of their Sin; there all misery begins, and there all our Complaints should
begin. We are all, not an unclean thing, but (as) an unclean thing, Sicut quid
inpurum, as the worst of things, as any thing that is most filthy and unclean.
There is the Uncleanness of a Toad, a Venomous deadly uncleanness: Our
Uncleanness is as bad as that; our hearts are, as it is said the evil tongue is,
full of deadly Poison. There is the uncleanness of a Leaper, a Contagious
uncleanness; such is ours, we have infected one another, we are all infected.
There is the uncleanness of a Serpent, a stinging uncleanness; such is ours,
our Sin has bitten us, and stung us to the heart. There is the uncleanness of
a Dunghill, a stinking uncleanness; such is our uncleanness, our Iniquities have
made us to stink before the Lord: Find out any thing that is worse, or more
unclean than all these; whatever it be, our Sin has made us as bad as the
worst; nothing can be said too bad of Sin, and none speak worse of it than the
People of God, who have the least of it. Those that are all Sin, carry it, as
if there were nothing in sin, no hurt in it: We cannot make Sinners understand,
or be sensible what evil there is in sin, but Saints feel it.

But it might be replied by some amongst them, Though we have our Deformity,
yet we have our Beauty too; though we have our uncleanness, yet we have a
covering for it, we have Righteousness as well as Sin.

What Is the Answer to that? Righteousness? What Righteousness have we? O our
very Righteousness is as filthy Rags; it is but a ragged Righteousness we have,
a tottered, maimed, torn thing; the best we have is but as a Rag, unprofitable
as a rag, not able to hide the shame of our nakedness, and as a nasty filthy
rag; if we have any thing that looks better than other, it is all naught, our
best is a loathsome thing.

2. Of their Afflictions: We all fade like a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the
Wind, have driven us away, driven us into Banishment, driven us into Captivity,
carried us away from our Country, and from the City of our God; yea, and from
the favor and presence of our God, into a strange Land, into our Enemies
hands. We all do fade and wither like a Leaf; our sin has brought us down into
a decaying, withering state, and our Iniquities, like the Wind, have driven us
away. Withered, faded Leaves, you see how they are blown down the Trees, and
carried away with every Wind, when those that are green and flourishing keep
their stand against wind and weather.

In verse 7. we have an additional complaint; they go on yet further, to make a
greater and a sadder complaint against themselves: And that is, and yet for all
this, as bad as our case is, yet there is none that calls upon thy Name. Our
punishment found us in a polluted and wasted state, and behold we grow worse
and worse, we wither daily, Prayer fails: then which, there is not a more
deadly symptom of a decayed soul. Prayer is the very breath of a Christian;
when Men's breath fails, they dye and turn to their Earth. Here observe: 1.
Against whom this Complaint is commenced, that is, against the generality of
the People; there is none, that is, none in comparison, very few, if any that
call -- 2. The matter of this additional complaint; they did not yet call upon
God; though their Iniquities had brought them to the dust, yet they had not
brought them to their knees; though they had made them a Prey, yet they had not
set them a Praying. 3. The immediate reason of this their neglect of God in
such a time, they were all asleep, and they did not awaken, or stir up
themselves to take hold of God, or to seek after him.

There is none [that calls upon thy Name.] Calling upon the Name of God, is
sometimes taken for Prayer, Psalm. 50. Call upon me in the day of trouble; that
is, Pray unto God. Sometimes, as Prayer is, so calling upon the Name of God, is
put for all Religion. Genesis 4.26. Then, in the days of Enoch, began Men to call
upon the Name of the Lord; that is, then Religion began to appear, and to break
forth more visibly in the Earth. In the Text, you may take the words as
comprehending both senses, Prayer in special, and all Religion in general; and
indeed, that is no Praying that leads not on to all Religi^n.

As these words, There Is none that calls upon thy Name: Note the neglect of
Prayer; in that sense I have spoken of them elsewhere heretofore, but my
present purpose is to speak of them in the latter sense, as the neglect of
calling upon the Name of God notes the neglect of all Religion. These several
observations I shall hence offer to you.

Doct. 1. The Churches special Complaints are of the Churches Sins, of their
own Sins; they cast the first stone at themselves. We are -- not Ishmael or
Edom, or the Philistines, but the Israel of God, we are as an unclean thing. Its
grievous to them to see and hear of the sins of others. I was grieved because
of the Transgressors, Psalm. 119.158. That the Uncircumcised among us, the open
Enemies of the Gospel are so Wicked, should be a grievous thing to us. The
Idolatries and Adulteries, the Drunkenness and shameful Spewing, those floods
of filthiness that overflow among such, should be a grief of heart to all the
Saints. It is not a thing to be made so light of, as it is by us, that there is
such a Vile Generation risen up among us, even as if Hell it self were broken
loose to affront the God of Heaven, to defile his Holy Name, and to disgrace
the Throne of his Glory; this should go near the hearts of all that love Christ
and the Holiness of the Gospel: And there is doubtless a great fault among us,
and it is our great Sin that we do no more lay it to heart. We tell stories one
to another of the Wickednesses that are amongst us, but we do but tell it as
matter of News; but who among us are Mourners in secret for all these
Abominations? If Men's hatred of Godliness, and the Persecutions that they raise
against it, do reach even to us, and touch our selves in our own particulars,
as far forth as we feel their rage to light upon our selves, in our own Persons
or Estates, so far forth we are apt enough to complain against them; but whilst
we can escape, and sleep in a whole skin, all is but lightly passed over. This
is our great Sin, and a great Argument that our hearts are not so much
concerned for God, or Religion, as for our own interest; it is what we our
selves suffer, not what Religion suffers, that goes so near us. Well, this
should be matter of our complaint and grief, that the Enemies of God are so
wicked as they are: But yet, if we could but keep all right among our selves,
let Enemies be as bad as they will, yet if it were with us as it should be, the
matter were not so great; though there be such Flies, and such Lice, and such
Frogs, such swarms of Locust-Lusts, and wickednesses upon the Egyptians among
us, yet if the People of God were more free from such Verminous sins, though
there be such thick darkness over all the Land of Egypt, yet if in Goshen there
be light, among the Israel of God, in the Churches of Christ; though we should
be as Israel was, held to the Brick-kilns, under Oppression and Persecution,
yet if we might grow and multiply as they did, if the number of Saints might
increase, and if those that are, might grow more holy and strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might; if it were but thus well with us that are
Christians, and Professors of Religion, this were a comfort, how wicked soever
the World were: But this is our misery, and here should be our special
Complaints, and our great Mournings, that our Iniquities, the Iniquities of the
Church, of Professors of Religion, are so great, and so many as they are. [We]
are all as an unclean thing; our Enemies are wicked, and we are not upright; we
that name the Name of Christ do not depart from our Iniquities. We that pray,
and hear, and profess to have separated our selves from the filthiness of the
Land, to the Law of our God; even we have transgressed the Covenant of the
Lord. What haltings and Hypocrisies are there among us? What Revolters and
Backsliders are many of us become! What Heart-Idolatries are there to be found
among us? What Pride, and what Covetousness, and what Quarrellings and
Contentions do there abound, even amongst us! What Sleepers and Loyterers and
Triflers are we? What a lukewarm Generation do we show our selves? How little
of the Purity, and Spirit, and Life of Religion is there going amongst us?
Self-love, and Self-seeking, and Flesh-pleasing, and Men-pleasing, and an
excessive heat and zeal for our carnal things, how has it eaten up the Zeal of
God, and the Spirit of Christianity, so that we may complain with the Apostle,
Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, and not the things of Christ: Certainly
Friends, this should be our great Lamentation, and let it be for a Lamentation
to us before the Lord. Let us complain, let us lament that Religion, which has
so many Enemies, has so many false Friends; that that which is so hunted by
the profane Hunters, so shot at by the Uncircumcised Archers, does receive its
greatest wounds in the Houses and by the hands of its Friends; that the
Circumcision is become as Uncircumcision, that whilst the stripes of the
ungodly are upon our backs, our own filthiness is yet in our skirts. Let us
lament not only the spreading evils that abound amongst the generality of
Professors, but let us especially lament, every one of us, that our own hands
are also in the Transgression: There Is a decay grown amongst Professors, but
let us enquire, Lord am not I, even I, one of the decayed souls? There are
worldly greedy Professors, whose hearts are gone after their Covetousness, and
O Lord, am not I gone in the Company? There are Hypocrites, there are Idlers, a
company of cold and lukewarm souls, and am not I such a one my self? O my my
soul! art thou faithful to God? Have I kept my Covenant? Have I kept mine
Heart, and kept my Watch, and kept my Way? Have not I wandered with them that
wander, and fallen with them that fall? Let this be our Lamenting; let us take
up a Lamentation together, let us join our Sighs, and mingle our Tears; let us
Lament together, and let us also, as Zech. 12.12. mourn every one of us apart,
and our Families apart; our Wives apart, and our Children apart; for our
Personal sins, and our Family-sins, that neither we, nor our own Houses have
had our hearts so with God, but that the Lord has a Controversy with us.

Doct. 2. Christians should not palliate or mince their own sins in their
Confessions, but give them their due aggravations.

What could the Church say more against themselves then they do in the Text? We
are all as an unclean thing, very Vile, full of Diseases and Sores, and our
very Righteousness is as filthy Rags. They do not hide or lessen their sins;
they say not, as bad as we are, others are worse; it is not, we have been
faulty, We are not as good as we should be, we have our spots and our failing,
as who have not? But they speak it out with a full mouth, our Iniquities are
multiplied, our Iniquities are marked before the Lord, and have marked us out
for a company of unclean and polluted souls; we cannot hide it, and we will not
hide it; we can neither hide nor lessen it, it is too true, it is too evident; we
must confess it, and we will confess it, that we are a naughty People: not so
bad as others? Why others never pretended to any good, never made that
Profession that we have made, never had the advantages that we have had; there
can be no excuse for us, we should have been better, and we might have been
better; but what ever we should have been, or might have been, we are very bad,
we are all as an unclean thing: Thus did that great Apostle, when he speaks of
Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Of whom (says he) I am chief.

Friends, whatever your faults are, do not mince the matter, do not count your
errors little Errors, your Sins, little Sins: Be sure of this, that mincing is
not the way to mending. Shame your selves before the Lord, abase your selves in
his sight; study the greatness of those you count your little sins; rip open
your hearts, and find out what a nest of Wickedness is there; ransack your
ways, and see what a course of Folly and Vanity is to be found there, and do
not go about to hide them: He that covers his Sins shall not prosper, Prove.
28.13. Do not go about to hide them, but confess them, and spread them before
the Lord, till your soul be ashamed. O that this Word might send us to our
homes, every one of us with an aching heart, and a blushing face, that it might
make us all fall down before our God, with Ezra's words in our mouth, Ezra 9.6.
O my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our
Iniquities are increased over our head, and our Trespasses are grown up unto
the Heavens. Let us blush at our Hypocrisy, let us blush at our Luke-warmness,
let us blush at our Worldlines and Carnality; let us blush in our Prayers, let
us go blushing home, and weeping as we go; let us acknowledge we all are as an
unclean thing, and our Righteousness is as filthy Rags.

Doct. 3. Consumption upon Professors is the high way to Confusion and
Dissipation. If we wither and fade as a Leaf, our Iniquities as the wind will
scatter and drive us away. If gray hairs be upon us, death and destruction is
near.

Beloved, you can hardly be ignorant what complaints there are, even from all
quarters of our Land, what a decay there is grown even every where upon
Professors of Religion; and whether this consuming Disease has not seized upon
many of us here, I leave it to your own Consciences to judge; the consideration
hereof, has engaged me to enlarge on this subject, beyond what I at first
intended; and I beseech you every one, to set your hearts upon the words I
shall speak, so as both to make a narrow enquiery each one into himself,
whether you be grown into such a decay, and to endeavor for a speedy recovery.
I remember how it has been with this Congregation, when our Assembling
together was in one place, what a glorious and hopeful Morning appeared? What a
Springtide there was of Converts flowing in to the Lord, and what a daylight
of warm and holy affections then brake forth amongst us; whether our day has
continued its brightness, accordring to the spring of our Morning, let us sadly
consider before the Lord.

Now in prosecution of the Doctrine mentioned, I shall first a little open this
consuming Disease to you, and show you, that even Christians may be sadly
surprised by it; and then show you, that where it proves Epidemical and
General, there this Consumption is a forerunner of confusion.

For the first, know, there is a twofold decay or consumption in Religion.

Partial. Total.
1. Paertial or gradual, a declining or consuming in some degree; a growing
into a worse case than sometimes we were; a growing weak and cold, and remiss
in our Religion; an abateing or loosing our former care, strength, life,
affection, and vigor of soul; and this may be incident to real Christians, who
are subject to decay.

Inwardly. Outwardly.
1. Inwardly, in the case and state of their souls in the inward Man; they may
be Back-sliders in heart, as the expression is, Prove. 14.14. Particularly,

1. There may be a shaking of their Faith: The principles and foundations of
Christianity may be shaken; there may be a failing of the firmness of their
belief of the truth of the Gospel, and some declinings toward Infidelity and
Atheism. Of Himeneus and Philetus it is said, 2 Timothy 2.18. that they erred
concerning the truth, and overthrew the Faith of some; and as they overthrew
the Faith of some, so probably they might shake the Faith of more.

2. There may be a decay or wearing out the sense of the importance of those
truths of the Gospel, that they do believe. Though the Gospel may still be
received as an undoubted and unquestionable truth, though the evidence of its
truth may be so clear as that they cannot contradict or question it, yet the
weight of it may not be so much felt upon their hearts; the truths believed may
not be so much minded, nor so thoroughly considered as to leave any powerful
impressions of them upon their hearts. Those great things, the worth and value
of a soul, the dreadfulness of loosing a soul, the danger that they are in of
loosing their souls, the excellency and necessity of Christ, the eternal weight
of glory, the everlasting Vengeance of God against the Unrighteousness of Men,
though all these things be believed and acknowledged, yet they may not for the
time be so duly minded and meditated on; they may be so much out of their eye,
out of their thoughts, that the sense of them, and the efficacy of that sense
may seem even to be utterly lost, Friends, it is not the being of these great
things, no, nor the bare believing that they are, but the minding and frequent
considering them, the having that height and depth, that life and death in our
eye, that will affect and work upon the heart; and Christians, through their
own carelessness and heedlesness, may have even lost the sight both of Heaven
and Hell. Things present may have so filled and overpowered their hearts, as to
put things to come quite out of mind; the heart may be so bewitched by this
present world, so surrounded with a crowd of carnal pleasures and delights, so
swallowed up of worldly cares and contrivances, so intent upon our worldly
business and commodity, that we may hereupon drive so heavily on in the matters
of Eternity, as if we had forgotten that we had a Christ or a soul to be minded.

3. There may be a decay, as of there Faith (as before) so of all other their
inward Graces and vital operations. Hence it is that the Apostle prays so
earnestly for them, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace, who has called us to
his eternal Glory, by Jesus Christ, establish, strengthen, settle you. We
should every one of us prove unstable souls, and shall never stand if the God
of Grace do not stablish us; we are every one of us weak souls, and shall
certainly fall, and come to nothing if the God of grace do not strengthen and
settle us. And therefore we had need to pray, and that earnestly, every one of
us, the God of all grace stregthen me; the God of all grace stablish and settle
this my weak and unstable soul. Hence also Christians are exhorted, Romans 3.11.
Hold fast what thou have, keep that good thing which is committed unto thee:
And so we had need every one of us to call upon our selves; hold fast O my
soul, hold fast to Christ, hold fast to Holiness; have thou gotten any Grace,
any sound Religion into thine heart? Hold it fast that thou lose it not. Our
Candle will burn dim, there is a Thief in the Candle which will wast it away,
if it be not carefully snuffed and looked to. Grace in the heart, is as a spark
of fire in the Hearth, it will be covered over with Ashes, if it be not kept
continually blowing; the rust will eat out our Gold, the Moth will fret out our
Garments, the Thief will steal away our Treasure if it be not watchfully
maintained. O what Losses do many Christians actually suffer through their
carelessness and negligence; loss in their Love, loss in their Life, and Zeal,
and all their holy Affections, that little good that is in them, may grow to
such a decay, that it may be ready to dye, and come to nothing; and as their
Grace, which is their Life, decays, so their vital operations fail with it. All
their sensible and sweet communion with God will be hindered; the warm and
lively workings of their hearts upon God, their thoughts and meditations on
God, their desires after Him, their delights in the Lord, the secret
entercourses of love betwixt the Lord and them will much cease when grace
flags: Whilst grace is kept alive, the thoughts of God will be many and
precious, Psalm. 139.17. How precious are thy thoughts to me O Lord? how great
is the sum of them? Their Meditations of him will be sweet, a reviving and
refreshing to their hearts. Have you none of you sometimes found it so? Have
you not poured out your souls into his Bosom, and felt the Lord pouring in his
Wine and his Oil into yours? Have you not walked with him upon the Mount, and
sat down under his shadow with great delight, and found his Fruits sweet to
your taste? Have you not sometimes rejoiced in his Presence and felt the joy of
the Lord to be your strength? And then, O what Love has streamed forth, O what
Praises have been sent up to His Blessed Name! This, if ever you have
experienced such Blessed seasons, has been maintained from the life of Grace
in you; and according as Grace sinks, or gathers rust, and grows dim, so do
not all your vital operations fail with it? I need not spend time to prove that
such sinking and decaying of our Spirits, our Graces, and the comfortable
operations of them, may be, the experiences of Christians do too fully, and too
frequently yield us undeniable proofs.

2. There may be outward decays, decays in point of practice. There may be a
neglect of the duties of Prayer, Hearing, Meditation, Examining, and taking an
account of our selves, Isa. 43.22. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob! thou
have been weary of me, O Israel. I can seldom hear of thee; thou [hast] been a
Praying People, a Sacrificing People, but thou art grown weary of my worship.
How seldom art thou found in thy Closet, or in the Congregation? Thou art
become a very Stranger to those duties which once were thy delight: Or if
duties be performed, yet the heart and the life of them may be lost; their
Sacrifices may be without an heart; if they bring their Incense, yet there may
be no fire to kindle it; dead Praying, cold Praying must suffice them. O how do
our Spirits often freeze in those Devotions which should kindle a fire in us!
Some Men's duties serve for nothing, but to keep them asleep, and to keep
Conscience quiet, which if there should be a total neglect, would fly in there
faces and awaken them. There may be a decay in their Conversations; they may
decline from a Spiritual to a Carnal conversation, from an Heavenly to an
Earthly Life. Those that had once escaped the pollutions of the world, may be
again entangled in the world, 2 Pet. 2.20. There may be a declining from a
savoury, useful, to an unsavory and unprofitable life; the Salt of the Earth
may have lost its savor; those very Tongues, whose speech was used to be with
Grace, seasoned with Salt, Ministering Grace to the Hearers, may either be dumb
and speak nothing, or else be employed to speak Vanity. How long may we be in
some Professors company e're we hear a savoury word from their lips; or if any
good does come, how heartless and lifeless is it? In what they do, they move
like Puppets; in what they speak, they speak like Parrots, that which they have
learned by rote, but without any true sense of what themselves do speak.

Such decays as these, both inward decays and outward decays may be grown upon
Christians. Such declining souls are a miserable Spectacle, the reproach of the
Gospel, the disgrace of Religion, that are more like Carkases, or Ghosts, than
living souls; Idol Christians, that have Eyes, and see not; Ears, and hear not;
Tongues, and speak not; Feet, and walk not: Such, who if they have any thing of
Religion in them, no body in the world is like to have the benefit of it, nor
themselves the comfort of it. They may be stark dead, and dried up at the
roots, they may be mere Chaff and Stubble for ought any body else, or
themselves either can say to the contrary: These dry Trees, how-ever they stand
in the Vineyard, they may stand there for Fuel for the fire, and not for Fruit.
Such miserable Spectacles are withering Professors, and yet what multitudes of
them are there to be seen?

Friends, let us consider our selves, with respect to the perticulars
mentioned; if we have not denied the Faith, and become downright Infidels, and
Atheists; if we believe God and the Gospel, and the great and wonderful things
of the world to come; yet are there not many of us that have lost the sense of
the weight and importance of those great things? Have not the lean and
ill-favored Kine eaten up the fat ones? Have not the thin and the blighted
Ears smitten and destroyed the full ones? Has not this Earth, and the
businesses thereof, choked up some of our hearts, and left little sense of
God, or Immortality upon us? Particularly consider,

1. Do we live as People that do verily believe we must shortly be in another
world, where we must eternally reap the fruit of our doings here? Do we live as
Men that have that Eternity in our eye, and the lively sense upon our hearts of
that Death and Judgment, that glorious Reward and eternal Punishment that is
before us? Sure we do not: O how few of us do thus live! Do we Pray, and Hear,
and Buy, and Sell, and Converse in the World, as Men that see and look for so
great a change? Was there never a time when we felt more of the Eternal things
upon our hearts than now? Was there never a time when we were more serious, and
in good earnest in our Religion? When we were more deeply engaged in laying up
Treasure in Heaven, and making an escape from the Wrath to come? Was there
never a time, when such serious questions, What must I do to be Saved? What if
I should be Damned, shut out of the everlasting Kingdom, shut up in everlasting
darkness? What may I do to please God, and to walk worthy of his holy Calling,
and to make sure of a part in Christ? Was there never a time when such
Questions were more ordinarily put than now, and when we were more solicitous
about the having them answered?

2. How is it with our particular Graces, and inward vital Operations? Do we
retain our first Faith? Do we hold out in our first Love? Where are those warm
and lively affections that discovered themselves in the infancy of our new
Birth? Time was when some of us were all in a flame of Love, and Life, and Zeal
for God, when we had melting affections, mourning, tender hearts, when our
spirits were hotly working within us about God, and the things of God; when we
could not live, nor be at ease, but under the influences of Heaven, and the
illapses and intimations of the Divine Love and good will to our souls; when
Communion with God, and entercourses with Heaven were sweeter to us than our
appointed Food; was there never such a time with some of you? And is it so now?
Or are not these matters sadly changed with you, from what they once were? May
you not say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.3.5. I remember the days of old, and am
troubled? I remember my pleasant things, my pleasant Houses, the sweet and
delightful entercourses I had with the Lord; I remember these things, and am
troubled to see what a fall there is from what once I enjoyed?

3. And how is it in your duties and in your lives? Is the old spirit of Prayer
kept up with you? Has the Lord such constant Visits, such affectionate Visits
from you as he was wont to have? Are your Sighs, are your Tears, are your Souls
poured out in Praying, and in striving and wrestling with the Lord in Prayer,
as formerly they have been? And is there such a vein of serious Religion
running through your whole lives? Do you eat and drink, work together, and
converse together in the Spirituality and singleness of heart, which the
Primitive Christians did, Act. 2.46. and which sometimes some of you did? Is it
your care to exhort and quicken, and build up, and provoke one another to love,
and to good works? Is there that Watchfulness over your goings, that diligence
in instructing, in governing, and educating your Families in the fear and
knowledge, and worship of God, as has been? Or must you not take up a
Lamentation over your selves, and fall to judging and condemning your selves,
some of you at least, upon most of these accounts, and cry out in bitterness, O
my soul, how art thou fallen?

Friends, let not these words pass as words of course, let them enter into your
hearts, and stick in your sides, and be a wound in your very souls.

Let me, upon all this that has been said, put the question yet again to you
all: How is it with you? How is it with your souls? What, do ye hold your own,
or are ye at a loss? What, Prospering or Perishing? Flourishing or Withering?
Upon the wing, and mounting upwards as the Eagles, or upon the Dust with the
Worms? Friends, pray consider, who among you can say, I thank the Lord, my soul
is upon the increasing hand; through the grace of God, my Soul is maintained in
Life, and I am reaching forward, and getting a little ground Heavenward daily;
through rich mercy, the Grace that has been bestowed on me, has not been
bestowed in vain: I cannot deny the goodness of God to me; I have good hopes
that it is something better with me than it has been? Some of you, I hope, can
speak thus, to the praise of the glory of the grace of God with you: But I fear
too many, even of you that are Professors, must give a sadder Answer. How is it
with my soul? O the Lord be merciful to me, it is but in a poor and pitiful
case; Lord I pine, Lord I am fallen, I am fallen. With my outward man it is well
enough, but O mine inner man withers, my Religion vanishes, my poor soul
languisheth, my grace perishes; much of it is lost, and that which remains, is
dying daily; I took it all along to be well enough; but now I think on it, O
it is a miserable decay that is grown upon me.

Beloved, I have told you already what complaints there are of decays from
other places; and now consider, is not the Moth come into this Congregation? Is
not the Worm eating at [our] root also? Compare the present spirit and temper
that is too generally upon us, with what it was in our first meetings at
Seimours Court; sure there appeared another manner of warm, lively, serious,
affectionate spirit then, than is to be found but in very few of us at this
day. What, has so many years Preaching and Praying, and Sacraments we have had
since, had no better success than this? Have you been hearing all this while to
your loss? and Praying to your loss, and had Sacraments to your loss? O that
every one of you now, would lay his hand on his own heart, and faithfully
enquire where be the decayed souls among us, Lord is it I? Lord, am not I one
of them? Do not think now to excuse the matter; do not tell me, we hope it is
not so bad, your fear of us is more than you have ground for: O that I were
mistaken in you, that it were better with you then according to my Jealousies:
But I must tell you, if you have not the same fears, some of you, concerning
your selves, I doubt it is because you have no more observed your selves, nor so
thoroughly considered your selves how it is with you.

Well, let these hints humble us, and lay us low before the Lord. Let these
words startle us, and awaken us, and prepare us toward our recovery. Thus much
touching the partial decay.

2. There is a total decay, or Apostasy from the Faith. If those that are real
Christians do not, yet many high Professors may, ye, and are become Apostates
from Christ. Such as these:

1. Never brought forth any fruit to perfection, Luke 8.14. Neither the right
fruits, nor any ripe fruits, it is rotten before it is ripe; and when it is at
best, it is rotten at the Core.

2. The Fruit they had falls off.

3. Not only their Fruit falls off, but their Leaves: They decline in the
practice, and fall off from the profession of Christianity.

4. Their Root is dried up and withered: The Faith they had, fails, and they
become downright Atheists or Infidels. But I shall not enlarge here.

2. Consumption in Religion, where it proves Epidemical, is the forerunner of
Confusion. What ever influence the wickedly profane may have upon the removal
of the Gospel, that which most certainly provokes the Lord to cast off, is the
decay and Apostasy of Professors, Rev. 2.5. Remember whence thou art fallen,
and do thy first works, or I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick out of its place.

To set home what has been spoken: You that are Back-sliders, consider this
one word; that whatever become of us, as to our general cases, as to the
particular cases of your own souls, this Consumption, if it be not speedily
recovered, is like to be mortal. You that are sick of this withering Disease,
look to it in time, lest your sickness be unto death, even to death Eternal.
You that are Back-sliders, think not that your souls are safe, by that of
Christianity which you have already attained, but know, that your drawing back
may be unto Perdition. You that have begun to fall, tremble to think where this
fall may end. You may sink and sink, and fall lower and lower, and never stop
till you come to the bottom of Hell, and so by your total and final Apostasy,
you may prove, that whatever you think, you never had the truth of
Christianity in you. O remember this word, and let it awaken you in time.

Now I come to the chief Doctrines intended.

Doct. 1. Its the duty of the People of God, to stir up themselves in the
matters of Religion.

Doct. 2. Stirring Religion will take hold of God. I shall handle them both
together, and show,

1. What it is to stir up our selves in the matters of Religion.

2. What need we have to stir up our selves.

3. What it is to take hold of God.

4. That stirring Religion will take hold of God.

5. How we should stir up our selves.

1. What it is to stir up our selves in the matters of Religion. There is,

1. A stirring up our selves to Religion, or to get Religion where there is
none.

2. A stirring up our selves in Religion, where there is something of it
already.

1. There is a stirring up our selves to Religion. There are some that are
utter strangers to Religion, that have nothing of God or Religion in them. Some
men have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15.34. It
is a shameful thing that there should be any in the Churches of Christ, without
the knowledge of God: Ignorant persons are the shame of Congregations: We may
be all ashamed that there are so many among us that have no knowledge. Thou
that art an Ignorant Man, the People of God may be all ashamed of thee, it is a
shame to our Congregation that there is such a blind soul amongst us; but yet
such there are.

Some that have a little knowledge of God, have yet no sense of God or Religion
upon them; Men of a Reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. Sottish senseless souls, void of
judgment, and void of sense. Nothing of God will affect them, or work upon
them: Instruct them while we will, Preach to them while we will, nothing will
enter into them or move them at all; we cannot beat any sense of God, of their
Souls, of Religion into them.

Others, if they have some knowledge and some little sense of God and Religion,
yet have no true Religion in them. They know something of God, know something
of Religion, yet still are without Christ, and without God in the world. They
have something of it in their heads, but nothing of it in their hearts, or
their lives. Or if there be some little touches of it upon them, yet there is no
sound or saving work upon them; they are Professors of Religion, but they are
Hypocrites, utterly void of the Saving grace or work of God: They are among the
Disciples of Christ, and go for Disciples, but they are not of them, as 1 John
2.19. They think themselves to be something, think themselves to be Christians,
but are nothing, but deceive their own selves. Some have no Religion, and care
not whether they have or no; do not at all concern themselves about Religion:
It does not enter into their thoughts to mind any such thing; they have no
desire to be otherwise than they are, but are quiet and well contented to
continue as they are.

How is it with you Sinners, that are here before the Lord? Some of you have
not the knowledge of God, are without Christ, are yet in your sins; and O how
little sense have you of your need of Christ? How little desire have you to be
changed, and delivered from this state you are in? Do not you feel that your
hearts are at rest in your present case? Are there any hearty wishes? O that
the Lord would change my heart! O that I might be brought into Christ, and to
fear God in truth? No, you mind not, nor take any care about any such thing; as
little of God, or Religion as you have, you care not whither ever you have more
than you have.

Now such as these, that have no Religion in them, their work is, to stir up
themselves (to) Religion, or to get Religion into them; and this stirring up
themselves to Religion, stands in these things.

1. In bethinking themselves how it is with them, and what they have to do.

2. In crying out for help, and recovery out of their sin and misery.

3. In taking the Alarm from the Watchmen.

4. In forceing themselves back from their sins, and onwards to Christ.

1. There must be a bethinking themselves how it is with them. This is the first
step they are to make toward Religion, to bethink themselves how it is with
them, 1 King. 8.47. If they shall bethink themselves; that is the first work,
and then, v. 48. If they shall return unto thee with all their heart, and with
all their soul. Sinners must bethink themselves, 1. What they are at present.
2. What they are to do for the future.


1. Sinners must bethink themselves what they are, and what a woeful state they
are in. What have I of the fear or knowledge of God in me? Am I a Christian?
Have I any thing of saving Religion in me? Am not I a blind, senseless,
careless soul, that have not so much as made any profession of Religion? I live
without Prayer, never pray in secret, no Prayer in my Family, no such thing as
minding God or my Soul. I eat and drink, I lie down and rise up, I work, and
trade, and follow my business for this world; but as for the other World, I
confess I take little care about it; or if I have minded it more than some
others, and have made a little profession of Christianity, yet am I not still
an Hypocritical Professor? Is this my case? Am I without Christ short of
saving-Religion? What can I think of my self and my present condition? Sure as
little as I have been troubled at it, it is a woeful case I am in* What, yet in
my sins, and under the power of the Devil, and in a state of Damnation? I had
need look about me before I be past remedy.

2. They must bethink themselves what they mean to do. What, shall I continue
in this case till I dye? or shall I make out after an escape? Sinners, it is a
fearful state you are in, you are miserable souls if you have no Religion in
you. But pray now bethink your selves, what do you mean to do for the future?
Will you go on as you are? Will you take no more care for your souls then you
have done? nor look after no more Religion than you have gotten? What do you
mean Sinners? Put your hearts to it, bethink you what you mean to do. What,
will you not be persuaded to thus much? Will you not so much as think with your
selves, what shall I henceforth do? Shall I venture it as I am, or shall I
make out after an escape, out of this fearful condition? If you were come to
this, to bethink your selves what a wretched case your souls are in, and how
you may do to escape it; you had then gotten the first step in this work of
stirring up your selves to Religion.

2. Crying out for help, and recovery out of this wretched state. When the soul
falls a crying once, a crying for help and recovery, then it begins to stir to
some purpose; and this kind of stirring stands.

1. In crying out upon [themselves] to seek out for help. When the Sinner,
being brought to a sense of his misery and danger, cries out to himself as
those Lepers, 2 King. 7.8. cries one to another, Why sit we here till we dye?
Or as the Mariners to Jonah, Chap. 1.6. Arise Sleeper, call upon thy God,
earest thou not that thou perish? Thou art ready to perish O my soul; if I
continue as I am, I dye for it; if I can get no more of God, or of Religion and
Christianity than I have hitherto gotten, I must to Hell, I must burn for ever
and ever. Awaken O my sleepy heart; to thy Knees, to thy Prayers, call upon thy
God, that thou perish not. Sinners, how often have we been crying to you?
Crying upon you to consider your ways; crying upon you to amend your ways, to
Repent and return unto the Lord, to get you new hearts, and to betake your
selves to a new Life? How often have you heard that word, Ezekiel. 18.32. Why will
ye dye? Turn and live. We have been long crying thus in your ears, but there is
scarce a Sinner stirs for all this; but you remain a company of stupid sleepy
souls. O Sinners, after all our crying thus upon you, when will you cry out
upon your selves? When will you take this word from Ministers mouths, when we
cry to you, Repent Sinner, go to Christ Sinner, and speak it to your selves, O
my soul Repent, hasten thee in to Christ, O my soul? Are there any of you now,
whose hearts cry thus to themselves, Away, O my soul, go to God, go to Christ
for his help, to save thee out of this wretched state, that thou perish not
everlastingly? There would be some more hope in this.

2. In crying out to the Lord, to give help in this time of need Crying out to
the Lord for help, is both an Argument that the heart is awakened, that
Conscience is stirring, and fears are stirring, and desires are stirring, and
it is the stirring of the heart. There may be a cold saying, God help me, when
the heart is still asleep; but when it cries out, then it is a sign it is
awakened: When the Psalmist, Psalm. 12. had a sight what a wicked world this
world was become, and was affected with the sight, then he cries out, Help Lord,
for the Godly Man cease, the Wicked walk on every side, and the Vilest Men
are exalted: And as the sight of such a wicked world was to him, so should the
sight of a wicked heart be to a Sinner. O my wicked heart, what a world of
wickedness is it! How full of deadly Poison; Grace is not; the good that was in
it, is ceased and perished, and every vile thing is to be found in it, Envy,
and Malice, and Lust, and Falsehood, and Folly, and Enmity against God; what a
Fountain of Wickedness is within me? O what an heart have I? Help Lord, save me
from this wicked heart, save me, or I perish. This is an hopeful stirring.

Sinners, how is it that you yet stir not? what hearts have you? Open your
Eyes, and look a little inward: Is there not sin within you, with all its
Curses and Plagues? Is not that heart of thine become like that City of
Abominations, Babylon, of which it is said, Isa. 13.21. Ziim and Okim dwell
there, and all manner of doleful Creatures, the Cormorant and the Bittern,
Owls and Satyrs, and Dragons? Is not that heart of thine a very Den of Dragons
and Serpents? Every Lust of thine heart is a Serpent, a Dragon, and an Adder,
which as tame as they lie, that thou feel them not, are devouring thy soul.
Every Sinner among you have such an heart; an (heart) full of Serpents, an
heart full of Dragons. O how is it that there is not a cry among you, Lord
help; save Lord, save me from this miserable heart? But behold for all this,
there is scarce a soul stirs; all quiet and fast asleep, and fears nothing. I Will
tell you Sinners, if you did but understand your hearts, and what there is
within you; if we could help you to a sight of those crauling Serpents, and
stinging Adders, and stinking Ulcers that are within you, 'twould scare you out
of your security, and put you to the cry, Lord save, or I am lost.

3. In crying to the Men of God, the Servants and Ministers of Christ. When
Ministers have been crying to Sinners, Men and Brethren, save your selves: If
our Word stirred them, we should have them crying to us, What must we do to be
saved? How may we escape, and be delivered from the wrath to come? So we find
it with those, Act. 2.37. when Peter's word pricked them to the heart, they
cried out, Men and Brethren (what) shall we do? And so the Jailer, Act. 16.30.
When the Lord Preached to him by an Earthquake, and shook his heart, he cried
out to the Apostles, (Sirs), what must I do to be saved? Such cries should we
hear from all the Sinners amongst you, could our Words once shake your hearts.
Help, O men of God, help me out of this miserable state; help by your Prayers,
help by your Counsels, Pray for a poor lost Soul, Preach to a poor miserable
Creature, tell me what I must do; help me to know the Lord, show me the path of
Life. Thus far that wicked one, Simon Magus, was stirred, when Peter had set
his sin and his misery home upon him, Act. 8.24. Pray for me, says he, pray to
the Lord for me, that none of these things come upon me. What am I in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity? For the Lord's sake help me out,
Pray to the Lord for me, that I abide not in this Condition.

O how few such stirring Consciences, how few such awakened Sinners can we find
among you? When do we hear one of all the Sinners here comeing to us with such
a question, Sirs, what shall I do, what must I do to be saved? When do we hear
any such Request to us, Pray for me, O pray me out of the hands of my Drunken
Companions, Pray me out of my Covetousness, pray that the Lord would deliver me
from this hard heart, from this blind mind, from this froward spirit; pray that
the Lord would convince and convert my soul? Sinners, I doubt, that how well
soever you sometimes speak of the Preaching you hear, yet I doubt it does not
reach your hearts: For mine own part, I do not remember the time when any one
Sinner among you did ever seriously put the question to me, What must I do to
be saved.

This is the second thing, wherein Sinners stirring up themselves toward
Religion, stands in their crying out for help.

3. In taking the Alarm from the Watchmen. God has sent forth his Ministers
to Alarm this sinful world, Joel 2.1. Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, sound an
Alarm in my holy Mountain, Isa. 48.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice
like a Trumpet, tell my People their Transgressions, and the House of Israel
their sins. What is the use of an Alarm? Why to awaken, and to declare to
People that there is War making upon them, that there is an Enemy near, that
they are in danger of perishing, if they suddenly look not to themselves. Thus
will I do to thee; that is, I Will do terrible things to thee, Therefore
prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. That was Amos his Alarm to Israel, Amos 4.
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; that was Jonahs Alarm to
Nineveh, Jon. 3.4. The Axe is laid to the root of the Tree, God is making short
work with Sinners, Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be cut
down and cast into the Fire; that is John-Baptist's Alarm, Mat. 3.10. The times
of this Ignorance God winked at, but now he commands all Men every where to
Repent; for he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
Righteousness; that is Paul's Alarm, Act. 17.30, 31. The like Alarms are the
Ministers of Christ sounding in Sinners ears every day; Repent, or ye shall
Perish, Believe, or ye shall be Damned, be Converted or ye shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. The most of Sinners, for all this, stir not, but
sleep on: Has not the Alarm been sounded amongst you? And yet how few Sinners
of you are there, whose souls are not fast asleep to this day? We have cried
unto you as Dalilah to Sampson, Arise Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee:
Arise Sinner, the Devil is upon thee, Sin lies at the door, the Judge stands at
the door, Death is ready to dart thee through, Hell opens her mouth for thee,
and behold nothing will do to awaken you. We give the Alarm, but you will not
take the Alarm: This is the stirring of the soul which I am Preaching of, when
Sinners are Alarmed, and take the Alarms; when the Word Preached sets
Conscience a Preaching, and thundering upon Sinners, when Conscience calls to
them, turn to the Lord, break off thy sins by Repentance; thou art a dead Man
if thou go on, there is but a step betwixt thee and everlasting death; thou will
be in, thou will be swallowed up of the eternal Furnace if thou suddenly Repent
not. When Men's hearts thus take the Alarm, and their Consciences being
startled, do fall to work with them, and provoke them to look after God and his
Grace: This is another thing wherein this stirring stands.

4. In forcing themselves back from their sins, and onwards to Christ. Though
in a proper sense, there can be no coaction of the will, yet such violence may
be used toward our selves, as in our common speech, we call forcing of our
selves. So Saul, 1 Samuel 13.12. I forced my self, and offered a Burnt-offering.
Sinners should lay violent hands as it were upon their hearts, pulling them
back from sin, putting them on to Christ. Sinners must do by their hearts as
the Angels did by Lot, Genesis 19.16. When they were hastening him out of Sodom,
they laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his Wife and Children, as
they lingered and played loath to depart, and even pulled them out from that
burning that was coming. Do your hearts hang back from Christ, do they still
hang after your sinful ways? Lay hold on them, pull them along, Mat. 11.12. The
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force. That
notes that People are in good earnest for Heaven, and cry mightily to God,
wrestle with the most High for admission. This speaks a kind of using Violence
with God; but the first Violence Men are to use, is upon themselves: They must
first lay violent hands on their own hearts to bring them about toward God;
and this must be done by pressing the things which they hear on, upon their
hearts, rouzing up their fear, and setting that as a Dog upon their heels, to
hunt them away from their sins, and drive them on to Christ. This fear will be
to Sinners as the Avenger of blood to the Manslayer, 'twill hunt them on their
way, and hasten them to Christ. O my Soul, art thou not afraid to continue as
thou art? to continue a Drunkard, to continue a Worldling, or a Liar, or a
Sleeper in thy course of Sin? Art thou not afraid of the Devil, art thou not
afraid of Death, does not Hell make thee tremble? Art thou afraid what may come
upon thee, and yet will thou not stir? Is the Avenger of Blood at thine heels,
and yet will thou not run for it? Thus should Sinners fright themselves to
Christ: If goodness, and kindness, and mercy will not allure you, let your
misery, and the danger you are in, scare you; put your finger into the fire,
dwell in the considering that Wrath and fiery Indignation, which you are
falling into; a sudden transient thought now and then will do little; you must
think and think over again and again of these terrible things. And to make such
thoughts to work, put the case to your selves, What if these dreadful things
should come upon me? What if I (should) fall into that fire? There is danger it
may be my case, and what if it should be so? If I should feel the scalding and
scorching of those flames, O how should I endure? How should I do to Burn, and
to dwell in everlasting Burnings? Think over such thoughts, Sinners, and give
not over till you feel these very thoughts begin to scald and scorch you; and
then force and fright your selves on to Repent, with such farther questions,
What, is turning from sin, and the pains of seeking after Christ, is this more
painful than everlasting Death? What, will thou do nothing to save thy Life?
to keep thee out of the fire? Suppose thy house were falling on fire, how would
it startle thee? How busy would thou be to prevent or quench it? How
passionately would thou cry out, Fire, Fire? How would thou run, and call,
and send for all the help thou could get, to save thy House out of Ashes?
And is not thy soul more to thee than thy House? Will not the Wrath of God burn
more fiercely than the fire of thine House? Nay further, Suppose thine House
were on fire, and thou were locked in, and could not get out, but were like
to burn with thy Goods; O how would thou cry out to thy Friends without, O
Pity, Pity me, and help me out, pull down the Windows, break open the Door
and help me out; I Burn, I Burn, break open the Door that I may get out.

Sinners, if you would be persuaded to dwell on such thoughts as these, O they
would fright you out of this sleepy and secure state, they would fright you out
of your Excuses; now you put it off, its hard to Repent, its hard to change
mine heart and my way; your pinching necessity would make you break through
difficulties; or at least you would call to your Friends, to your Minister,
Break open the door upon me; can you do nothing to break this hard heart of
mine? Can you say nothing to awaken this sleepy heart of mine? O help me, help
me out of this hardened state.

But what is it we must force our selves to? Why to Christ or Christianity, to
Religion or Godliness.

Obj. But God loves not, nor will regard a forced Religion, He will have his
Followers to follow him freely, and not by constraint or force.

Sol. There is a forceing our selves to the entrance upon Religion, and there
is a forceing our selves on in the exercise of Religion; it is most ordinary
that Men are at first forced upon Religion by their fear; that ordinarily is
their first motive to look after Christ, what shall I be Damned? Shall I stand
slighting of Christ and following my sins till I dye? O I must come about, I am
afraid to continue as I am, O my soul, escape for thy life, and get thee to
Christ. But those that thus force themselves in, do afterward go more freely
on. Not but that there is still need of some forceing of our selves; there is
still some use of fear, to hold us close to the exercise of Religion, and the
following of Christ: But though there be use of fear still, yet then it is Love
that chiefly leads us on; and the longer, and the further we have followed
Christ, the more freely we shall follow him.

2. There is a stirring up our selves [in] Religion, or to the vigorous
exercise of Religion: This concerns the Saints or Professors of Christianity.
Sinners have no Religion in them, and their work is to stir up themselves [to]
Religion, to get that which they have not: Christians have gotten to some
Religion, and their work is to stir up themselves in Religion, to a progress or
going forwards in Religion.

Amongst the Saints, some have more Religion in them, do abound in the Grace of
God, and in the work of Grace: Others of them have something, but it is but
little of Religion they have; they are but of little Faith, Mat. 6.30. have but
little strength. Some good thing is found in them toward the God of Israel,
but yet it is but a day of small things. Of these that have but little, some
never had much: We read of Babes in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.1. of Children in
understanding; and of these, some are but new born Babes, beginners in
Religion; others, who though as Heb. 5.12. for their time they might have been
grown up to be Men, to be strong in the Lord; yet after a long time of
profession of Christianity, they have not had one Cubit added to their Stature
in the grace of God. Though they have been Christians of long standing, yet
their souls are as Zacheus his body, of little Stature. Of those that have but
little Grace, some never had more, it has been ever but low with them from the
beginning. Others once had more Grace, but they are fallen, and sunk in their
Estates; like Naomi, time was when they went out full, but they are returned
empty. They have wasted their Talents, and are consumed in their strength;
their light burns dim, their flaming Lamp is become but like smoking Flax,
they have little more than the snuff of Religion left them.

Now there is need of stirring up themselves in Religion in all these sorts.
Those that have the most of Grace, had need bestir themselves to get more:
those that (live) most in the diligent exercise of Grace, that live most
spiritually, most circumspectly, had need be giving more diligence daily; you
that are highest, you are not yet come to your full growth, there is still more
to be gotten, and more to be done for God and your souls.

But this duty of stirring up our selves in Religion, most especially concerns
those that have but little Religion in them; both such as never had but little,
and such as once had more, and now are fallen to decay.

Now to show you what this stirring up our selves in Religion means, understand

1. By what acts you must stir up your selves.

2. To what pitch of Religion you should strive to attain.

1. By what acts you must stir up your selves.

1. The Saints must begin the stirring up themselves in Religion, where Sinners
must begin their stirring up themselves to Religion in bethinking themselves,
Hag. 1.5. Now therefore consider your ways, or set your heart upon your ways;
see how it is with you, take diligent notice how it goes with your souls.
Friends, it may be, there is the same reason for you upon a spiritual account,
as there was for them upon an outward account to consider your ways: Why
should they consider their ways? why, v. 6. Because ye have Sown much, and
Reap but little; ye eat, but have not enough; ye Drink, but are not filled; ye
Cloth you, but there is none warm; ye earn Wages to put into a Bag with holes.
May be, upon a Spiritual account, it may be said much to the same purpose
concerning some of you; God has been Sowing much, but has Reaped but little;
He has been Feeding and Clothing you, but you are empty still, and naked
still; all that you have received from God, does not keep you warm; whatever
Treasures have been poured out upon you, your hearts have been as bags with
holes, the Treasure of the Lord runs out as fast as it is poured in; you are
leaking Vessels, nothing will stay with you: Therefore consider your selves,
consider whether it has not been thus with you: O how have the Instructions of
God, His Counsels and his Comforts slid away, how quickly are they let slip?
What becomes of all your Sermons, and Sabbaths, and Sacraments you have had?
We have brought you many a rich Treasure; we have been pouring into those
hearts of yours, such living Food, such rich Wine and Oil that might have
made you fat and flourishing; but what is become of it all? O it still finds an
hole in your hearts, at which it runs out as fast as it is poured in. Consider
Friends, if it be not so with many of you, when you have been instructed and
affected with your instructions, when you have been fed and revived, and
refreshed with your Food, how soon after is it all run out and lost? Sure
Friends, it is grievous to the Ministers of Christ, and a discouragement to us
in our Administrations, to see how little a while what we bring you from God,
abides upon your hearts; the Lord has Sown much upon you, but how little is
there he Reaps? In some of you there is little springs up, and those in whom
there is more springs up, and flourishes for a time in the blade, O how has it
withered and grown to deday, and will not ripen to the Harvest!

That it may be better for the future, your first business is to consider and
bethink your selves, if hitherto it be not thus with you: Bethink your selves
every one of you, How is it with me? Is mine heart kept full? full of the
Knwledge of God, full of Faith, and the fruits of it? Is mine heart kept warm?
Is there such an heat wrought into it as holds? Is mine heart a Treasure of
good things, and do they abide in me? Do the counsels of the Word, and the
comforts and quicknings of Sacraments stay by me? Have I some standing abiding
Treasure within me, something within me to show that the Word is not Preached
to me in vain? Or do not I do as others, let all slip and dye away with the
speaking? Bethink your selves thus, how it is with you; is your Grace grown up?
Are your souls built up in Faith and Holiness? God has been building among
you, but how does the building go up? In some of you, has it not ever been at
a stand? If the Foundation has been laid, yet scarce a stone laid up upon it;
and others in whom the Building seemed to be raised to some considerable
height, is it not broken down, is not your work fallen again? Deal plainly in
this matter, bethink your selves, do your souls prosper, or is it but low with
you, and has it not been some time better with some of you than it is now?

2. If it be but low with your souls, much more if you have had a long time to
increase, since you first believed; and more then that, if heretofore it has
been better with you then it is now, then bethink your selves further, Is not
this an evil case you are in? Is this a case to be rested in? Do you like it to
be as you are? If you had a Child of your natural body, that should be no more
able to speak, or go, or feed its self, and had no more understanding at 10. or
20. years old then when 'twas but an Infant, but must be still Suckled and
carried in Arms at those years, as if it had been but in its first year; would
not such a Child be a Cross to you, and an Affliction? O how is it that you are
not a Cross to your selves, and an Affliction to your selves, that after so
long a time as some of you have had of growing, you should yet in matters
spiritual not be past Babes or Children? It was an Affliction to the Apostle, 1
Cor. 3.1. that he must still speak to them as to Babes I could not speak unto
you as to Spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ. Here 2
things, 1. To have Christians to continue still as Babes and Children, is an
Affliction to their Ministers. The manner of the Apostles speech intimates so
much, that it was a trouble to him that he must still speak to them as Babes.
2. By how much the more carnal Christians remain, by how much the less
spiritual, by so much the more Childish they continue, to be still carnal, is
there said to be the same with being Babes. Do thou think that thou art grown
past a Child? How is it that thou art so carnal still, minding carnal things,
and living such a carnal life? Carnally minded Professors, those that are given
so much to their carnal things, and are of such a carnal Conversation, if they
have any thing of Christ in them, yet it is but very little; if they be
Christians, they are but Babes in Christ; as they grow up, they will grow more
Spiritual and Heavenly. Never think your selves to be grown or thriving
Christians, till ye can more despise these carnal things and ways, and are come
to be more Spiritually-minded, and have gotten this Earth and Flesh more out of
your hearts, and under you feet.

Well, but is it not an Affliction to you to continue thus carnal? Are you
well satisfied with that carnal heart you have, with that carnal life you live?
But what do you think of [your] state, that have grown up from being Carnal to
be Spiritual, and are now fallen from being Spiritual to be Carnal again? Have
you once had the daylight shining in your hearts, and are you now returned to
the twilight again? Did you once live a life of Faith, and a life of Love, and
had your Conversation in Heaven? were you once of a tender heart, of a
circumspect savoury Life? Did you live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit,
and are you now fallen back to a more eager minding earthly things, and have
lost that sense, that lively sense you had of things Spiritual and Eternal?
Bethink your selves Friends, whither this be any of your cases, and whether you
like it to be in such a case? Or whether you do not with grief acknowledge it,
my soul is but in evil case, and it is time for me to bestir my self, and get me
up to a better state?

2. In crying out upon your selves, to be reaching forward to what you have not
attained, and to recover what you have lost, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 57.8. Awake
up my glory; so say you, awake up my Grace, awake up my Love, awake my Fear,
awake up my Conscience: And as the Apostle to the Romans, chap. 13.11. Awake O
my soul, it is high time to awaken out of sleep; it is high time to look about
me, it is high time to bestir me. What, shall I always loyter and trifle as I
have done hitherto? Shall I never take more care and more pains, and be more
busy for God and my Soul than I have hitherto been? It Is high time, it is high
time to awaken and put on. I may no longer live the (rest) of my time in the
Flesh, The time past of my life may suffice me to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles; As the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. The time past may suffice me. It is
enough, it is long enough that I have lived this carnal life? O it is more then
enough, it is too long, it is a shame that I have lived under the profession of
Christianity so long as I have, and yet my soul be brought to no better pass: O
it is time that I awaken and bestir my self to amend my pace. Cry out thus upon
your selves, awaken O my soul in time, it is time, it is high time, it is more
than time to look about thee; come my lazy heart, up, and be doing: And if it
be time to get more Grace than ever I had, sure it is high time to set to
recovering what once I had and have now lost: Is my soul at a loss, and shall I
always sit down by the loss? Much I have lost already, and shall I go on losing
and losing, till I have lost all? Friends, we cry unto you, remember whence you
have fallen, and Repent, recover your first love, do your first works; and when
you will take the cry from our mouths, and cry thus upon your selves, then
there is hopes ye will recover.

3. In crying unto the Lord for his help. If Ministers cannot stir you, if
Conscience cannot stir you, if ye cannot awaken your selves, nor recover your
selves, yet the Lord God can do it, the helper of Is^ael can help you. Seek the
Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is nigh, Isa. 55.6. Before
you be too far gone, before your case grow desperate, whilst the Lord is at
hand, calling upon you, now seek out to him. Go to the Physician of souls, He
can cure every Disease, and thy Disease, the Consumption of the heart. Behold,
thou art in a Consumption, not of the Liver, or Lungs, or Reins the Consumption
of the Heart is upon thee; and this Consumption no other Physician can cure but
the Physician of Souls: Whatever other Physician thou go to, with the
neglect of him, thou will find them all Physicians of no value; whatever other
course thou take, with the neglect of seeking God, he will say to thee, as
Jer. 46.11. In vain shall thou use many Medicines, for thou shall not be cured.
Go to God for thy languishing soul, cry unto Him, lift up thine heart with thy
might, pour forth thy very soul in thy Prayers; Lord I am fallen, Lord I pine,
my soul languisheth, my Faith fails, my Beauty is withered, my Spirit is
wasted, my Flesh and my Heart fails, but thou art the strength of mine heart,
and my hope is in thee; help Lord, or I dye, I dye for ever.

4. In putting a force upon your selves to do your duty. It is not lying down
in the Ditch, and only crying, God help me; you must do your best to help your
selves, or God will not help you. All the means under Heaven will never do,
unless we can bring you to set your hearts on work for your selves; have you
any of you taken a fall? Are you down, and would you recover? Count upon it,
that it must cost you pains; your hearts hang back, and are loath to come to it;
that is your Disease, your loathness to spiritual action, and what must you do
to get your selves on? Why, what would you do to your Ox or your Horse if they
lag or grow lazy? O they must feel the Goad and the Spur, and that will quicken
them: O Friends, put Spurs to your own sides, prick your selves on to more
activity; suffer not your selves to jogg on in Religion, so as you can with
ease; easy Religion will never help you: You that are not for pains-taking,
there you must lie, and pine, and perish, and there is no help for you. Why
lie thou thus upon thy face? Get thee up, says God to Joshua, Josh. 7.10. Why
stand you bewailing and bemoaning your selves? Up, and be doing, thou have
sinned thy self into this case, thou have idled thy self into this loss, and
nothing will help thee out without thine own diligence and labor. Go tell your
own hearts, there is no hope of recovery without industry, and if they will not
hear on it, chide them out of this listless temper: What, can thou take pains
for Bread, or for Money, and no pains for thy soul? Can thou take pains to
please thy flesh, and yet will be at no pains to please God? O what a wicked,
wretched, foolish heart have I? Any labor will down but this necessary labor:
Well, thou shall not 'scape me so, thou art no heart for me, if thou art not an
heart for work; never stand excusing or delaying, thou must come to it; fall to
thy duty and follow it close, or thou will dye the Death. In this manner force
your selves on, let not your hearts be quiet within you, till you have engaged
in a more active and laborious Life. Thus I have showed you by what acts you
are to stir up your selves.

2. To what pitch in Religion we should stir up our selves.

To this I shall Answer.

1. In General. It Is not to amend a little, to get into something a better case
than you are, but to come on to purpose, to come on fully after the Lord. May
be, some of you may think, if this word should have (some) effect upon you, and
make you a little better, that it had done its work upon you; no, no, you are
far short of what you should be; and think not that this word has done its
work, though it should make you a little better than you are, unless it also
bring you effectually onward toward what you should be. There Is no mark short
of perfection, that should bound or terminate your aims: But I shall give you
three marks on this side the Goal, the better to direct your eye toward it.

1. To such a pitch as is proportionable to your time. You are some of you,
Professors of long standing, and yet are come to but little. O labor that your
growth may be according to the time you have.

2. Those that are fallen, should strive to get up to that pitch, to which once
they had attained. This is the first thing we should have in our eye, to
recover what we have lost, to recover our first love, to do our first works
which the Church of Ephesus was exhorted to, Rev. 2.5. That which has been
attained, may be attained, and must be striven after. You that are fallen,
remember how it has been with you in your best time; remember the kindness of
your youth, and the love of your Espousals, when your hearts were tender, when
your love was keen, when your affections were quick and lively, when the Word
and Ordinances of God were sweet and powerful, when you came from far, and
would go through thick and thin to hear the word of the Lord; when your
Meditations, when your Communications by the way, as you went and returned,
were so savoury and so pleasant to you: Such a time there has been with some of
you, such a time of love and of life there has been, are you fallen from this?
O recover, recover, and let it be with you as in the days of old.

3. Both those that are fallen, and every one, should strive to get up to the
highest pitch of Religion, that is attainable. You should level at perfection
of Holiness, and no mark short of Perfection should limit or bound your aims, 2
Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from (all)
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. Though
perfect Holiness cannot be attained, yet it must be aimed at; though we cannot
reach unto it, yet we must be reaching toward it; though we cannot obtain, yet
we must be still following after. Because we cannot obtain all that is
desirable, but there will be still while we live, something that is before,
which we are yet short of; therefore our motion in Religion must be constantly
a progressive motion; we must still be going forward, and reaching out to that
which is before, that our works may be more, and our hearts may be better at
last then at first, Prove. 4.18. The Path of the Just must shine more and more
unto perfect day, Grace must be growing up till it be swallowed up of Glory.

2. Particularly.

1. To an hunger and thirst of soul after more of Religion; to a stirring
Appetite. Sick men, when their Stomachs come to them, it is a good sign of
recovery. Hunger and Thirst are eager Appetites, that put us to pain, and are
impatient till satisfied; the keenness, or eagerness of the Appetite after the
Grace of God, is expressed by Coveteousness, earnest Coveteousness, 1 Cor.
12.31. Covet earnestly the best gifts: The Coveteous are greedy souls; but
there are degrees of greediness, the hearts of some Covetous ones are more
sharp set upon the world than others that are greedy enough. Covet earnestly,
let your hearts be as hungry and thirsty after Grace, and the gifts of Grace,
as the most greedy Men on earth gapes after the world.

Hunger and Thirst are imperious Appetites, that will command men upon any
thing, any labor, any difficulties, for the obtaining satisfaction; Hunger
will break through Stone walls: A graciously thirsty soul will not sit still,
and only say, I Thirst, give me to drink; but he will rise and about, to seek
where he may be satisfied; he will out to the Springs and the Brooks, and the
Wells of Salvation, where he may draw and drink of the Water of Life. He will
refuse no pains nor no hazard, in order to the satisfying his desire. Then you
are hungry after Religion, then your souls are Athirst for God, when you are so
sharply set, that you must have it, and will stick at no labor and
difficulties for the obtaining.

The hunger and thirst of Souls after God, is an attainment which is the way to
an higher attainment, Mat. 5.6. Blessed are they that hunger after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled: Are you hungry after Grace? Are you
thirsty after God and Godliness? Blessed are you, for ye shall be filled, ye
shall have enough; Grace enough for you, Religion and Righteousness enough,
your souls shall be satisfied with the goodness of the Lord, He will fulfill the
Desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.19. O Christians, were we a more
hungry Congregation, were we a more thirsty People, Spiritually hungry,
Spiritually thirsty, what an Holy People, what a company of gracious souls
should we quickly become? The Lord will fill his hungry souls with his good
things; we should be full, and abound, and have all things, even all Grace
abundantly toward us, and in us.

It Is one misery of consuming decayed souls, that they have lost their
Appetites: Some Consumptive bodies will be hungry and eat till they dye, but
Consumptive souls do neither hunger nor thirst. It Is an ill sign that thou art
dangerously gone in a Consumption, who have lost thine Appetite after God, in
whom thy desire fails; it is one of the Death-Tokens mentioned by Solomon,
Eccles. 12.5. That desire shall fail. Thou have lost much of thy strength and
thy spirits, the life of Grace is fallen much to decay in thee; but does thy
desire after Grace fail to? Have thou lost thine hunger and thy thurst after
Righteousness, does thy soul cease to pant after the Waterbrooks? Can thou
not say I am athirst for God, for the living God? That soul of thine is nigh
unto death, if it be not suddenly recovered.

O Friends, how many such dying souls are there among us? Grace has failed,
and desire has failed in too many among us: Do not deceive your selves with
saying, I desire, I desire to be a more Holy and Heavenly and hearty Christian;
do not say you desire, nor think you desire what you do not. Appetitus
determinator ad hoc. If you truly desire Grace and an improvement herein, then
this is the one thing you desire; Grace, and nothing but Grace; Holiness, and
nothing but Holiness will satisfy. And if you can say, this one thing I
desire, then you will also say, this one thing I will seek. It Is not a dull and
idle, and ineffectual wish that can be accounted a sincere desire, but such a
keen and eager Appetite and Thirst after God as will not let you be quiet, or
suffer you to rest in such a case. Those that are heartily hungry, they cannot
sleep for hunger, their hunger will keep them waking. What, are you such
drowsy, sleepy souls? Can you take any rest in that poor and empty state you
are in? Sure, whatever you think, you have little thirst for God, 'twould keep
you waking (if you had); your souls would have no ease, you could not be in
quiet till you obtain.

O what a case is this that thou art in? What, to have so little of God in
thee, and yet no greater desire after more? What art thou like to come to,
whose Bread fails, and when hunger fails to; whose Grace is sunk, and whose
desire after Grace fails? What, neither to have, nor to wish thou had? or to
have so very little, next to nothing, and not to wish for more? What, to have
lost so much, and not to weep over thy loss, and wish for thy recovery?
Friends, how stands the case with you? Sure you do not know your state; if some
of you do, know that it is but very low with you: But what pantings, or
thirstings, or workings of your hearts are there after an increase? Do not some
of you find a great indifferency grown upon you in this matter? You are not
careful, nor much concerned about the reviving of your souls? If you have any
good desires at all, are they not weak desires, dull and cold desires, such as
do not at all stir or disquiet your spirits, but that you can go on well enough
for all this, in your worldly designs and fleshly ways? When do ye think to
recover into a better case? Are ye ever like to come to any thing in Religion,
may you not fear you are quickly like to come to just nothing, if ye hold on a
while longer at this pass? O Friends, feel your Pulses every one, (how) do your
hearts beat Heaven-wards? How very faintly do they beat? What might I do to
make you sensible what fainty souls you are? What might I speak to stir up
desire to whet your Appetites? If I could but Preach you into hungry ones, and
thirsty ones; if I might send you away from this Soul-meal with an Appetite,
then there would be hope that the Lord would fill you with his good things.

Well, this is the first thing I would persuade you to, to stir up your
Appetites; Get you such an hunger and thirst of soul after the Lord, and the
power of Religion: Let your loss make you hungry after a recovery; let your
want make you hungry after a supply: Let the worth and excellency of Religion,
and the power of Holiness, set you an hungring after it, as sometimes the very
fight of good Meat does in our bodily cases. What do ye mean? Will ye Starve
and Perish, and Pine away to nothing? What will ye dye away of this consuming
Disease? Have you lost so much, and will you lose that little that is left? Are
you not yet afraid that you may? That you that have lost so much, may even lose
all? Does it never move you? Does it never trouble you to see what Starveling,
Pale-faced Christians some of you are become? Sure Friends, if you would
consider your selves, if you would lay to heart your weak, and wasted, and
wanting state, this would kindle desire after a recovery and revival. And if we
could but kindle desire in you, affectionate desires, ardent desires,
impatient, painful, working desires, this would be a good step toward that
pitch of prosperous Religion that I am proposing to you to follow after. And
therefore pray never be at peace with your selves, nor suffer your hearts to
have quiet, till this miserable listlesness and coldness toward God be cured,
and you be so awakened out of this dullness that you may be able to say with the
Church, Isa. 26.8, 9. I wait for thee O Lord, the desire of my soul is to thy
Name, and to the remembrance of thee; with my very soul do I desire thee in the
night, and my spirit within me shall seek thee early: And with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 63 1, 2, 3. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: I have
neglected thee, I have forsaken thee, but now my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee in this dry and thirsty state, where no water is. O that
I might see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen it, or as others thy
Saints do see it? Thy loving kindness is better than life, my soul follows
hard after thee, let thy right hand help me: Let your souls thus cry out after
the living God, Lord help me; help me up to thee, help me on after thee, revive
thy work in me, I have gone astray like a lost Sheep; seek the soul of thy
Servant, that I may never again forget thy Commandments. Let me be sound in thy
Statutes, and let my ways be so directed, that I may keep thy Precepts. O
Friends, might you be brought to such a thirsting, longing, desiring, seeking
heart, then shall your souls be filled with marrow and fatness, and your mouth
shall praise him with joyful lips.

2. To a savor and relish of Religion. Some are so sick and weak that they
cannot eat nor drink what is good for them, have quite lost their ^ppetites;
others can eat and drink, but cannot relish what they take, have lost their
taste When both their Appetite is restored and their taste; when they can eat
that which is good, and can relish what they eat, that is a farther token of
recovery. When wisdom enters into the heart, and the knowledge of God is
[pleasant] to the soul, as Prove. 2.10. When we receive the knowledge of God,
and perceive the sweet savor of his knowledge, this is an argument of
soundness and healthfulness. Sickly and weakly souls, their necessity will make
them drink in something of the things of God: Religion and Godliness they must
entertain and embrace, they see they must dye else, as a Sick man sees he must
if he do not eat nor drink: And therefore how unpleasant soever it be, it must
down; but were it not for necessity, he could be better contented to let it all
alone.

Christians, it may be your Soul-necessities do put you upon something of
Religion, hold you to Praying, and to Hearing, and to minding and speaking of
the things of God; it is well that something will do with you, that your
necessity will prevail with you, better so than not at all; but yet it may be,
whatever you receive, whatever you do, you can find no savor in it, you have
no taste of the sweetness of Religion, it goes down like chips and sticks, and
has no relish in it. You can Pray, but you have no lively affections in
prayer; you can hear, and yet find no sweetness in what you hear; you can
speak, and maintain discourse about the things of God, but are not at all
affected with what you speak; it comes coldly and drily out, and has no
gratefulness in it, neither to your selves or those that hear you; sure this is
a sign that you have but little Religion in you, if any at all. When what we
receive of Religion, goes deep, enters into the heart; when that which we bring
forth of Religion (comes) deep, comes from the heart: When we speak with the
heart, it will be more affectionate, and the affection which we express will be
an evidence that we taste the good things we speak of.

O Friends, get you such a relish of Religion, get you up not only to be
knowing and understanding Christians, but savoury Christians, of a savoury
spirit, Romans 8.5. Those that are after the Spirit do mind (the word signifies)
do savor the things of the Spirit: Spiritual things are savoury things to
Spiritual men. Get you to be so Spiritually minded, that you may be spiritually
affected; that the knowledge of God, and the thoughts of God, and the worship
of God, that communing with God and with your own hearts, and one with another,
about the things of God, may be affecting and pleasant to your souls. Lively
affectionate Christians, it is a fign they have drunk in the Spirit of Religion
into their very hearts; and it will be an help to the begetting and warming
affections in others; when once you have experimentally tasted the sweetness,
and are thereby deeply affected with Religion, then you are like to hold to it,
and prosper in it. This taste and relish of Religion is not to be gotten but by
our inward and experimental acquaintance with it, whilst it dwells but in the
head and upon the tongue, it will be but a dry and insipid thing to you; whilst
you dwell upon the surface, and outside, and are but smatterers and triflers
in Religion, you may say of all your Religion, as it was said of Samaria's
Idolatry, Hos. 8.7. It has no Stalk, the Bud yields no Meal; or if it has any
stalk, or seems to yield any meal, yet neither stalk nor meal has any
sweetness in it. Friends, you must go deeper in Religion if ever you will taste
the sweetness of it. Get your hearts to be so leavened and seasoned with it,
get Religion to be so Naturalized to you, drink in the spirit of Religion into
you, that you may be metamorphised and changed into its own Image and Nature,
and then you will find how pleasant it will be to you.

3. To solidity in Religion. Particularly,

1. To solid substantial Religion.

2. To be more solid in Religion.

1. Get up to solid and substantial Religion. What the substance of Religion
is, I shall shortly hint to you from two Scriptures, Phil. 3.3. We are the
Circumcision which Worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh: Tit. 2.12. Teaching us, that denying all
ungodliness and wordly Lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in
this present world. Out of these two Scriptures you may learn wherein the
substance of Religion lies, viz.

1. In worshipping God in the Spirit; or as Joh. 4.24. in Spirit and in Truth.
This Notes, 1. The inward worshipping God, our loving, fearing, praising the
Lord, etc. 2. Our being real and spiritual in the outward worship of God, our
hearing with understanding, our praying with our Spirits, etc. Our taking heed
to it, that our acts of worship be not barely bodily exercise, but the works of
our souls; be not shaddows and Images of worship, but the very thing they
pretend to be.

2. In rejoyceing in Christ Jesus: That is, as our Mediator, by whom, as we
exhibit all our worship, so we expect its acceptance, and all the comforts and
fruits of it.

3. In shunning of Iniquity, Denying all ungodliness and worldly Lusts. This
Notes, 1. The abstaining from the practice of sin, that we do no Inity, Psalm.
119.3. 2. The mortifying the Lusts of sin, the killing of sin within, the
Crucifying the flesh, with the affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24.

4. In the practice of Holiness and Righteousness. Our living Soberly, and
Righteously, and Godly in this present world. These are the substance of
Religion; he that worships God in Spirit and in Truth, that thus rejoices in
Christ Jesus, that denying all Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, lives Righteously,
and Soberly, and Godly in this present world, he is a substantial Christian.

There may be great growth in these substantials, in this solid Religion, where
there seems but little in affection; and there may be much affection in others
that are not solid Christians: there may be Christians that cannot weep for sin,
as some others can, but yet they can take more heed of sin; they can fear it,
and shun it, and conquer the power of it more than those that can more
passionately weep for it. There are some that cannot so passionately melt under
the Word, but yet the Word sticks more upon them, and has more power over
their practice. There are, that cannot feel so much of the warm and lively
workings of love to God, but they are more tender how they offend or displease
God; more bent upon being Serviceable and Faithful to God: And sure there is
more of solid Religion in these, than in some others in whom it works more
passionately. Friends, look to this, if you be wanting in affection, let it be
made up in circumspection; what you want of the delights of Religion, let it be
made up in diligence. If you feel not so much of the warm workings of love to
Christ, yet can you but keep you close to Christ, and the obedience of his
will; if whilst you are less lively, you be yet more tender, and heedful, and
watchful in your goings; if whilst you cannot melt, nor passionately mourn for
sin, yet you carefully shun and beware of sin: if though you be not elevated
and raised to those heights and raptures of joys, as some others, yet you are
more mortified to sin and the world; if you be dead with Christ, dead to the
Fashions, and Lusts, and Pleasures, and Riches of this world; if ye be dead
with Christ, though your life and the comforts of it be yet but hidden, you
have gotten the substance of Christianity in you. In these, and such like
instances, stands the solidity of Christianity, wherein he that grows most is
the best Christian. It Is true, when affection and solidity go together, where
we are both substantial Christians, and also warm and lively Christians, that is
incomparably best and most desirable. Follow after both, but especially take
heed that whatever be wanting in affection, be made up in solidity. Get to be
more understanding experienced Christians, get to be more Conscientious,
tender, strict, and close followers of Christ in all the known and weighty
matters of the Law. Be mortified to sin, be crucified to the World, be bent
upon doing all the good you can in your Generations; this is it I mean by solid
Religion.

O Friends, what a deal of light and frothy Religion have we known some years
since in our Land, which made a great noise, and a fair show, and appeared in a
great flush of affection, and had but little it? What tryumphing in Christ,
what boasting of the Spirit, what magnifyings of free grace, what pretentions
to great joys and confidences were there amongst many hot and hasty Professors
which have since vanished into mere wind? How comes this to pass? Why there was
not the substance of Religion at bottom; the sounding Vessels were hollow, and
had nothing in them. Be as affectionate as you can, be as zealous and lively as
possible, but be sure that there be substance under all your shows. Be diligent
Christians, be doing Christians, be mortified Christians; it is this which will
hold out, and therefore let this be it you are reaching up unto, to keep you
from Iniquity, to keep you close to duty, and hence to be built up through
Faith unto Salvation.

2. Get to be solid in Religion, to more firmness, to be more [deeply] rooted
in the Faith, and more firmly resolved for the obedience of the Gospel; this
the Apostle expresses by groundedness and settleness, Col. 1.23. If ye continue
in the Faith, grounded and settled; and Chap. 2.7. rooted and built up in him,
and established in the Faith. In this establishment or rootedness (besides a
firm belief of the Gospel) are these 4. things.

1. A firm resolution for Christ. 2. A firm trust in Christ. 3. A firm
adherence to Christ. 4. A confirmed habit of Holiness.
1. A firm resolution for Christ, and the obedience of the Gospel; every
sincere resolution is a firm resolution, but there are degrees of firmness;
firmness may be taken in opposition to Fickleness. Feebleness.


1. To fickleness. Some Professors are light and unstable souls, they are off
and on, sometimes resolved, and then unresolved; sometimes their faces,
sometimes their backs are upon Christ. In this sense, every sincere resolution
is a firm resolution. The weakest Christian is unalterably resolved for Christ;
though he may be shaken, yet he never comes to be totally unresolved.

2. To feebleness, or weakness of resolution. Some Christians are more strongly
resolved, others are unalterably, but not so strongly. Though they do not go
back, yet are they under doubts and fears that they shall, and it may be
sometimes (in the day of temptation) put it to the question, Shall I go on, or
shall I give off? Now this is the firm resolution I would press you to be
reaching toward, which is opposed to feebleness and weakness. But having
written more largely to this elsewhere, I shall say no more of it here.

2. To a settled trust in Christ. Now because this will both prove us to be
established Christians, and also mightily conduce to our farther establishment
and growth; I shall therefore here a little the more enlarge, and shall show,

1. What this trust is.

2. That it both proves us established Christians, and makes much for our
further improvement and establishment.

1. What this trust in Christ is. It is expressed in Scripture by committing
our selves to him, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to him, or trusted him with. This committing
our selves to Christ, notes,

1. Our laying up our selves, and all our hopes and concerns with him, so as to
venture our selves in his custody, to venture our selves upon his faithfulness;
to cast all our burdens upon him, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord
and he shall sustain thee. To cast all our care upon him, 1 Pet. 5.7. to leave
it upon Christ to take the care of us, to put it into his hands, to look to it
that nothing be lost, and to help us on through our whole course to the end.
Only here, lest we be damnably mistaken, know, that it must be only for his own
part that Christ must be trusted, for that which he has undertaken to do for
us, for what he has undertaken to keep for us. 2. It must be only in his own
way, in a way of obedience to Christ, in a way of well-doing: As in respect to
God, so in respect to Christ also, we must commit the keeping our selves to him
in well-doing, 1 Pet. 4.19. There are some things that we are to do, which
Christ never undertook to do for us; we are to Believe, we are to Repent, this
we must do our selves: Christ has never undertaken to Believe or Repent for
us; we must believe our selves, and repent our selves. There are some things
that Christ never undertook [alone] to keep for us; we must keep Faith and a
good Conscience our selves; Christ has undertaken to help us to Repent, to
help us to keep a good Conscience, but never undertook to save us the labor of
repenting, of keeping Faith and a good Conscience our selves. And that which
Christ has undertook to keep for us, to keep our souls, to keep us unto
Salvation, to preserve us unto his Heavenly Kingdom, He will do it only in his
own way; whilst we are walking in Christ's way, in the way of Faith and
Obedience to his will, in the way of Holiness and Righteousness we may boldly
venture our selves in his keeping.

Sinners will trust Christ with their souls, will commit the keeping of their
souls to him, but not in a way of well doing; they trust him in a way of evil
doing; their trust in Christ they make to be their security in their evil
course: They trust in Christ to answer for their rejecting Christ; they trust
in Christ to answer for their not believing in Christ, for their abusing and
slighting of Christ, for their total and final Impenitence, and hardening
themselves against Christ; and from this trust they venture to go on in their
sins, and in the hardness and impenitence of their hearts.

Drunkards, how dare you go on in your Drunkenness? Worldlings, how dare you go
on in your Covetousness? Ye Vain and Carnal, and Careless ones, how dare you go
on in this carnal Life? How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? O I trust in
Christ for Salvation; and what follows? Why thereupon, behold how boldly thou
venturest on in thy neglect of Christ, and thy Rebellion against him; thou
would not dare to be such a drunken Beast, thou would not dare to go on in
thy Lying, or Coveteousness and Carnality, but for thy trust in Christ, to save
thee at last. Thou go on to serve thy will, and mind this World, and
satisfy thy Lust: and hence thou take heart and encouragement that thou
trustest in Christ.

But Man, will thou trust Christ for that he never undertook? Will thou trust
Christ for that which he never promised? Did Christ ever promise to save thy
soul, whether thou were a Believer or no Believer? Whether thou come in and
be Converted, or stand out, and runnest on thy wicked ways? Turn Sinners,
turn to Christ, Repent and be Converted from your sins, or never comfort your
selves in your trust in Christ. Christ has said He will Damn thee if thou
Believe not, if thou Repent not; but he never said he will save thee however.
Christians, trust in Christ, commit the keeping of their souls to him, but it is
in Christ's way, in a way of well doing and obedience to his will; they lay out
themselves and all their powers in the Service of Christ, and then lay up their
souls, and all their hopes in Christ and His custody.

2. Committing to Christ, notes our leaning upon Christ, and dependence on Him
in a quiet and confident expectation of his helping us, and holding us on our
way, according to his promise. The grounds whereof are our being satisfied
concerning His promise, His sufficiency and fidelity, Cant. 8.9. Who is this
that comes up out of the Wilderness, leaning on her Beloved? The weak or weary
Traveller, if he has whereon to lean, if it be but a Staff or a Style, or a
Tree, on which he may lean himself, he finds ease and rest. Christians lean and
depend on Christ, and this gives them courage for their work, and ease and rest
in their spirits; their trust in Christ, notes such a repose of their souls,
such a dependence on his sufficiency, on his fidelity, as quiets, and sustains
and stays their hearts in hope of his help, and in peace and comfort; and so
it is expressed, Isa. 50.10. Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
himself upon his God. Christians have their doubts and their fears, and their
darkness, and their tempests; even (their) hearts also are sometimes like a
troubled Sea; and how sadly are they tossed with the Tempests: But how do they
stand under all this? How is it that they are not sunk and overwhelmed, and
utterly lost in all this? Their trust is their strength, they stay themselves
upon the Lord. I am in a poor case Lord, hard beset, hard bestead, I know not
what to do, nor what to make of my self, nor how to help my self; only mine
Eyes are toward thee, thou art my Rock and my Refuge. I have given this soul
of mine to thee, it is thine own, and thereupon I have committed it to thy
custody. Look thou to it Lord, thou have undertataken for me, and that shall
satisfy me, there I will lean, I will stay, I will repose my fearing wearied
soul.

2. This trust in Christ makes much for our improvement and establishment in
Christianity: For,

1. It is our taking hold on Christ. As the Anchor takes hold on the Rock, as
the Root takes hold on the Tree, so Faith takes hold on Christ; and the higher
our Believing is grown up into affiance or trusting, the stronger is its hold.

2. It will answer to all our doubts and fears, and to all the doubting
questions that the anxious soul will be pulling in for resolution and
satisfaction, which whilst they remain unresolved, he is never like to go
comfortably or prosperously on his way.

There are amongst Multitudes of others, these three great cases it sees before
it, which it must have resolution in.

1. Says the soul, I have a Wilderness to pass through; this world is a
Wilderness, and the time of my Life is my Traveling through this Wilderness,
wherein I shall find much work and hard usage: who shall help me through this
Wilderness?

2. I have a Jordain to pass over, I must pass through the Vale of the shadow
of Death; I must dye, who shall bring me over Jordain.

3. I have an Inheritance that lies beyond the River, on the other side Death;
who shall give me possession of mine Inheritance? Trust answers to all, to all
the doubts that arise in these three cases.

The first case is most immediately proper to our business in hand, but I shall
crave leave to speak a few words also to the two latter, which will be, at
least of this use, to knock in what I shall speak upon the former.

1. Case. I have a Wilderness to pass through, the time of my life is a passing
through the Wilderness; who shall help me through it? And here the soul will
put two particular questions.

1. Who shall lead me my way through the Wilderness? Here are many ways, many
false ways, many cross ways, and but one that is the right way: How shall I hit
my may to Heaven, the right way that leads thither-wards? Who will show me, and
lead me in this way? Here Trust answers, Christ will do it, I lean upon him to
be my Moses to lead me in the way that I should go. Thou will guide me with thy
Council, Psalm. 73.24. Christ has gone the way before his Saints, and he will
show them his steps to direct them: Therefore the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 12.2.
Run the Race -- looking to Jesus; as for encouragement, so for direction;
follow not the footsteps of the Sheep only, but follow the footsteps of the
Shepherd, and walk on as he walked before thee. But how shall I find the way,
or the steps wherein Christ walked? Jer. 10.23. It is not in Man that walks,
to direct his steps. How can a Man understand his own ways, Prove. 20.24. There
are many hard and intricate cases, where I may be at a stand, and not know
which way to take: Their answer is, as Psalm. 143.8. In thee do I trust, cause
me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul to thee; and v.
10. Thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land of Vprightness; I trust thou will, thou will guide me by thy Counsel, and bring me to glory.

2. Question, Who shall supply and sustain me in the Wilderness? This World is
a dry and barren Land; I must have Bread to strengthen me, I must have water to
refresh me, whence shall I be supplied? Why I trust in Christ for supplies, He
will give me Manna, will rain down Bread from Heaven for me; He will be a
springing Rock to me, of whose streams I shall be refreshed: Such a Rock there
was in the Wilderness of old; and the Apostle tells me, 1 Cor. 10.4. This Rock
was Christ. Christians are sensible that their stock of Provisions which they
carry with them, will not last; that little Grace they have, those little
Comforts they have, will be quickly spent and wasted if there be not
continually fresh supplies: Whence shall I be supplied? Trust answers as the
Apostle in another case, Phil. 4.19. My God will supply all my wants, according
to the Riches of his Grace by Christ Jesus. I trust he will. I am often as a
dry Tree, my soul within me is as a barren Wilderness; I have every day my work
coming upon me, work for mine own Soul, work for my Family, work for my Friends
and Enemies. I have every day my wants coming upon me, I want Faith, I want
Love, I want Life, and Zeal, and Strength; O how poor and low is it with me! my
Soul hungreth and thirsts, and faints within me, and now what shall I do? I
will get me to the Rock, and there will I trust. I will trust in Christ, his
Grace shall be sufficient for me, 2 Cor. 12.9. of his fullness I hope to
receive, even Grace for Grace.

Christians, is this at any time the case of your souls? Are you discouraged by
your Poverty and Barrenness? Do you complain how weak and insufficient you are
for your work, how low and scant it is with you in respect of Grace and
Strength? Do you doubt how you shall hold up, and hold on? Do you thirst and
faint after the influences of Heaven? Do you fear you shall wast and wither,
and consume away in your souls Penury? O to the Rock, to the Rock, go to
Christ, and trust him for supplies. There are these three things that he looks
you should depend upon him for. 1. For the continued influence of his Grace,
whereby to hold and maintain your souls in life. 2. For assistance in Duty, for
his Spirit to help your Infirmities, and to work your works in you. 3. For all
needful and necessary Comforts.

You are yet but Children, and as Children you have not your stock in your own
hands, you have but from hand to mouth, every day you will need new provisions:
You are Children, and as Children, cannot go alone; without me (says Christ)
you can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. You are apt to be comfortless Children, and it is
He that has said, Isa. 51.12. I even I am He that comfort you: Learn to
know your own state, and carry it accordingly. Have thou Grace? Improve it,
preserve it, and make the best of it; but never count you have enough to last
you till you come home; you must to the Breasts every day, you must to Christ
for your daily Bread, or you will quickly starve. Have thou a little strength;
strength for Duty? Improve it to the utmost, be diligent and busy in the work
of the Lord, in every good work, in Hearing and Praying, and Watching, and
striving against sin, in mortifying the Flesh, in helping and strengthening one
another; do whatever you can, be as active and stirring, and industrious as
possible, but go not in your own strength, trust not to the strength you have,
but let this be your hold which was the Apostles, Phil. 4.13. I shall be able
to do all things through Christ, which strengthens me. Trust ye in the Lord
Jehovah, trust ye in the Lord Jesus, for in him is everlasting strength, Isa.
26.4. Have ye comfort in your hearts? Say not as the Psalmist, Psalm. 30.5. I
shall never be moved, thou Lord of thy goodness have made my Mountain so
strong, but know that you will need to fetch in fresh comforts as you have of
daily supplies of strength.

Well, thus this Trust will answer to these and all other the doubting
questions that a Christian will have to put in his lifetime, whilst he lives
in this Wilderness; who will show me my way, who will sustain me in my way,
till I come to my Journeys end, etc. Christ will do it, I trust He will.

2. Case. I have a Jordain to pass over, I must dye, who will bring me over
Jordain, who will stand by me in that hour? He is an established Christian who
is able to dye; who can say with the Apostle, To me to live is Christ, to dye
is gain, none of these things move me. I am ready to be offered up, I desire to
depart and to be with Christ. Then is the Life of Jesus most signally
manifested in our mortal Flesh, when we can by Faith triumph over mortality.

But as for me, I am afraid to dye; I am one of their weakly souls, who for
fear of death, are all their lifetime subject to Bondage. I walk unevenly and
uncomelily, because upon this account I walk so uncomfortably. How may I
out-grow my fears, and come to a settlement? How shall I do to dye? If I could
dye, I could live to better purpose than now I do, or can: What shall I have to
comfort me? Whom shall I have to stand by me in that hour? Trust answers, why
Christ will stand by me. He that has taught me to live, will I trust, help me
to dye. He has conquered Death, he has disarmed, and plucked out the sting of
Death, He has broken the head of that Leviathan: 'Twas He that said, Hos.
13.14. O Death, I will be thy death, O Grave, I will be thy destruction. He
has said it, and He has done it; He himself has passed over that Jordain,
and has thereby made a way for his Ransomed to pass over. He will send his
Angels to conduct me through that shady and dismal passage; He knows what it is
to dye, how hard the conflict is with the last Enemy, and what special need I
shall have of his help in that hour; and therefore has said, I will never fail
thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. If I can but hold me by him while I live, I
will hang upon him when I dye, and with Confidence say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
23.4. Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me: He has said, Joh. 11.25. Whoever lives, and
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: He has said, Rev.
20.6. Blessed is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on him the second
death shall have no power. Come on therefore O my soul, fear not to lanch forth
into the deep; trust in Christ, He that has delivered, and does deliver, will
also deliver in that day, [from] death he will not deliver, it is appointed to
all once to dye, there is no repealing that Statute, but He will deliver [in]
death, He will by death deliver me from all my fears and sorrows. Who of all
His, ever miscarryed in death? Look to this, that thou be one of His, hold thee
by Him, cleave to Him, follow Him while thou live, be faithful to Him to the
death, and trust to Him, He will be faithful to thee in death.

3. Case. I have an Inheritance which I hope for in the Land of Promise: And
here the question will be, Who shall give me entrance, who shall give me
possession of mine Inheritance? There is a great Gulf fixed betwixt me and
Glory; there is a Judgment that I must pass through in my entrance into the
Rest of God; and in that Judgment I must pass under a strict and severe
examination, and give an account of my self, and of all my ways unto God. O how
shall I stand in the Judgments, or who shall stand by me? I am a Sinner, a
guilty soul before the Lord, and mine Iniquities are all marked before Him.
Once I was an Enemy to Christ, and how much has he against me for that time?
Since I became his Servant, and Solemnly Covenanted and Vowed my self to Him,
Vowed Repentance, Vowed Obedience, Vowed Holiness to him, O what a Servant have
I been? What an idle and sloathful Servant? What a barren and unprofitable
Servant? He has made me his Child, but O what a wanton, unruly, froward Child
have I been? How often have I turned aside from him, and served my Flesh and
this present World? O my Pride and Hypocrisy, O my trifling and my haltings
after the Lord, O the reproaches that have fallen upon his Name by my unworthy,
uneven, and uncomely walking before him? How shall I answer for this in the
Judgment, or who shall answer for me? Who shall stop the Mouth of my Accuser in
that day? Christ I trust will do it; I put my whole Cause into his Hand, He
shall be my Advocate against my Accuser, whom I will trust to plead for me; He
has his Stripes and his Wounds, He has his Blood and his Death to answer for
me. It is Christ that dyed, who shall condemn, Romans 8.34.

But what shall I have to confirm my trust in Christ? and to secure me, that he
will answer for me? There be many that lay claim to Christ amongst the
Unbelievers and the workers of Iniquity; they will put their trust in Christ,
and will call to him, Lord, Lord, open to me, Mat. 7.22, 23. Lord, Lord, answer
for me; to whom he will say, Away from me, I know you not. I will not speak a
word for you, ye workers of Iniquity. O what shall I have to secure me from
such a repulse, and to assure me that he will be an Advocate for me? If I can
but get Christ to be mine Advocate, there is no doubt then but my matters will
be good, and the cause will go for me; here is the difficulty: What shall I have
to prove my title to Christ and his Advocation? and to secure me that he will
undertake for me? Why, my very trust (if it be sincere) will prove my Title. He
that trusts in him shall not be confounded. And for the evidencing the
sincerity of this trust, a confirmed Christian will have this to say, Through
the grace of God, I have the testimony of a good Conscience and an holy
Conversation; my works of Faith, and my labors of Love, my mortified Sins,
this crucified and conquered World, through the Spirit of Christ within me, for
whom I have forsaken all and followed Him, these will attest the truth of my
trust; though none of these things, none of my Graces, none of my Duties can
answer for me, or acquit me in the Judgment, or open the door of Glory to me,
yet they will be good evidences to prove my claim to Christ that can and will
do it. When Christ shall plead, I have dyed for Sinners, and thereupon shall
challenge Absolution and entrance for those that have believed in Him, and
obeyed his Gospel; the Accuser will reply, But this Man has not believed, has
not obeyed the Gospel; but now if I can get that to be evidenced by the
testimony of a good Conscience and my holy Conversation, then the mouth of the
Accuser will be stopped for ever against me; and so an entrance shall be
administered to me abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom. And here now is the
trust of the Saints, and its triumph over all matters of doubt and difficulties
that lie between them and everlasting Glory. From hence may they take up those
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Death, where is thy Sting? Grave, yea Sin,
Hell, Devil, where is your Victory? Thanks be to God, who has given me the
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

From what has been said, learn by the way, 1. That the life of a Christian in
this World, is to be a life of trust. 2. That a life of trust is an excellent
and desirable life, and worth your reaching after. But these I shall speak to,
together.

Christ is to be trusted not only for the world to come, to give us entrance
into Heaven, but for this world also to lead and help us on, to be with us in
all our way from first to last. Our great difficulty, and our great danger of
miscarrying, is not so much in our end, as in our way to it: As hard as it is to
dye well, it is harder to live well: Though the last Enemy, Death, looks with a
more frightful face, yet our Enemies that we meet with all along our lives,
Sin, and Lust, and Temptation, do us the most deadly mischief. He that has
conquered Sin, need not fear to encounter Death; do but live an Holy Life, and
then be nothing careful how ye shall dye. Those Saints, Heb. 11. Abel, Abraham,
Sarah, with the rest of them, it is Recorded that they lived by Faith; it is said
of them, v. 13. They all dyed by Faith, not one amongst them miscarryed in
Death, who by Faith kept close to God in their lives.

Now our great difficulty and danger being in our lives, there is the most need
of trusting in Christ for his conduct through this World, and this being that
which I am now especially directing you to be reaching to, that I may more
effectually lead you on to such a life of trust, I shall yet more particularly
show you that Christ must be trusted for, 1. Our entrance into Religion. 2. Our
progress in Religion. 3. Our perseverance in Religion.


1. It is Christ that must do the first work for us, must bring us in at the
straight Gate, and give us entrance into Religion. Who brought Israel out of
Egypt? Cut out a passage for them through the Red Sea, and set them into the
way of the Promised Land? 'Twas the same Moses that conducted them through the
Wilderness. Christians, you that have passed the New Birth, and have broken out
of the Womb; you that are escaped out of Egypt, that state of Bondage you once
were in, with the rest of this miserable World, and are now gotten safe into
the way of life; Who is it that has helped you hitherto? Are you not beholden
to Christ for this? As it was said of the second Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.22. so
it is true of the first Resurrection, As in Adam all dye, even so in Christ
shall all be made alive. Are there any living souls amongst you? It Is Christ
who is your Life. And who is it that must help after, and bring in those that
are behind, and quicken those that are yet dead? Is it not the same Jesus that
must do it? Sinners, you that have been left dead in your sins, some of you
have not trod one step toward the New Birth, others of you have been brought
to the Birth, but still stick in the Womb: What hope have you, that you shall
ever be new Born? If you be not new Born, there is no hope of you, but you must
dye for ever; better you had never been Born into this World, then not to be
Born a new to Christ: You must dye, there is no help for you, there is no hope of
you, you must dye eternally, the second Death will seize upon you, and swallow
you up for ever if you be not Born the second time. You are yet without the
Gate, and if you dye there, dye in your sins, dye in your ignorance, in your
impenitence and unbelief; if ye dye without the straight Gate, you go down
quick into the Pit.

Now what hope is there of your being brought in? Multitudes of your
Predecessors in sin, have never come in, have lived and dyed, and gone to their
Graves, and gone down to Hell in their impenitence, and down you are going
apace: What hope is there now, that you may stop before you come there, that
you may be brought about, out of that common rode, that broad way that you are
going, and brought into the narrow gate, that gate of Life? May be you will
say, Christ I trust will do it; and the truth is, that is all you have to say,
that is all the hope you have; there is the same Jesus before you, who has
brought in so many others, who says to you all, as Isa. 45.22. Look unto me,
and ye shall be saved. None comes to the Father, but by me; and Joh. 6.37. Him
that comes to me, that will trust upon me, to bring him to God, I will in no
wise cast him out. Go to Jesus Sinners, tell him, Lord, thou have told me that
none can come to the Father, can turn from his sins and come in unto God, but
by thee; this thou have told me, and I have found it true; I cannot come in of
my self, mine own heart hangs back, hangs after my sins, and this world, and
hangs back from God. Ministers cannot bring me in, they have been almost all my
life long dealing with me; threatening me in, persuading and beseeching me in,
but cannot prevail: Poor wretched Creature that I am, after all the means that
have been used to bring me in to God, behold I am an hardened impenitent soul to
this day, and so I am like to dye for all that they can do to help me: I have
nothing left for it, but only thy help, Oh Lord, and thy word for it, that thou will help me, and wilt not put me back if I come to thee: This being all mine
hope, I come unto thee, I cast my self upon that blessed Word, Help O King of
Saints, help O Savior of Sinners; Christ help, Christ help this poor soul of
mine; help me to God, that I may live; having nothing else for it, upon this I
must venture, upon thee I must lean; I come to thy door, there I will lie,
begging and crying, and hoping that thou will put forth thine hand and help me
in. Lord open to me, I trust yet thou will, and in this trust I will continue
crying and begging till thou have Mercy on me, and bring me within this
straight gate, the gate of Life.

2. It Is Christ that must do all our following works for us. By him we have our
entrance, and through him we must make our progress; He must bring us in at the
straight gate, must convert our souls, and it is He that must help us on in the
narrow way, and conduct our souls through all the duties and difficulties of
our whole life. The Mother must Nurse the Child as well as bring it forth into
the World; the Child must be carried in Arms, must be Suckled and supported,
and must afterward be taught to speak, and taught to go; and though our
Children may, yet God's Children will never be taught to go alone while they
live. They must keep by their Fathers side, they must be led by their Fathers
hand as long as they live. Christ must do all this for his Children, and He
will do it, Isa. 40.11. He will gather his Lambs with his Arms, He will carry
them in his Bosom, and gently lead them.

When we are entered into the strait gate, when we are passed the New Birth, the
great difficulty is over; Sinners, there are many difficult passages between
you and the Kingdom of Heaven, through all which you must pass or perish. There
are these three hard passages, the straits of the Womb, or the difficulties of
the New Birth; the strait course, or the difficulties of Life; the hard passage
at the end, the difficulties at Death. But the great difficulty is the first,
when you are once passed the Birth, the great difficulty will be over. If you
go on and dye in your sins, then there is not only a difficulty, but an
impossibility; there is a great Gulf fixed between Heaven and Hell, Luke 16. So
that they that would, cannot pass from Hell to Heaven. O keep you out of Hell,
when once you come there, you cannot escape; thank God, that yet, though it be
hard, yet it is possible for you to get to Heaven; and you that are Saints, may
rejoice, that with you the great difficulty is over.

But yet the narrow way, in which you must continue, is an hard way. The narrow
way, by which you must pass to glory, is that course of Holiness wherein you
must hold on to the end: There Is no getting to Heaven but by this narrow way,
and there is no getting through this narrow way but by help from Christ; and
therefore your whole life must be a life of trust, of trust in Christ, Christ
must be trusted,

1. For the helping us forward in all his Holy ways.

2. For the helping us through the sufferings we shall meet with in his ways.

1. For the helping us forward in all his Holy ways. It Is from Him we must
expect to prosper in our way, it is He that must lead us on toward, and raise
and work us up to that holy Conformity of heart and life to him, wherein our
souls prosperity stands. Here I shall shortly show you,

1. That our progress in Religion is to be measured by the degree of our
conformity to Christ.

2. That eminent Conformity to Christ, is that which Christians have, or should
have in their eye.

3. That Christians falling so much short of this Conformity to Christ, fall
under many doubts and fears, whether ever they shall attain to it.

4. Their trust in Christ, is their help against all their doubts and fears.

1. Our progress in Religion is to be measured by the degree of our conformity
to Christ. There Is a double conformity to Christ, To his Image. To his Will.


Our being renewed according to his Image, in our inner Man, and our being
governed by his Word, both in our inward and outward Man. Now by how much the
nearer we are made like unto Christ, by how much the more of the Image of his
Holiness, there is engraven upon our hearts, and by how much the more
compliance there is of our ways with the will and holy word of Christ, so much
the more progress have we made in Religion.

2. This holy conformity to Christ is that which Christians have, or should
have in their eye and desire. Christ is a Christians Prize, and a Christians
pattern. He is the Prize which a Christian runs for; what would you have as the
fruit of all your labors and sufferings? O Christ, Christ, that Christ may be
mine; and he is their Pattern, the pattern that God has set before them, and
that they also have set before themselves that their eye and their heart is set
upon. What is your aim? What is it that you are reaching toward, and working
up your selves unto? What manner of persons would you be? How would you live?
If you may have your wish, or your desire, what is it? What would you be? How
would you live? O let me be made conformable to Christ. We may find both these
in the Apostles eye, in comparison of which, he counted all things but loss and
dung, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. that he may win Christ, and that he may be conformable
to Christ. For whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them
but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him; and v. 10. that I may
know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
Sufferings, and be made conformable to his Death. Every Christian is of the
same mind, all is dung in comparison of him; and it is not only to be found in
Christ, that he so earnestly desires, but also to be made conformable to him.
They would live as he lived, and as he would have them live; they would not
only, that they may be blessed in Christ, but that Christ may be pleased in
them. They never have their wills, but when Christ has his will of them. It
does not suffice me says a Christian, that I have hopes of getting to Heaven
by Christ at last, I must be more holy here; I would live so, that my ways may
please Christ: How can I bear it to be so unlike to him, to be so often
breaking out, and breaking loose from him? O that I might hold me close by Him,
that I might in my whole course please the Lord. I would fain be a more exact
and perfect Christian. All this the Apostle follows so hard after, Phil. 3.12.
Not as though I had already obtained, or were already perfect, but I follow
after, if I may apprehend.

Brethren, this is as far forth as you are Christians, and this should be the
sum of your desires and aims, to get as near as possible to an exact conformity
to Christ, both to his Image, that as he was, so you may be in this World, and
to his will, that you may stand complete in all the wills of Christ.

3. Christians falling so much short of that holy conformity to Christ, they
desire, do fall under many doubts and fears how they shall attain. O how short
do I fall of such an holy frame, of such an holy and undefiled course! When I
look upon what I would be, and what I am, what a distance is there, how far am
I yet behind, how hardly can I reconcile my loose and lazy heart, to such a
strict and holy course? My untoward heart, O how it slugs and hangs back, and
will not come on! O how it boggles and breaks loose, how many a step does it
make out of this narrow, into the broad way! O how it lusts after the ease and
liberties of the flesh, and how often does it turn aside from Christ to the
vain ways and lying vanities of this present World? When I would be totally
conformed to the Law of Christ, I find another Law in my members, carrying me
out to a compliance with the Law of Sin. I am warping every day, I am wandering
in every duty, I am apt to lose my self in every Company I come into, in every
business I set my self to: I cant but look upon it as a comfortable thing, and
as a blessed thing, if mine heart might be ever with the Lord; if I could keep
me close by his side, and constantly under his eye: What a mercy, what a joy
would it be? but Woe is me, I cannot obtain; I have wished, and hoped, and
prayed; I have tried, and tried, and still I fall short; O how little hope is
there left, that yet I shall obtain?

4. Their trust in Christ is their help against all their discouragements and
fears. Do thou say, there is no hope, I shall not obtain? To perfect
conformity to Christ thou can not; but is there no hope of thy becoming a
more eminent Christian than now thou art? Rebuke that unbelieving thought with
this word, yet I trust in Christ I shall. He is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come unto God by Him, Heb. 7.25. Not only to save them from wrath, but
to save them from sin; to save them to the uttermost, and to sanctify them to
the uttermost. Do not say, I cannot think how this weak, slippery, loose,
untoward heart, I cannot think how it should ever come to be settled and fixed
in such a severe and holy course; do not say such a word, Can thou not think
how? Yet he is able to do for thee abundantly above all that thou can ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20. His thoughts are not as thy thoughts, his ways are not as thy
ways; the Lord Christ can over-do the thoughts of his People, can do that for
them which they never thought could be done; yea, and if thou will trust him,
he will do it. Consider and study that Scripture, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way to
the Lord, trust in Him and He will bring it to pass. Thou have many good things
upon thine heart, thou can not take up with this poor and pitiful, and in
and out way of life that thou live; thou would fain come to a more
spiritual, Heavenly, active, useful, course of life: This thou proposest to thy
self, this thou have made some offers and attempts upon, but thou can not
bring it to pass, but still thou fallest short; what should thou now do? why
commit thy way to the Lord, trust in Him, and he shall bring it to pass; and as
v. 4. He shall give thee the desire of thine heart.

Christians, I hope your hearts are set upon this holy conformity to Christ, I
hope you will not sit down by what you have already attained; God forbid, that
that easy trifling way of Religion, that is all that some of you have
attained; God forbid that this should satisfy you, and I hope it does not; I
hope you are both wishing for, and reaching toward a more strict and painful
course. Are you so? hold on. If you have prayed for it, pray again, pray
without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. Never give over till you have it. Have you tried
what you can do, to mend your course, and mend your pace? Try again and again,
never sit down as discouraged, but hold you on, keep to the way of the Lord as
you can; keep you going, keep striving and laboring with your hearts, with
your might, and in so doing, commit your way to the Lord, trust in him, and he
shall bring it to pass; do what you can, through the grace already received,
and what you cannot, trust in Christ, and he will do it for you. It Is not an
idle trust as I said before, that I exhort you to, such a trust as to save you
the labor: Never say I trust in Christ that he will work my work in me, and
for me, and so cast off all care your selves; it is not an idle trust, but a
stirring trust, an encourageing trust, heartening you to the work: Keep doing,
keep going, keep striving toward a more holy serviceable life, and then trust
in Christ, and he shall bring it to pass, and give you your hearts desire.

Christians, my hearts desire, and prayer for you is, that you may be saved; I
would fain help you to Heaven; and that you might be presented by Christ to the
Father, without spot or wrinkle; and in order hereto, I would fain see more of
the spirit of Christianity, and the holy Image of Christ, breathing forth, and
showing it self more conspicuously in all your ways. I study what I can to
Preach so to you, that my words may be effectual to bring you up to an higher
pitch of Holiness; and this is my encouragement, my trust in the living God;
that my labors with you shall not be in vain. I Pray and trust, I Preach and
trust, I labor among you and trust; and what is my trust? Why this is it, that
the Lord will so second my labors with you, that you may hear and trust, that
you may strive and trust, that whilst I strive with you, you may be brought to
it, to strive every one of you with your own hearts, putting your trust in the
Lord. So shall you find in your experiences that this life of trust will be a
life of triumph over all your weaknesses, doubts, and fears.

How Christ helps us to persevere, (which should next come to be spoken of,)
will appear in the next particular, and therefore I pass it by here.

2. For the helping us through the sufferings that we shall meet with in his
ways. Christ must be trusted here for these two things.

1. To help us in what we are to do, with respect to a suffering state.

2. To perform what he has undertaken to do for his suffering People.

1. To help us in what we are to do, with respect to a suffering state. There
are 4. things that you your selves are to do, to prepare you for a suffering
state.

1. You must give up your selves, and all that you have, to be disposed of by
him at his pleasure. Say of your selves, I am his own; say of all that you
have, all is Christ's. As Christ has said of himself, and all that he has, 1
Cor. 3.22. All is yours; so say you of your selves, and all that you have, all
is thine Lord; this House, and these Lands, and this Money, all is thine, I
give thee the full right to it all. Say you so, and be willing that he should
say, as in the Parable, Mat. 20.15. May I not do with mine own what I please?
If I leave it to thee to enjoy, or if I give it to Strangers for a spoil and a
booty, it is mine own, and I may bestow it where ever I please. Say not only as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me; but I am thine, afflict me;
bring me low, take from me whatever thou will; all that I have is thine, it is
at thy command, it is at thy service; call for it, and use it at thy pleasure;
if thou order it for the Spoilers, to the Spoilers let it go; let them strip me
naked, and share it amongst themselves if the Lord will have it so.

2. You must keep you fast by Christ, and sit loose from all things else. Give
your selves to Christ, and cleave unto Christ; do not say I am thine, and then
go a gadding and wandering after Strangers: Stick fast to Christ, be able to
say, Ps. 119.31. I have stuck to thy Testimonies. I have stuck to the Lord, and
I will stick to thee; I am thine, and nothing shall separate between me and
thee; stick to Christ, and sit loose from all things else; let not any thing
thou have given him, stick to thy fingers, nor let thine heart hanker after it.

You have Estates some of you; you live in the favor and friendship of Men,
you have an esteem and repute among them; but let not these be overmuch prized
and valued by you. You that have Estates, be as if you had them not. You that
have Friends, and their love and good will, be as if you had none, as the
Apostle advises, 1 Cor. 7.29. Never speak such a word, I [must] keep mine
Estate, I cannot part with it; I must keep my Friends, I cannot disoblige them;
get your hearts so loose from all, that if Christ should call you to such a
bold owning of him, as would sweep away all you have, and leave you never a
Penny, nor never a Friend in all the World, you could cheerfully submit. The
sitting thus loose from all we have aforehand, would make it less grievous and
less difficult, when sufferings come, to lose them all. He, whose heart cleaves
to any thing, so that he says, This I cannot part with, this will either part
Christ and him, or create him the more torment to part with it, when he sees it
must go. Remember Lots Wife, when called out of Sodom, where she must leave all
behind her; her heart being left there, and thereupon looking back, as loath to
depart, she was smitten into a Pillar of Salt.

3. Reckon upon nothing certain or sure to you under the Sun. Do not think,
because you have kept all about you hitherto, that you shall never lose it;
count upon it, there may a necessity be laid upon you that all must be parted
with. Do not give your selves to Christ, and all that you have, in confidence
that he will not take it, or call for it away: Possibly this may be the case of
some, they can easily say, I give my self, and all I have to Christ; and for
Him, I am content to suffer the loss of all; but it is upon this confidence,
that they shall never be put to it: They hope they may be Christians, and yet
never be called out to be suffering Christians: they can easily pass away their
right, in hope that Christ will continue them in constant possession. Think no
such vain thought, but what you give to Christ, count upon it, that Christ may
send some or other to turn you out of Possession; reckon upon it, that you may
be quickly in such a case, wherein you may be put to it, either to forsake
Christ, or actually to be spoiled of all that you have.

4. Make sure of something: of something that the greatest sufferings cannot
prejudice you in, or take away from you. This is the goodness of God to his,
that whereas there is but one thing needful; this one thing is certain, Luke
10.41. One thing is needful, Mary has chosen the good part which shall never
be taken from her. There is but one thing needful, and that one thing is
certain; That good part could never be taken from her.

To be totally undone and ruined, is intolerable. God never called any of his
Servants to it, nor ever will. He never calls for so much, but he still leaves
them something which he would not have them part with. They are only the Damned
in Hell, whose case this is, they have lost all, and have nothing left them.
There is something for you to get and keep, which will be sure to you: O get
the Lord God to be your Portion, get Christ to be your Inheritance; get you
sanctified Grace, get an upright heart, and a good Conscience, and make them
sure. Christians, you cannot possibly be able to bear the loss of all things,
unless you may have this something left. Make Christ sure, make your title to
everlasting glory sure; get Integrity and Uprightness, a good Conscience, an
holy Conversation, to be sure evidences of your title; charily preserve and
maintain these evidences, and then the worst Enemies you have either in Earth
or Hell, can never undo you, no, nor leave you in a worse case than you are:
If you should lose your Estates, all your Friends, yea, and your life to boot,
you are no losers, whilst you can but keep Faith and a good Conscience.

Well now, these 4. things you are your selves to do, to prepare you for
suffering. Give your selves, and all you have, to Christ's dispose, etc. and
then you are ready for the Cross; then let the Devil and all his Armies fall
on, you are ready to receive their charge without giving an inch of ground.

But who can do all this, or how shall I ever be able to come to it? The first
of these I hope you have done already: If ye be Christians, you have given your
selves and all you have to Christ; but how shall I do to keep me close to
Christ, to sit so loose from all things, to make sure of Christ, to maintain
the testimony of a good Conscience and an holy Conversation? Woe is me, I am
breaking loose from Christ at every turn, I have a fickle and unstable soul
that is apt to wander every day; and for things below, though I have given them
to Christ, yet I feel mine heart still cleaving to them, and hankering and
hanging after them: I cannot think of being made Poor, I cannot think of being
made a Reproach, or a Scorn, or a Prey; I cannot think of it with any patience;
what shall I do in this case? Why here is that which will do it, trust upon
Christ to help you; pray for such a disengaged spirit, pray for such a power,
pray for such a frame; reason, and do what you can to persuade your selves into
it; press your selves on to such a close conscientious, holy Conversation;
strive and labor, and be reaching on toward it, and then trust upon Christ to
bring you to it. Commit thy way to him, and he shall bring it to pass; he shall
put thee into such a condition wherein thou shall be Cross-proof, whatever thy
Crosses be. This is one of Christ's ways, by which he helps his Saints to bear
the Cross; he prepares them for it, and he must and will do it if he be
sincerely trusted for it: It thenceforth lies upon him, his faithfulness stands
engaged to work all your works in you where your faith has put it into his
hands.

2. Trust him to perform what he has undertaken to do for you, What has he
undertaken to do for his suffering People? 1. To support them in their
sufferings, Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain or
uphold thee; the burden of thy sorrows, the burden of thy sufferings, the
burden of thy fears; thou have Enemies that will bind heavy burdens, and lay
them upon thee; burdens of Reproaches, burdens of wants, burdens of thorns,
pricking and piercing burdens; and it may be thou will say, how can I bear all
these burdens? I sink, I sink, my spirit fails within me, heavy things there
are come upon me; O what shall I do to bear them? Why cast thy burden upon the
Lord, trust upon him, and he will sustain thee, Phil. 4.5, 6. Let your
moderation be known unto all Men: Be not over solicitous what you shall do, or
how you shall stand; Be careful for nothing, the Lord is at hand. 2. To
preserve them from falling; from falling away from Christ, from falling off
from their holy profession, Jude 24. He is able to keep you from falling, and
to present you faultless before the presence of his glory; and as he is able,
so he is faithful, 1 These. 5.24. Faithful is he that has called you, and will
do it: What will he do? why v. 23. he will preserve you blameless unto his
coming. Christians, be careful about your present duty, and then never torment
your selves with thoughtfulness and fears, how you shall stand your ground
under the greatest of sufferings, but as the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.19. Let them
that suffer, commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. And thus I have showed you the second particular, wherein
that solidity or establishment in Religion (which I am pressing you to reach
after) stands, viz. a firm trust in Christ.

3. Adherence to Christ, or cleaving to the Lord. The two main Roots, whereby a
Christian is grounded in Christ, are the two forementioned, Resolution and
Trust; and the immediate fruits of this rooting, is cleaving or sticking fast
unto him; and the closer we cleave unto him, the more we are confirmed and
established. The root of a Tree is that by which it cleaves unto the ground;
and by how much the deeper it spreads it self, and works its self into the
Earth, by so much the faster hold it takes. And there is a mutual hold taken;
the root takes hold of the ground, and thereby the ground holds fast the root.
A rooted Christian has gotten hold of Christ, and Christ has taken hold of
him, we have both these together, Phil. 8.12. If I may apprehend that for which
I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

Christ's hold of a Christian is sure, but not always perceived, Joh. 10.28,
29. My Sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and I give to them eternal life;
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. There are
many attempts upon the Saints; the World pulls at them, Sin pulls, the Devil
pulls, and would pluck them off from Christ, and pluck them up by the roots;
but says Christ, for all that, they are safe enough, pluck who will, they
shall not be plucked away.

But as sure as Christ holds them, they may sometimes think he has let go his
hold, and cast them off; and may say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 43.2. Why have thou
cast me off Lord? Where am I now? I once had hopes that the Lord was my
strength; but woe is me, now I am even cut off, and mine hope is perished from
the Lord; I fear, that after all my hopes, I shall prove a lost soul at last.

And as Christ's hold of a Christian, so a Christians hold of Christ is always
sure, though he himself always perceive it not. That Prayer of Christ for
Peter, is for every particular Christian, that his Faith may never fail; that
hand of Faith may grow weak, but shall never wither. It may shake, yet still as
the hand of a drowning Man, it keeps its hold. Yet as to his own sense, he may
be at a loss, and sometimes come to this conclusion; if ever I had Faith, yet
now I am sure I have none.

Well, but however, though a Christian may sometimes think I have cast off, and
let go mine hold of Christ; and thereupon he has cast off, and let go his hold
of me; yet even then, when it is saddest and lowest with him, he still cleaves
to Christ.

There are these two things which shall never totally fail. 1. There is a
secret stay upon Christ; this he may do, and does, even then when he thinks he
does not, nor cannot. There is an hope hidden in his heart, even then when he
says, There is no hope: That it may be so, appears from Isa. 50.10. Who is
there that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of
the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. That is, even then, when he is in
darkness and has no light; at such a time there may be such a stay, God would
not command him to impossibilities. What is it to be in darkness, and to have
no light? Why no les, then to give up all for lost; to be in the darkness of an
uncomfortable and hopeless state, and not to have so much light as to discern
his holy habits or actings that should comfort him. Why yet, even then there
may be a stay, or else God would never have bid him, even in such a case, to
stay himself upon his God. There may be a stay, and there is so; for, do but
ask such a poor dark disconsolate Christian, when as to his sense he is most
hopeless, and says I have no hope; do but ask him then, why what will you take
to give up and forgo all your hope in Christ? Will you be hired for ever to
quit your hope in Christ? O no, not for all the world; look ye there now,
though he says he has no hope, yet all the world shall not hire him to let go
that hope he has.

2. A resolved cleaving to Christ. He does still when it is lowest with him,
with purpose of heart cleave unto Him. He thinks here also, that he has no
mind, nor list to follow Christ or Holiness any longer, judging it will be all
in vain. I, but ask such a poor Christian, Will you return then to take up your
lot with Sinners, and give off from serving or following Christ any longer?
Will you return to your old Lusts, to your old carnal and fleshly Life? Will
you return from Christ to embrace this present World? Since you have no hope to
the other World, will you return to make your best of this World? Will you to
Ryoting and Drunkenness, will you to your old Covetousness and Greediness, will
you henceforth go back and live in a total neglect of Christ, and his holy
ways; will you give off hearing, and give off praying, and give off the trouble
and care of an holy watchful Life, and let loose the reins to your corrupt
Nature, and let it take its own course? Will you do so? Can you do so? O the
Lord forbid, sure I will never go back how-ever; if I never come to Heaven, yet
I will not return to wickedness. God will speak Peace to his People; but though
he never speak Peace to me, yet I will not return to folly. Though I cannot say
with Job, cap. 13.15. Though he Slay me, yet will I trust in him: Yet this will
I say, though he Slay me, yea, though he Damn me, yet will I serve him: If I
must to Hell, yet I am resolved that Holiness shall be my way. I will not allow
my self to slight Christ, or to sin against Christ, though I should never have
any benefit by Christ. Whatever he will do with me, as to my future state, yet
I am resolved to be his Servant while I live. If I may not be a Saint in
Heaven, yet I will be, as much as I can, a Saint on Earth. Holiness is good, if
I have never so small a spark of it; it is a Beam of God, it is the Image of
Christ: If I may not see God, nor dwell with Christ, yet I will get a little of
him here; a little is better than none, though it should last me but a little
time. If I may not (behold his Face) in Righteousness, yet I will do what I can
to sit at his Feet in Righteousness, whatever he do with me. Ask any poor
Christian that is in his darkest state, whether this be not the standing
resolution and purpose of his heart.

And is it not evident now, that whatever he thinks of himself, he still
cleaves unto Christ? The truth is, such abiding workings of the heart toward
Holiness, are the souls cleaving to Christ; and it appears though he cannot see
it himself, yet to Standers-by, that the root of the matter is still in him;
yea, and such holy resolutions in a dark state, are stranger evidences of
sincerity, than the same resolutions where they are encouraged by the highest
sensible enjoyments. Certainly, there is more of evidence in it, to be able to
say, though he damn me, yet I will serve him, then there is in this, I will
serve him because he has saved me. For mine own part, I should have an higher
confidence of a poor disponding and even despairing Christian that is bent upon
Holiness, than of many, whose Religion is animated and encouraged by raptures
of Joy.

For the close of this, e're I proceed farther, give me leave to put in a word
of Exhortation; let me exhort you in the words of Barnabas, Act. 11.23. That
with purpose of heart you will cleave unto the Lord. Cleaving Notes, Firmness,
Closeness,


1. Be firm; stick close to Christ. Let it be with you as with the Apostle,
Romans 8.38, 39. Let nothing separate you from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Be sure of this, that he will be with you whilst you are
with him, Jam. 4.8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh to you. So may I
say, stick fast unto Christ, and he will stick fast unto you: Christ is a sure
Friend, and he will stick by all his Friends that are faithful to him.

Consider the three forementioned cases as Arguments to press this
Exhortation. 1. You are in a Wilderness, and must expect troubles to come upon
you. Your Faithfulness to Christ may cost you dear; you may be forsaken of your
Friends, you may fall into the hands of your Enemies; yet if ye will be
Faithful to him, though all men forsake you, though evil men run upon you, yet
Christ will stick to you. So he did to Paul, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17. No man stood with
me, but all men forsook me, notwithstanding the Lord stood by me and
strengthened, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion; where we have
1. The hard case he was, nd Christians must look to be in. 1. He was in the
hands of Enemies, of great Men, who were examining him* and before whom he was
to answer for his Life. Christians may be brought b fore Rulers, and there
Tried for their Lives, and judged for Malefactors. 2. He was forsaken by his
Friends, he had many Friends before; but when it came to the pinch, they all
gave him the slip, and shrunk back, and stood aloof, and left him alone. Count
upon this hard lot, and count it not strange if it come to be your lot. It Is
not so much to suffer in Company; as when any particular person is singled out,
as a Deer from the Herd, and chased alone; the Hunters are upon him, and the
Herd will not shelter him, but shift away from him. That Is it you may look for,
to be persecuted by Enemies, and not to be owned by your Friends.

2. His comfort in this his hard lot. Though all Men forsook him, yet Christ
stuck by him; the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me. Christians, this may
be your case, and let this be your comfort, though none in the World should own
you, yet stick by Christ, and he will stick by you in all your Tribulations.

2. Again, you must dye; Sickness may Arrest you, and cast you upon the Bed of
Languishing, and Death may stand at your Beds-feet, and stare you in the face,
and the Grave will open its mouth for you, to swallow you up: Stick fast to
Christ, and look to find him standing by your Beds-side to comfort you. O how
will it be with you in that hour! O I feel my Diseases and Languishing; my
Flesh wastes, my Bones ache, my strength is lost, my heart faints, mine eyes
fail, my breath is departing, and all tell me that Death is at the door, ready
to turn me into rottenness: But O! where is my God? Now for a sight of Christ!
Those that are gone back from Christ, they may look, and look, and cry, where
is the Lord? where is the Savior? But poor Wretches, there is no Christ to be
seen. Death comes, and the Devil comes, and Sin comes, and puts a Sting into
Death's tail, and the poor Sinner is left to grapple with Death alone; its
gripes, its pangs, its terrors are upon him, but no Redeemer to be had.
Whatever come upon thee, this shall not, thou that hold thee by him, shall
see Jesus standing by thee; or if thou should not see him, yet there he will
not fail to be, though it may be, behind the Curtain, yet ready to help thee in
thy Conflict with this thy last Enemy.

3. Yet again, after Death thou must be brought to Judgment, where thou will
meet with a Righteous Judge, a Malicious Accuser, who will have many things to
lay to thy charge. All the ugly and frightful sins that ever thou have done in
thy life, thou may look to hear of from that Malicious mouth. And how will thou stand before that dreadful Bar? O there thou shall be sure, Even with
these Eyes, to behold thy Redeemer; there he will certainly be, for he is the
Judge, and there he will stick by thee, for he is thine Advocate; he has said
to thee, Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown
of life. Fear not how thy matters shall go in the Judgment, I will be there, I
will secure thee from coming into Condemnation. I will give thee the Crown of
Life. This will be the Portion of those that stick fast to Christ, He will
certainly stick to them; stick to them in all the troubles of their lives,
stick to them in death; and stand by them in the eternal Judgment. O Christans,
stick fast, hold fast what you have, that no man take your Crown, Rev. 2.11:
Hold fast your holy Profession, hold on your Confidence and your holy
Conversation, and thence-forth expect that Jesus will give you a Crown of Life.

2. Stick clos^ to Christ, or else you will never be likely to stick fast. By
how much the closer our adherence to Christ is, by so much the firmer is our
standing* and the less danger of falling off. The root of a Tree, if it be
loosned from the Earth, is more easily plucked up; it may be, some small
strings there may be that keep their hold, which maintain it in life; but if
the main root be loosned, it is the more in danger of being blown down. The
cleaving of the soul to Christ, is set forth by the cleaving together of
Husband and Wife; Ephesians. 5.31. For this cause, shall a Man leave Father and
Mother, and shall be joined to his Wife. The word in the Original signifies,
shall be glued to his Wife. What is glu'd together, if it shrinks or gapes,
loses its hold. Take heed of warping and shrinking from Christ, the glue will
give off if you do, and when you have once lost your hold, you know not whither
you may be blown. O take heed of growing to a distance, of wandering from
Christ, keep you near him if you would stand firm.

4. A confirmed habit of Religion. An holy disposition and constitution of
soul; this is the very heart of the new Creature; the Divine Nature, whereof
Christians are said to be made partakers, 2 Pet. 1.4. It Is an holy Spring or
Fountain within us, which will flow forth in Religious actions; and by how much
the more maturity it is ripened up into, by so much the more freely will it flow
forth. An heart that is holily disposed, and has strong and fixed inclinations
Heavenward, will find Religion sweet and easy to it, there will be the less
need of force and constraint: That fear which is so necessary to drive on a
servile spirit, will be of less use, according to the measures that we have
attained of this free spirit, and ready mind: Such Christians have that within
them that will save them much of their labor and pains which would be
otherwise needful. Our work will be easy, and we shall go on more prosperously
in our way; we shall both more abound in the work of the Lord, and we shall go
on more evenly and steadily in our course.

Religious acts, where there are no Religious habits, or where the habit is but
weak* will be both more seldom and more difficult; and when they are done,
whatever they be for the matter of them, yet it will be still questioned
whether they be sincerely or savingly Religious. Those that are
carnally-minded, their very Natures do prompt them, and carry them on in their
fleshly ways; there is the less need of temptation to sin, the Devil may save
much of his labor, their sinful dispositions will carry them on fast enough.

O Christians, let this be in your eye, let this be it you aim at, and labor
for, to habituate your selves to Holiness; to get up to such a settled holy
disposition, to such a promptitude and readiness of mind, that your hearts may
flow forth toward God and Godliness, that your inward stream may run
Heavenward, that you may feel a freedom and enlargement of heart toward
Godliness of Life.

Carnal Professors, both those that are wholly such, and have nothing of the
new Nature in them; and those, who though they have something of the Spirit,
yet have much of the Flesh remaining in them, O how heavily and slowly do they
drive on in the matters of Religion! How backward are they to duty, how hardly
brought to it, how quickly weary; they had rather be any where then with God,
about any work, than about the work of the Lord; not only eating and drinking,
and playing, and taking the pleasures of the Flesh, but their hardest fleshly
labors, Ploughing and Threshing will easilier down with them, than Praying, or
Holy Meditation, or otherwise Conversing with God: This is a wretched temper,
but is it not an ordinary temper? Consider, is it not thus with some of you
that are Professors of Religion? Consult your own experiences; how freely, and
how cheerfully can you follow your Trades and worldly business; you can Work
and Travail, and Buy and Sell, and follow it night and day; can rise early, and
go to Bed late, and eat the Bread of Carefulness, enduring heat and cold, and
never complain; but when you come to Praying and communing with your own
hearts, or taking a walk by Holy Meditation into the other World; when you
come to have to do in any of the matters of God, and serious Religion, O how
like Drones and Sleepers do you go on? A little of this is enough, and more
than you can well bear; your Wheels drug, your Spirits tire, and thereupon you
hastily over with this work, and are glad when you have done. How seldom is it
that you go into your Closets as willingly as you come out? How well were it if
you did as freely fall upon your knees, as you use to rise from them when you
have done?

How comes this to pass? O you are yet carnal, carnally disposed, carnally
inclined; your fleshly habits do dispose you to your fleshly ways, and fetter
you, and hang on your heels when you should be doing for God and your Souls. O
to work Christians, to work; work off these carnal dispositions, and work up
your hearts to Spirituality and Heavenliness. Get you to be better tempered and
better disposed; and the way to habituate your selves to Religion, is to hold
you closer to the exercise of Religion; if you would but use a little more
force upon your selves for a time, and hold you to diligence in your Holy ways;
this would by degrees, by the cooperation of the spirit of Grace with you,
which you might boldly look for, to come into your help, this your forceing
your selves upon a diligent holy life for a while, would bring you to go on
after you had been inured to it, with more freedom and alacrity, Heb. 15.14.
Those that were strong Christians, steady and established Christians, how came
they to be so? O it is said, That by reason of use, by having their senses
exercised, by this means they grew up to it. Friends, be persuaded to make
trial; exercise your selves more to Godliness, use your selves to a strict
conscientious Life: If you find it hard at first, yet force your selves upon
it, hold your selves hard to it, and by that you have accustomed your selves to
this course a while; look for it, you will find it sweet and easy; and when
you have thus gotten the habit of Religion, when by reason of use, and having
your senses exercised to Godliness, you become Holily disposed and inclined,
then what Christians, think you, are you like to be; what thriving Christians,
what flourishing Christians, what fruitful Christians, are you then like to
become! then your hearts will be streaming hearts, and flaming hearts, and will
mount up and ascend in those flames of holy Love and Zeal, above this Earth and
Flesh, and a Unity to live in the Light, and Love, and Joy of the Lord. O
Friends, would you set your hearts to be reaching out toward this holy frame,
would the Lord be pleased by the more abundant influences of his Spirit upon
us, to work us up to, and settle us in this habit of Holiness, this Spiritual,
and willing, and ready mind, then we should become a beautiful Congregation;
then we should become a blessed People, and should grow up as Trees of
Righteousness, which the Lord has Planted, and which the Lord has Blessed.

What Friends, does not all this stir you? Is there such a Blessed state and
frame to be had, and is it not worthy your striving after? Come my Beloved,
let us bestir our selves, let us follow after, let us be reaching on with our
might to this holy Prize. Be not discouraged at difficulty, be doing, and the
Lord will help you. We are workers together with God for you, be you workers
together with us for your selves, set your hearts to it, and the Lord will work
in you, both to will and to obtain of his good pleasure.

And thus I have showed you what that solidity in Religion which I am stirring
you up to be reaching after, is, to be well-grounded and settled in the
substantials of Christianity. He that worshippeth God in the Spirit, rejoices
in Christ Jesus, and heedfully shunning all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, has
given himself to a Righteous, Sober, and Godly life; he that being deeply
resolved for Christ, and firmly trusting in Christ, does with full purpose of
heart, cleave unto him, sticking fast to the Lord, and keeping him close by
him, till he has by reason of use, gotten Holiness to be habitual to him: This
is a Pattern that I would you would have much before your eyes.

4. To fruitfulness in Religion. There is a readiness to good works, mentioned
Tit. 3.1. standing in the preparation, or propension, or bent of the soul upon
holy action, (whereof before) and there is a fruitfulness in good works, or the
souls putting it forth in holy action.

All Religion stands in action, either the inward action of the Soul, or the
outward action of the Life. It Is the doing Christian that is the excellent
Christian, the fruitful field which has a Blessing in it. There is amongst our
Corn some that looks fresh and strong, and grows up ranker and taller than the
rest, but at best proves to have but little in the Ear, it is grown up all in
Stalk, and has little fruit; we cannot say of it as Hos. 7.8 It has no Stalk;
it is all Salk, and has no Ear; it is the full Ears of the Field that are its
fruitfulness.

That is fruitfulness where there is good fruit brought forth, and much fruit:
That ground which either brings forth no good fruit, or but very little, we
count barren ground. Will you call that a fruitful field which brings forth but
here and there an Ear? a few handful of Ears to whole Sheaves of Tares and
Weeds? Will you call that a fruitful Tree which has but two or three Berries
in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful
branches? It is precious fruit, and plenty of it that will give us the account
of fruitful Christians.

Fruitfulness in Religion, is the Honor of Religion; Herein is my Father
Glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15 8. And what Glorifies God,
God will make glorious before the World. Barrenness is a Reproach; it is matter
of sorrow and shame: Such Christians which stand as dry Trees, should not stand
with dry Eyes. We read that Barren Wombs have been the matter of great
Affliction: How did Sarah and Rachel take on that they had no Children? And
Hannah, when she Prayed for a Child; having yet none, said 1 Samuel 15. I am a
Woman of a sorrowful spirit, out of the abundance of my complaint and grief
have I spoken. But however it be upon the account of Barren Wombs, sure a
barren Soul should be a mourning soul. Indeed it is too commonly so, that barren
souls are usually as barren of sighs and tears, as they are of good fruit. You
that are empty Vines, fruitless Fig Trees, how seldom is it that you are upon
your knees, bewailing your Barrenness?

The sin of Barrenness is a provoking sin. There are 3. such words spoken
against Barrenness in Religion, as (setting aside the sin against the Holy
Ghost) there are not more terrible words spoken against any sin. One word you
have in the Parable against the barren Fig Tree, Luke 13.3. Cut it down, why
cumbreth it the ground. Another word against another barren Fig Tree, Matthew
21.19. Let no fruit grow on thee henceforth, for ever. A third word is against
the barren ground, Heb. 6.7, 8. The Earth that drinks in the Rain that comes
often upon it, and brings forth Herbs, meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives Blessing from God; but that which bears Briers and Thorns, is
rejected, and nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Methinks these words should make some of your souls to tremble: Professor,
what art thou? a barren soul? a fruitless Fig Tree? O how can thou contain
thy self from fear? Is not thine heart terrified within thee, at the hearing
the words of this Curse? What if this word should have been spoken to thee? Cut
this Man down, cut this Woman down, why cumber they the ground? Or what if it
should be said to thee, Never fruit grow on thee for ever; never a word of
Grace prosper more with thee, live and dye a barren soul; would it not make
thine heart shake? And are not these words spoken to thee? I hope not as an
irreversible Curse; I hope that word is not gone forth against any of you, cut
this Man down, never fruit grow on him for ever, let him wither, and perish,
and dye, and Burn for his Barrenness; yet if it be not so spoken, as an
irreversible Curse, yet to thee it is spoken as a terrible Warning: Thus much
of it does belong particularly to thee, thou art nigh unto Cursing; and if thou
look not the better to it, thine end will be to be burned.

Barrenness is a Reproach, Barrenness is an high Provocation; and fruitfulness
is an Honor, and receives Blessing from God. Fruitfulness does both speak
Christians grown up to good maturity, and will advance them yet higher and
higher. He that lays out most in his life, is still laying up more in his
heart; we gather by spending; the more we do, the more we have; no such
thriving and flourishing Christians as the diligent doing Christians. There Is
nothing gotten by holding in the Grace we have, and there is nothing lost by
laying it out. A good Man brings forth out of his Treasure, and the more is
brought forth, the more it increases within. If ever you would make an
increase in inward grace, let it put forth in vigorous exercise; no such way to
grow rich in Faith, as by being rich in good works; Faith without works dies.

This now is a farther perfection of Religion, that I would press you to be
reaching after, fruitfulness in Religion, or Holy action. Be not Hearers or
Talkers, but doers of the Word, Jam. 1.25. Who so looks into the perfect Law
of Liberty, and continues therein, not being a forgetful Hearer, but a doer of
the work, this Man shall be blessed in his deed. Be doers of the work, and
abound in the work of the Lord. That charge which the Apostle gives, 1 Timothy
6.18. with a particular respect to works of Charity, receive it with respect to
every good work; Do good, be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate, laying up in store for your selves a good foundation against
the time to come.

O my Brethren, set your hearts upon it, to do all the Honor you can to the
Name and Gospel of God, before the world. Wipe off that reproach of Barenness,
by showing your selves examples of fruitfulness. The world say in your
reproach, and in the reproach of your God also, What is this Christianity that
is so much boasted of, but a mere shadow? What are these Professors? what ever
they talk, what do they more then others? Show them what you do, which they
will never do.

If you ask me what you should do, it is too long to tell you the particulars of
all your duty; take the Apostles answer, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, --
these things do, and the God of peace shall be with you.

One Particular I shall instance in, (and but in a word here, intending to
speak more largely of it afterward) do all you can that more immediately tends
to the propagating of Religion in those that have none. Be busy in your
Families to propagate religion there: I am willing to take all occasions to
inculcate this Duty, in regard that to the grief of my Soul I find, that after
my so often pressing of it there is still so great a neglect even among some
high Professors of Christianity. O Friends, if ye will do any thing for God, be
doing amongst your own; instruct them, teach them the way of the Lord, Persuade
and provoke them to Christ: Let Religion be the top care and top business of
your houses. Do what you can to make Christians of your Children and Servants;
and this not so seldom, or sparely, or heartlesly, as some do, now a little,
and a long time after never a word; but be constant, be instant with all yours
to bring them to God, that there may be a face of serious Religion appearing
upon your whole Families, that a Spirit of Religion may be the very temper and
constitution of your houses. Some Professors, what ever they be when amongst
other Professors, how much soever of Religion there appears then, yet come into
their houses, and there is no more to be seen or heard of God than in the Family
of those that make no profession; there is ignorance, and carnality, and vanity,
and barrenness, and unsavoryness, and emptiness of all that is good. You that
come hither to the Ordinances to kindle religion in your own hearts, to fetch
holy fire from the Altar, what you get here carry it home to your houses,
instill it into the hearts of your Children and Servants: Here your holy
activity must begin; he that is not busily doing for God with his own, is never
like to do much good to others.

Next, endeavor to propagate Religion among your Neighbors and Acquaintance;
especially be doing good one to another, Christians to Christians; speak often
one to another, as they did, Mal. 3.16. speak to the hearts, and lay hold on
the hands one of another, and stir up and lead one another in the ways of the
Lord.

Friends, I would fain revive and set on foot that Christian Practice of
Fruitfulness in Holy Communication or discourse among you: Good words are none
of the least of our good works. This one thing would much conduce both to the
recovering that of religion which is lost, and to the filling up that which is
wanting in our selves or others. This has been in use amongst some of you, but
is it not much fallen and forgotten? Do not many of you that are Professors
converse together as carnally and as unprofitably as men that have no religion
in them? This is a great shame and of sad consequence; and Religion, which is
now so much fallen in the World, is never like much to rise till this holy
practice be revived.

You are all ready enough to complain what decays there are in Religion, but
are you willing to help toward its recovery? We have helped one another down
sadly, we have consumed one another by our own coldness; will you help to
recover one another, to warm and to quicken one another, as you have helped to
cool and to deaden?

By this means you will mutually have the benefit of each others graces and
experiences; your graces will hereby in a sort become their graces, and their
graces become yours: Your candle may light your Brethrens candles, at least you
may give light to those that are round about you; but of this more afterward.

I cannot enlarge further upon the several ways wherein your religious activity
should be exercised, you must take these hints: in general Labor to be doing
Christians, diligent busy Christians, ready to every good work, and fruitful
in every good work: Have an eye upon, and be reaching to, this active life;
hide not your Talent in a Napkin, put not your Candle under a Bushel, keep not
your Religion to your selves, your Knowledge, your Graces, your Experiences to
your selves: Has the Lord lighted up a Candle in your Hearts? let your light
shine before men that may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven.

5. To evenness and equality both of temper and course:

Evenness of temper is an argument of health and strength; they are the weakly
bodies that are apt to change with every change of Air or Weather, and they are
but weakly Souls whom every change of their circumstances puts out of frame.

This even frame must and will show it self in an evenness of the course. It Is
an holy life that Christians must live, and not satisfy themselves with
sometimes an holy duty or day: There must not be only some drops of Religion
sprinkled here and there upon their paths, but their life must be an holy
stream, and the stream must be constantly running toward God and Heaven. They
must run a Race thitherward, Heb. 12.2. He that runs a race keeps on his way
step by step in a continued motion: We must neither turn aside, nor go
uncertainly on, sometimes running, and sometimes but creeping or standing
still; we must keep our way and keep our pace; we must not go jumping
heavenward, doing something of our duty, and jumping over others, we must take
all along in order as we go.

Christians, it may be by the grace already obtained there is something done in
Religion at times, but how many duties do ye jump over and let them alone?
Sometimes you will pray, and sometimes you will jump over your praying seasons:
Sometimes you will perform works of piety, but you will jump over works of
righteousness and mercy. Sometimes you will be serious and savoury, and then
you will leap out into lightness and vanity. Sometimes you will take a leap to
Heaven in your retirements to converse with God, and then you will leap down
again into the mud and mire. Sometimes you will have some holy fits, and then
your proud fits or froward fits. Sometimes ye run, and then stand still;
diligent for a start, and then grow resty and idle who knows how long after.

It is uncomfortable to consider, how much this is the Religion of the most of
Professors; their Religion like a Fever comes by fits only, as if it were
rather their distemper than their temper; it is but here and there a little
sprinkling, some few drops fall that have any holy savor and tendency. Our
stream, our stream! O how, and which way does it run! Sure you had gotten much
higher if you had been more constantly rising upwards. But whilst there are
such risings and falls, such goings on and standings still, or turnings aside;
whilst you are such working and loytering Souls, no wonder it is so low with
you as it is.

Know every one of you, that this in and out course is an argument that yet you
have but little, and will never come to much, if it do not come to just nothing
at last. Now and then a strait step with so many steps awry; is this ever like
to bring you to Heaven? You are traveling up the Hill, but when will ye get
you higher, if as one foot steps forward the other slides back. This uncertain
unequal going on only as the fit comes, it is an easy kind of Religion, if it
were but sound: But how can you think your selves sound where you are so
divided betwixt something and nothing? An intermitting Pulse is dangerous if
not deadly.

Friends, would you prove your selves to be Christians indeed? would you not
that both you and your Religion should prove to be as the chaff before the
wind? And when the Lord shall come to purge his floor, would you not that both
your souls and your hopes should be blown away as the Chaff, and burn with the
chaff in unquenchable fire? would you make it evident that your Religion is not
Irreligion, and your Christianity Hypocrisy? Then get you up to a more fixed
spiritual temper, and hold you on in a more even and continued course; this
will prove you to be Christians both in truth and of growth; and hereby you
will be making an advance higher and higher, till you shall have perfected
holiness in the fear of God: That Is the mark that stands at the top of the
Mount, which I would, after all that I have said, you should have chiefly in
your eye, (perfection of Holiness) and be with your might reaching toward.

For the close of this, you now see what that pitch of Religion is that I am
pressing you to, even the highest pitch that is possibly attainable. You see
your way before you is an uphill way: You that are yet but at the foot of the
Mount, stay not where you are, but get you up by the rising ground till you
come to the top: Do not now stand desponding at the height of the Hill, and the
steepness of its passage; do not stand complaining of the difficulty of
attaining; say not within your selves, I cannot get on, I cannot get me up to
this holy, spiritual, fruitful, steady frame and life; with all my soul I
would, but O I cannot, I stick still here below, I am among the poorest, and
weakest, and hindermost of the Flock; and after all my waiting and hoping to
get to this holiness and fruitfulness, behold here am I in this lower ground to
this day: A Christian I hope I am, but sure a very mean Christian, a lame and
very weakly Christian: God help me, there is but little sign that I have been a
Professor so long, a Believer so long; I see I have hitherto gotten but very
little ground, and O how little hope is there I should ever get through! Do not
stand complaining thus, I often give you warning to take heed of this folly,
because I doubt it to be ordinarily a case with very many, who finding their
complaints to give them a little ease for the time, do thence count them to be
the cure of their diseases. Complain if ye will, and as much as you see cause,
but let it be in order to the quickening you to diligence, and not either to
ease you in your sloth, or to discourage you from your duty.

And thus I have at length dispatched the first General, What it is to stir up
our selves in Religion; having showed both by what acts, and to what pitch of
religion we should stir up ourselves.

2. What need there is of stirring up our selves to and in Religion. And here I
shall not speak to the particular cases of the unconverted, of the weak, and
backsliding Christians, distinctly and apart, but shall speak promiscuously to
them as they fall in my way.

Do you ask then what need there is of stirring up our selves?

I answer: It will appear there is need enough if we consider these two things.

1. Those that fall short of Religion, or carefully maintain not that Religion
they have, will be lost at last.

2. Those that stir not up themselves are never like to attain Religion, or to
maintain that little they have.

1. Those that fall short of Religion, of true and sound Religion, or that
carefully maintain not that Relirion they have, will be lost at last. Without
religion we cannot be saved, without regeneration, which is the beginning of
religion; or without sanctification, which is our progress in Religion; without
perseverance in religion we cannot be saved, Joh. 3.3. Heb. 12.14. Rev. 2.10.
particularly.

1. Sinners that live and dye in their sins, there is no question concerning
them, whither they go, they must all go to the Devil. Those that have no
religion, that have not taken up so much as the profession of serious
Christianity, and so live and dye; there is as much hope of the salvation of the
Devil as of them. You that serve the Devil, and continue to live under the
power of the Devil, you shall never come to Heaven unless the Devil himself be
admitted to meet you there: As you have lived with the Devil here, so he and
you must be together at the same place for ever; and whatever your hopes and
talks are of being saved by Christ, it cannot be. I must tell you, you that
come not to Christ, and will be none of his Disciples, you shall have no more
benefit by the blood of Christ than the Devils shall have, and that is none at
all. Without sound Christianity you have no part in Christ, and without a part
in Christ you can have no Salvation.

2. Yea and those that are come so far on to Christ as to take on them the
Profession of Christianity, if they dye Hypocrites, will be also certainly
lost. Those that are come off from the drunkards, and adulterers, and scoffers,
and total slighters of Christ, and have visibly joined themselves to the
Disciples of Christ, joined in prayer, and hearing, and sacraments with them;
how much soever they seem to have of the external fruit and appearance of
Religion, how commendable and hopeful soever their profession has been, if
Christ and Christianity be not rooted in their hearts, even these also, after
all their hopes and profession, will be lost at last: Hypocrites will have the
same lot at last with Infidels and final Impenitents.

3. Yea and those that have sincere religion, if they look not diligently to
it, will lose all the religion they have. Whatever security there be for the
Saints perseverance in religion to the end, there is no security at all, but
they will certainly fall off and perish, if they neglect the means of their
perseverance. And those that are but Children in religion, or are fallen to
decay, are backsliders in religion, can never prove to themselves that they are
not Hypocrites, and so can never be secure or have any assurance, but they also
will be lost in the end.

2. Those that stir not up themselves, are never like to attain to religion or
to prosper in it, yea to maintain that little which any of them have.

All this will be made evident.

1. From the distance we are at, the most of us, from sound and prosperous
religion,

2. From the difficulty of recovering those that are fallen.

3. From the difficulty of holding on for those that stand.

1. From the great distance we are at some of us from sound and prosperous
religion. There is as great a distance betwixt unconverted Sinners and Saints,
as betwixt Heaven and Earth, betwixt Life and Death, 1 John 3.14. We know that
we are passed from death to life; that is, from being Sinners to Saints: There
is as much difference betwixt the state of these, as betwixt the living and the
dead.

And there is, though not so great, yet a very great distance, betwixt the
lowest and unthriving sort of Christians, and flourishing Christians; betwixt
those that were ever but low and them, there is as much distance as betwixt a
Child and a Man, betwixt a very poor man and a wealthy man: And betwixt
backsliders and the prosperous is as much distance, as betwixt a languishing
and dying man and a healthful. The distance betwixt backsliders and the
prosperous is greater and more hardly reconciled, than of those that are but
Children: As you know a man that has had a good trade and a good stock, but is
broken and fallen to decay; there is less hope of his recovering and getting up
again, than there is of the raising of a young beginner how small soever his
stock be.

That you may more fully understand how great the distance is betwixt what you
are and what you should be or might have been, I shall advise you to make this
threefold comparison.

1. Compare your selves with some of those that are of your own time and
standing, yea with some that came in to Christ many years since some of you. O
how far are you left behind some of your company! Yea how much have some
younger Christians gotten the start of you! What fruitful Christians, what
lively Christians, what experienced Christians are there, which never had half
the time that some of you have had! Whilst they are shut up and become tall as
the Cedars in Lebanon, do not you continue as the underwood poor starveling
Shrubs that prosper not? What a distance is there betwixt a Shrub and a grown
Tree! When do ye think ye shall reach to their growth, if ye do not stir up
your selves to come on at another rate then hitherto you have done? O let it
not suffice you that ye have hope that ye are Christians, but get you on to be
with the foremost of your company; the top branches are the best.

2. Compare your selves with your selves, what you are now, with what you were
in your former time: Are you as good as ever you were? as holy as ever you
were? or is there not a fall and a great fall from what you once had attained
to? Is not the Sun gone many degrees back with you? Is not much of your light,
and your life, and your heat lost? Where be your eyes, Friends, if you do not
see what losers you are? where be your senses, if you do not feel your own
decays? Sure it is a sad sign that you have even lost all your Christianity, if
you have not so much of Christianity left as to make you sensible how much you
have lost. You that are backsliding Souls, my preaching to you is like to be in
vain; I have little hope that this word should do any thing toward your
recovery, if it does not make you sensible how much you have lost, and how far
you are grown behind hand. This would be hopeful, if we could see you smiting
on your thighs as once Ephraim did, Is. 31.19. Or smiting on your Breast as the
poor Publican did, Lord be merciful to me a sinner; Lord be merciful to me a
backslider, Lord pardon me, Lord receive me, Lord recover me and help me up,
that I utterly lose not that which I have wrought. Know, friends, that if ye be
fallen to such a distance from what you once were, you are at a greater
distance from what you should be. For,

3. Compare your selves with that Copy which I have set before you, to be
pressing toward; with that higher pitch of Religion which I have pointed out
unto you in the 5 particulars formerly mentioned. Compare your selves with
these, and then how great will the distance appear to be betwixt what you are
and what you should be? Are you such hungry and thirsty Souls after the highest
degree of Religion? Have you panting hearts, longing hearts, can you say, my
Soul is a thirst for God, mine heart cries out for the living God, O for more
of God, for more of the holy Image of God, more of the Life of God, for more of
the power of his Grace? Are your Souls such hungring and thirsting Souls, or
have you not even lost your appetites, does not even desire fail with you? And
then what savor or relish have you of religion in your hearts? Is wisdom
entered into your hearts, is the knowledge and grace of God become [pleasant] to
your Souls? Do you taste the sweetness of religion? Can you say with the
Psalmist, Ps. 84.1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord? Or as Ps. 19.10.
Sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb to my Soul; thy Testimonies are my
delight, how precious are thy thoughts to me! A day in thy Courts, an hour in
my Closet, my Retirements to the Lord, and my Soul solaces in the secret of his
presence; these are the great pleasures of my life, and the very joy of mine
heart: Can you say so? do you find it so? Lord, how short, how far short do the
most of Professors fall here! Ah wretched hearts! We have tasted so much of the
sweetness of this Earth, that we have lost our taste of God; the world is
become too sweet; our gains, and our pleasures, and our very labors are too
sweet; these carnal things put our mouths out of relish of things spiritual and
heavenly.

And thus I might lead you through all the Particulars, Solidity, etc. by
comparing your selves wherewith, you might easily perceive how very great the
distance is from that holy, heavenly, tender, fruitful frame which we should be
in. And sure, Friends, such a great distance from it makes it evident how much
need we have to stir up our selves, to be reaching and making toward it, Phil.
3.12. Not as if I had already attained or were already perfect, but I follow
after. The Apostles sense, that he was short of perfection, this was it to stir
him up to follow after: And O how hard does he follow? v. 13. Forgetting what is
behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I press to the
mark. O if it were thus with this great Apostle one that had out-stripp'd even
the rest of the Apostles, and was gotten so much nearer to the mark than they
all: If this thought, but I am yet short, I have not yet attained, did so press
him to follow after, then sure our sense how greatly we fall short of him, who
yet acknowledged himself short of the mark, does evidence how great need we
have to bestir our selves.

Do not now think that a little amendment will serve your turns, that a little
more care and pains will suffice to help you up and recover you; know that you
have a great way to go ere you can attain to this prosperous state, and if ever
you do recover to it, it must cost you much; many an importunate Prayer, great
watchfulness, much labor, yea many sorrows of heart for your neglects that
have been; many a sigh, and may be many a tear: And therefore much need is
there that you stir up and awaken your sleepy hearts to it. Fall upon your
knees, fall upon your knees, bemoan your selves, be ashamed of your selves that
you have sloth'd your selves to this sad pass, and then stir up your selves to
make after a recovery.

2. From the difficulty of recovering them that are fallen. It is with the
consumption of the heart as with the consumption of the body; there are 3
degrees of a consumption.

In the first degree it is hard to be discerned and easily cured. If this
Disease be but taken in the beginning, a little matter might do the cure; but
in our first declinings it is not easy to discern them: Consumptions come not
as Fevers with any violence, but we waste and waste by degrees; it does not
make men sick at first seizing them, but they consume away insensibly: May be
some amongst us have but begun to fall. A degree of declining there may be, but
they are not sick of it, but take themselves to be healthful and strong
Christians; a little while hence they may both see and feel, what they will not
suspect nor fear. If you would but understand in time, and seek remedy in time,
how much mischief and misery might be prevented!

2. The 2d. degree is easy to be discerned, but hard to be cured. The farther
it grows upon us the more plain our case is, but the more difficult is our
recovery. Friends, there is a Consumption of the Vitals of Religion upon too
many among us, and some are very far gone: There need not be much pains taken
to give you the Symptoms or Signs by which you may know it; their backslidings
are so visible, that they are manifest even to every eye. The paleness of some
of our faces, the shortness of our breath, the wasting of our strength, the
unwildiness and inability to labor, and the listlesness thereto discovers how
it is with us. O what weak and listless souls are some of us! our flesh and our
bodies strong and healthful, but how weak are our hearts, how short breathed,
quickly tired with every little of duty? and how pale and wan does our outward
man appear, our very Vitals are perished and gone. Friend, thou hopest thou
keep thy stand, but is it indeed with thee as it was wont to be? Do thou
pray, and hear, and live, and love, and labor in the matters of God, and of
thy Soul as in thy former days? Open thine eyes, and look a little upon thy
self, compare thy self now with what thou wast in thy best estate; and then
thou will say of thy self as God of Ephraim, Hos. 7.9. Gray hairs are upon me
though I knew it not. It Is conspicuous, man, to every one that observes thee;
thy Religion, thy conscience, and all that Grace that is in thee, it is all
grown gray: Gray hairs are upon thee, though thou mindest it not. What say you,
Christians, are you all fresh and flourishing? Are you strong Christians,
lively Christians? Do your Souls prosper, does your Religion prosper? or must
you not say, I remember the days of Old, when it was better with me than now?
such who are so far gone, whose decay is so visible, though their recovery be
possible, yet they are hard to be recovered.

3. A third degree is, not to be hid and past cure, plain to be discovered,
never to be cured: and then the Consumption of souls is ordinarily past cure,
when men are past feeling. It is one thing to be without feeling in those that
never had any sense of God upon them, and another to be past feeling in those
that once had some tenderness of heart: Those that have been chilling, and
cooling, and hardening so long, till God gives them over to that reprobate sense
mentioned, Romans 1.28. the case of such men is become desperate.

Now you that are fallen into this consuming Disease, consider these things,
how difficult your case is, unless it be but in the very beginning, and how it
will be growing on to be harder and harder, if yet you prevent it not with
speed till it becomes desperate. Consider this, and then say, if it be not time
to look about you, and to make hastily out to the Physician for cure. Friends
take heed, will you yet linger on as you have done! will you be quiet, take
your ease, and take no effectual care to recover the health you have lost, the
strength you have lost? Tremble to think how suddenly you may be given up to a
total and final Apostasy.

But why is the cure so difficult? I answer:

1. Because (as it has been said) in the beginning it is so hard to be
discerned. Who will look after a cure that thinks he ails nothing? This
Consumption invades and creeps on by such insensible degrees, that it is not
perceived or minded till it grows up to such an height as will scarce admit of
a cure. This Consumption fretteth out the Heart as a Moth fretteth a Garment.
When the Moth first breeds, there it lies undiscovered, till by insensible
degrees it eats up the strength of the Garment. If the Moth seized upon any
Garment as fire does, you would shake it off suddenly; but because it consumes
but insensibly and by slower degrees, therefore it is let alone till it has
done its work. Friends, is there not a Consumption upon you? is not the Moth
gotten in? I hope not into my Soul. Why there is the misery of it, you will not
know you consume till ye be utterly consumed.

2. From the indisposition and unwillingness of the Heart to seek after a cure.
Such untowardness and inindisposition there is to this work, that I am afraid
that by all that I can say, I shall not be able to prevail with some of you, to
make trial what may be done. May be you acknowledge that we have all need
enough of this warning, but I am in much doubt that when you have heard all,
your hearts will so hang back from the work, that all that can be said will
quickly be forgotten, and never effectually stir you. If you would take the
warning, and stir up your hearts* and set to the work, there I hope you might
be recovered; but I tell you again, esp^cially those that are far gone, that I
fear your unwilling and untoward hearts will be too hard for the word, and will
not let you come on to any purpose. Consider what I say, and remember it a day
or two hence, and see if it be not with too many of you according to my fears;
and tell me then if you can, I thank the Lord, the word has prevailed, and I
have set mine heart to it, and through the Grace of God will not give over till
I may see it effectually work to my recovery.

3. From that opposition that is made against our recovery.

1. There is a stirring Devil that opposes it.

2. There are stirring lusts that oppose our recovery.

1. There is a stirring Devil that opposes your recovery. The Devil is a
destroyer, that is his name, Rev. 9.11. Abaddon, Apollyon, that is a Destroyer;
it is he that has brought you into this case, that has destroyed that little
Grace you had, and is thereby attempting to destroy your Souls. When you see
what wastes have been made upon you, upon your consciences, upon your comforts;
it is the Devil that has made these wastes, he is that Fox that has devoured
your Grapes. The Devil is an adversary, and a busy adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8.
walking up and down, seeking to do you a mischief; it is he that has brought
you down to this low pass in which you are, and he that has brought you down
will do all he can to hinder you from ever rising again: The Devil is with you
wheresoever you are, he watches you where ever you go; if you go into your
Closets, go to pray for recovery, the Devil watches you there, and does what he
can to distract and hinder your prayers. When you come to hear, the Devil
watches you in the Congregation, and strives to catch away every word that
might do you good. All these words which I am speaking to you for your
recovery, I am in doubt they may have but little success; if the Devil can help
it, there shall none of them stick upon your hearts: He that has brought you
so low will be busy with you to hold you so low, resisting and stealing away
whatever word might help you up. What Is become of all the words that have been
hitherto spoken to this purpose, do they abide upon you? have they wrought a
cure upon any languishing Souls? or what is become of them all? O has not this
adversary stolen them all away, stolen away the warnings, stolen away the
reproofs, stolen away the awakening counsels that have been given you, and so
hitherto held your Souls fast asleep? Now having to do with such a busy and
stirring Devil, you had need the more to bestir your selves and look about you,
that he do not irrecoverably undo you. Resist the Devil, Jam. 4.7. Be sober, be
vigelant, 1 Pet. 5.8. knowing that your adversary. -- Is he so watchful upon
you to hinder you and mischief you? does he lie at the catch to steal away this
awakening word from you? You had need lie at the catch also, catch at every
word the Lord speaks to you concerning this matter, lay hold upon them, lay
them up in your hearts, forget them not while you live, keep them in memory,
let them dwell in you, and hold your thoughts upon them; keep them working in
your hearts, and never let them slip till they have done the work and your
Souls be recovered.

2. There are stirring lusts within you that oppose your recovery. Your lusts
are your disease, and your disease resists your remedy. There is a body of Sin
within you, there is the same evil nature in you that are Christians that there
is in Sinners; though the power of sin be broken, yet there is much of it still
remaining. Though the Egyptians be drowned, Sin as a Throne be subdued, yet the
Canaanite, Sin as a Thorn, is still in the Land. Though Christians have not an
Enemy Enemy to which they are in bondage, yet they have an Enemy that is still
fighting against their Souls; sin has no longer dominion over them, Romans 6.14.
yet it still makes war upon them. Though the head of this Serpent be broken,
yet it is a Serpent still: And as it is said of Daniel, Genesis 49.17. It is a
Serpent in the (way,) an Adder in the (path,) it biteth the Horse heels; it
wounds, and vexes, and hinders, though it cannot kill. This Sin is called a
Body of Sin, Romans 6.6. and of this Body there are many members, every lust of
our heart is a Member of our Body of Sin. Our evil nature is this Body, and
there our numerous Lusts do meet as in their common root, and thence they
spring. Now these Lusts are they that hinder and spoil us.

Friends, these are they that have tempted you off from God, and tempted you
off from your integrity, and turned you to iniquity, and hitherto hindered your
returning. Jam. 1.14. Every man when he is tempted, is drawn aside of his own
lust and enticed. Do not think to lay all the blame upon the Devil, and so to
excuse your selves; no, your own hearts have joined with the Devil, you have
been accessory to your own ruin. Some men when they have run themselves out of
their Estates by Riot and Drunkenness, they will think to lay all the blame
upon their evil company: O this evil company, this evil company have been my
Bane, sure enough they have; and therefore let every wise man be warned and
shun them as the Devil. But yet, let not evil company bear all the blame, it is
that evil heart of thine, thine own hearts lust that betrayed thee into thy
evil company: What could evil company have done had thou not had an evil
heart to go after them? How long might they have enticed thee and never
prevailed, if thou had not been drawn aside by thine own hearts lust and
enticed? They are those Devils within you, those Lusts that war in your
Members, that have given the Devil his advantages against you. Some fall a
lusting after Money, and this lust sets them so hard on work for the world,
keeps them so busy about their Trades and their Estates, that they forget God
and their Souls. Others lust after Pleasures, and ease, and idleness, and this
keeps them off from those labors and that industry which is necessary to the
maintaining their Souls in life. Some lust to Pride, others to Envy, others to
frowardness and contention, and those make such gashes in their Hearts, as let
out the life blood of all their Rellgion. It Is men's lusts that bring their
Souls down, and do devour and eat up all their Religion: and as I said before
of the Devil, so here of Lust, that which has brought them down will hinder
their rising.

And these Lusts are stirring Lusts, working and warring in our Members,
holding us in captivity to the Law of Sin, as Romans 7.23. and hindering our
recovery and redemption. When I would do good, evil is present with me, v. 21.
that is, to hinder and hold me back from doing any thing that would do me good:
And as it was with the Apostle, so is it more or less with every Christian. May
we not all say after him? When I would do good, evil is present with me. Lust
is busy, lust stands ready to spoil me in every duty. Whatever calls we have
to duty, to repent, and return to the Lord, to pray and cry unto the Lord:
Though the Word calls, remember whence you are fallen, and repent; though
Conscience calls, seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he
is nigh. Lust strikes in to stop or turn away our Ears from these Calls. Why is
it that no more of you have answered these Calls? Remember whence you are
fallen, and repent. O it is your Lusts that have stopped your ears. Whatever
need or necessity there be lying upon us to hearken to these calls, though we
see all the good that is within us even at deaths door, graces dying, comforts
dying, hopes dying, and all our Religion ready to give up the ghost, yet our
Lusts will not suffer us to mind our Necessities. Whatever inclinations, or
desires, or purposes we have to make an escape, to seek a remedy for these our
diseased languishing Souls; whatever offers and attempts we make to set upon
more earnest praying and crying to the Lord for help and deliverance, to set
upon a more watchful diligent life; whatever good it be we purpose or set our
selves upon, still evil is present with us; one lust or other is still at hand
to spoil or hinder all, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gall.
5.17. We think to come to it, we hope to come to it while the word is preaching
to us, and our hearts are a little touched and affected with it; whilst we are
made to stand convinced in our own particulars; This decayed state is evidently
my state: and it is an evil and wretched, and dangerous state, and thereupon we
take up such thoughts, Well through the grace of God I will amend, I will no
longer go on thus, I will seek my recovery; yet still Lust strikes in and
fights against all such thoughts, so that we cannot do the things that we
would. Christians, do you not find it thus in your experiences? One lust or
other is perpetually rising up to hinder any good that is going in your hearts,
and bringing it to just nothing. O how many good motions are quenched, good
purposes vacated, good desires and hopes frustrated, good beginnings
discouraged; your duties spoiled, your peace broken, your comforts clouded and
lost, and all by the malign influences of the Body of sin, and the
impetuousness of your lusts its members? Here are those outcries that we
sometimes hear from the tenderhearted; woe is me that I am constrained to dwell
in Mesech, to have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar; I am for peace, but
they are for war. I am for peace, yet not by a League, but by a conquest of
mine Enemies, let them dye that I may be at rest; but still they live and are
mighty, whilst I am for peace they are for war: I can have no rest in my
Spirit, I am weary of my life, because of these Daughters of Heth: Wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me? Hear Lord, cut down, cast out these Sons of
the Bondwoman, that they be no longer a Plague or a Snare unto me. Remember
these Children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; happy should I be could I
reward them as they have served me; happy should I be if I could take these
Children and dash them against the stones.

And now you see another ground why you have great need to bestir your selves
because of these stirring lusts that hinder and mischief you.

Let me here put in a word of application. You will say, But what should the
consideration of these stirring lusts stir me up unto? Why, you have it hinted
to you already, to deal by them as they have dealt and will deal by you: Have
they given you a fall? wrestle with them again, till they fall before you: Are
they for war? let them have enough of it, war against those lusts that war
against your Souls: Does the Flesh lust against the Spirit? let the Spirit lust
against the Flesh. Stretch forth the Spear, and draw not back your hand till
they become as the Midianites which perished at Endor, and became as the Dung
of the Earth. Mortify, mortify them; as lust has even mortified your
Religion, so let your Religion mortify Corruption. Take the Apostle for your
Pattern: O how did that great Apostle Paul bestir himself upon this account!
what compassionate complaints did he make against his lust, Romans 7.
aforementioned? The good that I would I do not, the evil that I hate that do I;
when I would do good, evil is present with me: I find a law in my members war
ring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
What earnest prayers did he make? For this I besought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor.
12.8. I was often upon my knees, begging the Lord that these Thorns in my flesh
might be pulled out. What assaults and batteries did he make upon them, 1 Cor.
9.26, 27. So fight I, not as one that beats the Air, but I keep under my body
and bring it to subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to
others, I my self should become a Cast away. What will become of me if I let
these Lusts live? O they will damn me at last. After all my preaching of Christ
to others, I shall be a Reprobate from Christ, a Cast away, if I conquer not
mine own sins; one of the two, they or I must die. Paul was a chosen Vessel,
and by the Election of God secured from coming into condemnation; but this
necessary means must be used, his sins must be slain, or his soul cannot be
saved, Acts 27.31. Though God had promised him his life, and the lives of all
in the Ship; yet, says he, unless the Mariners abide in the Ship ye cannot be
saved. And in the case of Jonah, if Jonah had not been cast out of the Ship,
the Mariners had all been drowned.

Friends, how often must I tell you this? Whatever Faith and Hope in Christ you
have, whatever profession of Christ you have made, whatever security you think
you have for your Salvation, yet if these Jonahs be not cast over board, you
will all be drowned in perdition and destruction, your lusts will never leave
enticing and tempting you from one sin to another, from one degree of Apostasy
to another, till they have damned your Souls: If you give them Rope and let
them alone, they will become such a Rope about your Neck as will drag you to
the Pit.

How near have they brought you to it already? are not some of you even become
as dying men? have not your souls and your hopes one foot in the Grave? And if
you die thus daily, what can you expect but to be buried in flames? See what
your lusts have already done, and tremble to think what they are still a doing;
you die outright if you save them alive. And will you not yet stir? have they
eaten up your hearts, and drunk up your spirits, and left such leanness upon
your souls? Have they withered your branches, and rotted your fruit, and are
these worms still gnawing at your root? How can you but cry out, Lord what am I
come to? Lord whether am I falling? save Lord, or I perish. Arise, O my Soul,
cut off the Limbs, and smite through the Loins of the Old Man; nothing but his
Death can secure his Life.

Friends, how do these words take with you? what do they work? what nothing
moved for all this? Or do the Sleepers begin to wake? O that it might be so!
Lord waken them.

3. From the difficulty of holding on, and getting on the way, for those that
stand. It Is hard to keep our way, and much more to make speed on in it; and so
hard, that unless we bestir our selves to purpose, we shall never come roundly
on. The way of Religion is an uphill-way, Prove, 15.24. The way of life is above
to the Wise, to depart from Hell beneath. The Mark we are making toward, stands
upon a Hill; there the City of God (in which alone that perfection we are
reaching after is to be found) is situate: The Holy Hill of Zion, Jerusalem
which is above. Our Mark we are pressing to stands upon an Hill, and our way to
it is all rising ground, and if we put not our selves hard to it we shall never
get up.

Sinners are all running downward, and therefore it is they run so fast: Behold
how the whole herd of Sinners are all like that herd of swine of the Gaderens,
running headlong down, and never like to stop till they be choked and drowned
in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; and the same way are Backsliders running,
these also are running down after the herd of Swine.

But now a Christians way is upwards; as it is said, Eccl. 3.21. the Spirit of a
Man, so much more the Spirit of a Christian, ascends and goes upwards; he does
so when he dies as the meaning there is, and he must do so while he lives,
that is his duty, Col. 3.1. and his duty is his way that he should go; his
course is to be from bad to good, and from good to better; from weakness to
strength, yea, and from strength to strength; from a little to an increase of
strength. Christians, you are all bound for Heaven, Travelers to the Holy
Hill; your progress in holiness is your ascending and climbing up the Hill; you
are getting up the Jacobs Ladder which reaches the Hill-top. Every Holy Day you
live, every Holy Duty you perform, every little degree of Grace that is added to
you, is your getting up so many rounds higher upon that Holy Ladder: And this
is it you have to do, to be climbing and climbing, higher and higher, in the
Grace of God, and in the Works of Grace.

And this now is the reason of our so slow motion; he that goes up the Hill
takes the more time, and the shorter steps; yea and as one foot goes up the
other slides back. Our goings up at Hill are more painful; Facilis descensus --
at revocare gradum -- hic labor, hoc opus est.

And hence is it, that there is so much need of the Goad and the Spur to prick
us on. Down at hill there is more need of the Bridle than of the Spur. Even
Christians have need of the bridle in this respect; we need not be driven down
to the lower Valleys which we have left, we are too apt to be running back to
the gains and the pleasures here below; it is to hasten our motion upward, that
we so much need the Rod and the Spur.

Yea, and we need to be quickened and warned to look well to the Bridle, to
restrain us from our cross and contrary motions: Sure, Friends, our so eager
running still after this world, running after the riches and pleasures of this
life, evidence it sufficiently what need we have to be stirred up to look well
to the Bridle: As the Psalmist says, Ps. 39.1. I will hold my mouth; so have we
all need to hold our hearts as with a bridle to hold the bridle upon our wills,
affections, and appetites. Do not you see how apt you are to run too fast this
way? with what speed are some Professors riding downwards? what haste do they
make to be rich and to be great in this world? The very Mountains of this
Earth, the Mountains of Pride and worldly Greatness and Glory, the very Hill
tops of Worldlings, are but as low Valleys to a Christian; he is still going
down at hill, while he is climbing up these worldly Mountains; and therefore he
needs the bridle to hold him in. Consider it, do we not still want to be warned
and called upon, and to call upon our selves to lay hold upon the bridle?
Behold, Friends, how many of us do suffer our carnal hearts to run their
course? how seldom do we give check to our fleshly desires? how seldom do we
speak such a word to our selves? Stay, O my heart, not too fast, O my Soul: How
little pains do we take to restrain our intemperate affections? How very few
self-bridling Christians, self-checking Christians, are here among us? When we
do hear such words, I am afraid I am making too much haste to be rich, I am
afraid I allow my self too much liberty for the pleasing my flew? Or if such a
word be now and then let fall, yet how little is it hearkened to? Though we
sometimes fear we run too fast this way, yet on we let our selves run, and do
not lay a due restraint upon our selves: Or if we do a little check our motions
earthward, yet do we effectually restrain them? It Is not enough that you say,
My heart needs a Bridle; you must make use of the Bridle: when you have stopped
your hearts in their carnal course, then you have done something

Friends, when you have considered and tried the difficulty of preventing your
motions downwards, and of speeding your way upwards, then you will see farther
what need you have to bestir your selves.

Lay altogether: Is it certain that those that fall short of Religion, or fall
off from the Religion they have, will be lost at last? Is there such a distance
betwixt what we are and what we should be? Is it so hard to raise those that
are fallen? Is it so hard to discern the Soul-consumption till it be almost
past cure? Is there such an indisposition in consuming Souls to seek, and such
an opposition made by a stirring Devil, and their stirring lusts, against their
obtaining their cure? Is it so hard for those that stand to get on their way?
then certainly every one of us had need to awaken and look to our selves. Thus
much for the 2d. General.

3. What it is to take hold of God? In answer to this 3 things.

1. Our great Happiness is in this, that the Lord is in us.

2. Our Happiness is in this, that the Lord is among us.

3. Our taking hold of God is our continuing the Presence of God with us, and
our preventing his Departure.

1. Our great Happiness is in this, that the Lord is in us. God is then in us.

1. When the Fear of God is within us.

2. When the Face of God is upon us.

1. When the fear of God is within us. When the Spirit of the Lord, the Image
and Holiness of the Lord, is within us, which come all to one: That Promise,
Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, is the same as those, Jer.
31. and Ezekiel. 36. I will put my spirit within you. A new heart will I give you.
Or as Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of God is within you. When God takes up his
Habitation, sets up his Throne in the hearts of his People, undertakes the
Government of them bp his Word and Spirit, subdues them to himself, reigns in
righteousness in their Souls, and makes them his voluntary Subjects and willing
People; when the Grace of God prevails and bears rule in their Hearts. It Is not
Gods being in their Mouths, the Grace of God in their Lips, but his being in
their Hearts, his dwelling and living in their Hearts, the real and inward
Sanctification of them by his Holy Spirit that dwells in them.

This is the being of God in his People, and this is the blessedness or
happiness of his People. When God is within us the Devil is cast out, sin is
thrown down, the Kingdom of Satan is destroyed where the Kingdom of God is set
up. It is peoples misery to have the Devil in them, to have Sin bear rule; and
therefore it is there blessedness to have these Tyrants cut down and cast out,
and the Kingdom of God set up in their stead.

2. When the Face of God is upon us; when we live in his fear, and live also in
the light of his Countenance; when he shines and smiles upon our hearts; when
he loves his Saints, and shows them his Loves; when he reveals his good will
and good liking of them, and lets them know that they are accepted with him;
when he is their Friend, and lets them have the countenance of their Friend
toward them; when he is their Father, and causes them to feel the Bowels of
their Father, the Compassions and Kindnesses of their Father, and hereby makes
them to joy in his Love, and to rejoice in hope of the Glory of God: This is
Blessedness indeed, these are Blessed Ones, whose God is thus their Lord.
Blessed are the people who are in such a case, blessed are the people whose God
is the (...), Ps. 144.15.

Christians, you need not complain whatever you want, if you have no bread in
your houses, no money in your purses, no health in your Bodies, no rest in your
bones, yet have you the Lord God in your hearts? it is enough, you are blessed
Souls. Sinners, ye need not boast your selves and lift up your heads so high,
you have money in your purses, you have friends in your houses, you have health
in your bodies, you have marrow in your bones, you can hardly tell what you
lack that would please you; and yet miserable souls are you all, God is not in
you, and that, to him that knows what it is, is misery enough to blast all your
comforts and your joys. The Devil is where God is not; Sin bears rule where God
does not; and this is the upshot of your boasting, and blessing, and comforting
of your selves; this is all you can say; matters of this World go well with me,
I can live a plentiful, and pleasant, and merry life; the Sun shines on my
Tabernacle, I have the Wind on my side, I am on the warm side of the Hedge, I
prosper, I flourish in the Earth, all things go well with me, I have but this
one thing to trouble me, my Soul is in the hands of the Devil, there is nothing
of God in me, and where God is not, there the Devil bears rule. This, if ye
knew it, is misery enough for you, that whatever you have, God is none of
yours; and this is happiness enough for the Saints, that God is in them of a
truth.

2. Our happiness is, that the Lord is among us, that we have the visible
tokens of his presence, that the Ark of his presence is among us, that we have
his Statutes, and his Ordinances, and his Worship among us; that the Doors of
his House are open, and the Glory of the Lord fills his House; that the
Ordinances are among us, and are not as a miscarrying Womb or dry Breasts, but
are fruitful to the propagating an Holy Seed, bringing forth abundance of
Children to the Lord, and nursing up those that are to be fat and flourishing.
This was that Glory of the Lord which the Psalmist so thirsts and longs to see,
Ps. 63.2. That I might see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in
the Sanctuary. This was that happiness of the Church which was prophesied, Is.
60.2, etc. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his Glory shall be seen in thee.
v. 4. Thy Sons shall come from far, and thy Daughters shall be nursed up at thy
side; then shall thou see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be
enlarged. v. 8. Who are those that flee as a Cloud, and as the Doves of the
Windows? v. 14, 15. They shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the
Holy One of Israel; and I will make thee an everlasting Excellency, a Joy of
many Generations. v. 21. Thy People shall be all righteous, the Branch of my
Planting, the Work of my Hands, that I may be glorified. This you will
acknowledge must needs be an happy time, and all this is the fruit of the
presence of the Lord among his People. When the Glory of the Lord fills his
House, and the offsprings of the Lord are numerous and prosperous; when the
Golden Candlesticks are set up, and the Son of man walks in the midst of his
Candlesticks; when there are not only here and there a flourishing Believer,
but when there are flourishing Churches, flourishing companies of Believers;
when there are not only a throng of People crowding the Doors of the Lords
House, but a throng of Saints worshipping at his Feet, and walking in the Name
of the Lord: Happy would such days be, blessed are the People that are in such
a case, by the presence of the Lord among them.

Yea, and every degree toward such a State is so far forth a degree of peoples
happiness; when the Lord gives his Prophets, and Teachers, and Ordinances, and
(any) freedom to attend upon them, and any little success to the propagating of
holiness, and the sincere Professors of it: This is a Token and a Fruit of the
presence of God with them. It Is a mercy for people to enjoy their civil
advantages, fruitful times and seasons for the good things of the Earth; plenty
of Bread, free and flourishing Trades, freedom from Oppression, etc. These are
Mercies, but these may be where the Lord is not as to his gracious Presence;
it is freedom and encouragement for Religion, the plentiful raining down of
Manna, the bread that comes from Heaven, and our thriving by our Bread; it is
this that evidences that the Lord is among us.

3. Our taking hold of God is our continuing this Presence of the Lord with us,
and preventing his departure; where I shall show 3 things.

1. God may depart from a people with whom he has been present.

2. It Is woe with that people from whom God departs.

3. This is to take hold of God to prevent his departure.

1. God may depart from his People with whom he has been present: And that,

1. From particular persons, from whom he may then be said to depart:

1. When he hides his Face from them.

2. When he suspends the influences of his Grace.

3. When he loosens the reins of Government.

4. When he denies them the benefit of his protection.

5. When he turns away his Heart from them and rejects them.

1. When he hides his Face from them, and withdraws the light of his
Countenance. Thus he withdrew from that precious Servant of his, David, Ps.
30.7. Thou did hide thy Face, and I was troubled; whom we find praying, Ps.
4.6. Lord, lift up the light of thy Countenance upon me; and Ps. 51.12. Restore
unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Gods Holy
Ones may forget God, may grow secure, and careless, and wanton Children; and
the Lord will not countenance the best of them in their sins: If they forget
God, he finds a way to remember them of him, by conveying himself out of their
sight; the clouds upon his Face, the darkness upon their own Spirits, make them
remember the light which once they had, and to look the better to it when the
light returns.

2. When he suspends the Influence of his Grace, witholds his Spirit from them:
This was the case of David, when he prayed, Ps. 51.20. Renew a right Spirit
within me. When those dews and showers of his Grace, which are necessary to the
holding our Souls in a flourishing state, are restrained; and hereupon the
Grace we have received withers and grows to decay. The former withdrawing of
God may consist with the vigor of Grace; God may hide his Face sometimes from
the dearest of his Saints, to prevent their decay; but the suspending of his
gracious influences will be followed with a decay. The Somer Sunbeams ripen
the Fruit, but the Winter Sun, when by its distance its influences are the
weaker, leaves all to fade and wither. It Is winter with those Souls, who by
their distance from Christ do lose the influences of the Sun of Righteousness.
When the Sun comes about again, and renews its influences, then it is Spring,
and fresh Buds, and Flowers break forth.

O Friends, is it not winter with many of our Souls? Have not the influences
from above evidently failed us? We have wasted out our Somer, and driven the
Lord to a distance; and now behold how our good things die away within us: It Is
become cold and frosty weather in our Souls, the cold has withered our Fruit,
and the Sun does not revive it: The Lord God is sadly withdrawn and gone far
off from many of our Souls. If Christians would be so wise as to keep them near
to the Lord, and so to keep the Lord near to them, it would be ever Spring and
Somer with them, and they should know Winter no more. O let us hold us under
the Divine influences; take heed how you put the Lord far off from you; take
heed of wandering from the Lord, lest he punish your wanderings from him by
removing himself from you.

3. When he loosens the Reins of Government, and leaves them to themselves and
their own foolish hearts, takes off his bridle from them, and lets them run
their own course, suffers their lusts to rule them, and lets them alone to walk
in their own counsels. Thus he withdrew from Israel, Ps. 81.12. I gave them up
to their own hearts lusts, or to the hardness or imagination of their own
hearts, -- And they walked in their own counsels: This is a worse case than the
former. It goes ill with those Souls, where the gracious influences of God are
suspended: That Field or that Garden is in but poor case that wants the Sun and
the Showers; but when it wants the care or the eye of the Husbandman too, what
good can be expected from it or to it? When grace is restrained, and sin is
restrained, to what a pass will such Souls quickly grow?

Gods Government is upheld in Souls, by the upholding of Conscience in its
vigilance, in its tenderness, in its authority. When Conscience is tender and
watchful, and we hold our selves under its inspection and government; whilst
Christians keep them to be conscientious, whilst Conscience tells them of their
duty, and warns them of their sin, and they will hearken to Conscience, their
case so long is hopeful; though God hides his Face, and leave their Souls in
the dark, and speaks not a comfortable word to them, yea and leaves them flat
and dead as to the wonted lively operations of his Grace, suspending (as to
their sense) both his quickening influences, and his comforting influences; yet
as long as Gods Government is kept up in them, as long as conscience is kept
tender, and wakeful, though they want the light of the Lord, yet they keep
close to the Law of their God; though his countenance be not toward them, yet
they have a good conscience toward him; though they cannot rejoice in God, yet
they will walk with God; though they cannot now see his Face, yet they are
still diligent in seeking his Face; though the Lord seems to have cast them
off, yet they will not cast him off; so long, though their case be sad at
present, yet it will be safe at last, Is. 50.10. Who is among you that fears
the Lord and obeys the voice of his Servant? though he walk in darkness and
have no light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, etc. Christians, are
there any of you in darkness and without the light of comfort and of joy in
your hearts? has the Lord hid his Face from you? this you will mourn under;
yet do you fear and obey the Lord? do you live under his Government? though you
cannot see him and rejoice in him, yet do you serve him and follow him? So long
it is well enough, trust in the Lord, and stay your selves upon God, he will be
a Sanctuary and support to you, though his Sun shine not upon you. But when God
hides his Face, withholds the sensible Influences of his Grace, and loosens
the Reins of Government too, leaves men to themselves, and they thereupon
follow their own hearts, and walk in their own counsels, then whither will they
run?

Friends, whatever befall you, pray that God will still keep you under
government; and look to your selves that you do not throw off his government.
Keep your consciences tender, and hold you under the government of them; such
Backsliders there are who have lost the sight of God, and have grown to decay
through the failing of divine influences, and also have lost conscience too;
their lust has gotten the government of them, the world, the love of the
world, and their cares for the world bear the great sway in their Souls; all
the bonds of Religion are loosened, and can take no hold of them farther than
their carnal ease and interest will give leave; if they continue in the number
of Professors still, yet they are a sort of loose Professors, unruly ones, all
the Religion they have will not rule their Tongues, nor rule their passions,
nor their appetites: When their passion is up, religion must stand by,
conscience must hold its peace, or if it speak they will not hear: Lust must be
let alone to control conscience, but conscience may not be suffered to
control lust; the sins which are for their gain or their pleasure, they can
swallow them and not keck at it: The duties that are a weariness to the flesh,
they can omit them, or shuffle them over; when the world, or their sloth will not
give them leave, they can let praying alone, or reading, or so much as serious
thinking of God, and the things of God; they can let it all alone. So much of
religion as will serve their turns they will take up, and what is more than
that, they can dispense with themselves in it. If they be told of their faults,
and their haltings, and be never so solemnly charged in the name of the Lord to
remember themselves, and recover out of this wretched state, it is all one as if
nothing had been said; on they go in their old carnal rode, and will lay
nothing to heart: And as they let themselves alone, so God lets them alone too,
and will not rebuke them for their sins; or if there be a rebuke that he sends
sometimes in their ears, as they stand in the crowd amongst other Sinners; yet
he will not set it upon their hearts, but lets them alone to shift it off as
they will, and to harden their hearts against it; this is a sign that the Lord
is departed from such Souls.

O Friends, how many rebukes has the Lord given to Backsliders? how many
charges has he given you to remember and repent, and to shake up your selves
out of your listless careless state? do these rebukes stick? do these charges
stick? do they work upon you? have they set you upon your repenting or
recovering work? how has it been with you? what have you done, since the Lord
has been particularly dealing with you in this matter? Are there any of you
that have done nothing but sleep on and continue as you were? O Sirs, let me
tell such of you, that it is to be feared the Lord is departed from you, that he
has loosened the reins of his Government, and has left you to your selves to
grow worse and worse, harder and harder, till you be utterly consumed and
brought to nothing.

4. When he denies the benefit of his protection. Here 2 things.

1. The Lord is the Protector of his people.

2. God then departs from them, when he casts them out of his protection.

1. The Lord is the Protector of his People, the Keeper of Israel, Ps. 121.5,
7. The Lord is thy Keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand, the Lord
shall preserve thee from all evil; the Lord shall preserve thy Soul. He is not
only the Keeper of their Substance, of their Flocks, and of their Herds, and of
their Houses; but he preserves the Souls of his Saints, Ps. 97.10. It Is true,
every man is to be his own Keeper, the Keeper of his own Soul; we abuse and
forfeit the protection of God, that thence grow careless and neglect the
keeping of our selves. Commit the keeping of your Souls to him in (well doing,)
1 Pet. 4.19. Do thou say, the Lord is thee Keeper of my Soul, and I will
leave it to him, and will not trust in my self, in mine own keeping? Thou say
well that thou will not trust thy Soul in thy own keeping; but do thou
hereupon neglect the keeping of thy Soul? will thou not do what thou can to
keep thy self, but wilt grow careless of thine own heart, and leave the whole
care upon him? thou herein forfeitest Gods protection: The same word that
promises the Lord shall preserve thy Soul, requires, Prove. 4.23. keep thine own
Soul, Keep thine heart with all diligence. We must be every one of us our own
keepers, or God will not; but here is our great security, when we have done
all, that it is the Lord that is our Keeper. The Devil could tell that well
enough, Job 1.10. Have thou not made an hedge about Job? He would fain have
been doing with him, but God had hedged the Devil so out, that he could not
touch him without his leave: And he that hedged the Devil out from Job, hedges
him out from all his Saints; and he that hedges the Devil out, hedges the World
out with all its temptations and snares.

Christians, you whose hearts are upright with God, how is it that the world
and its temptations are not broken in upon you, and have not totally carried
you away from God and his Holy ways, and carried you after your covetousness or
your pleasures, or the honors and preferments of this Earth, as it has done
many others? O you may thank God for this, he has hedgd the World out: 'Twere
well with many, even Professors, if they could find in their experiences as you
do find in yours, that God had hedged the World out of them. But O how many of
these, even Professors, are there, that the World has broken in upon them,
broken in upon their hearts, and carried them away after it. Do not some of you
feel that your hearts are gone, gone after your covetousness, gone after your
ease, and your pleasures, gone from God, gone from your Religion as to the
strictness and power of it; gone from a good conscience and your tenderness of
it, gone from your heavenly minds, and so you are become of those that mind
earthly things? Sure some of you do not know your selves, do not observe your
selves, nor are acquainted with your own Spirits, if you do not acknowledge,
Lord be merciful to me, mine heart is far gone; my conscience, my tenderness,
my religion, my love to Christ is much lost by the incroachment of this present
World. Is it so? and how does it sit upon your hearts? does it not trouble you?
does it not make you afraid? sure you have reason to be afraid, and to say
within your hearts, I doubt I am none of those Saints of whom God has
undertaken to be the Keeper; or at least, if God had ever an hedge about me,
the hedge is broken down, the tempter is broken in, and is carrying away all
that little good I had, and will never leave carrying and carrying, till he
has carried away my Soul.

God has made an hedge about his Saints, not to hedge (all) temptations out;
he sometimes suffers the devil and the world, as he did in the case af Job, to
break over the Hedge: He lets his Precious Ones to fall into diverse
temptations, but still they are under the protection of his Promise, 1 Cor.
10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape? Christians may be hard
put to it, and may suffer many a foyl; we too often feel the Devil is too hard
for us, the World too hard for us, and we suffer great losses and impairings in
our grace and comfort: But the promise will bring us about again, and fetch us
in again, and knock off our fingers from being so bold with these earthly
things. Indeed we can never have assurance that we are under the protection of
that Promise, but are left without the hedge and are none of the Lords; whilst
the world and its temptations do continue to make such a prey of our Souls, and
hold us such Slaves and Captives to it, but if we be the Lords, the Promise
will bring it about again. This is the first, God is the Protector of his
People.

2. Then God departs from them when he casts them out of his protection; when
he says concerning any person, as he said concerning his Vineyard, Is. 5.5, 6.
I will take away the hedge thereof and it shall be eaten up, and break down the
wall thereof and it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste, it shall
not be pruned nor dug, but briars and thorns shall come up; I will also
command the Clouds that they rain no rain upon it. It Is one thing for the
tempter to be suffered to break in over the Hedge, another to have the hedge
removed. God had his Hedge still about Job, though he suffered the Devil to
leap over it; and this Hedge limited him how far he should go, and no further:
But when the Wall is removed, and the Hedge broken down, and the Enemy is let
alone to make what waste he will, to eat up, and to trample into dirt the Fruit
of the Vineyard, and make it a place for Briars and Thorns to grow up instead
of the Vine; then the Lord has cast off, and is gone from the Vineyard. Sure,
Friends, there are such Professors in the world, and look diligently if there
be any such among you, about whom the Lord has broken down his Hedge, whom he
has even given up to the world and given up to the devil, and in whom these
Enemies have eaten up even all their good, and made their Souls a mere waste,
where grows nothing but Briars and thorns; in whom religion and righteousness,
truth and honesty, faith and love, and hope and prayer, and all sense of God,
and things to come, are devoured and eaten up of the world, and those briars
and thorns of pride and lust, of envy and intemperance, and all
unrighteousness, are sprung up in their stead. My hope is, that there are none
of the Professors of this place that are so far gone as this; but whether there
are none of you that are going, and in a fair way to it, I leave to your
consciences to judge. If the wall be not utterly thrown down, yet are there not
some sad breaches made in it at which the Devil and the World have entered? If
all be not eaten up, if all be not trodden down, if there be something of
Religion left alive, if some little minding of God, some little care of your
Souls, some little favor of Christianity be left, (and how very little is
there in some?) though all be not eaten up, yet is not this world an eating
daily, and a consuming more and more that little of God that remains? Does not
the World grow upon you, and does not Religion waste, and your Souls go back
farther and farther? Is it thus with any of you? look you diligently whether it
be or no; if it be thus, though I will not say, the Lord is utterly departed
from you, the Lord has rejected you; yet thus much I must say, God is going
away from your Souls; look to it, and lay hold upon him by repenting and speedy
turning toward him, or expect no other but that he will throw you off, and
cast you out of his sight.

5. When he turns away his heart from them and rejects them. The Lord has
rejected thee, said Samuel to Saul; and afterward, The Lord is departed from
me, said Saul to Samuel. God deals with particular persons that will not be
reclaimed as with backsliding Israel, concerning whom he said, Is. 15.1. Though
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind, or my heart, could not be
toward this People; cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth. God had
sent Prophet upon Prophet to them, to reclaim and recover them from their
Apostasies to their Idols, but when they would not be reclaimed, then this
fatal word comes at length, Cast them out of my sight, my mind is no longer
toward them.

Friends, you that have been Backsliders, that have fallen in your Religion,
that have declined from God to the World, God has sent many a word to you to
recover you, and now he is giving you solemn warning again: What will you now
do? shall this word be lost and take no effect upon you? will you yet continue
to sleep on and refuse to be awakened? O take heed, O awaken, who knows, if ye
yet refuse, but God may forthwith speak such a dreadful word concerning you, I
have no mind to this backsliding Soul, I Will be troubled with him no longer,
I Will give him a Bill of Divorce, and send him away. If you should ask as they
did there, Whither will he send us? Why, any whither; let them go whither they
will for me, I Will own them no longer: Send this man to the World which he has
loved, send him to the Devil whom he has followed; let him be gone from me, I
have no mind to him; this backsliding wretch, he has no mind to me, he has
more mind to the World, to his Money, to his Trade, to his Oxen, then he has
to his God; and I have no more mind to him, than he has to me. Since he has
so much mind to the World, and to the Service of the Devil, let the World take
him, let the Devil take him, give him a Bill of divorce and send him away.
What, false to his God, to his Conscience, to his Religion, to his Covenant?
What, an Hypocrite, an Apostate, an Idolater? One that has been so, and will be
so? though I have called him back, and threatened him back, and cried unto him,
though thou have played the Harlot and the Hypocrite these many years, yet
return to me; and yet none of my Words will stir him, nor move him, but on he
goes his old way: Away with such a wretch, I have no mind any longer to him,
cast him out of my sight.

Friends, you that are gone back, do not comfort your hearts with such a
thought, However I am no total Apostate, I have something of Religion,
something of Conscience left me; but know, that if you be not total Apostates,
yet your gradual backslidings are the way to it; and if you look not the better
to it, you will never stop (as I have often warned you) till you have lost all.
Are you not total Apostates? no more were Israel; they still acknowledged God,
and worshipped the true God; but though they did but hang betwixt God and their
Idols, yet upon their refusal to return, God sent forth this word concerning
their utter rejection, Away with them, cast them out of my sight. Thou have,
thou say, something of God in thee, something of Religion in thee, but art
thou fallen so far from God, as to hang betwixt God and the World, and shall
not this solemn warning, which comes to thee in the name of the God of Heaven,
shall not this shake thee up from sleeping in such a state, and raise and
recover thee out of that carnality and earthliness to sincerity in Religion and
Godliness? Shall all these warnings be spoken to thee in vain, and leave thee
such an earthly minded, such a dead-hearted careless Soul as they find thee?
God forbid, Friends, it should have no more success than so; and look you to it
every one of you that are particularly concerned in it; look to it, lest if you
continue without an effectual change and recovery, God should speak such a
dreadful word to any of you, I have no longer any mind to this man, I have no
longer any mind to this woman, give them a Bill of Divorce and send them away,
cast them out of my sight, let them be gone from me.

Friends, you must give me leave to speak as plainly to you and as closely in
this matter as I am able. I know how sad 'twill be with you if the word does
not prevail; and I know this consuming Disease is hard to be cured: Backsliders
are ordinarily of hard hearts, and deaf ears, and so hard to be recovered. God
knows how it may be with you, whether God may gain any thing, Religion may gain
any thing, upon you by this warning; I know it will be hard work to bring you
up out of this case, and yet I am loath to lose my labor: I would fain do
something for Christ, and something for the help of your poor Souls; and
therefore you must bear with me, that I thus set my self to speak over and over
thus closely to you; that if it be possible, my words may stick with you. Do
not say that I think too hardly of you, and make you worse than you are; I
thank God that there are among you those who are faithful, and stand their
ground; I thank God that there is so much Religion as there is, even in some of
you; I thank God I have hope there is as much of serious Religion continuing in
this Congregation, as in the most Congregations about us: But I must tell you,
that he is a stranger to us, that does not perceive at what a low ebb serious
Religion is amongst many of us; and he whose heart bleeds not and breaks not at
what his eyes may see and his ears may hear, has but little of the Spirit of
Christianity in him. Sure there are too many among us that have declined in
great degree, O that this word might find them out, and bring them to their
knees first, and then set them upon their Legs, that so there may be a
prevention of their utter Rejection.

2. God may depart from his Churches and the Congregations of his People; and
then he departs from these:

1. When he shuts up his House, and writes upon the Doors thereof; The Glory is
departed. When he causes their visions to fail, his Ordinances to cease from
among them; when preaching, and praying, and all his spiritual worship fails;
when, though the Candlesticks continue, yet there are few Candles left; and
those that are not quite put out, are put under a Bushel; when Pastors and
Teachers, which were burning and shining Lights, are removed into a Corner.

2. When he pulls down his House: When not only the Candles are carried away,
but the Candlesticks are broken in pieces: When he unchurches his People, and
scatters his Congregations: When the Societies of the Saints are broken in
pieces, and those that went to the House of God in companies, have neither
house to go into, nor company to go together. It Is promised, Is. 33.20. Ye
shall look upon Zion the City of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not
one of the Stakes thereof shall be removed, neither shall any of the Cords
thereof be broken; but there the Glorious Lord will be to us a place of broad
Rivers and Streams. Now when this word is changed, and our eyes see Jerusalem a
troubled habitation, our Tabernacle taken down, its Stakes that pitched it, and
its Cords that held it, all removed and broken in pieces; when the Habitation
of the Lord is become a desolation, and his Vineyard become a mere Wilderness;
when the Cormorant and the Bittern, when Owls and Satyrs, when the Beasts and
the false Prophets are where once were the Prophets and People of the Lord,
then is the Lord departed.

3. When, though his House and his Tabernacle stands, and his Ordinances are
continued, though there be Preaching and Praying still, yet the Spirit of the
Lord is departed. When he does not continue to bless his House, and bless his
Ordinances to his People; when that word is fulfilled upon them, Is. 28.13. The
Word of the Lord is to them, precept upon precept, line upon line, that they
might go and fall backward: When the Children of Zion are as it was said those
that hate Zion should be, Ps. 129.6. as the Grass upon the House top that
withers before it be grown up, whereof the Mower fills not his hand, nor he
that binds sheaves his bosom: Even this is a departure, and a grievous
departure of the Lord from his People; when he continues not among them to
bless them, continues his Word among them, precept upon precept, line upon
line, lets them have Sabbath after Sabbath, Meeting upon Meeting, Sermon upon
Sermon, but nothing prospers, but they fall and go backward, and wither as the
grass upon the House top.

O how many Congregations amongst us are there from whom the Lord is already
thus far departed! though he gives us his Word, yet he does not bless his Word;
though the Sowers come forth to sow, yet how is the Seed rotten under the
Clods, how little is there that comes up! Though the Planters plant, and the
Builders build, how few young Plants do we see coming up? how slowly does the
Building rise? does not the Building rather go backward! do not the Plants that
are hang their heads and wither, and no more rise in their room? When do we
hear of a new convert brought in, and how few do we see of the former planting
to flourish? O we fade, we fade, we wither as the Grass upon the House top; our
life, and our strength, and our beauty, how is it fallen and withered? the
beauty of love, the beauty of humility, the beauty of holiness, how is it even
all marred? Sure this is a token of the Lords departure from us. Thus you have
seen how the Lord departs from his People.

2. It Is woe with a people when the Lord departs from them: Woe unto them, says
the Lord, when I depart from them, Hos. 9.12.

1. It Is woeful to them that have something of Religion in them; when their
Pastors, and Pastures, and Waters fail, what is like to become of them? even
they also are like to pine for want. There are none to whom Famine is so
tedeous as to hungry Souls; the living Child will cry for Bread, when those
that are dead can want it well enough, and never feel their want: And it will
not be woeful only to their sense, they will mourn, and lament, and be pierced
to the very heart to see such a day; but to some amongst them it will be a
worse woe than that. Whilst some mourn for want of the Word, others will pine
away for want. Ezekiel. 24.21, 23. I will profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of
your strength, the desire of your eyes, and ye shall pine away for your
iniquities. Professors, there be some among you that have languished and grown
to decay in the fullness of all things, by all the Ordinances of the Gospel you
have had, by all the Manna that has fallen among you, by all our Preaching to
you, and Praying over you, we can hardly keep life in you; the little good that
remains is weak and even ready to vanish away: But what then will become of you
in the Day of Famine? when your Manna shall cease, and your Waters fail? O
tremble to hear this word spoken concerning you, you shall not mourn nor weep;
you will not be much troubled, nor lay it to heart, but ye shall pine away for
your iniquities. If in such a day of plenty as you have had you are such pining
Souls, what can you expect but you may pine to death in days of want?

2. Especially it is woeful to those that have no Religion in them, that are
blind, and hard, and dead Souls, that remain still without Christ and without
God in the World. Sinners, if ye be not brought in to be Believers whilst the
Word of Faith is preached to you, if ye be not converted whilst the Word of
Repentance is preached among you, if you continue such blind and ignorant Souls
whilst you have the light with you, what will ye be in the days of darkness?
Sinners concern not themselves about any such thing; let the Gospel shine or be
under a cloud, let Religion flourish or vanish, let God be amongst them or be
gone, let there be preaching or no preaching, it is all one to them, they are
like Gallio, Acts 18.17. they are for none of these things. But, Sinners, let
me tell you, as little as you regard it how it goes with the Church of God and
the Ordinances of God, whether there be liberty or restraint, a plenty or a
famine of the word; when ever the Gospel departs, when ever a famine of the
word comes, it is you are the men that are like chiefly to have the misery of
it: It Is an affliction to the Saints, and they may be great losers, they may
languish and grow to a decay; but you are like to lose your Souls, you are like
to dye in your Sins, and to perish for ever; if you are thus hardened under the
word, how are you like to be won to Christ without the Word? If the Devil has
such power with you to lead you on in your sins, in your drunkenness, and
swearing, and lying, and covetousness, and to hold you under your impenitence,
notwithstanding all the instructions, and warnings, and reproofs you have from
the word, how fast will he hold you when there is none to resist him? If you
never be converted and brought to repentance, you know you must to Hell; and
what hope will there be of your conversion when the converting word is no more
preached to you? Sinners, you had need make better use of the Word while you
have it among you, you had need look for another manner of work of God than
hitherto has been upon you: Of all men in the World you especially had need
pray, Lord take not the Word of thy Truth from among us; or at least, Lord,
delay that dark day, O let my Soul be first wrought upon, O let it first lay
hold on me, and recover me from my sins, and from the power of the Devil; let
me become a Convert to Christ, a Disciple of Christ before that day come: you
had need pray thus, and you had need hearken more to the Word while you have
it, and hasten in to Christ. That day will stay for none of you when it is
coming; and O! what if it should come upon you? if the Gospel should be carried
away, and leave you in that sinful guilty state that now you are in? Look to it
Sinners, in the name of God look to it, strike in with Christ presently, make
through work for your Souls instantly, while it is called to day harden not your
hearts; don't any longer stand, shall I, shall I? one day or other I hope I
shall: For ought you know, God may be even about to pack up his Treasure, to
take down his standing and ready to be gone, and then where are you? O carry
this thought upon your heart; if God should go, and his Gospel should go, and
leave my Soul at this pass, woe, woe to me poor wretched Soul, what shall become
of me for ever? O, if the preaching of the Word leave me under the power of the
Devil, sure the Famine of the Word is like to seal me up under the hardness of
my heart to everlasting condemnation. Look to it, Sinners, pray that such a Day
may not overtake you thus; and O hasten, and take the present season, and this
day break off your sins by repentance, and yield your selves to the Lord; be
converted that ye may be saved. Fear not but Christ will accept you if you will
now come in; he is yet willing, he stands stretching his hands to you, he lifts
up his Voice to you, and calls, Come ye poor sinful souls, come unto me, make
an adventure for Heaven, come and be my hearty Disciples; let the wicked among
you forsake his wickedness, let him return to the Lord and he (shall) have
mercy. Fear not but if you will now come in you shall be accepted; but dare not
for your lives delay any longer, lest the days of darkness overtake you, lest
the Gospel be removed from us, and leave you bound in your sins, and then you
be carried down, bound hand and foot into the everlasting Prison. The Lord
grant that this be not the dismal lot of any of your Souls, and look you to it
in time that it be not; lose not the present season, the Sun seems to grow low,
it is almost night; O see to it that it be not Sunset among us, before it be
Sunrising in any of your Souls. I hope the day is even now dawning upon some
poor Sinners among you, that some of your Souls are looking toward Christ, and
making toward Christ, and making your escape from your Sins: Is it so with
thee? art thou awakened from thy Sins? art thou wishing and waiting for Christ?
Even this is the dawning of the day upon thee: O for the Sun rising, for the
forming of Christ upon thine heart, look that the work that is, go not back
again, but come on, and hold on, that thy little morning light may increase and
grow up to perfect day, and that the Evening and the Morning meet not.

3. Our taking hold of God is our continuing the Lord among us, and our
preventing his departure. This was their Sin in the Text, they did not take
hold of God, that is, they took no course to continue the Lord amongst them:
God was going from them, and they let him go and looked not after him, they
were too willing to part with God. And this is the case of Backsliders in
heart, they are too well contented that God and they do part; their heart is
withdrawn from God, and they matter it not though God withdraws from them.

Our laying hold on God imports these 3 things which are necessary to our
continuing him with us.

1. Our letting go our Idols or false Gods. God never departs, till there be
another God taken in with him and set up by him; and God will never continue
unless these Idols be cast away, Ezekiel. 14.5. They are estranged from me by
their Idols; they are grown strangers to me, and I must be a stranger to them;
they have taken in other Gods besides me: And v. 5. Repent, says God, and turn
your selves from your Idols: If you would have me stay, let them go their way.
There is a setting up of Idols in the Congregation, a setting up of Stocks and
Stones to worship; and there is a setting up of Idols in the Heart, Ezekiel. 14.3.
These men have set up their Idols in their Hearts: Those that have no such
Idols as Israel had, those that abhor Image Worship, or worshipping of the Sun
and the Host of Heaven, those that would be trembled to see an Idol set up in
the House of God, may yet have an heart full of Idols. One of the chief of our
Idols is the World, and our great Heart-Idolatry is Covetousness, or the Love
of the World, Col. 3.5. And Covetousness which is Idolatry. If God be provoked
to depart from us, it is to be suspected that this is the Idol that drives him
away: Our hearts are gone after the World, and thereupon it is that the Lord God
is so far from our Hearts. Would you lay hold on God? put away your Idols, cast
this world out of your Hearts. It Is vain to confess we have sinned against God,
it is vain to pray, Lord, leave us not: God will never regard your confessions
nor your prayers, till your Idols be cast out.

Friends, whatever we suffer, or are like to suffer, it is this World, it is our
Worldliness that has undone the most of us; the gains of this World, the
pleasures of this World have been taken into our Hearts, and thereupon it is
that God leaves us to sink and go to ruin as we do. Cease from your Idolatry,
away with your Earthly-mindedness and Fleshliness, your hands are full of dirt
and ashes, empty them of these, or you can never lay hold on God.

We cry out against the Wickedness of our Age, the Atheism, the Adulteries; the
Oaths, and prodigious Profaneness that is among us; and these and suck-like
Evils we look on as the reason why God is such a stranger and so angry with us.
But besides these Wickednesses of the openly Profane, there are other
iniquities to be found even amongst those that profess against this Profaness;
and this for one, the Iniquity of our Covetousness that has thus provoked the
Lord against us, Is. 57.17. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness I was wrath
and smote him, I hid me and was wrath, and yet he went on frowardly in the way
of his Heart. Here 3 things:

1. That Covetousness is Iniquity, or Wickedness: Covetous Ones are Wicked
Ones, however they may look like Holy Ones; whatever of God or Religion
appears, yet their Covetousness, where it is predominant, marks them out for
Wicked ones. Art thou a Professor of Religion? do thou Hear? do thou Pray?
do thou join thy self to those that fear God? and yet art thou a Worldling?
thou art but a Wicked Man whatever thy Profession be.

2. The Iniquity of our Covetousness will make God to withdraw and hide his
Face from us. I hid me and was wrath.

3. Covetous men, how dear soever their Covetousness costs them, yet they will
go on their way: He went on frowardly, that is, perversely or obstinately in his
way. He would not be turned back, he would not give off from following his
worldly heart, how angry soever God was with him for it. O this Disease of a
worldly Heart, when it is rooted once, it hardly admits of a Cure. Beloved, God
has prescribed you many Remedies, and God has given you many Warnings, and
your Souls have suffered great loss by it: O the impoverishment that has
fallen upon your inward man by your so over eager pursuit of the advantages of
our outward man; and yet for all this, who will take warning? How little
abatement is there to be seen of the Zeal of our Hearts after Earthly things? O
it is an evil Disease, and a tough Disease, that will hardly be purged away.
There are some Humors of the Body that are so tough, that where they abound
they can hardly be purged away without the destroying of Nature; and there is
no Humor in the Body so tough and hard to be removed as this disease of the
Soul.

Well, but yet unless you mean to part with God, yea, and to part with him for
ever, you must let this Idol go. And the like may be said of any other of our
Idols, any other Sins you have set up in your Hearts. There can be no taking
hold of God, but you must let all your Idols go; you are at this point, either
these must be parted with, or God and your Souls must part. You that are proud
Professors, that Pride must be laid in the Dust; you that are for your pleasure
or your ease, you that are for your credit and reputation, you that are given
to appetite, whose God is your Belly or your Throats, you must come off from
all that your hearts are thus set upon, or else count upon it, that as you have
begun to fall as there is a breach between God and your Souls begun, so it will
grow worse and worse with you, and the breach grow wider and wider, till it
become too great to be ever made up.

What, Friends, will ye love this World to the Death? will you love your
Pleasures, and your Ease, and your Lusts to the Death? will you sell all that
you have, all your Religion, all your Hopes, and your Comforts that you have
had in it? will you sell your God, and your Souls, for these vile things? The
Young Man in the Gospel foolishly refused to sell what he had in the world for
Christ, and will you not refuse to sell Christ and all your Hopes as to the
other world, for the trash you have here? do not you see? do (none) of you see
how dear they have cost you, and how low they have brought you as to the State
of your inward man already? and will you hold on still and never give over till
you have lost all, and all hopes of ever recovering what you have lost? O be
yet advised and go no farther on, cast ye away, cast ye away your Idols, and
yet return to the Lord, and he will return to you.

2. Our laying hold on the Covenant of God. We have no other hold on God but
his Covenant with us; we had need keep the Covenant of God inviolable, for
there is all the hold we have either for this life, or the life to come. And
this is the hold that we find this people of Israel insisted upon, v. 9. of
this Chapter, Behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy People; that is, thy
Covenant People. See, we beseech thee, or remember, O Lord, what has passed
betwixt thee and us; thou have said, I will be your God, and ye shall be my
People: And this we find more expressly pleaded, Jer. 14.7, 8. We have them
expostulating the case, O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, our
backslidings are many, we have sinned against thee; O thou hope of Israel, and
the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should thou be a Stranger? The
Lord might have answered, Why should I not be a Stranger, when your Sins and
your Backslidings are so many? They reply, v. 21. Yet do not abhor us for thy
names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory: What would the Heathen say
of God if he should cast off his People? Remember, break not thy Covenant with
us; it is true, we have broken with thee, but yet remember what thou have said,
Ps. 89.31, 32, etc. If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, I
will visit their Iniquities with a Rod, and their Sin with Stripes;
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my
Faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my Lips: O that is a word of hope; Remember Lord, remember, and
break not thy Covenant with us.

Our only hope is the Covenant of God, and this is necessary to our laying hold
on the Covenant of God, To repent of our Covenant Breaking, and to renew our
Covenant with him, and return to our obedience

It Is a vain pleading from the Covenant of God, from the Faithfulness of God to
his people, if they have been false in the Covenant, and will not return; our
engaging to fidelity to God for the future, and our being faithful to our
engagement, this is the surest and our only way to take hold on the Covenant of
God.

Friends, you that are backsliders, you have been unfaithful to God, you have
broken the Covenant of your Peace; and as to your selves, you have hereby taken
the most effectual course to make void the Covenant of God; you have loosened
the Almighty from his bond to you; God is far from you (as I may so speak) and
may never look after you more, but may depart from you for ever, and leave you
to perish in your revoltings: And though God be gracious and abides faithful,
yet unless you will come into new bonds with him, and so lay hold on his old
bond to you, you can expect nothing but that he leave you, and forsake you for
ever.

This therefore you have to do for recovery: 1. To acknowledge your
unfaithfulness to the Lord; Lord, I confess I am a Backslider, and herein am
become false to thee; I have covenanted to love thee, and to serve thee with
all mine heart, and with all my might; but woe is me, thou have but half an
heart from me, mine heart is divided; O how much of it has this World carried
away from God? instead of Serving thee with my might, I have been an idle
Servant; the Lord forgive me, my business has of late lain another way than
about God or my Soul; I have been serving my Pride, and my Covetousness; this
world has too much of me, insomuch that many a time I have even forgotten that
I have a God to serve; and when I do any thing in the service of God, I do it
but by halfs; my strength has gone out for the world, and woe is me, there has
been but little left for God, but my weakness and weariness; yea, and though I
find the sad fruit of this my neglect in those wastes that are grown upon me,
though I see my self become a poor, withered, decayed thing, yet I am not much
troubled at it, but am still going on in the same busy life for this Earth,
and in the same neglect of God: O I have been thus unfaithful, an unfaithful
Servant, an unfaithful Steward of the manifold Graces of God; I have so wasted
my Talents, that I have almost nothing left. Thus confess unto God your
Covenant breakings.

2. Renew your Covenant and return to your Fidelity. To repent and not return,
is but a mock repentance; to confess and not amend, is but a mock confession.
Remember that word, Jer. 15.19. If thou will return, I will bring thee again,
and thou shall stand before me.

You that confess your backslidings, will you return? you see how it has been
and is with you, shall it be better for the future? what are your minds for
hence forward? are your hearts so set upon a reviving the work of God, and a
recovering out of your carnal, earthly, lazy habit and way, that you are
willing to renew your Covenant with God? will you promise to the Lord, that
through his Grace with you, and the help of his good Spirit, you will
henceforth set your hearts to be more faithful to him? to follow the Lord
fully, to stick faster to your Religion, to be true to God and your Conscience,
and the Covenant of your God? will you so, Friends? will you? O that there were
such an heart in you all! This do, and then, though you be gone back from him,
yet he will bring you again: Though you be fallen so low, yet he will raise you
up, and you shall stand before him.

3. Then trust upon the Covenant of God; return to be faithful to him, and he
will not leave you nor cast you off for your former unfaithfulness; trust upon
it.

This is your way to take hold of the Covenant of God, and your taking hold of
the Covenant, will be your taking hold of God. Friends, after such forsakings
and such declinings as many of us are guilty of, there is reason enough to be
afraid lest the Lord casts off such Unfaithful Ones; and there is no hope but he
will do so, if you thus return not, he will be lost to you for ever, he will go
farther and farther off from you, he will be gracious to you no more, nor
accept you nor any of your service, of none of your prayers for your selves, no
nor of the prayers of any others for you, but will say concerning you as once,
Jer. 14.11, 12. Pray not for this people for their good, and when (they) fast I
will not hear their cry, and when they offer an Oblation I will not accept
them. Pray while you will, speak to Ministers if you will, and to Christians,
Pray to the Lord for me, he will not accept your Prayers, nor any others
Prayers for you, unless you will set your hearts to return into faithfulness to
him.

Friends, I tell you again, you that are in this case, and either will not see
it, nor confess your unfaithfulness to God, but will satisfy your selves in
your way, and think you are well enough, or at least will excuse your selves,
and say, your case is made worse than it is; or if you do confess it, I was a
Backslider, I have been unfaithful, yet will not renew your Covenant, and
return to be faithful, but hold you at the same pass; look for nothing else but
this, that the Soul of the Lord will be utterly loosened from you, and he will
say concerning you, Give them a Bill of Divorce and send them away; let them
alone, let them pine away in their iniquities till they be past recovery or
redemption. And let me add this farther, if the rest of the Professors of
England which are in the same case will not see it, will not confess, will not
speedily return and recover; what can be expected, but that the Lord, who has
been for these many years so visibly departing from us, and after many returns,
seems at this time again to be removing from us; what can be expected if we
speedily repent not, but that he will never return but utterly reject us, and
leave us as a dark Land, make us a desolation and astonishment, and write his
Ichabod upon the Doors of our Congregations and Habitations; The Glory is
departed from England. But if you will yet see, and and will confess and
return, I will say to you, as Shecaniah said to Ezra concerning that revolting
people when they were upon reforming, Ezra 10.2. There is yet hope in Israel
concerning this thing; There is yet hope in England concerning these poor
Souls, that the Lord will return and continue to dwell in them and among them
as in the former days; his Covenant is your hope, lay hold upon it.

3. Our recovering our Communion with God. Our Communion with God stands much
in these things.

1. In our mutual Acquaintance, God with us and we with him. God is acquainted
with his People, and he requires them to come into his Acquaintance, Job 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with God. Acquaintance stands in our Knowledge of God: We
cannot be said to be acquainted with them we know not; and in such experimental
knowledge as is gotten by converse together: We cannot say we are acquainted
with every one we know; converse or walking together is necessary to our being
acquainted. The nearer and more intimate our Acquaintance with God is, and of
the longer continuance by so much the more hold we have of God; God will not
easily lose his Acquaintance, and those that are acquainted with God have
tasted so much of the sweetness of walking with him, that they will take the
more heed how they lose that Acquaintance. Those that are intimately acquainted
by their friendly converse together, this Acquaintance knits their Hearts
together as David's to Jonathan, so that they will not easily be separated.
Have thou used thy self to intimate converse with God, and thereby gotten into
experimental Acquaintance with him? O thine heart will be hereby knit to the
Lord, and the Lords Heart knit together with thine. Acquaintance cannot bear
strangness; it is grievous to us when our Acquaintants become Strangers to us,
and we are unwilling to be strangers from them. Friends, do you suffer your
hearts to be estranged from the Lord! can you forget God and keep at a distance
from him? can you lose your Intimacy in Heaven? are your delightful thoughts of
God restrained, and is not this grievous to you? It Is a shrewd sign that God
and you were never well acquainted. You that are the Friends of God, keep your
acquaintance, take heed of wanderings, take heed of distances and enstrangments;
get the experimental delights that arise from your intimacy with him, and that
will hold you near him: And you that have lost your Acquaintance, O recover and
revive your old Intimacy in Heaven.

2. In mutual Acceptance. This is a special part of our Communion with God, our
Complacency in God, and his Complacency in us. Acquaintants take mutual
pleasure in one another, their company is grateful and acceptable: God is
accepted of his Saints, they have an hearty goodliking to him, and are glad of
his Presence; not only all the intimations of his Love and Kindnesses to them,
not only such a word spoken to their Hearts, I love thee, mine Heart is toward
thee, thou art mine, the dearly beloved of my Soul, I am at peace with thee, my
delight is in thee: O how acceptable, O how pleasant are such gracious words!
but not only these, but the manifestations of the Will and Counsels of God to
them; they accept his Commands, they love that the Lord should tell them of
their Duty, His Statutes are my delight, Ps. 119.77. and they accept his
Rebukes, and Corrections, and his Punishments of them for their Sins, Levit.
26.41. knowing that he corrects them in love, and that they cannot want his
Chastizements, that the very Rebukes of his Countenance are sometimes as
necessary for them, and as beneficial to them, as the Light of his Countenance.

2. They are accepted with God; he accepts their Persons: Ephesians. 1.6. He has
made us accepted in the Beloved; he accepts their approaches to him. Ezekiel.
20.40, 41. In mine Holy Mountain of the height of Israel there will I accept
them; I will accept you with your sweet Savor. Offer your Offerings, lift up
your Voices, pour forth your Prayers, they shall be a sweet Savor, a Savor of
Rest to me.

Now whilst God finds rest in a People, he will not depart, Ps. 132.14. This is
my rest, here will I dwell for ever. Acceptance with God, and rejection from
God, are so contrary, that whilst we have the one we need not fear the other;
and whilst God is accepted with us, to be sure we are accepted with him; whilst
Gods ways please us, our ways will please the Lord, Prove. 16.7. When a man's
ways please the Lord, he will make his Enemies be at peace with him; and so
long we may be secure that our Friend will not become our Enemy, but will live
in love and continue his abode with us.

3. In mutual Correspondence: In frequent and friendly entercourses God will be
sending down to his Saints Tokens of his Love, and his Saints will be sending
up Presents to the Lord, Tokens of their Love to him. There is a Jacobs Ladder
betwixt Heaven and Earth; this Ladder is Christ, by which there is constant
coming and going: There are Spiritual Blessings, the Blessings of Grace, the
Blessings of Peace, that are sent down from God to his Saints; and there are
Spiritual Duties, Holy Affections, Holy Desires, Holy Prayers and Praises,
which by the hand of Christ are sent up before the Lord. It Is the very Life of
Christians, to be either receiving down, or sending up to Heaven; they must
hear often from God, or they cannot live; I will hearken what the Lord God will
speak, Ps. 85.8. And whilst they live, God shall hear often from them; there
are Messengers and Messages that pass daily betwixt God and them: They are
often sending up, and the best Present they have is their Hearts; I lift up my
Soul to thee, Ps. 25.1. They will be sending up their Desires to the Lord, and
their Sighs after him; if they have nothing better, they will be sending up
their Tears, and their Sorrows, and their Complaints to the Lord, Ps. 38.9. All
my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Ps. 56.8. Put
my Tears into thy Bottle. If it be well with them, then their Praises are sent
up; if they want any thing, then up go their Desires to the Lord for Supply; if
they ail any thing, if they be surprised by Sin, swallowed up of Sorrow,
whatever it be that ails them they pour it out into the Bosom of their Friend.
Some-Messengers or other are daily sent up, and whatever the Messengers be, if
it be a Prayer, or a Sigh, or a Tear, this is still the Message, tell him, That
I am either sick of love, or sick for love, for an Heart to love the Lord.

Such Entercourses there are betwixt God and his Saints, and these are a
special part of their Communion with God, and a special security against
distances and enstrangments betwixt the Lord and them. And it is to be
observed, That whenever there is a parting betwixt God and Souls, there is a
cessation or failing of these Friendly Entercourses. Declining Souls, how
seldom do they look upwards! they are so busy here below, that they have no
leisure, and they grow so carnally-minded, that they have no list to have much
to do with God; they restrain Prayer, and restrain Holy Meditations; the Lord
seldom hears from them, and when he does, it is so coldly and so dully, that he
can take no pleasure in it: O Friends, it is a sign that there is a breach
betwixt the Lord and you, when you are fallen so into a neglect of Spiritual
Duties. Do your affections Heavenward flag? do the fervor of your desires
fail? are your Prayers shortened and straightened? are you so seldom, and so
remiss, and so flat in your retirements to God? can you not say, at least, My
sighs and complaints are daily before him, and my groanings are not hid from
him? What danger is there that God and your Souls may utterly part, if you have
thus lost your Correspondence with him?

4. Often reckoning; by this our Communion with God, and our Friendship with
him, is maintained. Often reckoning keeps long Friends; whilst we keep our
Account clear and fair, so long there is the less danger of a breach: The best
of Saints run upon score daily; we go upon score for Mercies received from God,
and we go upon score for Sins committed against God; and where there is such
scoring, there must be often reckoning.

1. Our score of Mercies should be answered in our Praises and more abundant
Duties; and a reckoning must be kept both of what we have received and what we
have returned; of what the Lord has done for our Souls, and what our Souls
have done ever the more for his Name: Thus we should reckon for these; O my
soul, the Lord has done great things for thee, has brought thee from darkness
to light, has saved thy life from death; when thou were going on in thy sins,
running with the multitude either after thy Covetousness or after thy
Companions, in the lusts and in the lewdness of thine heart, when thou were
making all the haste thou could down to Hell, there Grace met thee, and
whilst it let others run on, it singled thee out and brought thee back out of
that deaths Rode, and has brought thee into the way of Life, and of a dead
Sinner, has made thee this living Soul. O what a wonder of Mercy was there!
and since, how many a kindness has it showed thee? how often has the same
Grace met thee in the House of God and taught thee, and instructed thee, and
quickened thee, and comforted thee? how often has Grace met thee in thine own
House, met thee in secret, met thee upon thy knees, and has enlarged thine
heart, and helped thee to pour out thy Soul before the Lord, and has poured in
upon thee such a sense of the kindness of God to thee, as has delighted and
even ravished thine heart? And what great multitudes of other instances have
there been of the renewed Kindnesses of the Lord to thee? O to what a reckoning
do thy Mercies rise! have thou kept the Account by thee? if thou have, what
has been returned in answer of the loving kindness of the Lord? As 'twas said
concerning Mordecai who had saved the Kings Life, Esther 6.3. What honor and
dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? Can not thou say, The Lord has
saved my life from death, and done for me these great things; what honor have
I done to the Lord for all this? And if upon thy reckoning made, it be found as
'twas there found in that instance, there has been nothing done, or but little
done, then thou will see that there must be more done, or God will be angry.

2. Our score of sins should be reckoned up in order to the getting them
crossed by faith in the Blood of Christ, and repentance from dead works: Thus
therefore thou should go on; O my Soul, thou see what God has done for
thee, but what is it that thou have done against the God of thy Mercy? how many
slights have thou put upon the Grace of God? how often have thou abused Mercy?
have thou not grown secure? have thou not grown wanton? have thou not been
haughty and lifted up in the pride of thine Heart? Remember thy frowardness and
quarrellings, thy backbitings and talebearings; have thou no lies, no false and
fraudulent dealing to put down upon thy account? do thou not use to play the
Hypocrite, and come before the Lord with such an hollow heart and such hollow
duties, as if thou meanst to mock him to the face? art thou not either a
backslider, or a loyterer? if thou have not lost ground and fallen backward,
yet have thou not lost time and not gone on forward? have thou no slothfulness,
and negligence, and non-proficiency to write down against thy self? have thou
not somewhat against thy self for thy covetousness and over-eagerness upon the
World? have thou no wrongs of thy conscience to be remembered? do not find
much of these and many more evils that thou art run in score with thy God for?
and what has there hitherto been done for the crossing out of the score? Sure
if thou go on thus, thou art like to hear of him in another way than thou
would, or it may be not hear from him at all. Beloved, the keeping good
reckoning betwixt the Lord and us being of so great importance and so necessary
to the continuing his presence and favor with us, I shall give you some short
directions concerning it.

1. Let every one especially look to his own personal reckoning. We must reckon
for our people also, how great things God has done for our Nation and his
Churches amongst us; and how great have been the sins of our People: What have
our Princes and our Priests, what have our Magistrates and our Ministers done?
What have the Sins of Congregations, of our Neighbors, of our Families been?
We are, as Members of the same Body, concerned in all these, and therefore must
keep a public reckoning: But our special reckoning which we must most insist
upon, must be our own personal reckoning. Concerning our Mercies we must say as
the Psalmist, Ps. 66.16. Come, and I Will tell, and reckon up, what the Lord has
done for (my) Soul. For our Sins, we must say to our selves, what Israel was
rebuked for not saying, Jer. 8.6. What have I done? there is no man that
repented nor said, What have I done? May be we may some of us be telling too
much what others have done; the Sins of Princes and great Ones, the Faults of
our Neighbors and Acquaintance may be too much in our Mouths; though they be
not so much as they should be upon our Hearts, yet our Tongues will run and
catch up every evil report, and be spreading it abroad, making it our ordinary
talk and discourse, raking up all the evil news we can hear in the Town or
Country, as if we were the very Sinks to gather in all the Filth of the Places
we live in, and then casting back the stink of it in our discourses. This is a
wicked practice, which I have more than once warned you of; and O that it were
avoided and amended. But whilst we vainly talk, what has this man or that
woman done? how foolishly, how proudly, how frowardly, have they behaved
themselves? O how very seldom is it that we mind our own reckoning? Lord, what
have I done? O my Soul, what have thou done? Here our chief business lies, to
mind and make our own personal reckoning. Let every man prove his own work,
says the Apostle, Gal. 6.4. Let every man search his own heart, let every man
observe and take an account of his own ways and goings.

2. Do not under reckon. Do not carelessly or deceitfully skip over any of your
faults: make a plain and perfect account; deal faithfully betwixt God and your
Souls: be not like the unjust Steward, Luke 16. when there is fifty or an
hundred owing for, do not take your bill and write down but twenty, or but ten;
do not say to your selves as the Lord to the Church in Pergamos, Rev. 2.14. I
have a few things against thee: a few small faults I have. God may have many
things, and great things against you, and if you will reckon truly, you may
find many and great things against your selves.

3. Level your accounts. 1. For your mercies that you have received: the way to
level them is to see to it, that ye walk worthy of all the mercies of God, and
that you receive none of the grace of God in vain. Let it not suffice you that
you live better lives then sinners, that have received no such mercies as you
have; I thank God I am not as this Publican, no nor as this Pharisee; I am no
lewd Liver nor no proud Hypocrite; shall that suffice you? You may be as
neither of these, and yet God may have much against you, that you are no better
then you are. You ought to live up to all the light you have received, to the
love you have tasted of, to the experiences you have had of the manifold
kindnesses and compassions of the Lord to your souls. There are some of you
that God has done more for, and bestowed more upon, more knowledge, more
helps, more grace, then upon multitudes of weaker Christians: your life must be
as much above the ordinary rank, your care, and your zeal, and your diligence,
and your faithfulness, must be as much above the lower sort of Christians as
you have been set above them in what you have received. Some of you will not
say, but the Lord has been abundantly gracious to you; he has not done by
every Christian as he has done by me, his grace has abounded, his kindnesses
have abounded, O how deeply has my soul tasted how gracious the Lord is! And
what should you hereupon say further? O this you should say, What shall I
render? how should I live? Study, O my soul, to walk worthy of all this grace;
O let me have my conversation in Heaven; let my conversation be in (all things)
as it becomes the Gospel: let me be holy, harmless, lively, fruitful, that I
may show forth the virtues of him that has called me out of darkness into his
(mavelous) light. God has been marvellously gracious to me, he has showed
me mavelous loving kindness, he that is mighty has done for me great things;
help, Lord, help me, O my God; that as thou have made me such an instance of
thy great mercy, so I may become an instrument of thy greater praise.

2. For your sins, the way to level the reckoning for them is by getting the
scores to be crossed, and having them all blotted and struck out of your
account. Get them crossed, 1. By repentance, Acts 3.19. Repent ye -- that your
sins may be blotted out. Whatever sins you find upon your account, there they
must stand against you till by repentance they are blotted out. Repentance is
the washing us from our sins, and till they be washed out of your lives, they
will never be blotted out of your book. Fall upon repentance every one of you;
have you lived an earthly and worldly life? O repent that you have. Have you
been proud, or self-conceited, or self-willed, of a froward and a contentious
spirit? O let your souls and all that is within you say, It repents me, I am
grieved at the heart, that ever I have been such a wretch. Have you under all
your professions of Christ lived a carnal, careless, heedless, idle, unsavory,
unprofitable life? what should you say? O it repents me that I have been no
more spiritual, and diligent, and savoury, and useful in my generation. Repent
and reform, repent and amend; let it grieve you at the heart, that you have
lost so much time, that you have lived to so little purpose, that you have been
such barren vines, such fruitless figtrees, in the vineyard of the Lord: and
now let your root spring forth, let your branches shoot up, let your buds and
blossoms appear, and grow up to more fruitfulness: this is repentance, and
nothing short of this. Amend your ways, come you to a better life, a more holy
and heavenly life, that is the way to have all your former sinfulness and
unfuitfulness blotted out.

2. By faith in the blood of Christ. It Is not your own tears that will wash
away your sins, it is only the blood of Christ, 1 John 1.7. your iniquities
must not only be purged, but be pardoned too; whatever repentance may do
toward it, it is the blood of Christ, and faith in his blood, that must both
get them purged and pardoned. Do not only say, If I have done iniquity, I hope
I shall do so no more: I hope through the grace of God I shall never live as I
have lived: but besides this you must get your pardon for what you have done.
Now this is your way to level your accounts concerning your sins, to repent and
amend all your evils, and to sue out your pardon through Faith in the blood of
Christ.

And now you see what it is to lay hold on God; to continue his presence with
us, by casting away our Idols, by laying hold on his Covenant, by recovering
into Communion, getting into an holy acquaintance with God, living so that you
will both accept of God, and be accepted with him, maintaining a frequent
intercourse betwixt the Lord and your souls, letting him hear often from you,
and listening and longing to hear as often from him; by keeping even reckonings
betwixt the Lord and you, keeping a reckoning of your mercies and a reckoning
of your sins, by levelling your accounts, by walking worthy of your mercies, by
getting the scores of your sins crossed, washed away by repentance, and
pardoned by the blood of Christ. Here Is that you have to do, if you would take
hold of God, and continue his presence with you.

Friends, is the Lord within you? I hope he is in many of you; would you that
he abide and continue with you? I know you would; you that are Christians, I
know you would all say, Woe to me if the Lord depart from me. I know it is the
desire of every sincere heart among you, let the Lord dwell in me, and walk in
me, as he has said he will; let Christ dwell in mine heart by faith; Lord,
leave me not, take not thy Holy Spirit from me; if all the Friends I have in
the world forsake me, if all the comforts I have under Heaven fail me, if mine
house must go, and mine estate go, and my health go, and my life go, yet let
not the Lord depart from me; let the Lord still dwell in my soul, dwell in me
as my Teacher and Instructor, dwell in me as my governor and my guide, dwell
in me as my portion and treasure, dwell in me as my Refuge and Protector; let
but the Lord God continue with me, and influence me by his Grace, and quicken
me by his Spirit, and guide me by his Counsels, and hold me by his Right Hand,
and lift up the light of his Countenance upon me, and so long mine heart shall
be glad, and my glory shall rejoice, my flesh also shall rest in hope, in this
hope, that he will show me the Path of Life, I shall behold his Face in
Righteousness, and when I awake I shall be satisfied with his Likeness. Why is
this your mind? is this your desire that it may be thus with you? why now you
know what you have to do that it may be so.

Beloved, you have much the more reason to hearken to these instructions, and
hereby to secure the continuance of the Lord in your own hearts, in such a time
as this, wherein there are so many tokens of his being about to depart out of
our Congregations, to shut up the Doors of his House against us. O how will it
be, if when the days shall come wherein we shall lose our opportunities of
meeting the Lord in the Congregation? how very sad will it be, if we should in
such a time not find him within us, if the Word of the Lord should be thrust
out from his House, and the Spirit of the Lord should be withdrawn from our
Hearts; if with our public communion we should lose our secret communion; if
instead of finding comfort in our retirements to God, he should hide his Face
from our Souls; if instead of speaking comfortably, he should speak roughly to
us; if this should be his Word to us in such a day, Now see what thou have
done, now remember thy wantonness and thy worldliness, thy hypocrisy and thy
backslidings, and triflings out thy day of grace; of these things thou have
been warned aforehand, but would not lay them to heart, and now reap the
fruit of thy folly; think not to have countenance from me, and comfort from me,
in the day of distress, whom thou have so mocked and slighted in thy
prosperity: If men be angry let them be angry, if men will persecute, let them
persecute, and look for no relief from me. O what if the Lord should speak thus
to any of your Souls in the days of darkness that may come, how dreadful dark
will it then be! or what if he should say nothing, but leave thee a blind, and
hardened, and senseless Soul, wasting away and growing worse and worse, and not
at all affected with his severe providence? How if it should be thus! O
Friends, that this may not be your case, that God should depart from his House
and your Souls together; know that you are so much the more concerned to give
special heed to the Instructions you have received for the laying such hold
upon him, that he may continue with your hearts if he should not be entreated,
but depart from his House and Congregations.

4. Stirring Religion will take hold of God: What might have been said to this
is in great part prevented by what has been said already, yet something I
shall add and show.

1. What Is meant by stirring Religion.

2. That stirring Religion will continue the Presence of God with us.

1. What Is meant by stirring Religion. 1. Negatively, not headiness in
Religion, an hot and mistaken Zeal about the lower and more uncertain things of
Religion; not such a Spirit of Fire which was in those Disciples, Luke 9.54.
who would needs call for Fire from Heaven to destroy and consume those that
were not Followers of them; not a stirring up of strife and contention, a
making breaches and divisions, and propagating of our own Opinions by censuring
and judging those that are otherwise minded, and are not in every thing
according to our own Size: Such as these are some of those perilous persons
which the Apostle warns Christians not to imitate, but to take heed of; of whom
he says, 2 Timothy 3.2. they are Proud, Boasters, False Accusers, or makebates,
fierce, despisers of them that are good, heady, highminded, and after all their
blustering against others, have but a form of Godliness, denying the power
thereof; from such, says he, turn away, take heed of them, and take heed of
being leavened with such a Spirit. This then, this headiness, and fierceness,
and hot censoriousness upon the account of Religion, this is not the stirring
Religion I mean.

2. Positively. An humble, active, lively, zealous prosecuting or pursuing that
which is Religion indeed or the substance of sincere Christianity. Some vain
ones there are, who upon the hearing this headiness and fierceness, this hot
and mistaken zeal blamed and decryed, will turn the edge of such Reproofs
against Godly Zeal, and all fervor and activity for God; and every one that
goes beyond the drowsy sleepy multitude of Professors, is cried out against,
as one of these heady highminded ones. Such is the craft of the Devil, that if
he cannot blow up coals of wildfire, that under the pretense of kindling will
devour all serious godliness; if he cannot make men hot and heady in the
propagating their own fancies, will then on the other hand quench and cool that
genuine fervency of spirit wherein we ought to serve the Lord: If he cannot
make men heady, he will do what he can to make them heartless, and cold, and
lukewarm, in all the matters of God.

Friends, take heed of both these extremes, of being heady or fierce on the one
hand, or of being cold or lukewarm on the other: Of heady ones, God would have
us take heed and turn away from them, and for lukewarm ones, he will spue them
out of his Mouth, Rev. 3.16.

The stirring Religion I mean is as I said before, a lively activity of Soul
for God, and for the advancing in real Godliness. A stirring Spirit is opposite
to a drowsy, sleepy, slothful, careless Spirit, which is nothing moved by all
that the Scripture speaks, when it presses us to be fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord, Romans 12.11. To be zealous and amend, Rev. 3.19. To contend for the
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. To strive to enter in at
the strait Gate, Luke 13.24. To be violent and force our selves on in the way
of the Kingdom, Mat. 11.12. To fight, to wrestle, to run, to make haste to be
fruitful in good works, and the like; after all these pressing and quickening
words, there are a sort of slow Bellies, sleepy, lazy Professors, who will but
creep on when God would have them run, who will lie down and laze and loyter
out their time, when they should be fervent in Spirit; who will be idle when
they should work, be silent when they should speak; who let their lazy hearts
alone to their own slow and easy pace, and so are overgrown with rust and
suffer their Religion to be even strangled and chok'd up by their flesh to
which they so much indulge.

This stirring Religion is the opposite to such a sleepy heartless way of
Religion, a blowing up the coals which God has kindled in us; as Timothy is
exhorted, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the (Gift) of God. The word is, Blow up the
Coals; so Christians are to stir up the Grace of God within them.

I need say the less here, because I have told you so much of it already. It is
our being awakened, and putting on vigorously upon that savory, solid, fruitful
Religion which I have already instructed you in.

Whatever Holy Principles we have received and sucked in from the Word of God,
whatever Holy Habits or Dispositions have been begotten and wrought into our
Hearts by the Spirit of God; have we any thing of the saving knowledge of God,
have we Faith, have we the Fear of God or any Love to the Lord Jesus? these
must be all set on work and held to their work, that so the Knowledge of God
may bring forth the Life of God; that the Habit of Faith may bring forth a Life
of Faith; that the Love of Christ and the fear of the Lord may constrain us and
provoke us to walk on in the Law of our God; that the light that is set up
within us may break forth and make our Paths to shine; and not only so, but
that the Holy Fire that is kindled and blown up in our Hearts, may bring forth a
Zeal of God in our Lives; that we may be Christians, and Christians in earnest;
busy for God, busy for our Souls, striving against Sin, and striving for the
Mastery, fighting against Sin, and fighting to the Victory; ready to every good
work and fruitful in good works, doing what we can to rouse up this sleepy
World, to raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and helping on and
building up one another in our most Holy Faith; laying out our strength in
following the Lord, and laying hold every one on the Skirts of his Brother, and
leading them on with us; living in love, and all the fruits of Christian love;
and hereby adorning our Holy Profession, and walking worthy the Lord unto all
pleasing; this is that which I mean by stirring Religion.

2. Stirring Religion will continue the Presence of God with us; for,

1. It will work out and drive away whatever offends or would provoke God to
depart: God will never depart without cause; it must be a great matter that
must part such dear Friends as God and the Souls of his Saints: God will never
depart from his People till there be some sin entertained, and loved, and
allowed, that bids him depart. Every sin says to the Lord as those wicked ones,
Job 21.14. who said to the Almighty, depart from us; but though every sin says
thus, yet God will not hearken to its voice unless it be an allowed sin that is
suffered to have the command in the heart and life. Sin says to the Lord,
Depart, God shall not rule here; and if thou be of the mind that that Sin shall
stay with thee notwithstanding, if thou art willing to entertain such a Traitor
however, if thou had rather venture the displeasing and disobliging of God
than have thy Sin cast out, this the Lord will not bear, away he will. God says
concerning every sin, If ye love me, let these go their way; let this Pride go,
let this Covetousness go, let this Frowardness go; if thou say, O with all
mine heart, Lord, I would be glad with all my Soul to be rid of them; but woe is
me, they are too hard for me, my lusts will dwell in me, and work in me, and
hinder me in my work for God do what I can; O my Soul would rejoice to be well
rid of them; O that I might never be proud, or froward, or carnal, or
earthly-minded any more: I know it is an offense to the Lord, and sure it is a
grief of mind to me, that any thing that offends should abide with me; and
though I cannot conquer them, yet through the help of God I will not foster
them whilst I live. If these Sons of the Bondwoman must dwell with me, yet
through the help of the Lord they shall never dwell in peace with me while I
live: if thou say thus, and say truly, and wilt stand to thy word, God
will not depart from thee. God will not depart for unallowed resisted sins: If
whilst thy sin says to the Lord, Depart from me, thy Soul says to thy Sin,
Depart thou rather; God will hearken to the voice of thy Soul rather than to
the voice of thy Sin. Thy Sin says to the Lord, Depart; but if thy Soul say,
Lord let me be loosed from my Sins but stay thou with me; God will not depart
from thee: But every allowed Sin, every loved Lust and Corruption that thou will not hear of parting with; if thou art of a proud heart, and art resolved
to maintain thy Pride, if thou art of a Covetous Earthly Heart and Life, and
wilt not hear of giving off from thy Covetousness, if thou art carnal, and
foolish, and froward, etc. and wilt continue so, then look to thy self, God
will not stay with such a Soul; what, love your pleasures more than God? what,
love this World more than God? even take them for me, says the Lord, I Will be no
more a God to them. This is the first, every allowed sin provokes God to depart.

2. Stirring Religion will work out sin, especially every allowed sin. The life
of a Christian is a warfare, there is a continual conflict betwixt the flesh
and spirit, Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts -- lusts, that is, fights; sin
fights against grace, and grace fights against sin. Sin fights for the
Devil to set him up, and to lay the government on his Shoulder; and grace
fights for God to lift the Lord up, and to give him the pre-eminence in the
Soul. God will no longer stay in the heart than he may have the pre-eminence;
God will not be kept as an underling, if he may not have the pre-eminence,
he will be gone and leave you to the Devil; never talk that you hope God is
within you, where Sin or the World bears rule, God is not there.

Now where the flesh is let alone in its fight against grace, much more where
the heart takes part with the flesh, and nourishes, and cherishes, and makes
provision for it, and grace is let lie asleep, there sin rises, and increases,
and abounds both in heart and life. Where sin is stirring, and that little
grace that is, is let lie and quite out of heart, what can be expected, how can
it be otherwise but the Devil must carry it against God? But when grace
revives, and the heart falls off from sin, and takes part with grace,
nourishing, and cherishing, and abetting the better part, then sin will be put
to it and must away. Christians, your hearts would quickly be too hot for your
sins, if the grace that is in you be once well rouzed up; when the live Coals
are blown up into a Flame, the Smoke is consumed and vanishes.

Do not sluggishly lie down and complain that you cannot master your sins; you
are proud and cannot help it, you are earthly, and worldly, and cannot help it;
you are froward, and passionate, and peevish, and cannot overcome your
passions: Do not say, you cannot overcome, you cannot prevail; if there be
grace in your hearts and you will set to it; to stir up the grace that is in
you, this would overcome. What do you think if your love to Christ were blown
up into a flame, would it not quench the flame of lust? Friends, it is a sign
that religion is asleep, grace is asleep, conscience is asleep, when your
carnality and earthliness do thus ride in triumph over you; this little David,
that little good thing that is within you, if it gets on its Armor and go
forth to the fight, will not only put to flight, but put to death the Champion
of the Philistines: Put your grace to it, let it but engage heartily and lively
in the fight, and sin will run the field.

Loytering, and idleness, and laziness do beget and nourish evil humors and
diseases; exercise and activity will subdue and work them out; he that lives a
stirring life, is usually the most strong and healthful.

Christians, if you would be hearty and healthful and overcome those
corruptions that are the diseases of your Souls, and the offense of your God,
if you would overcome, resolve upon a stirring life; pray, and let no praying
satisfy, but stirring prayer; sleepy prayers will stand you in no stead; let
your thoughts be stirring, let your affections be stirring, let conscience be
stirring, let your conversations be stirring conversations; be not the carkases
of Christians that have no life, show forth the Spirit of Christianity as much
as possible; be all soul, and life, and spirit, and keep you in lively action,
and then let your sins stand before you if they can. The quick running Rivers
keep themselves pure, they are the dead and standing Pools that gather most mud
and dirt. Certainly, Friends, our Sky would be clearer and more serene, if our
Spirits as the Wind did rise higher. Our thick Mists and unwholesome Fogs that
infest and annoy us would much be dispelled, if Grace (the rays of the Sun of
Righteousness) did once break forth more in us. What will ye do, Friends! your
light grows dim, and your day misty, your waters are mudded, we are a company
of dark souls, polluted souls, such as the Lord can take little pleasure in;
what must ye do to help it? if you will bestir your selves you may help all;
get Religion to be aflote, let that living stream be running, let the coals be
blowing, and then you shall see your mud will be cleansed, and your dross will
be purged away. Never think 'twill be better by sitting still and complaining
how bad it is: To work, Friends, to work with these lazy hearts, to work with
those earthly minds; rouse ye up out of sleep, up and be doing, and see if you
find not the same success against your sins as the Lord promised against the
Devil, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil and he shall fly from you; resist Sin, and it
shall fall under you.

Now Friends, if ye can but get your sins out, if ye can subdue your iniquities
so far, as that not one of them be allowed, and all of them have their power
broken and weakened in you; if those that are by a specialty (your) iniquities,
if your special sins, your most beloved lusts, those that have most of all
taken with you, and carried your hearts captive, those evils that have been
your special hindrances either in holiness or comfort, and that your hearts
have been most apt to go a whoring after, if you get these to be mortified and
brought under, (stirring Religion will do it) get it to be done once, let
nothing be left that offends God, but that it also offends you, and you shall
not be like to have reason to complain the Lord is departed from me, that which
would have driven him away is now removed.

2. Stirring Religion will work up, and improve, and increase those good
things, which the Lord will delight in, and will not forsake. As it will work
out iniquity, so it will work up grace and holiness. There is not the poorest
and weakest of Saints, but by diligence and industry will be improved. Stirring
Christians will be thriving Christians: it is for want of action and industry
that our souls are in this poor case. As they said Genesis 43.10. Except we had
lingered we had returned the second time, or twice by this time. Friends, if we
had not lingered and loitered, we might have had twice so much grace, twice so
much holiness as now we have: it is our lingering that keeps us so poor; we may
thank our sloth and our carelessness that there is so little of God in us: by
our industry we shall advance. Stirring lively Christians will be thriving
Christians: the best of Christians can never keep their stand, much less
increase their store, without diligence; and the least of Saints shall not be
always at a stand if they will be diligent: and whilst your souls flourish in
grace, the Lord will never leave you nor forsake you. The more you have of the
grace and holiness of God in you, the more the Lord has to lose; the more
gracious ones the Lord has in a Nation, the more he has to lose among that
people; and the more grace there is in any soul, the more he has to lose if
that soul should miscarry; the greater treasure the Lord has in your hearts,
the closer guard will he keep about it that it be not lost. You whose religion
has so abounded, that your souls are filled with the fruits of religion, fear
not, God will stand at your right hand, he will not lose such a treasure. If
you make the Most High your habitation, and keep his habitation clean and well
furnished, he will delight to dwell with you. Never any gracious soul, that
made it his work to please the Lord, could ever say (unless upon a mistake) the
Lord has forsaken me. Upon a mistake some of his most precious ones may say
so, and have said so: Ps. 77.6, 7. I communed with mine own heart, and my
spirit made diligent search; what was it he searched for? why, he searched what
was become of his God: he said to his soul, as once his enemy said to him in
reproach, Where is thy God? he searched for God, but could not find him; and
thereupon concluded, as appears by the following verse, the Lord was departed
from him, and had cast him off; for, says he, Will the Lord cast off for ever,
and will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone? has God forgotten
to be gracious? This was his thought he had; God had left and forgotten him:
but this was his mistake, and so he saw and said afterward, v. 10. This is my
infirmity to think so, I was mistaken: God was with him still, though at
present he hid his face. Keep close to God, keep up the holiness of God, and
God will never be gone: if he should at any time hide his face whilst you are
walking uprightly before him, and your heart should whisper to you, God is
departed, give check to such a thought, and say as the Psalmist did, this is my
infirmity, this is my mistake, the Lord is still with me, and holds me by his
right hand; and this I do and will believe, though yet I see him not. He has
said, The Lord is with you while you are with him; and how sad soever it be
with me, yet I thank the Lord mine heart is with him; to him is all my desire,
in him is all my delight, my conscience witnesses with me, that this is my
great care, that I may please and walk with him; and having this witness, that
my soul is with God, this is my confidence that the Lord is still with my soul.

5. How we should stir up our selves. To the directions I have hitherto
occasionally given, I shall add these that follow.

1. Make your advantage of stirring providence.

2. Put you upon stirring thoughts.

3. Get you stirring affections.

4. Get you stirring consciences.

5. Be much conversant in stirring society.

6. Be much exercised in stirring duties.

1. Make your advantage of stirring providence, times of trouble and
affliction and persecution, especially such troubles as threaten an eclipse, if
not the putting out the light of the Gospel, such afflicting threatening
providence are awakening providence; and that upon a double account:

1. As they are signs of a storm coming.

2. As they are tokens of a night approaching.

1. As they are signs of a storm coming. When workmen in the fields lie
loitering or asleep under the cocks, if they espy a storm rising, then they are
all up, and every man falls to his work, that they may dispatch before the
storm falls, and they be beaten out of the field. Is there no fear of such a
Storm? there is a double ground of fear of a Storm coming at this day.

1. May we not see a storm in the angry Face of God?

2. May we not see a storm in the dark providence of God?

1. May we not see a storm in the angry face of God, who is so provoked by us?
Do you think you may provoke God at the rate that so many of us have done, as
by our manifold iniquities, so by our so little answering the Calls of the
Gospel, to repentance and recovering our selves out of that wretched state we
are in, and yet God not be angry? Prove. 1.24, 28. Because I have called and ye
refused, therefore you shall call and I will not answer. If we be so hard of
hearing when God calls, God will in anger be gone out of hearing when we call
upon him. God has been calling to sinners, and calling upon the Professors
amongst us, and what answer has there been either of the one or the other?
Has not the Gospel called upon sinners to come in and be converted, and what
answer is there of this call? Sinners, how many are there among you who after
all that God has spoken, yet will not answer? Drunkards, you have been called
from your drunkenness, called from the Alehouse, called from your Companions,
but are you come away? have you cast them off and forsaken them? Yea, every
blind and impenitent sinner among you, you have all been called upon to seek
the knowledge of God, to seek after the grace of God, to come to Christ, to be
his hearty Disciples, to become new Creatures, to seek the Kingdom of God, and
to escape out of the snares of the Devil: And yet there you lie, a company of
blind, hardened, senseless souls, even as if you had never been preached to; if
we had been calling to the Rocks and the Mountains; if we had been calling to
the dead that are rotting in their Graves; if we had been preaching to the
skulls and bones of those that have been long since dead and rotten, we might
even have seen as much success of our word upon these bones, and mountains, and
rocks, as we do see upon multitudes of impenitent ones. Have you not heard? do
you not see that it is even just thus, and yet is not God angry? Do thou not
hear that word in thine ears, Jam. 5.9. Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord, shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

2. And what answer is there of the calls of the Gospel upon Professors? The
Gospel that has called you in to Christ, has also called you on after him.
The Gospel that has called you to the Profession of Christianity, has called
you also to come on to the power of Christianity; has called you from your
indifferency, from your hypocrisy, from your backslidings, to a lively
fruitfulness in Religion; and what answer is there of these Calls upon you? Are
you awakened? are you revived? have all the words that have been of late spoken
to you, have they prospered? have they prevailed upon you? have they gotten any
heat in you, which before were cold? have they brought your Religion to life
again, which was almost dead? or have these stirring words stirred you so much
as to say to your selves, Well, I must no longer hold me in this wretched case;
I must, and through the help of God, I will set all my might and all my power
on work to recover out of this case. What say you, Friends, is there any
comfortable success of this kind that you see and feel upon you? I hope there
is something done upon some of you: But how many Professors are there upon whom
just nothing is done? they still stick in the mud, and the mire, and will not
come forth.

What do you think that these so many and so visible neglects of the Calls of
the Gospel are like to bring forth? Look toward the Lord; do you not see a
storm in his Face? do you not verily believe that God is angry, and angry with
(thy) Soul, who art one of these impenitent sinners or hardened backsliders? Is
not God angry? Thou art a blind Soul indeed, that either can not see that God
is angry, where there are so great provokings, or that there is a storm coming
where God is angry.

2. May we not see a Storm coming in the dark Providence of God? Are not the
winds risen, the clouds gathering; yea and has it not begun to drop? The
Proverb is, It Is a sign 'twill rain, when it begins already. The counsels and
designs that have been laid by the adversaries, and the violent pursuance of
them, and what has been already brought forth: The sad things that we see and
hear, do they not threaten a storm? and such a storm as may raise a flood to
sweep away those advantages of the Gospel which yet have been left us? Is there
a storm coming? then sure we had need bestir our selves before it so overtake
as to overwhelm us. O let us forthwith answer the Calls of God, whilst yet he
continues to call. Sinners, bestir your selves, and get you into Christ out of
hand; let not the storm find you, where the thunder and the hail found the
hardy amongst the Egyptians, Exodus 9.19. Let it not find you without, hasten
into Christ, lest your lot be as theirs, to be destroyed and to perish.
Professors bestir you your selves; get you nearer to Christ, keep you closer to
Christ, stand ye upon the Rock, and stand fast there, get you in the Ark, and
keep you there; and fear, lest if you keep you at this distance, and in these
wanderings, the flood come and sweep you also away.

2. Threatening troubles are stirring providence, as they are tokens of a Night
approaching, that it is almost night: What a stirring Providence this is, will
appear if we consider the properties of Night. These are,

1. Night is dark.

2. Night is cold.

3. Night is a time of silence.

4. Night is a time of sleep.

5. Night is no time of work.

1. Night is dark. Night is the dark part of our time, both are joined together
as signifying the same thing, 1 These. 5.5. Children of Night and of Darkness.
It Is the dark that makes it night, as it is the light, the Sun light, that makes
it day. When the Sun is set, the Sun of Righteousness that shines forth in the
Gospel, (the light of the Gospel being the very Sun beams of Christ) when this
Sun is set, what darkness, spiritual darkness follows? Those parts of the World
where the Gospel is not, nor Christ has appeared, they are the dark places of
the Earth; and whenever the light of the Gospel is removed from those parts
where it has shined, darkness overspreads them.

2. Night is cold. The light of the Sun has heat going with it; as the Sun
withdraws, it grows cold. It was given by Christ, as a sign of night
approaching on Jerusalem, Mat. 24.12. The love of many shall grow cold. As the
Sun grows low the cold increases; and if when it is but almost night, much more
when night has overtaken us, when its darkness has overspread us, that is the
cold part of our time. What ever heats there are now upon our Spirits any of
us, it is to be doubted how cold we may grow when night overtakes us. If the
love of so many, if the religion of so many of us be waxen so cold already,
when it is but almost night, it should make us tremble to consider, how much
colder we are like to grow, when it comes to be quite night with us.

3. Night is a time of silence. The silent night it is often called: Those that
now speak to you, and call upon you to keep you waking, the night that is coming
upon us may silence them, and not suffer them to speak any more to you. Rev.
8.1. it is said, that at the opening the 7th Seal, there was silence in Heaven;
that is, say some, there was no Word or Revelation came to John for some time:
What that silence in Heaven meant, though it be hard to determine, yet sure,
when there is silence on Earth, when the Watchmen must be silent and hold their
peace, that is a sad and dismal time.

4. Night is a time of sleep: 1 These. 5.7. They that sleep, sleep in the night.
That Is like to be the unhappiness of people, that whatever be the miseries of a
spiritual night, they are like to fall asleep under all, to be without sense of
their unvaluable loss; it will leave men stupid and senseless Souls. You that do
not prize nor improve the Gospel light, this is like to be your case; when it is
gone, you will not bewail its loss, but your Souls will fall asleep. O if you
be such sleepy Souls whilst you have the light with you, if the word of the
Gospel will not waken you, what a deep sleep will the want of the Gospel bring
upon you? Friends, you have need rouse you up every one of you now whilst the
Gospel calls to you; as, Ephesians. 5.14. Awaken thou that sleep: If you will
not, but will continue under the preaching of the Gospel a company of drouzy
Souls, (I am afraid that all that you have heard hitherto has left many of you
fast asleep) but if you continue such sleepy Souls whilst you have the light
among you, if the Gospel do not awaken you, how do you think it will be with
you when night overtakes you? The Devil will say to you then, as Christ did
once to his sleepy Disciples, Mat. 26.45. Sleep on now: Nay Christ himself may
do the same, since ye would not watch in the day whilst ye had the light, now
even sleep on while ye will, sleep on to the death. Friends, this sleepiness of
Soul, if ye will not yet be awakened, is like to be your death sleep. Christ
said to the Damosel, Mat. 19.24. She is not dead but sleeps; but it is to be
feared it will then be said concerning you, They are not asleep but dead, dead
in their sins. O how many of the dead are there already amongst these sleepy
Souls? Sinner, art thou yet asleep in thy Sins? O thou art in a dead sleep; and
if this night overtake thee thus, its like to close up thine eyes as the eyes
of the dead are closed, never again to be opened.

And you that hope you have life in you, and yet will not be awakened by the
day light, but will sleep on still, whom neither the lightning nor the thunder
of the Word will awaken, pray tell me what dead sleepers you also are like to
continue in the dark and silent night?

This, I say, is like to be the misery of people, if such a night overtake us,
they are like to be senseless Souls, that will not lay it to heart, nor be
affected nor moved at all with the darkness that comes upon them, but will dye
away in a sleep; Become of the Gospel, of the Ordinances of the Gospel, of the
Sabbath, and all the means of Grace what will, they will not be much moved or
lay it to heart.

5. Night is no time for work, John 9.4. night comes when no man can work.
Work there is, that lies upon every one of you, and such work wherein your life
is concerned. I will not say only with the Apostle, 2 These. 3.10. He that will
not work shall not eat, but he that will not work shall not live; thou shall
dye the death who do not in the day work out the work which God has
committed to thee to do. You have every one of you your work to do, and it is
great work and of great consequence: You are to work for your living, for an
eternal livelihood; you are to work out your Salvation, that is your work in the
general: And in this there are many particular works comprehended; there is the
work of Repentance and Mortification of Sin, etc. There Is Grace to be gotten
and improved, there is your Peace with God to be made; have you done these
works? have you repented? are your sins mortified? have you grace in your
hearts? have you made your peace with God? you that have, there is still all
this to be maintained and carried on, that ye lose not the things which you
have wrought. But are all these things yet to do with so many of you? are you
yet without repentance? are you yet to seek for grace? have you gotten never a
drop of the Holy Oil into your Vessels? are you without the Knowledge of God,
without faith in Christ, without repentance? is your peace with God yet to
make? does the wrath of God still abide upon you? what, and yet asleep? what,
and yet such idle, careless, loytering souls? What if this work should never be
done? if you should never have more of Christ nor his Grace, never have more of
Faith and Repentance than you have now? why then you must go down among the
dead. Look ye down, cast an eye down on those chambers of darkness, that place
of pitch and brimstone, that place of fire and everlasting burnings; look ye
down into that horrible pit and see where you must lie, what your place and
your portion must be for ever, if you arise not and work these works of God; ye
cannot live but must die, and that is the death you must die, you must burn, you
must be tormented night and day for ever and ever.

Well now, you see here is great work to be done, and to be done by every one of
you; you see what will follow if it be not done, you must die the death. O
methinks now this word should be a stirring word to you; awaken every one of
you, arise and to your work, the night comes when no man can work. And let it
not suffice any of you to say, I hope this work is done, and therefore no such
danger if I be fallen asleep; but know, 1. That if the grace you seem to have
does make you grow secure, if you grow bold to be idle and careless upon the
confidence that the work is done, that you are converted, have repented, and
are made partakers of the grace of God, that confidence of yours is a deadly
sign that the work is not done, no nor savingly begun upon you.

2. Whatever work there be done upon you, your life lies upon it, upon your
careful and vigorous carrying it on; if you do not hold out to the end, keep
working to the end, ye cannot be saved.

And is not this a stirring word to (you) also that are sleeping and loytering
professors? Awake or perish, to your work or be damned? And is not this
stirring word seconded by a stirring providence, the appearance of such a night
approaching upon us; the light being even ready to vanish from amongst us? If I
should not say concerning such a night in the words of Christ, A night comes
wherein no man (can) work, yet this I may be bold to say in such a night, few
men (will) work. What does our experience speak to this? The shadows of the
evening have been stretched out over us; it has been evening and almost Sunset
with us for diverse years; and O what lamentable influence has this evening
(wherein the word of the Gospel has been more scarce) had upon us? what a woeful
change is there visible upon the greatest number of Professors in England? are
there not multitudes among us whose Religion is fallen and almost lost? since
it is grown darker, is it not also grown much colder with us? and what sleepy
loytering souls are we already become? Friends, if there be such a fall of
lively Religion amongst us, while it is but evening, do you not tremble to
think how much more it is like to be, when the thick darkness of the night has
overshadowed us?

2. Put upon stirring thoughts. Our thoughts are apt to be busy, and too busy
where they should not; like little Children which will be busy from morning
till night about doing nothing. Keep your thoughts employed, and well employed;
there are wandering thoughts which are too busy, roving and flying up and down
this way and that, which like the eyes of a Fool, Prove. 17.24. are in the ends
of the Earth. There are the wanderings of our thoughts after sin, and vanity,
and impertinences; we are thinking too much, and too often of what we should
not think; and sometimes there are wanderings after good things; sometimes our
thoughts wander to Heaven, wander up and down about things Spiritual and
Eternal; though we think sometimes of these better things, it is but with
wandering thoughts; though we light upon them, yet we fix not; we are not like
the Be which wanders from flower, but pitches and stays upon each flower till
it has gotten the Honey; but we are more like the Fly that leaps up and down,
that is here and there and every where; sometimes upon a Wall, sometimes on a
Flower, and sometimes on a Dunghill, but stays nowhere. Our better thoughts are
so transient, and in and out, that they are to no purpose. Sometimes one
Scripture comes to mind, but before any thing is made of it, away from that to
another, and another, till all be forgotten and become unfruitful. Sometimes
one Duty is thought upon, then off from that to another; sometimes a little
glance heavenward, by and by we fall and pitch upon the earth; one thought
thrusts out another, till all that is good be lost: Such hoverings up and down
there are from this thing to that, as brings an utter confusion in the heart.
These also may be reckoned among our vain thoughts, which we are cautioned
against, Jer. 4.14. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Not only
our thoughts of vanity, but our thinking of good things in vain, and to no
purpose, these also are vain thoughts. Exercise your thoughts upon good things,
upon the matters of God and your Souls, and exercise them to purpose on them.

That your thoughts may be stirring thoughts, so as to stir up your hearts
toward God and Godliness, they must be,

1. Searching thoughts; looking upon, and looking into the things of God. Ps.
77.6. My spirit made diligent search. Searching looks deep into things. There
are 3 great deeps that we should be searching into; the deep of the Heart, and
what we can find there either of good or evil; the deep of the Pit, the
Infernal Pit, for what we may find there to awaken us; and the deep mysteries
of God and his Gospel, for what we can find there to keep us doing: If you
would be thinking more what there is within you, what a world of wickedness
there is in your hearts; if you would be thinking oftener what there is beneath,
what a dismal place your sins are preparing for you; if you would be thinking
more of the mysteries of God and Godliness, of the Counsels, and instructions,
and ways of God, of the kindnesses and compassions of God, of the severities
and wrath of God, and looking narrowly and deeply into them; such thoughts as
these would be awakening stirring thoughts; but then they must be,

2. Working thoughts; looking into these things, and staying, and dwelling, and
working upon them. Think upon your evil hearts, and never leave thinking and
thinking, till you be affected with what you find in them; think till your
hearts ache for the evil you see in them; think upon your sin till your heatts
tremble and turn from your sins. 'Twas said of Peter, Mat. 14.72. When he
thought thereon he wept. Psalm 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy Testimonies. Think on all your evils, till your hearts be thus
affected with them, and thereupon be put to flight, to make an hasty escape
from them: Think on God, and on Holiness, and on Grace, till your hearts be
athirst for God and his Grace, so as to put your selves upon following hard
after him. Think on these things with an applicatory eye to yourselves: Yet
again, bethink your selves, whether you have escaped, or how you may escape the
evils that are within or before you; whether you have obtained, or how you may
obtain the good things you desire: Think how it is with you, how much you are
under the power of sin, how short you are of the Grace of God, or if you have
any, how very low it is with your Souls in this respect, how little you have
gotten or how much you have lost.

And when you find how bad it is, then think farther, Is it good for me? is it
safe for me to continue at this pass? is there any hope that I may recover out
of this case? is it worth my pains to seek out after an escape? what shall I
do? shall I venture on in this idle, trifling, carnal way as I have done? shall
I venture an eternal loss, an eternal misery and woe, rather than put my self to
it to recover? shall I venture my soul on these Cobwebs, these rotten and
deceitful Boughs that I have hanged mine hopes upon? mine heart tells me, I may
be saved however, though I have never more grace than I have now, though I
never take more care than I do now, I hope for all that it may be well at last;
shall I venture all upon such an hope? shall I venture to sin in hope, and
sleep in hope, and loyter in hope, that yet I shall obtain mercy? is it not
most evident, that the hope that serves for nothing but to secure men in a
carnal, sinful, careless way, is a lying hope, a damning hope? It Is a lie, this
carnal hope, it is a lie that I have in my right hand, I shall be undone by it
for ever and ever; there is no hope, there is no hope, but I shall be lost and
perish eternally, unless I shake off my sins, and shake up mine heart to follow
on after the Lord.

Friends, would not such thoughts as these be stirring thoughts? could you
sleep in your sins or under your backslidings, were you more exercised in such
thoughts as these? O put upon such thoughts, think of the sad case your Souls
are in, and think till you weep over your selves, think of the dreadful things
you are in danger of, and think till you tremble, think of the things you have
received and heard from the Lord, and think till they pierce and enter into
your Souls. The many things that I have spoken to you in this matter, let them
not be forgotten, but recover them back to your minds, and call them over in
your thoughts, and set your hearts a working thus upon them. All the words I
(can) speak, all the counsels I (can) give you for your recovery, they will
never do you good nor work a cure, if you set not your hearts on work upon
them; as you know your bodily food will never nourish you, nor your Physic
cure you, unless nature work both with your Food and Physic.

Friends, I beseech you in the Lord that you deny me not this request, that you
will every one of you bestow some such thoughts upon your souls; what, will you
deny me in this? will you not grant me thus much? I do not now persuade you to
spend your money upon your souls, to be at the charge of all your substance for
your souls recovery; this is that at present that I would desire of you, that
you would every day spend some serious thoughts about them; and what, will you
not do thus much? not spare a few thoughts for your eternal welfare? Is not the
scaping the fire worth your thinking of? I know you will say, O it is worth
thinking, and working, and running, and laboring, all that ever I can, and
spending all that ever I have, to save my life, to save my soul; every one of
you will say so, and yet for all that, I doubt there are many of you that will
not do this little thing, to spend some serious thoughts daily upon it.

Well, whether you will remember this or forget it, that my soul may not be
guilty of your eternal miscarriage, of your dying in your sins, or of your
sleeping to death in your languishing state, I once again warn you, to bethink
your selves how it is with you, and every day to bestow such serious thoughts
upon the important matters of God and your souls, as may tend to your recovery.

2. Get yon stirring affections.

1. Stir up godly sorrow. The Apostle wrote such a Letter to the Corinthians,
as made their hearts ache. 2 Cor. 7.8. I made you sorry with a Letter: and this
sorrow, what a stir it made in their hearts? v. 10. it stirred up care, and
fear, and indignation, and vehement desire, and revenge upon themselves for
their faults and neglects.

O that my preaching to you might have the same effect upon you, that the
Apostles Letter had upon them; that I might make you sorry, sorry at the heart,
for the woeful cases that many of your souls are in: yea set you to it, to stir
up this godly sorrow in your selves; think, Friends, what matter of sorrow and
grief you have within you and amongst you. The King said to Nehemiah, chap.
2.2. Why is thy countenance sad, since thou art not sick? I may say to you, why
is your countenance not sad, since you are so sick? what, sick at heart, and
yet so merry at heart? Look inwards and see how it is with you; rake in your
sores and wounds, till you make them bleed and smart. Sure you have forgotten
what has been said, if you yet find not for what to mourn. Remember your
selves, is it no matter of sorrow to you to see what your sin has made? What,
is the head sick, and the heart faint, and the whole man become wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores? and is all this nothing to you? what is your
Religion, the Gospel, and the name of your God wounded by you, by your
hypocrisies, by your backslidings, by your walking so unworthy that worthy
name, and does not this move you? will you tell the World, that the Children of
God are such wanton unruly Children, or such lean and starveling Souls as you
appear, who go under the name of his? have you grieved your God by your falls,
by your follies, by your falsehood to his Covenant, and declining from his Ways?
shall your Redeemer weep over you, because of the hardness of your hearts, and
the spirit of grace be grieved by whom you have been sealed to the day of
Redemption, and will not this grieve your hearts? O study out what matter of
sorrow you have, and give not off that study till tears do come. What, is it
with you as 'twas with Israel, Jer. 2. are you which were once holiness to the
Lord, and as the first fruits of his increase, now laid in common to the World,
and the lusts thereof? have you changed your glory for that which profits
not? v. 11. Have you forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed out to
your selves cisterns that will hold no water. v. 13. Is the Lord become as a
wilderness to you, and as a Land of darkness, and is this world become your
Paradise? have you lost the kindness of your youth and the love of your
espousals, and is your love to Christ swallowed up of your lust after vanity?
See, Friends, if this be the case of any of you; and if it be, O make not light
of it, but lay it deeply to heart; and as v. 19. let your own wickedness
correct you, and your backslidings reprove you, and know and see, that it is an
evil and a bitter thing that you have thus forsaken the Lord, and that his fear
is so much departed from you.

Friends, O that my word may put you to grief, and make you sorry. What, art
thou not sorry for all this? can thou not yet say, O I am pained, I am pained
at the heart for mine iniquities? my backslidings reprove me, my foolishness
corrects me, and makes my soul within me to mourn? art thou at ease in such a
case? is thine heart quiet as if all were well and nothing ailed thee? O how
little hope is there then of thee that thou will be recovered? If I could but
make you sorry, if you would but stir up a godly sorrow in your own souls, O
how mightily would this work to your recovery! then what fear would there be of
continuing thus any longer, then what indignation against your selves for your
own follies, in departing thus from the living God! then what care would there
be, and what vehement desire after a speedy escape and recovery!

2. Stir up fear. But what cause have we of fear? search, and you may find
cause enough. Is there no matters of fear in your present cases? You that are
in your sins, you ignorant, impenitent, ungodly ones, is there no fear of you?
are your souls safe? are they not in danger? is there no fear of unbelievers?
is there no fear of hypocrites? no fear of the drunkards, the covetous, the
proud, of liars, of loose livers? art thou such a one, and is there no fear
what may become of thee? art thou under condemnation, and yet not under fear?
As the penitent Thief said to the other, Luke 23.40. Fear thou not God?
Fear thou not God, sinner, who art under condemnation? and if thou fear
not God, fear thou not the Devil neither, fear not thou Hell neither? O
stupid, senseless souls, what under condemnation and yet not afraid?

2. You that hope you have grace, and yet continue low in grace, is there no
fear concerning you? no fear of idlers and loyterers? you that have but little
and satisfy your selves with that little, is there no fear that that something
may be nothing? He that thinks himself to be something but is nothing,
deceives his own Soul, Gal. 6.3. Is there no fear that though you think your
selves to be something, to have something of Christianity in you, something of
saving grace, yet you may at last be found to have nothing, and so be deceived?
is there no fear of deceiving your selves in a matter of such importance? are
you in such danger of being deceived, and yet not afraid? or if you have
something of Christ or Religion in you, is there no fear that you may lose that
little you have, and come to nothing at last? What means that exhortation, Rev.
3.11. Hold fast what thou have? what means that caution, 2 John 8. That we lose
not the things that we have wrought, what mean these words, if there be no
danger of losing what we have?

3. You that are already fallen to decay, that have lost your first love, is
there no fear of your loosing all? Is there no fear, but you shall recover all
again? or is there no fear of you, whether ever you do recover or no? is there
no fear of backsliders, no fear of revolters, and apostates? wherever there is
danger, there should be fear; what, unbelievers and in no danger? what,
hypocrites and in no danger? what backsliders, what Apostates and yet in no
danger? what, can you say, there is no danger to men in my case? can you say, I
thank God, whoever be in danger, my Soul is out of danger? There Is not one of
you dares say so, you have lost the understandings of men if you confess not,
The Lord be merciful to me, my Soul is in great danger. What, are you in
danger, and yet not in fear? what, in such great danger, and yet not afraid?
not afraid of the Devil, not afraid of Death, not afraid of Hell when in such
great danger of it? When Christ says, Luke 12.4. Fear not them that kill the
body, will thou say, no, nor will I fear him that can destroy body and Soul? O
poor stupid Souls, awaken your fears; open your eyes and see your danger; the
Lord open your eyes before it be too late, and make you to see the fearful case
you are in, and so make you afraid. If I could rouse up your fears, it would be
as the stirring up a nest of Hornets about your ears, which sure would make you
run for it. Prove. 28.14. Happy is the man that fears; if there were more fear
in you, there were more hope of you. Friends, I should have done God and your
Souls good service this day, if I could but preach you into fear, if I could
but make you afraid of your selves, if this word might run through all the 3
sorts of you I am dealing with, the Impenitent, the Loyterers, and the
Backsliders, woe is me wretched creature, I am afraid, I am afraid what will
become of me; I am afraid I shall to Hell, I am afraid the Devil will have me
at last:, if such a word might come through all your hearts, the next word I
should hope to hear, would be this; Well, I see there is no safe abiding thus,
I am undone if I continue as I am, arise O my soul, flee away out of this
sinful state and get thee into Christ; shake thee out of this sloth, recover
out of this languishing state, recover thy first love, return to thy first
works, or I shall lose my Crown and my Soul. O Friends, stir up such a fear in
your selves, do not hide your danger from your own eyes till it be too late;
dare not to say such a word, I trust my Soul is in no danger; but deal plainly
with your selves, and come to understand the truth and the worst of your case;
give not over to study your danger till you have stirred up your fear, and when
your fear is once up, this, there is hope will stir up all within you to make
out after an escape.

3. Stir up desire. Desire is the thirst of the Soul, and thirst is a stirring
appetite as I have already showed, and therefore shall need to speak the less
here. Desire will stir up to labor, therefore it is that Solomon says, Prove.
21.25. The desire of the slothful kills him. It Is death to the slothful to
labor, and yet his desire will prick him on upon it: One thing have I desired
that I will seek after, Ps. 27.4. [One thing have I desired] that notes a
stirring desire; when the motions of the soul run in one chanel, and all after
one thing, then they run more strongly and impetuously; and this strong desire
puts him upon an earnest seeking the satisfaction of it. Prove. 13. 12. When the
desire comes it is a tree of life: And what is so sweet when it comes, will be
the more earnestly pursued before it comes.

Would you be zealous followers of God and followers of Holiness? get stronger
desires after the Lord and his Holiness. Strong desires will pour forth strong
cries; your Souls will go on crying after the Lord, crying after his Grace, and
the power of his Spirit, if ye do in earnest desire it. Cold desires, or none
at all leave the soul as a Ship becalmed that stirs not on; when the Wind is
quick, and the Sails are filled, its motion is more swift; but when the Wind
lies, it moves not at all. Our slight and slow endeavors in following of God,
if you inquire into the reason of them, it is because desire fails.

Stir up your desires, get you quick and strong desires and these will not
suffer you to be so sluggish: But how must we stir up our desires after God?

1. Suppress and keep under your carnal desires: Desire Earth less than you do,
and you will desire Heaven more than you do. A River that is divided into
several Channels, runs more weakly in either; when our streams are united and
run all in one Chanel, they are much the stronger. Unite mine heart to fear thy
name, says the Psalmist, Ps. 86.11. Let me fear God, and let me fear none but
God: So let your Souls say, Unite mine heart to love thy name and to desire
after thee; let me love nothing but God, let me desire nothing but God; let me
be able to say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee,
and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee: Thou have all my love,
and all my desire is toward thy name. When you love nothing but God, when you
desire nothing but God, O this will be strong love, these will be strong
desires: What you inordinately love or desire besides the Lord, this will abate
your love and your desires after him. Friends, your desires after this World,
your appetite after Meat, and Drink, and Money, and carnal Pleasures, are too
eager to have any strong desires after the Lord. Quench your carnal thirst if
you would have your Souls to pant after God and spiritual things: Be more
indifferent what you have or how it is with you in respect of these carnal
things; whether you have more or less, whether it be better or worse with you
in respect of these; leave it to God, to do with you what he will, to let forth
these nether streams, or to dam them up; to make you rich or poor, prosperous
or afflicted; and the more patient you are of wanting the nether streams, the
more impatient will be your thirst after the upper streams. Whereas it is hard
to find any persons in the World, that have a greedy appetite to things below,
who have any great or strong desire upwards. If any man love this world, 1 Jo.
2.15. that is, with an ardent and intense love, the love of the Father is not
in him: And so if any man desire this world with his most eager and greedy
desire, the desire after God is not in him. Methinks this word should shake the
hearts of some professors; there are, I doubt, many that go under the name of
Christians, that are as excessively hungry after this world, whose Souls are
hunting after, and heaping up whatever they can catch of this earthly muck,
with as great zeal and ardency of mind, as any of those do, or can, who have
nothing of Christianity in them, nor profess, nor pretend to any such thing. He
is a covetous worldling indeed, who does love the world, and wish for the
world, and work harder for it, than some of these do which profess religion. It
is a shame and a reproach to the Gospel that it should be so, and woe be to them
by whom the reproach comes: But yet it is too true, there are amongst the
number of Professors, some (though not so many as the world say, God forbid
there should, for they say all are such) yet some such there are, whose hunger
and labor after the world can hardly be overmatch'd by any of those, whose
names are written in the earth, and have no part nor portion in Christ, nor
name in his Churches.

Friends, I pray deal faithfully in this matter, every one of you with your
selves; ask your hearts, How stand I affected to this world! are my desires
after this earth moderated and limited by my Religion, or are they not so high
and impetuous, that they have even swallowed up my desires after God? are you
as impatient when you sink and grow to decay in religion, as you think you
should be, if you were sunk and fallen to decay in your outward estates? Can
you truly say, I am not so much athirst to grow rich in this world, but I am
more athirst to grow rich toward God? nay, can you say this, I am so much
athirst for God, that this has quenched my thirst, and allayed my desires
after this world? I am become more indifferent what I have here, whether more
or less, my heart sits loose from all below, through the strength of my desires
after God? can you say so? O that you could, more of you than I doubt can.

Well know, that it is impossible that you should intensely desire God and this
World together; one of the two must fall; you must strike sail as to your
earthly affections, or your souls will never hoise up sail heavenwards. And
this is the first direction for the kindling and quickening your desires
heavenward, suppress and allay your carnal and earthly desires.

2. Be sensible of your necessity: Necessity kindles desire. Ps. 63.1. My soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh, longs for thee. Whence is this thirst and
longing? O it is from his necessity. I am in a dry Land, where no water is. I
have need of thee, Lord, need of (thy) water Brooks, for out of thee I have
none; it is all a dry Land, there is no water below thee, to quench my thirst.

Friends, would you be quenched in your desires after more Grace? be sensible
of your barrenness and your want; do you not want to be in better case than you
are? have you grace enough to supply your necessities? those that are very poor
outwardly, whose poverty pinches them, their necessity will make them beg. How
is it there are so many poor, so many necessitous souls, and yet so few begging
souls? even ready to starve for want of bread, and yet cry no more after it?
Why, it is because, however we are in great necessity, yet we have not a due
sense of our necessity; our soul poverty does not pinch us; men that are
extremely poor in the world, their poverty pinches them; but for souls, the
poorer they are, the less they are pinched with it. O friends, if you were more
pinched with your spiritual poverty, if those dry and lean souls, did but feel
how lean you are, if you were touched with a feeling of your necessities, if
your cold wishes, I would I had more grace, were come to, I must have more, I
must be more holy, I must be more heavenly-minded, I must be more zealous for
God, and more busy and active in following him, a necessity lies upon me, and
woe is me if I continue as now I am; the sense of your necessity of getting up
into a better case, would enlarge your desires after it.

3. Be practically convinced of the excellency of a prosperous state in the
grace of God. All the world, how eagerly are they wishing after prosperity? men
have such high thoughts of worldly prosperity, that every one would be glad to
prosper; as Mal. 3.15. they count the proud happy, so generally, do worldly
men, count the rich happy, the prosperous happy: When we hear of men grown up
to that plentiful estate, described Ps. 144.13, 14. Whose garners are full,
affording all manner of store, whose sheep bring forth thousands, and ten
thousands in their streets, whose Oxen are strong to labor, and there is no
complaining in the streets, who have plenty of good things, and nothing ailing
them; how do worldlings cry out, Happy are the people that are in such a case;
and hence it is, that their very Souls are all upon the wing, making all the
haste they can after this earthly prosperity.

And what if Christians had as great thoughts of soul prosperity; O what a case
are they in, whose (hearts) are full of all manner of store, full of wisdom and
spiritual understanding, full of faith and of power, full of the hidden
treasures of eternity; whose mouth is full, that have grace in their hearts and
grace in their lips; whose life is full of all the fruits of righteousness!
what an excellent spirit are they of, what an excellent life do they live!
happy are the people, thrice happy are the souls that are in such a case. Do
worldlings call the proud happy, the rich happy, the great ones happy ones? Yea
rather, Happy are the Souls whose God is the Lord; and those especially, who
have the grace of God so abounding toward them and in them. What if you were
practically convinced of this, of the excellency, of the happiness of a
flourishing prosperous state in the grace of God? If you did not only
notionally conclude it so in the general, for that every Christian will do, but
with a particular respect to your selves, O how happy were it for (me) if I
were one of these prospering souls, if I could get (my) soul to be filled with
God, and the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; O if I could love as the best of Saints
love, O if I could live as I see some Christians live; if from creeping on the
earth, and having my foundation on the dust, my soul might get upon the wing,
and have its conversation in Heaven; if in stead of having fellowship with
sinners, I might have fellowship, and live in communion with the Father and the
Son; if instead of serving my flesh, I might spend my days in serving the
living God; if from being such a sluggard, such a cold and lazy soul, I might
get up to be fervent in spirit serving the Lord; O what if there should be such
a change made upon me! if from this dead, and dry, and barren case I am in, I
might be brought to be a living, lively, fruitful, heavenly, zealous Christian;
O what a blessed change would this be! O how should mine heart be filled with
joy, and my mouth with praise! Brethren, such sensible apprehensions of the
excellency and blessedness of that prosperity in religion, which I have been
pressing you to, what would it work, what would it bring forth, less than such
strong desires, O let my soul be in such a case; What would I desire more? how
would I despise, and trample on the beauty, and glory of the world, and leave
such dotages upon the best to be found here, to the men of this world, who know
no better things? O how heartily could I then say with the Apostle, Phil. 3.7,
8, 9. What things were gain to me I now count them loss for Christ, yea
doubtless and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I am content to suffer the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
and may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death. Such ardent desires would a
sense of the excellency of Christ, and a prosperous Christian life bring forth;
O that I might apprehend, O that I might attain to such a blessed state; and
such ardent desires would bring forth a zealous prosecution and following
after, if by any means possible, we might attain and get up unto it.

O friends, that you would set to it, thus to stir up your desires: You say, I
desire, I desire; I desire to please God, and to follow God more fully, and
more freely than I do, but it is so dully, and so coldly that you desire it,
that it comes to nothing; and for ought I know, such cold desires may burn with
you in Hell at last.

O get an abatement of your carnal desires: never look to desire heartily after
an heavenly life, till you have crucified and conquered your earthly desires.
Consider more thoroughly your necessities, consider the miserable poverty of your
souls, and barrenness of your lives; the great power that this World has still
upon you, and your necessity of getting it conquered; and do not barely say, I
could wish it were better with me, wishing will never do it, but bring your
hearts to it, to say in good earnest, I must, I must get mine heart into a
better frame, I must get me to a better life, a necessity lies on me to look to
it, and labor for it: and then look upon the blessedness and comfort of such a
prosperous flourishing state of soul, and look till your hearts be enamoured of
it; and this is it that will engage you mightily in the effectual following
after it.

4. Stir up hope. Maybe you will say, I do desire it were better with me; I see
it would be happy for me, if I could obtain, but the Lord help me, I have
little hope of it: I have desired so long, and waited so long, and yet it comes
not; but my poor and barren soul after all still abides in the same dead and
lifeless state as ever, and is so far short, and at so great a distance from
that blessed state, that I am even quite discouraged, and am in doubt I shall
never obtain. Be not discouraged, hope in God. To stir up this hope consider;
1. The promise of God. 2. The earnest that you have already received.


1. Consider the promise of God. The hope of the Saints is called Acts 26.6.
the hope of the promise of God. The promise, which is the foundation of our
hope, is our encouragement against all despondencies. Amongst the many promises
that we have for our encouragement I shall mention one, Matthew. 7.7. etc. Ask
and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you. For every one that asks receives, etc. What man of you, if his son
ask bread, will he give him a stone? etc. If ye being evil, know how to give
good things to your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven, give good things to them that ask it of him! Here I shall show,

1. The matter of the promise, or what God will give, that is, good things. In
Luke 11.13. it is expressed, give the holy spirit; there is all that you need in
one word. In giving the holy Spirit, is included the giving all good things.
What is it you want, to help up your weak and languishing souls? Is it a spirit
of Wisdom and Understanding that you want? is it a spirit of Holiness? is it a
spirit of Grace and Supplication? is it a spirit of Faith and of Power? is it
the teachings, the motions, the quicknings, the conduct, of the Spirit? How is
it with them that are taught by the Spirit, led by the Spirit, worship God in
the Spirit, walk in the Spirit? So shall it be with you, if ye obtain the holy
Spirit upon your asking of him. This grace, the grace of the Spirit shall be
sufficient for you, to make the dry tree to sprout, and the barren to bring
forth fruit.

2. The means of obtaining this promise. Ask, seek, knock; this notes prayer,
importunity in prayer, and the use of all means, that must go along with
prayer. Ask, seek, knock; pray and pray instantly, and follow on after the
Lord, and ye shall have, ye shall obtain; this gracious, this all-sufficient
spirit shall be yours.

3. The assurance of prevailing. This is, 1. From the Promise, ye shall have,
ye shall find, it shall be opened; Heaven shall be opened, the heart and the
hand of the all-sufficient God, the bowels of Christ, the Covenant, all the
Treasures of the Gospel shall be opened to you. Thou that art in fear, that the
heart of the Lord is straightened toward thee, that the bowels of his
compassion are shut up against thee, that the treasures of the Gospel are all
locked up from thee; ask, and knock, and all shall be opened. If all the help
that is in Heaven, if all the riches of Christ, if all the treasures of the
Gospel, will recover and raise up that weak and withering soul of thine, take
the right course and thou shall have it; all these treasures shall be opened;
thou have my word for it, the word of promise, which God that cannot lie, has
given thee to put thee out of doubt.

2. From experience. Every one that asks receives, etc. There Is no man in
the world, that has taken this course, that ever failed; find out any one man
if thou can, that can say, God has been worse to me than his word; and
surely thou may boldly say, He that never failed any one of his Servants, I
have good hope he will not fail me.

3. From the relation of God to his Saints: He is their Father; whence he
reasons thus: If the Fathers of their flesh will not deny the Children of their
own bowels, (which of you if his Son ask bread, etc.) if the Fathers of our
flesh will not deny the Children of their bowels, any good thing they need and
ask, how much less, will your Father in Heaven, who is a God of bowels, of
infinite compassion, deny his Holy Spirit to those that ask it of him?

Christians, study this Promise, trust upon this Promise: and whatever your
fears and discouragements are, that you shall never obtain, use Gods means,
ask, and seek, and knock, follow on instantly, and earnestly in Gods Way, and
then hope in God, and be no longer dismayed.

2. Consider the earnest that you have already received, what pledges God has
given you, for the performance of his Promise. What, is nothing of this Promise
performed to thee? O I hope there is; something I have gotten from it, but it
is so very little, that this discourages me. Why, this little thou have
received, is a great encouragement to hope for more. I say, though you have
asked, and sought, and knocked, and yet but little comes, yet that very little
which you have obtained, is great ground for you to hope for all that you need.
Every little that you receive from the Promise of God, is an earnest to assure
you of all that is behind. Have you received but the first fruits of the
Spirit, a little Grace, a little Strength, a little improvement in Grace? Is it
a little better with you than it has been? this is a pledge to you from the
Lord, that if ye follow on ye shall have more and more. There is hope, in what
the Lord (has) given you, in what he has done for your souls; 2 Cor. 1.10. He
that has delivered, and does deliver, we trust that he will deliver. He that
has supplied and does help you, hence you may hope, that he will supply all
your needs, out of the riches of his grace, by Christ Jesus. If the clouds from
above have yet but dropped upon you, and that grace which your parched Souls,
like the thirsty earth has received, has come in but drop by drop, you may
from those drops, have the more hope of a shower, that shall rain down
righteousness upon you, until your souls become as a well-water'd Garden, and
as a spring of waters whose waters fail not.

Christian, is thy Soul as the chapp'd ground, opening and gasping after the
influences of the Lord, and has it begun to drop? is there something come
down? art thou a little quickened, a little revived? those very drops are the
forerunners of a shower, that will fill all thy furrows. O look about you
Friends, see, after all the means that God has been using, to quicken and
improve your Souls, see if any drops be fallen upon you; if it be a little
better, if there be something done to your recovery; be not discouraged that
it is no more, be humbled that it is no more, but be not discouraged; he that
has begun, there is so much the more hope, that he will perfect a cure upon you.

Thus stir up your hope in God, by considering the Promise, and any little
degree of its performance. But beware, (I cannot too often give you this
caution) use not this hope to make you secure, and careless; say not, for your
lives, as bad as it is with me, I hope it will be better, and thereupon sleep
on, and neglect to follow after: There is no hope for such a Soul, let not your
hope secure you in your negligence, but establish you against your
discouragement; let it not secure you against diligence but encourage you unto
diligence. Since the matter stands thus, as great a distance as there is
betwixt your present state, and that prosperous state of Soul, which you desire
and wish for, and as great difficulty as you imagine it, ever for you to get up
to such a state, since both the Promise and Experience gives you such ground of
hope, that even you also, with whom it is so very low, may get comfortably up,
therefore be encouraged to take all the pains possible hereto. Look on Acts
26.7. and there see how hope will work; Unto which promise, our twelve tribes,
instantly serving God night and day, hope to come. Observe it, God gave them a
promise, the promise gave them hope, and their hope encourages and provokes
them on, instantly to serve the Lord; and this instant serving God is their way
to the possession of the Promise.

Friends, let all this that has been spoken, engage you to all manner of
diligence, and fortify you against all manner of discouragements: come on
Christians, come on in the name of the Lord; you have heard many directions
that I have given you, and some more there are that yet remain; O set your
hearts to the practice of all these words, and how hard soever it may seem to
be, take the way prescribed to you, and then commit your way to the Lord; hope
in him, and he will bring it to pass, and give you your hearts desire; only
when you have done all, and no success appears, yet still wait for the Lord. As
there must be the expectation of hope, so there must be the patience of Hope:
Wait on the Lord and keep his way; be not weary of well-doing, and in the end
ye shall reap if ye faint not.

O Friends, follow on after the Lord, and encourage your selves on, by your
hope in God: Pray for more grace, pray for more life, and more power, and pray
as men of hope. Strive and stir up your sleepy hearts, and strive as men of
hope, that as low as it is with you, yet there is hope for you to get up. Be
encouraged by the promise, be encouraged by every little that you have
received. Has the Lord but begun to awaken you, let that be his security to
you, that he will do more, and better things for you: Are you yet a great way
short? are there many difficulties yet before you to break through? are there
any fears and misgivings of heart, that ye shall not obtain? yet do not
discourage your selves, hope in God, hope in the promise of God, and in the
help the promise offers: be not dismayed, put you on after the Lord, and hope
in God. Say to your hearts in the words of the Psalmist, Ps. 43. ult. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul? why art thou discouraged, O my soul? Hope in God,
and thou shall yet praise him, who will be the health of thy countenance and
thy God. Though my flesh and mine heart fail me, yet he is the strength of mine
heart, and in him shall be my hope and my trust: there is a promise, before me,
and unto this promise, if I can but instantly seek and serve the Lord, I have
hope to come.

4. Get a stirring Conscience. God has made conscience overseer and ruler in
the heart; he has advanced conscience in the heart to the same dominion, that
Potiphar advanced Joseph in his house, Genesis 39 4. he made him overseer of his
house, and put all that he had into his hand. Or as Pharaoh, Genesis 41.40.
advanced him in his Kingdom; to whom he said, Thou shall be over mine house,
and according to thy Word shall all my people be ruled, only in the throne
will I be greater then thou. Conscience is subject to none but God; God is
greater then Conscience, 1 John 3.20. God is greater then our hearts, that is,
then our Consciences. But next under God, Conscience has the supreme dominion
in the Soul; and as the Centurion to his Soldiers, so Conscience, where it
maintains Authority, says to all the faculties of the Soul, to one go and it
goes, to another come and it comes, and to every one, do this and it must be
done.

Now as Conscience is faithful and diligent, or as it is careless and
negligent, so do matters go in the Soul; a faithful watchful conscience sets
the whole soul in good order, a negligent sleepy conscience lets all run to
ruin: when God has given men up to a spirit of slumber, when conscience
slumbers, the whole soul falls asleep; or, which is worse, runs out into all
manner of disorders. When God will awaken sleepy souls, he begins with
conscience; awakens conscience first, and that will awaken all their powers.
God awakens conscience, mostly by frights, as the Jailer by an earthquake, and
Saul by an affrighting voice from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Soul, Soul, what art thou doing? why slightest thou the Lord? why fightest thou
against God? There Is nothing but such thunder from Heaven that will rouse a
sleepy conscience. But though there is none but God that can awaken conscience,
yet God ordinarily does it by our selves; sets the soul on work upon its self,
to its own awakening; a word, or it may be but a thought, comes into the heart,
which is made to stick into conscience, and to sting it out of sleep: and when
conscience is stung, and begins to stir, there is no more sleep, no more quiet
in the soul. When the Master of the house is up, and about once, he rouzes all
the Servants: O Friends, get your consciences to be awakened, get your
consciences to be stirring, and then all your faculties will up and be doing.
That conscience may be a stirring conscience, 1. Let Conscience open its ears
and hear. 2. Let it open its eyes and see. 3. Let the mouth of Conscience be
open and speak. 4. Let it be quick and tender.


1. Let Conscience open its ears and hear what the Lord speaks. Let the voice
of the Lord have an impression upon conscience; when the Word comes into the
thoughts only, it is quickly gone, and does nothing; or when it has some
sudden work upon the affections, that wears off; but when it enters into the
conscience, when conscience hears the Word of the Lord, when the Word which we
preach from God, is as the Apostles word, 2 Cor. 5.11. made manifest in the
conscience, then it is in a way to prosper. Let conscience open its ears first;
and 2. Let conscience open its eyes and see, see how it is with the Soul, how
sad and miserable the state and way of the Soul is; see how it is like to be, to
grow worse and worse; see how it should be, and what is to be done that it may
be better. 3. Let Conscience have its mouth open. Sleepy consciences are silent
consciences; those that see nothing will say nothing. Let your consciences
speak to you: whatever the Word preaches to conscience, let conscience preach
it to the whole heart. O Friends, if we could so preach to you, as to set your
consciences a preaching to you the same things; if when we preach to you,
repent, and recover your selves out of the snares of the Devil, we could get
your consciences to preach repentance to you: if there were such a voice heard
within you, I see I must repent, I am lost and undone if I repent not; if when
we give a rebuke to you out of the Word, your consciences also would rebuke
you; if the Word calls you, thou unbeliever, thou child of the Devil, thou
hypocrite, thou loyterer, thou backslider; let but conscience say the same,
it is true what the Word speaks, I am an unbeliever, I am an hypocrite, a child
of the Devil, an idler, a backsliding soul; I cannot deny it, it is too true
what the Word speaks concerning me: If the Word threatens, thou shall have thy
portion with unbelievers and hypocrites, thy place among the children of the
Devil, if thou speedily repent not, let conscience say the same, this must be
my place, and my portion, if I amend not; there is no help for me, there is no
hope for me, if I continue and go on as I am: If the Word exhorts you, Be
converted thou unbelieving soul, put away thine hypocrisy, arise sluggard,
return O backsliding soul, remember whence thou art fallen, and recover thy
first love, and do thy first works; let conscience speak the same words, go to
Christ O my soul, turn from thy sins, make thy peace with God, get thee a new
heart, be upright with God, be sound in the Faith, follow the Lord thoroughly,
follow the Lord fully; as ever thou look for mercy do it, as ever thou
hopest for pardon do it; would thou ever see the salvation of God, thou must
count upon it, to seek after the grace of God, and increase and abound therein
unto the end, and then something would be like to be done.

4. Let Conscience be quick and tender.

1. Let the ears of Conscience be open, and let it be quick of hearing.

2. Let its eyes be open, and let it be quick sighted.

3. Let its mouth be open, and let it speak quick and home.

1. Let its ears be open, and let it be quick of hearing. Be not of those fat
and gross souls, which are dull of hearing. How many deaf ears do we preach to,
that hear nothing, whose hearts will hear no more then the stone of the wall,
or the beam of the timber? and of those that will hear something, how many that
are dull of hearing? we have much work, and hard work, to beat any thing into
them. O get an hearing ear, and be quick of hearing; Swift to hear, as Jam.
1.19.

2. Let the eyes of Conscience be open, and let it be quick sighted; so that it
may espy and observe the smallest matter of duty and sin: and let it be tender
eyed, and not able to bear the least of evils; some men's eyes can see none but
the grossest of evils; can see drunkenness to be evil, or swearing, or gross
lying to be evils; but for ordinary intemperances and excesses, so they do not
eat and drink themselves into very beasts and sots; though they sit with the
Drunkards, and waste time with them, and their estates with them, and be
foolish, and jolly, and carnally merry with them; so they be not downright
drunk, they will tell you, they see no evil in it. Other men, though they can
(see) smaller evils, yet their consciences can swallow them; though conscience
be never so quick sighted, yet it wants tenderness, and they can dispense with
themselves in smaller matters: you will never be Christians of any proof, you
will never come to much in religion, unless your hearts be tender of the
smallest evils.

3. Let the mouth of conscience speak quick and home. I will not say concerning
Conscience, as the Apostle concerning the Tongue, Be swift to hear, slow to
speak; but let it be swift to hear, and swift to speak. Let it speak quick, and
speak home. Let it speak home, and speak aloud; let not your consciences be
muzled or meal mouthed; let them speak, and speak closely, and deal plainly
with you; let them not whisper out a warning, or a reproof, but if they may not
otherwise be heard, let them do as the Prophet was to do, Isa. 58.1. Cry aloud,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet. Let conscience never leave
speaking and crying, till it be heard; such a conscience as this, is like to be
a stirring conscience.

That Is a stirring conscience, which will maintain its authority and integrity,
whatever difficulties or pains it cost; which will be faithful in instructing,
admonishing, and rebuking, and will not, that its word or authority be
slighted: which will not suffer its self to be slighted, and abused, nor to be
baffled, or put off with shifts, and excuses or delays: such a conscience
(will) be obeyed, you shall have little ease, it will not suffer you to have
any rest or quiet in your minds, if you will not hearken to it. As the Apostle
said he will not, 2 Cor. 13.2. so neither will conscience; it will not spare
them that have sinned. If conscience gives an admonition, or a warning, take
heed of pride, take heed and beware of covetousness, or frowardness, or
suppose, but loytering and coldness in matters of Religion: if conscience gives
warning, take heed of this worldly carnal lazy trifling life, and a warning
will not do, it will check, and chide, and rebuke, and scourge the heart; if
its voice may not be heard, 'twill set in its teeth, 'twill bite, and sting,
and worry the soul; if once speaking, or chiding, or scourging will not do,
'twill hold on, and lie at the soul, from day to day, and give no rest till it
prevail.

O what stirring Christians should we be, had we such stirring consciences! the
reason why we sin, and sink as we do; shuffle in our Religion, turn aside after
the world, play the hypocrites or the formallists in our duties, let all run to
ruin within us, and suffer our selves to continue asleep, this is much our
consciences faults: conscience lets us alone, and either does not speak but
keep silence, or if it speak, it is too softly, it does not chide or scourge us,
it does not come to us with a rod to smite us for our faults. You that can go
on in your sins, or go so coldly on in your Religion, you with whom the World
is so much risen, and godliness is so much fallen, (you cannot but confess that
this is the case of many of you) how is it with your consciences mean while?
what says conscience to you in this case? it may be just nothing, conscience is
asleep as well as you. O if we could but awaken your consciences out of sleep,
if the stirring words the Lord sends among you, might have but this effect, to
stir up conscience, this would awaken you all to another manner of life, and
activity in Religion.

Friends, what is become of all those words, those awakening words, that have
been spoken on this subject? have they stirred up any thoughts of heart within
you, and set these on work? have they stirred up your affections, and set these
aworking in you? if they have not, it is a sign they have not stirred up
conscience; and what hearers have you been, if conscience has been asleep all
this time? when shall we ever stir your hearts, or mend your ways, if we cannot
stir your consciences?

If your consciences will yet hear, then let them speak, and give their
judgment on these particulars;

1. If it be not a wretched thing, to be most remiss and negligent in those
things, which are your highest concernment; to be so busy and intent about
those small matters, about Meat, and Drink, and Money, which all perish with
the using, and to be so remiss, and heedless, and heartless, about the most
weighty and important affairs? What says conscience to this? Do not you think
in your consciences, that this is a wretched thing, and a piece of extreme
folly?

2. If the matters of this world, be not all but small matters, in comparison
of the matters of Religion, the matters of God and the other World; what says
conscience to this? Do not you think in your consciences it is so, that the most
prosperous state in this world, is a Toy in comparison of prospering in your
Souls, and the matters of Salvation? If that Question be put to you, Mat.
16.26. What shall it profit you if you win the whole world and loose your own
souls, would not your consciences say, It would profit me nothing! O it is a
miserable gain, that is gotten by such an eternal loss; every man's conscience, I
doubt not, but must speak thus, if it will speak at all.

3. If yet this be not many of your cases; Is it not the plain truth, that you
are more remiss, and heedless, and cold in the matters of Religion, than in the
matters of this World? do not some of your consciences tell you, O'twere well
for me, if I were but as hearty, and lively in Religion, as in my worldly
concernments; if I could serve the Lord, as hotly and as heartily as I serve my
flesh; but I cannot say it is so well with me; my conscience tells me, and I
cannot deny it, I am much more intent about Earth than about Heaven.

4. If it be not better for you to rouse up, and recover your selves, out of
your remisness and coldness in the matters of God, and to abate your zeal for
the World; would it not be well for you if this word might have this effect, to
make such a change? do not you think in your consciences 'twould?

5. If it be not necessary for you, thus to rouse your selves up, and recover;
does not conscience tell you, you are in hazard of being undone for ever, if
you continue at this pass?

6. If Conscience judges thus in all these particulars, and will but speak one
word more, then it would be well; if conscience would hereupon, give the word
of command, awaken sleepers, arise sluggards, put away your sloth from you,
hearken to the word of the Lord, take his warning, stir up your selves, bethink
your selves, recover your selves from this dullness and deadness of heart; seek
the Lord earnestly, serve the Lord instantly; no more such idling, and creeping
on, be zealous; run the good race, fight the good fight, make sure the good
treasure, lay hold on eternal life; live not at these hazards and
uncertainties, but do thy best, put forth thy strength in the work of the Lord,
that thou may come to a certainty; if your consciences would speak thus to
you, and cry thus in your ears night and day, and not suffer you to rest, till
you hear and answer its cries; or if you yet linger and delay, if conscience
would make use of the rod, and smite and scourge you out of your remisness; if
your consciences would fall upon you, and sting you for your neglects, and
fright you out of your security, by telling you and laying before you, the
dreadful reward of sleepers, and such idle servants; would cast in some of that
fire into your hearts, which your sin and your sloth is preparing for you; if
your hearts would condemn you for your follies, and tell you down right, this
my way I am in, is the way of death, these my paths lead down to hell; I am
sleeping upon a rock, drowzing on a mast: O the waves are ready to rise, and
tumble upon me, and to sweep away this sleeping soul of mine, and drown it in
everlasting perdition: Had you but such a stirring conscience as this, O what a
cure, what a change would it speedily make upon you?

Brethren, awaken conscience, that conscience may awaken you; look to your
consciences, that conscience may look better to you: Watchman, what of the
night? Watchman, what of the night?? Is it day break? does sleep begin to
depart from thine eyes? what is the Watchman asleep? awake sleeper, it is high
time to awaken out of sleep. Speak thus to your consciences; and then hear what
conscience will speak to you.

Friend, art thou fallen? art thou come to this? so thou can but grow rich in
the world, thou considerest not how poor it is with thee in thy soul? whilst
thou have been so busy for thy self, and thy flesh, have thou let fall the
care of thine heart? whilst thou have turned a side after thy pleasures, after
thy lovers, have thou lost the sight of God? have thy carnal correspondencies,
and compliances made thee such a great stranger in Heaven? What says conscience
to this? Ask, Is it peace conscience? is it well? Is it with me, as it has
been? is it with me as it should be? Speak, conscience; go tell this man, I
have somewhat against thee, thou have left thy first love, remember whence thou
art fallen, return to thy first husband, for then it was better with thee than
now. What have thou gotten since thy departing from thy God? may be thou have
gotten more of the world about thee, more great friends than heretofore, more
esteem and reputation amongst thy friends; but O were thou not a better man,
when thou were a poorer man? had thou not more of a Christian, in the days of
old, when thou had less of this world? Remember the sweet days that thou
had, when thou walkedst humbly with thy God; remember the hopes, and the
joys, and the peace that thou had, in the secret recesses to thy beloved: Now
thou can snatch at a duty, cast a look heavenward, a word and away, scarce
considering what thou do, or what entertainment thou have with the Lord; thou
have thy long dinners but short duties; long markets but short prayers, and as
slight as they are short: What says thy conscience to this? does it not tell
thee, thou have made a dear bargain? It Is a great rate that thy riches have
cost thee, that thine ease and thy pleasures have cost thee; better thou had
kept thee a poor man still, and been holy, and humble, and tender, and upright,
than to have made a purchase of the world at so dear a rate, as the loss of
thine integrity and tenderness.

Speak conscience, and speak home in this matter; thou may speak where I may
not, thy word may be heard, where mine may not.

Conscience, art thou awakened? get thee about and walk the rounds, and speak
according to what thou find. Go into the City, and observe the Professors
there; go into their Chambers, and see if thou find them not in their beds,
when they should be on their knees; go into their Wardrobes, search after their
gaudy clothing, their antic ornaments and attires, and see if thou find not
such habits and dresses as are fitter for a Stage player than for a Christian;
go into the Parlour, and hear what is going amongst them there, whether there be
any more seriousness or savouriness in their discourses together, than there is
amongst them that know not God; and whether the Cards and the Dice be not,
where the Bible was wont to be. Go to their Tables, and observe their
superfluities, and curiosities, how delicately, how sumptuously they fare every
day, like that Gentleman, Luke 16. Go into their Shops, and their Markets, and
observe if there be no lying, and deceitful dealing, even as amongst others;
observe how little difference thou can find, betwixt some that are
Professors, in their dealings, and those that pretend to no Religion.

Then conscience, from the City go down into the Country, into the Fields, into
the Houses, and see how busy they are there; in ploughing, and sowing, in
building, and planting, in buying, and selling, laying house to house, and
field to field, hasting to be rich, oppressing the poor, working, and sweating,
riding, and running, and neglecting nothing, but God and their Souls. See what
they do, and see how it fares with them, both in City and Country; what
starveling souls thou find within, under their pampered flesh; see
conscience how it is, and speak according to what thou see; reprove them, warn
them, worry them; if they will not hear thy voice, set in thy teeth and make
them feel.

O Christians, if I could but set on your consciences thus upon your backs, or
if you would set them on upon your selves, you would both hear of more that is
amiss in you, than now you will acknowledge, and would find no quiet till you
set upon amending.

5. Be much conversant with stirring society and acquaintance, and be stirring
among them. And here I shall endeavor the reviving of that too obsolete
practice, of holy and quickening discourse, the neglect whereof is both a cause,
a sign, and an effect, of the decay of Religion among us: For the recovering
and promoting of this Holy Practice, I shall give you

1. Directions for the bringing you on upon it, and the better managing of it.

2. An Argument to persuade you to it.

For the Directions, they are these that follow.

1. Get your hearts well filled with the Grace of God. Mat. 12.34. Out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. 1. Men ordinarily fetch their words
out of their hearts; as it is said of a fiery Tongue, Jam. 3.6. It Is set on fire
of Hell, that is, of that Hell of malice, that is in the heart; so of an holy
Tongue it may be said, all the good that comes from it, is kindled from Heaven,
from that of Heaven, that is in the heart. Men usually (unless it be the
Hypocrite) speak according to what is in their hearts; the proud heart speaks
proud things, the vain heart speaks vain things, and the holy heart speaks
holy things. 2. It Is the (abundance) of the heart, that is most apt to come
forth at the lips. In some hearts there is a little good, but much evil; in
others, there is much good and less evil; it is that which abounds in the heart,
that which is most in the heart, that has the command of the tongue.

See that there be Grace in your hearts, and that the grace of God abound in
you; a little grace will not do, to set your tongues agoing, it is the abundance
of the heard, that which most abounds within, that will have the easiest and
most ordinary vent: Job 32.18. I am full of matter, my spirit within me
constrains me; my belly is as wine, which has no vent, it is ready to burst,
like new bottles; I will speak that I may be refreshed, I will open my lips and
answer. I am full of matter, and therefore will I speak; an heart full of
grace, must and will have a vent by the speech: The holy spirit within us will
constrain us; where there is little good coming forth, it is a sign there is not
so much as there should be within: We may pretend inability, and unaptness to
speak, as the reason of our barrenness of holy discourse, that sometimes may be
something that hinders, but mostly the reason is, there wants matter within: We
have reason to suspect, that it is from want of grace, rather than from want of
utterance, that no more savoury, and spiritual, and useful words come from us.

A full heart will be the best help for a stammering tongue. Christians, let us
get an increase of inward grace, let us get more of the holy spirit, of a
spirit of life and love, and power within us, and our Friends and Acquaintance
are like to hear of it oftener, and to better purpose, than they do. Poor
creatures that we are, we are empty, we are empty. our insides have no good
filling: Be ye filled with the spirit, faith the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.18. speaking
to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; and the more we speak
thus to our selves, the more freely shall we speak to others: those that have
but little grace, are but Babes in Christ, and Babes are but Infants, that
cannot speak; when the Infant is grown, then he will find his Tongue: In vain
shall I exhort you to use your Tongues more for God, till you be nursed up from
Children to more strength in grace: Would you ever come to be more fruitful and
useful in your Generations? this must be your way to it, get you more inward
grace.

2. Let your [thoughts] be working more about holy things: Thinking makes way
for speaking; what our thoughts run most upon, that ordinarily our Tongues will
run upon. We cannot know each others thoughts, but we may give a near guess at
them, by the words that are spoken: Men whose thoughts are most in the Earth,
that are still thinking of their Money, or thinking of their Trades, or their
Pleasures; they can hardly forbear to be talking of these things: And if our
thoughts were more of God, and of our Souls, of Religion, of Righteousness and
Holiness, we should certainly have more of God and of Heaven in our Mouths. The
Psalmist, who said, Ps. 119.46. I will speak of thy Testimonies, and will not
be ashamed, said also, Ps. 119.97. My meditation is of thee all the day long.

Christians, get your thoughts to be well exercised, be much in thinking, think
of the goodness, and kindness, and holiness, and compassions of the Lord:,
think of Christ, of his love, of his life, of his death, of his bowels, and
everlasting kindness; think often what great things the Lord has done for your
souls; think what ye would that he should do for you: much thinking on God and
his holy things, will leave an holy tincture on your hearts, will by degrees do
much to the begetting holy habits and dispositions in you: The Lord uses to
convey down much of his holy Image and likeness upon the heart by the thoughts.
Friends, such of you who find but little of the impress and image of God upon
your hearts, pray consider it, if you be not too great strangers to the
thoughts of God: How often in a day are your thoughts in Heaven? how very
seldom is it, that you are seriously looking, either upwards or inwards? No
wonder if your tongues be so silent of God, whilst your thoughts are such
strangers from God.

Christians, I doubt there are many of us, that are much faulty here; that our
thoughts are no more taken up or working upon things spiritual and heavenly; we
should make the thoughts of God more precious and delightsom, and more familiar
and ordinary with us: we should be able to say of our thoughts of God, as the
Psalmist does, Ps. 139.17, 18. How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God; how
great is the sum of them? If I should count them, they are more in number
then the sand. When I awake I am still with thee. Thus it was with that holy
man, and thus it should be with us; we should be much with the Lord in our
thoughts; but is it so with us? Friends, do but trace the goings of your souls,
for one day together, and ask your hearts in the evening, how much have I been
with God this day? how often have I been looking Heavenwards? the Psalmists
holy thoughts were so (many) that he could not count them, and it may be some
of ours have been so (few) that we cannot count them; we can hardly remember
any such thoughts we have had.

I know it is hard work to keep your thoughts well employed, they will be
wandering and roving more or less, do what you can; and you that observe your
selves, cannot but know it your selves, how hard a work it is; and I am afraid
that some of us, because it is so hard a work, will let it alone: if their
thoughts will gad, and rove, let them gad whither they will; if they will not
easily be gotten up to Heaven, let them even stay below, and so we let them
take their own course, and run whither they will. I pray, Friends, this once;
put your selves every one of you to it, and spend this one thought upon your
selves; think which has most of your thoughts, God or this World; must you
not, if you speak truth, speak the quite contrary to what the Psalmist speaks?
whilst he said, How precious are thy thoughts to me, O God; how great is the
sum of them? Must not you say, how irksom are thy thoughts to (me) O Lord,
how small is the sum of them? this argues an evil temper: it is sure a carnal
frame your hearts are in, where spiritual thoughts are so rare and difficult:
and I shall not wonder, that it is so hard to speak, where it is so hard to think
of any thing that is good: nor shall I hope to prosper in my exhortation, to use
your tongues better, till you be persuaded to exercise your selves to better
thoughts.

Friends, if you would open your ears to the counsels I have given you from the
Lord, and put your selves upon such holy thoughts, your ears would open your
mouths. I know not what to say, to make my words to stick upon you, and to be
reduced into practice: here I come and preach to you, and you come to hear, and
then away, and quickly forget all, and scarce bestow (some of you) a serious
thought upon it afterward. O will you be persuaded to try what you can do, to
put upon a more thoughtful life; and if you would be once brought to it, to be
more seriously thinking Christians, you would more easily come to it, to be
more savourly speaking Christians. While I was musing, or thinking, says the
Psalmist, Ps. 39. the fire kindled, and then spoke I with my tongue.

3. Get a zeal for the honor of Christ, and for doing him the best service you
can. Consider often, wherefore has the Lord made me, this living soul? Ps.
100.3. It is he that has made us, and not we our selves. But wherefore has he
made us? v. 4, 5. that we should enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and
into his courts with praise; that we should be thankful unto him, and speak
good of his Name. This we are made for; and wherefore am I redeemed? why was
that precious blood shed for me? for what was it that Christ died? 2. Cor.
5.15. That they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto
him that died for them. Wherefore am I called, and sanctified, and separated
from the ungodly World, by the Spirit of Christ? why was I not left out among
the men of this world? wherefore is it, that I was not left among the Drunkards
and Profane of the earth, among the Heathens and Infidels, amongst the blind
and ignorant Multitude? wherefore is it, that I and my brethren in Christ, are
called in, and are become a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, and not left out in common with the World? wherefore
is all this? Why, 1 Pet. 2.9. that we might show forth the virtues of him that
has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. And then consider
farther, what shall I do to answer these great ends? to serve the Lord, to live
unto Christ, to show forth his virtues and praises? how happy would it be for
me, if I could serve to these holy ends. Is it not my duty thus to live? is not
the Lord worthy whom I should serve? is not Christ worthy to whom I should
live? what can I do better with my self, then to consecrate my life to him? O
this is a life for a Christian, O this is a life for the redeemed of the Lord,
so to carry it in their whole conversation, that Christ may be magnified in
them. O let my love, and my labor, and my care, let the strength of mine
heart, let the ardent zeal of my soul be all spent upon this very thing, that
Christ may be honored and magnified in me.

Friends, what if we were brought to this pass, and wrought up to this holy
zeal for Christ? what would it bring forth? would it suffer us to dwell in
silence? the zeal of our hearts would open our lips, that our mouth would show
forth his praise; the tongue of the dumb would be loosed, the dumb would speak,
and speak good of his Name; our delight would be to be speaking of our Beloved.
Our excuses and pleas for our sinful silence are, O I am slow of speech, of a
stammering tongue; I cannot speak to any purpose, and therefore as good hold my
peace: this may be something, in some persons; but there is a worse cause lies
at the bottom; thou do not so much want a tongue to speak, as thou want an
heart to speak. Had thou more love to Christ, more zeal for Christ within
thee, this would open thy mouth: if thou can but find thee an heart, thine
heart would find thee a tongue: if thine heart were as big, and as hot as that
holy Prophet was, Jer. 20.^. thou would say as he did, I am weary of
forbearing. I cannot hold, but I must speak; thou would then be as weary of
forbearing, as now thou art weary of speaking. Christians, get you such a
zealous heart, let your hearts be once firmly set in you, to do Christ all the
honor you can; be more heartily concerned for the honor of his name, for the
glory of his Kingdom, for having your hand in the propagating of his Gospel: Be
more thoroughly possessed and even swallowed up of his love, be more firmly and
more passionately devoted to his service, and I need say no more to you in this
matter, this would do it, this zeal of your hearts would put grace into your
lips.

4. Get more pity and compassion to souls. Jude 22. the Apostle exhorting
Christians, to be active for the good of souls, requires, On some have
compassion, putting a difference; others save with fear, pulling them out of
the fire. The meaning is, put a difference in your dealings, betwixt the weak
and the willful; on the weak have compassion, deal more pitifully and more
gently, and more tenderly with them, but more roughly with those that are
willful; save them with fear, fright them out of the fire. Compassion must be
either as a means for the restoring of sinners; and thus some must be dealt
compassionately and tenderly with, others more roughly: In this sense there
must be compassion exercised toward the weak but not toward the wilful; that
is, we must deal gently with the one, but not so, but must deal roughly with
the others: Or else our compassion must be our motive to put us upon dealing
with souls: And thus, on all we must have compassion, without making a
difference; or if any difference be, the worst of sinners must be the object of
our greatest compassion. We must have compassion on the most obstinate, and
wilful sinners, upon the wickedest of men; those that will have no compassion
on you, if they have you in their power; those that have no compassion on
themselves, and their own souls; those that are the most hardened in their sins,
toward these especially should be our great compassion; those who are in the
greatest misery, in the greatest danger, are the greatest objects of compassion.

There should be compassion in the heart of a Christian toward every sinner;
though most to the greatest sinner, yet some compassion to every sinner, even
to the sinning Saints that are amongst us; and this our compassion should be an
argument fetched out of our own bowels, to press us to do the best we can for
them. What was it that moved Christ, to engage so deep as he did, in saving of
Souls? 'Twas his compassion that moved him to it. Is. 63.9. In his love and his
pity he saved them: And such a one, a compassionate one, it was requisite that
our Highpriest and Redeemer should be; one that can have compassion, on the
miserable; and that which was Christ's motive to do his part, must be our motive
to do our parts, our compassion to souls; nor must we have compassion to
sinners only, but one to another, 1 Pet. 3.8. Having compassion one of another.

O Friends, have compassion on one another souls, this will open your mouths.
Do thou see a company of poor sinners, held in the snares of the Devil,
running headlong to the pit, destroying and damning themselves with all their
might? do thou see a company of blind sinners, of sick sinners, deadly sick,
and ready to die of the plague of their hearts? do thou see the Devil
butchering and murdering so many, and dragging them on, one after another, as
the Ox to the Slaughter? Where be thy bowels? have thou no pity within thee
toward such miserable ones? How can thou say, I pity them, when thou will
not speak a word to recover them out of their misery? how can thou say,
There Is a poor drunkard, I pity him that he is so carried away, when thou will
not speak one word to reform him? how can thou say, There Is a poor, blind,
and ignorant soul, I pity his ignorance, when thou will not speak a word to
instruct him? how can thou say, There Is a poor worldling, I pity him, to see
how he is eaten out of his worldly cares, when thou will not speak a word to
convince him of his danger? and how can thou say, concerning sinning
Christians, it pities mine heart to see, how some of them do pine away, and
consume; what backsliders they are, how cold and careless and dead-hearted they
are: How can thou say, I pity these backsliders, I pity these wasted and
decayed souls, when thou will not speak a word, to remember them from whence
they are fallen, and to help toward their recovery? If thou would be
faithful, who knows but thou may save poor, lost, and languishing souls?
do thou pity them notwithstanding? will thou say, thou have no pity for them?
thou art an hard-hearted one, thou have shut up thy bowels against them, who
shuttest up thy mouth, from yielding that help thou might for their
recovery. Be pitiful, Christians; pity poor drunkards, pity poor, blind, and
hardened sinners, pity poor, lukewarm, and backsliding Professors; and in your
pity, go speak to them; parents, pity your poor ignorant rebellious Children;
Husbands pity your poor carnal Wives, Masters pity your poor Families; every
one of you, pity your poor carnal friends and acquaintance; and in your pity
labor their Conversion and Salvation.

O the miserys of poor sinners souls cry in your ears, you that have the heart
of a Christian, pity me. Whilst Sinners mouths are full of scorns at you,
whilst they will laugh and mock at you, for any good they see or hear; yet the
miserys their souls are in, cry for your pity, though some of them will reply
to you, if you offer them a word to them about the danger of their states, what
is that to you? look to your selves, meddle with your own business; yet still
the more pity is to be showed to them. If you would hear the voice of their
misery (and bowels have ears to bear that voice) if you could hear the voice of
their misery this would be it, O an undone, a lost, a perishing soul; a captive
to the Devil, yea and not willing to be delivered, running on upon mine own
ruin, almost past recovery. Is it nothing to you that stand by? behold and see
if there be any misery like my misery? O be neither deaf nor dumb to me: open
your ears and hear the cry of my misery, and then open your mouths and tell me
what I must do to be saved; but open your bowels first, and that will most
effectually open your ears amd mouths.

5. Go always well provided. Get you well furnished with matter for holy
discourse, the great hindrance is the want of an heart, but in some, though
they have a heart to speak, yet they are to seek for matter, they know not
where to begin, Mat. 15.52. Every Scribe which is instructed to the Kingdom of
Heaven, is like an householder which brings forth out of his treasure, things
new and old. Here 3 or 4 things: 1. Good men have a treasure within them; they
are well furnished, and have in readiness for all holy uses: Vain men, it is no
wonder they are vain in their discourses, they have it not in them to be
otherwise than they are; they are empty souls, and therefore have but barren
lips. 2. Their treasure is laid in by instruction, by what they have received
by instruction, by what they have learned and heard. 3. A good man's treasure is
long a gathering; he has within him, things new and old. 4. A good man does
retain his instruction; old things are not passed away with him; the things
that he heard many years ago, they are still with him; he has hid the word in
his heart, as the Psalmist did, Ps. 119.11. and where he hides it there he
finds it. Of Mary it is said, Luke 2.51. that she kept all the sayings of Christ
in her heart. 5. Out of this treasure in the heart it is, that he brings forth,
for the use and benefit of others: His treasure, though it be hid in his heart,
yet it is not buried there, but there it lies, ready to be brought forth. Ps.
45.1. My heart is inditing a good matter, I speak of the things that I have
made, concerning the King, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Where
observe: 1. He prepares what he had to speak: He did not speak quic quid in
buccam, whatever came first to mind, but he meditates and thinks before he
speaks. I speak what I have made, made ready for my tongue. 2. He is ready to
speak what he had prepared; My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

For want of this provision and preparation, some men are dumb and silent, they
have nothing to speak; other men, if they speak, speak nothing to purpose; to
prevent both these, both sinful silence and impertinent speaking, this is the
best course I can advise you to, go always prepared and well provided of what
to speak: provide your selves,

1. From the Scriptures. When you read a Chapter, any special things you read,
that may be of most and most frequent use, lay them up in your memories; think
with your selves, here is a word, that I may shortly have occasion to make use
of, in my Family, or amongst others, and so remember it that you may have it in
readiness against you have occasion.

2. From the Sermons you hear. I have told you formerly, and now tell you
again, that it would be a special means for the improvement of Ordinances, and
a special help to holy discourse, if what you hear preached on the Lords Day,
you would make the matter of your discourse the week following; hereby you may
the more fix what you hear, in your own hearts, and hence you may be supplied
with fresh matter, and so find holy discourse the less difficult to you. How
you have observed this direction, since I formerly gave it you, whether you
have put it in practice, I leave it to your consciences to judge. Friends, if
you will not take the directions given you, and put them into practice, to what
purpose are they preached to you? I therefore exhort you again to practice this
useful direction, what you hear on the Lords Days, discourse of on the week
days.

3. From your own experiences, of the dealings of God with your own souls, Ps.
66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has
done for my soul. Self-observing Christians have many experiences by them,
which may be much useful for others. You may be telling one another, what
experiences you have had, of the workings of sin in you, and of temptations;
and what experiences of the workings of grace, and of your victories over
corruption and temptation, what comforts you have had, and how you come by
them; what distresses and fears you have been under, and how you were relieved;
what difficulties you have found in your work, how long you groaned under them,
and how at length you overcame them. Many cases you may have been in, out of
which much may be brought forth, for the benefit of others, that are or may be
in the same cases.

4. From the consideration of the company, that at such or such a time you may
be like to be cast amongst. Some days, it may be, you may see your necessary
business leading you amongst sinners: you must work with them, in the same
field, or the same shop; or you must travel with them the same journey, and the
like: these sinners, whom you foresee in the morning, you must converse with on
the day, may be, they may be blind, or ignorant sinners, or profane and lewd
sinners, or mocking and scoffing sinners; whatever temper they are of, the
consideration of it, will give you an hint, what to provide: for the ignorant,
you must go provided with words of instruction; for the profane, with a word of
reproof; for all sorts, such words as you judge most proper for their case, and
most like to do their souls good.

Sometimes you may see, your converse is like to be among Christians; and then
consider, whether they be weak Christians, and need your help, and what their
weaknesses are, and go provided of a word accordingly: a word of comfort to the
troubled, a quickening word to the dead hearted, and slothful, a recovering
awakening word to the backsliders, etc. or else they may be stronger and more
judicious Christians; and then your study should be, to go prepared with such
questions, touching your own cases; touching any doubts, or fears, or spiritual
wants, or difficulties you are under, that you might receive benefit from them.

These directions are all practicable, and may be exceedingly useful; it will
cost you pains to inure your selves to this holy practice, but by pains taking
a while, and the help of God with you, it may come to be more easy: and were
it but seriously set on foot, and carefully carried on, you cannot easily
imagine, what an advance to you it will be in the state of your own soul, and
what a blessed expedient 'twill be, to propagate religion where it is not, and
to recover it where it is fallen, and to raise it where it is but low.

Well, this is the sum of all the Directions hitherto given, Go always with
your bow bent, and your arrow upon the string; with an heart will disposed to
speak, and a word ready to be spoken.

6. Take a right method, by which you may with the most ease attain to this
holy use of your tongues. You will say, it is hard service, and so it is; but
are you willing to try to come to it? Why what method will you prescribe to us
that we may attain?

1. Begin this practice within your selves; speak often to your own hearts, Ps.
4.4. Commune with your own hearts, maintain an holy discourse with your selves.
The Cock does first clap his wings on his own breast to awaken himself, and
then he crows to awaken others: As the Apostle, Romans 2.21. Thou that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that would instruct another, warn
and awaken another, how can thou do that, if thou do not first instruct and
awaken thy self? Mat. 7.5. Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly, to pull out the mote out of thy
brothers eye. That Is the complaint, Is. 64.7. There is none that stirs up
(himself) to take hold on thee. Stir up your selves in the first place, say to
your own hearts, Arise sleeper, there is a God before thee, there is a Christ
before thee, there is a Gospel and a Covenant of Grace before thee; lay hold on
this God, lay hold on this Covenant, walk worthy of the Lord, and be faithful
in the Covenant of thy God. Speak thus to your own Souls, and discourse the
matter, reason with them about it, as the Psalmist reasons with his Soul, in
his distress, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? hope in God; so do thou reason
with thy Soul, in thy deadness, or in thy hardness, or any other case thou art
in: Why art thou lifted up, O my Soul! why so hardened? Fear God; why so proud?
why so carnal? why so slothful? humble thy self, shake up thy self, quicken and
rouse up thine own sleepy heart.

Brethren, here is the original, of all our neglects of our duties to others,
our self-neglects, till we stir up our selves more carefully, we shall never do
any thing to purpose at stirring up one another. Kindle an holy fire in your
own breasts, set your own affections more strongly working upwards; if we can
get up our own hearts, into a more serious lively frame, then there is hope we
shall more effectually help up others.

2. Next set upon this holy practice in your Families. Inure your selves to be
speaking of God among your own, with them you can be more free and bold.
There Is no such great difficulty for a Father to speak to his Children, for a
Master to speak to his Household; and by speaking much to these, you will by
degrees, grow more free and more able to speak to others. Fall therefore closer
upon this practice; Fathers speak often to your Children, Husbands speak often
to your Wives, Wives speak to your Husbands, Masters speak to your Servants,
Servants speak you one to another. Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. These my words shall be in
thine heart, and in thy soul -- Speak them to thy self first, and then -- ye
shall teach them to your Children, speaking of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. Charity begins at home, and so must all Religion; Religion must
begin at home, in thine own heart first, and then in thine house, and thence
thou will get more ability, and aptness to diffuse it abroad.

Consider, Beloved, how is it with you at your homes, upon this account? what
Religion is there going in your Families? how often do your Children, and your
Servants hear any gracious words from you? O Friends, do all you can, to make
all yours, Partakers of the Grace you have received. Is the word of the Lord in
thine own heart? let your whole household hear oftener of it, as you sit at your
Tables, as you sit at your fires, or are walking in your houses; it is not now
any stated way of instruction, by reading the word, repeating Sermons,
catechizing, etc. that I am dealing with you about, but that in a way of
familiar discourse, you would be often dropping down some gracious words:
Friends, have you a conscience toward God? What conscience is that, that will
suffer you to live in the neglect of so known and necessary a duty? can you
with any conscience, withhold bread, or cloths from your own, with what
conscience then, can you withhold counsel and instruction? will you make yours
partakers of all you have in the world, only they shall have no benefit by the
knowledge, or the grace you have received? Let your bowels instruct you, to be
kind to their souls; and if you will by any arguments be persuaded, to be thus
kind to your own, you will thereby be prepared, and get such an holy habit, as
will make it more familiar, and easy to you to live profitably amongst others.

Beloved, Hearken to me in this thing; will you hearken and try what you can
do? if ever you would stand up in your Generations, as persons of any use, or
serviceableness to Christ, and the interest of his Gospel; if you would not
stand in the companies you come into, as insignificant Ciphers, or as dumb
Idols, that have mouths and speak not, be persuaded to use your tongues to
better purpose at your homes.

3. Next speak unto your Brethren and fellow Christians, to those that fear the
Lord. Mal. 3.16. Those that feared the Lord, spoke often (one to another.) Ps.
66.16. Come to me (ye that fear the Lord) and I will tell you. We took sweet
counsel together, said the Psalmist, Ps. 55.14. That is, we that were the
Friends of the Lord, or took our selves to be such, we consulted together, or
counseled one another in the matters of God. It may be you may be more
abashed, and afraid to speak to those that are without; you know not how they
will take it; you doubt they may be dogs, that will tear and rend you; or at
least that they may be swine, and trample under feet, and scorn and despise
those holy words, you speak unto them; they may laugh at you, and scoff at your
counsels: But now with your Brethren in the Lord you may be more free, in
confidence that they will accept, and take in good part, the good words you
speak, and will also be tender to you, and bear with your infirmities, if any
be in speaking.

Labor for a more profitable converse, Christians with Christians, Believers
with Believers; this will be more easy, because you may presume one another to
be of the same Spirit; your good words will be unto them acceptable words, and
the sense of that, will invite you to speak. Christians have mutual need one of
another, to help each other in the Lord; and yet there is a great fault amongst
us, that we are not thus mutually helpful. Like those foolish Quakers, we have
too many of our silent meetings, (as to our main concern) scarce a serious or
savoury word comes from us, when we meet together.

Christians, learn to amend this fault: Let us, as we have opportunity, edify
and build up one another in the most holy Faith. Jude 20. Let us consider one
another, to provoke to love and to good works, Heb. 10.24. Friends, do not
tempt one another, (as perhaps too often you do) to be vain as you are vain, to
be carnal as you are carnal. Do not chil and damp each others spirits, by your
carnal, and frothy, and impertinent discourses; but quicken one another, do
what you can to whet and set an edge upon each others spirits, and holy
affections. What have you nothing to talk of when you come together, but of
your trades, and your fields, or of news, or of the weather, and suchlike
impertinences? Have you not a God? have you not Souls? have you not a Country,
whether you are traveling? are you not upon a Journey to that blessed Land?
have you not Friends and Kindred above, that are worth the speaking of? have
you not enemies and temptations here below, an evil world to travel through,
many corruptions and afflictions to conflict withal, and have you not need of
mutual counsel, comfort, encouragement, and establishment one from another? How
is it that you can find room for so much idle talk, when you have matters of
such weight and moment to fill up your time? when do you use to return with
most comfort, and satisfaction upon your spirits? when you have been vainly
merry together, or when you have been edifying one another in the most holy
faith.

4. Then in the next place speak to those which are without, to poor sinners,
that are yet in their sins. Ps. 51.13. Then will I teach transgressors thy
ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. Your special work possibly, may
lie amongst the household of faith, but as you have opportunity, you must do
good to all, Gal. 6.10. All that need you must be made partakers of your
spirituals, as well as of your temporal things: Those that fear God, it may be,
may sometimes hear some good words from you, but have you never a word for
those that fear not God?

O pity your poor unconverted neighbors, and in your compassion, do what you
can to pull them out of the fire; convince them of their sins, warn them of
their miseries, persuade them back from the Devil, invite and allure them in to
Christ; let them hear often, of grace and sin, of heaven and hell, of death and
judgment, from your lips. See how the compassions of the Church, work toward
the Heathen world, Cant. 8.8. We have a little sister that has no breasts,
what shall we do for our sister? The poor Gentiles, they have no Scriptures, no
Prophets, no Ordinances, no breasts of consolation; we have a poor sister that
has no breasts, what shall we do for her? they pitied the poor Gentiles, and
in their pity, they consider what they might do for them. And why do not we
carry it alike, to unconvered sinners? we have poor children, poor neighbors,
that have no eyes, no heart; that have no Christ, no knowledge, no grace; poor
blind neighbors, poor hardened ones, poor lost and undone souls; O what shall
we do for these poor children and neighbors? have I never a word to speak,
that might do them good? shall I be silent to them, whilst I see them
perishing for want of instruction? Christians, have you the light with you? are
there the words of wisdom and instruction with you? is there ever a word of
grace, hid and laid up in your hearts, O keep it not in, withhold it not from
poor perishing souls; speak to poor sinners, affright them, from their sins,
provoke them to repentance, persuade them to pray, to hear, to read, to
consider, and to turn from the evil of their ways; and who knows what such
words might do to their conversion and salvation?

Thus for the directions for the performance and managing of this holy practice.

2. The argument that I shall use to persuade you to it, shall be, from the
advantage of this practice for the reviving and improving our own souls in the
grace of God. The advantage will be great,

1. From our necessary preparations to this duty I have told you, that it is
necessary to the better performance of this duty, to get your own hearts well
furnished with grace, to live more in the affecting thoughts of God; to get a
zeal for Christ, to do him all the honor you can; to get more compassion to
souls: without these things, whatever our attempts are, to converse more
profitably and spiritually one with another, we shall make nothing of it; and
these our preparations are our improvements.

2. From the practice of this duty. Holy discourse will keep our graces in
action. It Is for want of action that our talents grow rusty; by rubbing up the
spirits of our brethren, we shall whet our own. Though the edge of your knife
will be blunted by long cutting, it is not so here, the edge of your spirits
will grow keener by use; your very work will be instead of a Whetstone.

Who is like to grow rich in this world, he that lets his stock lie dead by
him, or he that puts it to use, or imploys it in trade? those that occupied
with their talents, Luke 19.13, etc. made this return, Thy pound, Lord, has
gained ten pounds, says one; thy pound has gained five pounds, says another;
but what could he say, that bound up his talent in a napkin? what greater
encouragement to diligence in trading, then the hope of increase? the hope of
the in gathering of the Husbandman, is his encouragement in his more plentiful
scattering in sowing. He that sows plentifully shall reap plentifully, 2 Cor.
9.6. and therefore, Blessed are they that sow beside all waters, Is. 32.20. the
communicative Christian is sowing where ever he comes, and where ever he sows,
thence shall he also reap, and gather his sheaves into his own bosom.

Christians, you say you have but little grace, and it is like enough you say
true: but would you have more? go forth to sow with that little you have. The
more you scatter, the more you are like to gather. Would you have more love,
and life, and power to serve and glorify the Lord? be more diligent, in
shedding abroad what you have Resolve, no longer to keep your Religion to your
selves, put not your light under a bushel, put it on a candlestick, that it may
give light to others, and God will increase both your light and your life. It Is
to little purpose, only to think of hearing more, or of praying more for a
better heart, this alone, will never do; converse more like Christians, then ye
shall be every day more Christians then ye are Learn of sinners; Drunkards
converse like Drunkards, Rioters converse like Rioters, profane hearts have
ever a profane converse; what do their tongues run of? what is their talk, when
they come together, but of their cups, and their harlots, and their sports? and
what is their ordinary fruit? why, hereby they not only propagate their own
wickedness in others, one Drunkard makes another, and he another, and these
more; but also, they every one, improve their own cursed stock; fomenting, and
heating, and stirring up their own hearts lusts, and so make themselves twofold
more the children of hell then before. Christians, learn of these brutes; do
Drunkards converse like Drunkards, do Worldlings converse like Worldlings, do
profane hearts use themselves to profane converses? and do you not see how
mightily they grow, and improve hereby in their wickedness? what should this
teach you? but that Christians converse like Christians. Let your Religion be
the business of your communion, and then look for as much advance to your souls
in godliness, by this holy converse, according as you see sinners to thrive in
wickedness, by their wicked conversing one with another.

You see, Friends, I have been somewhat large in this direction, but is there
not need of more words than these? is not this holy practice sadly let fall
amongst us? does not the world, something or other of it, either quite shoulder
it out, or thrust it into a narrow room? Our heads are so full, and our hearts
are so full, and hence our mouths are so full of carnal things, that there is
little room left, for a few words of God, and the things of eternity to be
interposed: And O what is the fruit? sure that dreadful fall, which is so
visible, in the spirit and the whole practice of piety, is both the mother and
the offspring of this grievous neglect; we are fallen sick, and therefore are
so speechless; and then we spend and waste more and more by silence: Whilst
sick bodies waste by speaking, sick souls waste more by silence.

What shall I say farther in this matter? The Lord heal a poor, barren,
languishing people, the Lord touch our hearts with a coal from his Altar, and
then touch our lips with a coal from our hearts. Brethren, I hope you come
hither to learn your duty, and I hope you have a conscience, that will put you
upon the practice of what you learn; have you yet learned, what an advantage
it is to have lips of knowledge, and what a duty it is, that your speech be with
grace? Remember what your Master said, John 13.17. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them. I would not, that a man of you should be so
unhappy, as to know and not to do. Do you know and believe, that holy
communication would be an advance to your religion? then what shall be your
practice in this matter? have you a tongue for the world, a tongue for your
flesh, and no tongue for God and your Souls? O might I hear that word from your
mouths, thy word, O Lord, is within me as fire, I am weary of forbearing, I
will speak that I may be refreshed; Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praises.

6. Put upon stirring duties. I shall mention only two.

1. Prayer. 2. Fasting and Prayer.

1. Prayer. Prayer in the text is noted to be a stirring duty; there is none
that stirs up himself, there is none that calls upon thy name, that
stirs up himself. Had they prayed, and prayed as they ought, this would have
stirred them up, or have been their stirring up them selves, to take hold of
God: But neglecting to pray, they therein neglected to stir up themselves.

Prayer is a stirring duty. 1. It Is to stir up the Lord to their help, Ps.
35.23. Stir up thy self and awaken to my judgment, my God and my Lord. Ps.
80.2. O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep, thou that
dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth, stir up thy strength, and come to
save us. The God of Israel sometimes seems to be, as Elijah once said mocking,
of that false God Baal, 1 Kings 18.27. It may be he is asleep, and must be
awakened. Though he be the keeper of Israel, and never slumbreth nor sleeps,
yet he sometimes carries it toward them, as if he were asleep, and expects to
be awakened by their cries upon him.

2. Especially, prayer is for the stirring up our selves. There is a sort of
praying, dull, and cold, and formal praying, that is good for nothing, but to
lay our souls asleep. When conscience begins to stir, and run upon sinners, and
fright them for their neglect of God, then they will to their prayers and blind
devotions; and this must serve them, as a charm to allay and quiet conscience,
as David's Music did, to drive away that evil spirit, that vexed Saul. Some
sinners consciences will not let them be quiet, but dog them, and haunt them,
and fright them into something of religion; they dare not live without calling
upon God, their consciences will not suffer them to be quiet, under a total
neglect, and thereupon something must be done, which they can call praying, and
then they are at ease, and can go on quietly in their sins, without trouble or
disturbance; these men's praying serves them for nothing, but to lull them
asleep in their sins.

But prayer rightly performed will stir and awaken; prayer is said to be, a
striving with God, Romans 15.30. a wrestling with God, Genesis 32, 24. and this is
our most effectually striving with God, and wrestling with God, our striving
and wrestling with and stirring up our own hearts. Praying is not the saying of
some good words but the calling up all our powers, to come in and join in
seeking the Lord. That you may particularly understand what a stirring duty
Prayer is, consider,

1. That in Prayer, we set our selves under the Eye of the great and mighty God
of Heaven and Earth. It is a drawing night unto God, a lifting up our Eyes to
the Everlasting hills, a presenting our selves before the throne of God, the
throne of his Grace; a setting all the Attributes of God before our Eyes, his
Allmightiness, his Allsufficiency, his infinite greatness, dreadfulness,
goodness and grace, etc; which all make up that fearful Name, the Lord our God,
Deuteronomy 28.58. and sure Friends, such a sight of the glorious and dreadful God,
will be a stirring sight.

2. In Prayer we come to deal with God, about all the wonderful and astonishing
things of Eternity; we are to have eternal life and death in our Eye, when we
pray; and what will stir us, if Eternity, if a sense that we are now treating
with the Eternal God, about the eternal things, will not? O a sense of this,
that we are begging for our lives, begging for our immortal Souls, begging the
everlasting Kingdom, seeking our escape from the everlasting Fire, a deep sense
of this upon our hearts will awaken them.

3 In Prayer there is a ripping open all the affrightning Evils that are in our
Hearts. Confession unbowels the Soul, and fetches up all the filth and
rottenness of the Heart, lays open all the deadly Diseases that are in the
Heart; every wicked thought, and filthy lust, and vile affection; all the
falsehood and Hypocrisy, all the pride and malice, and envy, and frowardness of
the Heart, are in our confessions brought forth, and laid open before the Lord.
The Devils are roused that lodged within us, and were taken too little Notice
of; and all the hazard and danger that our Souls are in, by these our
wickednesses, will in our confessions be made to stand before our Eyes, and
there cannot be such a discovering of our wicked Hearts, and our danger that we
are in, but it will affright and awaken us.

4. Prayer is the uniting of all our powers, and the engaging them all, in
seeking the Lord. It strains every string, it bends all our forces upon the
duty; it sets all our faculties, our understandings, our memories, our wills,
our affections, our consciences on work; as the Psalmist; Ps. 103.1. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name; Pray to the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, call upon his Name. Prayer is not
tongue-work, or knee-work, but Soul-work; bless the Lord, O my Soul; and it is
not a piece of an Heart, one string of the Instrument, but every string must be
strained and struck up; understanding, memory, will, affections, all must join,
all that is within me, bless his holy Name. All our faculties, and all our
graces, our faith, our love, our hope, our desires, whatever we have of God
within us, all must be called forth to join in seeking of him.

5. Prayer is not only the employing and exercising our Souls, with all their
faculties and graces, but the putting them forth to the height; not only the
striking every string, but the straining every string to the height; the word
in the original, which is translated Acts. 12.5. Prayer without ceasing,
signifies, instant, earnest Prayer; or more properly, according to the notation
of the word, strained Prayer, prayer stretched out; and this is that praying
which is stirring praying, the pouring forth our Soul in Prayer. With my Soul
have I desired thee, Is. 26.9. the straining and working up all within us,
every faculty and grace of our Hearts, to the height; the stirring up all our
strength in the work; this is that Praying instantly, required Romans 12.12. that
praying fervently. Jam. 5.16. that crying, and crying mightily unto God, unto
which the Scriptures promise Audience.

Now when Prayer has thus rouzed up our sleepy Souls, set all our Faculties
and Graces a stirring within us, and so gotten an heat in the heart, by the
joint and vigorous exercise of all within us, in the duty, when we have prayed
our Souls awake, and all our Graces awake, and our Heart is waxen hot within
us, we are therein prepared and put in a readiness and disposedness to, and
shall feel our selves bent upon, the practice of every holy duty, in our whole
course.

This therefore is my next direction; put upon Praying, and such stirring
Praying. Go set the Lord and all his Glory before your Eyes, and get a sense of
eternity upon your Hearts; rip open and lay forth to the light, all that
filthiness and garbage, and rottenness that is within you; bend all within you
to seek the Lord, and go cry unto him, and cry so loud, that your own Souls may
be awakened by your cry. Strive so with God in prayer, wrestle so with the
Almighty, that your own Soul may find its Hands and Legs. Friends, do not
neglect Prayer, and do not deceive and undo your selves by your Prayers, do not
pray your Souls asleep, do not pray your consciences asleep, but awaken them.

It Is a miserable thing to consider, how little some Professors are in secret
Prayer; sometimes they pray, and sometimes they cannot tend it; their Closet is
so seldom visited, that it may be said of the very way to it, as of the way to
Zion, Lam. 1.4. the ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn
Feasts. The Grass grew upon their paths, because they were so little trod. It
is a miserable thing that there is so little praying, such seldom Praying as
there is; but a worse Evil then this, is that that little which is, is worth
nothing; we go to Pray, many of us, as if we had a mind to mock God, and
provoke him to his Face, we go to this duty, as if we had a mind to lay our
Souls to sleep, rather then to stir up and awaken them; it is no wonder there is
no more light in our Paths, when there is no more life in our Duties; it is no
wonder there are so many gray Hairs on the Head, so many wrinkles in the Face
of our Religion, when it is so cold at the Heart; when our secret recesses and
retirements to God, are so Heartless and Spiritless; it is no wonder that Sin
and Lust and vanity do so swell and abound, that Grace and Holiness do so sink
and disappear in our conversations, when that which should kill Sin, and keep
Grace alive (the Soul of Duty) is so little to be found.

Friends, if ever you would recover the beauty of your ways, begin in Secret,
revive the power of Duty; pray constantly, pray frequently, and be fervent in
Prayer; pray and strive with God in Prayer; pray and strive with your own
hearts in Prayer, pray and wrestle against the Devil, and the World, and your
Sins in Prayer; such praying would make the nest too hot for the Devil, and
your Sins; such Praying would cure your colds; such praying in the Morning,
might be a means to keep you warm for all day, and such praying in the Evening,
would make you awake warm the next Morning.

Therefore Friends, pray hearken to the Word of the Lord; hearken to me in this
thing, put your selves to it, put upon constant secret Prayer, and put upon
such stirring Prayer, such instant and importunate Prayer; what say you, will
you do it! will you hearken to me in this thing! I tell you Friends, if I may
but prevail with you in this one thing, if you will obey and practice this one
direction, this will make all the rest to prosper, you will deny me in nothing,
if you will but grant me this; and if you deny me here, if you will go on to
satisfy your selves with cold and perfunctory Devotions, if you will not set
to it to be lively and vigorous in your secret duties, I shall look upon all
else that I have said, as lost, and that which will come to nothing; and
therefore pray consider with your selves, what you mean to do in this thing;
will you begin this night? go not to pray as at other times, but put on upon
the life of the duty, and then I shall hope to see a blessed and a visible
change upon the whole frame and face of your conversation. What say you
therefore, will you do it! I am in great earnest with you in this thing, since
the success of all that I have said, to the recovering the decaying interest of
Religion among you, depends so much upon this one thing, and therefore once
again, I pray deny me not; and that you may not deny me, take particular notice
of this one word more, that I shall add, remember these words anon in the
Evening; when you are going to Pray, then remember what I have now spoken from
the Lord to you, and accordingly set your Hearts to it, and the Lord grant you
the presence of his gracious and Almighty Spirit, to help you herein, to the
praise of his Grace, and the comfort and advantage of your Souls.

For the more effectual fixing of this direction upon you, and for your
improvement by it, I shall here remember you of two Directions, which I have
formerly Preached and published.

1. Be so earnest and intent in this duty, that you may feel your hearts
enlarged, in the lively actings and exercise of Grace, and so raised and warmed
by your sensible communion with God, as may put you into a spiritual and
heavenly frame, that if it be possible, you may come off your knees in a better
and more lively disposition of soul, than you had in your entrance upon your
duty.

Do not satisfy your selves with the work done, but let your aims and
endeavors be, to get something more of God, that you may have to carry away
with you, when you depart; that you may come out of your Closets, as Moses came
down from the Mount, Exodus 34.39. whose face did shine, and was a token, that
he had been conversing with God. O let there at such times, be a shining and a
burning light raised up within you; come from your duties as men coming out of
Heaven, with the very Sunbeams shining in your countenances, and with some
tincture of Heaven upon your spirits. We come many times with no other spirits
from our duties, than we come out of our Shops or Fields; with no more sense
and favor of God, than if we had never been near him. O it is a sign that thou
have but trifled in thy duties, that thou neither had, nor much mindedst to
have communion with God in it; certainly sincere communion with God, will leave
some divine impressions behind it. Well, every time you go to pray, put hard
for it, to get you into such a divine and spiritual frame before you have done.

2. Whatever better or more spiritual frame you are gotten to in duty, be
careful to maintain it, and keep it alive afterward. See to it, that your
spirits do not presently sink and cool, and grow dull and carnal again, when
you have been thus quickened and spiritualized; has there been an holy fire
kindled in you? O keep it burning, keep it flaming, and let it not be covered
over with ashes; get your hearts to be alive in your duties, and keep them
alive from duty to duty. In the Old Testament, though their Sacrifices were
offered but morning and evening, yet the fire that kindled them, was not to go
out night nor day; there must be fire kept alive from the morning Sacrifice, to
kindle the evening Sacrifice, and fire left from the evening to kindle the
morning Sacrifice; O Friends, how often is it, that though at our morning
Sacrifice a fire be kindled, that it is quenched and lost before the evening,
through the carelessness and negligence of our hearts; Sin and the World have a
whole days time to quench and put out, what an hours duty has been kindling,
and so at the return of our duty-seasons, we find our hearts at the same loss,
in the same deadness and hardness as before. Beloved, these two Directions, of
getting up our hearts into a lively frame in duty, and of keeping up that holy
frame from duty to duty, though there be some difficulty, and it will cost you
pains to practice them to purpose, yet the advantage you will hereby gain, will
be abundantly worthy all your pains; and therefore I pray remember them; if you
do in good earnest intend an advancing in Religion, let these two Directions be
before your eyes every day; you have them preached to you, and you have them
written for your use, the Lord write them upon your hearts, and hold them
before your eyes. This course will be as the whetting our Instruments, and
keeping them keen for our work; how much work may be done, and with much more
ease, by a cutting than a blunted Instrument. Eccl. 10.10. If the Iron be
blunt, and he do not whet the edge, he must put to more strength; 'twill cost
you much more pains to make any work in your Religion, whilst your edge is
blunted; a dull heart will do little, and that little, not without much pains.
By the course prescribed whet your spirits, and keep them with a good edge, and
then all your work will be the more easily carried on. To this I shall add,

3. Let your prayers be pursued in your practice. Whatever Grace you pray for,
whatever Sin you pray against, follow after the one, and fight against the
other, in your daily practice: Let Prayer and Practice join hand in hand, and
both drive the same way. Think not you have done your whole days work, when you
have prayed morning and evening; Religion must be the business of your whole
time; ( be thou in the fear of the Lord, be thou at the work of the Lord, all
the day long, Prove. 23.17.) and not the business of an hour or two. When you
have been praying for an heavenly mind, that God would help you to live in the
spirit, to set your affections on things above, to have your conversation in
Heaven; when you have ended your Prayer, what should ye now do? Why then to
thinking on heavenly things; let your thoughts run upon and be working more
throughout the day, upon these holy things; to pray for an heavenly mind, and
never to think more of heavenly things, all the day long, till you come to pray
again, what will such praying come to? When you pray for a willing, obedient
and fruitful life, what should you do? Go and take pains with your hearts, to
bring them on, and to hold them close to your several duties. When you have
been praying against Sin, for power over a proud heart, or a froward heart, or
a covetous worldly heart, what should you now do? Why then set your watch
against your sins; take heed of every proud thought, of every froward word;
take heed and beware of all covetous practices; set your selves to the
mortifying of these sins, to restraining your selves from the actings of them,
to pray against pride, or to pray against covetousness, and as soon as you have
done, to leave your hearts loose for them, to carry it as proudly, or as
frowardly as before, to be as busy for the world, as eager in hunting after
it; what is this but to set your Prayers and your Practices together by the
ears, to destroy the things you have been building, to destroy by your
Practices, what you have been building by your Prayers? And whilst this has
been the voice of your Prayer, Lord, deliver me from a proud, or froward, or
covetous heart, your Practices say, I care not whether this Prayer be heard or
no; I had rather be let alone and left under the power of them. If ever you
would that your praying should come to any thing, let your Prayers and
Practices drive the same way. Let it not suffice you, to pray for a more
gracious and fruitful heart and life, to pray for a more mortified heart, a
more self-denying course, but set to it to put your Prayers into practice. Let
the stream of your care, the stream of your endeavors, run the same way with
the stream of your prayers and desires; and that is the stirring Prayer I would
have you give your selves to, such as may effectually overpower the stream and
course of your life, and carry it on according to the stream of your Prayers.

O Friends! If of all that I have said, these three last words might be
remembered and observed; if in every Prayer you henceforth make, you would
diligently strive to get you up into a spiritual and lively frame. If 2. you
would carefully maintain this blessed frame afterward, from duty to duty. If
you would 3. set to the practice of those things you pray that God would enable
you to, what do you think would be the success? O what a cure would be wrought!
O what a blessed change might we expect, to appear upon you and all your
Religion!

2. Fasting and Prayer. In the former particular I spoke of Prayer, as an
ordinary duty, here as an extraordinary, as annexed to that extraordinary duty
of Fasting and Humiliation. We may say of that evil spirit, that Spirit of
slumber and of a deep sleep that is fallen upon us, as Christ said of that
Devil, Mat. 17.21. This kind goes not out but by prayer and fasting.
Extraordinary Diseases must have extraordinary Remedies.

Hitherto I have spoken mostly to our personal Cases, now I shall speak with
more respect to the public Case of our People and Age, and shall direct you,

1. How you may most effectually stir up a spirit of Prayer, in your days of
Humiliation.

2. How you may most successfully perform this duty.

1. How you may most effectually stir up a spirit of Prayer in your days of
Humiliation. And so,

1. There Is something in the very abstinence, that conduces to the stirring up
the spirit of Prayer. Abstinence is pinching upon the flesh, and should be so
much, in such days, as may afflict the body first, and thereby the soul. The
abstinence of a Fast, should be afflicting abstinence, as far forth as the body
will bear it, without prejudice to its health, and so becoming an hindrance
rather than a furtherance of the duty.

There Is a twofold failing too common in our days of Humiliation.

1. In the time: Mostly what we call a Day of Humiliation, comes to no more but
a few Hours of Prayer. It Is said of a Fast, Lev. 17.31. It shall be a Sabbath
of Rest to you, that is, 1. It was to be a whole day, as a Sabbath is. 2. It
must be wholly spent in the proper exercises of it, a Sabbath of Rest it must
be in this extraordinary duty, there must be a laying aside our ordinary works,
and the whole time spent either in the public or private worship of the day.
How seldom is it that we hear of such a Fast! Some Hours, as I said, we
sometimes spend together in seeking the Lord; but when do we keep a Day to the
Lord? The morning of the day, is usually as other mornings; we are as busy at
our Callings, and may be, more busy to dispatch our work out of hand; and so
come hot out of our shops and fields, with our heads full, and hearts full of
our worldly affairs, and as soon as ever the Public Duty is over, then away to
our work again. Is it such a Fast the Lord has chosen? will ye call this a Day
of Humiliation?

Christians, it is well that you spend some Hours of Prayer, but call not That a
Day of Humiliation; when ever you set apart a Day for Fasting, let it be a
Sabbath of Rest to you: begin it in secret, and separating your selves from all
your unnecessary ordinary works, hold you to the duty of the day, (as your
strength will bear it) to the end of the day. Let the private part of it, both
before and after Public Exercises, be spent as your Lord's days are, in
suitable converses with God. Were this more observed, we might expect more of
Spirit and of Power in the duty, and more Fruits afterward.

2. There is also a failing in the Abstinence of the Day. How often have I
known it, that the Abstinence in a day of Humiliation, has been no more than
the sparing of one Meal, which has been made up by a larger Breakfast, and
perhaps a Feast, at least a full Meal at Supper? and sometimes, in the
intervals of the duties, Wine, Cake, Sweetmeats, Tobacco, and such like
refreshments, are allowed and used. No particular Rules for the degree of
Abstinence can be prescribed to all sorts of persons, but this should be
observed in the general; 1. That there be such Abstinence used both as to
quantity and quality) as may best subserve the Spiritual duties of the day,
especially that of afflicting the Soul; and therefore 2. That not only our full
Meals be forborne, but no Wine or strong Drink, etc. no not so much as a Pipe of
Tobacco be allowed, for the present pleasure or refreshment of it: This latter,
concerning the use of Tobacco, I the more particularly mention, because I
suppose it is not so much thought on; many of those that use it much, find
great pleasure in the use of it, and it may be can give no good account of
their present need of it, and yet will use it at such times. If it be really
needed, as in some cases it may, and by some persons, let it be used: But if
Daniel would eat no pleasant Bread, nor Flesh, nor Wine came into his mouth,
Dan. 10.3. If the Jews be reproved, Is. 58.3. that in the day of their Fast
they find their pleasure, then any thing taken as an exhilarating refreshment,
which is not necessary to the present duty, is a transgression.

Well, this will be something toward the stirring us up in Prayer,
self-afflicting Abstinence.

2. Especially, a deep consideration of the case we are in, will most
effectually do it: Qui nescit orare, discat navigare; Tempests will teach even
profane Mariners to pray; if any thing will do it, afflictions will fetch out
our very hearts in our Prayers, and is not iniquity an affliction? Sure if it
be, we are in an afflicted state; for consider a little again, how grievously
iniquity does abound! I shall not now lead you a voyage over the Seas, and
remember you how it is abroad; how the Devil drives almost all the world before
him, filling them with all unrighteousness, and what a small handful there are
that follow Christ, and how very little of serious Religion or Christianity,
and how much iniquity there is in those few.

Let us at present inquire, how it is with us at home; may we not take the words
of the Text into our mouths, and complain, We, even we are all as an unclean
thing, and our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; we fade as a leaf, and our
iniquities like the wind are taking us away. Who can say, Mine heart is clean,
I have kept me from mine iniquity? who of us will not say, My righteousness is
as a filthy rag? Or if any will not say thus concerning themselves, must not we
say it for them and of them? To put in but a word of the profane Rout, the open
enemies of Religion and Righteousness, whose wickedness has left the shade of
the twilight, and the covert of the night, and who are grown up to that
impudence, as to show their shame in the Sun-light; not to speak much neither
of their Prophets and Teachers, amongst whom (though through mercy there are
that deal faithfully, yet) some of them cannot, others will not tell them of
their transgressions, or heal their hurt; what Snuffs are there in some of the
Candlesticks? what dark Lanthorns are many of those, that should be burning and
shining lights? Seers without eyes, lame Leaders, sickly Healers of the hurt of
the daughter of our people; such some of them are, as if God had said
concerning us, as Micah 2.11. If any man walking in the spirit of falsehood, do
lie and do prophecy of wine and strong drink, he shall be even the Prophet of
this people. To let these pass also, let us consider how it is with the Sinners
in Zion, with those of us who profess to have separated themselves from the
follies and filthinesses of the Land, to the Law of their God; may not even
these also complain, Even we are as an unclean thing, our filthiness is still
in our skirts. What is our Religion? what is our Righteousness? what a tottered
maimed thing is it? Ah, how little Religion is there in our Religion? how
little of the Spirit, how little of the power, how glorious soever the form
appears? How much unrighteousness is there mingled with our righteousness? is
not our Gold mixed with Dross, and our Wine with Water? What a spirit of
vanity, what hypocrisy, pride, headiness, censoriousness, peevishness, is
there to be found, and all cried up for Religion? What wood, and hay, and
stubble is there built upon the foundation? Christians and yet carnal,
Christians and yet earthly, and sensual, having not the Spirit, how much soever
of the Name of Religion in them?

And amongst them that were once better, how many are there that must go on
with the complaint, and confess, we all do fade as a leaf, we wither, and wast,
and consume, and are even dried away? And it is not here and there a fading
leaf; does not the Tree fade? so that it is but here and there a leaf, that is
not withered away. Were it only a few backsliding persons, the matter were not
so sad; but is it not a backsliding Age, may we not be called a backsliding
People, for the multitude of Backsliders that are amongst us? scarce living
enough to serve for mourners over the dead.

As I said in the beginning, were it only the Wilderness and Commons of the
world, and the Tents of the uncircumcised that we had to complain of, it were
sad enough; but O the Field of the Lord, his Floor, his Fold, his Family, his
Vineyard! What tares are there in his Fields? what a deal of Chaff in his
Floor? what a general bane and rot is there among his Flock, few sound ones
left? What an Hospital is his House, of blind, and lame, and sick Souls? what
wild Vines do fill up his Vineyard? -- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis! --
Friends, should you see your own Houses fallen into ruinous heaps, your
fruitful Fields become a prey to the Locusts and the Caterpillars, your Flocks
dying away of the rot; if you should see among your poor children, that were
once strong, beautiful, healthful, hopeful, one bewitched into a Changeling,
another a Cripple, another a Lunatic, a Fool or Idiot, others possessed of a
Devil, O how would such a sight rend your bowels, and tear the very caul of
your heart? And is not this lamentable case, the case of the Household of God?

But is this all? may we not go on with the complaint? And yet there is none
(very few) that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold on
Thee. O what hard work have the poor Ministers of Christ to stir any of these
miserable Souls, to bring them to their senses, to bring them to their knees,
to awaken them to seek out after their recovery! They will not stir up
themselves, no they will not be stirred up by us, by all our cries and callings
upon them; though we call upon them, yet we cannot bring them to it, to call
upon God. Some of them will not be brought to know their disease, and those
that cannot but know it, yet will not consider it, nor concern themselves so
much about it, as to seek their cure, but there (poor wretches) they lie, dying
away in their sleep themselves, and every one infecting others with the same
Lethargy, and going on to rock one another, till even a whole Country become a
generation of Sleepers.

How often have I heard, some of these sleepy Souls, complaining of this dull
and declining age, and yet have not had the Heart to say, am not I one of the
sleepers! how many have I known, that have confessed their own declinings, and
yet away they go, and quickly forget their own confessions; and to day is with
them as yesterday, and to morrow is like to be as to day. O England, England,
thou which were once, as Jerusalem, great among the Nations, and Princess among
the Provinces, how art thou fallen? where is thy Glory? thou have the light
still with thee, but where is the love, and the life? where is thy beauty, (the
beauty of Holiness) where is thy zeal and thy strength? what are thy Sabbaths,
and thy solemn meetings and ordinances become to thee, but even as a
miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts? how few Children are brought forth within
thee, and how many of them that are ready to famish at thy feet?

What silly Doves, without an Heart; what wandering stars, hollow vessels, what
sounding brass and tinkling Cymbals, are most of those become, who boast
themselves to be thy Glory? thou have a few names, who have not defiled their
garments, nor stained their Glory, nor reproached the Name of their God, but
Lord how few!

How sadly is that Scripture fullfiled in thee. 2 Timothy 3.1. etc. have not those
perilous times overtaken thee, wherein Men are, lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce-brakers, false accusers, or
make-bates, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
Heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof. O how art thou fallen?

Yea, and whither art thou falling? thy righteousness is become as filthy rags,
the yoke of thy transgressions is bound upon thee, they are wreathed and come
upon thy Neck; thou art faded like a leaf; and do thou not see, that thine
iniquities like the wind are taking thee away? thou may say this day, where
is my beauty? where is my Glory? and how suddenly may thou be forced to take
up this for thy lamentation,

O now, where is my God! for these things I weep, mine Eye mine Eye, runs down
with water, because the comfort that should relieve me is gone far from me. How
has the Lord covered me with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven
to Earth, the beauty of England, and remembered not his footstool in the day of
his anger? the Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has
not pityed; he has brought us down to the ground; he has polluted the
Kingdom, and the Princes thereof; he has cut off in his fierce anger, the Horn
of England, and he burns against it, like a flaming fire, which devoureth
round about. He has violently taken away his tabernacle, he has destroyed his
places of the Assembly; he has caused the solemn Feasts and Sabaths to be
forgotten, he has cast off his Altar, he has abhorred his Sanctuary, he has
given me up into the hands of the Enemy, and made me a desolation.

Friends, open your Eyes and see, if the Symptoms of such desolation, be not
visible amongst us; go into the City, go into the Villages; go into the
Sanctuary; go into our Habitations, and see if Death be not come up into our
windows, and desolation ready to enter; how is it, that you that have the
Hearts of Christians, your mouths should not be sounding with such
Lamentations, My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very Heart, my Heart
makes a noise within me, mine Eyes do fail with tears, my Liver is poured out;
O that my Head were waters, and mine Eyes were a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and Night, for the fallen daughter of my People.

O do not now any longer go about to palliate or mince the matter; O let not
the blind Eye, or the hard Heart, whilst it goes about to excuse, aggravate our
Sin and our shame. Our diseases are too great to be palliated, and too many to
be hid. He is a stranger in our Israel, that sees not how deadly sick we are.

Friends consider it, and make not light of it; ponder the state we are in, and
give not over, till your Hearts break and bleed within you, and so go and pray
before the Lord. Methinks it should stir you; O when ye go to pray, carry a
deep sense upon your Hearts, and hear the cry in your Ears, of the Sin and the
misery of those you are praying for. Hear the cry of the poor blind and hardened
Sinners amongst us; these stones cry out, their (misery does) let fall a tear
over us, lift up a Prayer for us; Hear the cry of your Enemies, who curse you,
and persecute you for Religion sake; their case calls upon you, bless us that
curse you, pray for us that despitefully use you, and persecute you; hear the
cry of your brethren in the Lord, especially your Sin-sick brethren, your
Soul-sick brethren, your decayed and backsliding brethren; do not their cases
cry loud in your Ears, Help, help us, by your Prayers? hear your poor Children
and Families crying, what shall (we) do? What will become of us, if there
should be a going on in this sinning and sinking, 'till the Gospel be taken
from us? For our sakes try what ye can do, besiege the Throne of Grace, take
hold of the God of Grace, that he leave us not, to die for want of Instruction.
Hear Magistrates and Ministers crying, We need your help as much as any; cry
mightily unto the Lord for us. Hear a whole Kingdom, yea hear the whole World,
crying, Pray to the Lord for us.

O Brethren, how much matter of Prayer have we, how many moving and
heartbreaking cases have we before us? Set them before your eyes, lay them
deeply to heart, and this will quicken you in Prayer. All these cases, and
multitudes more send in their Bills, and passionately cry in your ears; now try
what you can do to help in a time of need; to help a poor languishing Nation,
to help poor Magistrates and Ministers, to help poor sinning and dying Souls;
you that make mention of the Lord, now keep not silence; bow your knees, call
up all your sighs and groans, pour out your tears, pour out your souls, set
heart to heart, and prayer to prayer, unite your strength, and cry in the ears
of the Almighty, O Lord behold, for we are very vile, we are very low; arise
and save us, save, Lord, or we perish.

2. How you may most successfully perform this Duty. In answer to this, take
these few following Directions.

1. Make God your Friend, and see that there be no standing controversy
betwixt Him and your Souls. See that you be sincere Converts to God, and have a
good conscience toward God; see that ye be reconciled to God by the blood of
Jesus, and be not aliens and enemies, and that matters be kept fair and clear
betwixt God and your Souls. Is it peace betwixt the Lord and you, or is there
not a particular controversy that he has with you? Consider, if the Lord has
not somewhat against you, and such as has provoked him to anger against you;
Get the controversy to be taken up, make your own peace first, and then you
will be fit to be Intercessors for others. If I had a Petition to present to
the King, I would not put it into the hands of a Rebel, no nor into his who
were under his Princes frown; I would put it into the hands of a Favorite, and
so should have the more hope to speed: If you would do your friends a kindness
in Heaven, see that you hold your own friendship there; If I regard iniquity in
mine heart, God will not hear my Prayer, Ps. 66.18. Pray for whom you will, for
your self, or your friends, it is like to come to all one, as if you held your
peace; God will not hear you, whilst you regard iniquity in your hearts. Have
thou Sin in thee; and Sin that thou allowest in thy self? what ever it be,
great or little, open or secret, purge it away, and cast it from thee, or God
will not hear thee, Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the upright is his delight. Give
me the holy Souls, the humble, the tender, the watchful, the Jacobs, the
Daniels, the Noah's, the plain-hearted, them that walk with God, and are highly
favored of the Most High, to appear before the Lord for me.

Those that are in their Sins, and utterly Strangers from God, and those that
have declined in Godliness, and are become Wanderers from the Lord, what hope
is there of any service that their Prayers will do? God hears not Sinners;
but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears. John
9.31.

Beloved, a poor languishing Nation calls upon you, for the help of your
Prayers; but alas, what help is there in them? To have a company of poor
hard-hearted, impenitent, and dead Sinners, or of sick and loose and carnal
Professors, to have such a company gathered together to pray; there is as much
hope in it, as if the Blind, and the Lame, and the Bed-ridden of a Nation,
should be gathered together into an Army to fight; as great success is like to
be obtained by such a sinful congregation assembled to pray, as would be by
such an impotent Army, gathered together to fight: One sincere upright hearted
Saint, will do more than a whole congregation of praying Sinners. Acts 27. we
read of a Ship in a Storm, and a desperate hazard of being cast away; all
visible hope of its being saved was cut off: the Mariners could do little more
in the Ship, and such a company of profane Wretches could do nothing in Heaven:
But behold, one Paul, he prays, and he prevails; the Lord gave him his life,
and the lives of all them that sailed with him; the Mariners and the Soldiers
might have prayed while they would, but the Ship had been never the more
secured from sinking, if Paul had not been with them.

Indeed it is the duty of Sinners to be present in days and in the exercises of
Humiliation, and there may be this advantage of it, They may by this means be
converted, and so 1. There Is one more added to the number of God's
Remembrancers, there is one more Soldier added to the Praying Army: If there
were hundreds or thousands of Converts more brought in, so many would there be
added to join in their strength to wrestle with God. 2. By every new Convert,
God's Interest is increased in such a people; by how many more Converts there
are, by so much the more has God to lose, if such a people should miscarry.
Well, this is the first Direction, if you would that your praying should be to
any purpose, Make God your Friend.

2. Make often use of your Friend in your personal cases, live a Praying life;
those that are much in Prayer, are most like to be mighty in Prayer. He that
deals much with the Lord in prayer, will have many experiences of God's
gracious dealings with him in answer to his Prayers. You will hereby prove,
that Prayer is not such an helpless and insignificant Duty, as those that
disuse themselves to it are apt to distrust it to be; you will never give off
your cases for hopeless, whilst there is this way open, to go to God.

He that uses to go before the Lord, will be the more able to go with boldness
and confidence before him. He that has been often heard for himself, in his
personal or Family-necessities, will speak with the more confidence for his
friends or people. I have seen how Prayer will help a poor distressed person, a
poor distressed family, and why may it not prevail for a diseased and
distressed Nation? Since I have found, that the Lord has heard me, when I have
been seeking him for my self, and for mine house, O what hope does this give,
that he will also hear me, now that I am seeking him for his own House.

Beloved, when any of you that fear God, are under any pressing straits, and
desire the help of Prayer, to whom do you use to seek? you do not call together
the lazy, and the idle, and the careless ones, that use not to call upon God;
you do not send to such, to come and pray for you; but you will pick out and
call together the praying people, those that are most conversant in this duty;
what is the reason of this? why, your consciences tell you, that if there be any
whose Prayers are like to help you, these are they, the men of Prayer. Be you
such in both these respects, be ye thus prepared, Be the friends of God, and be
often with God, and then I will add no more, but as the Prophet, Joel 2.15, 16,
17. Then come and sanctify your Fasts, call your solemn Assemblies; gather the
people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the Elders, let the Bridegroom go
forth out of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; let the Tradesmen
come out of their Shops, and the Husbandman out of the fields; let the
Ministers and people of the Lord weep before his Altar, and let them say, and
cry, and cry aloud, Spare thy people, O Lord, heal thy languishing heritage, be
not angry with them till thou have consumed them; let not the ungodly say to
them in thy reproach, Where is your God, your Christ, and your Religion? And
who knows but the Lord may hear, and what ever evils be upon us, and to
whatever distance he is withdrawn from us, he may yet return and repent, and
leave a blessing behind him, and may be jealous for his Land, and pity his
people and heal them.

For a conclusion, let me add a word or two, both to those that have heard, and
to them also that read these words. I am unwilling (if I could help it) to make
an end before I have done, before the work be done, for which all this has
been spoken and written. Have I been all this while beating the Air, or
speaking to the Wind, or writing in Sand? Must I at last sit down with the
shame and the grief of the disappointed? Mine heart and mine eye is upon
success; I have been plowing in hope, and harrowing and sowing in hope; O thou,
who art the hope of Israel, make thy servant partaker of his hope.

Success is of God; Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that
gives the increase: We are they whom the Lord has set to watch and give
warning, to convince and reprove, to instruct and exhort, but who is it, that
must give the fruit? As hard as our work is, as small success as we yet see,
yet therefore we faint not, because we trust in the living God, who is the
Savior.

Where is the Lord? he, who has said, My word shall not return unto me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. Wherefore has the Lord spoken? Is it that we may go and
fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken? Is it for the hardening of
those that have sinned, that they may not repent? Is it for the sealing up of
the eyes of those that see not, that they may be the more blind? Is it for the
searing of brawned spirits, that they may be more hard? Is his Light only to
dazzle and put out our eyes, and his strokes only to hammer into more
senselesness, and to drive away his wanderers farther from him? God forbid, God
forbid, we hope better things; we long, we wait for better issues; and if the
Lord has any pleasure in us, if utter ruin be not determined upon us, he will
give good success, he will recover and revive us, he will humble and heal us.
Success is of God, O, our God, we have no might, nor know we what to do, only
our eyes are upon thee.

But though it be the Lord that gives success, it is we and you all that must
seek it, and be working toward it. It Is not the best Physician that can cure
you, unless you take his Medicines, and follow his Prescriptions; he that
reaches down his hand to help you up out of the Pit into which you are fallen,
will not lift you out, unless you will do what you can to help your selves.

In order to your seeking and obtaining good success, let me ask,

1. Thou whose eyes are now upon these words, Art thou one of them whose
doleful cases have been here opened and lamented? Art thou a Sleeper, a
loytering or backsliding Soul? Whilst thou have been looking on this Glass,
have thou not seen thine own face in the company? Has not this Word found thee
out, and said unto thee, even unto thee, as Nathan to David, Thou art the man?
Or have thou so much as asked the question of thy self, Am I not one of them?
If thou have not, read over again; go back before thou read forward, consider
again and again, before thou conclude, I am none of them; whoever they be, mine
heart (I hope) is right with God, I am free. Put me not off with an (I hope I
am none of them) but inquire more narrowly, till thou have put it out of doubt
what thou art.

2. If thou see thou art one of these wretched souls, art thou content to
continue thus? Is it safe, is it comfortable to thee thus to live? Will thou
die a Backslider, or but a Babe? Will thou venture it to continue as thou art?
Art thou at a point with Christ, that thou will no more of him than thou have;
nor shall he have more of thee than at this day? Shall thy flesh and this world
still go such great sharers with him? Wilt not thou come back, to be only his,
to be wholly his? Will thou say as those Jer. 2.25. There is no hope; no hope
of prevailing with me? Will thou say, I have loved strangers, and after them I
will go? I love this world, I love my carnal friends, I love my ease, and my
idleness, and my liberty, and I cannot part with them; the life I live is better
than that severe life you call me to. Art thou indeed of this mind, and do
mean to hold thee of the same mind, till thou come to the Grave? Do thy
tenderhearted friends weep over thee, to see what a Child or a Changeling thou
art, and do thou bless thy self in thine own heart, and say thou art well
enough? Art thou come from the Fountain to the Cistern, and will thou never go
back from the Cistern to the Fountain? Will thou dwell in thy Fools Paradise,
and venture thy shutting out of the Paradise of God? Carest thou not that thou
perish, fear thou not that thy Sickness and thy Sleep may be unto death?
Man, what meanest thou? Man, what an Heart have thou, that either thou will not
know thou art in an evil case, or do not regard whether ever it be better
with thee? Have thou never a Tear to let fall over thy miserable Soul? never a
Sigh to breath out after Redemption from thy misery? If thou say, it is not
so bad with thee, take heed; How can thou say, I am not polluted? How can
thou say, I am not degenerated? See thy way in the valley, and know what thou
have done. Jer. 2.23. Trace thy self in all thy goings, and dealings with God
in the world. Ask thy Closet, which is so seldom visited; ask thy Bible, which
is so seldom looked into; ask thy companions, and thy unsavory converse with
them; ask thy Family, and thy unprofitable converse with them; ask thy Fields
and thy Farms, thy Shop and thy Money, with whom thy heart has so long dwelt;
yea and ask thy Conscience a little more strictly than thou usest to do, and
see if all will not tell thee, the Charge of the Lord against thee is too true.
It cannot be denied, but that thou art come to a very pitiful pass; what, and
yet no mind to amendment? When shall it once be? what never, what never? Must
we leave you thus? must we continue preaching to you, and crying after you so
long in vain, till the Lord say to us, Let them alone, speak no more to them,
pray no more for them, let them perish in the hardness of their Hearts; Ah
Friends, shall this be all the good we can do, to mourn over you, that we can
do you no good? or shall there be yet hope among you, concerning this thing,
that yet at length ye will repent and return?

The truth is, our spiritual Diseases do so lurk, that they are not easily
discerned; and having more of pleasure in them, then of pain, the patient is
impatient of his cure. Those that are sick of a sleepy Evil, are loath to be
stirred; yet a little more sleep, says the Sluggard, yet a little more of this
easy Idle life. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? by the
question, it seems they would not, and that which follows, When shall it once
be? the sense of it, is not barely, when [shall] it be done? but when will thou
be willing to have it done? when will thou be willing to be made clean? Lord if
thou will, (says the Leper) thou can make me clean. Sinner, says the Lord,
if [thou] wilt once, I will, Be thou clean; but though God would, yet Sinners
will not.

What Demas is there of you, that has forsaken the Lord, and embraced this
present World; what Diotrephes, that from walking Humbly with God, has his
Heart lifted up, and loves the pre-eminence, that do heartily wish, O that my
Soul and this World were once again parted? O that the Lord would humble me,
and lay me low, and bring my aspiring Heart, to the very dust! I would rather
be with poor Lazarus at the Door, with poor Job on the dunghill, any thing,
nothing, any where, no where, rather then be this rich Worldling, or thus proud
in a Palace; Oh how few of all that are fallen, are willing to rise? how few of
all that are wandered, are willing to return? O how light do they make, of all
our calling upon them, and after all we can say to awaken them, do sleep on;
after all that we can do to reduce them, do hold on their way? do thou not
see! do thou not feel, that for thy part, it is just thus with thee? thou that
art proud, or covetous, or slothful, and whilst thou can thus increase in
the World, how ever thou decreasest in thy Soul, art thou not at ease, art thou
not content in this wretched case? Really Sirs, I much fear, that all that has
been said, and if I had the Tongue of men and of Angels, and should speak all
that could be spoken by a creature, 'twould very hardly change your mind and
your ways. I have seen so great disappointments hitherto, that I fear how it
may be still, and under these fears, my Soul travail thou in pain, and groan
being thus burdened.

Lord, have I not called upon them? Lord have I not called after them? has not
my very Soul been poured out to them and for them? and after all, have they
heard? have they repented? are they recovered? and what they will do, O Lord,
thou know; but thy Servant is in great doubt, what they will do; Ah Lord, Ah
Lord, art not thou he, that can and must do the cure? when Lord? when shall
it once be? O when shall it be said again, He has made the blind to see, the
Deaf to hear, the sick to rise and walk, and the dead to live.

Soul, art thou still content, he should never do so by thee? would thou,
that the Lord should leave thee this blind Soul? this secure and senseless and
sleepy Creature? would thou be let lie as thou art, or be let run on as thou
art going, till thou have run thy self out of all? would thou live and die in
this case: Is there no hope, That yet at length thou may be persuaded, and
prevailed upon? will thou yet say, no, there is no hope? I have loved strangers
and after strangers I will go? I have loved mine ease, I have loved my money, I
have loved my pleasures, and I cannot leave them? What not for God? what not
for a Soul? not for the smiles and sweet embraces of thy God, nor for the peace
and prosperity of thy Soul? If thou say, God I hope may be mine however, my
Soul may be safe however; as bad as you think it is with me, yet I hope it is not
so bad, but that the Lord is still my God, and has such hold of mine Heart,
that it shall never utterly forsake him; Suppose it were so (which thou can
not be sure of) but suppose it be so, that the Lord is still thy God, and thy
Soul were not in such danger of an everlasting miscarriage, yet is this
dishonor thou do to his Name, this distance thou live from his face, this
dimness that has overgrown his image, those defilements, wherewith thy Soul
has been polluted in the House of thine Idols, that loss that thou art at, in
point of truth, tenderness, spirituality, vivacity, which either once thou
had, or at least might have obtained, and that earthlyness, carnality,
deadness that is upon thine Heart, is all this recompensed, and made up to
thee? has thine ease or pleasures, or Worldly gain and greatness, so well paid
thee for all this, that it has either lost thee or pulled upon thee, that thou
art still of the same mind? Will thou yet say, I am content to be as I am? Ah,
foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? Ah Friends, are you so foolish, that
having begun in the Spirit, you will now think to mend your condition, by
returning to the flesh? what might I speak to you, to set you into your right
minds? would you be but convinced, that you are out of your minds, mad, and
distracted Souls, there were the more hope you would come to your wits, and so
with the prodigal, return to your Father, from whom you have been wandering.

Carnal Professors, let not these words depart from your Hearts, till they have
done their work; till they have showed you your folly, and learned you the
Wisdom which is from above; till your own mouths be forced to acknowledge, I
have played the Fool, I have wandered from my God, and turned to mine one way,
and this my way is my folly; and now through the help of the Lord I will
return. Will thou so? will thou return and recover? I will then add but this
one word more, When thou art recovered, do thy best toward the recovery of thy
brethren, pity thy fallen Friends, and help them to arise; jogg thy sleepy
neighbors, and call upon them to awaken; who knows, what a small beginning
may rise to in the end? a few returned Persons may fetch in more, and these
more; a few Souls raised from the dead, may be the first Fruits of a more
glorious resurrection; the light and the life which is sprung up in thine
Heart, if it be well improved, may enlighten and enliven many ( your zeal has
provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9.2.) O be solicitous, first for thine own recovery,
and then be zealous for the recovery of more; so shall there be, after all our
darkness, an hopeful dawning toward a comfortable day; so may we hope, that
our shining lights, which now stand so thin, as a Beacon on an Hill, as a
Cottage in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers, may grow so
numerous, that we may become a Land of Light, and our Jerusalem may be made a
praise in the Earth.

FINIS.
Books printed for and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the Sign of the three
Bibles in Popes Head Alley in Cornhil.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New Fish-street.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores; being a Companion for those that are in Christ or out of
Christ 2. Heaven on Earth: Or a serious Discourse touching a Well-grounded
assurance of Man's Everlasting Happiness. 3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ
held forth in 22 Sermons. 4. Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women, Or the
Happiness of being good betimes. 5. A String of Pearls: Or the best Things
reserved till last. 6. The Mute Christian under the Smarting Rod, with
Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable Exigents. 7. An Ark for all Gods
Noah's in a Stormy Day. 8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity, in 48 Sermons on
Heb. 12.14. 9. The privy Key of Heaven: Or a Discourse of Closet Prayer. 10. An
Heavenly Cordial for such as have had or escaped the Plague. 11. A Cabinet of
choice Jewels, or a Box of precious Ointment: Containing special Maxims, Rules,
and Directions in order to the clearing up of a Man's Interest in Corist, and
his Title to all the Glory of another World. 12. Londons Lamentations.
The Godly Man's Ark, in several Sermons. To which is added Mrs. Moors Evidences
for Heaven. By Edmund Calamy, B. D. at Aldermanbury.

Christ's Communion with his Church Militant. By Nicholas Lockyer.

Sin the Plague of Plagues. By Ralph Venning.

A true Narrative of those two never to be forgotten Deliverances, one from the
Spanish Invasion in 88, the other from the Hellish Powder Plot, Nov. 5. 1605.
By Mr. Sam. Clark.

The Accurate Accountant, or London Merchant: Being Instructions for keeping
Merchants Accounts. By Tho. Brown, Accomptant.

Short Writing; the most Easy, Exact, Lineal, and speedy Method that has ever
yet been obtained, as thousands in this City and elsewhere can from their own
experience testify. By Theophilus Metcalfe.

Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining all the Rules thereof.

A Word of Advice to Saints, or a choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ.

A Copy Book of the Newest and most Useful Hands, with Directions for Spelling
and Cyphering.

Bridges Remains: Being eight choice Sermons. By the late Reverend Mr. William
Bridge of Yarmouth.

A Disswasive from Conformity to the World. Also Gods Severity against
Impenitent Sinners. By Henry Stubbes, Minister of the Gospel.

Vennings Remains, being the substance of many Sermons. By Mr. Ralph Venning;
prepared by himself for the Press a little before his Death.

The Poor Man's Family book. By Richard Baxter.

Luthers 34 special and choice Sermons.

Comae Berenicis, or the Hairy Comet; being a Prognostic of Malignant
Influences from the many Blazing Stars wandering in our Horizon.

Gospel Love, Heart Purity, and the Flourishing of the Righteous: Being the
last Sermons of that late Eminent Divine Mr. Joseph Caryl.

The Young Man's Guide to Blessedness, or Seasonable Directions for Youth in
their unconverted Estate. By R. Matthew, Minister of the Gospel.

Causa Dei, or an Apology for God; wherein the Perpetuity of Infernal Torments
is evinced, and his both Goodness and Justice defended. Also the nature of
Punishments in General, and of Infernal ones in particular, displayed by R.
Burthogge.

The Legacy of a Dying Mother to her Mourning Children; Being the Experiences
of Mrs. Susanna Bell: Published by Tho. Brooks.

King James his Counterblast to Tobacco. To which is added a Learned Discourse
touching Tobacco by Dr. Maynwaring; wherein men may see whether Tobacco be good
for them or no.

Strength in Weakness; Being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Martha
Brooks, late Wife to Mr. Thomas Brooks, Minister of the Gospel. To which is
added some Experiences of the Grace and Dealings of God, observed and gathered
by a near Relation of the said Mrs. Brooks.

An Excellent Catechism, by the late Reverend Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs.

A Discourse of Christ's Coming, and the Influence which the Expectation thereof
has on all manner of Holy Conversation and Godlin ss: By Theophilus Gale.

The Shepherds Legacy, or forty years experience of the Weather.

The Young Man's Conflict with, and Victory over the Devil by Faith: Or a true
and perfect Relation of the Experiences of Tho. Powel, begun in the fifteeenth,
and continued till the seventeenth year of his Age.

Theological Treatises.

1. Production of Man's Soul. 2. Divine Predestination. 3. The True Church
Regiment. 4. Predictions of Messiah. 5. Christ's two Genealogies. 6. The
Revelation Revealed. 7. Christ's Millenary Reign. 8. The Worlds Dissolution. By
Robert Velvain.
Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment: By Samuel Malbon.

A brief Descreption of New York, and the Places thereto adjoining; with
Directions and Advice to such as shall go thither: By Dan. Denton.

A Cry for Laborers in Gods Harvest: Being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Mr. Ralph Venning: By R. Brag, Minister of the Gospel.

Christian Directions, showing how to walk with God all the day long: By Tho.
Gouge.

The Young M^ns Guide through the Wilderness of this World to the Heavenly
Canaan: By Tho. Gouge.

Conscience the best Friend upon Earth, or the Happy Effects of keeping a Good
Conscience: By Henry Stubbes.

Patience and its Perfect Work under sudden and sore Trials.

Orthodox Paradoxes Theoretical and Experimental, or a Believer clearing Truth
by seeming Contradictions: With an Appendix of the Triumph of Assurance over
the Law, Sin, World, Wants, etc. To which is added, The New Command Renewed, or
Love one another: With Ten Rules for the right understanding of Scripture: By
R. Venning, A. M.

An Awakening Call from the Eternal God to the Unconverted, with seasonable
Advice to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
Conversion: By Samuel Corbyn, A. M.

The Triumph of Mercy in the Chariot of Praise: A Treatise of preventing secret
and unexpected Mercies, with some mixed Reflections: By S. Lee.

FINIS.

