Unity Stated. The only Means to it ASSIGNED and ARGUED. TOGETHER With the
Motives pressing it. IN A SERMON BEFORE THE Worshipful Company of Salters,
Land. In St. Swithin's Church, Sept. 1683.

By WILLIAM BASSET, Rector of St. Swithin, Land.

Earnestly recommended to the perusal of all DISSENTERS.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen Corner. 1683.

PSALM 133. 1. Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is: Brethren, to dwell
together in Unity.
THIS Text is a Thesis from whence the other parts of the Psalm are discoursed,
but is not itself deduced from any preceding matter. Therefore without any
farther introduction, I shall observe in it,

First, The subject matter of it, Unity; and

Secondly, The duty we owe it, viz. to dwell together in it.

-- dwell together in Unity.

Which is pressed upon us by no less than five Arguments; whereof the

First, Is drawn from that common Relation we all have one to another, in that
word, Brethren; the

Second, From the advantages of doing so, it is good; the

Third, From the comforts and satisfaction that arise from such a Life; it is
joyful.

Fourthly, The whole is brought in with a Behold, which points it out as a
thing worthy our notice and observation; Behold it is good --

Fifthly, The manner of its proposal farther speaks its excellency; in that
particle How.

Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is: Brethren, to dwell together in
Unity.

1. The subject is Unity, which falls under a threefold Consideration, viz. of
Judgments, Affections, and Peace.

1. There is an Unity of Judgment, which the great Apostle both describes, and
pathetically presses on us, 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same things; that there be no
Divisions amongst you, but that ye be all perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and the same judgment. To which end, as the Sacred Scriptures have given
us a Form of Prayer, and a Summary of the Commands; so it was the early care of
the Church to make a Collection of the main Articles of Belief, that we may all
come in the Unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect
man. That there might be no Jars and Discords, but a sweet consent of Notions,
Worship, etc. in the Christian Church. That our Assemblies might be like those
of the first Christians, who met together (...), with one mind, as well as in
one place.

Though indeed difference of Constitution, Education, and Converse; difference
of parts, both natural, and acquired; the ambiguity of some Phrases, and Texts
of Scripture; and the many impostors Men meet withal; will no more suffer their
minds to be all proportionate to the same rule, than their Bodies were to
Procrustes his Bed. For we find difference between even S. Peter, and S. Paul;
and between particular Churches themselves. Difference about Mosaic Rites
occasioned that famous Council, Acts 15. Difference about the time, and manner
of the Fast of Lent, when the thing was received by all the Churches, as an
Apostolical Tradition, had almost rent the Church in pieces. Nor did they
dispute only some indifferent things, and the Sense of Scripture, but even the
Canon it self; for the Epistles of S. James, the 2. of Peter; the two last of
John, and the Revelations, were not received by all of a long time. No Canons,
Councils, Edicts, or any means imaginable, could ever yet make all Men of the
same mind.

I know the impossibility of the thing is made an Argument against all
endeavors that way. But for the same reason, we should no more press Men to
live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, because we find an
equal impossibility of obliging all Men to these indispensable Duties. The
difficulty of the thing rather speaks it a Duty, while the easiness of the
contrary is from its sutableness to the Looseness, and Debaucheries of Humane
Nature. Nothing is so hard to do, as what we ought to do; and the best things
are usually the most difficult. Therefore we should press toward this mark; and
if we fall short through weakness, or want of better means, allowances will be
made; for God requires no more than according to what a Man has: And he
usually secures such that are not wilfully wanting to themselves, from any
mistakes, dangerous to themselves, the Church, or Society they live in. But if
any out of idleness, humor, or an unreasonable conceit of their own light and
reason, fall into false and mischievous Opinions, he leaves 'em to their own
Inventions, to make and believe a Lie; without any excuse or mitigation, either
of Sin or Punishment. The case is like that of Perfection, which is set as a
mark for us all to aim at; if we honestly endeavor, and cannot attain, the
Will is accepted for the Deed: But if we proudly, or idly neglect the means
appointed, what we fall short of will be imputed as a wilful Sin.

Therefore the Scripture is so pressing in this particular, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
There is one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and
one God, and Father of all: For which reasons, v. 3. We should keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: Having but one Mind, one Religion, and one
Church amongst us all. Diversity of ways is unsuitable to all these Unities.
When in 1 Cor. 1. 12. Men pleaded I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, etc. he
immediately argues v. 13. Is Christ divided? Is there difference and opposition
in him; that there is such difference and opposition among his Disciples? Is
the Doctrine he taught dissonant from it self; are there any Discords in those
Sacred Truths, that there is so much diversity and variance amongst them that
profess it? Is the head divided, that there is so much division in the Church,
which is his Body? Certainly difference of Opinion, falsely called Religion, and
opposition of Professors, are a reproach to a God of Unity and Order; and a
Scandal to that Gospel, which teaches but one Faith, but one Baptism, and but
one God.

Now because Men must be supposed of themselves liable to delusions, and
mistakes; therefore the Scripture has given us a rule, which (if we follow)
will secure us from all material Errors, that may be reasonably judged a breach
of this Unity; and that is to follow the Conduct and Customs of the Church. For
when the Spouse inquires of our Savior, where she should find him; he answers,
Cant. 1. 8. Follow the footsteps of the Flock; and feed thy Kids by the
Shepherds Tents. And when there was a difference between the Jewish, and
Gentile Converts, about Mosaic Rites and Ceremonies, which matters the people
could no way determine, nor be satisfied by their Teachers, even they
themselves differing in the same points; a Council is assembled at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. who decree, that as to the things in Controversy, they abstain from
things strangled, and from blood, Ver. 20. which implies both the power of the
Church to determine, and the duty of the People to receive, and abide by such
determinations. Our Savior promised the Apostles, Matthew. ult. That he would be
with them to the end of the World; that is, with them, viz. in their own
Persons and Successors; because they were no otherwise to continue to the end
of the World; and because God is not Essentially only, but even Graciously
present with all good men; therefore this promise made to the Apostles at the
very time of their receiving their Commission of Baptizing, and Discipling all
Nations, must imply something beyond the common grants made to the World; and
that is with them in a sufficient way and manner for the Founding, Guiding, and
Governing his Church: And when the Canon of Scripture was completed, the many
differences from age to age, which yet have pleaded Scripture for their
warrant, do abundantly prove, that the Scripture of itself is no more able to
hinder and determine differences, than the Law to prevent and decide
Controversies without a Judge; therefore there being a promise of sufficient
Aids, and the same necessity of Councils and Synods in after ages, as there was
then, the Church has ever looked upon herself sufficiently empowered to follow
this pattern in the Acts. Sometimes after this, when St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. had
been pressing matters of Decency in places and times of Divine Worship, as for
men to be Uncovered, etc. he adds, Ver. 16. If any man seem Contentious, i. e.
not willing to abide by what has been said, but is disposed to Cavil, let him
know, we have no such Custom, neither the Churches of God: Whence it was the
Apostolical practice, and a rule left to all Posterity, to correct the Errors
and Cavils of particular persons, by the custom and practice of the Church.
Which was so well observed of old, that as Eusebius relates, and Origin
somewhat to that purpose; it was then pleaded, (...), these things are
dissonant from the Church; a sufficient reason to reject 'em. Nor was there
less than an Anathema added to her determinations; a Curse upon all them that
should refuse 'em. We find the Church of Thyatira was commended, Revel. 2. 19.
for her works, and charity, and service, and faith, and patience -- but yet,
Ver. 20. I have a few things against thee; and why? because thou suffer that
Woman Jezebel, which calls herself a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my
Servants -- Whence that Church had a Power (and it was her Sin she did not use
it) of obliging her Members to such a rule that might have been effectual for
the excluding these, and by parity of reason, all like Errors. There was then
no plea of Liberty of Conscience, and judging every one for himself, allowed
of; things that were invented for the promoting Schismatical Parties, and the
serving every one his own humor and interest. And indeed it is so necessary to
the ends of Religion, and the very being of a Church, to have this our rule,
that it is therefore become the common practice of the World. And those who now
join in their common cries for Liberty, when time was, would by no means allow
it one to another.

It is true indeed, if the Church determine and impose upon men, as terms of
Communion with her, things that are apparently repugnant to any proper and
express Text of Scripture; then, and then only, that question comes honestly
in, Whom shall we obey, God or Man? Which is the only Argument Protestants have
to justify their departure from the Church of Rome, as in those instances of
adoring the Creature, where the Church commands, and the Scripture forbids. But
if there be no such apparent repugnancy, as there cannot be in things of an
Indifferent Nature, which are the ground of our Controversies, because these
are no where forbid in Scripture; though a man cannot perhaps give a reason of
all the Churches determinations, or expose every Sophistical plea against them,
yet there being no such apparent repugnancy, I ought to submit and follow her
Judgment and Authority; in doing which I follow even God himself, who has made
her my Rule and my Guide. Therefore if a Question be moved about the Doctrine
of the Church, contained in the 39 Articles; or about her Rites and Ceremonies,
contained in the Canon and Rubric; it is a grand mistake in any to think, that
if they meet a man, who cannot prove and justify all those things, that they
may be rejected; for the Church may in all reason be supposed to see more than
Individuals may. I receive 'em from her, and it is enough to justify my doing
so, that I have no plain Scripture against them: It lies upon the adversary, as
a Member of this Church, to justify his dislike, or else to receive 'em too.

For whatever the Church defines and imposes, must be either true, false, or
doubtful: If true, we must obey, because the command falls upon a Lawful
matter; else we make the Command to alter the Nature of the thing, and the Sin
to lie in Obedience, which would quickly disturb all Societies, and overthrow
every Government in the World. If false, then prove it. Which must be either,

1. by some plain demonstration that may even force assent; or,

2. By some plain and proper Texts of Scripture, which either expressly or by
undeniable consequence, forbids or commands the contrary. For even Murder it
self had not been unlawful, unless forbid by the Divine Law, either natural or
revealed. Ergo, if there be no such Law against the Definitions and Impositions
of the Church; there is nothing that can speak them false and unlawful. But if
any think there is some such Law, let them produce their instances; which we
are certain none can do, because all their attempts that way have been hitherto
baffled; whence some have denied reason in matters of Religion, because they
have none for their own placits: And others fled from Scripture, as not serving
their wild Hypotheses, to downright Enthusiasm, and a Light within. Or,

3. By showing us such a perfect rule, as to Government, Worship, and all
particular things requisite for the gathering, governing, and maintaining a
Sacred Society, laid down in Scripture, that there can be no room left for any
Humane Constitutions. But because all parties differ so notoriously about these
things* we presume there is no such perfect rule at all: And therefore room
left for any such Humane appointments that are not contrary to the reasons of
Mankind; or to any part of Divine Revelation. But

3. If doubtful, either in their own natures or circumstances; we ought in
Prudence, as well as Duty to believe the Church, rather than our private
Sentiments; else we make our selves more wise and judicious than the Church it
self, which is the very height of Pride; and likewise a charging infinite
wisdom and goodness, in appointing us so weak and treacherous a guide.

Nor do we in this give any farther power to the Church, than what the very
being of Councils and Synods does suppose to belong to her. For their being
does imply their power of determining in doubtful and controversial matters,
and therefore of giving rules in such cases; which rules and determinations the
people consequently stand obliged to observe: For power of giving Laws in the
Superior does always infer a Duty of receiving 'em in the inferior, and you
will find that not only ancient Councils, but the Synod of Dort about the
Doctrins of Arminius, and that undue Convocation, which the Scotch taught us to
call the Assembly of Divines, which laid aside the Liturgy, and established the
Directory, did very smartly evidence their belief, that they had a power of
obliging the people to their own placits. For beside the greatness of the
undertaking, they were as positive in their determinations; and as severe in
their injunctions as if they knew themselves seated in an infalliable Chair.
Therefore their allowing such a power, when it ministered to their own passions,
and interest, does evidence that they hold the thing not absolutely unlawful.
From the faults that Dissenters now find with Ecclesiastical Establishments,
and that monstrous Bill for uniting the Kings Protestant Subjects prepared by a
late House of Commons, which designed the turning our Church upside down, we
must in all reason conclude, they would make very great, and peremptory
Alterations, was it in their power. Whence we must infer, that according to
them themselves, there is such a power lodged in the Church. Which if they
deny, they consequentially deny the lawfulness of the Reformation, both in its
first settlement before, and in its Restoration, after Queen Mary; they
condemn the haughty attempts of their late Assembly, and even themselves too,
who put in their objections against some little passages in our Liturgy, to the
Convocation called soon after his Majesty's return; and likewise take from the
Church all power of future Reformation from any Errors she may sink into.

And indeed it is reasonable to suppose the Church knows what is Lawful and
Expedient, better than some private Heads. For the Persons called as
Representatives of the whole Church, are usually the most Grave, Learned, and
Judicious; many see more than one; God has more regards to the whole, whom
these (duly called) do represent; and in whose determinations the whole are
concerned; than of a part, viz. a few scattered Individuals, who are every one
for his own Sense. He stands in those relations to the whole, which he does not
to particulars in separation from her, as of an Head, an Husband, etc. and has
promised to be with them to the end of the World, as they are the guides and
pastors of his Flock, and therefore in a more peculiar manner, than with any
private Persons who are concerned not for all, but every one for his own self.
Therefore though the Church may err, yet it is not by incomparable odds, so
likely she should, as that a few divided particulars may. Therefore it is my
Prudence as well as Duty, in all things doubtful, to submit to the Church; else
I run into an apparent Schism, which nothing can justify, but some apparent
Evil, which I cannot hold Communion with the Church, but I must be polluted by.
Therefore because the Schism is apparent, but the Error not; I run into a
certain Sin, only for fear of what seems to me a probable Error.

Now suppose that by this means I chance to err with the Church yet I have used
the means, and kept to my guide; and consequently have done the best I could to
secure my self from Error; and for that reason my Sin is only from weakness, in
that I could not see the Error of my guide; therefore I shall be excused a
tanto, and forgiven upon a general repentance. But he that errs against the
Church has wilfully, because without apparent reason left his guide, and
means appointed; or in case the reason of his dissent seemed to him apparent,
yet it had not seemed so, had he honestly used the means for his better
Information; for God is never wanting to such; but when Men have itching Ears,
run after Novelties, and have no love to the Truth, 2 These. 2. 10. then v. 11.
For this cause God sends 'em strong Delusions, that they might believe a Lie.
Therefore all their subsequent Errors are the issue and Offspring of that
causeless, and willful separation; which kind of Sins are not forgiven, but
upon a special repentance.

This is a rule so plain and safe; that certainly it had never been opposed,
had not some out of politic ends, and others out of a weak and superstitious
fear of Popery run into all the extremes from it; unless where interest and
secular advantages may teach an Union: For Knavery in some, and weakness in
others, has gave being to all the parts of Phanaticism: The Romanists show
Reverence in Churches, therefore these in opposition will have all places
alike: For fear of being lavish in their Devotions, they become profane and
slovenly; and out of a dread of Idols, in some real, in others pretended, run
into Sacriledg; and in the case before us, they are said to believe as the
Church believes, without requiring any farther grounds and motives of
Credibility; therefore these will believe her in nothing, but contradict and
oppose her in all they can; and rather than they will be thought to follow the
Church in any thing, they give up themselves with as real an implicit faith to
some Illiterate and Mechanic guide, as any are thought to do to the Church of
Rome: Which necessarily runs 'em into more Errors, and greater Confusions, than
they think by such methods to avoid: For from hence have sprung our Quakers,
Seekers, Ranters, Adamites, Famalists, Muggletonians, fifth Monarchists, withal
the herds of Sectaries, that have debauched Religion beyond that of Heathen
Rome, or Turkey. Therefore to avoid all damnable Heresies and Schisms; and the
roveing extravagancies of Enthysiastick heads, we have no more certain and
ready way, than to follow the Church, where we have no plain Scripture to the
contrary.

And indeed it is very observable, that all pretenders to Christianity do hold
the necessity of some guide and rule in matters of Religion, whereby they may
come to aright understanding of Scripture; and thence to a-consent and union in
every Truth. Those that are for no Government, nor any Humane measures, but for
an absolute Liberty, as they are Christians, do boast of an extraordinary
Light, and Conduct of the Spirit; which they make to be their guide, that leads
'em into all Truth. But the monstrous Errors, beastly Practices, and direct
Contradictions these people run into, do abundantly convince all observing Men,
that they have not that Conduct, which by pretending to such a guide, they own
necessary for Christians. Then those who are for some Face of a Church and
Government, do likewise grant the necessity of some helps this way. Therefore
Calvin will have every one go ad proprium pastorem, to his own Doctor, or
Teacher: Now this Pastor must be taken either Independently, or Dependently; if
the former, then he attributes that to Individuals, which we ascribe to many:
And would have Men give up themselves to the guidance of one, when we would
have him follow the Church of God; therefore he is a thousand times more likely
to be led into Error that way, than this. But take him dependently, as speaking
not from his own private Light, but according to the Doctrine, and Judgment of
the Church, of which he is a part, and this is no more than what we are
pleading for; unless in name only, he meaning an Assembly of Presbyters, we a
Synod of Divines. Therefore since it is agreed on all hands, that there must be
something to guide us to a right understanding of Divine things, and keep us
within the due bounds of reason, and Duty; and secure us from those sly
impostures, which debauch the plainest Scriptures, and most reasonable Duties;
let us not follow that, which sad observation tells us, has ever proved the
Mother of Confusion; but that which the Scripture directs us to, viz. the
customs and usages of the Church: And then there is some hope we may once come
to be joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment, and as Brethren
to dwell in Unity.

2. There is an Unity of Affections: When Men live in mutual Love, and good
will. This is an indispensable Duty, which is never superseded by any
difference of Judgment; for if we cannot agree in every point, yet however this
should be no breach of our Love. Unity of Affections should always hold, though
Unity of Judgment may not.

For we are commanded to love without consideration of Men's particular
Opinions. Those precepts make no exception of Persons, but reach to all Men,
and therefore to those that differ from us. S. John 1 Ep. 4. 7. bids us to love
one another, and that for this reason, viz. that God is love; and every one
that loves is born of God. Nothing speaks us so much his Children, as a
Participation of Divine Qualifications; but then our love must be like his, who
makes the Sun to shine on the Evil, and the Good: Else we can never be his
Children, Mat. 5. 44, 45. His Love and Mercy, which is over all his Works, are
the rule our Affections must walk by.

It was the old Pharisaical Doctrine our Savior condemns, Thou shall Love thy
Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy. To confine our Affections, and good Offices,
to our Friends, and them of our own party, is no more than the Scribes and
Pharisees have ever done; and Jews and Turks at this day do. But Christian
charity is more extensive, and reaches even the poor Samaritan.

Now this was ever the Practice, as well as Duty of the true Church; her very
Censures are for Edification, not for Destruction; all her Acts were lively
instances of her Affections. But all the contraries of Love have constantly
been the black Brand of false pretenders. For when difference of Opinion draws
Men off from the Church, they soon lose their Affections. When Donatus divides,
he confines the Church to Africa: And every Heretic restrained her to the
narrow bounds of his own Fraternity. We have seen there are no such unnatural
heats, Unchristian Oppositions, and Uncharitable Censures, as of one party
against another, and of the whole against the Church.

Nor is this an accidental, but a necessary consequence from the other, being
so generally consequent thereupon, that you find no exceptions from this rule;
if of persons, yet not of parties. For Envy, and Opposition, is of the very
nature of Division: Gathered Churches naturally teach Men to confine their Love
to their own parties; and live at a distance from all others, as Persons that
are without. Every one is willing to believe himself in the right, and to
justify his own separation; which he cannot do without speaking others in the
wrong. It is true, he is not always the Schismatic that separates, but he that
gives the occasion: Therefore Separatists, to throw the odious Imputation of
Schism from themselves, always endeavor to prove the cause to be in the
Church: To which end they blacken, and bespatter her all they can, as guilty of
Willworship, Superstition, Idolatry, Lukewarmness, or any other vile and filthy
Imputation. Whence they distinguish themselves from her by certain Novel names.
The Turks in their way delight in nothing so much as to be called Musulmans,
right Believers, in opposition to the Persians, who agree with 'em in the same
imposture; but differ about the Interpreters of Mahomet.

There were an ancient Sect of Heretics that called themselves the Gnostics,
that is, knowing Men, as the Etymology of the word imports; which employed the
Church were a company of poor Fools, that were still in the Dark. After them
others styled themselves the (...), the pure, exclusive of all others: To which
the word Puritan afterward succeeded. And indeed this is employed in the very
reason of Schism; for every Sect thinks it self purer than the Church it
divides from, otherwise it had never divided at all: And from the same Root
spring those Pharisaical Appellations now in use, viz. the good People, the
sober Party, the People of the Lord, and the true Protestants, as if none were
such, but their own selves. Whence S. Paul 1 Cor. 3. 3. As a Politician, as
well as Divine, puts Envying, Strife, and Division all together; as Sins
Dependent, and Productive one of another. And St. James chapter 3. 14. tells the
Jewish Converts, who differed from the Gentile Christians about Mosaic Rites,
and Ceremonies; that they had (...), a bitter Zeal; or as our Translation
renders it, bitter Envying, and Strife in their Hearts. When the ten Tribes
once set up their Calves at Dan, and Bethel; they never after lived friendly
with Judah: Nor had the Samaritans any sooner built their Temple on mount
Gerizim, but they quickly refused all Commerce, and Society with the Jews; and
denied entertainment to our Savior, though for no other reason, but because he
set his Face as though he would go to Jerusalem. Such are the black and ugly
Offspring of difference of Judgment, when it runs Men into parties: That we
must endeavor to be of one Judgment, as the best expedient to a being
like-minded one toward another.

3. There is an Unity of Peace: When Men live securely together, without being
alarmed by Ryots and Tumults; when they are not branded for Men worthy, nor
closely designed to a common Slaughter. This flows necessarily from the other,
and is implied and wrapped up in it, as the conclusion in its premises. For if we
must love, then we may not injure and destroy; difference of Judgment should
not prove breaches of our Peace; nor controversies about Religion kindle the
Flames of an Irreligious War.

This is a Truth founded in Nature, as well as Revelation: A Primitive State of
War is as much a Monster, as the Leviathan that taught it. For all Men were
apprehensive of this Truth: The Poet makes that a Degenerate, and Iron Age,
such as was not from the beginning, wherein there was not -- hospes ab hospite
tutus.

One Friend and Neighbor safe by another.

The Prophets foretold that the Gospel Dispensation should bring Unity, Peace,
and everlasting Righteousness into the World: That then Weapons of Death should
be turned to Implements of Husbandry; and Men should learn War no more: That
the Lion should lie down with the Lamb; and the Leopard eat Straw like the Ox:
That all evil Qualities should be transformed into better tempers; and that
nothing should hurt or destroy in all his Holy Mountain.

Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna:

Now Justice, and the Golden Ages of the World, return again.

The Gospel it self was prefaced with, On Earth Peace, good will toward Men.
It designs not only the Reconciling us to God, but the Uniting us one to
another. It teaches Subjects to obey every Ordinance of Man; to study to be
quiet, and to do every one his own business. It teaches not to revenge our
selves, but to suffer in smaller matters, rather than make a noise and
disturbance in our just Vindications, Mat. 5. 39. 40, 41. It declares that
those who live in Strife and Division, are Carnal, and walk as Men: 1 Ep. Cor.
3. 3. And therefore such that have made but little, if any advances in True
Religion. In Romans 13. 13. we have Ryoting, and Drunkenness; Chambering, and
Wantonness; Strife, and Envying; put all together as very fit Companions;
whence the Exhortation is (...), let us walk honestly as in the day; implying
that the practice of such things is a walking dishonestly, and is suited to
none, but times of Darkness; Intemperance and Incontinence are made the Lusts
of the Flesh, which make Men like Beasts; but Pride, Sedition, and Rebellion
are the filthiness of the Spirit, which make 'em like Devils.

Whence some have made it a question and scruple of conscience, Whether Arms be
at all Lawful for Christians? And it has been by many determined that none are
but defensive only: That is, not of Subjects against Lawful Governors, but of
one Society, or Nation, when invaded against another. Therefore those are new
as well as false Lights, Monstrous Saints, Club Divines, and Bloody Casuists,
that study and advise the perplexing all Humane affairs; and the making a
Society mad: The overturning Crowns and Miters; and the imbroyling a Nation in
Massacres and Blood.

Having thus viewed our Subject, we pass

Secondly, To the Duty we owe it, and that is -- to dwell together in it.

Which Phrase speaks it the business, and constant Companion of our Lives. For
we must -- dwell in Unity.

To which end, the Text presses it with many apt and cogent Arguments: As

1. From our common Relation; we are Brethren, and therefore should live in
Unity.

-- Brethren to dwell together in Unity. We are descended from the same common
Parents, agree in the same common Nature; we are all parts of the same Society,
or Body Politic, and therefore Members one of another. From which Topic the
Scripture often draws Arguments to this purpose, as Acts 7. 26. Sirs, ye are
Brethren, why do ye wrong one to another? Implying that no reason can be given,
why they should not agree that stand thus related.

We have all but one Baptism, but one Faith, but one Hope, and but one God: We
are all parts of the same Spiritual Building, and make up the Body of Christ,
which is the Church: We all live in hope and expectation of that common
Inheritance; as we are Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ. Whence not
only the Scripture, but the first Christians called one another Brother and
Sister. Therefore our Relation, as well as common Faith, should oblige us to
this Unity. These were the things that made the Primitive Professors hold
together, as one entire Body, distinct from the rest of the World. Whence the
Gentiles would often say, as Tertul. relates, See how these Christians love one
another!

Now our Religion is the same, its Rules and Precepts are no way altered: Our
Relation, Dependence, and all other reasons of Unity are the same too:
Therefore the Duty is as great, and the Obligations as strong as ever. And
consequently that we do not love and unite as much as they; is from the sole
reason of Men's departure from the Holy Commands delivered to 'em. Our breaches
proceed from alterations, not in our Religion, but in the minds of Men. Our
rule is still the same, but we do not keep so well up to it. Men have not more
Light and Liberty now; but stronger Passions, and more stubborn Lusts, that
debauch 'em into parties, and Seditions. Where they have learned to reckon none
Brethren but such who like Simeon and Levi are Brethren in Iniquity, who linked
in the same Association are in their Anger for killing Men, and in their
selfwill for digging down our Wall, viz. of Strength and Government: While
others, poor Souls, are the wicked of the Earth, who have forfeited all into
the hands of the Saints, and are fit for nothing but to be taken and destroyed:
Or, as the Association words it, to be pursued to Destruction. Therefore seeing
Hell has taught Men, not only to enervate this Argument of Heaven; but to turn
it to the ends of Destruction, instead of Edification, I shall inquire what
strength there is in the next Argument, and that is,

Secondly, The advantages of doing so; it is good. -- Behold how good it is:
Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

For it is agreeable to our reasons, and desirable from its own native worth,
and Beauty: And therefore exacts Praises from every Tongue, even from them,
whose private interests and humors lead 'em to destroy it. Nor is it an
unprofitable good, like some mere Ornaments of the Universe, which serve only
to please the Eye, and delight the Mind; and give a pleasant Theme for the
Orator, and Historian to play upon. Nor is it like the pure Positives under the
Law, which had no intrinsic or relative good in 'em, but stood purely
Instances of obedience. For Unity brings Profit wherever it comes, and derives
a sweet Prosperity to all public and private affairs of Men. It gives a free
Commerce and Communication of every good thing from one part of a Society to
another. Like a due Circulation of the Blood, it maintains every Member in
health, and Vigor; and inables 'em to perform their distinct and proper
Offices. Whence a very sensible increase must necessarily arise to the whole:
Which made the Ancients to observe, that by Concord small and inconsiderable
things soon wax great, and make a figure in the World. For which cause the
Founders of Cities and Nations have endeavored to contrive such Laws that
might satisfy the minds, and give security to the Persons, and properties of
Men; whence a lasting Unity might arise as the surest Foundation of outward
greatness.

Unity seldom wears the Willow Garland, but is generally Crowned with Blessings
and Success; as our own Histories and Observation may evince: For Nations and
Churches when wasted by War and Persecutions have ever found this, like the
Vernal Sun, that gives new Life and Vigor to the World; and makes 'em like the
Hills of Sion, to laugh and sing.

Whereas Variance and Divisions, like boding Owls and Ravens, have ever proved
unlucky both to Church and State.

For Controversies about Religion have many times almost destroyed Religion
itself: When that zeal which should have been employed in the duties owing to
God and Man, has wasted itself in disputes, and bitter invectives. Whence such
times have usually heightened men's Passions, but not their Graces; and made many
Combatants, but few Christians. Till in fine, Religion torn into numerous
Fractions, has, like the Echo, pined into little but a voice; and men's
Christianity been concluded from their being on this, or the other side. And
whereas it is observed, that Divine Judgments have usually fallen upon the
Church, when Division has made her mad; we must consider this not solely as an
exertion of Divine Power and Justice, but also as the Natural effect of this
Sin: For God usually punishes Sin with those Sufferings which are the Natural
results and necessary consequences of 'em: He clothes the Sluggard in Rags,
brings the Prodigal to a Morsel of Bread; and fills those with Confusions, and
every evil work, that delight in breaking the Churches Order and Peace.
Therefore where we see a Divided, we must expect an Afflicted people; not only
because God has declared his wrath from Heaven against such things, but
likewise by reason the same Divisions have a Natural tendency to diverse kinds
of mischief.

Nor has Division a less malignant influence on the State; for it has brought
desolation into almost every corner of the World, as may be proved by an
induction of particulars from almost all parts of it anciently known. It not
only checks Trade in the general, but withdraws it from many particulars; and
several other ways oppresses and injures 'em; which must be a considerable
weakening to the whole: It sometimes necessitates Governors to act above and
beyond Law, for the preservation of themselves and Government; and oftentimes
has given up the whole into Foreign hands. Whence it was a Maxim, or
conclusion from reason, laid down by Ancient Politicians, Divide and Conquer.
The Malmsbury Philosophy, which presumes a state of War to have been the
Primitive condition of Mankind, does yet plead that mutual preservation was the
Origin of all Societies; which is a plain concession that Union is the best
means of mutual preservation; and consequently Division which runs men first
into Parties, and then into Opposition, is the ready way to ruin. Our Savior
tells us, that an House, a City, or a Kingdom divided against itself, cannot
stand, but is brought to desolation: Now he lays down this as a Medium to prove
something farther, viz. that a Division in the Kingdom of Darkness will destroy
that Kingdom; and because the thing that proves must be the notius, or better
known than that which is proved; therefore that such Division will destroy
Kingdoms and Societies of Men, must be very well known and easily granted even
in those Ages of the World: Else we must suppose him to be proving ignotum per
ignotum, which nothing but weakness or fallacy can offer. It is therefore the
maddest thing in the World for Men to dream of keeping off a ruin by the
aptest means and methods to let it in. To secure their Persons, Properties and
Religion, by those very courses which all Histories and Observation tell us,
have been Destructive to 'em all! Which is no less mad than to break down our
Banks, to the end we may keep out the Sea: Or to take Poison for recovery of
our Health.

And certainly our Circumstances make the madness and wonder greater than ever:
Because

1. The parties divided from, and against the Church, are so many, so
irreconcilable, and so hot one against another; that if we may suppose they had
the Government again in their own hands; they could not live comparably so
happy as under present Establishments. For they must then either fall under
some one party, or live as they can in a Medly together: If the former, they
cannot but know they must expect severer Ministrations than from the present
Government: If the latter, they must live in continual Feuds, and contests,
every one for his own way; and because nothing is established, and they know
not what may; they must consequentially stand in continual uncertainties, both
as to Property and Religion; which must necessarily make 'em as restless as
under late Usurpations; when the Nation was vexed and harrass'd; oppressed and
confounded beyond the example of all Ages. Which made ^ome who were the first
beginners of our Calamities, to wheel about for a Royal Interest, only as the
lesser Evil. And because

2. Popery (as they daily tell us) is closely watching an opportunity of
obtaining amongst us: Which in all Humane reason it can never do, could we
stand United together. But by Division they make a Gap and Lane for its easy
Advance. For those that have seen, or have otherwise any deep impressions from
the Miseries of the late Rebellion, that nauseate the damned Hypocrisies
Violence and Blood of those days; finding Divisions ready to repeat the same
Miseries; that Hanibal was ready again to enter our Gates; and that the Stirs,
as the L. R. in his last Papers diminutively calls 'em, were just ready to
devour us; they will set themselves entirely to the opposing this Evil; what
little regards soever they may have to the other. Nor can we in reason expect
but that Men will the most oppose that, which is the nearest Evil, has the
most hands and means to promote it; and which, like an Hurricane blown up from
Hell, has destroyed not Job's House and Children only; but born down even all
before it. There is therefore no such Enemy, both to Religion and Government as
Dividers are. A Truth so plain; that was it not, that the Devil ows Men a
shame; or that God is pleased to punish 'em by their own inventions: making
their Choice to become their Ruin; we cannot imagine any Man should be so
blind as not to see, at least in this their day,

-- How good it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

3. It is farther pressed from the Comforts and Satisfactions that arise from
such a Life: For it is joyful.

-- Behold how good and joyful a thing it is to dwell in Unity.

When Balaam Numb. 24. 2. saw Israel abiding in his Tents, according to their
tribes, so great a Body, and yet in such admirable Unity and Order, he breaks
forth into a kind of rapture, v. 5. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy
Tabernacles O Israel? Whence he proceeds to the highest description of their
future Greatness and Glory, v. 8, 9. He shall eat up the Nations, etc. as if
that sight had moved him beyond his former capacities. It is certain indeed
that the Prophets spoke as they were moved of God: Yet it was usually by the
advantages of some external Object, either real or visionary: Thus we read of
Daniel's four Beasts, representing the four chief Empires of the World.
Ezekiel's Roll, and his boiling Pot, etc. all representing the matter they had
to speak. So when Balaam saw Israel in his Tents, in Unity and Order, which was
it self a rational Prediction, or promising sign of their future Greatness; it
follows in the next words, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he took up
his parable and said -- he shall eat up the Nations, etc. -- But Ryots,
Tumults, and unreasonable Hurries would have been an ill rise for the Prophet
to have taken up his parable from. Had he seen that vast Body crumbled into
little parties, agreeing in nothing but Oppositions; had he seen them with
Clubs and Staves assaulting the Tents of their Prince, and the Priest. And
scraming the Names of Corah, Dathan, Abiram, Absalom, Achitophel, etc. our
Seditious Bonfires; a sight so ugly, and the probable issues so fatal; we may
expect that either he would have sung us another Song or that the Ass might
once again have opened his Mouth; and have reproved the madness of the Prophet

What more unmanly than that Asian Riot, Acts 23. 32. Where the whole City was
moved, but few could tell what any would have? Or that in Acts 23. 10. where S.
Paul was like to have been torn in pieces by contending parties? What more
unseemly, and nauseous a sight, than the Mobile in Acts 22. 22, 23. casting off
their Coats, and throwing dust in the Air, and crying against S. Paul, away
with such a Fellow from the earth, it is not fit that he should live? Such
meetings are like herds of wild Beasts, all noise, but no order: Passion
enough, but no reason, where every one is ready to use his Paw as well as his
Tongue. Such Assemblies make Halls and Cities like Bedlam, where all differ in
noise and actions; and agree in nothing but this, that they all are mad. These
sights make ugly impressions on all sober minds, and leave nothing but
nauseousness and aversation behind them.

While Unity has beauty and comeliness in it; and affords a delight, and
complacency to every Eye. The World has not an Object more satisfactory and
pleasant than a body of Men without noise and clamor, acting Uniformly in their
places, and driving up in a regular course to their several ends. This is a
spectacle so worthy of Men, that S. Paul tells his Colossians chapter 2. 5. That he
rejoiced, beholding their Order.

Nor is it more pleasant in the Object, than joyful in the effects, and
consequences: For while passionate heats and giddy motions, run Men beyond
Reason and Law; make their Houses too hot, and their Countries too narrow for
'em; and perhaps bring 'em by weeping cross to their long homes: Unity and
orderly Methods keep 'em Masters of their Passions, secure 'em from Scaffolds
and Gibbets; and enable 'em to sit under their Vines and Fig Trees, where none
can make 'em afraid. While designing Heads filled with Cares and Fears; the
constant Companions of unlawful Policies; vexed with Delays and Disapointments;
hag'd by a Guilty Conscience and night-mared with the Griping Jealousies of
Bloody Fates and Vengeance; lose the sweetness of all past, and present
Comforts. Those that live in Unity as they are Men and Christians, fear no evil
because they design and do none; and have leisure not only to gust and relish
every Mercy; but also to collect all the scattered Blessings of their Lives
into one Body, and at every view repeat the pleasure they perceived from their
first Enjoyment.

Such void of fear, and secure from dangers, reflect upon their Lives past, and
joyfully see 'em sullyed with no Strife and Contention; no Schisms and
Seditions; but so conformed to their Lord and Master, that no provocations,
distracted times, and common delusions have been able to draw 'em to Factious
Clubs and Seditious Meetings; or at any time to have their Voice heard in the
Streets; in any common Rout designing Shows or Bon-fires.

Lives so suited to the Nature, and Intendments of the Gospel, as well as to
that, the Saints do lead in Heaven, that the Pleasure and Satisfactions arising
from such Contemplations, enable the Man to say of Unity, as Solomon of Wisdom,
viz. that her ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all her paths are Peace:
Length of days are in her right Hand, and in her left Riches and Honors.
Whence it is no wonder that in the

Fourth place we have a behold fixed upon it, -- Behold it is good.

Which points out this Unity as a subject worthy our Consideration and
Practice. For this word is seldom used but in these two cases, viz. where the
matter is either strong, and somewhat surprising; or else of more than ordinary
importance, as it is in this place, therefore its business is to turn our
thoughts to so noble and worthy a Subject.

-- Behold it is good, Which Fifthly, Is farther recommended by the manner of
its proposal in that particle How; -- Behold how good and joyful a thing it is.

Such indefinite ways of expression hint the happiness of the thing to be so
incomparable, that we can receive due and adequate thoughts of it from nothing
else but our own experience; therefore he does not say, but bids us taste and
see how good and joyful it is to live in Unity? For who would expect any thing
farther, where the Author seems swallowed up in the Contemplation of so
excellent a Life? And at a loss how to express his large and sublime
Conceptions of it! But at length he recovers himself, and tells v. 2. that it
is like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard: Even
to Aarons Beard, and went down to the Skirts of his Clothing. A precious
Ointment; such as was made by Divine appointment, such as was sweet as Incense,
and such as was made Holy by God himself, in that it was appropriate to such a
peculiar use. Even such is Unity, so Precious, so Sweet, so Holy and therefore
so acceptable in the sight of God! Then v. 3, 4. Like as the Dew of Hermon:
Which fell upon the Hill of Sion. For there the Lord promised his Blessing: And
Life for evermore.

Now pleasure and profit are the grand ends and motives of all Humane Actions;
without which all labors and diligence would quickly cease, and so powerful
attractives are these; that we can pursue the little particles of either,
through more than the common hazards of Humane Life. Therefore it must needs
stand a reproach to them for ever; whom both together, and in such excelling
degrees too, cannot oblige to this Unity, which as the Gentiles said of Virtue,
is a reward to it self. A Life which every wise and considerate Man would
choose, had it no other recompense, but the present advantages and
satisfactions that arise from it.

But because many will commend Unity, and own it a necessary Duty for all
Christians to agree together; but plead the fault of Division is not in them,
but in the Government, which requires their Union upon those terms they cannot
close with: I will therefore inquire.

1. What is the sense of their chief Authors and Leaders in this particular; and

2. Whether we may in charity judge their Division from us to proceed really
from any scruple of Conscience.

1. Mr. Vines who was an hot Man in the late Rebellion, and at the Treaty at
Vxbridge against the King, by which you must judge him no Churchman, in his
Sermons upon the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Printed after his Death,
undertakes to prove that nothing can justify a Separation from a True Church,
less than flat Idolatry: And gives a challenge to any Man to give an instance
in Scripture to the contrary: For all Separation is either Local, or Moral; now
a Local Separation is required from Idolatrous Temples, and Heathen Mixtures,
as in 2 Cor. 6. 16. What Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For you
Christians are his Temples both by Dedication in Baptism: and also by the Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit dwelling in you: Therefore v. 17. Come out from
amongst 'em, and be ye separate: But we have neither Precept, nor example of
any allowed separation from a Christian Church, unless a Moral only. He argues
from the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2. Which suffered the false Prophets to
seduce his People to commit Fornication, and to eat things Sacrificed to Idols;
which were great Corruptions, but yet v. 24, 25. Upon you that are pure, viz.
from these things, I put no other burden but this, that which you have
already, hold fast till I come. Here is not a word of separation locally, viz.
the leaving their Assemblies, but morally only, viz. from her Sins.

If you consult Mr. Jenkins on Jude v. 19. separating themselves, where he
tells you what a Church you may, and what an one you may not separate from;
there is nothing that can justify, but rather condemn his present separation.
Mr. Baxter published a piece An. Dom. 1670. Entitled the Cure of
Church-Division, or Directions for weak Christians to keep them from being
Dividers or Troublers of the Church. Dr. Bryan in his Sermons Printed An. Dom.
70. and page 328. presses all parties to live free from any appearance of
Contention, either in Church or State: They that do so having the Brand of
Graceless Men set upon 'em by the Holy Ghost. Jud. 8, 11, 12. In the next page
every Man that dwells in God, is of a Peaceable disposition: Quiet in the Land.
Psalm. 35. 20. The Ancient Puritans were all for a Lay-Communion; and smartly
opposed the Brownists, now Independents, for the desperate breaches they made
in the Church: And even Brightman himself, that extravagant Expositor, on
Revel. 3. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock -- says that those who are
ashamed to sit down in that Church, where Christ is not ashamed to knock by his
Word and Ordinances, do make themselves purer than Christ himself. We have a
Cloud of Witnesses to this point in a late piece for Lay-Communion; therefore I
shall only give you part of an Epistle to a Book Entitled the Saints Care of
Church Communion. Printed An. Dom. 1671. By Mr. Crofton a late Nonconformist.

Nonconformists of old did account it their glory, that they did not separate,
nor any way encourage or countenance, but every way disown and oppose the
Separatist. The Judicious Ball affirms, That as Hannibal observed there was not
one in the Enemies Camp called Gisco: so there was not so much as one of the
godly Ministers which suffered in England about the Discipline, that might be
deservedly called Brownist; not a Nonconformist could be found a Separatist; I
wish we could at this day say the same thing, with the same truth and
confidence. But alas! How many whose Preaching and Writings have been strong
and servent against Separation, do at this day make the Independents insult,
Your Presbyters leave the public Assemblies, have gathered Churches, in which
they minister the whole solemn Worship of God; and not contented with Domestic
Liberty, have occasioned the Laws, and execution thereof, to confound them,
with the severest Separatists, and most vile Sects, that ever troubled the
Churches Order, or the Nations Peace? Pudeat haec dici potuisse, and non
potuisse refelli. I did in an Epistle published many years since, solicit the
serious Nonconformists, in this day of temptation, to kick off that
Bastard-Brood of Separatists which hang on them, and are by their Enemies laid
at their door, as their genuine offspring. But I have not herein prevailed;
but, to the anguish of my Soul, seen Schism so acceptable to good men, that
scarce any called Nonconformist dare once reprove it. In sense whereof, and in
conscience of duty, I could not keep silence, but by Pulpit and Press stand up
to testify against this common growing evil, eating out Love, the Heart of
Piety, the Power of Truth, and Unity of the Church.

I expect the Committee of Discretion (at whose Bar I have (on this very
cause) stood more than twenty years without conviction) to revive against Me,
and this Work, their old Charge; however the thing is good, the Doctrine is
truth, the discovery thereof be duty; yet it is done unseasonably, and out of
time. I have been often arraigned for missing the season; yet no man has set
me a Dial by which to determine the time of my Ministerial actings: In the year
1655, my Saints Zeal against sinful Altars, was out of season: In 1661, my
Reformation not Separation, was out of season. It is now 1670, and yet the
season of this duty is not seen. When will this season be, wherein I may appear
against Schism? When I am in the Grave (toward which I hasten) where there is
no mention of God, nor pleading the cause of his Church? If I know any thing of
the Mind of the God of Time, and may compare Watches with the faithful
Watchmen of God's House, the season of Ministerial reproof, is the season of
sin's prevalency: When the Believers are in danger to be beguiled from the
simplicity of the Gospel, was Paul's season to cry out, Take heed of Angels of
light, and false Apostles. When Schisms in the Church (not so dangerous and
deadly as Schisms from the Church) distracted Corinth, was the Apostles time to
cry out, Ye are carnal, ye are not spiritual. When Peter turned Separatist, and
drew Barnabas into the Schism, was Paul's season to withstand him to the face,
because he was to be blamed. What shall I say of the Prophets, who timed their
Prophesies by the prevalency of Israel's defection: And our Savior, who chose
the season to explain the Law, when the Scribes and Pharisees had made the word
of God of none effect by their Traditions. Austin's season to preach against
Drunkenness, was when, and as long as the men of Hippo lived Drunkards. And to
appear against Separation, when, and as long as the Donatist's Schism prevailed
in the Christian World. Luther's season to express his zeal against the German
Anabaptists, and Libertines, was when they exposed his Reformation to reproach.
Ball, Hildersham, Hind, Nicols, and other Nonconformist's season, to speak and
write against Separation, was when the Brownist's Non-communion became the
reproach of their Nonconformity. If these may not guide me, lend me your
Watches; if they go not false, I will set mine by them.

In answer to this charge of missing the season of Truth and Duty, I have many
years since appealed to Presbyters, Whether men wisely serving God's
Providence, and studious to do God and his Church proper and apt service, must
not judge the time of witnessing corruptions circa cultum publicum, will not
warrant Non-communion and Separation from a true Church, to be; then, when,
that is acted on this ground and reason? Till that be argued and overruled, I
will plead no more to this Indictment; and that I expect not to be, till Christ
do come to Judgment.

Secondly: But you will be ready to complain, That I am too rigid, too severe
and bitter against the Independent Congregationalist's, who undoubtedly are
very good men. To this I say:

1. The Goodness of the men be to themselves: But remember, The Goodness of the
men is the common bait which hides the Hook of Imposture and Seduction, by
which the simple are beguiled. Angels of Light, Men like the Apostles of
Christ, Pious Pelagius, Devout and Holy Novatius, have been the perverters of
Truth, and subverters of the Churches Peace and Order. And be the men never so
good, the severe reproof of their vile Opinions, and sinful Practices, must not
be superseded by that Goodness which is in them.

2. Be the men as good as they will, if by their fruits we may know them, we
must be free to affirm, they have been no good Plants in the Lord's Garden. To
pass by the Narrative of their Practices beyond the Seas, collected by the
Anti-apologist, and improved by Mr. Robert Baylie, beyond the possibility of
denial or contradiction. Should we but declare their Paganizing all England,
the Confusions in Church, and Commotions in Commonwealth, which our Eyes have
seen acted by, and this present Age must attest to have been the unhappy horrid
Generation-work of these good men; you must needs say, The severest rebuke of
them must needs be too gentle. But I will forbear to recite the Acts which all
of this Age must needs remember: Yet when I consider the sinfulness of Schism,
the speciality of their Schism, exceeding that of the rigid Brownists;
unchurching not only England, but all the Reformed Churches, at one blow;
meritoriously, by their Apostasy; and legally, by the Law of their rejection:
And remember their precipitancy, if I must not say perfidy, in falling into it
when the pretended occasions of stumbling were out of their way, and they were
solemnly engaged against Schism, and this very Schism: I cannot but see much
reason to maintain a constant and severe zeal against them; and the rather, for
that (we have observed it, we know the verity of it) the sobriety, moderation,
and indulgent silence, of their soft and over-mild Brethren, has been the
nourishment, guard, and advantage of their Schism: They, as (their Progenitors)
the Donatists, did at first study nothing more than by the cry of Moderation,
Moderation toward Brethren and Good men, to charm the Zeal and Duty of those
who ought to have discovered this Panther's Face, before they had broken in,
and made havoc of the Church of God, as at this day they do, necessitating
more loud cries, and severe reproofs against them, than ever; for that they
have prevailed so far, as to seduce Multitudes, and confound endeavors for
Reformation, with their groundless Separation; and, with the Donatists, want
nothing but opportunity to make their Schism domineer through the World, beyond
the power of Magistratical cohibition.

The simple Godly have a long time been deluded with a pretense, That there is
no great difference between them and their angry Brethren; it is but a matter
of Discipline, there is nothing in their Practice fundamentally erroneous, or
inconsistent with salvation. And scarce any man is found so faithful, as to
detect the falsehood of this Plea: Let me tell you wherein the Controversy
only concerns matters of Discipline: I have often said it, and now say it
aloud; Though I know the Discipline they pretend to, to be confused,
disorderly, and mischievous to the Church; neither found in Scripture, nor
right Reason or Polity; yet let them own the being and truth of the Church, the
salvability of Ministration in it; and in union with the Church, in any
particular, orderly distributed Assembly, make their Discipline practicable if
they can; they shall not be by me disturbed, till they have experienced the
evil thereof in its Effects. But be ye not deceived; there is more cause of
controversy, than matters of Discipline only. I have often under my hand
asserted, what with the leave of my more moderate Brethren I will persist in,
and undertake to demonstrate, to the conviction of them who deny it, at least
to the undeceiving of the weak, who are seduced by them: That if 1. Groundless
or causeless Separation from true Churches; 2. Self-constitution of new
Churches; 3. Self-consecration of a new Ministry;


be, as none can deny they be, fundamental errors, and Practices inconsistent
with a state of salvation; then the Way or Practice of the
Independent-Congregationalists among us, is fundamentally erroneous, and
inconsistent with Salvation: For, that they have groundlesly separated from
true Churches, constituted new Churches, and consecrated a new Ministry;
insomuch that they who were lawfully ordained, have renounced their Ordination,
and received their Ministry in their new Way; let any who have seen their
course, and considered their Writings, deny if they can.

Although I have charity to believe, many a sincere heart toward God, may
simply communicate with Gods Ordinances among them, and not be sensible of
their Schism, nor design so great an evil, no way obvious to the weak; yet
their Way being in it self so evil, requires all that will be found faithful
(as Jerome and Austin against the Donatists) to animate each other to discover
so great an evil, and withstand so grievous Schism, growing to so great an
height, as to confound, yea nullify the Church of God among us.

Bravely offered: What to prove that our private Meeters, who break off from
the Church, and set up Conventicles of their own, cannot be in a Salvable
State! That their Leaders for interest sake, dare not reprove the Schism! That
these practices caused the late Rebellion, and Murders, and have paganiz'd
almost all England! And dare none of these Men accept the challenge? It Is a
shrewd sign they suspect, the goodness of their cause; else we should certainly
have had a melius inquirendum. We may presume those Men are in crooked paths,
who will not bring 'em to the rule, when required to do so. Hence we will
inquire;

Secondly, Into their Plea from Conscience, whereby they would justify
themselves every one in his own way. Which Conscience is made the greatest
cheat, and the veriest fool in the World.

For Men espouse such, and such Opinions, and ways of Life:

Whence they fly our Churches, Writings, and all other means of better
Information, till by Custom, and the just Judgment of God, who gives them up to
strong Delusions, that love not the Truth; they think there can be nothing true
and good but what is wrapped up in their own Tenants and Practices. And because
they have no mind to budg, therefore they cry Conscience will not let 'em.
Which Conscience is mere Opinion, Delusion, Prejudice and Self-will.

Just such a Conscience as the greatest Heretics, and their most deluded
Followers had to plead for their damnable Opinions: And several Nations for
their own Heathen Gods, and Sacreds. Such a Conscience as put the Jews upon
Crucifying our Savior, and stoneing the Prophets; and spurred on late Zealots
to the worst Rebellion, Murder, Theft and Sacriledg. Such a Conscience as
makes the Scotch Sectaries glory in their sufferings for their late Rebellion,
and Inhumane Butchery of the late Archbishop of S. Andrews: And put others
amongst our selves upon acting the amazing Tragedy of 48 over again.

The greatest Villainies have ever been acted under the Pleas of Conscience: And
never has the World seen worse times, than where such Consciences have been
most in fashion.

Look into the many Sects amongst us, and you cannot find any two of 'em, but
what hold some things contradictory to each other: Yet every Man in all parties
pleads Conscience for what he does. Now because Conscience cannot make
contradictories to be true; therefore it is not Conscience that makes all
parties differ from the Church, and every one from one another; or if
Conscience must be in the case, it is but an Erroneous one, and that is to say,
the Errors and Delusions of Men that make all this bustle. It is but the Ass
under the Lions Skin, a Spirit of Delusion under the Pretexts of Conscience,
that has made so many Opinions, falsely called Religion amongst us.

Conscience can never condemn a Man without some warrant or rule, e. g. It can
never condemn any Man for Theft, had it not this or some such rule, viz. Thou
shall not steal, whereby to do it. Therefore in all the little parts of
Religion and Government, which are not ordained in Scripture, and where there
is no contradiction to those general rules of doing things decently, in order,
and to edification, false Notions and Opinion may disquiet the mind, but
Conscience cannot oppose, because she has no rule, whereby to do it; nor any
Foundation to ground an Accusation on. And consequently it is a Man's Prejudice
and Delusion, not his Conscience, that draws back from Common Prayer, the Sign
of the Cross, etc. because these things not being forbid in Scripture,
Conscience cannot oppose and reject 'em.

At the rate these Men talk, we must allow every Humor, Prejudice, Opinion,
Fancy, and trick of Knavery to be Conscience; the falsehood of which
sufficiently appears from the contradictions, palpable Errors, beastly
Practices, and Confusions of Religion and Government, which such Consciences
have already brought into the World, and do farther expose us to.

But if it be really Conscience that makes all this stir, Pray tell me how
comes it to pass, that Conscience should scruple some things, which are no
where forbid in Scripture, and yet so readily close with many that are expressly
forbid? How can it be, that Conscience should boggle at a Surplice, and
kneeling in the Sacrament of the Supper; and yet make no Bones of Schisms and
Seditions? How is it reconcilable to my reason, that Conscience should fly mixed
Communions, of which we have examples in Scripture, and which themselves can no
way avoid; and also set Forms of Prayer, for which the Scripture affords both
example, and Precept too: And yet should sport and solace it self, in speaking
evil of the King; resisting the Powers, etc. Till I am satisfied in these
points, I must conclude it is no Conscience: But Delusion in some, and in
others mere tricks and design.

It is certainly now time for 'em to consider, that if the Evils which
Divisions naturally produce should come upon us, what an heavy aggravation it
will be to their sufferings, to consider that all this is the fruit of their
own doings; and the work of their own hands? That their own Passions, Mistakes
and Self-will, have pulled all this upon their own heads? What excuse can they
make to God and Man; what recompense to Posterity for the ruining a Church; the
whole protestant cause and interest by a Division, which their best Writers
condemn, themselves cannot justify, and are forced falsely to plead Conscience
for, as their last and only refuge?

If any thing shall ever persuade these Men to look toward Unity; they must as
a means thereto avoid all the hindrances of it. Many are self-conceited, and
think none understand truth so well as themselves: Others self-willed, and
resolved to yield in nothing: And yet for such Men to wish for Unity, is really
to wish that the very Government would stoop, and all Men yield to their own
selves. Nor is it some few only, but the Majority in every party that is of
this mind: Which renders a satisfaction utterly impossible; unless they could
make the Government like Manna to suit it self to every pallat. Therefore when
S. Paul Ephesians. 4. 3. is pressing to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace; he direct 'em to the fittest means to that end, v. 2. walk with
lowliness and meekness, with long suffering and love: Endeavoring to keep the
Unity of the Spirit. -- All endeavors are like to prove unsuccessful without
these Methods and Qualifications. For it is a censorious, hasty, proud and
ungovernable Spirit, that leaves its rule, and follows its own giddy motions;
which makes the greatest breaches both in Church and State. Let Men lay aside
all those humors which in the Judgment of any indifferent Man are inconsistent
with any Government, as standing stubbornly irreconcilable to any but their own
placits, and after all the complaints of Grievances, Popery, etc. they will
certainly say of this Church and Nation, Happy are the people that are in such
a case.

And indeed I did never yet know but that Men must part with something for the
ends of Peace and Unity: They must in something deny themselves, restrain their
passions, and yield to a rule; else they shall live their own punishments, and
at last be driven to what they would never go.

FINIS.

