A Funeral Sermon, PREACHED Upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent Divine
Dr. Thomas Manton, Who deceased October. 18. 1677.

By William Bates, D. D.

To which is now added, The Last Public Sermon Dr. MANTON preached.

LONDON: Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons in Cornhil,
over against the Royal Exchange. 1678.

The Bookseller to the READER.
INtending to reprint this Funeral Sermon, it was judged convenient to annex to
it, a Sermon of Doctor Thomas Mantons, suitable to the Subject that was treated
on, and being the last he publicly preached.

This will shortly be followed with a Volumn of the Doctor's Sermons now in the
Press.

1 Thessalonians. 4.17. the last clause. -- And so shall we ever be with the Lord.


THE Words are a Consolation, brought by the Apostle from the third Heaven,
where he was by extraordinary Privilege raised, and saw and understood how
great an Happiness it is to be with Christ. And they are addressed to Believers,
to moderate and allay their sorrows for the death of those Saints, who by their
conjunction in Blood or Friendship were most dear to them. Thus he speaks in
the 13th Verse, I would not have you be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them
which are asleep, that ye sorrow not as others which have no hope. The
Heathens, that were strangers to a future state, and thought that after a short
course through the World, Mankind would be lost for ever in the Dead-Sea, might
with some pretense abandon themselves to the extremity of their Passions. But
Christians, to whom Life and Immortality are revealed by the Gospel; who
believe, that as Jesus died and rose again; so all that sleep in Jesus, that
persevere in Faith and Holiness to the end, God will bring with him, are forbid
upon the most weighty Reasons, to indulge their Grief in excess. The Union
between Christ and Believers is inviolable; and from thence it follows, they
shall be partakers with him in his Glory. The Soul immediately after Death
shall be with Christ. Whiles the Body reposes in the Grave, it is in his
Presence who is Life and Light, and has a vital joyful Rest in Communion with
him. And in the appointed Time the Bodies of the Saints, those happy Spoils,
shall be rescued from the dark Prison of the Grave, and be sharers with their
Souls in immortal Glory.

This consummate Happiness of the Saints, the Apostle assures from the highest
Authority, the Word of the Lord; and describes his glorious Appearance, so as
to make the strongest Impression on our Minds. For the Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of an Archangel, and with the
Trump of God; and the Dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive,
and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the
Lord in the Air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Then Death, the last
Enemy, so fearful and feared by Men, shall be destroyed. And the Captive Prince
of the World, with all the powers of Darkness, and all other Rebellious Sinners
that obstinately joined with him, shall be brought in Chains before his
dreadful Tribunal: and after the great Act of the Universal Judgment shall be
completed, then all the Saints shall make their triumphant Entry with the
Captain of their Salvation, into his Kingdom, and shall ever be with the Lord.

The general Proposition from the Words is this; The Saints after the
Resurrection shall be Completely and Eternally happy in the Presence of Christ.

To make this supernatural Blessedness more easy and intelligible to us, the
Scripture describes it by sensible Representations. For whilst the Soul is
clothed with Flesh, Fancy has such a dominion, that we can conceive of nothing
but by Comparisons and Images taken from material things. It Is therefore set
forth by a Feast, and a Kingdom, to signify the Joy and Glory of that State.
But to prevent all gross conceits; it tells us that the Bodies of the Saints
shall be spiritual, not capable of Hunger and Thirst, nor consequently of any
refreshment that is caused by the satisfaction of those appetites. The objects
of the most noble senses, Seeing and Hearing, the pleasure of which is mixed
with Reason, and not common to the Brutes, are more frequently made use of to
reconcile that glorious State to the proportion of our Minds. Thus sometimes
the Blessed are represented placed on Thrones with Crowns on their heads;
sometimes clothed in White, with Palms in their hands; sometimes singing Songs
of triumph to Him that sits on the Throne, and to their Savior. But the
reality of this Blessedness infinitely exceeds all those faint Metaphors.
Heaven is lessened by Comparisons from earthly things. The Apostle who was
dignified with the revelation of the successes that shall happen to the Church
till Time shall be no more, tells us, it does not appear what we shall be in
Eternity. The things that God has prepared for those that love him, are far
more above the higest ascent of our thoughts, than the Marriage Feast of a
great Prince exceeds in splendour and magnificence the imagination of one that
has always lived in an obscure Village, and never saw any Ornaments of State,
nor tasted Wine in his Life. We can think of those things but according to the
poverty of our Understandings. But so much we know that is able to sweeten all
the bitterness, and render insipid all the sweetness of this World.

This will appear by considering, that whatever is requisite to constitute the
perfect Blessedness of Man, is fully enjoyed in the Divine Presence.

1. An exemption from all evils, is the first condition of perfect Blessedness.
The sentence of wise Solon is true in another sense than he intended, --
Dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
No Man can be named happy whilst in this valley of Tears. But upon the entrance
into Heaven, all those Evils that by their number, variety, or weight disquiet
and oppress us, are at an end.

Sin, of all evils the most hateful, shall be abolished. And all Temptations
that surround us, and endanger our Innocence, shall cease. Here the best Men
lament the weakness of the flesh, and sometimes the violent Assaults of
Spiritual Enemies. St. Paul himself breaks forth into a mournful Complaint, O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of Death? And when
harrass'd with the buffetings of Satan, renews his most earnest Addresses to
God to be freed from them. Here our Purity is not absolute, we must be always
cleansing our selves from the relicts of that deep defilement that cleaves to
our nature. Here our Peace is preserved with the Sword in our hand, by a
continual Warfare against Satan and the World. But in Heaven no ignorance
darkens the Mind, no passions rebel against the sanctified Will, no inherent
pollution remains. The Church is without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.
And all Temptations that war against the Soul, shall then cease. The Tempter
was cast out of Heaven, and none of his poisoned Arrows can reach that Purified
Company. Glorious Liberty! here ardently desired, but fully enjoyed by the Sons
of God above.

And as Sin, so all the penal consequences of it are quite taken away. The
present Life is an incurable Disease, and sometimes attended with that sharp
sense that Death is desired as a Remedy, and accepted as a Benefit. And though
the Saints have reviving Cordials, yet their joys are mixed with sorrows, nay,
caused by sorrows. The tears of Repentance are their sweetest refreshment. Here
the living stones are cut and wounded, and made fit by Sufferings for a Temple
unto God in the New Jerusalem. But as in the building of Solomon's Temple the
noise of a hammer was not heard, for all the parts were framed before with that
exact design and correspondence, that they firmly combined together. They were
hew'n in another place, and nothing remained but the putting them one upon
another in the Temple; and then, as sacred, they were inviolable. So God, the
wise Architect, having prepared the Saints here by many cutting Afflictions,
places them in the Eternal Building, where no voice of Sorrow is heard. Of the
innumerable Company above, is there any Eye that weeps, any Breast that sighs,
any Tongue that complains, or appearance of Grief? The Heavenly State is called
Life, as only worthy of that title. There is no Infirmity of Body, no Poverty,
no Disgrace, no Treachery of Friends, no Persecution of Enemies. There is no
more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor shall there be any more Pain: for
former things are past away. (Rev. 21.4.) God will wipe away all tears from the
eyes of his People. Their Salvation is complete in all degrees. Pure Joy is the
Privilege of Heaven, unmixed Sorrows the Punishment of Hell.

A concurrence of all positive Excellencies is requisite to Blessedness. And
these are to be considered with respect to the entire Man.

1. The Body shall be awaked out of its dead sleep, and quickened into a
glorious, immortal Life. The Soul and Body are the essential parts of Man; and
though the inequality be great in their operations that respect Holiness, yet
their concourse is necessary. Good Actions are designed by the Counsel and
Resolution of the Spirit, but performed by the Ministry of the Flesh. Every
Grace expresses it self in visible Actions by the Body. In the sorrows of
Repentance it supplies Tears, in Fastings its Appetites are restrained, in
Thanksgivings the Tongue breaks forth into the joyful praises of God. All the
victories over sensible pleasure and pain are obtained by the Soul in
conjunction with the Body. Now it is most becoming the Divine Goodness not to
deal so differently, that the Soul should be everlastingly happy, and the Body
lost in forgetfulness; the one glorified in Heaven, the other remain in the
Dust. From their first setting out in the World to the Grave they ran the same
Race, and shall enjoy the same Reward. Here the Body is the Consort of the Soul
in Obedience and Sufferings, hereafter in Fruition. When the Crown of Purity,
or Palm of Martyrdom shall be given by the great Judge in the view of all, they
shall both partake in the honor. Of this we have an earnest in the
Resurrection of Christ in his true Body, who is the first fruits of them that
sleep, 1 Cor. 15. He shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashioned
like to his glorious Body, according to the working of his Power, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.1. A substantial unfading Glory
will shine in them infinitely above the perishing Pride of this World, that is
but in appearance, like the salse Colors painted on the Feathers of a Dove by
the reflection of the Light, which presently vanish, when it changes its
posture, or the Light is withdrawn. Indeed what can be more glorious than to be
conformed to the Humanity of Christ, the Seat of all Beauty and Perfection.
This Conformity shall be the Work of his own Hands. And when Omnipotence
interposes, nothing is difficult. The raising the Body to an unchangeable state
of Glory, is as easy to the Divine Power, as the forming it at the first in
the Womb. As the Sun labors no more in the Mines in the forming Gold and
Silver, the most precious and durable Metals, than in the production of a poor
short-lived Flower.

II. The Soul shall be made perfect in all its Faculties.

1. The Understanding shall clearly see the most excellent Objects. Now we know
but in part, 1 Cor. 13. The naked beauty of Divine Things is veiled, and of
impossible discovery. And the weakness of the Mind is not proportionable to
their dazzling brightness. But when that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away. In that enlightened state, the glorious
manifestation of the Objects shall as much exceed the clearest revealing of
them here, as the Sun in its full luster, one beam of light strained through a
crevice in the Wall. And the Understanding shall be prepared to take a full
view of them. Therefore the Apostle compares the several Periods of the Church,
in respect of the degrees of Knowledge, to the several Ages of this Life. When I
was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child:
but when I became a Man, I put away childish things. In Children the Organs,
either from an excess of moisture, or their smalness, are indisposed for the
vigorous exercise of the Mind: some strictures of Reason appear, a presaging
sign what will be, but mixed with much obscurity. But when the Organs are come
to their just proportion and temperament, the Soul displays its strength and
activity.

All things of a supernatural order shall then be clearly discovered. The
contrivance of our Salvation, the ways of conducting us to Blessedness, which
are Objects of a sublime nature, will afford an exquisite pleasure to the
Understanding. All the secrets of our Redemption shall be unsealed. The great
Mystery of Godliness, the Incarnation of the Eternal Son, and his according
Justice with Mercy, shall then be apparent. The Divine Counsels in governing
the World, are now only visible in their wonderful effects, either of Mercy or
Justice, and those most dreadful; but the Reasons of them are past finding out.
But what our Savior said to Peter, What I do, thou know not now, but shall
know hereafter, is applicable to these impenetrable dispensations. All the
original Fountains of Wisdom, as clear as deep, shall then be opened. We shall
then see the beauty of Providence in disposing temporal things in order to our
eternal felicity. We now see as it were the rought part, and Knots of that
curious Embroidery: but then the whole Work shall be unfolded, the sweetness of
the Colors and proportion of the Figures appear. There we shall be able to
expound the perplexing Riddle, How out of the Eater came Meat, and out of the
Strong came Sweetness. For we shall know as we are known.

We shall see God. Our Savior tells us, This is Life Eternal, to know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. The beginning and
perfection of our Happiness consists in this knowledge. The Deity is spiritual
and invisible to the Eye of the Body, infinite and incomprehensible to the
Soul. But we shall then so clearly understand the Divine Perfections, that our
present knowledge compared to that, is but as the seeing a dark resemblance in a
Glass, to the clear view of a Person in the native beauty of his Face. God is
most gloriously present in Heaven. For according to the degrees of excellence
in the Work, such are the impressions and discoveries of the Virtues of the
Cause. Now all sensible things in the low order of Nature, are but weak
resultances from his Perfections, in comparison of their illustrious Effects in
the Divine World. The Glories of the Place, and of the Inhabitants, the Angels
and Saints, clearly express his Majesty, Goodness and Power. But in a
transcendent manner he exhibits himself in the glorified Mediator. He is styled
the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; not
only for his equal Perfections in respect of the unity of their Nature, but to
signify that God in the Person of the incarnate Mediator is so fully
represented to us, that by the sight of him we see God himself in his
unchangeable Excellencies. This appears by the following words, that having
purged us from our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
for they respect the Son of God as united to the humane Nature, in which he
performed the Office of the Priesthood, and took possession of his glorious
Kingdom. During his humble state, the Divine Virtues, Wisdom, Goodness,
Holiness, Power, were so visible in his Person, Life, Revelations, and
miraculous Works, that when Philip so longed for the sight of the Father as the
only consummate Blessedness, Show us the Father, and it suffices; He told him,
He that has seen me, has seen the Father also. But how brightly do they appear
in his triumphant Exaltation. 'Twas his Prayer on Earth; Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my Glory. Inestimable Felicity! Whether we consider him in the respect of an
Object, that incomparably transcends all the created Glory of Heaven, or in the
relation of our Head, on a double account; partly because he was debased into
the form of a Servant, and suffered all Indignities and Cruelties of Sinners
for us, has received the Recompense of his Meritorious Sufferings, the triumph
of his Victory, being glorifled with the Father with the Glory he had before
the World was; and partly because every Member shall be conformed to him in his
Glory; We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And all Felicity
and Glory is comprised in that Promise. The sight of the Face of Moses when
radiant, had no transforming efficacy; for the light of it was not in him as
its source, but by derivation. But God is Light essentially, and the sight of
his Perfections will be productive of his Likeness in us, so far as it may be
in a restrained Subject. When our Savior was upon the holy Mount, and one
vanishing Beam of Glory appeared in his Transfiguration, Peter was so
transported at the sight, that he forgot the World and himself. How ravishing
then will the sight of him be in his triumphant Majesty, when we shall be
transfigured our selves?

2. As we shall behold God's Face, know his most amiable Excellencies; so they
shall love him as perfectly as they know him. To the illustrations of the Mind,
there are correspondent impressions on the Heart. In the present state our Love
is imperfect, and as Fire out of its sphere, dies away, by our neglect to feed
it with proper materials, enamouring considerations of God. But it is not so in
Heaven: there the Divine Sun attracts every Eye with the light of its Beauty,
and inflames every Heart with the heat of his Love. The continual Presence of
God is in different respects the Cause and Effect of our Love to him. For there
is no more powerful Attractive to love him, than to see him; And Love keeps the
Thoughts undivided from him. God is Love, and will kindle in us a pure
Affection that Eternity shall never lessen.

Our Affections that are now scattered on many things, wherein some small
Reflections of his Goodness appear, shall join in one full Current in Heaven,
where God is all in all. We shall then understand the riches of his Love, that
God who is infinitely happy in himself, should make Man for such a Glory, and
such a Glory for Man. And that when for his Rebellion he was justly expelled
from Paradise, and under a sentence of Eternal Death, God should please to
restore him to his Favor, and to give him a better state than was forfeited.
We shall then understand our infinite Obligations to the Son of God, who
descended from the Heaven of Heavens to our Earth; and which is more, from the
Majesty wherein he there reigned, from the Glory wherein he was visible to the
Angelical Minds, and became Man for Men, Redemption for the Lost, to purchase
Immortal Life for those who were dead to that blessed Life. In short, then God
will express his Love to us in the highest degrees that a finite Creature is
capable to receive from Love it self, and we shall love him with all the
strength of our glorified Powers.

3. Complete satisfaction flows from union with God by Knowledge and Love. In
his Presence is fullness of Joy, at his Right Hand are Pleasures for ever. The
Causes and Excellencies of the Heavenly Life are in those words expressed. The
Causes are the influxive Presence of God, the revelation of his attractive
Perfections, the beholding his Face, the declaration of his peculiar Favor.
This our blessed Lord himself had a respect to, as the complete Reward of his
Sufferings: Thou shall make me full of Joy with thy Countenance. And his
Right Hand, his Bounty, that dispenses, and Power that secures that Felicity.
The Excellencies of this State are fullness of Joy, and that without diminution,
or end.

When the Soul opens its eyes to the clear discoveries of the first Truth, and
its breast to the dear and intimate embraces of the Supreme Good, beyond which
nothing remains to be known, nothing to be enjoyed, what a deluge of the purest
Pleasures will overflow it? We cannot ascend in our thoughts so high, as to
conceive the excess of Joy that attends those operations of the glorified Soul
upon its proper Object. But something we may conjecture.

(1.) Those who are possessed with a noble Passion for Knowledge, how do they
despise all lower Pleasures in comparison of it? How do they forget themselves,
neglect the Body, and retire into the Mind, the highest part of Man, and
nearest to God? The bare apprehension of such things that by their internal
nature have no attractive influence upon the Affections, is pleasant to the
Understanding. As the appearance of Light, though not attended with any other
visible Beauties, refreshes the Eye after long darkness: so the clear discovery
of Truths, how abstract so-ever, that were before unknown, is grateful to the
intellective Faculty. Thus some have been strangely transported with the
pleasures of a Mathematical Demonstration, when the Evidence, not the
Importance of the Thing was so ravishing: for what is more dry and barren of
delight than the speculation of Figures and Numbers? Solon when near his end,
and some of his Friends that visited him were speaking softly of a Point of
Philosophy, by a sound of Wisdom was awakened from the sleep of Death that was
just seizing on him, and opening his Eyes, and raising his Head to give
attention; being asked the reason of it? Answered, That when Vt cum istud
quicquid est de quo disp it at is percepcro, moriar. Val. Max.
I understand what you are discoursing of, I may die. Such was his delight in
Knowledge, that a little of it made his Agony insensible. But here are many
Imperfections that lessen this intellectual Pleasure, which shall cease in
Heaven. Here the acquisition of Knowledge is often with the expense of Health:
the flower of the Spirits, necessary for Natural Operations, is wasted by
intense thoughts. How often are the Learned sickly? As the Flint when it is
struck, gives not a spark without consuming it self; So Knowledge is obtained by
Studies that waste our faint sensitive Faculties. But then our Knowledge shall
be a free emanation from the Spring of Truth, without our labor and pains.
Here we learn by circuit, and discern by comparing things; our Ignorance is
dispelled by a gradual succession of Light: But then Universal Knowledge shall
be infused in a moment. Here after all our labor and toil, how little Knowledge
do we gain? Every Question is a Labyrinth, out of which the nimblest and most
searching Minds cannot extricate themselves. How many specious Errors impose
upon our Understandings? We look on things by false Lights, through deceiving
Spectacles: But then our Knowledge shall be certain and complete. There is no
forbidden Tree in the Celestial Paradise, as no inordinate Affection. But
suppose that all things in the compass of the World were known, yet still there
would be emptiness and anguish in the Mind: for the most comprehensive knowledge
of things that are insufficient to make us happy, cannot afford true
Satisfaction. But then we shall see God in all his Excellencies, the supreme
Object and End, the only Felicity of the Soul. How will the sight of his Glory
personally shining in our Redeemer, in the first moment quench our extreme
thirst, and fill us with joy and admiration? It Is not as the naked conception
of Treasures, that only makes rich in ideas, but that Divine sight gives a real
Interest in him. The Angels are so ravished with the Beauties and Wonders of
his Face, that they never divert a moment from the contemplation of it.

2. The pure Love of the Saints to God is then fully satisfied. Love considered
as an affection of Friendship, is always attended with two desires; to be
assured of Reciprocal Love, and to enjoy the Conversation of the Person
beloved, the testimony of his esteem and good will. This kind of Aristot.
Affection seems to be inconsistent with that infinite distance that is between
God and the Creature. But though it is disproportionable to the Divine Majesty,
it is proportionable to his Goodness. Accordingly our Savior Promises, He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
my self unto him. And to confirm our belief of this astonishing Condescension,
repeats it, If a Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and make our abode with him. In the present state, the signs of God's special
favor are exhibited to his Friends. Now he bestows on them the Honor of being
his Sons, the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, the precious Earnests of his
Love, and Seal of their Redemption. But in eminency of degrees, the effects of
his Love are incomparably more glorious in Heaven. Here the Saints are Adopted,
there Crowned. There he opens all the bright Treasures of his Wisdom, the
Riches of his Goodness, the Beauties of his Holiness, the Glories of his Power,
and by the intimate application of his Presence, makes his Love most sensible
to them. O the mutual delights between God and glorified Souls! God looks on
them with an engaged Eye, as his own by many dear Titles, and is well-pleased
in his own Goodness to them, and ravished with the reflex of his own
Excellencies shining in them. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, ('it is
the Language of Divine Love) so their God rejoices over them. And what a
blessed Rest do they find in the complete fruition of their Beloved? All their
desires quietly expire in his Bosom. What Triumphs of Joy follow? Can we frame
a fuller Conception of Happiness, than to be perfectly loved by infinite
Goodness, and perfectly to love him?

3. The supreme Joy of the Saints is for the Felicity and Glory of God himself.
For as the Holy Soul feels no more powerful motive to love God, than because he
is most worthy of it, as he is God, a Being of infinite Excellencies, and
therefore to be loved above the dearest Persons and Things, even it self; so
the highest Joy it partakes of is from this consideration, That God is
infinitely blessed and glorious. For in this the supreme desire of Love is
accomplished, that the most beloved Object is perfectly honored and pleased.
In Heaven the Love of the Saints to God is in its highest Perfection; and they
see his Glory in the most perfect manner, which causes a transcendent Joy to
them. And this is one reason why the Saints, though shining with unequal
degrees of Glory, are equally content. For their most ardent Love being set on
God, that he is pleased to glorify himself by such various communications of
his Goodness, is full satisfaction to their desires. Besides, in those
different degrees of Glory, every one is so content with his own, Sic itaque
habebit donum aliud alio minus, ut hic quoque donum habeat ne velit amplius.
Aug.
that there is no possible desire of being but what he is.

4. The full joy of Heaven shall continue without diminution, or end.

First, The number of Possessors cannot lessen it. The Divine Presence is an
unwasted Spring of Pleasure equally full and open to all, and abundantly
sufficient to satisfy the immensity of their desires. Envy reigns in this
World, because earthly things are so imperfect in their Nature, and so peculiar
in their Possession, that they cannot suffice, nor be enjoyed by all. But in
Heaven none is touched with that low base passion: for God contains all that is
precious and desirable in the highest Degrees of Perfection, and all partake of
the influence of his Universal Goodness without intercepting one another. In
the Kingdom above there is no cause for the Elder Brother to repine at the
Father's Bounty to the Younger, nor for the Younger to supplant the Elder, to
obtain the Birthright. The Heirs of God are all raised to Sovereign Glory.
Every one enjoys him as entirely and fully, as if solely his felicity. God is a
Good as indivisible as infinite, and not diminished by the most liberal
communications of Himself. We may illustrate this by comparing the Price of our
Redemption, and the Reward. The Death of Christ is an universal benefit to all
the Saints, yet it is so applied to every Believer for his perfect Redemption,
as if our Savior in all his Agonies and Sufferings had no other in his Eye and
Heart; as if all his Prayers, his Tears, his Blood were offered up to his
Father only for that Person. The common respect of it the Apostle declares in
those admirable words, that signify such an excess of God's Love to us, He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things? But to imagine that Et totum se dedit
universis, and totum singulis. Ac per hoc quicquid passione sua Salvator
praestitit, sicut totum ei debent universi, sic singuli; nisi quod prope hoc
plus singuli quam universi, quod totum acceperunt singuli quantum universi,
Salvian.
the propriety of every Believer is thereby prejudiced, is not only false, but
extremely injurious to the Merit and Dignity, and to the infinite Love of
Christ. Therefore the same Apostle tells us, The Life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God; who loved me, and gave himself
for me: as if he were the sole Object of Christ's Love, the End and Reward of
his Sufferings. And this appropriating of it to himself, is no prejudice to the
rights of all others. St. John describes himself by that truly glorious Title,
The Disciple whom Jesus loved. Could he speak this of himself without the
injury and indignation of the other Disciples? Certainly he might. For if we
consider that incomprehensible Love of Christ, expressed to them all at his last
Supper, after Judas was gone forth; As the Father has loved me, so have I
loved you. We may easily understand, that every one of them might justly
believe that he was singularly beloved of Christ. They were all received in the
Heart, though (with John) they did not all lean on the Breast of their Divine
Master. Thus in Heaven God is the Universal Treasure of all the Saints, and the
peculiar Portion of every one. Si audiat multitudo silens, non inter se
particulatim comminnunt sonos, tanquam cibos: sed omne quod sonat and omnibus
totum est, and singulis totum. August. in Epist. ad Volusan.
As by his Essence he equally fills the whole World, and every part of it; and
by his Providence equally regards all and every particular Creature; so in
Heaven he dispenses the Riches of his Love to all, that they cannot desire
more, if every one of them were (if I may so express it) the only begotten of
the only begotten himself, the sole Heir of all the Merits of his Son. Every
Saint may with the inflamed Spouse break forth in that Triumph of Love; My
Beloved is mine, and I am his. Nay, the great number of the glorified Saints is
so far from lessening their Joy, that it unspeakably increases it. The
innumerable Company of Angels, and the General Assembly of the Church of the
Firstborn, next to the happiness of enjoying God, are a chief part of Heaven.
An unfeigned ardent Affection unites that pure Society. Our Love is now kindled
either from a relation in Nature, or some visible Excellencies that render a
Person worthy of our choice and friendship: but in Heaven the Reasons are
greater, and the degrees of Love incomparably more fervent. All Carnal
Alliances and Respects cease in that Supernatural State. The Apostle tells us,
If I have known Christ after the flesh, I know him so no more. By the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ he was transported into another World, and
had communion with him as an Heavenly King, without low regards to the temporal
privilege of conversing with him on Earth. The Spiritual relation is more near
and permanent than the strictest band of Nature. The Saints have all relation
to the same Heavenly Father, and to Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and Head
of that happy Fraternity. The principal motive of Love here, is for the
inherent Excellencies of a Person. Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, are mighty
Attractives, and produce a more worthy Affection, a more intimate Confederacy
of Souls, than propinquity in Nature. David declares that all his delight was
in the Excellent. But there are allays of this Noble Love here. For,

1. There are relics of Frailty in the best Men on Earth, some Blemishes that
render them less amiable when discovered. Here their Graces are mixed
Infirmities, and but ascending to Glory. Accordingly our Love to them must be
regular, and serene; not clouded with Error, mistaking defects for amiable
qualities. But in Heaven the Image of God is complete, by the union of all the
glorious Virtues requisite to its perfection. Every Saint there exactly agrees
with the first Exemplar, is transformed according to the primitive beauty of
Holiness. No spot or wrinkle remains, or any such thing, that may cast the
least aspect of deformity upon them.

2. In the present state, the least part of the Saints worth is visible. As the
Earth is fruitful in Plants and Flowers, but its Riches are in the Mines of
precious Metals, the veins of Marble hidden in its bosom. True, Grace appears
in sensible Actions, but its Glory is within. The sincerity of Aims, the purity
of Affections, the impresses of the Spirit on the Heart, the interior Beauties
of Holiness, are only seen by God. Besides, such is the humility of eminent
Saints, that the more they abound in Spiritual Treasures, the less they show.
As the Heavenly Bodies when in nearest conjunction with the Sun, and fullest of
light, make the least appearance to our sight. But all their Excellencies shall
then be in view. The Glory of God shall be revealed in them. And how attractive
is the Divine Likeness to an holy Eye? How will it ravish the Saints to behold
an immortal Loveliness shining in one another? Their Love is mutual and
reflexive, proportionable to the Cause of it. An equal constant Flame is
presery'd by pure materials. Every one is perfectly amiable, and perfectly
enamored with all. Now can we frame a fuller Conception of Happiness, than
such a State of Love, wherein whateyer is pleasant in Friendship is in
perfection, and whatever is distastful by Men's folly and weakness is abolished.
The Psalmist breaks out in a Rapture, Behold how good and pleasant it is for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Love is the Beauty and Strength of
Societies, the Pleasure of Life. How excellent is the Joy of the Blessed, when
the Prayer of Christ shall be accomplished, that they all may be one! As thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. God is
absolutely One in his glorious Nature and Will, and therefore unalterably
happy; And their inviolable Union in Love, is a Ray of the Essential Unity
between the sacred Persons. There are no Divisions of Heart and Tongues, as in
this Babel, but the most perfect and sweetest Concord, an Eternal Agreement in
Tempers and Inclinations. There are no envious Comparisons; for Love that
affectively transforms one into another, causes the Glory of every Saint to
redound to the Joy of all. Every one takes his share in the Felicity of all,
and adds to it. Such is the power of that Celestial Fire wherein they all burn,
that it melts and mixes Souls in such an entire Union, that by Complacence and
an intimate Joy, the Blessedness of all is, as it were, proper to every one; as
if every one were placed in the Hearts of all, and all in the Heart of every
one. If in the Church of the firstborn Christians, in the earthly Jerusalem,
the Band of Charity was so strict, that it is said, the Multitude of Believers
were of one Heart, and one Soul; How much more intimate and inseparable is the
Union of the Saints in Jerusalem above, where every one loves another as
himself?

It Is recorded of Alexander, that entering with Haephestion his Favorite, into
the Pavilion of Darius's Mother, then his Prisoner, she bowed to the Favorite,
as having a greater appearance of Majesty, thinking him to be Alexander; but
advised of her Error, she humbly begged his Pardon, to whom the generous King
replied, Non errasti, Matter, nam hic Alexander est. Curt. l. 3.
You did not err, Mother, for this is also Alexander. Such was their Affection,
that whoever was taken of them, the other was taken in him; the less ascending
in the greater, without degrading the greater in the less. This is a Copy of
the holy Love of the Blessed; but with the same difference, as between the
Description of a Star with a Coal, and its Beauty in its proper Aspect. And
where all is Love, all is Delight. O how do they enjoy and triumph in the
Happiness of one another? With what an unimaginable tenderness do they embrace?
What Reciprocations of Endearments are between them? O their ravishing
Conversation, and sweet Intercourse! for their Presence together in Heaven is
not a silent Show. In the Transfiguration, Moses and Elias talked with Christ.
With what excellent Discourses do they entertain one another? If David felt
such inward pleasure from the sense of God's favors, that he could not
restrain the expression of it, but invites the Saints, Come and hear, all ye
that fear the Lord, and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul. Certainly
in Heaven, the Blessed with overflowing Affections recount the Divine
Benefits, the admirable Methods, whereby the Life of Grace was begun, preserved
and carried on in the midst of Temptations; the continual Succession of Mercies
in the time of their Hopes, and the Consummation of all in the time of their
Enjoyment. How joyfully do they concur in their Thanksgivings to God for the
goodness of Creation, in making them reasonable Creatures, capable to know,
love and enjoy Him, when they might have been of the lowest Order in the whole
Sphere of Beings; for his compassionate Care and Providence over them in this
World. But especially for his Sovereign Mercy in electing them to be Vessels of
honor; for his powerful Grace, in rescuing them from the cruel and ignominious
bondage of Sin; for his most free Love, that justified them from all their
Guilt by the Death of his only Son, and glorified them with himself. They are
never weary in this delightful Exercise, but continually bless him for his
Mercy that endures for ever. We may judge by the Saints here, when they are in
a fit disposition to praise God, what Fervours they feel in their united
Praises of him in Heaven. The Psalmist in an Ecstasy calls to all the parts of
the World to join with him; The Lord reigns, let the Heavens rejoice, and the
Earth be glad; let the Sea roar, let the Fields be joyful, and all that dwell
therein. He desires that Nature should be elevated above it self, that the dead
parts be inspired with life, the insensible feel motions of joy, and those that
want a voice, break forth in praises, to adorn the Divine Triumph. With what
Life and Alacrity will the Saints in their blessed Communion celebrate the
Object of their Love and Praises? The Seraphims about the Throne cried to one
another, to express their Zeal and Joy, in celebrating his Eternal Purity and
Power, and the Glory of his Goodness. Oh the unspeakable Pleasure of this
Concert! when every Soul is harmonious, and contributes his Part to the Music
of Heaven! O could we hear but some Echo of those Songs wherewith the Heaven
of Heavens resounds, some remains of those Voices wherewith the Saints above
triumph in the Praises, in the solemn Adoration of the King of Spirits, how
would it inflame our desires to be joined with them? Blessed are those that are
in thy House, they always praise Thee.

2. The fullness of Joy in Heaven is undecaying; for the causes of it are always
equal. And those are the Beatifick Object revealed, and the uninterrupted
Contemplation of it.

Whilst we are here below, the Sun of Righteousness, as to our perception and
sense, has ascensions and declinations, accesses and recesses. And our Earth is
not so purified, but some Vapors arise that intercept his cheerful refreshing
Light. From hence there are alternate successions of Spiritual Comforts and
Sorrows, of Doubts and filial Confidence in the Saints. It Is a rare favor of
Heaven, when an humble Believer in his whole course is so circumspect as not to
provoke God to appear displeased against him: When a Christian (as those
tutelar Angels spoken of in the Gospel) always beholds the face of his Heavenly
Father, and converses with him with an holy Liberty. And what a torment the
hiding of God's face is to a deserted Soul, only they know who feel it.
External troubles are many times attended with more Consolations to the Spirit,
than Afflictions to Sense; but to love God with a transeendent Affection, and
to fear he is our Enemy, no punishment exceeds, or is equal to it. As his
Loving Kindness in their esteem is better than Life, so his Displeasure is
worse than Death. How do they wrestle with God by Prayers and Tears, and offer
as it were, a holy Violence to the King of Heaven, to recover their first
serenity of Mind, the lost Peace of Heart? How passionately do they cry out,
with Job, in the Book of his Patience, (Job 29.2, 3, 4.) O that I were as in
months past, as in the day taken God preserved me: when his Candle shined upon
my Head, and when by his Light I walked through darkness: As I was in the days
of my youth, when the Seoret of God was upon my Tabernacle. And sometimes God
delays the revealing himself even to his dearest Children; not that he does
not see their Necessities, and hear their Prayers, or is so hard that till
their Extremities he is not moved with Compassion, but for wise and holy
Reasons; Either that they may not return to Folly, if by any presumptuous Sin
they forfeited their Peaces; or if they have been careful to please him, yet he
may deprive them of Spiritual Comforts for a time, to keep them humble, and
that with an obedient resignation to his Sovereign Pleasure they may wait for
his reviving Presence. And then Joy returns greater than before. For thus God
usually renders with interest what he suspended only for trial. But the Saints
above are for ever enlightened with the vital splendour and dear regards of his
Countenance, always enjoy his beamy smiles. A continual effusion of Glory
illustrates Heaven and all its blessed Inhabitants.

And their Contemplation of God is sixed. If the Object, though extraordinary
glorious, were transient, or the Eye so weak that it could only see it but by
glances, the height of Joy would not be perpetual. But the Mind is prepared
with supernatural vigor, to see the brightness of God's Face, and by the most
attentive application always converses with that blessed Object, so that the
Joy of Heaven is never intermitted for a moment. They always see, and love, and
rejoice, and praise him.

It Is possible a carnal Suspicion may arise in some, as if the uniform
perpetual Vision of the same Glory might lose its perfect delightfulness. For
those who seek for happiness in the vanity of the Creatures, are always
desirous of Change, and have their Judgments so corrupted, that while they
languish with a secret desire after an unchangeable Good, yet they conceive no
Good as desirable, that is not changed.

But to correct this gross Error of Fancy, let us a little enquire into the
Causes of Dissatisfaction, that make the constant fruition of the same thing
here to be tedious.

1. Sensible things are of such a limited Goodness, that not any of them can
supply all our present wants, so that it is necessary to leave one for another.
And the most of them are Remedies of our diseased Appetites, and if not
temperately used, are destructive Evils. Eating and Drinking are to extinguish
Hunger and Thirst, but continued beyond just measure become nauseous. Besides,
the Insufficiency of their Objects, the Senses themselves cannot be satisfied
all at once. The Ear cannot attend to delightful Sounds, and the Eye be intent
on beautiful Colors at the same time: the Satisfaction of one Sense defeats
another of enjoying its proper good; therefore the same Object is not
constantly pleasant, but the Heart is distempered from as many Causes, as there
are desires unaccomplish'd. Add further, all things under the Sun afford only a
superficial delight, and miserably deceive the Expectations raised of them: and
many times there is a mixture of some evil in them, that is more offensive than
the good is delightful. The Honey is attended with a Sting, so that often those
things we sigh after through vehement desire, when they are obtained, we sigh
for grief. Now all these Causes of dissatisfaction cease in in Heaven; for
Vitae nos taedium tene^, timor mortis natat omne consilium, nec implere nos
ulla foelicat^s potest. Causa autem est, quod non pervenimus ad ilud bonum
immensum and insuperabile, ubi necesse est consistat nobis voluntas nostra,
quia ultra summum non est locus. Son. ep. 74.
God is an infinite Good, and whatever is truly desirable and precious is in
him in all degrees of Perfection. And in his Presence all the powers of the
Soul are drawn out in their most pleasant exercise, and always enjoy their
entire happiness. The Fruition of him exceeds our most raised hopes, as much as
he is more glorious in Himself than in any borrowed Representations. God will
be to us incomparably above what we can ask or think. The Compass of of our
thoughts, the Depth of our desires are imperfect Measures of his Perfections.
And as he is a Pure Good in Himself, so he is prevalent over all Evil. It Is
evident therefore, that nothing can allay the Joys of Saints when they are in
God's presence.

2. Novelty is not requisite to ingratiate every Good, and make it perfectly
delightful. (...) Arist. Eth. lib. 7. c. ult.
God is infinitely happy, to whom no Good was ever new. It Is indeed the Sauce
that gives a delicious taste to inferior things. For Men relish only what is
eminent, and the good things of this World are so truly mean, that they are
fain to borrow a show of Greatness by comparison with a worse estate preceding.
But an infinite Good produces always the same pure equal complete Joy, because
it arises from its intrinsic perfection, that wants no Foil to commend it. The
Psalmist breaks forth, Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? This is no vanishing
Rapture, but a constant joyful height of Affection. God the essential Happiness
of the Saints, is always perfectly lovely and delightful to them.

3. The glorified Saints in every period of their happy state, have as lively a
perception of it as in the beginning. To make this evident, we must consider
that the pleasure of Novelty springs from a quick sense of the opposite terms,
between our condition in the want of some desired Good, and after our obtaining
it. Now the Mind is more intense on the advantage, and more strongly affected
at first. One newly freed from the torments of a sharp Disease, feels a greater
pleasure than from a constant tenor of Health. Those who are raised from a low
State to eminent Dignity, are transported with their first change; but in tract
of time the remembrance of their mean condition is so weakened and spent, that
it is like the shadow of a Dream, and proportionably their Joy is lessened.
Honors, like Perfumes, by custom are less sensible to those that carry them.
But the Saints above always consider and feel the excellent difference between
their suffering and triumphant state. They never lose that ravishing part of
Felicity, the vivid sense of past evils. Their reflections are always as strong
on the Misery from whence they were raised to the pitch of Happiness, as in
their first glorious Translation. In what an Ecstasy of wonder and pleasure will
they be, from the fresh memory of what they were, and the joyful sense of what
they are? I was (says the admiring Soul) poor, blind, and naked; but O
miraculous and happy Alteration! I am full of Light, enriched with the
Treasures of Heaven, adorned with divine Glory. I was under the tyrannous power
of Satan, but he is bruised under my feet. I was sentenced to an everlasting
Separation from the Presence of God, my only Life and Joy; but now am possessed
of my supreme Good. O how transporting is the comparison of these wide and
contrary Extremes? How beautiful and pleasant is the Day of Eternity, after
such a dark tempestuous Night? How does the remembrance of such Evils produce a
more lively and feeling fruition of such Happiness? How strangely and mightily
does Salvation with Eternal Glory affect the Soul? This gives a spritely accent
to their everlasting Hallelujahs. This preserves an affectionate heat in their
Thanksgivings to their Victorious Deliverer. And thus their Happiness is always
the same, and always new. Their Pleasure is continued in its perfection.

Lastly. The Blessedness of the Saints is without end. This makes Heaven to be
it self. There is no satiety of the present, no solicitude for the future.
Were there a possibility, or the least suspicion of losing that happy state, it
would cast an aspersion of bitterness upon all their delights: they could not
enjoy one moments repose; but the more excellent their Happiness is, the more
stinging would their fear be of parting with it. But the Inheritance reserved
in Heaven, is immortal, undefiled, and fades not away. And the tenure of their
Possession is infinitely firm by the Divine Power, the true Support of their
everlasting Duration. With God is the Fountain of Life. They enjoy a better
Immortality, than the Tree of Life could have preserved in Adam. The
Revolutions of the Heavens, and Ages, are under their Feet, and cannot in the
least alter or determine their Happiness. After the passing of millions of
Years, still an entire Eternity remains of their enjoying God. O most desirable
state where Blessedness and Eternity are inseparably united. O joyful Harmony!
when the full Chorus of Heaven shall sing, This God is our God for ever and
ever. This adds an infinite weight to their Glory. This redoubles their
unspeakable Joys with infinite sweetness and security. They repose themselves
in the complete fruition of their Happiness. God reigns in the Saints, and they
live in him for ever.

From what has been discoursed we should,

1. Consider the woeful Folly of Men in refusing such an Happiness, that by the
admirable Favor of God is offered to their choice. Can there be an
Expectation, or Desire, or Capacity in Man of enjoying an Happiness beyond what
is Infinite and Eternal? O blind and wretched World! so careless of everlasting
Felicity. Who can behold, without compassion and indignation, Men vainly
seeking for Happiness where it is not to be found, and after innumerable
disappointments fly to an Impossibility, and neglect their sovereign and final
Blessedness? Astonishing Madness! that God and Heaven should be despised in
comparison of painted Trifles. This adds the greatest Contumely to their
Impiety. What powerful Charm obstructs their true judging of things? What
Spirit of Error possesses them? Alas, Eternal things are unseen! not of
conspicuous moment, and therefore in the carnal Balance are esteemed light,
against temporal things present to the Sense. It does not appear what we shall
be: The Vail of the visible Heavens covers the Sanctuary, where JESUS our
High Priest is entered, and stops the enquiring Eye.

But have we not assurance by the most infallible Principles of Faith, that the
Son of God came down from Heaven to live with us, and die for us, and that he
rose again to confirm our Belief in his exceeding great and precious Promises
concerning this happiness in the Future State? And do not the most evident
Principles of Reason and universal Experience prove, that this World cannot
afford true Happiness to us? How wretchedly do we forfeit the Prerogative of
the reasonable Nature, by neglecting our last and blessed End? If the Mind be
darkened, that it does not see the amiable Excellencies of God, and the Will so
depraved that it does not feel their ravishing power; the Man ceases to be a
Man, and becomes like the Beasts that perish. As a blind Eye is no longer an
Eye, being absolutely useless to that end for which it was made. And though in
this present state Men are stupid and unconcerned, yet hereafter their Misery
will awaken them, to discover what is that Supreme Good wherein their
Perfection and Felicity consists. When their folly shall be exposed before God,
Angels, and Saints, in what extreme confusion will they appear before that
glorious and immense Theater? Our Savior told the unbelieving Jews, There
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves
turned out. They shall be tortured with the desire of Happiness without
possible satisfaction. It Is most just that those who err without excuse, should
repent without remedy.

2. Let us be excited seriously to apply our selves in the use of effectual
means for the obtaining this Happiness. Indeed the original Cause of it, is the
pure rich Mercy of God; the meritorious, is the most precious Obedience of our
Savior, by whom we obtain plenteous Redemption. His Abasement is the cause of
our Exaltation. The Wounds he received in his Body the Characters of Ignominy,
and Footsteps of Death, are the Fountains of our Glory. Eternal Life is the
Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. But the Gospel declares; That
without Holiness no Man shall see God. An holy change of our Natures, and
perseverance in the Course of universal Obedience, are indispensibly requisite
in order to our obtaining Heaven. Those who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for Glory, Honor, and Immortality, shall partake of Eternal
Life. Now were there no other Reason of this Constitution, but the sovereign
Will of God, it were sufficient. But the Foundation of it is laid in the nature
of the Things themselves. Therefore our Savior does not simply declare, that
an unregenerate Person shall not see the Kingdom of God, but with the greatest
emphasis cannot, to signify an absolute impossibility of it. Besides the Legal
Bar that excludes unsanctified Persons from the beatifick vision of God, there
is a moral incapacity. Suppose that Justice should allow Omnipotence to
translate such a Sinner to Heaven, would the Place make him happy? Can two
incongruous Natures delight in one another? The Happiness of Sense is by an
impression of Pleasure from a suitable Object: The Happiness of intellectual
Beings arises from an entire conformity of dispositions. So that unless God
recede from his Holiness, which is absolutely impossible, or Man be purified,
and changed into his likeness, there can be no sweet Communion between them.
Our Savior assigns this Reason of the necessity of Regeneration in order to
our admission into Heaven: That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. According to the quality of the
Principle, such is what proceeds from it. The Flesh is a corrupt Principle, and
accordingly the natural Man is wholly carnal in his Propensions, Operations,
and End. The Disease is turned into his Constitution. He is dead to the
Spiritual Life, to the Actions and Enjoyments that are proper to it: Nay, there
is in him a surviving Principle of Enmity to that Life: not only a mortal
coldness to God, but a stiff aversion from him, a perpetual resistance and
impatience of the Divine Presence, that would disturb his voluptuous
enjoyments. The Exercises of Heaven would be as the Torments of Hell to him,
while in the midst of those pure Joys his inward inclinations vehemently run
into the lowest Lees of Sensuality. And therefore till this contrariety, so
deep and predominant in an unholy PersOn, be removed, it is utterly impossible
he should enjoy God with satisfaction. Holiness alone prepares Men for the
possession of Celestial Happiness, that is against the corruption, and above
the perfection of mere Nature.

Let us then, having such a Joy set before us, lay aside every weight, and the
Sin which does so easily beset us, and run with patience the race that is set
before us, looking to Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Methinks the
sight of worldly Men, so active and vigilant to prosecute their low Designs,
should quicken us to seek with the greater diligence and alacrity the Kingdom
of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof. A carnal Wretch urged by the sting of
a brutish desire, with what impatience does he pursue the pleasure of Sin,
which is but for a season? An Ambitious Person, with what an intemperate height
of Passion does he chase a Feather? A Covetous Man, how greedily does he
prosecute the Advantages of the present World that passes away, and the Lusts
thereof? Ah! how do they upbraid our indifferent desires, or dull delays, and
cold endeavors, when such an high Prize is set before us? Who is able to
conceive the excess of Pleasure the Soul feels when it first enters through the
beautiful Gate of Paradise, and sees before it that incomprehensible Glory, and
hears a Voice from Him that sits upon the Throne, Enter into thy Master's Joy,
for ever to be happy with him? The serious belief of this will draw forth all
our active Powers in the Service of God. The feeding by lively thoughts on this
supernatural Food, will add new vigor and luster to our Graces, and make our
Victory easy over the World. If we believe indeed that our Bodies shall be
spiritual, and our Souls divine in their perfections, it will make us resolute
to subdue the Reble Flesh, and rescue the captived Spirit from all
Intanglements of Iniquity. Having the promise of such an excellent Reward, let
us always abound in the Work of the Lord.

3. The lively hope of this Blessedness is powerful to support us under the
greatest Troubles can befall us in this our mortal condition. Here we are tossed
upon the alternate waves of Time, but hereafter we shall arrive at the Port,
the blessed Bosom of our Savior, and enjoy a peaceful calm: and so we shall
ever be with the Lord. Words of infinite sweetness! This is the Song of our
Prosperity, and Charm of our Adversity: We shall ever be with the Lord. Well
might the Apostle add immediately after, therefore comfort one another with
these words.

More particularly. They are a Lenitive to moderate our Sorrows upon the
departure of our dearest Friends, who die in the Lord: for they ascend from
this Valley of Tears, to the happy Land of the Living. What Father is so
deserted of Reason, as to bear impatiently the parting with his Son, that goes
over a narrow part of the Sea, to a rich and pleasant Country, and receives the
investiture and peaceable possession of a Kingdom? Nay, by how much the
stronger his Love is, so much the more transporting is his Joy: especially if
he expects shortly to be with him, to see him on the Throne, in the state of a
King, and to partake of his happiness. If then it be impossible to Nature to be
grieved at the felicity of one that is loved; according to what Principle of
Nature or Faith do Believers so uncomfortably lament the Death of Friends, of
whom they have assurance that after their leaving our Earth, they enter into an
everlasting Kingdom, to receive a Crown of Glory from Christ himself? Our
Savior tells the Disciples, If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said I
go to my Father, to sit down at his right hand in Majesty. A pure Affection
directly terminates in the happiness and exaltation of the Person that is
loved. I am not speaking against the exercise of tender Affections on the loss
of our dear Friends; and the pensive feeling of God's hand in it; which is a
natural and necessary duty. There is a great difference between Stupidity and
Patience: but violent Passion, or unremitting Sorrow, is most unbecoming the
blessed Hope assured to us in the Gospel.

Chrysostom treating of this Argument, and reflecting upon the custom of those
Times, wherein at Funeral Solemnities a train of Mourning Women attended the
Corpse, tearing their Hair and Face, and crying out with all the expressions of
desperate Sorrow, breaks forth, Ah Christian Faith and Religion! that was
triumphant over thine Enemies in so many Battles and Victories by the Blood and
Death of the Martyrs, how art thou contradicted by the practice of these who
profess thee in words? Is this not to be sorrowful as those that have no hope?
Are these the affections, the expressions of one that believes the blessedness
of Immortal Life? What will the Heathens say? How will they be induced to
believe the Promises of Christ to his Servants of a glorious Kingdom, when
those who are so in title, behave themselves as if they had no steadfast Faith
in them?

4. The hopes of this blessed state, is able to free us from the fear of Death.
This last Enemy gives a hot Alarm to Mankind, both as it deprives them of all
that is pleasant here, and for the terrible consequences that attend it. To the
Eye of Sense, a dead Body is a spectacle of fearful appearance. He that a
little before heard, and discoursed, and with a cheerful Air conversed and
enjoyed the World, now is dead, and all his Senses in him: the Eyes are dead to
light, and the Ears to sounds, the Tongue to words, the Heart to feel any
affections, and the Countenance to discover them: nothing remains but silence,
horror, and corruption. Besides, after Death comes Judgment, and a state of
unrelenting Torments to the wicked. But a true Believer that has been obedient
to his Savior, sees things by another Light than that of sense, and has living
hopes in his dying Agonies. He knows that Death to the Saints is but a sleep:
and while the Body rests in the Grave, the Soul is as it were all Act,
continually exercising its most noble faculties on the best Objects. Does the
Soul sleep in that all-enlightned World, that sees with open face the infinite
Beauty of God? that hears and bears a part in the Hymns of the Angels and
Saints encircling his Throne? that drinks of the Rivers of Pleasure that flow
from his Presence? that freely and joyfully converses with all the Celestial
Courtiers, the Princes of that Kingdom, the Favorites of God? Then it truly
lives. This reconciles Death to a Christian, who has nothing more in his wishes
than to be with Christ, and knows that Diseases and Pains, the forerunners of
it, are but as breaking down the Walls of this earthly dark Prison, that the
Soul may take its flight to the happy Region, and for ever enjoy the Liberty of
the Sons of God. And for his Body, that shall be reunited to the Soul in
Glory. Methinks God speaks to a dying Believer, as he did to Jacob, when he was
to descend to Egypt; Fear not to go down into the Grave, I will go down with
thee, and I will bring thee up again. The same Almighty Voice that gave being
to the World, shall awake those who sleep in the Dust, and reform them
according to the Example of Christ's glorified Body. O how should we long for
that triumphant day! and with most ardent Aspirings pray, Thy Kingdom come in
its full power and glory?

I Shall now come to speak of the Mournful Subject, the Cause of my Appearing
here at this time, the Deceased, Reverend and Excellent Divine, Dr. Thomas
Manton: A Name worthy of precious and eternal Memory. And I shall consider him,
both in the quality of his Office, as he was an Ambassador of Christ, declaring
his Mind, and representing his Authority, and in the holiness of his Person,
showing forth the Graces and Virtues of his Divine Master.

God had furnished him with a rare union of those parts that are requisite to
form an excellent Minister of his Word. A clear Judgment, rich Fancy, strong
Memory, and happy Elocution met in him, and were excellently improved by his
diligent study.

The Preaching of the Word is the principal part of the Minister's Duty, most
essential to his Calling, and most necessary to the Church. For this end
chiefly, the severral Orders in the Ministerial Office were instituted, (
Ephesians. 4.) and upon our Savior's triumphant ascent and reception into Heaven,
an abundant effusion of the Spirit in Graces and Abilities descended upon Men.
Now in the performing this Work, he was of that conspicuous Eminence, that none
could detract from him, but from ignorance or envy.

He was endowed with extraordinary knowledge in the Scriptures, those Holy
Oracles from whence all Spiritual Light is derived: And in his preaching, gave
such a perspicuous account of the order and dependence of Divine Truths; and
with that felicity applied the Scriptures to confirm them, that every Subject
by his management was cultivated and improved. His Discourses were so clear and
convincing, that none without offering voluntary violence to Conscience, could
resist their Evidence. And from hence they were effectual not only to inspire a
sudden Flame, and raise a short Commotion in the Affections, but to make a
lasting Change in the Life. For in the humane Soul such is the composition of
its Faculties, that till the Understanding be rectified in its Apprehensions
and Estimations, the Will is never induced to make an entire firm choice of
what is necessary for the obtaining perfect Happiness. A sincere persevering
Conversion is effected by weighty Reasons, that sink and settle in the Heart.

His Doctrine was incorrupt and pure, the Truth according to Godliness. He was
far from a guilty vile intention, to prostitute that sacred Ordinance for the
acquiring any private secular advantage. Neither did he entertain his Hearers
with impertinent Subtilties, empty Notions, intricate Disputes, dry and barren
without productive Virtue: But as one that always had before his Eyes the great
End of the Ministry, the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, his Sermons
were directed to open their eyes, that they might see their wretched condition
as Sinners, to hasten their flight from the Wrath to come, to make them humbly,
thankfully and entirely receive Christ, as their Prince, and all-sufficient
Savior. And to build up the Converted in their most holy Faith, and more
excellent Love, that is the fulfilling of the Law. In short, to make true
Christians eminent in Knowledge and Universal Obedience.

As the Matter of his Sermons was designed for the good of Souls; so his way of
expression was proper to that end. Words are the Vehicle of the Heavenly Light.
As the Divine Wisdom was incarnate to reveal the Eternal Counsels of God to the
World; so Spiritual Wisdom in the Mind, must be clothed with words, to make it
sensible to others. And in this he had a singular Talent. His Style was not
exquisitely studied, not consisting of harmonious Periods, but far distant from
vulgar meanness. His Expression was natural and free, clear and eloquent, quick
and powerful, without any spice of folly, and always suitable to the Simplicity
and Majesty of Divine Truths. His Sermons afforded substantial food with
delight, so that a fastidious Mind could not disrelish them. He abhorred a vain
ostentation of Wit, in handling Sacred things; so venerable and grave, and of
eternal consequence. Indeed, what is more unbecoming a Minister of Christ, than
to waste the spirits of his Brain, as a Spider does his bowels, to spin a Web
only to catch Flies? to get vain applause by foolish pleasing the ignorant. And
what cruelty is it to the Souls of Men? Suet.
It Is recorded as an instance of Nero's savage temper, that in a general
Famine, when many perished by hunger, he ordered a Ship should come from Egypt
(the Granary of Italy) laden with Sand for the use of Wrestlers. In such
extremity to provide only for delight, that there might be Spectacles on the
Theater, when the City of Rome was a spectacle of such misery, as to melt the
heart of any but a Nero, was most barbarous Cruelty. But it is cruelty of an
heavier imputation, for a Minister to prepare his Sermons to please the foolish
curiosity of Fancy with flashy Conceits; nay, such light Vanities, that would
scarce be endured in a Scene, whiles hungry Souls languish for want of solid
nourishment.

His fervor and earnestness in Preaching was such, as might soften and make
pliant the most stubborn, obdurate Spirits. I am not speaking of one whose
Talent was only in Voice, that labors in the Pulpit as if the end of Preaching
were for the exercise of the Body, Si sudare aliter non potes, est alind.
and not for the profit of Souls: But this Man of God was inflamed with an Holy
Zeal, and from thence such ardent expressions broke forth, as were capable to
procure attention and consent in his Hearers. He spoke as one that had a living
Faith within him of Divine Truths. From this union of Zeal with his Knowledge,
he was excellently qualified to convince and convert Souls. The sound of words
only strikes the Ear, but the Mind reasons with the Mind, and the Heart speaks
to the Heart.

His unparalled Assiduity in Preaching, declared him very sensible of those
dear and strong Obligations that lie upon Ministers, to be very diligent in
that Blessed Work. What a powerful Motive our Savior urged upon St. Peter?
John 21.
As thou love me, feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. And can any feed too much,
when none can love enough? Can any Pains be sufficient for the Salvation of
Souls, for which the Son of God did not esteem his Blood too costly a price? Is
not incessant unwearied Industry requisite to advance the Work of Grace in them
to perfection? In this the Work of a Minister has its peculiar disadvantage,
That whereas an Artificer, how curious and difficult soever his Work be, yet
has this encouragement, That what is begun with Art and Care, he finds in the
same state wherein 'twas left. A Painter that designs an exact Piece, draws
many Lines, often touches it with his Pencil to give it Life and Beauty, and
though unfinished, it is not spoiled by his intermission. A Sculptor that carves
a Statue, though his labor be hard from the resistance of the Matter, yet his
Work remains firm and durable. But the Heart of Man is of a strange temper,
hard as Marble, not easily receptive of Heavenly Impressions; yet fluid as
Water, those Impressions are easily defaced in it; it is exposed to so many
temptations that induce an oblivion of eternal things, that without frequent
excitations to quicken and confirm its holy purposes, it grows careless, and
all the labor is lost that was spent on it. This faithful Minister abounded in
the Work of the Lord; and which is truly admirable, though so frequent in
Preaching, yet was always superior to others, and equal to himself. In his last
time when declining to Death, yet he would not leave his beloved Work; the
vigor of his Mind supporting the weakness of his Body. I remember when oppressed
with an obstinate Hoarsness, a Friend desiring him to spare himself; he
rejected the advice with indignation.

He was no fomenter of Faction but studious of the Public Tranquillity. He
knew what a Blessing Peace is, and wisely foresaw the pernicious Consequences
that attend Divisions. By Peace, the bond of mutual Harmony, the weakest things
are preserved and prosper; but where Discord reigns, the strongest are near to
ruin. The heavenly Consent in the Primitive Church, was a principal cause of
its miraculous increase and flourishing; but after Dissentions prevailed
amongst Christians, that was destroyed in a short time, which was built by the
Divine Union and Heroic Patience of the Primitive Christians. And the glorious
Beginnings that promised the Reformation of all Europe, were more obstructed by
the Dissentions of some employed in that Blessed Work, than by all the Power
and Subtilty, the Arms and Artifices of Rome it self. How afflictive is the
consideration of our divided Church? Sweet Peace! whither art thou fled?
Blessed Savior! who did by thy precious Blood reconcile Heaven and Earth,
send down thy Spirit to inspire us with that Wisdom that is pure and peaceable,
that those who agree in the same Principles of Faith, in the same substantial
parts of Worship, in asserting the same indispensible necessity of Holiness,
may receive one another in love. I am affectionately engaged in a Matter that
so nearly touches all those that value the Protestant Interest.

Briefly; Consider him as a Christian, his Life was answerable to his Doctrine.

It Is applicable to some Ministers, what is observed of the Carbuncle; by its
color, luster, and fiery sparklings it seems to be actually a Fire, but it has
only the name and appearance of it. Thus some in the Pulpit seem to be all on
fire with Zeal, yet their Hearts are as cold as a Stone, without Holy
Affections, and their Lives are unworthy their Divine Ministration. But this
Servant of God was like a fruitful Tree, that produces in its Branches what it
contains in the Root; his inward Grace was made visible in a Conversation
becoming the Gospel of Christ.

His resolute Contempt of the World secured him from being wrought on by those
Motives, that tempt low Spirits from their Duty. He would not rashly throw
himself into troubles, nor spreta Conscientia avoid them. His generous
Constancy of Mind in resisting the current of Popular Humor, declared his
Loyalty to his Divine Master. His Charity was eminent in procuring Supplies for
others, when in mean Circumstances himself. But he had great experience of
God's fatherly Provision, to which his filial Confidence was correspondent.

His Conversation in his Family was holy and exemplary, every day instructing
them from the Scriptures in their Duty.

I shall finish my Character of him, with observing his Humility. He was deeply
affected with the sense of his Frailties and Unworthiness. He considered the
infinite Purity of God, the Perfection of his Law the Rule of our Duty, and by
that humbling Light discovered his manifold defects. He expressed his thoughts to
me a little before his Death; If the Holy Prophets were under strong
impressions of fear, upon the extraordinary discovery of the Divine Presence,
how shall we poor Creatures appear before that Holy and Dread Majesty? Isaiah,
after his glorious vision of God, reflecting upon himself, as not retired from
the commerce and corruption of the World, breaks forth, Woe is me, for I am
undone! because I am a Man of unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
People of unclean Lips; for mine Eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
It Is infinitely terrible to appear before God the Judge of all, without the
protection of the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things than the Blood
of Abel. This alone relieved him, and supported his hopes. Though his Labors
were abundant, yet he knew that the Work of God, passing through our hands, is
so blemished, that without an appeal to pardoning Mercy and Grace, we cannot
stand in Judgment. This was the Subject of his last public Sermon.

He languish'd many months, but presuming he should be too strong for his
Infirmity, neglected it, till at last it became insuperable and mortal. Many
pathetical aggravations heighten our great and dear Loss; That such a faithful
Minister of Christ should be taken away, whose Preaching was so powerful to
repair the woeful Ruins of Godliness and Virtue in a degenerate Age: Whose
prudent pacifick Spirit rendered him so useful in these Divided Times, when
Professors of the same Religion are alienated from one another, as if they had
been baptized with the Waters of Strife: That before our Tears were dried up
for the loss of other worthy Ministers, the Fountain of Sorrow should be opened
again by this afflicting stroke. But it becomes us to receive the Dispensations
of Heaven with humble and quiet submission; to reflect upon our sins with an
holy grief, that provoke God to remove such an excellent Instrument of his
Glory from us. Let us pray to the Lord of the Harvest, that he will send forth
Faithful Laborers into it. O that surviving Ministers might be animated with a
Zeal more pure and fervent in their Divine Work! And that People would be wise,
while a price is put into their hands, to improve it for their eternal
advantage. The neglected Gospel will at last be a terrible Witness against the
Disobedient, to justify and aggravate their Condemnation.

FINIS.
Dr. Manton's LAST SERMON ON 2 TIMOTHY 1.18.
2 TIMOTHY 1.18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find Mercy of the Lord in
that day.


THE Words are the Apostle's Prayer for Onesiphorus. He prays for his Household,
v. 16, The Lord give mercy to the House of Onesiphorus. His Family was probably
now at Ephesus, the ordinary place of his Abode, where Timothy also was, to
whom he wrote; but he himself was then at Rome. Secondly, He prays for his
Person, in the Text. That which put him upon these Prayers was the Kindness he
had received of him at Ephesus, and afterward at Rome; where he sought him,
and found him out, and was not afraid to own him, and relieve him, nor ashamed
of his Chain. In requital, he prays God to be his Paymaster, and to return
his Kindness into his bosom. He showed mercy to Paul, and therefore Paul
desired the Lord to show him mercy. He seeking Paul, found him; so he desires
God would let him find mercy. Paul found mercy of him in a Prison, let him find
it in Paradise. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find Mercy of the Lord in
that day.

In the Words three things are to be observed.

1. The Person, for whom he prays. 2. The Matter, for which he prays. 3. The
Time, when this is to be accomplished.
1. The Person for whom he prays, Onesiphorus, a good Man, that God would grant
to Him.

2. The Matter for which he prays, that he may find Mercy of the Lord. A
necessary request; for Mercy is the Original and Rise of all the Recompenses we
expect from God. Mercy begins our Salvation, and Mercy crowns it. Mercy
enters us into the Covenant of Grace, and Mercy consummateth the Happiness we
have thereby. Jud. 21. Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus unto Eternal
Life. We are not only pardoned out of Mercy, but glorified out of Mercy. A
suitable Request, for God loves to retaliate, or pay us in kind. Merciful Men
shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5.7. On the contrary, Jam. 2.13. They shall have
Judgment without Mercy, who have showed no Mercy. And as this is suitable, so
it is most kindly believed; for we muse of God as we use our selves: they that
are not faithful to themselves, and do not keep their own Promises, can never
be confident in God's. Revengeful Men are most apt to distrust of God's
pardoning Mercy. Those that are hard and unmerciful, and do not pity the misery
of others, do more difficultly believe God's tender Mercies and Compassions.

3. The Time mentioned in the Prayer, in that Day. Some say, when he also
should be afflicted. Others the Day of Death: but rather the Day of Judgment,
that is often called a Day by way of excellency; Acts 17.30. He has appointed
a Day, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. When God shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe. In that Day, that is, the Day when Christ
shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead, and to distribute Punishments and
Rewards. That is the Day when Mercy shall stand us in most stead; and if it go
well with us then, it will go well with us for ever.

Doct. That the best of God's Children will very much need Mercy in the Day of
Judgment.

The Apostle prays for a good Man, who was full of good Fruits, that he might
find Mercy. Had Onesiphorus need of Mercy, and have not we? Surely the free
Mercy of God is our best plea at that time.

I shall state this Point.

1. The Mercy here spoken of, does not exclude and shut out the Satisfaction of
Christ; for God shows this Mercy as propitiated by Christ: for that was the
most convenient way to demonstrate his Justice and Holiness, and to vindicate
the Honor of his Government and Law, and to be a warning to Sinners not to
presume upon his Mercy. Therefore this is called the Mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Jud. 21. Our Eternal Blessedness is the Fruit of his Merit and
Satisfaction.

2. This Mercy must not be urged to exclude our Qualification: for, till we are
qualified, we have no right to the good things of the Covenant. The Mercy and
Favor of God is conditional, but yet free; not due by any Merit and Claim, but
that of his Promise; and his Promise is made to them that are rightly
qualified, the sincere Believer, the Holy, the Humble, and the Penitent; others
are incapable of Mercy. You must not think God will show Mercy to Men, though
they have no inherent Holiness at all. Faith and Repentance are required before
we can be pardoned.

3. Though Mercy be our best Plea; yet you must not take it so, as if a
Believer's Condition were doubtful and uncertain, and a good Christian could
not know how it will fare with him. The Mercy of the Lord is the Ground of our
Hope, but in conjunction with other Evidences, whereby they understand their
Estate. The most serious People do consider the weight of the Matter; but
Humility is not Uncertainty. They are unworthy in the brokenhearted sense of
their own Defects and Failings; but God counts them worthy, because of their
Diligence and Seriousness in the Heavenly Life. Luke 21.35. Watch ye therefore,
and pray always, that ye may be counted worthy. He accepts them as worth;
They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.

4. God's Servants plead Sincerity though not a finless spotless State. Perfect
Righteousness according to the Covenant of Works they cannot plead; but sincere
Righteousness according to the Covenant of Grace, they may and do plead. Isa.
38.3. Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth,
and with a perfect Heart. Their Graces and Duties will endure the Touchstone,
though not the Balance; are of the right kind, though not full weight. There
must be inherent Righteousness, or you will never come to Glory.

5. Though they may take Comfort in their Evidences, yet they dare not plead
the Merit of any thing in themselves. They take comfort in their Evidences; 2
Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is the Testimony of our Conscience; that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, we have had our Conversation in the World. They
are God's, Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me. Yet they dare not challenge God's
Reward as a a Debt. If God should deal with them according to their Deservings,
their very Remnant of Sins were enough to bring them to Damnation; yea they
would not be an hour out of Hell, as soon as God should enter his Action against
them.

6. Though they are not perfect, yet they are not wicked; there is enough to
difference the Godly from the Ungodly. Job 10.7. Thou know I am not wicked.
Though all Men be Sinners, yet some have escaped the Reign of Sin. We must
distinguish our selves. 1 John 3.10. In this the Children of God are
manifested, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness, is
not of God.

Many Arguments will show the Necessity of this.

First, From the Nature of God. who is a God of exact Purity, glorious Majesty,
impartial Justice, and infinite Knowledge. All which show the need of Mercy.

1. The Holy Nature of God. When he is upon his Judicial Process here in the
World, who is able to endure it? The Men of Bethshemesh said, 1 Samuel 6. Who is
able to stand before this Holy Lord God? That is, because he shows himself so
Zealous of his Institutions. And, Josh. 24.19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he
is a Holy God. He speaks not this to discourage them, but that they might not
have slight thoughts of God, and his Service, as if he did make little
reckoning of Sin, or that it were not so hateful to him, and so great a Matter
as usually it is made to be. Slight Spirits wonder why Men make such ado about
Sin. What harm is it, say they, to take a little forbidden Pleasure, or to
indulge a wanton Thought, or drop a vain Word? These Men are ignorant of the
Purity and Holiness of God; therefore their Humiliation and Repentance is
thought needless, their Sense of the Necessity and Benefit of Pardon lessened,
their Awe and Watchfulness abated. What thoughts they have of Sin, the same
they think God has. Psalm. 50.21. Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one
as thy self. They make light work of Sin, either in repenting, or watching and
striving against it. Certainly, they that have slight thoughts of Sin, never
have great thoughts of God. If we think seriously of the Purity and Holiness of
God, it would be another Matter, and it would not so lightly go off the
Conscience.

2. There is the glorious Majesty of God. He is a Sovereign, and all his
Recompenses are Acts of Grace, and not of Debt. Job says, ( Job. 19.15.)
Though I were righteous, I would not answer; but I would make Supplication to
my Judge. Whatever Sense we have of our own Integrity, and the Good wrought in
us, yet Supplications for Mercy do become the Creature. For God is our
Sovereign, and represented there as our Supreme Judge, whose Tribunal none can
decline, whose Examination and Trial is most strict and accurate, whose Doom
and Sentence is decisive and absolute, without power of appealing or repealing;
and the Execution and Punishment most dreadful. Therefore nothing becomes us so
much as a brokenhearted Imploring of Grace and Mercy. God is so great and
glorious, that we can merit nothing at his hands; all that is done to us must
be mere Grace. This is the Difference between Sin and Obedience: the
Heinousness of Sin is always aggravated by the greatness of the Object against
whom it is committed; but the Value of Obedience is still thereby lessened. The
Offense is aggravated. To strike an Officer, is more than to strike a private
Man, a King more than an ordinary Officer: so the Infinite Majesty of God
greatens the Offense. But on the other side, the greater God is, and the more
glorious, the more it lessens the Value of that Good we perform. We can never
oblige him. When we have done all that ever we can, we are but unprofitable
Servants, Luke 17.10. Mercy is the Fountain of all that we are and hope for.
That Grace which first accepted us with all our Faults, does at last crown us.

3. The Impartial Justice of God. That belongs to him, as Governor of the
World. There is a threefold Justice in God.

(1.) His general Justice. That requires, Vt bonis been sit, and malis male;
That it should be well with them that do well, and ill with them that do ill.
This is spoken of, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. It is a righteous thing with God to render
Tribulation unto them that trouble you, and unto you that are troubled, Rest.

(2.) His strict Justice, according to the Covenant of Works. If God should
deal with us according to our undeservings and ill-deservings, not in a way of
gracious Compassion, what would become of the best of Men in the World? Not one
of us could appear in Court. For there is not a Man found, that has not some
Fault and Failing, which would render him incapable of God's Favor. If he
should proceed in just Severity against us, who could stand? not only who among
the wicked, but who among the People of God? Psalm. 130.14. Therefore that
Judgment must be deprecated, as David does, Psalm. 143.2. Enter ^^t into
Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified.
It is impossible for such a frail sinful Creature as Man is, to appear before
God's exact Tribunal with any Comfort and Hope. Now because this strict Justice
of God leaves us in such a desperate and hopeless Condition, there is another
Court set up, to which we may appeal, even the Covenant of Grace, which
allows Pardon to penitent and sincere Believers.

(3.) There is his merciful Justice, according to Promise in the new Covenant.
Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous, to forget the Work and Labor of Love. 1
John 1.9. He is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us
from all Unrighteousness. Not that the Work deserves his Grace, but God having
made himself a Debtor by his own Promise, it is just that he should make it
good. Now this is the same we speak of in the Text, The Lord grant that he may
find Mercy in that Day (...) It is his Grace to enable us to perform the
Condition, and it is his merciful Justice to accept of it, when it is performed.

4. His Infinite Knowledge, by which he takes notice of all that we do. We may
be blinded with Partiality and Self-love, but the Holy and All-seeing God knows
many Faults, which Men either cannot or will not see; 1 Cor. 4.9. I know
nothing of my self, yet am I not hereby justified. Some of God's People have
attained to new Covenant-Righteousness, yet they dare not venture their Eternal
Estate upon that alone. Suppose our Hearts condemn us in part, we know somewhat
by our selves, yet God knows more. 1 John 3.20. For if our Hearts condemn us,
God is greater than our Hearts, and knows all thins. Things appear otherwise to
the Holy God, than they do to us. Luke 16.15. And he said unto them, Ye are
they who justify your selves before Men, but God knows their Hearts, for that
which is highly esteemed among Men, is an Abomination in the sight of God. God
many times detests that which is highly valued and cried up in the World. So
Prove. 16.2. All the ways of Man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs
the Spirits. We look to the Bulk and Matter of the Action, but God looks to the
Mind and Spirit with which it is performed. We look to the Action slightly, so
as to overlook the Evil that is in it through partiality and indulgence to our
selves; but God exactly weighs things, and puts them into the Balance of the
Sanctuary: Therefore we see a necessity, that when we come into the presence of
the Righteous and Impartial Judge of Heaven and Earth, we should make Mercy our
Plea; though we be conscious of no Defect and Disobedience, saw nothing, or
knew nothing amiss by our selves, yet God knows Failings, sees Errors. Job
9.22. If I were perfect, yet do I not know my own Soul. That is, I would not go
by the inward sense and feeling of my Conscience, but give up the Cause to God,
that he might justly condemn me: for no Man sees exactly the depth of his own
Heart; therefore I would not argue my Right, but crave Mercy: So that you see
it is Mercy that must stand us in most stead.

2. From the Condition and Disposition of the Saints.

(1.) Their Condition; they were once Sinners, and still are imperfect. Once
Sinners, liable to the Wrath of God. And as they were once Sinners, they are
still to own the Merit of Sin, though not to determine the Event: for they are
to judge themselves, 1 Cor. 11.31. Though they are as Brands plucked out of the
Burning, yet they deserved the Burning. I do not tell you what God will do, but
what you have deserved; not to weaken your confidence and rejoicing in Christ,
but to humble your Hearts. You had once the Sentence past upon you, and had the
Rope about your Necks; you were at the Gates of Hell, and might have entered in,
but for the Grace of your Redeemer. A sense of it is still necessary to quicken
your Thankfulness and Prayers for Mercy and Pardon, and to promote your
Humility. You turn Grace into Wantonness, and abuse it, if it lessen any of
these Acts: for though God forgive, we must not forget. We were once as bad as
the worst, and Children of Wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Therefore when God
justifies us, we must still condemn our selves. We are still imperfect, and the
best feel and find in themselves great Infirmities, and make but too much work
for pardoning Mercy. There are great mixtures of Sin that we are conscious
unto, notwithstanding the little good which we perform. Job 9.2, 3. How should
Man be just with God? If he should contend with him, he cannot answer one of a
thousand. Our Righteousness is so imperfect and full of Defects, that we do not
make it our Plea, but God's Mercy is our best and surest confidence. There are
many sins that we are conscious unto; Psalm. 40.11. Innumerable Evils have
compassed me about, therefore what should we do but cry for mercy and
forgiveness of them? Lord be merciful to me, a Sinner, Luke 18.13.

(2.) The Disposition of the Saints: They have a greater apprehension of the
Evil of Sin, because of the increase of Light and Love: As their Light and Love
increases, so does their Trouble about Sin. Romans 7.9, 24. Paul makes more
complaint about remaining Sins that cleave to the Best, than the Wicked do
about reigning Lusts. They are ashamed of the folly and filthiness that is in
Sin, troubled and grieved for their unkindness to God; and therefore are more
apprehensive of the need of Mercy than possibly others can be: None see so many
Sins, none see so much hainousness in Sin. In a clear Glass of Water the least
Mote is espied: and the most delicate and tender Complexions are most sensible
of annoyance. Therefore if God will show mercy to them, notwithstanding all
their unkind dealings with him, they apprehend it as a great and wonderful
favor.

(2.) They have a greater dread of God's Justice and Holiness, and a more
sincere respect to the Threatenings of his Word: It is true, they do not fear as
before with a Tormenting Fear, yet have a great reverence for the Sentence of
his Law, and a more firm belief of his eternal Recompenses than the blind and
stupid World has. Therefore they more earnestly deprecate his Anger, have a
greater care to please him, a more piercing grief, because they have offended
him; and therefore if God will show them mercy in the free and full forgiveness
of all their Offenses, they are more apprehensive of the Benefit. They know
God's Word is true, and observe his Providence as a Comment on it, Romans 1.18.
None of them can or dare appear in the Judgment, till they have sought his
Favor, and obtained his Pardon.

(3.) They are more sollicitous in the Case, than others who make a light
business of Salvation, and do the Work of an Age in a Breath. We are all
Sinners, but God is merciful. They know that a business of this weight must be
carried on with all diligence imagiable. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling. They see so many deceive themselves, make a
full account they shall be saved; Rev. 3.17. Matthew. 25.
do well in the Judgment, when there is no ground for it. They know the
sleightness that is incident to humane Nature, the deceit and hypocrisy of
their own Hearts; therefore use diligent Cares, constant Prayers, continual
Watchings; and when they have done all, dare not rest upon that, but the Mercy
of Jesus Christ, as their best Refuge and Comfort.

3dly. With respect to the Purity and Strictness of his Law, which is the Rule
of Commerce between us and God. The Law may be considered, as it relates to
the Covenant of Works, or as it relates to the Covenant of Grace.

(1.) With respect to the Covenant of Works, where the least Failing lays us
open to the Curse, surely no Plea can be allowed but Mercy. For that Covenant
shuts up from all Hope of Escape, unless Mercy opens the Door for us. Romans
11.32. He has concluded all under Unbelief, that he may have Mercy upon all.
Gal. 3.11. The Scripture concluded all under Sin. All are guilty of
Disobedience unto God, that all might be saved by Merey and Grace. It Is a
Similitude taken from Malefactors, who are shut up in Prison to be kept unto
Punishment. For who among us can perfectly keep the Law?

(2.) With respect to the Covenant of Grace; where God requires Perfection,
but will accept of Sincerity. The Law of God is still in force; for it is
adopted into the Frame of the Covenant as the Rule of our Duty. The Rule is as
strict as ever, but the Covenant is not so strict. The Rule is as strict, for
it still requires Perfection; but the Covenant is not so strict, it is not so
indispensibly required, because Sincerity, or Perfection of Parts, is accepted
instead of Perfection of Degrees. Perfection is still required: otherwise our
Defects were nothing, and we might allow our selves in our Failings, and no
great Harm would come of it. And then to strive after Perfection, or to press
toward the Mark, would not be a necessary Duty, but only a Work of
Super-errogation. No; it does invite us to the highest Degree of Godliness, and
makes the Endeavor after Perfection a necessary Condition of our Happiness, as
Perfection it self to be our proper Happiness. And so our Duty and Felicity do
agree, that we may not have any liberty to be bad and miserable. But yet it
accepts of Sincerity, if our Hearts be upright with God, and our whole Mind
and Desire be set to obey, please, and glorify him, and we make it our main
Work so to do. God will not enter into Judgment with his Servants, nor be
strict and severe to his Children, nor condemn those that love and fear him for
lesser Failings and Infirmities, nor take that Occasion to ruin and destroy
them. Indeed as the new Covenant commands Perfection, it notes our
Infirmities, to humble us in order to our Cure. Christ, as a Physician, looks
to our Infirmities, to rid us of them, and free us from them; but not as a
Judge, to condemn us for them. But yet, because of the multitude of our Errors,
the holiest, and humblest, and most penitent believing Soul is scarce able to
abide the Trial. Therefore when we have done, our utmost Mercy in that Day is
our greatest and surest Support.

4thly. With respect to the Day of Judgment.

1. The Preparation that is necessary. Since Christ is ready to judge, and we
know not the Day and Hour of his Coming, we should be ready to be judged. A sad
Meeting and Greeting there will be between Christ and an unprepared Soul.
Therefore it concerns us deeply, to see whether we be ready to give up our
Account to God. Now there is a twofold Readiness; when you are in a safe
Condition, and when you are in a comfortable Case, with respect to that Day.
All that are in a safe Case, know not that they are in a comfortable Case, know
not that it shall go well with them in the Judgment. Our Safety is known by the
Law of Grace; for Christ will judge according the Gospel. Romans 2.16. Whom the
Gospel does justify, they shall be justified; and whom the Gospel does condemn,
they shall be condemned. The Rules of judging are in the Word, but every one
cannot apply them. Now the Gospel justifies all that repent and believe. By
Repentance meaning a Turning in Heart and Life to God: and by Faith, a
believing what Christ has done for the Restoration and Salvation of Sinners,
and an accepting, and making use of him to this End. But these things are not
wrought in us as easily as they are spoken of. And when they are wrought in us,
they are not so soon evidenced, that we have Repentance unto Life, and Faith
unfeigned. Now then, is it not a necessary Prayer whilst we are in the midst of
our Doubts and Conflicts, that we may find Mercy in that day.

2. The strict Trial that we must undergo. The Day of Judgment is the greatest
and most dreadful Day that ever was, when it is Matter of Sense, as now it is
Matter of Faith. If a Man had it, he would give all the World for Mercy in that
Day. For then the Judge will come from Heaven with a shout, and the Books shall
be opened, Rev. 10.12. the Book of Conscience, and the Book of God's
Remembrance, and every thing must be produced in the Judgment, whether it be
Good or Evil, Eccles. 12.14. Now the thought of this should make us humbly to
sue out our Pardon. Then entreaty is of no use, but now it may steed us; and no
request becomes us so much, As Mercy, Lord, in that Day. If we miscarry then,
we are undone for ever: but if accepted then, we are blessed indeed to all
eternity.

3. The greatness of the Blessings we expect, which beyond all proportion excel
our best Endeavors. Eternal Mercy is at the bottom of all God's proceedings
with us: Now the least comfort that he bestows upon us, comes from his Mercy
and Grace, and should work a deep sense of it in our Hearts: Genesis 32.10. I am
not worthy of the least of all thy Mercies, and of all thy Truth, which thou
have showed unto thy Servant. But then there will be the fullest and largest
manifestation of God's Love and Favor to us; 1 Pet. 1.13. Hope to the end, for
the Grace that is to be brought to us at the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
There is Grace brought to us now by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the
Gospel, in some measure, but hereafter by that Revelation we shall see his
Grace and Mercy more fully and perfectly. We see his Grace in the pardon of
Sins, and that measure of Sanctification and Renovation which we attain unto;
that he is pleased to pass by our Offenses, and to take us into his Family, and
give us a taste of his Love, and a right to the Heavenly Kingdom, and will any
way employ us in his Service. But then it is another manner of Grace and
Favor. Indeed, when our Pardon and Approbation shall be pronounced and
ratified by our Judg's own Mouth, Acts 3.17. Then times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord. When he shall not only take us into his
Family, but into his Presence and Palace, that we may dwell with him for ever;
John 12.26. Not only give us a Right, but Possession. Matthew. 25.34. Not see
Christ by Faith, but by Sight. 1 John 3.2. See our Persons admitted into the
nearest fruition of God that may be, and we are capable of. Not only have some
remote Service and Ministration, but everlastingly employed in loving and
delighting in God, and praising of God with all those Heavenly Creatures, who
are our Eternal Companions in this Work. This is Grace and Mercy indeed. The
Grace of God, or his Favor to Sinners, is never seen in all its graciousness
till then: Then the praise of his glorious Grace does shine forth, Ephesians. 1.6.
We cry, Grace, Grace now, when we taste his Love, but then we have the full and
uninterrupted communion of it. We have much of his Mercy now; For we are
justified freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24. Of his abundant Mercy he has
begotten us to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. Grace is as free now as then; but
then it is more full. No more trouble with Infirmities or Necessities.

The consideration of these things should press us to three things, To be
Serious, Humble, and Thankful.

1. Serious in our preparation for our great Account. The Judgment is so exact
and impartial, that the choicest of God's Servants are fain to refer their
whole claim to Mercy. The Business is weighty, we are to be judged to Life or
Death, and both are Everlasting, we have need to be serious in it. The
Qualifications are not easily to be interpreted, till they evidence and
manifest themselves by their powerful Influence and multiplied Acts; therefore
we must give diligence, that we may be found in him of peace, without spot and
blameless, 1 Pet. 3.4. Surely you should do all your Works, order all your
Actions as Men that shall be judged for them, Jam. 2.12. Matthew. 12.36. Consider
what will be comfortable in the last Reckoning, and how things will appear in
that Day. I know God's Mercy and Faith in the Blood of Christ, will be the
chiefest ground of your Comfort. But you must make your Qualification more
explicit. A free Pardon through the Mercy of God, and the Merit and
Intercession of him that redeemed you, is your great Encouragement: but yet you
must hold on in the way of Holiness, that it may stead you in your greatest
need. All do not rise to the Judgment of Absolution, but some to the Judgment
of Condemnation; therefore you must make it evident that you are of the former
number, Romans 8.1.

2. To be Humble, by the knowledge and consideration of God and your selves.

(1.) Humility becomes us, with respect to God. The Throne of Grace is a
Throne still; and though we have great liberty and boldness by Christ, yet we
must come humbly. There is an everlasting distinction between the Creature and
the Creator, and you must accordingly address your selves: Not as the Pharisee
that came to challenge a Debt, but as the Publican that came to emplore Mercy,
Luke 18.10, 11. He that had a lowly Opinion of himself, was most acceptable to
God.

(2.) With respect to your selves. God's Children need to be spared in their
best Actions. Mal. 3.17. I will spare them, as a Man spares his own Son that
serves him. Nehem. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and
spare me, according to the greatness of thy Mercy. He speaks this when he had
procured God's Ordinances to be duly observed. He pleads no Merit before God,
but desires rather to be spared, for he was conscious of his own many Failings.

(3.) The strictness of your Rule. Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his Errors?
Cleanse thou me from secret Faults. The Multitude of Errors that we know, and
the multitude of them we know not, should keep us humble.

3. It presses you to Thankfulness. From first to last Mercy supplies all our
Needs. The Throne of Grace was erected for this purpose, that we might have
Mercy when we need it most. Heb. 4.10. Let us therefore come boldly unto the
Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of
need. All our Qualifications come from Grace; 1 Chronicles. 29.14. For all things
come of thee. Luke 19.16. Not my Industry, but thy Pound; not his own Industry,
but his Masters Talent. Gal. 2.20. Not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. 1 Cor.
15.10. Not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. Cast your Crowns of
Excellency at the Lambs Feet. Rev. 4.10. Let him have all the honor, for you
have all from him, and all should be to him. All the Benefits we expect from
God, come not for our Righteousness, Dan. 9.18. but for this great Mercy. Deuteronomy.
9.4, 5. Say not in thy Heart, for thy Righteousness, the Lord has brought thee
in to possess the Land. It is the Mercy of God, that sets the Crown upon your
Heads at last.

FINIS.
Page 17, line 14 and 15, for they, read we. Page 34, line 4, after mixed, read
with.

Some Books printed for, and sold by Brab. Aylmer, at the 3 Pigeons, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Accomplishment of Man's
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses, wherein is showed, how the
wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God, are glorified in that
great and blessed Work: By William Bates, D. D. In Quarto.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the Future State. To which is now added, the Divinity
of the Christian Religion, proved by the Evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation. For the Cure of Infidelity, the Hectic Evil of the Times. By
William Bates, D. D. In Octavo.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions, by Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of
Trinity-Colledg in Cambridg, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary. In
Octavo.

The Reconcileableness of God's Prescience of the Sins of Men, with the Wisdom
and Sincerity of his Counsels, Exhortations, and whatsoever means he uses to
prevent them: In a Letter to the Honorable Rob. Boil, Esquire To which is added a
Postscript in Defense of the said Letter. By John How, M. A. sometime Fellow of
Magdalen-Colledg. Oxon. In Octavo.


