A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Modern Courtier, AND AN Honest English Gentleman.

To which is added The AUTHOR's Dedication TO Both Houses of Parliament, To
whom he Appeals for Justice.

By SAMVEL BASTON, Gent.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCVII.

TO THE Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled:
AGainst the Opening the present Session of Parliament, I thought it my Duty,
(considering the Nation's great Distress) to point out to your Honors, who
were the principal Causers and Continuers of its Miseries; which I did in the
following Dialogue; Containing, 1 st. Bare Matter of Fact already proved
against the Lords of the Admiralty, Commissioners of the Navy, Commissioners of
the Post Office, and Commissioners of the Sick and Wounded Seamen, etc. with
the foul Practices of the Commissioners of the Public Accounts, for Concealing
and Justifying the said Crimes. 2 dly, Natural Consequences and Arguments drawn
from the said Matter of Fact, in Reference to Religion, Law, Policy and the
true Interest and Safety of the King and Kingdom.

The Book being out, it was seized by Messengers, diverse reporting it was High
Treason, and Mr. Crosfeild, and a Poor Woman, were Committed to the Poultrey
Compter about it, by a Justice of Peace, at the bare Instance of a Messenger:
The said Justice of Peace often professing he was sorry the matter came before
him, for that by his own Losses he could speak deeply to the Truth and Honesty
of the Book, but was afraid of being chid by some of the Court, if he neglected
to do what the Messenger bid him, with Diverse other Expressions of like Nature;
which shows the great Force of Truth, that it will be Confessed, tho from the
mouths of its very Opposers.

I was also informed, that the aforesaid Messenger had given direction to the
said Justice of Peace to Commit me the first time he saw me; for that there was
a Warrant out against me for High Treason (which Trouble they need not have
given the Justice of Peace, for they knew where to have found me themselves).
But I being very infirm and weak of body, by reason of long sickness
(occasioned by my ill usage) was unwilling to be committed to Newgate, in this
smugling manner, to destroy my Health (which I knew was the Design against me);
and the said Justice of Peace, through Ignorance and Timerousness, would
certainly have done it, (had he seen me) tho the book I had printed had been
David's Psalms.

This Report was on Saturday, and the Monday following I went to the
Secretaries Office to surrender my self to this Warrant of High Treason: but,
upon Enquiry, found there was no Warrant against me for High Treason; Sir
William Trumball's Secretary making a Jest of it, told me, 'twas only the
Messenger's mistake (but I could not get him to examine the Messenger about
it); and that what was against me in that Office, was only upon Suspicion of
being the Author of this Dialogue (so the High Treason was fallen only to
Suspicion of a Misdemeanour), and that I must submit to be confined in a
Messenger's Custody, which was accordingly done. After some days I got a sight
of the Warrant for my Commitment, which was not upon Suspicion of my being the
Author of this Dialogue (as I was told at the Office), but for Publishing and
Dispersing a Seditious and Scandalous Libel against His Majesty and Government;
without Naming what Libel, or mentioning its Title in the Warrant. The Warrant
also shows, that 'twas drawn after I surrendered my self; for it begins thus,
These are in His Majesty's Name to require you to keep in safe Custody, etc.
Whereas another Warrant directed to a Messenger, to apprehend any Person,
commands him to go and take a Constable to his assistance, and seize or attach
the Body of such a one, and bring him and his Papers before the Secretary to be
Examined, etc. By which it appears what Drudgery was designed for this Timorous
Justice of Peace to commit me to Newgate for High Treason, to Ruin my Health
without Warrant, Law, or Sense.

Thus I continued a Prisoner in a Messenger's Custody from the 26 th October
1696. to the 29 th January following, being 3 months and 3 days, to the great
endangering of my Life by bad Diet, and was then discharged, giving a
Recognizance of 500 l. to appear the first day of the next Term. So I, that
have served the King, and discovered, and detected many of the Utter Enemies of
his Majesty and his People, am now Cited to answer as a Criminal, for pointing
out the Destroyers of the Nation to the Parliament. And those Notorious
Criminals I write of in this Dialogue, are brought to no Trial, but protected,
as if there was no Law to take Cognizance of them.

And further, the matters of Fact related in this Dialogue (the Post Office
excepted) are no more than what are contained in a Petition and Articles
Exhibited by Mr. Crosfeild and others, in the House of Peers, about two years
since, where it is now depending: The late Commissioners of Accounts, to whom
it was Referred to Examine into it, and make their Report, having hitherto by
Evasions, and False Allegations, in behalf of the Criminals, delayed and stopped
the laying open these Grievances, and have to this day disappointed your
Honors of a true Knowledge of them; whereby the said Grievances have been
supported and increased; for which the Nation has severely suffered; But has
reason now to give thanks to God, that the said Commission is so happily
Dissolved, which was so great a Bulwork of Iniquity; And I hope it is a good
Omen, or Presage of a General Overthrow of Fraud and Wickedness.

So now because the Facts contained in this Dialogue, are not yet Examined in
Parliament, (by means of the aforesaid Commissioners of Accounts) the Printing
them again, to re-mind the Parliament of the present miseries, that God may be
honored by the Punishment and Suppression of Wickedness, the King and Kingdoms
Enemies removed, and the Laws put in Execution for the public safety, for the
future, is (it seems) become A Seditious and Scandalous Libel, against his
Majesty and Government. I*m sure, this Dialogue chiefly depends but upon three
things. First, Truth in the matter of Fact related. Secondly, The Gospel in
reference to Gods Judgments, for Imorallity and Tolerated Wickedness. And
Thirdly, The Laws of the Land in reference to their being Invaded, and
Perverted, and not put in Execution: And if this Dialogue will endure a Trial
by these three Touch-Stones, and yet continue still to be a Seditious and
Scandalous Libel, etc. Why, then, Truth must be Scandalous, and the Scripture
and Statutes of England Seditious Libels, and he that Writes for the safety and
preservation of the King and Kingdom, is an Enemy to his Majesty and
Government. This shows how Exceedingly Wickedness abounds, and what a Cabal of
Men there are in Power, ready to turn the King's Authority against himself, and
to subvert Gospel, Law, Loyalty, Justice, and all things tending to the honor
of God, and benefit of the King and State.

This Dialogue is called a seditious Libel: Whereas it speaks for the Execution
of the Law with as much Force as words can express. Now where the Law is put in
Execution, there can be no Sedition; but where the Laws and Constitutions of a
Kingdom are invaded and perverted, by the Arbitrary Power of Evil Ministers, it
is that which introduces Sedition; and as Sedition is a dangerous Distemper in
a Nation, so the Impartial Execution of the Law is a Sovereign and Certain
Cure. And whereas it is called a scandalous Libel, I answer, that if it is true,
it is not scandalous, and every Subject of England has an undoubted Privilege to
Complain of, and discover Injuries done to the King, and also lay open the
Grievances of his People: And if all the Subjects of England, tho in never so
high a Station, are subject to the Law, and answerable for their Actions (which
I hope is not in the least questioned), then this Dialogue will not deserve
these Characters, nor the Author deserve to be Arraigned as a Criminal for
writing it (while the real Criminals he writes of are protected): For certainly
the pure and undefiled Law of England does not provide any punishment for its
Advocates. 'Twas a Noble saying of that Glorious Prince Edw. 3. of Famous
Memory (when he hanged his Chief Justice [Thorp] of the Kings Bench, for taking
a Bribe of 100 l.) That he being entrusted as the King's Deputy, to administer
Justice in that Court, had, as much as in him lay, broken that solemn Oath that
his Majesty made to his People at his Coronation.

If such strict Scrutinies should be made in these Days, (which no doubt God
Requires) what a multitudewould there be found Guilty of this Chief Justice's
Crime, who continue to practice it without any regard to their Master's Safety,
Honor or Coronation Oath, or Safety of their Country? nay, so far are they
from thinking it a Crime, that a Learned Lawyer not long since (as I was
informed) brought it as a mighty Objection to the Bill against buying and
selling Offices, That the Perquisites of his Employment came to about 3000 l.
per an. and prayed a Clause in the Bill to secure it to him, which shows how
strong a desire he had still to be able to Expose the Rights and Liberties of
the People to Sale to the highest Bidder: So Religious a Regard had that
Gentleman to his Master's Coronation Oath. Nevertheless, such Corrupt Men as
these, who so openly oppose Justice, do generally pretend to have a great Love
for their Sovereign, and how they will stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes, and what not, when alas, their Love has no more reallity than the
pretended Love of a Common Harlot: For Certainly, a Corrupt and Unfaithful
Servant, can no more Love his Master, than an Adulterous Wife can Love her
Husband:

It is not Improbable, but this Dialogue may by a Trial in the Kings Bench be
made (as it is called) A Seditious and Scandalous Libel against his Majesty and
Government; And so the Tables shall be turned, and I shall be tried as a
Criminal, for laying open the Nations Grievances to the Parliament, and the
Criminals acquitted of the Crimes they are accused of, without any Trial at all;
It cannot be supposed, that I shall have free Liberty in the Kings Bench Court,
to bring such Numbers of Witnesses, as are necessary to prove the Matters of
Fact contained in this Dialogue; For the Court is tied to one single Ishue, and
therefore cannot Enquire into the bottom of Grievances in the State: Besides,
it is rarely seen that any Man escapes the Censure of the Courts of
Westminster, who runs Counter to the Predominant Party at White Hall, let his
Cause be ever so just; Instances enough may be given of it in the late Reigns,
when the Courts of Justice have (under pretense of Law) been made perfect
Slaughter-Houses to Punish, Imprison, Fine, and take away the Lives of Diverse
Noble Patriots of their Country, for doing that which we now call their Duty,
whose memories we Commemorate, and the Judgments against them have been
Reversed in Parliament. But Certainly, it had been much more Honorable (if it
could have been done) to have saved their Lives, by putting a stop to their
Illegal Trials, than now to say, we are sorry for their Deaths.

Therefore, I most humbly appeal to this most August Assembly, who in these
Cases are tied to no single Is^ue, but may thoroughly enquire and search into
the Nations Grievances, (which my Designs has been only Loyally and Faithfully
to lay open) humbly Conceiving, that if I produce Witnesses to prove the
Matters of Fact, Contained in this Dialogue; That then it will not deserve the
Title, given it in the Warrant for my Commitment, Viz. A Seditious and
Scandalous Libel, against His Majesty and Government. Neither, shall I deserve
to be Arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar as a Criminal, the next Term, where I am
bound to appear by Recognizance of 500 l. after above three Months
Imprisonment, to the hazard of my Life.

And being thus ready and able to produce Witnesses, to prove the said Matters
of Fact, Contained in this Dialogue (to the great Advantage of the King and
Government) whenever your Honors shall please to Command; I humbly Cast my
self upon your Honors Justice and Protection, that no such Prosecution may be
made against me, as is intended, till I be first heard, and have liberty to
prove, that what I have Written in this Dialogue is Truth, and for the King and
Kingdoms true Interest, Peace, and Safety, and then I shall be willing to stand
a Trial at the Kings Bench Bar; And submit to what Law my Adversaries can find,
to punish me, for Writing this Dialogue. I am,

With all Dutiful Respect, Your Lordships, and Honors, Most Obedient Servant,
SAMVEL BASTON.
London, the 16 th of March, 169^.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Modern Courtier, and an Honest English Gentleman.
Courtier. DEAR Sir, Your Humble Servant, you are Welcome to Town; Pray how
long have you been arrived.


Gentleman. Sir, I came but last Night, and thought my self obliged to pay my
Respects to you in the first place: I hope all your Noble Family is well.


C. I thank you Sir, they are very well; But pray how does your good Lady? And
how do Matters go in the Country?


G. Why we are all reasonable well in Health, but out of Order every way else;
For the Taxes are so high, Money so scarce, Trade so dead, etc. That I Protest
my Estate is so Cultivated, 'twill hardly maintain my Family.


C. Come, Sir, you are my Worthy Friend, and therefore I would not have you
find Fault with any thing; for, if you are willing, I doubt not, but you may
soon have such an Employment, that you will not feel the weight of the Taxes;
nay, you may be a Great Gainer by the War; and I would fain have you in the
Government. What say you, Will you Advance a small Sum.


G Sir, I give you many Thanks for your kind Offers which at this time-a-day I
can by no means accept; and I am desirous to be plain with you in my Reasons
for Refusal: but you being a Privy-Councellor, and Member of Parliament, etc. I
know not whether 'twill be Convenient to use Freedom of Speech; for, you may
Interpret some things I may say, as Reflections on your Self.


C. Sir, I assure you, what I Offer is designed for your Interest; but, if you
don't approve on it, you may use what Freedom of Speech you please; for, though
I am Honored with those Offices you mention, yet that shall not, in the least,
be any bar to the freedom of our Discourse, neither shall I take any thing
Ill, for I perceive you have a desire to Talk about Public Affairs.


G. Sir, I heartily Thank you for the Liberty you have given me; And now I must
tell you, that I am of Opinion, there is such a Caball of Corrupt Men in the
Government, that it is impossible for an Honest Man to live and act amongst
them, unless he will renounce his Duty to God and his Country; For (as one well
observes) Good and Bad Men Joined in a Government, are like the Iron and Clay
in the Toes of Nebuchadnezar's Image, they may Cleave, but they will never
Incorporate.


C. Why truly, what you Allege* is a good Reason for not taking an Employment,
provided there be any Just Grounds for your Opinion about the Corruption in the
Government. -- I Confess there is, and has been a Great Noise and Clamor about
Corruption and Mismanagement and I have always endeavored, as narrowly as I
could to search out the Truth of Matters, but could never yet find any thing so
Material, as to be worthy the Cogninance of either King or Parliament. However,
Great Clamours have been made by some Private-Men, who (I suppose) were
Male*Contents, they have Promised Vast Discoveries of Treachery and Fraud, but
when it has come to Examination, I never found that the Accusers could make out
their Allegations, but Mountains dwindled away into Mole-hills, and, as I said
before, nothing appeared that was thought worthy of Cognizance.


G. I find, by your Discourse, you endeavor not only to Evade, but Cover those
Gross and Monstrous Evils that have been the Causes of the Length of the War,
and of our Present Distress: Sir, I know not what kind of Miscarriages you
think are worthy of Cognizance, but, I fear, upon Examination, 'twill be found,
that the Crimes already proved in the Faces of our Rulers, will Amount to the
Degree of ROBBERY and MVRDER; and, which makes them more Heinous, they have not
been done in a Hostile Manner, in Open Defiance of the Law, as the High-way-man
takes away your Money on the Road, But with the Audacious Face of Authority,
under the Sacrilegious Mask of Law, Justice and State-Pollicy: The Authors and
Upholders of these Mischiefs in the mean time blowing the Trumpet of Fame in
each others Praise, as Long-headed Counselors, etc So that I do not wonder
these matters should be Rejected, and not thought worthy of Cognizance, when I
consider that Infallible Maxim, That the Inferiors cannot be Knaves, and be
Protected by the Superintendants, unless those Superintendants be as bad. And
thus it appears almost Impossible any Fault could be Punished, but that all
Criminals must be Protected, and their Crimes hid from the King, when Corrupt
Men sat Judges of each others Actions -- Therefore 'twas not likely they would
hurt one another; For the very Scripture tells you, That Satan cannot cast out
Satan, if he should his Kingdom would fall.


C. Sir, you have Charged the Court with a (...) yet it is but a General and
bare Assertion; and let me tell you (being something Concerned) there is a great
difference between Asserting and Proving, and therefore I Would fain have you (if
you can) branch out your General Charge into some particular Instances, as for
what may seem to Reflect upon me, as I told you before, please to use your
Freedom, for I shall not Resent any thing that shall happen in Discourse at
this time.


G. Why then, Sir, for your Satisfaction, I shall give you some Instances, that
have accidentally fallen under my Observation, which I fear, in Reference to
the Mighty Mass of Corruption in the Government, will be found only as a small
Pattern or Sample of a vast quantity of Goods, that the Whole Parcel is of the
same Sort, otherwise there could never be such an agreeable sweet harmony among
all the Offices, in Crying up the Parts, and hiding the Crimes of each other
from King and People: But having more than one Office to speak of, I think I
shall begin first with that of the Navy.

The Commissioners of that Office have been accused of making most horrible
Wast of the Public Treasure, by a long Practice of Fraudulent Contracts for
Naval-Stores, and driving Trades in Embezelling all sorts of Stores, as well as
Foul and Shameful Extravagance in Building and Repairing the King's Ships:
These things have been Fully Proved against them before the Lords of the
Admiralty, and before the Lords of the Council, and afterward openly set forth
in Print to both Houses of Parliament, and yet the Delinquents are still
Continued in their Employments. So that by this Open Villainy, the Necessary
Charge of the Navy is more than doubled, and the King Shamefully Betrayed and
Cheated, and His Subjects made Beggars by Heavy Taxes. But there is one thing
more that is a most Dangerous and Cursed Evil, and that is the Usage of the
Poor Saylors, whose Number is about Forty Thousand Employed in the Service of
their King and Country: Their DEPLORABLE CASE has been often at Large set
forth in Print, and made known to the Parliament, Council, Admiralty, etc. And
to Relate all their Grievances, and the Cursed Arts used to Ruin and Destroy
them and their Families would be Endless: Therefore to avoid being Tedious, I
shall only give you a short Account of their MISERIES, as I find it Inserted in
a BOOK, Entitled, Justice Perverted, etc. Printed and Published last Year by
Mr. Crosfeild, and Dedicated to Both Houses of Parliament. The BOOK contains
besides this a Great Mass of Flat Downright Knavery; and the Commissioners of
the Navy, and others, are Named therein to the particular Facts: But I find, it
has all been passed over and Stifled. However, I shall Relate it as follows, in
his Own Words, having, by Good Luck, the BOOK in my Pocket to Assist me.

The poor Saylors (Says he) that Venture their Lives and Limbs to Serve their
King and Country, and who are one of the greatest Bulworks of the Kingdom, have
been all along most Inhumanely and Barbarously Treated; and they and their
Families reduced to a Miserable and Deplorable State, particularly by the
wicked practices of putting QVERY's and RVNS upon their Pay, For amongst those
great Numbers that are Set on Shore Sick; those that Dye and others that
Continue Sick above Thirty Days, and those sent to the London Hospitals who are
thereby disabled to return to their Ships, are for the most part made Run.
Others whose Ships are Sailed before recovery having gone aboard other Ships,
are pricked Run in that Ship from which they were Sent: And if a Seaman is
Turned over from Ship to Ship, and by that means has Served on board four or
five Ships in the Navy, Yet if he happens to be pricked Run in the last Ship he
served in, he shall of Consequence be pricked Run in all the preceding Ships.
By this Means a Query or Run takes away a Man's pay worse than an Execution, and
by the present practice (...) Seaman* or (...) ^oor Family is at any Certainty
of having the benefit of the Kings pay, For it is in the power of the Captain,
Captain's Clerk, Purser, Clerk of the Checque, Muster-Master, or Clerks in the
Navy-Office, wherever they please to put a Run or Query upon any Seamans pay
without Inserting the Reason for so doing, or the Name of the person that put
it, so that for these Black pieces of Robbery, No one is liable to be Called to
Account, but the poor Saylor is kept wholly in the Dark, and he or his Wife may
wait at the Navy-Office Month after Month with Petitions to no purpose, till he
has Spent all his Substance, and if he begins to talk of his being thus Cheated
and Robbed, he is Threatened to be Tried for his Life as a Mutineer: So that the
Barbarity the poor Saylors do and have Suffered this War is unexpressible, For
the Blood of Thousands of Familys are poured out as Sacrifices to the
Covetousness of those whose Duty and place it is to be their Guardians and
Protectors. By all which it is plain, That whatever Good-Laws may be made for
the Increase and Encouragement of Seamen, will prove Ineffectual, so long as
these Practices Continue.

These Grievances have been at large set forth in Print by one Mr. Hodges, and
a Scheme of their true Cause laid barefaced before the Admiralty by Mr. Trevor
in a Letter, and a remedy for them proposed in Writing, to the Admiralty by Mr.
Gibson, by order of a Committee of Council; and why there is nothing done but
this Fraud and Robbery still practiced and supported, is, what no reason can be
given for, since neither Mr. Hodges's, Mr. Trevors, nor Mr. Gibsons Papers
beforementioned; have ever been exploded.

The Lords of the Treasury were so fully Convinced of these Cheats, that their
Lordships did by Warrant under their hands in December last, appoint Mr. Gibson
to receive all Informations of abuses in Payment of Seamens Tickets; which
doubtless, would have put a stop to these wicked Practices, Notwithstanding
which, the said Mr. Gibson has never been suffered to Act, and so their
Lordships good Intentions have been wholly defeated: But why their Lordships
have not been able to put their own orders in Execution, is another strange
thing to me.

This is the Account he gives; and it is certainly very amazing to consider that
the Government should be so wretchedly Corrupt, as to pass over Crimes of such
fatal Consequence.

But you may see that by this Cheating and Robbing there are vast Sums of Money
gotten for some body, and certainly the Actors in it cannot have the whole
profit to themselves, but it must be distributed elsewhere, to persons of
higher Rank; Because their Interest is so great, that even after Conviction,
they have power enough to Chain up Law and Justice from doing their proper
Offices. And now Sir, what think you, are these Crimes worthy of Cognizance or
not? but I have many more to add


C. Why then, Pray Sir proceed, for this is something more than I knew before;
I confess, one of Crosfeilds Books was given me at the House of Commons, it
lies somewhere about the House, but I had never time to read it over.


G. Indeed I thought as much, for it appears all things of that kind have
hitherto been shamefully thrown aside as wast Paper, as if the persons to whom
they were Dedicated did not desire to be Informed: But I shall go on and give
you some Account of the Commissioners of the Admiralty.

Their Lordships have been accused of Concealing and Advocating the Crimes of
the Navy-Board, and Discouraging and Ruining such of the Kings faithful
Officers and Subjects, that laid them open* this has been proved against them
before the Council, but all things lie dormant and unregarded: So that here is
three degrees of such fatal Corruption, from the Navy to the Adm^raity and from
them to the Council, that alone is sufficient to shake the very Foundation of
the Government.

It were endless, to tell you the rest of the Admiralties Crimes, who through
Corruption and Ignorance, have not been able with about two hundred Sail of
Ships to Guard our Navigation; whereby Trade has been destroyed, and our
Merchants undergone Infinite Losses, which our Enemies have had the Benefit of;
and then further, the Admiralty have all along placed Commanders in the Fleet
without any regard to Merit. So that this War we have lost above a hundred
Ships, the greatest part of which have been fooled away, by the Ignorance of
the Commanders; and some by Cowardice without fighting, besides the horrid
Miscarriages in Expeditions against the Enemy, as the shameful Expedition to
Breast, etc. Which serves only to dispirit the People, and Increase their Taxes.
Certainly a Man would think, that these Gentlemen have a design Totally to
destroy the Navigation of England, for tho the Crimes of the Sea Commanders are
so Hanious and Numerous; yet has not one of their Sea Journals been Examined
all this War, to see how they have performed their Duty, tho there is no other
way to Judge of their Fidelity and Ability in their Stations but by Traceing
their Journals; and thus Ignorance and Negligence, as well as horrible
Profaneness and Debauchery has generally overspread the Sea, as well as the
Land. But what should I speak any more of this Admiralty, for every one knows
their Wickedness and Ignorance, yet I have often wondered there has not been
more Complaints against them, from the East*India and Guinea Company and
others, who are almost Ruined with Losses: Certainly our Merchants are like the
Fools spoken of by Aesop, that none would meddle to remove the Stone from the
Mouth of the Bath, tho every Man stumbled, and broke his shins over it at going
in, till at last a Wise Man came and Roll d it away; God grant we may have some
Wise Men by the next Parliament, that will stand up for the public good, or
else in short we must prepare for foul VVeather.


C. But Sir, what needs all this Complaint, why most of these sores are healed,
for here is a Council of Trade now settled, by which the Merchants Grievances,
and several other things will be rectified


G. I confess, the Council of Trade was excellently proposed at first to the
Parliament; But the Interest of the Court quickly beat out it is Brains, and
from this Establishment I doubt little good will arise, my reasons for it are
these. First, They do not understand Trade, it is Foreign to them, and out of
their sphere. Secondly, I cannot but observe, that the Major part of these
persons are the same that sit in Council; and from time to time have heard the
Crimes of the Admiralty and Navy* and wanted no Power to redress those
Grievances there: So that the Regulation is no more than removing these
Gentlemen from one Room to another, as the Barons of the Exchequer pass from
the Law to the Chancery side, now certainly if I am a Corrupt or Ignorant Man
in the Parlour, I am the same in the Dineing Room.

Put Sir, there you flatly Arraign the very Wisdom of the Government.


G. Yes, certainly and their honesty too (if by the Government you mean the
Court or else what d' think I have been talking of all this while or how is it
possible I could speak at all of any public Grievances, unless I Arraigned
both, without you would have me say we are all Ruined; and at the same time
affirm, that no body did it: But I must beg your patience a little further,
because you did as it were, Challenge me to give you some Instances of
Corruption.


C. Sir, Then you may proceed if you please; I am sorry to hear so much, tho I
think none of it does Actually relate to me, for I Am sure, I always did what I
could.


G. Why, then in the next place, I shall give you some Account of the
Commissioners, for taking Care of Sick and Wounded Seamen, and Exchanging
Prisoners of War, and these you will also find to be a wretched Pack: For one
of their Clerks who laid down his Employment, has proved Notorious Crimes
against them.; as holding a Pernicious and Unlawful Correspondence with the
French all this War, So that there has been an open and quick passage to give
Intelligence to the Enemy of all our Affairs and Designs, and to betray the
Kings Councils from time to time, also he has proved that they have Cheated the
King in their Accounts; and Cheated the poor Sick and Wounded Seamen in
Plymouth Hospital out of their Provisions, and that they have all along Cheated
the Poor French Prisoners under their Care, out of part of their Allowance, and
treated them in a very Barbarous manner. For it seems their whole Allowance was
but four pence each Man a day, and they deducted three farthings out of that
four pence: It was also proved that the French Intendant General Marine, writ
diverse doleful Letters of Complaint to these Commissioners, telling them how
Barbarously and inhumanely the poor French Prisoners were used, whereby many of
them Perished; And that he had Orders from the French King to use our English
Prisoners in like manner if it was not rectified; But no Regulation being made,
but the Evil rather Increasing* was the true Cause that the French have all
along used our poor English Captives in such a dreadful and Barbarous Manner:
For by reason of their Miserable short allowance and lying diverse Months in
Filthy and Loathsome Prisons, and others by being driven like Gally Slaves
several hundred Miles Naked through the Country, I say from these Causes many
hundreds of them have Perished, and many Familys have thereby been brought to
utter Ruin: Nay these Men have Committed Murder on both sides of the Water;
For, besides the English, they have basely and Cruelly destroyed many of the
poor French prisoners, which doubtless is no less Murder in the Sight of God
notwithstanding the War.

These and Diverse other Crimes were Examined and proved before the Admiralty
by the Kings Special Order above two years since, and a Report thereof was made
to his Majesty and Carried by the Admiralty to the Cabinet-Council, but the
Matter was so managed, that the Report was Stifled and not Read to the King: so
that the Commissioners, upon their Petition, were granted a Re-hearing before
the Council in Public, where these Matters were Fully Proved over again; but
the business was delayed from time to time, till the King was gone for
Flanders, so that the Report of the Council was also kept from his Majesty, and
how that Report was afterward curry'd in his Majestys absence I know not, but
this I know, the Commissions are still in their places with power to pursue
their Villainy* so that what I told you just now appears again to be true. That
Satan cannot Cast out Satan.

There may many things more be said of these Men's horrid Wickedness, as their
destroying the poor Sick and Wounded Seamen with bad Medicines for the Lucre of
gain, which with many other Crimes were fully proved against them before the
Comissioners for Stateing the public Accounts, where some Witnesses they
brought appeared most Wilfully and Notoriously perjured, and Escaped
punishment. But for a more plain and particular Information herein, I shall
refer you to a Book Printed and Published last year, by the Person that brought
the Complaint against these Men, and Dedicated to the house of Peers, It is
Entitled Bastons Case (for so was the Clerks Name) or a Brief Account of the
Evil Practices of the present Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, as they were
prove d. 1 st* Before the Lords of the Admiralty. 2 ly. Before the Lords of the
Council, and 3 ly. Before the Commissioners for Stateing the public ^counts.
For there is Contain d the Admiraltys and Councills Report, and there the
Crimes of these Commissioners for Sick and Wounded lie barefaced to the World.

And now Certainly it would Stir up a Man's Zeal for the public good, if he did
but Consider in what Jeopardy and peril the poor Saylor Serves his King and
Country; For besides the hazard of his Life in open Fight) if he continues in
the Kings Service without being Sick or Wounded or Taken by the Enemy, why then
he is liable to be Query'd, or Run'd out of his pay, or obliged for Necessity to
sell his Ticket for half loss (or more) to some of those Cursed Monsters,
called Ticket-buyers, who (as it has appeared too plain) are but Deputy's or
Journy-men to the Navy-Board. If he is set on Shore Sick and Fresh diet and
Broth will not Cure him, why then he runs a great hazard of being Poisoned
with his Physic, but if he recovers it is ten to one but he is pricked Run; And
if he is taken by the Enemy it is a great Chance if ever he returns to his Native
Country.

Certainly it must ere long be Counted hard Measure, that for such petty Retail
Robbery and Murder, as taking away a small Matter upon the Road, or for
killing another in a Duel for an Injury received that a Man should be hanged
like a Dog; When such wholesale Murderers and Robbers as these are protected
and Flourish in their Villainy, though their Actions tend to the utter
Subversion and overthrow of a State: But this is an Age full of Wonders; For
from the Court proceeds Abundance of Praying and Preaching and Fasting, but
hardly a Grain of Integrity, Honesty, Justice or Humanity, as if these were
Accounted Needless Ingredients in Religion.

But I am unwilling to try your patience any further with these unpleasing
Relations, otherwise I could add several other things and particularly of the
Commissioners of the Post Office, how they have been lately proved Horribly
Corrupt and unfaithful before the Lords Justices; likewise more might be said
of other Offices, and also of the great Corruption in the Army and abuse of the
poor Soldiers, by the Agents and others, which was also plainly proved; But I
think this is Enough at present to show you what a Condition the Nation is in:
For any one may Judge by these what the other Offices are, They being all
Streams that proceed from the same Fountain (I mean the Court) and must
consequently afford the same Bitter Water. And now I hope you are thoroughly
convinced that the Complaints of Grievances have not been mere Clamor, as you
were pleased to say in the beginning of our discourse.


C. I Confess Sir these things do look with an Ill face: Yet it is the greatest
Riddle in the World to me, how such Miscarryages as these could be carry`d on,
when we have had for some years past a Commission Establish`d by Act of
Parliament to Take, State and Examine the public Accounts of the Kingdom, and
they have Power by the Act to Administer Oaths and to Call all Persons to an
Account that have the Receipts or Issues of the Public Revenue and that
Commission consists only of Members of the house of Commons, who are utterly
unqualifyd for any Employments at Court* and consequently unbyas`d Men; And
therefore I wonder how these things can be.


G. Why I Confess, this is a Mystery of Iniquity that has darkened the
understandings of some, however it is a matter easily unriddled, for 'twill be
found that these are also a pack of Gentlemen, nothing Inferior to the worst
of those already spoken of; for as the Court have hid the Grievances of the
People from the King, so these have kept them from the Parliament, and have
used such Arbitrary Arts, Tricks, and Devices to acquit and Justify the worst
of Villains that have come before them, and to blacken the Reputations of
Honest Men, that certainly the like has not been known, for an Instance of
which I refer you to the Printed Book I spoke of just now* about the Crimes of
the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded, Entitled Bastons Case, etc. There you
will see in what an Arbitrary manner they heard that business, and Endeavored
by all the shameful ways Imaginable, to acquit those Commissioners of Crimes
they had been proved Guilty of twice before, Viz. At the Admiratly and Council.
They allowed Criminals to swear in their own behalf contrary to Law, and when
Baston made them appear Notoriously perjured, they Barbarously Encouraged one
of them to swear on, (whose Name was Nicholas Sharrack) which he did, and was
perjured again, and again, as plain as the Sun, and as black as Hell; and then
they discharged him any further Attendance, with as much Commendation and
Applause as if he had Sworn right, but I refer you to the Book for that and
much more, for by this Illegal and Ungodly Method of Swearing Criminals in
their own behalf; with diverse other new Invented Arbitrary ways in hearing the
Peoples Grievances, these Gentlemen can at pleasure make the Devil white.
However, it seems this business of the Commissioners for Sick and Wounded was
so plain being twice before both proved and Reported) that they were not able
to wipe off their Guilt and Infamy: But this they were able to do for them, to
bury it in their Office and keep it from the knowledge of the House of Commons,
which they have accordingly done: And when it was afterward brought into the
House of Lords to be heard, they prevented it there also by a Trick, and got it
out of the House, for they Acquainted their Lordships that the matter was then
depending before their Board; and prayed it might be Recommitted to them to
finish the same, and make their Report, which the House accordingly did; but
the Report is not made to this day, neither will be I suppose till the day of
Judgment: And as to what they told the House of Lords, that the matter was then
depending before them, 'twas a great falsity, and designed only as an Excuse to
disappoint the hearing of the matter in Parliament. Much more might be said of
these Men concerning the Navy and Army, how they have brow-beat and discouraged
Witnesses, and Encouraged Knaves and Villains, stifled, Complaints, etc. So
that these Men instead of being a Checque to Corruption; have been the Props
and Pillars to support it, as true Servants and Vassals to the Court.

Certainly such a Commission might have been of exceeding use to the public,
had it consisted of true Englishmen, and been Wisely and Honestly managed; for
'twou'd have been a place to Punish and reform Knavery and Villainy, and Rogues
and Cheats, with Tears in their Eyes, might have called it the terrible Office
of Inquisition, but now, on the contrary, they may Rejoice, and truly say, it is
an Office of Absolution; For they have Examined no Accounts, nor sav`d the
Nation a penny of Money this War, but Knaves, Knavery and Taxes have constantly
Increas`d; all that they do, as I know of, is, they receive the Accounts of the
Receipts and Issues of the Kings Revenue from all Offices and Persons, and them
they take the pains to Transcribe in Books and Methods of their own, so as to
be able to Answer any Question of the House of Commons, relating to the
Receipts of the Revenue or Charge of the War, but to detect Frauds, is so small
a part of their work that they hardly Regard it. Sure, in this mighty Mass of
Corruption the parties concern`d, could not have subsisted without the help of
this Office; for it is a Receptacle for all their Knavish Accounts, where being
New-Moulded (without Alteration) they receive a Vizard of Honesty; In short,
this Office, as it is manag`d, has been a great Blind to the Nation, and may (for
its Abominable foulness) be fitly compar`d to a Capital Common-shoar, into
which abundance of other Common-shoars and little petty Sinks do Empty
themselves.


C. But Sir, I tell you again, They are Men utterly unqualify`d for any
Employments at Court, to what end therefore can this Corruptien be among them?
really it is still a Riddle to me.


G. Why Sir, to the same End that all other Corruption is, Namely to get Money
and I must tell you they are in a most Excellent way for (...) because they
have it in their power to Crush or Protect such a great Number of Knaves of all
sorts and sizes: And I hope Sir, you don't question* but that they have Pockets
and Coffers enough to put their Money in, as well as the Courtiers. Therefore
pray where the Riddle on it, for my part, I see none at all; For it plainly
appears, these Gentlemen have been so far from obstructing, that they have
afforded great help, and performed their part toward the Destruction of their
Country, as well as the rest.


C. Well, admit all you say is true, and that there is such a General
Corruption as you speak of; How can you help it at present, pray would* you
have the King at this juncture Immediately go to Turning out* and Punishing
such a great Number of Men? Certainly, (...) make such Disorder and Confusion,
as would soon (...) up the very Foundation of the Government, and than would be
a Remedy with a Witness.


G. Why then, I find you have Changed your Opinion, and own at last that the
Nation is Sick, But now to save the Court, you would have the Distemper so far
gone, that there is not strength left to undergo a Course of Physic, without
Imminent hazard of Life: I confess the Court of all sorts of Physic, ever
hated Purges. They will take Gold Cordials, and they are great Admirers of
Quieting Pills, but Purging they mortally hate, and will have it to be a Vile
and Dangerous way of Practice But, to speak in your own words -- Admit what you
say is true, that the Government is brought to this degree of Feebleness, Pray
how highly then is the King and Nation Obliged to these* Long-headed STATESMEN
and COVNCELLORS (whose Parts and Honesty, for some Years past, it has been
almost Treason to Question) Or what Satisfaction can they render to His
Majesty, and the People of England, for bringing upon them this Incurable
Disease?

But now, Sir, pardon me, if I differ a little from you in Opinion: I do not
believe the Government is so weak, but that a Fit Remedy might be applied for
all these Evils, and that is, to Turn Out in the first place some of those that
have been most Obnexious to the People, and put in their Rooms Men of Public
Spirits, Fearing God, and Hating Covetousness, and they will have Courage
sufficient to Balance the rest of the Wicked Party, till the Law is let loose
to do its Proper Office upon them that are Turned Out, whose Punishment will
strike others with Great Terror, and make them fearful how they Offend: But if
they escape, 'twill be a most Pernicious Example to Encourage and Excite all
Men to become as Corrupt (...) they; 'twill also be highly Displeasing to God,
and 'twill greatly Incense the People; and indeed none has any Rightful Power
to Pardon them, because their Crimes have been Universal, and committed not
only against the King, but against the Whole Body of the People of England. In
this manner the Court may be soon Gradually Purged, and then the Inferiors
will of consequence be purged also. The Scripture says, Resist the Devil, and
he will flee from you: and no doubt the same Rule holds for those that have
Acted like his Children; Therefore why should we fear to Execute JUSTICE upon
them? Alas, they are but poor Feeble Creatures, not worth mentioning, in
Comparison of the Force of the Law: it is true, they have Power to do great
Mischief in their Stations, as we have found to our Cost, but when the Law lays
hold on them, their Power ceases like the Power of a Witch, when She^ Seized by
a Constable: Certainly he that knows their Actions, and Contributes to Save
them from the Just Censure and Sentence of the Law, makes himself an Approver,
before God, of all the Ruin and Destruction they have brought upon this Nation,
and of all the Innocent Families they have Destroyed and Blood they have Spilt*
Therefore, unless the Law is put in Execution, there can be but a Half faced
Regulation, or a Palliative Cure, that will soon Relapse, and become Incurable.
For, let none Absurdly and Foolishly Dream, that God will-suffer us to Prosper
in the midst of those Oppressions, Frauds, and most Heinous Immorallities, that
we are* Bound in Duty, and Able by Authority to Punish and Hinder. It Is a False
and Villainous Saying, to Whisper in the Ears of Princes, That Wholesome Laws
have any Antipathy to True Policy: The Law, when it is Upheld, is the Princes
best Friend, it cannot Dissemble, but always faithfully stands by Him, ready to
Oppose His Enemies: It gives Him His RIGHT, and His Subjects theirs, and so
makes a powerful prince, and a Virtuous VVealthy and peaceable Government. But
it is Natural for Corrupt Men to Hate Good Laws, and that makes it and the
Nation have so many Enemies at Court. And now, after all, when these
Long-headed Men have brought the Nation to this Pitch of Ruin, for them
Cunningly to Insinuate, That 'twill be Dangerous to Call them to an Actount for
their CRIMES, and Administer Help to our selves, pursuant to the Laws of God
and the Nation; is an Unparalled Audacious Absurdity: But I confess, we can
expect no better Advice from that Party, because the King, and Kingdoms Safety,
seems Opposite to Theirs; For hitherto they have Pernitiously and Pitifully
made Themselves the Center of all Their Actions.


C. Sir, I believe things are bad enough; but, methinks you are too Furious for a
Regulation; really 'twill put things into Great Disorder: therefore I am of
Opinion it is better to see the Success of One Year more.


G. As for Staying a Year longer 'twill be highly dangerous; Why should God be
Provoked, and the Nation Oppressed a Year Longer? perhaps a Year hence we shall
not have ability to help our selves. It Is said in the Law of Moses, Thou shall
not delay Justice, as if the Legislator had said, Thou shall not put it off to
a further time. The poor Man's Cause shall not be delayed an hour. God knows by
willful and Needless delays Multitudes of private persons are Barbarously
Robbed of their Right and utterly Ruined by the horrid, delaytory, Expensive
unrighteous practice in our Courts of Law and Equity; therefore let that
Suffice, and let not the, whole Body of the People have a General Ruin, by a
Delay in the State; Certainly 'twill be very Dangerous to delay the Cause of
this drooping Nation any longer. A Learned Statesman Speaking of foreruners of
Troubles, says, That when any of the four Pillars of Government are Shaken or
Weakened (which are Religion, Justice, Council, and Treasure) Men had need pray
for fair Weather: Now certainly with us not only some, but all these Pillars
are Shaking and Ready to fall; As for Religion we have none, though we have
much Preaching, Praying, etc. for had we any Real Religion, we should have
Justice and Morallity. Justice it plainly appears has almost quite left us. And
as for Council or Policy, I Confess we have abundance of that, but it is of a
VVretched Stamp, being such as is opposite to Divine and Humane Law. And for
our Money on Treasure, we may Reckon that gone also; For though there may still
be a great Stock in the Nation, yet the people may Starve, because by a long
devouring Corruption it is almost all gathered into the hands of a few
Court-huxters, that neither do nor will use it.

It Is no hard Conjecture to say that a General Poverty, Oppression, Breaking of
Laws, and Advancement of Unworthy Persons to Great Offices, are Common Motives
to, and Forerunners of Seditions and Troubles; and the* certain way to prevent
these Evils, is to take away the Cause and Matter of them, which the
Administration of Justice, and Suppressing of Vice and Wickedness will
Effectually do; For God will surely give Success to all such Remedies, if they
be Sincerely and Faithfully applied, and all contrary Policy, in this Case,
must certainly prove very Foolish, if not Fatal.

How Ridiculous is it to Delay this Matter, and to think that these Persons now
upon the Stage, can ever make this a Flourishing Nation, when they have neither
Parts nor Moral Virtues equal to other Men^ It Is true, they are Gifted with a
little Cunning, which a Learned Statesman (truly) says, Is only a Crooked sort
of Wisdom. Besides, it does appear by above Seven Years Experience, that the
very Talent of these Gentlemen lies not to Enrich or Increase, but to
Impoverish, and bring a Flourishing State to Ruin and Decay, and to Trample
upon Law and Justice* and all Good Men, and (as one excellently observes) to
make Magistracy, which was Intended for the Benefit of Mankind, prove a Plague
and Destruction to it. But the Honor of God, and the Good of their Prince and
Country is the least of their Care. They Level their Councils and Polliticks to
their own Advantage, and Slyly Study rather be thoroughly acquainted with their
Master's Temper, than to be Skilful in His Business. I Pray God that all the
Enemies of our King and Nations Happiness may be Plentifully Stocked with
Statesmen of such Parts and Honesty, and be so*effectually blinded as not to
perceive them.

Certainly at this time a Day, when Poverty, and consequently Coffeehouse is
so Universal, it is Highly Dangerous to make any Delay in Justice; For, of this
you may rest Assured, That as many as are Ruined, or Impoverished in their
Substance, by Injustice, or Maladministration, so many VOTES there is for
TROUBLES.


C. Why really I know not well what to say to it; I wish all things were done
for the Best: But yet methinks it is strange to Observe, That all these
Complaints have been brought upon the Stage, by a few Inconsiderable Men, such
as had generally Bad Characters, and were Reported to be veey Ill Men in
themselves, and that they did these things with Ill Designs, and I believe that
was one Reason why they were no more taken Notice of, as likewise because none
of any Great Figure appeared with them.


G. Why that is no Wonder at all: For it may be observed, that the Generality of
the World is so Foolish, that they regard more the Outward Manner of things,
than the Inward Matter of them. It is so in Religion it self (to our Eternal
Shame be it spoken) as appears by the Vast Troops of Pious Hypocrites,
Overseers, Pastors, and Members of all Churches, who take Great Pains by
abundance of Praying and Preaching, and Fasting, to make an Outward Gaudy Show
of Godliness, but use no Hearty, nor Sincere Endeavors really to Suppress Vice
and Wickedness: As if Religion was a Noun Substantive, that could stand by it
self, without requiring Morallity to be joined with it.

As for the Ill Characters these Persons generally have, that is no wonder
neither; For, it is one great Masterpiece of this Corrupt Party's Policy, in
their Fencing with Law and Justice, to serve all those that Complain of
Grievances, as the Persecuting Pagans did the Primitive Christians, who put
them into Lions and Bears Skins, that the Dogs might seize on them, and Bait
them to Death; So these Monsters, after they have Perverted, Delayed, Denied,
or otherways Baffled Justice, give an Honest Man a Cursed Character, and in
that Masquerade turn him loose to the Mercy of a Mistaken Multitnde: But
certainly it is a high degree of Presumption, as well as Deceiving and Wronging
the Public, thus falsely to Brand those (that stand up for the Interest of
their Country, to preserve their Laws and Liberties) with such Base Characters,
as persons Disaffected to the King and Government, as though by such Complaints
they only designed to stir up the Minds of the People to Sedition and
Rebellion; when, in Truth, it is themselves that only Bid Fair for REBELLION, by
their Corrupt and Wicked practices: For he that Endeavors to Inform King and
People of such Dangerous Distempers in the STATE, certainly does nothing but
his Duty, and therefore cannot deserve such an Odious Character, for
endeavoring to Preserve, Support and Defend the King, Government and Laws he
lives under. But he, that by his horrible Maladministration, and Oppression,
endeavors to overthrow all, let him be in ever so great a Place to pass his
Crafty Censures on others, does certainly himself deserve the Name and
punishment of a Rebel and Traitor.


C. But, pray Sir, Answer me one thing, How can the Government be so corrupt,
as you say, and so regardless of Justice, when there has been diverse Great Men
turned out this Reign for Mismanagement? These must be Acts of Justice, unless
you will say, they were all Turned out only for their Honesty.


G. Not I indeed Sir, If I should say so, I should wrong my Conscience, But I
believe I can unfold the Mystery, which generally I take to be only this; all
Men know the Court is divided into Factions, which sometimes have a difference,
either about their Profit or Preferment or something of like Nature, when the
Quarrel is broached one must overcome and perhaps the others fall into
disgarce; But they are not turned out for any of their Crimes, or through any
principle of Justice in their Adversarys, but only through a private peake and
Quarrel, wherein Virtue, Honesty, and the Public Good has no Concern; For you
may observe in the Course of this War that though there has been great Crimes
alleag'd against some of those that were turned out: Yet after they were
dismissed their Adversarys made no prosecution against them, Not for want of
Malice or Proof, but as if both partys were alike Concerned and so Equally
afraid of the Law. Just as two Harlots (Pardon the Comparison) that live
together, and falling out about their Profit, the Strongest turns the Weakest
out of doors; Why this is no Argument that she is Virtuous that Remains in the
House: For both of them were Harlots before they met, Harlots while they lived
together, and Harlots after they parted; Neither does the Prevailing Harlot
follow the other with Warrants to send her to the house of Correction, because
'twill also bring her self into Jeopardy: For the same Law will Whip them both.


C. Sir, I could wish with all my Heart that things were better, yet sure they
cannot be so very bad as you say, because there are in Office persons of
different Opinions, part Churchmen and part Dissenters, and no doubt it has
been Wisdom so to do: For they would be forward, and glad of an Opportunity to
tell each others Faults, to Weaken the Contrary party, and Strengthen their
own; So that there is Cause to believe they have hitherto been a perfect Checque
upon each others Actions, and therefore it does not stand to reason there can
be such a United Cabal as you speak off.


G. Why Sir, this is only another Court Riddle much like the former, which has
also Confounded the Judgments of the people; yet if a Man will but Consult
Reason it is Easily unfolded. I believe there is at Court the Church-party and
the Dissenting-party (as they call themselves) and I Confess the Argument that
you bring from it seems something plausible, though I can by no means allow it
to be true.

The Philosophers say, That one Experiment will knock a hundred Arguments in
the head: Then Certainly your Argument cannot stand, For we have seen by long
and Woeful Experience that these partys have had no differences in the State for
promoting the Honor of God, the good of their Prince and Country, and
Suppressing Vice and Wickedness; For these indeed would have been glorious
Quarrels, But all their differences have been Independent of this only to
promote Private Interest.

What though they seem to be at Variance one with another, It has hitherto been
found, If any Man offers to do his Duty, and Stand up for the Public Good, he
finds no difference in them, but they are all his Mortal Enemies: Church and
Dissenters all alike, all stand firm for the Profitable Cause of Corruption, to
Betray their King, and Ruin their Country; This I say we have found by
Experience, and therefore all the Arguments in the World will never Refute it.

What though they pretend to diverse Opinions in Religion, What then? Do not
Harlots do the same? Yes Certainly, there are Church of England Harlots,
Dissenting Harlots, Roman Catholic Harlots, etc. Though these pretend to
different Religions, yet they are all of one Trade, and no doubt would
Unanimously agree in the Main that all Justices of Peace, Constables, Houses of
Correction, etc. should be Suppressed, because by them their Trade is
Obstructed: So in like manner these Men notwithstanding any petty Differences,
Stand together in a body against Law and Justice, because it tends to Mortify
their Ambition and Lusts, and to hinder their Profit.

But Sir, I am afraid after all that you and I are Mistaken, and that the Court
does not Consist so much of a Real Church of England and Dissenting-party as of
a Predominant Atheistical Party, for so indeed they appear to be by their
Actions, and it also agrees with our Saviors Rule, That the Tree is known by
its Fruit; For it is Certainly very foolish, and Contradictory to say, That a
Corrupt and Wicked Man has any real Religion, let him pretend to what he will;
so that these that Divide themselves into two divisions, under the Masquerade
of Church and Dissenters, do plainly appear to be but one and the same party,
whose Moralls and Practice is such that they can truly be of no Religion or
Church, unless they be of the Synagogue of Satan.


C. Why Sir, I know not what to say to it, you have such an odd way of Arguing;
yet methinks it is Strange the Nations Grievances should arrive to so great a
pitch (as you say they are at) with so little Opposition; Why it is in Effect
Charging the whole Body of the People to be a Company of Sleepy, Senceless,
Sotts and Fools, that having Laws and Privileges, they did not make more
Powerful and Formidable Complaints to the Parliament: Therefore I must still
tell you it is very unintelligible to me to believe that Matters can be so bad
as you say, and the People so quiet, Who so bravely like Englishmen Stood up
for their Laws and Privileges in the late Reign.


G. Certainly Sir, the Peoples Patience ought not to be used as an Argument to
Continue their Grievances, I Am sure that is an odd way of Arguing: However I
Wave it, and for your Satisfaction shall give you some Reasons why they have
hitherto been so quiet under their Burdens.

The Revolution (you know) was wrought by the General Consent of the People who
for many Years past have had great and Just Apprehensions, and fears, of Popery
and Slavery: The War was also Engaged in by our general Approbation, so that
having a King after our own Heart, so generally Beloved, a known Protestant,
and Engaged in a War that we so long wished for, every Man then slept Secure,
thinking all things were safe, because the Head was Sound; and the Court
likewise, and all the vast Troops of their Dependants Cried up the same thing
(as indeed they had good Reason) for Matter's went well wish them; So that the
generallity of the People being Void of Mistrust never Troubled themselves
about State Matters, but minded their Private Affairs, and with great
Willingness paid the Taxes.

Whereas in the late Reign, the King being a known Papist, all the People in
general were possessed with Jealousy, and even the very Cobbler in his Stall would
Eagerly Enquire after News, and thought himself Concerned to know the Affairs
of the Court: So that the Actions of the State, and the Peoples Knowledge of
it, went hand in hand, For we see they were forewarned to make such provision
as they did to disappoint their designs; For then the King Acted openly with
his Court, but now the Court Acts privately without the King, by hiding each
others Crimes, and the Peoples Grievances from him, having had the great
advantage of His Majesty's Absence about Six Months in every Year during the
Course of this War. And this I take to be a Principal reason why the
generallity of the People have been so quiet from making any Public complaints.

But then it may be further observed there is a great Difference between the
Grievances of the la(...)e, and those of this Regin; The one was the
Endeavoring to take away our Laws, to bring in Papery, which all the Nation
were Enemies to: Rich and Poor, Good and Bad, Virtuous and Vicious, Saint and
Sinner, all were ^ti^^ Enemies to Popery: Besides it would take away abundance
of Estates of Abbey-lands which was so great and general an Allarm to the whole
Nation, but Especially to the Clergy, That those Celebrated, Simple, Threadbare
Doctrines of Passive-Obedience, Non-Resistance, etc. were Instantly frighted
out of the Kingdom, and never heard of since: Nay, I dare Affirm, the very
Papists themselves (tho 'twas to Introduce their own Religion) would ha been
very unwilling to part with any of these Estates.

But what are our Grievances now! Why not about Popery; They only consist of
Pure Downright Cheating the Public; And, Sir, to our Eternal Shame and Infamy,
I must tell you, That multitudes of Poperies Zealous and Mortal Enemies, are
Dear and Intimate Friends to this. Nay, to speak in General, there are few Men
but what will much rather choose to take Part in it, than make Complaint against
it; for indeed the Nation is miserably Debauched by the horrid Nasty Fogs and
Fumes of the Courts unsavory Noisome Lusts.

But now, after all this Mighty Hate to Popery, and Love to Cheating, the
Consequence of both is much alike; For if our Present Grievances, viz. Cheating
the Puhlick, be well followed, the People will soon be made Beggars and
Bankrupts, and then Poverty and Slavery will be found as True and Proper a
Saying, as Popery and Slavery: And therefore, (to Speak in your own Style) I
think there is many that do well deserve the Character of Sleepy, Senceless Sots
and Fools; But especially those Great Ones that have got Vast Estates by Fraud,
Treachery, etc. Sure they are Besotted with a WITNESS, Fondly to Fancy, that
they shall hold their Ill-got-Goods by Virtue of those Wholesome Laws that they
have Constantly broke to Get them, This, I say, is a strange Paradox.

And now, pray, Who would you have to omplain of Grievances, and especially of
these sort of Grievances, that are so generally Beloved by those that should
Redress them: You see a very considerable part of the Nation are Silent, for
Reasons I spoke of just now; and as for the Popularity, or Middle sort, viz.
Traders, Husbandmen, etc. who are the Main Body of the People, they know their
Grievances in General, but can tell nothing in Particular, where to fix the
Fault; and so cannot Complain, but only Grumble, Mutter and Murmur.

And now, if a Self-interested Man will not Complain, and if an Ignorant Man cannot
Complain, and if a Wise and Honest Man (that knows the Strength and Power of
the Corrupt Party) dare not Complain; Pray, Who would you have to Complain at
all? Certainly, it is so far from being strange (as you say) that so few have
Complained, That it is a great wonder to me, how any have had so much GRACE or
COVRAGE to open their Mouths against Corruption.

For who d'think should Complain of a Universal and Gainful Grievance? You see
the Destruction of our Coin went forward all this Reign, and had even just
destroyed the Government before our Long-Headed-Statesmen did take the Pains to
put King or Parliament in Mind to Redress it; This could not possibly be
through Ignorance: no, there was too much Money got by the Evil: and when the
Trade could be carried on no longer, Then they all Cried out, like Patriots of
their Country, to have it Redressed. So that for this Branch of the Nations
Ruin, we may also Thank the Court, and Pray God we get well over it.

These are all Miserable and Destructive Evils, that this Poor Nation at
present Staggers under, only for want of the Early, Constant and Impartial
Execution of Justice to Encourage Virtue, and Suppress Vice. But it seems this
has been contrary to the deep Maxims of our Policy, and so has hitherto been
omitted: And thus I think I have showed you, why so few have Publicly
Complained, though the Nation is so Loaded with Grievances. But I had almost
forgot one Party* and that is the Jacobites; and, I hope, you wou*d not have
them Complain against these Grievances: no, they had much rather forward them.
For, it is upon these Shameful Corruptions they build their Hopes, and for which
they Contemn and Scoff at the Government in all Public Places, and Increase
their Party by many Proselytes: For no Honest Man is capable to Contradict
them, being able to say nothing that is Good of the Court: Whereas, had Justice
been duly Administered, and Vice and Wickedness Punished and Suppressed (which
we had, and have Power enough to do) there could not have been at this day a
Protestant Jacobite left in the Nation; For, the Justice and Equity of the
Government must needs long before this, have Brought them all over from
Stubborn Folly, and made them Proselytes to their own Interest, and to Common
Sense, as well as Loving and Loyal Subjects to His Majesty.

And now, Sir, since you have Asked me several Questions, I shall beg leave
Calmly to Ask you one, and, that is, Pray to what end were your Honors and
Employments Conserr'd upon you? Were they, d'think only to get a Great Estate
to leave to your Posterity? Certainly the Duty's Incumbent on such Offices
cannot have so poor a Center, but must aim at much Higher and Nobler Objects,
if a Man would rightly consider them; But I shall not detain you at present
with an Account how Great and Extensive they are, not doubting your Knowledge
therein; however, in point of Friendship, I cannot but put you in Mind*

That (as a Privy-Councellor) you have Power to Administer Justice, but no
Power to Obstruct it.

You have Power to put the Law in Execution, but you have no Power to Pervert
it, or render it useless.

You have power to punish any Capital Public Offender, but you have no Power
to Conceal his Crimes, Protect him, and let him Escaps Punishment: For, in
doing it, you betray the King, and take from Him* His Regal* Power, and Rob the
People of their Laws and Liberties. For you are to consider, that in hearing
the Crimes of a Public Offender, your Power only extends to Hear and Examine
that Cause in Trust for your King and Country, that Law and Justice may take
place; and a Lord Chief Justice may as lawfully presume to Pardon MURDER, or
Forgive one of my Debtors, or a Justice of Peace to Compound that Felony
whereby I am Robbed, as you to Protect, or Acquit any Public Offender.

In short, In all your public Stations, you are only a Trustee for your Prince
and Country, to promote the Interest of both; and you are Answerable to both,
in this World, as well as to God in the next, how you Discharge these Trusts;
and* I fear many MEN have most Dreadful Reckonings to make on this Account.

Therefore Sir, I do Earnestly Advise you to take a Resolution to Save your
Self from the Terrible Burden of this Guilt, and Rouse a Noble English Genius,
and stand up for the Honor of God, and the Good of your Prince and Country
(whose true Interests are Inseparable) that Justice may be Administered, Virtue
Encouraged, and Vice and Wickedness Punish`d and Suppress`d: For if you
Sincerely Study True Policy; God will surely Instruct, and put you in the
Right Way; Otherwise, you may still Continue to Wander, as you have Hitherto
done: But after all, do not Entertain any fond opinion, that a Private Company
of Men can possibly hold their Riches in the midst of a Ruined Nation; No,
Certainly they must be Ruined also: For if there is any Law, that will do their
business; if not, They Will only have the pleasure of being Plundered last, by an
Enraged and Furious Popularity: For (as it is said in Job,) Fire shall Consume
the Tabernacles of Bribery. If God has said it, We may affirm it; and Pawn our
Lives and Souls, 'twill be done if Atonement be not made.


FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1696.


