A MURDERER PUNISHED, AND PARDONED.

OR, A True Relation of the Wicked Life, and shameful-happy Death of Thomas
Savage, Imprisoned, justly Condemned, and twice Executed at Ratcliff, for his
Bloody Fact in Killing his Fellow Servants, on Wednesday, October. 28. 1668.

By us who were often with him in the time of his Imprisonment in Newgate, and
at his Execution; Robert Franklin, Thomas Doolitel, Thomas Vincent, James
Janeway, Hugh Baker.


To which is annexed a Sermon Preached at his FUNERAL.

The Thirteenth Edition: With the Addition of the lewd Life, and shameful Death
of Hannah Blay, who was condemned and executed for being guilty of the Bloody
Murder committed by Tho. Savage. With other new Additions.

London, Printed in the Year, 1671.

To the Reader.
IN the following Narrative you have a relation of the bloody Murder committed
by T. Savage, with an account of the wonderful mercies of God to his poor Soul
after the commiting so bloody a sin. To which is added a short relation of the
carriage and behavior of that vile Strumpet Hannah Blay, during the time of
her being in Newgate to her Execution: which (though it had nothing in it
worthy to be related, yet (she being an instrumental cause of that bloody
resolution, was thought fit to be inserted, that she may remain as an example
of shame to all lewd women, and a severe example of Gods Justice upon such
cruel Monsters, who are not content with endangering the Souls of such ignorant
young men (that have not the fear of God before their eyes (with their
abominable whoredoms and Adulteries, but as it were to make sure of destroying
both body and Soul together, by adding to their former sins the guilt of
shedding innocent blood. And as you have a wonderful instance of Gods
Free Grace to the Soul of T. S. so the foulness of his Fact, the danger of
damning his Soul, and the twice shameful execution which he suffered, may be a
means to preserve all young men and Apprentices from being guilty of the like
fact. And as a help to you herein, you are advised to be careful what company
you keep. That you addict not your selves to drinking, or gaming, or company
keeping, which is the ruin of many young men, who by getting a habit of keeping
company, or other Vices, are very often drawn to purloin from their Masters to
maintain them in their extravagancies: by which means, they do not only run the
hazard of exposing their bodies to public shame (if they be discovered) to the
great grief, and even heartbreaking of their Friends, (when they hear of ill
courses) but the wrath of God, and eternal damnation of their poor Souls, as
you may see in the Narrative of T. S. who first began with Company keeping,
from company keeping to Whoring, from Whoring to Thieving and Murder. And
lastly, be careful to spend the Lords day, and all other spare time in the
service of God, as Reading, Praying, Hearing the Word Preached, etc. which may
be a means to preserve thee from the guilt of sins of this nature; and other
sins likewise, if thou apply thy self seriously to this work. But whiles I am
advising of others, I my self commit an error in exceeding my bounds (being
confined to a Page,) I rest

A real well-wisher to the eternal happiness of thy immortal Soul.

BLood does cry aloud; the blood of man, when violently shed by cruel hands for
private revenge or covetousness, or the satisfaction of some such base lust
does cry as far as from Earth to Heaven for vengeance: And however some
horrible Murders may be seeretly plotted, and as secretly effected, yet seldom
are they long unpunished, even in this World; for besides that, sometimes the
guilty-accusing consciences of such persons who have committed this heinous
crime, do so inwardly lash and torment them, that they can find no rest until
they have made discovery of the Fact with their own mouth; there is the
all-seeing eye of a sin-revenging God which does find them, and a strange hand
of his Providence which does often follow them, and entangle them in their
steps (when they are flying, and seeking some hidden place) which does as it
were bind them before they are in Chains, and deliver them before they are
aware into the hands of Justice to be punished.

But there is another Blood which does send forth a louder cry, namely, the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for the sins of men, which
speaks better things than the Blood of Abel, crying for mercy and
forgiveness: This Blood has such prevalency and virtue, that when it is
applied by Faith unto the most notorious Malefactor guilty of Blood as well as
other Wickedness, it does outcry and drown the voice of Blood, and every other
sin, and washes the most impure Soul died in sin, unto a Scarlet and Crimson
hue. This Blood we hope was sprinkled upon the Conscience of this Murderer, who
had a little before, embrued his hands in the blood of his Fellow Servants: for
having given such evidences of his sincere repentance, and true Faith unto
several of its Ministers and other Christians that were with him before, and at
his Execution; We hope, though he were justly punished with the first death by
the hand of man for his Crime, that through infinite Free Grace and Christ's
Blood, he has escaped the second death, and wrath of God in Hell. The
Narrative may give the same satisfaction to others which we the publishers
hereof have received; which is as follows.

THomas Savage born in the Parish of Giles's in the Fields, was put out
Apprentice to Mr. Collins Vintner, at the Ship-Tavern in Ratcliff, where he
lived about the space of one year and three quarters, in which time he
manifested himself to all that knew him, to be a mere Monster in Sin; in all
that time he never once knew what it was to hear one whole Sermon, but used to
go in at one door, and out at the other, and accounted them fools that could
spare so much time from sin, as two or three hours on a Lord's Day, to spend in
the Lords Service: He spent the Sabbath commonly at the Alehouse, or rather at
a Base-house with that vile Strumpet Hannah Blay, which was the cause of his
ruin; he was by a young man (now gone to Sea) first enticed to go drink there,
and after that he went alone, and now and then used to bring her a Bottle or
two of Wine, which satisfied not her wicked desires, but she told him, if he
would frequent her house, he must bring money with him; he told her often he
could bring none but his Masters, and he never wronged his Master of two pence
in his life; still she enticed him to take it privately; he replied, he could
not do it, because the Maid was always at home with him; Hang her Jade, says
this impudent Slut, knock her brains out, and I will receive the Money. This
she many times said; and that day that he committed the Murder, he was with her
in the morning, and she made him drunk with burnt Brandy, and he wanted one
Groat to pay of his reckoning: she then again persuaded him to knock the Maid
on the head, and she would receive the money; he going home between twelve and
one of the clock, his Master standing at the Street-door, did not dare to go in
that way, but climeth over a backdoor, and comes into a Room where his
Fellow Servants were at dinner: O, says the Maid to him, Sirrah, you have been
now at this Bawdy house, you will never leave till you are undone by them: He
was much vexed at her, and while he was at dinner, the Devil entered so strong
into him, that nothing would satisfy but he must kill her; and no other way,
but with the Hammer: to which end, when his Master was gone with all the rest
of the Family to Church, leaving only the Maid and this Boy at home; he goes
into the Bar, fetches the Hammer, and takes the Bellows in his hand, and
sits down by the fire, and there knocks the Bellows with the Hammer: the
Maid says to him, Sure the Boy is Mad; Sirrah, what do you make this noise
for? He said nothing, but went from the Chair, and lay along in the Kitchen
window, and knocked with the Hammer there; and on a sudden threw the Hammer
with such force at the Maid, that hitting her on the head, she fell down
presently, screeching out; then taking up the Hammer three times, and did not
dare to strike her any more: at last the Devil was so great with him, that he
takes the Hammer, and strikes her many blows with all the force he could, and
even rejoiced that he had got the victory over her: which done, he immediately
takes the Hammer, and with it strikes at the Cupboard-door in his Master
Chamber, which being but slit Deal, presently flew upon, and thence he takes
out a Bag of Money, and putting it under his Arm under his Cloak, he went out
at a back-dore strait-way to this base house again, when he came thither, the
Slut would fain have seen what he had under his Cloak, and knowing what he had
done, would very fain have had the Money; he gave her half a Crown, and away he
went without any remorse for what he had done; going over a style, he sat down
to rest himself, and then began to think with himself, Lord, what have I done!
and he would have given ten thousand Worlds he could have recalled the blow;
after this he was in so much horror, that he went not one step but he thought
every one he met came to take him; he got that night to Greenwich, and lay
there, telling the people of the house that he was to go down to Gravesend;
that night he rose and walked about, and knew not what to do, Conscience so
flew in his face. The Mistress of the house perceiving the Lad to have Money,
and not sealed up, said, I wish this Lad came by this Money honestly; the next
morning* he going away toward Woollidge, the Mistress of the house could not
be satisfied, but sent for him back, and told him, Sweet heart, I fear you came
not by this Money honestly; yes indeed Mistress (says he) I did, for I am
carrying of it down to Gravesend to my Master a Wine-Cooper, we live upon
London Bridge, and if you please to send any one to my Mistress, I will leave
the Money with you; so there were some people going to London, and he writ a
Note to send to his Mistress, and he left the Money with the Woman of the
house, and went his way, wandering toward Woollidge, and there was in the
Ship-yard; about which time news came to Greenwich of the Murder that was
committed at Ratcliff by a youth upon his fellow Servant, and that a bag of
Money was taken away; the Mistress of the house forthwith concluded that sure
it was the same youth that was at her house, and that that was the money;
whereupon she sent men out presently to seek him, who found him in an Alehouse,
where he had called for one pot of Beer, and was laid down with his head on the
Table, and fallen asleep: one of the men calling him by his name, Tom, says he,
did not you live at Ratcliff? he said yes; and did not you Murder your
fellow servants? he confessed it; and you took so much money from your Master? he
acknowledged all; then said they, you must go along with us, he said, yes, with
all my heart. So they went forthwith to Greenwich to the house where he lay
that night, where when he came, he met his Master with some friends, and when
his Master spoke to him of it, he was not much affected at first, but after a
little while burst out into many tears; thence he was conveyed to the Justice
at Ratcliff, where he fully confessed the Fact again; and by him was committed
close Prisoner in the Goal of Newgate, where Mr. H. B. (who after some
acquaintance with him, and this preceding Narrative from his own mouth) came to
see and speak with him, and he seemed but little sensible of what he had done:
Are you (said he) the person that committed the Murder upon the Maid at
Ratcliff? he said yes, O what think you of your condition? what think you will
become of your precious Soul? you have by this sin not only brought your body
to the Grave, but your Soul to Hell, without infinite mercy: were you not
troubled for the Fact when you did it? not for the present Sir, said he, but
soon after I was, when I began to think with my self what I had done. The next
time he asked him, whether he were sorry for the Fact? He said, wringing his
hands, and striking his breast, with tears in his eyes, Yes, Sir, for it cuts me
to the heart to think that I should take away the life of a poor innocent
Creature; and that is not all, but for any thing I know, I have sent her Soul
to Hell. O how can I think to appear before Gods Bar, when she shall stand
before me, and say, Lord this wretch took away my life, and gave me not the
least space that I might return to thee: he gave me now no warning at all,
Lord. O then what will become of me?

Soon after the imprisonment of this Thomas Savage, in Newgate, upon the desire
of one of his Friends, Mr. R. F. and T. V. went to him in the Prison, and had
liberty, with much readiness, from the Keepers to discourse with him: They
asked him, if he were the person that had murdered the Maid? He answered, that
he was: they did then open to him the heinous nature of that sin, endeavoring
to set it home upon his Conscience; telling him of the express Law of God, Thou
shall not kill, and the express threatening, That whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed. They spoke to him of the Law of the Land, and
the punishment of Death which would certainly be inflicted upon him; that he
had but a few Weeks more to live, and then he would be Tried, and Condemned,
and Executed: but they told him, that the punishment of Temporal Death was but
small in comparison with the punishment of eternal Death in Hell, which he had
deserved, and was exposed unto. They told him, that so soon as Death should
make a separation between his Soul and Body, that his Soul must immediately
appear before the dreadful Tribunal of the Sin-revenging God, and there receive
its final doom, and be irreversibly sentenced to depart from the presence of
the Lord, in everlasting fire, if he were found under the guilt of this or any
other sin. They asked him if he knew what Hell was? telling him what a fearful
thing it would be for him to fall into the hands of the living God, how
intolerable the immediate impressions of Gods wrath would be upon his Soul!
what horror and anguish he would there be filled withal! and how he would be
bound up in Chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day! and then
told him of the Glorious Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ to Judgment, that
Soul and Body should be then joined together, and condemned together, and
punished together, with such exquisite torments as never entered into the heart
of man to conceive! declaring the extremity and the eternity of the Torments of
Hell, which were the just demerit of his sins. Then they asked him, whether he
had any hopes of escaping this dreadful punishment of hell? He answered that he
had. They enquired into the grounds of his hopes; he told them that he repented
of his fault, and hoped God would have mercy on his Soul. They asked him,
whether he thought his Repentance would procure for him a Pardon? He knew no
other way. They told him that God was just, and his justice must be satisfied,
and there was no way for him to do it, but by undergoing the eternal torments
of Hell, and did he know no way of satisfying Gods Justice besides, and
pacifying his anger that was kindled against him? No, he knew not any; and
(...) did he hope to be saved? He answered, yes. They ^^quired whether ever he
had experience of a gracious change wrought in him. Herein he could give no
account, and yet hoped to be saved. Yes. They told him his hopes were unsound,
having no good foundation, and he would find himself disappointed; that it was
not his repentance, his tears, and prayers (though he ought to use them as
means) that would save him, if he fixed the Anchor of his hope upon them. That
if he hoped to be saved in the condition which for the present he was in, he
would certainly be damned. That he must cast away all those groundless hopes he
had conceived, and endeavor to despair in himself, that being pricked and
pained at heart, through the apprehensions of the wrath of God ready to fall
upon him, and seeing no possibility of flying and and escaping, if he looked
only to himself, he might cry out, What shall I do to be saved? and enquire
after a Savior: and then they spoke to him of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
way of Salvation by him, which before he was sottishly ignorant of, as if he
been brought up in a Country of Infidels, and not of Christians. The words
spoken to him by these two Ministers, seemed to take little impression upon
him, whilst they were present; yet after they were gone, the Lord did begin to
work, and he did acknowledge to Mr. B. that two had been with him (he knew not
their names) whose words were like arrows shot into his heart, and he did wish
that he had those words in writing, especially one expression of T. V. That he
would not be in his condition for ten thousand Worlds, did affect and so
affright him, that he said, it made his hair stand an end.

An account of a Discourse betwixt T. D. and T. S. about fourteen days after
he was Prisoner in Newgate.
When I came in and saw him in Irons, I said, were these Fetters for the sake
of the Gospel, they would be far more precious than chains of Gold; but see
here the cursed fruits of Sin, that thou should all thy lifetime have been a
faithful servant of God, have neglected no time to serve the Devil.

I asked him how old he was? he said, 16 years old; I told him he was a young
man, but an old sinner; then I began to set my self to bring him to a sense of
his sin, and of his miserable and lost estate; and asked him whether he
believed there was a God? he answered, yes; and do thou believe that this God
is true? he said, yes, and taking up the Bible, I asked him, do thou believe
that this is the Word of God? he answered, yes; Then I told him, according to
this Word, he was a damned wretch, and God had past a sentence of death upon
him; and told him plainly that he should not enter into the Kingdom of God, but
be a companion of Devils in a lake of Brimstone to all Eternity, (meaning
without Repentance, Conversion, and Faith in Christ.) Then I turned him to
several Scriptures, and told him this was the Word by which he must be judged
at the (...) of God, and be damned or saved, according (...) then he should be
found to be, converted, o^ ^^converted; The Scriptures were these, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not
deceived: neither Fornicaters, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Esseminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, ver. 10. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

Another Scripture I read to him, was Gal. 5. 19. Now the works of the flesh
are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, ver. 20. Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, ver. 21. Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness,
Revellings, and such like, of the which I tell you before, as I have also told
you in time past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God.

The next Scripture to the same purpose was Rev. 21. 8. But the fearful, and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

I told him these were the words of the holy, true, and infallible God; this
was the sentence which God had passed upon him, as the desert of those
abominable sins which he was guilty of: for these Scriptures pointed at several
of the sins which he confessed he had lived in, and had committed, as
Drunkenness, Lying, Uncleanness, and Murder. I cried, you confess your self
guilty of these sins, and that God threatens you with eternal death, with
everlasting torments, and exclusion from his Presence and Kingdom; not only
God's Justice, but God's Truth also, stood betwixt him and eternal happiness;
and told him, that I spoke it with reverence, that the Holy God must be a liar,
or else he dying in the guilt of these sins, must be certainly and eternally
damned.

I asked him, what do you think? how will you escape the damnation of Hell, and
the great wrath that is to come? you have heard what God says, what do you
say? what course will you take, and what means will you use, that you may not
according to Gods threatening be cast among Devils into eternal devouring
flames? to this, at present, he made no reply, but did often shake his head,
and lifted up his eyes toward Heaven.

Next I endeavored to bring him to a sight and sense of the corruption of his
nature, and of the sinfulness of his heart; and told him all those sins were in
his heart before they were actually committed; and turned him to the saying of
Christ, Matt. 15. 19. for out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False-witnesses, Blasphemies; and told him
that in his repentance for those sins, he must not only lay to heart, and be
grieved for the outward acts, but lament and bewail the inward principle of
corruption, whereby he was so strongly inclined to such horrid abominations,
according to the example of David after his sins of Adultery and Murder, in his
confession did follow them up to the rise and original from whence they did
spring, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me. By this time I perceived some workings of heart within him, and
that he was in some measure sensible of his lost estate, and by his deportment
and carriage, to be cast down, not knowing what to do; I was unwilling to leave
him without some grounds of hope that it may be he might be saved; that there
was a possibility that he might obtain pardoning mercy, and be delivered from
that great damnation that was due to him for his great transgressions. I began
to open to him the readiness of Christ, the fullness and sufficiency of Christ
to save the greatest sinners, and that God (I hoped in mercy to his Soul) had
sent me one of his Ambassadors to offer him a pardon, and eternal life, if he
were but willing to accept of Christ upon the terms of the Gospel, for his Lord
and Savior, and did encourage and assure him, upon Repentance and Faith in
Christ, there was mercy yet for him, though a Murderer, from these Scriptures,
Isa. 1. 18. Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; and though they be red as
Crimson, they shall be as Wool. As I opened to him the great mercy of God in
Christ toward Sinners, died in Grain, that were sinners of a Scarlet color,
that had committed heinous transgressions, he brake forth into tears, and wept
plentifully at the tidings of mercy and possibility that such a one as he might
be saved. Besides, I turned him to some Scripture promises, that God would
certainly forgive his sins, and save his soul, if he could repent, and get
Faith in Christ, such as, Prove. 28. 13. He that confesses and forsakes his
sin, shall find mercy; and Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. This
Scripture he diligently heeded, and turned it down in his Bible; and these two
Scriptures, (the night before he suffered) amongst others, he alleged as the
grounds of his hope of mercy.

I also gave him some Scripture instances of great Sinners that had obtained
mercy, turned him to the example of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. to that of Mary
Magdalen, Luke 7. 37, 38. to that of the Jews, Acts 2. 37, 38. that were guilty
of the blood of Christ, that had murdered the Son of God; a greater Murder
than which could not be committed; and yet upon Repentance and Faith, many of
them were pardoned and saved. To that of Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. showed
him how God had set up Paul as a pattern of Free Grace, toward great sinners,
for the encouragement of such, that (though guilty of great sins) afterward
should believe. To all these he hearkened very carefully, and took notice of
the places of Scripture for his Meditation after I left him.

And last of all, I endeavored to set before him Jesus Christ, as the only
remedy and Savior for his Soul, and showed him the insufficiency of all his
Duties, Prayers, and Tears, to get off the guilt of the least sin; that if he
could shed a thousand tears of blood for any one vain thought, it would be no
better than puddle water to justify, or to save him. Much discourse I had with
him at this time, besides what is here inserted, and several other times when I
went to visit him in Newgate, which I willingly omit, because this book should
not swell to too great a bulk.

After all, I went to Prayer with him; in which Duty he was much dissolved into
tears; he seemed to me, and his faithful Friend that was most with him above
all others, to be very earnest in Prayer, and with weeping eyes to beg for
Pardon and converting grace, and Christ to be his Savior, which was much
insisted on in the Prayer that was made for him.

After which, advising him to consider of what I said, for that time I took my
leave of him.

The next time, after this Discourse, that Mr. Baker came to him, he enquired
how it was with him: he said, what T. D. had said, did very much startle him,
that he knew not what to reply, and cried out very much of the hainousness of
his sins, that he should commit that horrid sin of Murder; and knew not what to
do, for that left a deep impression upon his heart, That God must be a Liar, or
else he (in that condition of impenitency) must be damned: yet he laid hold
upon that Promise that was unfolded to him, That if a sinner turned from his
wicked ways, God would abundantly pardon; and afterward read on the verse that
followed, Isa. 55. 8. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your
ways my ways, says the Lord. Upon which considering, said, Men cry out for
death and vengeance, no mercy to be had from Men; but Gods thoughts to a
repenting sinner were life, for he delights not in the death of a sinner.

About four or five days after this, he was puzzled about his performing of
Duties, and resting only upon Christ for Salvation; for he was tempted, if he
perform Duties, to rest upon them; or to let them alone, and leave them off, if
he must rest only upon Christ. At which time H. B. coming to him, enquired how
it was with him now? and how he hoped to be saved? He answered, By Repentance
and Faith; and I could easily tell you, to satisfy you, that I do repent, and
do believe; but truly so to do as I ought, I find it the hardest thing in the
World: I do believe, and I do not; I cannot tell how to believe that Christ
died for sinners, so as to throw my self wholly and fully upon him, and to
think my Tears and Prayers will do me no good.

But here, Reader, we must take notice of the unwearied diligence of the Devil,
in using all means, from time to time, to undo, ruin, and wound the soul of
this poor Malefactor, who would not forbear to solicit him to sin, after he
was cast into Prison for former Iniquities he had committed; for we cannot but
judge that the Devil was loath to lose such a prey, as his Immortal soul, when
he had brought him to the very mouth and gates of Hell, to have him snatched
out of his hands by the free Grace of God; the Devil did work the more (because
he knew his time to tempt him was but short) to blemish and eclipse the
gracious work of God upon his heart, and cloud the glory of God's mercy in
saving such a sinner. He was by some former acquaintance visiting of him, (who
showed their love to a death-deserving sinner, no other way than by calling for
drink, and desiring him to drink with them,) overcome therewith, and after some
former convictions of sin, and his lost estate, did twice relapse into the sin
of drunkenness, whereby he caused many to fear that all this while he had no
more than some common workings of the spirit; and put us to a stand, that we
knew not what would be the issue of these things; but yet not daring to omit
endeavors (if possible) as instruments, under God, to save his soul: we did
after this, visit him again, and again, and set forth unto him the greatness of
his sin, that he should sin yet more against the Lord; and in his affliction
and chains to provoke the Lord to greater wrath against his soul; with many
words to that purpose.

After which, his soul was wounded, his heart was pierced, he knew not what to
do; he asked, may mercy be had for a backsliding sinner? to which were given
him some Scriptures, where God called to backsliding sinners to return, and
invited them to repent, and promised mercy to them if they did, even after they
had done as wickedly as they could: and this was much enlarged upon before him
from Jer. 3. 1, to 15. verse. But God that had begun to awaken and to rouse his
conscience, that he might set him up as a pattern of Free Grace, would not let
the Devil go thus away with his soul, but brought him to a deep sense of his
falling into sin, that he much lamented, with many tears, the sadness of his
state, the misery of his Soul, saying, what will become of my soul! my Immortal
soul! I cannot think what will become of my soul! I deserve Hell ten thousand
times over, and have I now but one grain of sand left in the glass to work for
eternity! shall I neglect God any longer? O I have neglected God too long
already! striking his hand upon his breast, and wringing his hands, and shaking
his head, and weeping abundantly, said, Lord, what shall I do? O God, what
shall I do? Lord, what will become of me? If God had dealt justly with me, I
had now been in Hell, I had been dashed into Hell when I murdered that poor
innocent creature; I wonder that I am not now in Hell; that such a wretch as I,
am not in Hell; God has been pleased to manifest more mercy to me in sparing
of me, and affording me so long time for repentante, but I have neglected time,
and relapsed into drunkenness and vain talking, time after time. I thought this
place (meaning the hole in Newgate) a hell upon earth, and did account it a
heaven to be among the other Prisoners; but now God has tried me, whether sin
will be bitter and displeasing to me or not, I have this day (being Lords day)
been among the Prisoners, and they asked me to play at Cards, but instead of
complying with them, I reproved them, and told them for my part, I had profaned
Sabbaths enough already, I have but a little time to work for my soul, and I
ought not to neglect time now; that they likewise (he told them) if they
rightly considered, had something else to do, and striking his hand upon his
breast, with much earnestness he cried out with tears. Now, now, I find that
God has been at work, that God has been at work upon my soul; he has, I am
sure, been at work, for now I see so much evil, and taste such bitterness in
sin, that I am not so much troubled that I am to die, nor so much troubled that
I am in danger of hell, as to think I should so dishonor God, that I should so
offend so gracious and merciful a God, and spurn against all his mercies. Oh my
soul, my Immortal soul, I know not what will become of it to all eternity, it
is the grief of my very soul that I have neglected time as I have done, now I
see so much need of Christ, and so much preciousness and excellency in Christ,
that if the greatest King in the World should come and throw his Crown at my
foot, and tell me I should enjoy it, and all the glory of it for millions of
years, and should have my liberty presently, and should say, but it must be
without Christ, I would sooner choose to die this moment, nay, to be racked to
pieces by ten thousand deaths, or burn ten years together, so I may have a
Christ, I speak freely from my heart, so far as I know my heart; and now I find
it is not only the Devils tempting me, has brought me to this, but this
cursed, wretched, devilish heart of mine within. It is within me, so that it
was in me before it was committed by me. I deserved hell ten thousand times
over before I committed this horrid sin; well, now I am resolved I will pray as
much as I can, and weep, and wrestle with God, as if I were to have Heaven for
it; but when I have done all, I will deny all, for my Prayers and Tears cannot
save me, and I will fully and wholly throw my self at the feet of Christ, and
if I am damned, I will be damned there; and more he spoke to this purpose in
Mr. Bakers hearing.

About three days after, Mr. B. coming to him, asked him how it was with him?
He told him that the Devil was very busy with him, and did solicit him
grievously with his temptations, persuading him to have thoughts of escaping;
these things (said he) hindered my minding of God one part of the day, the other
part of the day the Devil fills me with drowsiness, that I can neither pray nor
read, nor perform any duty, nor mind any one that prays with me; sometimes he
tempts me to delay, telling me that it is time enough for me to think of
Repentance when I am Condemned, and that God is a merciful God; and sometimes
he tempted* me to despair, telling me that it was impossible that so monstrous
a sinner as I had been should be saved; but blessed be God, that he made me to
think that these were but the Devils temptations, although I have been sadly
hurried with them for some days; but that which did most fill me with terror,
was the frequent fears of the Devils appearing personally to me, which did so
exceedingly trouble me in Prayer, so that I could say nothing when I kneeled
down, but was fain to set the Candle down before me, and durst not look one way
or other, for fear I should see him; and my thoughts have been so vain many
times when you have been reading to me, that I have scarce heard a word of what
you said.

A Discourse betwixt H. B. and T. S. Prisoner in Newgate, after some Friends
went away dissatisfied, fearing he had not a sense of his sin, etc.
H. B. asking him how it was with him? he replied, It was the grief of my soul
that I should be no more affected, I think I have the most rocky, stony heart
in the World, if ever there was an heart of Iron, I have one, it is not fit to
be called an heart. To have others come and pray with me, and instruct me, and
see how they are affected with my condition, and yet I not at all affected with
my own condition; Oh it is the grief of my soul to see it so! and yet as soon
as Ministers and good People are gone, and I walk about and consider, Oh it
melts me, and breaks my heart in pieces, to think I can mourn for sin, and
grieve for sin no more, when God's people are with me! because it causes them
to think that I am not sensible of my sin, though, blessed be God, I am in some
measure sensible of the evil of my sins, and it is the grief of my soul to
think how I have dishonored God, and abused his Mercy, and spurned against his
Mercy and Patience.

After this they both spent some time in Prayer, and H. B. asked him, how it
was with him now? he said, I find so much sweetness in Prayer, although I
cannot find God loves me, that to think I am not Cursing and Swearing as
others are, but be confessing my sin, my very tears trickle down my cheeks for
joy; sometimes I find my heart so dead and dull in Duty, that I know not what
to say in Prayer; at other times I find my heart so full, and so much affected
in Duty, that I could wish I might never rise from off my knees.

The night before the Sessions, H. B. coming to him, asked him if it was not
terrible to him to think of appearing before the Bar of Men? he answered,
Methinks when I consider seriously of it, what a light poor thing Man's Bar is
in comparison of Gods Bar, yet Man's Bar is enough to daunt one, to hear them
say; Take him Jailer, tie him up: but to appear before Gods Bar, who knows
all the sins that ever I committed; he saw all my secret sins, and for God to
say, Take him Jailer, Take him Devil, shut him up in the Dungeon of Hell: Oh!
that is enough, I believe, to make the stoutest heart in the World to tremble,
for there is no recalling that sentence, and I believe there are many go out of
this Prison, as I saw formerly three that went to be hanged, and they were
almost drunk, and did sing all the way they went, but Oh their note was soon
changed; when they came to stand before Gods Bar.

The morning before he went to the Sessions, H. B. and the Prisoner spent some
time in Prayer, the Prisoner in his Prayer did earnestly beg of God that he
would keep him from those temptations he might be exposed unto by bad company;
After this he was taken down to the Sessions House, but was not called, because
the Jury of Middlesex did not sit that day.

At night H. B. came to him again, and asking how it was with him, he answered,
he found it no easy thing to be a true Christian; I thought before I came to
Prison, that reading a Chapter now and then, and saying the Lords Prayer and
the Creed at night when I went to bed, would have saved me, though many times I
was a sleep before I had half done; but now I find it no such easy thing to
get to Heaven, nay, I find it the hardest thing in the world, for my Prayers,
and Tears, and Duties, if I could fall upon my knees, and never rise off from
them while I live, they would not save me, for all this is but Duty, but now I
know there is merit enough in the Blood of Christ to save me; and he did
earnestly beg of God in Prayer, that God would wash his soul in the Blood of
Christ and blot out all his sins out of the book of his remembrance, and turn
them behind his back; though I as earnestly beg they might be all spread before
my face, that I might have a more humble and thoroughly broken heart for them;
Lord, one drop of that blood is enough to wash away all my sins; and so after
some conference H. B. left him for that night, who heard from one that was with
him that night, that he spent that time most in Prayer and Reading.

The second morning in the time of the Sessions, Mr. Baker, that was a careful
Friend for the good of his Soul, went to the Sessions House, where he found him
well, and in good frame, and continued with him for the space of two or three
hours that morning, after which time Mr. Baker was from him to hear the Trial
of the person that was arraigned, and afterward executed for the fire upon the
house burnt down in Mincing-Lane, for the space of half an hour, or thereabout;
in which time, in company of other Prisoners, he was much distempered with
something that he had drank amongst them, which did take from him his
understanding, that he was not his own man, we judge (that though this did cast
a blemish upon the profession that he had made after he came to Newgate) it was
not a voluntary act, but some surprizal or design of the other upon him; partly
because the quantity was far less than what at other times he could drink
without any disturbance to his head. A Friend also heard Hannah, the Strumpet,
that enticed him to his former wickedness: say, others have made you drunk to
day, but I will make you drunk to morrow: But afterward he was afraid to drink
in their company, but rather denied to take what was necessary for his
refreshment.

The Prisoners were much against his accusing of that Harlot, and did much
persuade him to take something to cheer his spirits; and when T. D. was with
him on Saturday before he died, he charged him with this sin, which had caused
such a blot upon all the profession he had made, and what great cause he had to
be humbled before God, and desired him to tell him as a dying man, whether it
was his voluntary act and delight in excessive drinking, or no? and he did
profess that he knew it was not the quantity that he had drunk, which was not
near so much as at other times he did use, without distempering himself.

However, God was pleased to make him taste the bitterness of that cup, in that
he had given such occasion to sinners to speak evil of the ways of himself)
upon the stones cried out; Oh that I should offend God! And though he did much
lament the scandal, yet he always said, that he looked not upon it as a sin of
Drunkenness, but a circumvention; or to use his own words, that something was
put into the drink to distemper his head.

On Saturday during the Sessions, he was Arraigned, and pleaded Guilty,
confessing, with many tears, and wringing his hands, that he did, through the
instigation of the Devil, and enticement of that wretched Creature (meaning his
Harlot) th^^ he had committed that bloody Fact, which was suc^ an horror to his
Conscience, that he would not do it again for ten thousand Worlds; his carriage
and confession was such, that he much moved the Honorable Bench and Jury, and
most of the Beholders.

On Monday next, he received his Sentence of death, after which time he was
with the other condemned Prisoners, and did pray with them four times a day,
and read to them, and sung Psalms with them. After the execution of the rest,
he had time given, or procured him by the Honorable Sheriff of London, for
some days; which he improved to the great advantage of his Soul.

On Friday night he uttered these expressions in Company with H. B. being the
day that the other Prisoners were Executed.
I find, says he, so much sweetness, and delight, and pleasure in Gods ways,
and so much folly in the ways of sin, that if there were no Heaven to reward,
nor any Hell to punish, I could not but love the ways of God, and the people
of God; O it is so sweet to be in company with them, praying and conversing
with them, over what is in hearing others Swear and Curse, that I account it as
great a mercy as any almost, that I may be in their company; O methinks it is a
Heaven to me to be with Gods Ministers and People; and Prayer now is so sweet,
that I grudge the time always when I am off from my knees, or go down to the
Grate: Now there is nothing in the World I prize like Christ, one Christ above
ten thousand Worlds; now I do repent, and I do believe through mercy, it is the
Lord's work, but I earnestly beg and pray for a more humble, and a more broken
heart, and a more through sense of sin, and a greater sorrow for it, and beg
that God would enable me to come to him, to believe in him; Lord, says he,
Faith is thy work, Repentance is thy work, do thou enable me to repent, nay,
thou have enabled me to repent, and I do from the very bottom of my heart,
Lord, as far as I know my own heart: I repent that I should offend so gracious,
and so merciful a God as thou art; Lord, and Faith is thy work; Lord, says he,
have not thou said, no man can come to thee except the Father draw him; draw me
O Lord, and I shall run to thee, enable me to believe, Lord, and I shall
believe; nay, I do believe, Lord, that Jesus Christ his Blood was not shed in
vain; did Christ die for nothing, Lord, did he not die to save all repenting
and believing sinners, of whom I am chief?

On Saturday at night, in Company with Mr. Baker, he discoursed thus,

O my dear Friend, taking me by the hand, come hither, says he, and opening
the Coffin, look, here is the ship, says he, in which I must lanch out into
the Ocean of Eternity: and is it not a terrible thing (says he) to see ones
own Coffin and Burying clothes, when at the same time I am as well as you; do
you think it would not daunt you, and to go to the Gallows to have the Halter,
and to die there? were this for the sake of the Gospel, I should not care, were
it ten hundred times a worse death, but to suffer this cursed death for such
horrid sins, O this is sad! why, said I, you have a greater mercy, in some
respect, than those that die in their beds, for they are full of sickness and
pain, and cannot so well mind repentance as you who are well, and have nothing
else to mind. (Ah Sir, says he, their sins are of a far less nature than mine,
and so they do not need so much repentance as mine do; my dying for such horrid
sins makes my repentance to be so much the more hard. Oh, says he, I believe
it, it is a hard work to die, I could carry it out as bravely as any, (do you
think I could not?) But to consider that as I die, and am sentenced from Gods
Bar, so I must be for ever, immediately either be everlastingly happy, or
everlastingly miserable: To consider this, would make a stout heart to tremble;
those poor Creatures that were here the other night, (meaning the other
condemned Prisoners) they know not what it is to be in an Eternal state, and if
they are gone to Hell, O Lord, how miserably are they disappointed, who hoped
for to have gone to Heaven, and are sent from thy Bar to endless burning: Lord,
what a mercy is it that I have a little time longer left, let it be improved to
thy glory, and let my soul live, and I shall praise thee.

The Last Lord's Day he lived, he desired to be alone, and spent it in wrestling
with God by prayer, and in other duties in order to his preparation for his
great change by death, that then he expected the next day, in which duties he
found so much of God, that he had some fore-tasts of the joys of Heaven, and
when we asked him what of God he had found that day, he replied, that he had
such pleasure and delight in mourning for sin, and praying unto God, that he
was loath to come off from his knees; at night there were some Ministers that
sat up with him, and spent that night in Prayer with him, and for him, and in
conference; on Monday morning came T. D. to him before day (thinking it was his
last day, for an order was sent on Friday for his Execution on Monday) and said
to him, Thomas, how is it with you now, your last day begins to dawn? he said,
blessed be God I am not afraid to die, because I hope I shall go to Jesus
Christ; after some time in Prayer for him, we desired him to spend some time in
that Duty, which he performed with so much affection, and earnest pleading with
God, that all the company were exceedingly melted, and their hearts beyond
ordinary measure warmed, and raised, that the room did ring with sighs and
groans; and there was such a mighty presence of the Spirit poured out upon him,
and on those that joined with him, that we do not remember the time when ever
we had experience of the like; in which Prayer, after the confession of his
sins, he begged earnestly for pardon, and for an interest in Christ, saying, O
Lord, will thou let me die without a Christ? shall I leave this World before
thou smilest upon my soul? thou have promised pardon, and mercy, and salvation
to those that do repent, and to those that do believe; Lord, I do repent, I do
believe, if I know my own heart, I do repent, I do believe; Lord, I roll my
self upon thy Son, I cast my self at his Foot for mercy; thou would be just
if thou do damn me, but thou have pardoned others, and it will be to the
Praise of thy Free Grace to pardon me; Lord, shall those Prayers that have been
made, and all those tears that have been shed for me, and all those
instructions which have been given me, be all in vain? with many other
expressions in that Prayer, which wonderfully affected the hearts of those that
were with him; that afterward we looked upon one another, wondering at the
Grace of God toward him, that one so wicked all his days; so young (being 16.
years old) so lately acquainted with the ways of God, should have such a
spirit of prayer poured out upon him: after this he prayed with more life and
fervency then before, and the nearer he came to his end, the more we perceived
God was ripening him for his glory.

After this, we took our leave of him, not knowing but that was the last day;
for the Cart stood below, and the Coffin fetched down, and some of the
honorable Sheriffs of London's men, came into the Prison; but the Sheriff of
Middlesex having not notice to be ready, his Execution was deferred till
Wednesday following.

Reader, here take notice, that the report that the reason why he was not
Executed on Monday, was because he was drunk, is an abominable falsehood, for to
our knowledge, that were with him, he did not eat nor drink that morning. When
we went up to him again, we told him that we perceived he was not to dye that
day, giving him caution, not to think there was any pardon intended for him:
and one came from the Sheriff to acquaint him with the reason of the delay of
his Execution.

When his Coffin was carried up to him again, one asked what he thought, and
what were the workings of his heart, when he saw his Coffin brought back, he
said, he was much troubled, and it daunted him to see it; for he could
willingly have dyed that day to go to Christ. On Monday in the Afternoon he had
an excessive pain in his Teeth (as we judged occasioned by his leaving off his
clothes, and putting on some thin apparel to die in;) and that evening he
expressed great willingness to dye and leave this world, he said, I see and
find so much excellency in Christ, that he is so pure, pure in grace, pure in
holiness, pure in all things; Lord, I count it an hell to be upon earth, I so
long to be where I might enjoy thee: and he spent some time in Prayer
(notwithstanding his pain) with much affection, wherein he said, the pain of
thee Teeth was great, but the pain of Hell was greater!

On Tuesday, the day before he died, after some time spent in prayer both by
him and H. B. being full of joy, he expressed himself thus; O my dear friend,
what a welcome shall I give you when you come to Heaven; and say to you, come,
see, come, see, this is the glory that you told me of, but all that you ever
told me, was nothing to what I have found, O what a place is this! O how shall
we love one another then! sure it cannot be, but Heaven must be a glorious
place, where God, and Christ, and Angels be.

The night before he died, a Minister came to Thomas Savage, and after other
serious discourse, for satisfaction of a Christian friend that had seen him
before, he demanded of him what were now the grounds of his hopes of salvation?
He made this reply; God both in infinite mercy made me deeply sensible of great
sins, and not only of them, but of the vileness of my heart and nature, and God
has made me to abhor my self for my sins, and I hope truly to repent of them,
for that which has been the delight of my soul, is now as bad as hell; and God
has given me to see, that all my own prayers and tears, and all the prayers of
all the good people that come to me, are not able to save: A Christ alone; I
throw my self at the feet of Christ for mercy, and if I perish, I will perish
there. I feel longings and breathings after Christ, and love him more than my
life; I long to be with him, and I would not be to live any longer; this world
is a little Hell because of sin; I fear not death, for I hope the sting of it
is taken out for me.

This last night before his death, he desired us to sit up with him, in order
to his better preparation for the great work he had to do the next day, that we
might wrestle with God on his behalf, that when death approached so near unto
him, he might have some nearer accesses of God into his soul, that when pale
death stared him in the face, he might see God's smiling countenance; which
opportunity we readily embraced, and spent the former part of the night in
Prayer, till two of the clock in the morning; about which time he desired us to
go down into the Lodge, that he might have some part of the night for Prayer
and Meditation alone, and to discourse a while with his friend Mr. Baker, to
whom he most of all did open his very heart, and spoke more freely to, than to
any others; (whom for that reason we left with him) and when we were gone down,
his friend being with him, who told us afterward, he fell into admiration, and
said, What a prodigy am I? What a wonder of mercy, that God should incline the
hearts of his Ministers to come and pray with me, and pour out their souls in
prayer thus for me? For me a Murderer; for me a Drunkard; for me so vile and
sinful? Well, I cannot but love God, and though I go to Hell, yet I will love
God for his goodness and graciousness to me already manifested in this world;
yea, though I should be damned for my sin, yet I could, and would love God.
What, would they venture to come and pray with me a Murderer? How did they
know but I might have murdered some of them? Pray for me! wrestle for me!
well, I know God loves me; I am sure God loves me.

When he was in prayer, some of us heard him say; Now Lord I am coming to thee,
thou art mine, and Christ is mine, and what need I be afraid of Death? Lord
give me some sense, and some sign of thy Love, that when my Soul shall be
separated from my body, it might be received into glory.

Afterward when he looked upon his clothes he had put on to dye in, said,
What! have I got on my dying clothes? dying clothes did I say? they are my
living clothes, the clothes out of which I shall go into eternal glory, they
are the best clothes that ever I put on.

About four of the clock in the morning we went up to him again, full of
expectations what he would say to us, and what we should hear from him, and T.
D. stood behind him and took his expressions as he spoke them, from his own
mouth; and first he told us, I account it a great mercy that God has showed me
the evil of sin, before he cast me into Hell, sin has not only brought my body
to the grave, but my soul in danger of everlasting burnings.

The Lord will have mercy on me I hope; I am filled with joy, I am no more
afraid to dye, than to stand in this place, the Lord make me thankful. The Lord
has been working on my soul; for it was not I that could pray, nor refrain
from company, nor delight in any thing that is good; I have cause to bless God
that ever I was taken (and this we have heard him often say) for if I had
escaped I had gone on in my sin, and might have lost my soul for ever.

One asked him which he thought was worse, hell or sin? using some gesture of
body, said, hell is very dreadful, but sin is worse than hell, because sin
brings men's souls to hell, and sin is that which offends God.

One asked him what he thought of heaven? with a smiling countenance said,
heaven! it cannot be, but heaven must be an excellent place, for it is an holy
place. We spoke to him concerning his Coffin, that was by him, whether it did
not trouble, and amaze him to have it in his sight; he replied, with all my
soul I could go into my Coffin; oh it is a comfortable place. (He spoke it with
joy) I can comfortably die. I have found such a deal of joy and comfort, that I
would not for a world have been without it.

We enquired, whether death did not affright him, morning Light will presently
appear, he answered, death indeed did trouble me, but now not at all, I long
for day, I am not daunted at death. Die! it is nothing: this life is nothing:
but to die eternally, and to loose God, and Christ, and Heaven, that is death.
Hell torments is not so much, as to be shut from the presence of God. Alas! who
would not die this death to go to Jesus Christ? when my body is upon the
Gibbet, my soul shall be carried by Angels into Heaven. My heart is so drawn
out after God, that I could leave this world to be with him. This world is
nothing, those that have the pleasure of it, they have nothing. I desire to
die, because I long to be with Christ, there I shall never sin more; there is
no sin, but joy, where I shall sing Hallelujahs and praise to God. We asked
what he thought of the company of Gods people, for he now had had experience of
company, good and bad. He said, I had rather be here (meaning the hole in
Newgate) with bread and water with such company, than to have the company of
wicked persons, with the greatest dainties. It was wicked company that drew me
away. I account it the greatest mercy, to have the Prayers of Gods people for
me, had I had my deserts, I had been now in hell, where I should have had no
prayers, no instructions; God does love me, for he has inclined the hearts of
his People and Ministers to pray for me, and their Prayers have prevailed.

Being asked what promises he found to be his support against the guilt of sin,
now he was to die, he alleged these, repeating the words himself, Whosoever
will, let him come and drink of the waters of Life freely; and he that
confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy; and let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. This word (abundantly pardon) did often refresh his soul; I have sinned
abundantly, but God will pardon abundantly. After these, he mentioned another,
viz. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief: and said, I do rely and throw
my self upon Jesus Christ, I do believe there is merit enough in him, and
all sufficiency in him to save me; It is nothing that I can do, will save me.

He complained, that it was the grief of his soul, that he could love God no
more, and love Christ no more for his mercy toward him, in giving him so much
time, and so many helps, in sending so many Ministers to instruct him, but
added, when several Ministers had been with me, I threw off all, and returned
to sin, and did as vainly as any. I could not have repented, and believed of my
self, it is the work of God. He often said, I fear not death, it was nothing
with him to die, and to go to Christ. He often said, that he had rather die
imediatly, having an interest in Christ than to live a thousand years in this
world, in the enjoyment of all the pleasures of it, without Christ.

And, that he had found more pleasures and delight in the ways of God, since he
came into Prison, than ever he found in all the ways of sin.

He confessed his sins, saying, he first neglected and profaned the Sabbath,
and said this was the beginnig of all his wickedness, that on the Sabbath
morning, he studied what company to go into, in what place of sin he might
spend the Sabbath, then to wicked Society, then to Alehouses, then to
Brothel-houses, then to murder, then to theft, then to Newgate, and yet at last
he hoped to Heaven.

He lamented, saying, I have striven to dishonor God, and to run into sin: Oh
that I should spend so much time in serving of the Devil, and now have but a
little moment of time to spend in the service of God, and to the glory of God.

This discourse being ended, we desired him now on his last morning before he
went into eternity, to pray with us, and he willingly consented, and his prayer
was as follows, being taken from his mouth by Thomas Doolittel, that also
took in writing his preceding discourse; Verbatim.

The Prayer of Thomas Savage in Newgate, with those that sat up with him the
night before his Execution.
O Most merciful and ever blessed Lord God, I beseech thee, O Lord, look down
upon me with an eye of pity if it be thy blessed will, it is thy infinite mercy
that I am on this side the grave, and out of Hell: O Lord I have deserved to be
cast into Torments to all Eternity. How have I offended thee, and run on in
sin, and thought I could never do enough to abuse thy mercy! Pardon the sins
that I have committed, wash that blood from off my soul, let not my soul perish
to Eternity. It was (...) horrid crime to shed innocent blood; Pardon that sin,
O Lord, let the blood of Christ cry more for mercy, than the blood of that
Creature cry for Vengeance. O Lord, thou have been merciful to me in giving me
time to repent, for ought I know, her Soul is undone for ever, Lord forgive me,
Lord forgive me, I knew not what I did. Forgive my Sabbath-breaking, lying,
cursing, forgive my drunkenness, blot them out of the book of remembrance, turn
them away behind thee. Lord I have repented of them from my Soul, that ever I
should offend God, so good, and so merciful and gracious, I do believe on thee,
and do wholly throw my self upon thee. I acknowledge it would be just in thee
to damn my Soul, but it will be infinite mercy in thee to save me, and what
free grace will it be in the to pardon me. It is dreadful to lose the body, but
how dreadful will it be to lose the Soul to all eternity! Lord let it not be in
vain that I have had so many instructions, O let me not go down to Hell, let my
Soul bless and praise thy Name for ever, for what thou have done for me, thou
have been at work upon my heart, and thou have helped me to repent, the Lord be
praised. Lord I desire to be more and more humbled under the sense of my sins,
for they are dreadful; there are many Souls that have not committed those sins
that are now in Hell. O what mercy is it that I am not in those flames, in
those devouring flames! Lord as thou have spared me here, spare me to Eternity.
Let not my Soul perish, Lord reveal thy self unto me, make known thy love unto
me, tell me my sins are pardoned, tell me, that I have an interest in Christ
before I go hence, and be seen no more, that I might leave some testimony
behind me, that I might tell thy Ministers, what thou have done for me, and
tell thy people what thou have done for my soul; Lord this will not be only for
my satisfaction, but for thy glory. Blessed Lord, pardon the sins that I am
guilty of, and take away this cursed base heart of mine, break this rocky stony
heart in pieces, these sins of Murder and Drunkenness, etc. were in my heart
before, I thought no eye did see me commit those sins, but thou did see me,
Lord turn my heart to thee, and take away this heart of stone, and take away
this cursed nature; for it was this cursed nature that brought me to these
sins, and to this end, and I was in danger of losing my soul to all eternity;
but, Lord, though I am a great sinner, Christ is a great Savior, He is able to
save me from my sins, though they be never so great; I do believe, Lord, I
speak freely from my heart, so far as I know my heart, I do believe, it is my
grief I can sorrow no more for my sins, which have been the cause of my
offending thee so long, and so much. One drop of thy Blood sprinkled upon my
soul, will pardon all my sins; Lord, cross the black line of my sins with the
red line of thy Blood: I am not able to answer for one vain thought, much less
for all my horrid crimes. Lord, save my immortal soul, that I might sing praise
to Thee to all Eternity. Thou have pardoned Manasseh that was a great sinner,
and Mary Magdalen, and Paul, that were great Sinners, and the Thief upon the
Cross; and thy Mercies are as great, thy Mercy and thy Love to Repenting
Sinners is not shortened; though my sins be great, yet thy Mercies are greater
than my Sins; Lord, be with me in my death, then let me have some comfortable
assurance of thy love unto my soul, of the pardon of my sin; do thou be my God
and my Guide now, and to all Eternity. Amen.

This Prayer he put up with much earnestness, with great brokenness of heart
for sin, that all that joined with him, were exceedingly affected* and blessed
God for the spirit of Prayer they discerned God had so plentifully poured out
upon him.

After we had some other discourse with him, we took our leave of him, telling
him we purpo^ (...) see him again at the place of Execution. After two or three
hours, when the time of his going from Newgate drew near, we were willing to
return to see him once more there, and the rather, because one Minister that
had not yet been with him, was desirous to visit him: and then again after some
few words with him, we asked him to go to Prayer again, once more, saying now,
this will be the last time that we shall pray with you in this place. And he
did perform this duty with great liveliness, that now he excelled himself, and
the nearer he came to his end, the more fervently we perceived he prayed; but
we took notice, that in this last duty in Newgate he was much in praising God,
and blessing God for his mercy to him, to our great astonishment.

After a few words, when this duty was over, we took some of us our final
farewell of him; and he expressing his thanks to Gods people for their Prayers
for him, and to the Ministers for their love and pains with him, was commended
by us to the grace of God, saying, Thomas, the Lord be with you, the Lord of
Heaven be with you, O the Lord of mercy help you, and have compassion on you.

This morning he expressed himself to his friend H. B. thus, Oh my friend, we
cannot tell how glorious a place Heaven is, but if once I get thither, and
could drop down a Letter to you, and tell you of the glorious things I there
shall find, how would it rejoice your heart? and to this friend parting with
him, said, I know God loves me, and that I am going to the Kingdom of Heaven.

The last Speech of Thomas Savage at the place of his Execution at Ratcliff.
Gentlemen,
HEre I am come to die a cursed and ignominious Death, and I most justly
deserve it, for I have Murdered a poor innocent Creature, and for ought I
know, have not only murdered her body, but if God had no more mercy on her
soul, than I had of her body, she is undone to all Eternity; so that I deserve
not only death from men, but damnation from God. I would have you all that look
upon me, take warning by me; the first sin I began with, was Sabbath-breaking,
thereby I got acquainted with bad company, and so went to the Alehouse, from
the Alehouse to the Bawdy House, there I was persuaded to rob my Master, as
also to murder this poor innocent creature, for which I am come to this
shameful end. I was drawn aside, I say, by ill company, pray take heed of that,
for it will not only bring your bodies to the grave, but your souls to hell;
have a care of neglecting the Sabbaths, it is that which has not only brought
my body to the grave, but my soul in danger of eternal torments. And try the
ways of God, for, the Lord be praised, I have found so much of excellency and
sweetness in Gods ways, that I bless God that ever I came into a Prison. And
now, though I am leaving this world, I know I shall go to a better place; for I
have repented from my soul for all my sins, not because I am to die for them,
but to see that* I should do that whereby I should deserve hell ten thousand
times over, and so dishonor God.

Now the Lord have mercy on my Soul.

The Prayer of Thomas Savage at the place of Execution.
O Most merciful and for ever blessed Lord God, I beseech thee look down upon
my poor immortal soul, which now is taking its flight into another World, which
now is ready to appear before thy Bar, Lord, I beseech thee prepare me for it,
and receive my soul into the arms of thy mercy, and though my body die, and I
come to die this shameful death, yet let my soul live with thee for ever; Lord,
pardon all the horrid sins that I have committed, the Sabbath-breaking, Lying,
Swearing, Cursing, Uncleanness, and all the rest of my sins that ever I have
committed; Lord, give me a n^w heart, and give me Faith, that I may lay hold
and throw my self fully and wholly upon thee; enable me, O Lord, give me saving
repentance, that I may come to thy Bar, and thence be received into glory, let
me not be a prey to Devils to all Eternity: let not my soul perish* though my
Body die, let my soul live; Lord, let me not be shut out from thy presence, and
let not all the Prayers, and Tears, and Counsels, and Instructions that have
been made and shed on my behalf, be in vain; pity my poor soul, Lord, my
immortal soul. Lord, it would be just with thee to cast me into everlasting
burning. I have been a great sinner, but Christ is a great Savior. O Lord,
thou have pardoned great sinners, and thou can do it, Lord, and Lord, will thou not do it? Lord, let me not be a firebrand of Hell, and a prey to Devils
to all Eternity, let me not then be shut up with Devils and damned souls, when
my soul takes its flight into another world; Lord, I have repented for what I
have done, from the bottom of my heart, I have repented; and Lord, if thou
would damn me, thou would be just, but how infinitely more would it be for
the glory of thy Free Grace to save such a sinner as I am; good Lord pour down
thy spirit upon my soul, O tell me that I have interest in Christ's Blood, good
Father, good Lord, before I go hence; Lord, I am willing, I am willing to leave
this world, I ^an prize thee above all, there is nothing I can prize like to
thee, will thou not receive my soul? receive it into thy arms, and say, come
thou blessed of my Father, dear Father, for Jesus Christ sake pity my poor
soul, for pitties sake. Lord, it is not my Prayers, or tears, will save my
soul, but if ever I am saved, it must be through Free Grace, and the Blood of
Christ, and if there be not enough in that Blood, Lord, I am willing to be
damned. Lord, look down upon my poor soul, and though I have been such a
sinner, thou art able to pardon me, and wash me, apply one drop of thy Blood to
my soul, Lord, my immortal soul, that is more worth than ten thousand worlds;
it is true, Lord, I confess I have taken a great deal of pleasure in sin, I
have run on in sin, and could not invent where to go on Thy day, and was wont
to study into what place, and into what company I might go upon the
Sabbath Day: forgive me, Lord, wash me, receive me into Thy arms, O Lord; Oh
for one glimps of mercy; Lord, if thou will please to reveal thy self to me, I
shall tell it to all that behold me; it is a mercy, Lord, that I am not in
Hell, and that thou show me the bitterness of sin before I come into Hell;
it is a mercy, Lord, that I have had the Prayers, converse and instructions of
so many of thy Ministers and people; Lord, receive my soul, one smile, Lord,
one word of comfort for Jesus sake; O let me not go out of this world, let not
my soul perish, though I killed a poor innocent creature, Lord deal not with me
as I dealt with her, but pity me, pity me for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

One asked him in the Cart, well, now Thomas, how is it with your soul, what
sense have you of God's love? Sir, I thank God, though infinite mercy, I find
God loves me, and that now I can cheerfully go.

After his Cap was over his eyes, he used these Expressions,

Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Lord, one smile.

Good Lord, one word of comfort for Christ's sake, tho death make separation
between my soul and body, let nothing separate between thee and my soul to all
eternity.

Good Lord hear me.

Good Father hear me.

O Lord Jesus receive my soul.

Whilst he did thus pathetically express himself to the people, especially to
God in Prayer, there was a great moving upon the affections of those who stood
by, and many tears were drawn from their eyes by his melting speeches. All this
was the more remarkable in this young man, being under sixteen years of age
when he was first apprehended.

After he was turned off the Cart, he strugled for a while, heaving up his
body, which a young man (his friend) seeing, to put him quickly out of his
pain, struck him with all his might on the breast several times together, then
no motion was perceived in him, and hanging some considerable time after that,
and as to all outward appearance dead, insomuch as one said to another friend
of his, namely Mr. B. now he is in Eternity, and the people beginning to move
away, the Sheriff commanded him to be cut down, and being received in the arms
of some of his Friends, he was conveyed by them into a house not far distant
from the place of Execution, where being laid upon a Table, unto the
astonishment of the Beholders, he began to stir and breath, and rattle in his
throat, and it was evident his life was whole in him; from the Table he was
carried to a bed in the same house, where he breathed more strongly, and opened
his eyes, and his mouth (though his teeth were set before) and offered to
speak, but could not recover the use of his tongue; but his reviving being
known, within 4 hours the Officers came to the house where he was, and conveyed
him to the place of Execution again, and hung him up again, until he was quite
dead, whence he was carried by his mourning friends to Islington, where he now
sleeps in the bed of his Grave, until the morning of the Resurrection; from
whence, though buried in dishonor, he will then be raised in glory.

Thus you have had the Relation of one that was but young in years, but old in
wickedness: you have read of his Sabbath-breaking, Profaneness, Swearing,
Lying, Stealing, Drunkenness, Fornication, and the like sins, which he
confessed himself frequently and deeply guilty of; and to complete and fill up
the measure of his sins, he added to the rest the horrid sin of Murder. I
believe you have scarcely heard of sin grown up to such maturity in so short a
time, as it did in him, who when he was imprisoned, was under sixteen years of
age.

And what could any expect should be the issue and product of sin arrived to
such perfection, but death, and wrath, and the vengeance of Eternal Fire?

But behold here an instance of Free Grace! his sins did abound, but Gods grace
did super-abound. Sometimes God does sow the seed of Grace in the heart that is
most unlikely to receive it, and reapeth Great Glory to his name by pardoning
Great Sins.

We read that when Ephraim was bent upon wickedness, so that a man could hardly
expect the restraining of Gods anger any longer, but that it should kindle in
his breast, and break forth in a flame to devour a people so rebellious, yet
the Lord expresses himself in a way of wonderful mercy, and astonishing free
Grace, Hos. 11. 8, 9. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I make thee
as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me (not
against Ephraim, but toward him) my repentings (not mine anger) are kindled
together, I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger. And the reason is
not drawn from any thing in Ephraim to move him, but only from himself, for I
am God, and not man. If one man had been so provoked by another, and it had
lain in the power of his hand to have avenged himself upon his enemy, surely he
would not have spared, or shown any favor; but because he is God and not man,
whose thoughts are not like our thoughts, and whose mercies are not like our
mercies, but further removed above them, than the Heavens are removed above the
Earth; in comparison with whose mercies, our most tender mercies are no less
than cruelty: therefore, because he is God and not man, and herein would Act
like himself, he has pity, and shows favor unto Ephraim. Take another
instance in Israel, who had made God to serve with his sins, and wearied him
with his iniquities, having pressed God herewith as a cart is pressed with
sheaves, and nothing but vengeance could rationally be expected, and that God
should say as at another time (for God does not show such favor to all, and at
all times, that the freeness of it might be the more evident;) Ah, I will ease
me of my Adversaries, and avenge me on my Enemies; and I, even I am he that
will make such audacious sinners see and feel what an evil and fearful thing it
is to affront and provoke me; yet read how graciously God pardons Israel,
declaring the ground of it to be only for the glory of his own Name, Isa. 43.
25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins.

Surely no motive from this young man's person, or any good previus disposition
(he being so exceeding vitiated by such defiling sins) could in the least
incline God to have mercy upon him; but the motive was taken from himself, and
his own bowels. He had mercy on him only, because he would have mercy, and
compassion on him, because he would have compassion. If some, yea many are
passed by, who have escaped the more gross pollutions which are in the world
through lust, and never committed such God-provoking sins, as you read in the
Narrative that he committed; but for lesser faults are punished everlastingly,
when God has had mercy upon him, and thrown the skirt of his love over him,
and wrought a gracious change in him; we must say with our Savior, Matthew. 11.
26. Even so Father, because it so seemed good in thy sight! It is through free
grace that any are saved; but in the salvation of such a one, God has
demonstrated the exceeding riches of his grace toward him through Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 2. 7.

Let not any from this example of Gods free grace presume to continue and
indulge themselves in a sinful course, hoping to obtain mercy at the last as he
has done, and to turn Gods glory into shame, and his grace into wantonness:
for it is a rare example, hardly again to be paralleled: will a man run himself
through the body, because some have been healed of such wounds? will a man
drink down poison, because some by an Antidote have expelled the poison and
escaped with life? Is not presumption the bane and ruin of millions of souls?
may not God cut you off in the act of some of your sins, and not give you time
for repentance? and if life does continue, may not he deny you the grace of
Repentance? does not custom and continuance in sin harden your heart, and
fasten you in Satan's Chains? has not God threatened that such who cry peace,
peace to themselves, though they walk after the imagination of their hearts, to
add drunkenness to thirst, That he will not spare them, but his anger and his
jealousy shall smoke against them, and that he will blot out their name from
under Heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.

The great Improvement which should be made of Gods gracious dealings with this
young man, is for all to admire Gods free grace; and especially for poor
distressed Souls, that are upon the brink of Hell in their own apprehensions,
and are ready to despair of Gods mercy, because of the greatness of their sins;
to take encouragement from hence, and hopes, that there may be mercy in store
for them; they have not been Murderers, whatever their sins have been, and if a
Murderer has been received into favor, why may not they hope? Let such think
with themselves that it is free grace has saved him, and let them sue out at
the throne of Grace, for the same grace which is freely tendered unto them.

A recollection out of this Narrative of those passages, from which in charity
we do conclude, that the work of grace was really wrought in his soul; or the
evidences of T. S. of his Title to Eternal Happiness.

1. HE bitterly lamented his sins, and loathed himself for them, especially as
they were against a good and gracious God, according to Ps. 51. 4. and Luc. 15.
18. (2) He was deeply sensible of, and grieved for, the corruption of his
heart, from whence his actual sins did proceed, according to Psalm. 51. 5. (3)
He mourned over his backslidings, because God was thereby dishonored. (4) He
found it hard to believe, yet professed he would roll himself, and rely upon
the merits of Christ alone for Salvation, and if he perished, he would perish
there. (5) He was much in a little time in duty, yet did protest he saw the
insufficiency of them to justify or save him, according to Phil. 3. 9. (6) He
made choice of Christ before all, before life it self, according to Phil. 3. 8.
(7.) he longed for morning when he was to die, because he desired to be with
Christ, according to Phil. 1. 23. (8) he greatly loved God, because much was
forgiven him, according to Luke 7. 47. and said, though God should damn him,
yet he could and would love God. (9) he loved the company of Gods people, and
professed, he had rather be with Gods people in prison, with bread and water,
than with the ungodly with liberty and greatest dainties, according to 1 John
3. 14. (10.) he blessed God that ever he was taken and imprisoned; thinking it
better to be in chains, and brought to die, than to go on in sin. (11) he was
most broken and melted for his sins, when those that came to visit him were
gone from him, and not in their presence; when hypocrites mourn before others,
and are less affected when alone; yet this was sometimes his trouble, lest God
should lose the glory of the work he had wrought in him. This was observed by
one that was usually with him, when others went from him. (12) he wept for joy
at that time, when he could not find that God loved him; that he was not
cursing, and swearing, and sinning against God, as others did, and he himself
formerly. (13) he found and tasted more sweetness in the ways of God, in
praying, and mourning for sin, than he ever found in the commission of sin.
(14) he accounted sin to be worse than hell. (15) he had a spirit of Prayer
given to him so plentifully, that it was an astonishment to many that joined
sometimes with him, considering how ignorant he was a little before, according
to Acts 9. 11. for behold, he prays. (16) he looked upon the loss of God,
more than than the torments of hell, and feared it more. (17) he prized Heaven,
because there he should sin no more. These were his own expressions, and what
we observed that were frequently with him: and Reader, do thou pray, and watch,
that thou may not be guilty of this young man's sins, but pray, and labor
that thou might obtain the like evidences for Heaven.

A Relation of what passed in the Imprisonment, and at the Execution of Hannah
Blay.
H. B. belonged to a Bawdy House in Ratcliff, where T. S. used to frequent, and
was always welcome so long as his money lasted, but having spent his money, and
denied entertainment, except he brought more money: to which he replied, he knew
not where to have any, H. B. presently puts him upon robbing his Master, (which
he could not easily accomplish, by reason of the diligence of the servant maid)
and to murder the maid rather than fail of getting the money: which he
accordingly did, and goes again to H. B. and tells her what he had done, then
flies. But the justice of God pursued him so fast, that he was soon
apprehended, and committed to Newgate. After he had accused H. B. for putting
him upon the murder, she was apprehended, and committed also. At the Sessions
she was Endicted, and Condemned for being accessory to the Murder committed by
T. S. In the time of her imprisonment, she was very rude and debauched, being
seldom sober, except at such times when she could by no means procure drink to
be drunk withal. She often endeavored to make T. S. drunk with her, which she
once or twice effected, and endeavored very much to draw him off from his
Repentance, by driving his old trade of sin and wickedness. If any advised her
to Repentance, and to take care for the future estate of her soul, she would
laugh at them, and reply in some such language as she had learned in the devils
school, with which she was well stored. She was, from that Sessions, reprieved
till the next, fully persuading her self she should escape that bout, and
spending her time according to her former course of living, taking as little
care what should become of her soul, as if she had never offended a gracious
God, and as of there was no devil to torment her, nor hell to be tormented in.
But now Sessions being again come, and she again brought down to the
Sessions House in the Old Baily, had Sentence to be executed at Ratcliff where
the Fact was committed The night before her Execution, the Ordinary of Newgate
came to administer the Sacrament to her, which she refused, saying, she could
not die in Charity with some (whom she named) judging them the cause of her
second Judgment and Execution. The next day, being Friday, Feb. 26. she was
conveyed in a Cart from Newgate to the place of Execution, where she ended her
wicked life by a shameful death, without the least sign of sorrow or Repentance
for her abominable whoredom and wickednesses: So that howsoever notoriously
wicked she had been in her life, answerable thereunto was she in her shameful
end, in impenitency and hardness of heart.

2 TIMOTHY 2. 22. Flee also Youthful Lusts.
I Am come this day to speak to you in the name of a dying man; and dying men's
words should leave living affections, and lasting affections upon hearts of the
Hearers. Nay, that which is infinitely more, I am come to speak to you in the
Name of the Living God: and therefore, I beseech you, be serious; remember that
we are not now about a laughing-business; it is no less then for Lives and
Souls: and for ought that I know, as you demean your selves now, it may fare
with you to all Eternity: And if that will make you mind what I say the more,
know this, That what I shall now speak, is but a Comment upon what was
yesterday delivered in brief, from one that was in perfect health, and in the
Grave the same day. And who knows whether there be not some here alive, and in
health, that before to morrow morning shall be lumps of clay, and this the last
Sermon that ever they shall hear! Wherefore I beseech you Sirs, if you love the
life of your souls, hearken as if you expected to die as soon as my Sermon were
ended.

The shortness of my time, will give me leave to spend no time at all, by way
of reflection, upon the Context; but I shall immediately fall upon the words, as
they lie before us: Flee youthful Lusts. In which you may observe,

1. An Act, Flee.

2. The Object, Lusts.

3. The quality of the Object, Youthful lusts.

The Doctrine that I shall take notice of from these words, is this.

Doct. That it is the great duty of young people, to be exceeding careful to
avoid the sins which usually attend their age. Or, if you please, That it
highly concerns Young men, to flee youthful lusts. It Is no cowardice to flee
from sin.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall show,

1. What are the common sins of young people.

2. What it is to flee from youthful Lusts.

3. Why they should flee from youthful Lusts.

4. I shall apply it.

I shall name some of those sins which young ones are subject to.

First, Young people are very apt to be disobedient to their Parents, or
Masters. O how great a rarity is it, to see young people as ready to obey, as
their Parents are to command! Most children are children of Belial; that is,
without a yoke. Let Parents command, advise, nay entreat, all is to little
purpose: How ready are they to break the bond which God and Nature lay upon
them to dutifulness! Though the Command of God be plain enough, though his
Threatenings are terrible, and though this sin seldom goes unpunished in this
life; yet children take little or no notice of them: one would think that one
Scripture should scare them, Prove. 30. 17. The eye that mocketh at his Father,
and desp^seth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the valley shall pick it out,
and the young Eagles shall eat it. What is the English of that? Why, they shall
come to an untimely end. Have not the sad Complaints of many, at Tyburn,
sufficiently demonstrated this to be true? Have not many cried out, with a
halter about their neck, Children, if you value your lives and souls, take heed
of disobeying your Parents. That was the sin which brought me to this untimely
and shameful end.

2. Another youthful sin is, Lying: Poor children quickly learn this Lesson of
their Father the Devil. It is not without good reason, that the Psalmist, Psalm.
58. 3. gives such a character of wicked children which went astray from the
womb, telling Lies and the older they grow, the more skilled they be in this
devilish Art: it is like they are not ignorant, that it is a sin that cuts the
bonds of all Society: it may be they are told how dear Ananias and Saphira paid
for one Lie, Act. 5. 3. nay, though the Word of Truth tell them more than once,
That Liars must dwell with their Father the Devil, in that black Prison, Hell;
though they hear of a Lake of Fire and Brimgone that burns for ever, [Rev. 21.
8.] and that such as they are, must be cast into it: yet for all this they will
venture still.

3. Sabbath-breaking is another youthful sin. O how little do most of the young
people of this City, (...) the sanctifying of the Sabbath? Does not the
multitude of Apprentices and Children that wander up and down Monefields on the
Lord's Day, speak this to be too true? they dare not make bold with their
Masters time on the Week-daies; but as for God's Day, that they spend as if God
had set apart one day in the Week for young people to sleep, drink, and play
in. They dare as well eat a piece of their fingers, almost, as to do that of
another day, which they do then: and the truth of it is, they look upon the
displeasure of a dying man as terrible; but the Anger of a Holy GOD* they make
light of. O! little do they think what precious time that is! their souls are
naked, and they may then have clothing; they are starving, and they may then
have food, the Market is then open; Provisions for Eternity may then be had.
But, O prodigious madness! the hearts of most young ones speak in this
language, As for Christi Heaven, and Soul, let them go; we have better things
to think on; more weighty matters to mind. And is it true indeed, O young man?
What, is the company of vain Wretches, like thy self, the wanton embraces of a
whorish Woman, the turning off thy cups, and damnation, more needful than the
hearing of Sermons, than Praying, and Reading, and Salvation? Sure you shall
not always be of that mind! O! little do you imagine how dear you shall pay
for all the pleasures you have on the Sabbath, out of God's House. This, this
was THE SIN which lay like a load upon the soul of this poor Young man, The
profaning of the Sabbath; that was the bane of him. This carried him out of
God's Way, into the Devils Quarters. O how bitterly did he bemoan himself for
this sin, as the cause of all the rest! O! (said he) when I should have been
begging the life of my soul, I was plotting the death of my soul and body too.
Did none of you stand by the Cart, when he wept so bitterly, and cried to the
Lord to forgive this great and dreadful sin? Did none of you hear how earnestly
he begged of you to have a care of that sin, as you loved your Lives and Souls.
O wretch (said he) that I was! I studied how I might spend the Lords Day in the
Devils work. I thought I could never dishonor God enough: and that time that I
should have served God most in, I did most for Satan: in them, then, I played my
mad pranks; I went into the Church indeed, sometimes, but (I may speak it with
shame and deep sorrow now) I never heard one whole Sermon all the time I was
with my Master, and indeed, I laughed at those that spent the Sabbath in
hearing of Sermons, and Praying; and looked upon them as the veriest fools in
the world. I was glad when the Sabbath came, that I might have time to run to
my vile Comrades: I rejoiced that I could then go to satisfy my cursed Lusts
with whorish women. O! tell young m^n from me, that the breaking of the Sabbath
is a costly and dangerous sin. Sirs, the substance of this Sermon I received
from his mouth: And will you not believe a dying man? Do you think he did but
jest? 'Twas on the Sabbath day he went to a whore; 'twas on the Sabbath he
robbed his Master, and 'twas on the Sabbath that he killed the Maid. But
because this sin is Epidemical, I leave a short story with you, and desire you
to think of it; and the if you like what follows, break the Sabbath still. The
story is this; A dear Friend of mine was preaching about the sanctifying of the
Sabbath, and had occasion to make mention of that man that by the special
command of God was stoned to death for gathering sticks upon the Sabbath Day.
Whereupon one of the Congregation stood up, and laughed, and made all the have
he could out of the Church, and went to gathering of sticks, though he had no
need of them; but when the people came from the Sermon, they found this man
stark dead, with the bundle of sticks in his arms, lying in the Church Porch.
And yet for all this, there stands a young man in that corner that makes
nothing of idling away the Sabbath; and there sits another that minds not the
Lord's Day, except it be to get into wicked company, and take his pleasure in
it. And how can thou endure to hear of this, without trembling? But I fear
thy heart is so hard, that thou art ready to rage against this reproof. Well,
if the case be so, I have done with thee: but, believe it, God has not yet
do^e with thee, and the Devil has not done with thee; and though thy
Conscience say nothing now, yet I tell thee, that has not done with thee
neither. Let none think I am tedious upon this Head: if young men will but
reform this sin, I promise I will never tell them of it more. Christians (I
hope that there be some such here) would it not be a blessed sight to see the
Fields, the Tavern, the Whore-houses empty, and the Churches full? would it not
be a blessed Reformation? O when shall it once be! Which is the sweeter Music,
to hear the air echo with the confused hollowing and roaring of lewd young men
playing upon the Lord's Day, or to hear the sound of singing of Psalms,
repeating of Sermons, Praying, Reading of Scriptures? Which is like to end
best? Isa. 56. 2. Amos 8. Isa. 58. 14, 15. Ezekiel. 20. 12.

4. Another youthful sin is, Mispending of time. Young ones think they have
time enough before them; and therefore make nothing of trifling it away. How
far are most from following the Apostles counsel, in redeeming of the time?
What, do you think many hours discourse of filthy Bawdy stories, is that
redeeming of time? is sitting up whole nights to play at Cards and Dice,
redeeming of time? Is robbing your selves of sleep, to lie in the bosom of
Daliah, redeeming time? If this be redeeming of time, then some of our young
ones, and many of our Gallants, redeem time bravely. 'Twas a notable one, that
of Seneca; if (says he) one ask me for my Purse, I am not very willing to give
it him; if he beg all my Estate, I think it a mad request: but if he ask me to
pass away time with him, two or three days of time, I pass not much upon it,
but it is easily granted; and thus one of the most precious things in the World
is vilified. O little do people think how glad they shall be one day of one of
those hours that they spent in foolery! Oh call Time again, will be the
language of more than one, upon a deathbed. Could you talk with some of the
mad young ones that are in Hell, that lived five or six years ago in as much
pleasure as you do now, and spent their time like you; but it may be, little
dreamed of being in Hell so soon, but might reckon of forty or fifty years to
live; could you, I say, talk with them, and ask them what they think of time
now? They would quickly say, Oh! a World for one praying hour. Oh! where are
the people to be found, that seriously consider, that there is not a moment of
time but we must be accountable for. 'Twas excellently spoke of that poor young
man, when he was in Newgate amongst the ^^mmon Prisoners; one Sabbath Day they
asked (...) to play at Cards with them: Oh (says he) you and I have something
else to do with our time, than to play at Cards! Is it now a time for us to be
sporting away the Sabbath, when we have but one poor Sand left to work for
Eternity?

5. Another youthful sin is, Keeping bad Company. Are there not many of the
Devils Emissaries, that make it their business to decoy poor young ones? O what
a happiness do they promise them! a goodly happiness indeed to carry them to
the Devil! 'Twas not without cause that David (in Psalm. 1. 1.) did pronounce
them blessed that had least to do in wicked company. Whatever deluded Creatures
think of their mad jovial company; one that is well in his wits, looks upon
their society as an emblem of Hell, Psalm. 120. The young man, upon whose
account we are here met this day, told me, That two or three wicked fellows
first, got him out to spend a penny; but little did he think whither they were
leading of him; and after they had been at one place, they carried him to
another, till at last they brought him to that house, out of which few go
without their Deaths-wound. This was the general complaint of them that went
this last Assizes to Tyburn. And yet how are silly souls pleased with such
company; whose greatest kindness is to make them go merrily to Hell? And are
they still such sweet natured Creatures, that you cannot love too much, who do
what they can possibly to deprive you of your truest happiness, and make you
miserable for ever? O how will your boon Companions greet one another in Hell,
nay, it may be, upon Earth too? I remember I was once with a drunkard that lay
a dying, and after I had prayed with him, in comes one of his old Companions in
sin, and asked him how he did: at which he was ready to gnash his teeth, and
made this dreadful reflection concerning him, to me. O that, that was the
wicked wretch that drew me away: if it had not been for him, I had not been in
so lamentable a case upon a deathbed, Prove. 1. 10, 11.

6. The sixth youthful sin is, Cursing and Swearing. How ready are young ones
to learn the language of their Father? it was not long since that I heard a
little Boy swear at every sentence he spoke. O what will such be when they come
to be old, if they begin so soon? scarce creep on their feet, and yet running
post to Hell! O how many are there of this Daring Generation, that bend their
tongues like bows, and shoot those Arrows against Heaven, which will fall down
dipped in the poison of Divine Fury. It would make ones heart ache, to hear how
some belch out their hellish Oaths! to hear how cruelly they take in the Wounds
of Christ, and crucify him afresh; not considering that at the same time they
are butchering of their own souls: and if one tell them of their Swearing, how
ready are they to swear, That they did not swear; and turn and laugh, as if it
were a creditable thing to be like the Devil, and an honor to make have to
Hell? O how many are there of his Black Crew, that brave it out with their
Damn-me and Sink-me, and Oaths, as if they would dare the Almighty to his very
face, and as if there were little of truth in God's Threatenings, and his Anger
a very light matter! O sinner! What if God should take thee at thy word, when
the next Damn-me is in thy mouth, and stop thy breath, with an Oath in thy
mouth? What if God should go to cursing too? Do you know what a dreadful Word
that is, Go thou cursed? O! What if God should swear too, That thou shall never
enter into his rest? Could thou but see the flaming tongues of those horrid
sinners that know what the meaning of that word, Damn-me is could thou but
see how they bite those tongues for madness, it may be it would make thee
think, that an Oath is no such light matter. You say, words are but wind: but
believe it, this wind will rise to such a Storm, as will not be allaid, without
deep repentance, till it has blown thee into hell. Did you never read the
third of Mal. v. 5. I will come near to judgment, and will be a swift witness
against the false Swearers, and such as fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts.
But you will say, your tongues are your own, who is Lord over us, Psalm. 12. 4. You
shall hear one shortly, that will answer that question, and let you know, that
he is Lord over that, and that your own Tongues shall be made to condem you.
But what is it that I see? How does that swearing Wretch storm and rage there
at me, for telling him of his sins? Come, come, sinner, if you spare not God, I
promise you I will not spare you: and I tell thee, What thou hear, is
nothing to what thou shall feel.

7. The next youthful lust that I shall mention, is Drunkenness. Do not many (I
wish old ones were not here too guilty) act as if their business in this World,
was to eat, and drink, and take their pleasures? The Devil bids them read the
Text, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young men; and they are easily persuaded to
take his counsel: and so they drink, and roar, and consider not what a
reckoning will be brought in at last; neither do they stand till they have read
the latter part of that verse; but know that for all these things God will
bring thee to judgment. Not considering the meaning of that whole Scripture,
which is but this; Go, young man, lie at the Taverns and Alehouses, do; drink,
and be drunk; but remember this, you shall be damned for it; and God will make
you take off the other Cup, whether you will or no, and that is a Cup spiced with
Wrath and Fury. But you see not, neither do you yet feel it; and therefore you
do but laugh at all this; you say with those in Matt. 24. 49. My Master delays
his coming, and therefore you eat and drink with the Drunkards: you say, let
him talk till his heart aches, I will never leave my Pleasure for you: why Man!
Will thou then be desperate? Dare you say, I Will drink, though there be Death in
the Pot, though Hell be at the bottom of the Cup? or do you think that God will
be worse than his word? and, that though he threaten high, yet he means no such
matter. O sinner, deceive not thy self, and if you forget the rest, carry home
but that one Text, Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10. If any one hear the words of this curse,
and yet bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk
in the imagination of mine own heart, and add drunkenness to thirst, the Lord
will not spare him, etc. Do you read on, and read it again, and think of that
Scripture the next time that you sit down to your Cups. Little do poor
creatures think how dreadful a sin Drunkenness is, and how many it brings
with it: I Will tell you of one story of my own knowledge, and then I shall leave
this: A certain Drunkard that I knew very well, when he was in drink,
quarrelled with his Fellow Servants, and after a few words, knocked him down
with his Flail, and killed him at one blow. Afterward, by Friends, he made a
shift to escape the Halter, and comes home again, and swears, and curses, and
drinks at as high a rate as ever: but at last, when he was in the same yard
where he did this Murder, he dropped down dead in a moment; and I was one of the
first that saw him.

8. Another youthful sin is, Uncleanness. Is not England too near a kin to
France? Do not many of our young ones act as if they took pattern by Sodom, and
had learned of Gomorrah? Jeremiah made sad complaint, Jer. 5. 7. And are we
less guilty? Does not the Scripture speak plain enough against this sin? Though
the Pope count it a Vemal fault, yet those that are guilty of it, will find,
that his Pardon will give them little ease, when they are cast into a Bed of
Flames. Sure our hot young men seldom read the book of Proverbs, but act as if
that simple young man (Prove. 7. 13.) did run no great hazard. What was it that
brought Thomas Savage to Theft and Murder? what brought him to that shameful
death? O how bitterly did he take on, that he should ever see the face of that
Vile Woman! O! had he but considered whither he was going, and that most of her
Guests go to Hell? had be but thought seriously, how bitter that sin would
prove, I believe he would have lain in Flames, as soon as with that abominable
woman. Did none of you hear what he said when he was upon the Cart? Did none of
you see with what earnestness he spoke? Why, this was one great thing that he
begged of you young ones, as his dying request, That you would have a care of
this sin.

9. The next youthful sin that I should mention, is Theft. Drunkenness and
Uncleanness are two costly sins, especially the latter; and poor creatures are
usually so bewitched with that, that Credit, Purse, Body, Soul, and all, must
go, rather than that beastly sin should not be gratified. How many Servants are
there that wrong their Masters, imbezel their Goods, and secretly wast them by
the forementioned sin: and I believe I need not tell you what a tragical end
Theft has.

That Prodigy of her Sex, and disgrace of Women, could not be satisfied with
Wine and good Cheer; her Purse must be fed as well as her stinking Carcass:
What do you come hither (said she) for without Money? Why, where should I have
it, said he? What has your Master none? replied that Monster. Yes, said he,
but I never wronged him, neither can I. Nay, said she, if you be thereabout,
come no more here. But alas! the poor Creature is ensnared, so that he cannot
but go to ask counsel of this Daughter of the Devil, how he should manage his
matters, so as to get that money which his Master had. She makes a ready reply,
and advises, To murder the Maid, to bury the theft. O that unfaithful servants
would think of these things, and now and then read that Scripture, Tit. 2. 10.
and Luke 16. 6.

I should here speak something of the bloody sin of Murder; but the Word of
God, the Laws of Men, the Power of Conscience, and the signal Judgments of God
against such, puts me in some hope, that I need not much insist upon that. I
shall add but one sin more.

10. Another youthful sin is, Incorrigibleness. How resolutely do most young
ones go on in their sins? How hardly brought so much as to debate the business
soberly with themselves or others? How do they fly in the face of them which
reprove them, as if it were ten times a greater fault for to reprove sin, than
to commit it. Nay, some are come to that height, that they make but a mock of
Hell and Judgment, as well as Sin, Isa. 5. 19. But these are so vile a
Generation, that I have little hopes of prevailing with them, Psalm. 28. 4, 5.
Jer. 22. 21. Genesis 19. 14.

11. The next thing I proposed to speak to, was, To show you what it is to flee
sin. In this I shall be very brief.

1. Not to commit it. Take not up this Serpent, for it has a deadly sting in
the tail of it. Embrace not this Dalilah, for she will betray thee. Have away,
avoid it; if you do not, it is as much as your life, the life of your soul is
worth, Isa. 1. 16.

2. Flee; That is, avoid the very occasions of sin. It Is ill jesting with
edge-tools. They are safest, that are farthest from it. A hundred to one but
thou art caught, if thou play with the Bait. Who, but a madman, would take
strong poison into his mouth, and say that he will then spit it out? Who would
choose to sleep upon the top of a Mast? Believe it, Sin is one of the most
dangerous things in the World, and he that tampers with it, plays with Hell,
and is sporting with the Devil, 1 These. 5. 22.

3. Flee; that is, hate it with a perfect hatred. Say, What have I to do with
Idols any more? How shall I do this, and sin against God? Labor for a
spiritual antipathy against sin, and to loath it, as David and Paul, yea, as
God himself, Psalm. 139. 23.

4. Flee, and persuade others to flee: for the danger is not inconsiderable.
Tell others what sin will prove at last, and persuade them to consider what the
wages of such work will be, Psalm. 119. 157.

III. Why should we flee youthful lusts?

1. Because our Captain bids us flee: we have his Commission, nay, his absolute
Command; may I not say, his Entreaty too? What is the meaning of all those
pathetical Expostulations, Turn you, turn you, Why will you die? Why does he
bid us to beseech you to look about you? What is the design of all the
Scripture? Wherefore do we Preach, and Pray? Methinks the Ministers of Christ
should be like those Angels that warned Lot to flee out of Sodom; and when he
lingered, they pulled him, and bid him haste, and flee for his life. I might be
infinite in Scriptures for the proof of this, Psalm. 34. 11, 14.

2. Because of the danger of not fleeing. If the Wrath of God, if Hell and
Damnation, if everlasting Misery be to be avoided, then Sin is: for as sure as
God is true, Sinners must be damned if they flee not sin.

3. Because of the benefit we shall have by fleeing sin. We shall be
everlastingly secured, if Heaven and Glory be worth the getting, if Happiness
and Salvation considerable, if a Kingdom and Crown be worth the having, this
may be obtained by fleeing from sin.

APPLICATION.
IV. Use 1. Is it so, That it is our duty to flee youthful Lusts: Then let all
this Congregation of young men and women, consider how well they have obeyed
the Command. Sirs, be faithful to your souls, and ask your selves speedily,
What you have done? young men, Are you guilty, or not guilty? It Is better you
should be asked this question at the Bar of Conscience, than at the Bar of
God's Judgment. Children, how say you, Are you as ready to obey, as your
Parents are to command? Does not your Conscience tell you, that you can tell a
lie to cover a fault, and yet not be much troubled? Some of you are come here
this day to hear news, more than to hear your sin reproved: but where are you
on the Sabbath Day? May not I see you idling in the streets, and sitting at
your doors* nay, may I not see you in the company of wicked creatures, in an
Alehouse? Well, sinner, well, the reckoning will come up by and by. I pray tell
me, How do you spend your time? Is it in your Chamber upon your knees, and at
your honest Callings, and in Civil and Christian Society? Who are the persons
that you take most delight in? Are they those that discourse of God and their
souls, and warn one another with words of Grace? What think you of Cursing and
Swearing? Do you fear an Oath? Or do you think the deepest Oaths the best
Rhetoric, and most graceful, if I may so speak, to your discourse? What
language do you speak, the language of Canaan, or the language of Ashdod? Can
you stretch your selves upon beds of Ivory, and drink Wine from morning to
night, and look upon this as the only life? Is is not a pleasing thing to lie
in the embraces of a wanton woman? and cannot you use unseemly dalliance, and
say, Am I not in sport? Did you never wrong your Master in your life? and dare
you do so still? And how would you take it, if I should come to you, and tell
you roundly of all your sins? Could you bear it if I should come close to you,
and set hell and damnation before you? Young men, I beseech you answer me. I
tell you again, it is better for you that I should ask you this question here
than God hereafter. Well, have you put it to your Conscience? And are you
guilty? I must tell you plainly, I cannot but thing that abundance of this
Congregation are in many of these sins deeply guilty; and yet there stands* a
sly sinner, no more affected than the ground he treads on: thou think I do
not know thee; but that, if possible, I may stop thee before thou come to the
Gallows and Hell* I shall do what I can for my soul to reach thee. Wherefore
give me leave, in the next place, to speak one word by way of Conviction.

Young people, I am not come this day to tell you News; my business is not to
tickle your ears, but to do what I can possibly to keep you from that place of
shame, the Gibbet; and that place of torment- Hell. I believe that here are
many here, that I shall never see nor speak to while the World stands; and that
our next meeting will be before the Judgment Seat of Christ: and therefore I
must tell you, I must not jest with you. I speak to those that are guilty; you
know well enough who I mean. Let me ask you soberly, Do you believe that there
is a God? and that he is privy to all you do? And dare you outface God with
your wickedness? Or do you make account his eye is nothing, so man does not
know; Say you so? Believe it, sinner, you will shortly know, that God and your
Conscience are witnesses enough to cast you: and is this nothing? are not the
threatenings of a God to be regarded? Shall the Lion roar, and will not such a
Beast as you tremble? Know this, as stoutly as you brave it out now, you will
shortly quake. But you are resolved, come on it what will, venture you will:
But hold sinner, I prithee let us reason the case a little; do not act like a
Fool and a Madman: Were you ever in Newgate? Do you know what a Prison is? Are
Fetters such desirable things? Has the Devil done you so much kindness, as
that you must venture your liberty for his sake? Come tell me, sinner, what
good did the devil ever do for thee willingly? Is it worth the while to do and
suffer so much for one that never intended any good to any in the World.
Consider a little, young man, is it nothing to come gingling in your chains
before an Earthly Judge? Is the sight of the Bench nothing? Is it nothing to
have your villainy laid open before the World? How do you think you shall look,
when Evidence comes in clear, and the Jury shall cast you? What, brave it out
still! But what will you say, when the Judge shall pass sentence upon you, to be
carried from thence to the Prison; and from that, to the place of Execution? It
is nothing to have ten thousand Spectators of your shameful end? But methinks I
hear some of that hellish rout laughing, and saying, It is but a swing or two,
and then all is over, their misery's at an end. But hold there sinner, then thy
misery will begin, for thou shall appear immediately before the Bar of God, and
there receive another sentence ten thousand times more dreadful than the
former. What, do you make nothing of that dreadful word, Depart thou cursed?
and then immediately the devil takes your soul. They wait for their prey; and
thou must be reserved in chains of darkness, in unspeakable and unavoidable
torments, to the Judgment of the great day, and then thy cursed body and soul
shall meet; O what a dreadful greeting will that be! when body and soul shall
be cast into everlasting flames. Well, young man, now what do you say? Is it
best venturing still? But it may be, thou beginnest to think what a strange
censorious man is this? Such Preaching is enough to make one out of their wits:
What, is there no such thing as repentance, a Grace a God one may be saved for
all your railing. What do you think of Tho. Savage? did not he repent? I hope
you will not say that he is in Hell. No indeed, for I verily believe that he is
a Saint in Glory; but how do you know whether God will give you repentance? I
must tell you, he is a singular instance, such a one as we shall scarce hear of
in an age: and I remember, that he that is often reproved, and hardens his heart,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

But though I speak thus, Brethren, I hope better things of many here, and
things that do accompany Salvation. I am persuaded here are some young ones
that had as live venture their lives, as indulge themselves in the
forementioned youthful Lusts. I think I have some ground to say what I do.
Brethren, I beseech you make not my boasting void; neither let me be ashamed of
my confidence. I am persuaded, I say again, that some of you now hate what
sometimes you did delight in; and though it may be in the days of your
darkness, you lived in your sins, yet now fear to fall into them, as much as
you fear Hell. Courage my Brethren, go on bravely, and the Lord be with you;
you are the hopes and joy of old Christians, they bless God from their hearts
to see such Flowers in Gods Garden; hold but out, be strong, and quit you like
men, and heaven shall be yours, as sure as if you were already there.

Use. 4. I shall here speak something by way of advice to Masters of Families,
and Parents. It lies much in your power to set a stop to that mighty torrent of
wickedness, that does almost overflow this City. Remember Sirs, what a dreadful
sin the sin of Murder is. What then do you think of those that murder souls,
that starve souls? How do you think God will take it at your hands that you
should be so careful that your work be done, and never mind his at all? Is it
nothing to you, that one that dwells under your roof, must dwell in everlasting
burnings? Are you so barbarous as to be indifferent whether your servants and
children are damned or saved? What can you answer, when those of your own house
shall stand before the great God, and say, Lord, if it had not been for my
Master, I had never sinned against thee at the rate that I did. He never told
me any thing of the danger of sin, he would be sure to call me up betimes to
look after his business; and if I neglected that, I should quickly hear of it:
but as for the Lords Day, praying or reading, or any thing that concerned God
or my soul, I never was so much as reproved for the neglecting of them. O! if I
had been but told of such a dreadful place as this is, and what sin would end
in, sure I should never have ventured as I did. Sirs, I beseech you think how
you shall answer such an accusation at the day of Judgment; as sure as you
live, you will then be speechless. Parents, methinks you have something within
you, to put you upon your duty. What, have you no love at all to the fruit of
your Bodies? Is it no great matter whether your children sink or swim? would
you be contented to see them in a house that is in a Flame, and do nothing to
get them out? Would you have your children firebrarnds of Hell for ever? will
you do nothing to rescue them from that devouring Lion, who would tear them in
pieces? can you bear to hear them cry out against you, and ready to fly in your
faces? Does it never trouble you to think what a greeting you shall have in
another World, when they shall curse the day that ever they saw you, when they
shall say, I may thank you for this dreadful misery; you never catechized me;
you never told me one word of this place of torment; you never corrected me for
my sin; if you had, it may be I should not have lain under this intolerable
anguish. What do you say, Sirs, to these things? Methinks they call for your
serious consideration. Really, if these be not weighty matters, I know not what
be. Let me ask you in meekness, whether it be not a piece of the most barbarous
cruelty in the world, to let your children and servants run to hell, without
doing what in you lies to stop them? But I hope, by this time, some of you are
a little convinced of the dreadfulness of the loss of a soul, and are loath to
have the guilt of the blood of souls to lie upon you for ever; and therefore
begin to ask, what shall you do, that you and yours may be saved, and your
servants and Children might escape the snares of Satan, and flee youthful
lusts? And you in good earnest Friends? And will you promise, as in the
presence of God, that you will do what you can possibly, to discharge your
duty, and to follow those directions that I shall give you? In hopes that some
are resolved, by the help of God, to do what in them lies, for the keeping all
under their charge from everlasting burnings, I shall advise you:

1. Be good your selves, and labor to be patterns of Holiness, and to show
your children and servants by your conversation, that you your selves believe
that there is a God, an immortal Soul, Heaven, Hell, and Eternity: let your
language be savoury, and speak you to be one that has been with Jesus. Let
your actions be regulated by the Word, and endeavor to let them know, that you
are not in jest when you speak of God and their souls, Psalm. 10. 1. 2.

2. I charge you, as in the presence of God, as you will answer the neglect of
it at the Bar of that great Judge, take an exact account of your servants how
they spend their time, what company they keep, what they do upon the Sabbath;
and if you would make any thing of Religion, be as careful that the Sabbath be
spent in God's service, as the Week-daies in yours. I could tell you of a
servant that was wont, many a time and often, to complain of his Master, and say,
If my Master had ever examined me the Text on the Lord's Day, or called one to
any account where I had been, or what I had heard, I am persuaded I should
never have come to so sad an end as I am like to do.

3. Instruct them often in the matters that concern their eternal welfare. Sirs,
tell them I beseech you, with all the earnestness that you can for your lives,
of the danger of sin; give them wholesome advice; tell them of the necessity of
Conversion; allow them a little time to pray and read, and let them know that
you take notice of any thing that is good in them.

4. Pray for them; cry to the Lord mightily, and say, O that Ishmael may live
in thy sight: Lord, have thou not a blessing, O my Father, for me and mine? O
pity dear Lord, my children and my servants; and let all under my roof be of
the household of faith, and of the Family of the Lord Jesus. And now once more I
beg you to be in good earnest; 'twill be the truest evidence of the truth of
your grace, to be faithful in this work. 'Twill be your joy upon a deathbed;
'twill be your Crown in another world.

Use 5. One word by way of advice to you young people. Brethren, you saw
yesterday what it was to fall into youthful lusts; and to day you have heard
something of the danger of these sins. Methinks by this time you should be in a
rage against sin: methinks you should all say, Well, now I will never spend the
Sabbath day as I have done: I Will never come near the company of vile women:
This, I hope shall be a warning to me as long as I live. Are you (in sober
sadness) of this mind? O that the Lord would keep this always upon your hearts.
O that you may not now get out into the cold world, and shake off the sense of
these things. But do I not see some weeping eyes, aching hearts? And what do
thou say, poor soul? O Sir, I am the man you mean! But is it possible for me to
escape Hell? I have lived in almost all those sins for many a year; what shall
I do?

I shall answer this honest request, and the God of love and power send it home.

1. Labor to be acquainted with the Principles of Religion. Be much in reading
of the Scriptures, search, and you will find never a word there to encourage
sin, but all against it; they will make you wise to salvation; consult the
word, and you will escape the wrath to come, which shall surely fall upon those
that live and die in youthful sins, Psalm. 119. 9.

2. Labor to understand wherein your happiness lies. It lies not in Riches,
Pleasures, and Honors, but in the favor of God, Psalm. 4. 6. Seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof; set your affections on things
that are above, and not on things below.

3. To be sure, keep the Sabbath strictly, and attend upon a powerful Ministry.
Then is the time to buy Provisions to live upon for ever.

4. Keep good company. Get out of wicked men's society. Mark those that walk
soberly, and that mind their souls, and make much of them; and beg an interest
in their Prayers, and take their advice. If you once grow weary of good
company, I shall have little hopes of you; and it is a sign God means good to
poor souls, when they are very desirous to be in with them that are dear to
God; A warm Christian-companion, O Sirs, you cannot value him too highly, 1
Cor. 15. 33. 1 Pet. 4. 4. Heb. 6. 12.

5. Take heed of sinning against conscience. Let David's Prayer be yours, Ps.
19. 13. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me.

6. Take heed of putting off Repentance; remember now thy Creator; now is the
acceptable time: O, if you value your lives, make have, and delay not an hour,
but go home, and fall upon your knees, and beg of God to give you repentance
unto life; give God no rest day nor night till he have charged your heart, and
made you see your need of a Christ, and made you to give your self to Christ. O
cry out this night, a Christ, dear Lord, a Christ for my poor soul, or I am
lost for ever. Eccles. 12. 1. Psalm. 119. 62.

7. Be much in consideration; commune now and then with your heart, and think
seriously whither you are going, and ask your soul what a condition it is in,
and what it has to bear it up against the fear of death, and what provisions
are made for eternity; look into your purse, what money have thou that will go
current in another world. Spend much time in thinking. I asked this poor boy how
he spent his time in prison: he answered, in prayer, reading, and consideration.

8. Neglect not Prayer; ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you; be frequent and serious in this duty, forget
not secret Prayer, and look after your Prayers, and be not content except you
hear of them again.

9. Be diligent in your calling; be not slothful in your worldly business,
idleness is the devils shop, Romans 11. 12.

10. Hold out to the end: remember what they shall have that conquer, resolve
for Christ and Heaven upon any terms Well Sirs, now my work is done; have I
been beating the air? what will become of these two Sermons? yesterday you
heard one out of the Cart, and from the Gibbet, and to day from the Pulpit; and
what are you resolved to do? what, shall the tears, prayers, and entreaties of
that dying young man be so soon forgotten? if they are, can the commands of the
living God be so easily contemned? is there nothing in all that I have been
speaking? what, are you still of the same mind that you were, or are you not? I
say again, I must leave you, and a thousand to one whether I shall ever see you
or speak to you more; once more I charge you, as you love your own soul, as you
fear the wrath of God, and the flames of hell; Flee youthful lusts.

FINIS.

