Considerations OF THE Existence of GOD, AND OF THE Immortality of the Soul,
With the Recompenses of the future state: For the Cure of INFIDELITY, the
Hectic Evil of the Times.

By William Bates, D. D.

(...).

Plat. in Phileb. LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three
Pigeons, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1676.

THE PREFACE.
THE usual Method whereby the Enemy of Mankind trains so many into his bloody
snares, is by enticing the lower Faculties, the Senses, the Fancy, the
Passions, to prevail upon the Will and Mind, and accordingly his motives are
pleasure or pain that affect us from sensible things. But on the contrary, the
great Lover of Souls first inlightens the Understanding to discover what is the
most excellent Good, what the most pernicious Evil, and by that discovery moves
the Will to pursue the one, and fly from the other, and so descends to work
upon the Affections and Senses, that with readiness they follow the direction
and command of the Superior Powers in Man. These Objects being Spiritual and
future, and therefore raised above the highest Regions of Sense, are only
apprehended and become effectual by the evidence of Faith. As the Spartan in
Plutarch after trying many ways to set a Carcass upright in a living posture,
and finding that all his Endeavors were vain, it was so suddenly discomposed,
the head sinking into the bosom, the hands falling, and all the parts in
disorder, concluded something was wanting within, that is the living Soul,
without which the Body has no strength to support it self. Thus the most
convincing Reasons, pressed with the greatest vehemence of Affection, all the
Powers of the World to come are of no Efficacy upon those who have not Faith,
the vital Principle of all Heavenly Operations.

We live in an Infidel Age wherein wickedness reigns with Reputation. The
thoughts of the Mind are discovered by the current of the Actions. Were there a
serious belief of the great Judgment, and the terrible Eternity that follows,
it were not possible for Men to sin so freely, and go on in a War so desperate
against God himself. Sensuality and Infidelity are Elements of a Symbolical
quality, and by an easy alteration are changed into one another. Fleshly Lusts
darken the Mind and render it unfit to take a distinct view of things Sublime
and Spiritual. They hinder serious consideration, (especially of what may
trouble the Conscience) by their impetuous Disorders. And which is the worst
effect, the corrupt Will bribes the Mind to argue for what it desires. It Is the
interest of Carnalists to put out the eye of Reason, the prevision of things
Eternal, that they may blindly follow the sensual appetite. Thus Epicurus with
his herd (as Epicuri de Grege Porcum. Hor.
one of them styles that Fraternity) denied the Immortality of the Soul,
consonantly to his declared principle that the Supreme Happiness of Man
consisted in the delights of Sense. And it is as natural that the disbelief of
another state hereafter should strongly incline Men to follow their Licentious
Pleasures. If the Soul, according to the impious fancy of those Infidels
described in the Book of Wisdom, be a spark of Fire that preserves the vital
heat for a little time, and gives motion to the Members, Vigor to the Senses,
and Spirits for the Thoughts, but is quenched in Death, and nothing remains but
a wretched heap of Ashes, What preeminence has Man above a Beast? It follows
therefore in the progress of their Reason it is equal to indulge their Appetites
as the Beasts do. If what is immortal puts on mortality, the consequence is
natural, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we must die.

Now though supernatural Revelation confirmed by Miracles, and the continual
accomplishment of Prophecies, has brought Life and Immortality into that open
light, that the meanest Christian has a fuller and more certain evidence of it,
than the clearest spirits of the Heathens ever had, yet because the weight of
Authority is of no force with Libertines, it is necessary to argue from common
Principles, which they cannot disavow. Indeed the Shield of Faith, and the
Sword of the Spirit are our best Defense in the Holy War; but with the use of
equal Arms, Reasons against Reasons, the cause of Religion will be victorious.

It Is the design of the ensuing Treatise to discover by the light of Nature
invisible objects, viz. that a Sovereign Spirit made and governs the sensible
World, that there is an Immortal Soul in Man, and an Eternal state expects him
hereafter. There is such a necessary Connection between these Supreme Truths,
The Being of God, and future Recompenses to Men, that the denial of the one,
includes the denial of the other. It Is uncertain which of the two is the first
step, whether Men descend from the disbelief of the future state to Atheism, or
from Atheism to Infidelity in that point.

Some excellent Persons have employed their Talents on this Subject, from whom
I have received advantage in compiling the present Work. I have been careful
not to build upon false Arches, but on substantial Proofs, and to persuade
Truth with Truth, as becoms a sincere Counselor and well-willer to Souls. And
if the secure Person will but attentively and impartially consider, he must be
convinced that it is the only true Wisdom to believe and prevent, and not
venture on the trial of things in that state, where there is no other mending
of the error, but an everlasting sorrow for it. Those whose Hearts are so
irrecoverably depraved, that no motives can persuade to examine what so nearly
touches them with calmness and sobriety, and their minds so fatally stupefied
that no Arguments can awaken, must miserably feel what they wilfully doubt of;
whom the Light does not convince, the Fire shall.

OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD.
CHAP. I. Chap. I.

Atheism is fearful of public discovery. Three heads of Arguments to prove the
Being of GOD. 1. The visible frame of the World, and the numerous Natures in
it, exactly modelled for the good of the whole, prove it to be the work of a
most wise Agent. The World considered in its several parts. The Sun in its
situation, motion, and effects, declare the Providence of the Creator. The
diurnal motion of the Sun from East to West is very beneficial to Nature. The
annual course brings admirable advantage to it. The gradual passing of the
sensible World, from the excess of heat to the extremity of cold, an effect of
Providence. The constant revolutions of Day and Night, and of the Seasons of
the Year, discovers that a wise Cause orders them.

IN the managing the present subject, I shall first propound such things as
clearly discover that a Sovereign Spirit, rich in Goodness, most wise in
Counsel, and powerful in Operation, gave being to the World, and Man in it.
This part of my work may seem needless, because there are very few, if any,
declared Atheists. As Monsters remain where they are born, in the desert sands
of Africa, not seen, unless sought for; so there are some unnatural Enormities
that conscious how execrable they are, conceal themselves in secret, and dare
not appear in open view. And of all others, no impiety is so monstrous and
fearful of public discovery as Atheism. But, The fool says in his heart,
there is no God. He secretly whispers in contradiction to Nature, Reason,
Conscience, Authorities, there is no supreme invisible Power to whom he is
accountable. And having thus concluded in the dark, he loses all reverence of
the Divine Laws, and is only governed by the vicious rule of his carnal
Appetites. That many in our times, even of the great Pretenders to Wit and
Reason, are guilty of this extreme folly, is sadly evident. They live, as
absolute Atheists, only refuse the title, for fear of infamy, or punishment. It
will therefore not be unseasonable to revive the natural notion of the Deity.
Now to establish this Truth no Arguments are more convincing than what are
level to all understandings. And those are,

I. The visible frame of the World, and the numerous natures in it, all modeled
by this supreme rule, the good of the whole.

II. The Evidences that prove the World had a beginning in time.

III. The universal sense of the Deity impressed on the minds of Men.

1. The first Reason is clear and intelligible to all: for it is the inseparable
property of an intellectual Agent to propound an End, to judge of the
convenience between the Means and it, and to contrive them in such a manner as
to accomplish it. Now if we survey the Universe, and all the beings it
contains, their proportion, dependence and harmony, it will fully appear that
antecedently to its existence, there was a perfect mind that designed it, and
disposed the various parts in that exact order, that one beautiful World is
composed of them. The Vitruv. praef. lib. 6.
Philosopher conjectured truly, who being shipwrackt on the Island of Rhodes,
and come to the shore, spying some Mathematical figures drawn on the Sand,
cried out with joy, Vestigia hominum video, I see the foosteps of men, and
comforted his dispairing companions, that they were not cast into a Desert, or
a place of Savages, but of Men civil and wise, as he discovered by those
impressions of their minds. And if we observe the frame of the World, the
concatenation of the superior with the middle, and of the middle with the lower
parts, whereby it is not an accidental aggregation of bodies, but an entire
universe; if we consider the just disposing them conveniently to their nature
and dignity, the inferior and less noble depending on the superior, and that
so many contrary natures, with that fidelity and league of mutual love embrace
and assist each other, that every one working according to its peculiar
quality, yet all unite their operations for one general end, the preservation
and benefit of the whole, must not we strongly conclude that it is the work of a
designing and most wise Agent? Boet.
-- Pulchrum pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum mente gerens, similique ab imagine formans.
To make this more evident, I will produce some Instances.

The Sun, of all celestial Bodies the most excellent in beauty and usefulness,
does in its situation, motion, effects, publish the glory of a most wise
Providence.

1. In its situation. The fountains of all his benefit to Nature are heat and
light: with respect to its heat the Sun may well be called the Heart of the
World, wherein all the vital Spirits are prepared; and it is so conveniently
placed, as to transmit more or less immediately to all even the most distant
parts of that vast body, by perpetual irradiations, the influences necessary
for its preservation. It cannot be in another place without the disorder and
injury of Universal Nature. If it were raised to the Stars, the Earth for want
of its quickening heat would lose its prolifick virtue, and remain a carcass.
The Air would be filled with continual oppressing vapors, the Sea would
overflow the Land. If it were as low as the Moon, as dangerous effects would
follow, The Air would be inflamed by its excessive heat, the Sea boiling, the
Rivers dried up, every Mountain a Vesuvius or Aetna; the whole Earth a barren
mass of Ashes, a desert of Arabia. But seated in the midst of the Planets, it
purifies the Air, abates the superfluity of Waters, temperately warms the
Earth, and keeps the Elements in such degrees of power, as are requisite for the
activity of mixed bodies depending on them.

Besides, there is a sensible proof of a wise Director in its Motion, from
whence so many and various effects proceed. The Diurnal Motion from East to
West causes the Day. The Sun is the first spring and great original of Light,
and by his presence discovers the beauties of the most of visible Objects. From
hence all the pleasant variety of Colors, to which Light is the Soul that
gives vivacity. Without it the World would be the Sepulcher of it self, nothing
but silence and solitude, horror and Confusion. The Light guides our Journeys,
awakens and directs our Industry, preserves mutual Conversation. And the
withdrawing of the Sun from one Hemisphere to another is as beneficial to the
World by causing Night. For that has peculiar advantages. Its darkness
inlightens us to see the Stars, and to understand their admirable Order,
Aspects, Influences, their Conjunction, Distances, Opposition, from which
proceeds their different effects in all passive Bodies. Now what can be more
pleasant than the Ornaments and Diversities of these Twins of time? Besides, by
this distinction of the Day and Night there is a fit succession of labor and
rest, of the Works and Thoughts of Men, those proper to the Day, active and
clear, the other to the Night, whose obscurity prevents the wandering of the
mind through the senses, and silence favors its calm contemplations.

And the constant revolution of Day and Night in the space of twenty four hours
is of great benefit. If they should continue six entire Months together, as
under the Poles, though their space would be equal in the compass of the Year
as now, yet with public disadvantage. The shining of the Sun without
intermission, would be very hurtful to the Earth, and to its Inhabitants. And
its long absence would cause equal mischeifs by contrary qualities. For the
nature of Man and other living Creatures cannot subsist long in travail without
repairing their decays by rest. Now the succession of Day and Night in that
space, fitly tempers their labor and repose. After the toilsom service of the
Day, the Sun retires behind the Earth, and the Night procures a truce from
business, unbends the World, and invites to rest in its deep silence and
tranquillity. And by sleep, when the animal operations cease, the Spirits that
were much consumed in the service of the senses, are renewed, and united in
assistance to the vital faculties, the Body is restored, and at the springing
Day made fresh and active for new labor. So that the wisdom of the Creator is
as visible in the manner of this dispensation, as the thing it self. And it is
an observable point of Providence in ordering the length and shortness of Days
and Nights for the good of the several parts of the World. Under the
Equinoctial Line the Earth being parcht by the direct beams of the Sun, the
nights are regularly twelve hours through the Year, fresh and moist to remedy
that inconvenience: On the contrary, in the northern parts, where there is a
fainter reflection of its Beams, the Days are very long, that the Sun may
supply by its continuance, what is defective in its vigor to ripen the fruits
of the Earth.

The annual course of the Sun between the North and South discovers also the
high and admirable wisdom of God. For all the benefits that Nature receives,
Obliquitatem ejus intellexisse, est rerum fores aperuisse. Plin.
depends on his unerring constant motion through the same Circle declining and
oblique, with respect to the Poles of the World. It Is not possible that more
can be done with less. From hence proceeds the difference of Climates, the
inequality of Days and Nights, the variety of Seasons, the diverse mixtures of
the first qualities, the universal Instruments of natural Productions. In the
Spring it is in conjunction with the Pleiades, to cause sweet showers, that are
as milk to nourish the newborn tender plants, that hang at the breasts of the
Earth. In the Summer it is joined with the Dog Star, to redouble its force, for
the production of Fruits necessary to the support of living Creatures. And
Winter, that in appearance is the death of Nature, yet is of admirable use for
the good of the Universe. The Earth is cleansed, moistened and prepared, so that
our hopes of the succeeding Year depends on the Frosts and Snows of Winter.

If the Sun in its diurnal and annual motion were so swift that the Year were
completed in six Months, and the Day and Night in twelve hours, the fruits of
the Earth would want a necessary space to ripen. If on the contrary it were so
slow as double the time were spent in its return, the Harvest but once gathered
in the twenty four Months, could not suffice for the nourishment of living
Creatures.

It Is also a considerable effect of Providence, that the sensible World does
not suddenly pass from the highest degrees of heat to the extremity of cold,
nor from this to that, but so gradually that the passage is not only tolerable,
but pleasant. Immediate extremes are very dangerous to Nature. To prevent that
inconvenience the Spring interposes between the Winter and Summer, by its
gentle heat disposing living bodies for the excess of Summer. And Autumn of a
middle quality prepares them for the rigor of Winter; that they may pass from
one to another without violent alteration.

To attribute these revolutions, so just and uniform to Chance is the
perfection of folly, (...). Arist.
for Chance, as a cause that works without design, has no constancy nor order
in its effects. If a Die be thrown a hundred times, the fall is contingent, and
rarely happens to be twice together on the same square. Now the Alternate
returns of Day and Night are perpetual in all the Regions of the Universe. And
though neither the one nor the other begin nor end their course, twice together
in the same Point; so that their motion appears confused, yet it is so just, that
at the finishing of the Year they are found to have taken precisely as many
paces the one as the other. In the amiable War beween them, though one of the
two always gets, and the other loses the hours, yet in the end they retire
equal. And the vicissitudes of Seasons with an inviolable tenor succeed one
another. Who ever saw the various Scenes of a Theater move by hazard in those
just spaces of time, as to represent Palaces, or Woods, Rocks and Seas, as the
subject of the Actors required? And can the lower World four times in the
circle of the Year change appearance, and alter the Seasons so conveniently to
the use of Nature, and no powerful Mind direct that great work? frequent
discoveries of an end orderly pursued, must be attributed to a judicious Agent.
The Psalmist guided not only by Inspiration but Reason, declares, The Day is
thine, the Night also is thine, thou made the Summer and Winter. But this I
shall have occasion to touch on afterward.

CHAP. II. Chap. II.

The Air a fit medium to convey the Light and influences of the Heavens to the
lower World. It Is the repository of Vapors that are drawn up by the Sun, and
descend in fruitful Showers. The Winds of great benefit. The separation of the
Sea from the Land the effect of great Wisdom and Power. That the Earth is not
an equal Globe, is both pleasant and useful. The League of the Elements
considered. Excellent Wisdom visible in Plants and Fruits. The shapes of
Animals are answerable to their properties. They regularly act to preserve
themselves. The Bees, Swallows, Ants directed by an excellent mind.

THe Expension of the Air from the Etherial Heavens to the Earth, is another
testimony of Divine Providence. For it is transparent, and of a subtle Nature,
and thereby a fit medium to convey Light and Celestial Influences to the lower
World. It receives the first impressions of the Heavens, and insinuating
without resistance, conveys them to the most distant things. By it the greatest
numbers of useful objects that cannot by immediate application to our faculties
be known, are transmitted in their images and representations; All colors and
figures to the Eye, sounds to the Ear. It Is necessary for the subsistence of
Animals that live by respiration. It mixes with their nourishment, cools the
inward heat, and tempers its violence.

Besides, In the Air Vapors are attracted by the Sun, till they ascend to that
height to which its reflection does not arrive, and there losing the soul of
heat that was only borrowed, by degrees return to their native coldness, and
are gathered into Clouds, which do not break in a deluge of waters that would
wash away the seed, but dissolving into fruitful showers, fall in millions of
drops to refresh the Earth, so that what is taken from it without loss, is
restored with immense profit.

The Air is the field of the Winds, an invisible generation of Spirits, whose
life consists in motion. These are of diverse qualities and effects, for the
advantage of the World. Some are turbid, others serene and cheerful; some warm
and refreshing, others cold and sharp; some are placid and gentle, others
furious and stormy; some moist, others dry. They cleanse and purify the Air
that otherwise would corrupt by the settling of vapors, and be destructive to
the lives of Animals. They convey the Clouds for the universal benefit of the
Earth; for if the Clouds had no motion but directly upwards, they must only
fall on those parts from whence they ascended, to the great damage of the
Earth. For moist places that send up plenty of Vapors would be overflowed; and
the highest parts, to which no other Waters arise, would be unfruitful. Now the
Winds are assigned to all the quarters of the World, and as the Reigns are
slack or hard, they guide the Clouds for the advantage of the lower World.

The separation of the Sea from the Land, and containing it within just bounds,
is the effect of Almighty Wisdom and Goodness. For being the lighter Element,
its natural situation is above it. And till separated, 'twas absolutely useless
as to habitation or fruitfulness. It Is now the convenient seat of terrestrial
Animals, and supplies their Provisions. And the Sea is fit for Navigation,
whereby the most distant Regions maintain Commerce for their mutual help and
comfort.

The Rivers dispersed through the veins of the Earth, preserve its beauty, and
make it fruitful. They are always in motion, to prevent corrupting, and to
visit several parts, that the labor of cultivating may not be in vain. And
that these Waters may not fail, the innumerable branches spread through the
Earth, at last unite in the main body of the Sea. What they pour into it,
through secret channels they derive from it, by a natural perpetual circulation,
not to be imitated by Art. In this we have a clear proof of the Wisdom and
Goodness of the Creator.

That the Earth is not an equal Globe, but some parts are raised into Hills and
Mountains, others sunk into deep Valleys; some are immense Plains, affects with
various delight, and is useful for excelent ends: not only for the production
of Minerals, of Marble and Stones requisite for Buildings, but for the thriving
of several kinds of Grain and Plants that are necessary for Food or Ne sylvae
quidem honidiorque naturae facies Medicinis caret, sacra il a parente rerum
omnium, nusquam non remedia disponente homini, ut Medicina fieret ipsa
solitudo. Plin.
Medicine: for some love the Shade, others the Sun; some flourish best on Rocks
and Precipices, others in low moist places; some delight in Hills, others in
Plains. Thus by the unequal surface of the Earth, is caused a convenient
temperature of Air and Soil for its productions.

Add further, The Wisdom of the Creator is discovered by observing the league
of the Elements from whence all mixed bodies arise. Of how different qualities
are Earth, Water, Air, Fire? yet all combine together without the destruction
of their enmity, that is as necessary to preserve nature as their friendship.
Can there be imagined a greater discord in the parts of the Elementary World,
and a greater concord in the whole? To reduce them to such an aequilibrium that
all their operations promote the same end, proves that there is a Mind of the
highest Wisdom, that has an absolute Dominion over all things, and tempers them
accordingly.

If we come to Plants and Flowers, Who divided their kinds, and formed them in
that beautiful order? who painted and perfumed them? how does the same Water
dye them with various Colors, the Scarlet, the Purple, the Carnation? what
causes the sweet Odors that breath from them with an insensible subtilty, and
diffuse in the Air for our delight? from whence proceed their different
virtues? These admirable works of Nature exceed the Est igitur id quo illa
conficiuntur, homine melius. Id autem quid potius dixerimquam Deum? Tull. de
not. deor.
imitation and comprehension of Man. It Is clear therefore they proceed from a
Cause that excels him in Wisdom and Power. That some Plants of excellent virtue
are full of prickles in their stock and leaves, to protect them from Beasts
that would root them up, or trample on them, an His muniendo aculeis, telisque
armando, remediis, ut tuta and salva sint. Ita hoc quoque quod in iis odimus,
hominum causa excogitatum est. Plin. l. 22.
Atheist acknowledged to be the effect of Providence. The same Wisdom preserves
the Seed in the Root under the flower, and prepares the numerous Leaves of
Trees, not only for a shadow to refresh living creatures, but to secure their
Fruits from the injuries of the weather. Therefore in the Spring they shoot
forth always before the fruits are formed. And tender delicate fruits are
covered with broader and thicker leaves than others of a firmer substance. In
Winter they cast their leaves, are naked and dry, the vital sap retiring to the
root, as if careless of dying in the members to preserve life in the heart,
that in the returning Spring diffuses new heat and spirits, the cause of their
flourishing and fruitfulness. The season of Fruits is another indication of
Providence. In Summer we have the cool and moist to refresh our heats, in
Autumn the durable to be preserved when the Earth produces none.

If we observe the lower rank of Animals, their kinds, shapes, properties, it is
evident that all are the Copies of a designing Mind, the effects of a skilful
Hand. Some of them are fierce, others familiar; some are servile, others free;
some crafty, others simple, and all framed conveniently to their Natures. How
incongruous were it for the Soul of a Lion to dwell in the body of a Sheep, or
that of a Hare to animate the body of a Cow? It would require a volume to
describe their different shapes, and fitness to their particular natures.
Besides, creatures merely* sensitive are acted so regularly to preserve
themselves and their kind, that the reason of a superior Agent Quid est in his
in quo non naturae ratio intelligentis appareat? Tull.
shines in all their actions. They no sooner come into the World but know their
enemies, and either by Strength or Art secure themselves. They are instructed
to swim, to fly, to run, to leap. They understand their fit nourishment, and
remedies proper for their Diseases. Who infused into the Birds the art to build
their nests, the love to cherish their young? How are the Bees instructed to
frame their Honycombs without Quis non stupeat hoc fieri posse sine manibus?
unlla interveniente doctrina hanc artem nasci.
hands, and in the dark, and of such a figure that among all other of equal
compass and filling up the same space, is most capacious? The consideration of
their Art and Industry, their political Government and Providence, and other
miraculous qualities, so astonished some great Wits, that they attributed
something divine Quid non Divinum habent nisi quod moriuntur? Quintil. Virgil.
to them.

Esse Apibus partem divinae mentis, and haustus
Aetherios dixere --
-- some there are maintain That Bees derived from a Celestial strain, And
Heavenly race.

What moves the Swallows upon the approach of Winter to fly to a more temperate
Clime, as if they understood the Celestial Signs, the Influences of the Stars,
and the Changes of the Seasons? From whence comes the foresight of the Ants to
provide in Summer for Winter? their economy fervor, their discretion in
assisting one another, as if knowing that every one labored for all, and where
the benefit is common the labor must be common; their care to fortify their
receptacles with a banck of Earth that in great rains, it may not be
overflowed, have made them the fit emblems of prudent diligence.

This is excellently described by Virgil.

Ac veluti ingentem formicae farris acervum,
Cum populant, Hyenis memores, tectoque reponunt,
It nigrum campis agmen, praedamque per herbas
Convectant call angusto, pars grandia trudunt
Obnixa frumenta humeris, pars agmima cogunt,
Castigantque moras. Opere omnis semita fervet.
So when the Winter-fearing Ants invade
Some heaps of Corn the Husbandman had made;
The sable Army marches, and with Prey
Laden return, pressing the Leafy-way;
Some help the weaker, and their shoulders lend;
Others the Order of the March attend,
Bring up the Troops, and punish all delay.
How could they propound such ends, and devise means proper to obtain them?
It Is evident from their constant and regular actings, that an Understanding
above man's, who often fails in his designs, signs, impressed their unerring
instincts, and directs their motions.

CHAP. III. Chap. III.

The Body of Man formed with perfect design for Beauty and Usefulness. A short
description of its parts. The fabric of the Eye and Hand admirably discovers
the Wisdom of the Maker. The erect stature of the Body fitted for the rational
Soul. Man by speech is fitted for society. How the affections are discovered in
the Countenance. The distinction of Persons by the face how necessary. The
reasonable Soul the image of a wise and voluntary Agent.

I Will now briefly consider Man, with respect to both the parts of his
compounded nature, wherein are very clear evidences of a wise Maker.

The Body is the most artificial of all perishing things in the World. It Is
justly called the storehouse of proportions. It Is equally impossible to add any
thing but what is superfluous, or to take aaway any thing but what is
necessary. How many internal parts diverse in their qualities and figures, are
disposed with that providence, that all operate according to their proper
Natures, and not one can be, I do not say better, but tolerably in any other
place, as well for its special as the common benefit? All are so justly
ordered, with that mutual dependence as to their being and operations, that
none can be without the whole, nor the whole without it. So that if with
attentive Eye we consider this, it might seem that in making the Body the
design was only respecting convenience and profit: But if we turn our thoughts
from that which is within this unparalled Piece, and regard the various forms
and structure of the outward parts, the graceful order that adorns them, we
might imagine that the Maker only designed its regular visible beauty. Platonis
Oratione verbum aliquod demas, de elegantia detraxerit, si ex Lysia de
sententia.
As Phavorinus comparing the Writings of two famous Orators, observed, that if
one word be taken from a sentence of Plato, you spoiled the elegance, if from
Lycias, the sense. So the taking away the least considerable part from the
Body, spoils its comeliness, or usefulness. Arist. Gal. (...). Gal. de ^ae. form.
Two great Philosophers have left excellent Discourses of the parts of the
Body, justly esteemed among their most noble works. Galen after an exquisit
observation of the Symetry of this Fabric, challenged the Epicureans, to find
but one of all the numerous parts that compose it, the least Vein or Fiber,
that was not serviceable for its proper end, or might be better if changed in
its form, temperature or place, and he would embrace their opinion, that Chance
was the Author of it. And for this reason he says, that by describing the use
of the parts, he composed a true Hymn in praise of the wise Maker.

What knowledge is requisite to describe all that is wonderful in it? the
contempering the differing humors in just weight and measure, the inviolable
correspondence established between all the parts for the performance of natural,
vital and animal operations? To touch upon a few things. The Stomach that by an
unknown virtue prepares the nourishment, the Heart and Liver the two Seas of
blood; the one more gross, the other more refined and spirituous; the Veins and
Arteries their inseparable companions, that diffuse themselves into innumerable
rivolets, and convey the blood and spirit of Life; the Nerves the secret
channels, that from the Brain derive the spirits of sense and motion; the
Muscles that give it various motions; the fleshy parts of different substance
and quality according to their various Offices; the Membrans in that diversity,
some finer, some thicker weaved according to the quality of the part they
cover; the inward fat that preserves the warm Bowels from drying up; the Marrow
wherewith the instruments of motion are oiled and made nimble and expedite; the
Bones that support the building of such different forms, proportions,
qualities, and so fitly joined: these are a full conviction that a Divine Mind
contrived it, a Divine Hand made and fashioned it.

I will more particularly consider the curious fabric of the Eye and Hand. The
Eye is a work of such incomparable Artifice, that who ever understands it, has
a sufficient proof of his Skill that formed it. This is most evident by
dissecting it, and representing the parts separate one from another, and after
reuniting them, and thereby discovering the Causes of the whole Composure, and
of the Offices proper to every part.

That that may be understood without seeing it, is that there is no member in
the whole Body composed of more parts, nor more different, nor ordered with
more exact wisdom between themselves in one frame. Their situation is so
regular and necessary, that if any of them be never so little displac't, the
Eye is no more an Eye. It includes three Humors that are transparant, and of
different thickness, the one resembling Water, the other Glass, the other
Crystal, and from them borrow their names: to vary the place, the distance,
the less or greater thickness, the figure that is peculiar to each of them
would render the Eye altogether useless for seeing: for the refractions of the
light that enters through the pupil would be disordered; and the rays not be
united in a point, to paint in the Retina, the images of visible objects, which
is the last disposition from whence the act of seeing follows. Several tunicles
involve it, one of which is perforated (as much as the little Circle in the
middle that is called the pupil) to give open passage to the images flowing
from their objects. The Muscles by their agency raise or cast down, turn or fix
it. The Nerves fastened to the Brain, convey a supply of spirits for the sight,
and transmit the representation of all visible objects without confusion to the
internal senses.

If we consider the Hand by the most exact rule of proportion, it is evident
that its substance and shape are most conducive to beauty and service. If the
Fingers were not divided, and separately moveable, but joined together with one
continued skin, how uncomely, how unuseful would it be? Of an hundred effects
ninety would be lost. All that require variety of motion, subtilty of art, or
strength could not be performed. But the Fingers being disjoined, it is fit to
do whatever the mind designs, or necessity requires. It works entirely, or in
parts, it brandishes a Sword, or manages a Pen, (...). Arist. lib. 4. de part
Animal. c. 10.
strikes on the Anvil with a Hammer, or uses a delicate File, rows in the
Water, or touches a Lute. It Is fit for all things, adapting it self to the
greatest and least, all which advantages the Philosopher expresses with
admirable brevity, In divisione manus componendi facultas est, in Compositione
dividendi non esset. Suppose the Fingers were of equal length and bigness,
great inconveniences would follow. And in this the Divine Wisdom is eminent,
that what at first sight seems to be of no consequence, yet is absolutely
necessary, not only for all the regular, but for most works of the Hand. If the
Fingers were extended to the same measure, it were able to do nothing but what
the four longest can. And how uncomely would such a figured hand appear? when
that beauty is lost, that springs from variety in things alike. Besides, how
unprofitable a part were the Hand if the Fingers had within one entire bone,
not flexible to grasp as occasion requires? Or if a fleshy substance only, how
weak and unapt for service? what strength or firmness for labor? even the
Nails are not superfluous; besides their gracefulness, they give force and
sense to the points of the Fingers. If one be lost, the feeling in that extreme
part is very much lessened, that is so necessary for the discerning of things.

To these I shall add two other considerations that discover perfect wisdom in
the framing the humane Body.

1. Its structure is very different from that of Brutes, whereby it is a fit
instrument of the rational Soul. The Brutes being merely terrestrial Animals,
are perpetually grovelling and poring downwards, seeking no more than their
food. They have no commerce with the Heavens, but so far as it serves them for
the Earth, as being only born for their Bellies. But in Man the posture of his
Body interprets that of his Soul. Quid ergo before Argumentum and Mundum
hominis, and hominem sui, causa Deum fecisse quam quod ex omnibus animantibus
solus, ita formatus est, ut oculi ejus ad coelum directi, facies ad Deum
spectans sit? Vt videatur hominem Deus quasi porrecta manu allevatum ex humo ad
contemplationem sui excitasse. Lactant.
The stature is straight and raised, expressive of his dominion over the
Creatures made for his use. The Head is over all the less noble parts, and the
Eyes so placed that the mind may look out at those windows to discover the
World in its various parts, to contemplate the Heavens its native Seat, and be
instructed and excited to admire and love the divine Maker.

2. If we consider Man complexly as joined with society, to which he is
naturally inclined, he is so formed as to give or receive assistance for his
preservation and comfort. The Tongue his peculiar glory, the interpreter of the
Thoughts, and reconciler of the Affections, maintains this happy commerce.
Besides, the Face makes known our inward motions to others. Love, hatred,
desire, dislike, joy, grief, confidence, despair, courage, cowardice,
admiration, contempt, pride, modesty, cruelty, compassion, and all the rest of
the Affections are discovered by their proper Aspects. By a sudden change of
the countenance are manifested the deepest sorrow, the highest joy. As the face
of the Heavens veiled with Clouds by the breaking forth of the Sun is presently
cleard up. And (which is above the imitation of Art) different affections are
represented in a more or less expressive appearance according to their stronger
or remisser degrees. Timanthes the famous Painter, wisely drew a vail over
Agamemnons Face present at the sacrifice of his innocent Daughter; despairing
to express and accord his several Passions, the tenderness of a Father, with
the Majesty of a King and the generosity of the Leader of an Army. This way of
discovery has a more universal use then words. The ministry of the Tongue is
only useful to those that understand our Language, but the Face, though silent,
speaks to the Eye. The Countenance is a Crystal wherein the thoughts and
affections otherwise invisible appear, and is a natural sign known to all. For
this manner of expression is not by the common agreement of Men as Signs
absolutely free or mixed, but from the institution of Nature, that always chooses
what is most proper to its end, being guided by a superior directour according
to the rules of perfect Wisdom. Moreover, the innumerable different characters
in the Faces of Men to discern every one, is the counsel of most wise
Providence for the universal benefit of the World. For take away this
distinction, and all the bands of Laws, of Commerce, of Friendship are
dissolved. If we could not by singular inseparable lineaments distinguish the
innocent from the guilty, a Brother from a Stranger, the worthy from the
unworthy, all truth in Judgments, sincerity in Relations, distinction of
Merits, security in Trade would be destroyed. In short, humane societies cannot
be preserved without union and distinction? the one prevents division, the
other confusion. Union is maintained by speech and other signs of the inward
dispositions of the Heart; distinction is caused by the variety of
countenances. And it is considerable that so few parts composing it, and in so
small a compass, and always in the same situation, yet there is such a
diversity of figures as of faces in the World. Inter caetera propter quae
mirabile divini artificis ingenium est, hoc quoque existimo, quod in tauta
copia rerum, nusquam in idem recidit; etiam quae similia videntur, cum
contuleris diversa sint.
Seneca propounds this as a spectacle worthy of admiration, though the Stoical
pride, falsely esteemed greatness of mind, would scarce admire Miracles.

And as the frame of Man's Body, so much more the rational Soul, his eminent
prerogative above all sensible beings, discovers the Deity. The superior
faculties, the Understanding and Will, whereby he makes a judgment and choice
of things in order to his happiness, declare it to be the living image and
glory of a most Wise and voluntary Agent. The admirable composition of two
things so disproportioned, a spiritual and material substance in the humane
nature, is an argument of his omnipotent skill who united them in a manner
inconceiveable to us. But the nature, qualities, and operations of the Soul,
shall be more distinctly considered afterward. And by this short account of
some parts of the World, we may sufficiently discover the perfections of the
Maker. We must pluck out our Eyes, and exstinguish common sense, not to see
infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness shining in them, the proper marks of the
Deity.

CHAP. IV. Chap. IV*

The vanity of Epicurus's Opinion of the Worlds original discovered, from the
visible order in all the parts of it. Chance produces no regular effects. The
constant natural course of things in the world proves that it is not framed nor
conducted by uncertain Chance. The World was not caused by the necessity of
nature. In the search of Causes the mind cannot rest till it comes to the
first. Second Causes are sustained and directed in all their workings by the
first. The Creator though invisible in his Essence, is visible in his effects.

BEfore I proceed to the other Head of Arguments, I will briefly show the
vanity of those Opinions that attribute the production of the World to Chance,
or to the sole necessity of Nature.

'Twas the extravagant fancy of Democritus, and Epicurus after him, that the
original of the World was from the fortuitous encountering of Atoms, that were
in perpetual motion in an immense space, till at last a sufficient number met
in such a conjunction as formed it in this order. It Is strange to amazement,
how so wild an Opinion, never to be reconciled with Reason, could find
entertainment. Yet he left a numerous School, many followers tenacious of his
Doctrine, the heirs of his Frenzy. It Is very easy to show the vanity of this
conceit, that supposes all, and proves nothing.

That these particles of matter should thus meet together, it is necessary they
move: now from whence is the principle of their motion, Cum in rerum natura duo
sint quaerenda, unum quae materia sit ex qua quaeque res efficiatur, alterum
quae vis sit quae quidque efficiat, de materia disseruerunt Epicuraei vim and
causan efficientem reliquerunt. Tul. de fin. lib. 1.
from an internal form, or an external Agent? If they will be ingenuous and
speak true, they must answer thus, from whence soever they have it, they have
it: for if they did not move, their Opinion cannot proceed a step further. But
supposing their motion to be natural, what powerful Cause made them rest? how
are they so firmly united? have they Hooks that fasten, or Birdlime or Pitch or
any glutinous matter, that by touching they cleave so fast together? They must
grant something like this, otherwise they cannot unite and compound, and then
the Epicurean Opinion is presently dissipated. Supposing them triangular,
circular, square, or of any other regular or irregular figure, yet they can
make no other compound then a mass of Sand, in which the several grains touch
without firm union. So that it is very evident whether we suppose motion or rest
to be originally in the nature of matter, there must be a powerful Efficient to
cause the contrary. Besides, by what art did so many meet and no more, and of
such a figure and no other, and in that Si sensu carent nec coire tam disposite
possint, quia non potest quicquam rationale perficere nisi ratio. Lactant.
just order as to form the World, a work so exact that by the most exquisite
skill it cannot be made better. Add further; how could these minute Bodies
without sense, by motion produce it? this is to assert that a Cause may act
above the degree of its power.

Can we then rationally conceive that a confused rout of Atoms of diverse
natures, and some so distant from others, should meet in such a fortunate
manner, as to form an entire World, so vast in the bigness, so distinct in the
order, so united in the great diversities of natures, so regular in the variety
of changes, so beautiful in the whole composure, though it were granted, that
one of their possible conjunctions in some part of Eternity were that we see at
present? Could such a strict confederacy of the parts of the Universe result
from an accidental agreement of contrary principles? It Is so evident by the
universal experience of Men, that regular Effects are caused by the skill of a
designing Agent, that works for an end, that upon the sight of any such
effects, there is not the least shadow of a suspicion in the mind, that it
proceeded from blind and counselless Chance. If we should hear one make a plea
for a Cause, with such reasons as are most proper to convince and persuade his
Judges to decide for him, can we doubt whether he understands what he speaks,
or casually moves the organs of speech? And yet if he did move them by Chance,
one of the casual motions equally possible with any other, would be that he
performed at present. If a thousand brass Wheels were thrown on a heap, would
six or eight meet so fitly, as by their conjunction to organize a Clock, that
should distinguish the hours? or, is a skilful hand requisite to join them, and
direct their motion? And did the Planets, those vast bodies, by Chance ascend
to the upper part of the World, and join in that order, as to measure the time
exactly for so many past Ages? Who ever saw a dead Statue formed in the veins
of Marble, or a well proportioned Palace, with all Rooms of convenience and
state, arise out of a Quarry of Stones, without a Sculptor to fashion the one,
and an Architect to frame the other? Yet Marble and Stones are more disposed to
make a Statue, or a Building, that are the materials of them, and only require
skill and workmanship to give them form, than Atoms mixed together are to make
the World. Indeed Fama est, and habuisse fertur, non art, sed sponte naturae,
ita discurrentibus maculis, ut musis quoque singulis sua redderentur insignia.
Pliny faintly tells a story of a fabulous Ring of Pyrrhus, in which an Agat
was set, distinctly representing not by Art, but pure hazard, Apollo with his
Harp in the midst of the nine Muses. The first Reporter was defective, that he
did not oblige us to believe, that the sound of his Harp was heard in consort
with the Muses. It would have been a fine Miracle, and the belief as easy that
a Stone might be a Musician, as a Painter.

Now if the effects of Art are not without an Artificer, can the immense
Fabric of the World be other than the work of a most perfect Understanding?
Who fixed the foundations of the Earth? who laid the beautiful Pavement we tread
on? who divided and adorned the Chambers of the Spheres? who opened the Windows
to the light in the East? who encompassed it with the immense vault of the
starry Heaven hanging in the Air, and supporting it self? Could artless Chance
build it? No man unless totally deserted of Reason can possibly have such a
fancy. Let Reason judge how could the World be otherwise then it is, supposing it
framed by a designing Cause? all things are disposed divinely, that is, by
perfect Wisdom, as public necessity and ornament require. What the Psalmist
observes concerning the Heavens, is equally true of all the other parts of
Nature, Their line is gone out, to signify the exactness of their proportion.
If this be the effect of Chance, what is the product of Design? Can Reason
distinguish between things artificial, wherein the felicity of Invention
appears, and things rude not done by rules in the works of the Hands, and can
it not discover the manifest prints of Wisdom in the order of the Universe? How
much more Skill is evident in the frame of the World than in all the effects of
humane Art, so much the less folly would it be to attribute the most curious
works of Art, than the production of the World to Chance.

Add further; The established order of the parts of the World is an argument
that excludes all doubt, that it is governed and was at first framed by unerring
Wisdom. For, if they were united by Chance, would they continue in the same
manner one day? Is it not most likely that one of the innumerable possible
combinations should succeed, different from the same tenor of things that is
but one? especially if we consider that the parts of the World are never at
rest: The Heavens, the Elements, mixed bodies are in perpetual motion. If Chance
ruled, is it within the confines of probability, that the Sun that runs ten or
twelve thousand Leagues every day, should be now in the same part of the
Heavens, where it was in former years in such a day, when there are so many
other places wherein by Chance it might wander? Would the Stars keep a
perpetual course regularly in such appearing irregularities? Nec quicquam est
tanta magis mirabilemole,
Quam ratio, and certis quod legibus omnia parent;
Nusquam turba nocet nihil illis partibus errat.
Manil. lib. 1. Astrom. Or would the sowing of Seed in the Earth certainly
produce such a determinate sort of Grain? for the other possible mixtures are
so vastly numerous, that it would be ten thousand to one but some other thing
should spring up than what does. According to this Hypothesis, it would be
greater folly to believe that the natural course of things should be the same
this Year as in former times, than to assert that a Gamester should to day
throw the Dice in the same order, and with the same points uppermost as he did
yesterday. It Is evident therefore, that the Epicurean Doctrine having not the
least shadow of Reason, had never been received with applause but as it is
joined with impiety.

2. Some attribute the rise and course of things in the World to the sole
necessity of Nature. To this it may be replied.

1. It Is true, there is an evident connection of Causes and Effects in the
Celestial and Elementary World, whereby times and seasons are continued, and
the succession of mutable things is preserved, so that Nature always consuming,
remains entire. Though all vegetive and sensitive beings dye, yet the species
are immortal. For the living are brought forth to succeed in the place of the
dead. But the inquiring mind cannot rest here: for it is impossible to conceive
a train of Effects one caused by another, without ascending to the first
Efficient that is not an Effect. For nothing can act before it exists. The
order of Causes requires that we ascend to the Supreme, which derives being and
virtue to all the intermediate. Thus Nature produces things from seminal
Causes, that depend on things already in being. The Seed of Flowers and Trees
suppose the Fruits of the Earth before growing, but the first Tree could not be
so produced. To fancy an infinite succession of Causes depending one upon
another, without arriving to a first, can only fall into the thoughts of a
disordered mind. How came this Horse, that Lion in Nature? It Is by generation
from another, and that from another, and so infinitely. How came this Man into
the World? It Is because he was begotten by such a Father, and he by another,
and so infinitely. Thus Atheism that rejects one truly Infinite Cause, is
obliged to admit an Infinity in all things, an Incomprehensibility in all
things. It Is therefore evident the efficient principles in Nature are from the
sole power of the first and independent cause. They could not proceed from
themselves; and that a most wise and powerful Being is the original of all
things is as evident. Is it conceivable that the insensible Mass that is called
Matter, should have had an eternal being without original? whereas there is not
the least imaginable repugnance in the Attributes of the first and highest
Being, in whom all those Perfections concur, which, as proper to the Deity, are
formed in the mind in the idea of it, as his spiritual Nature, Eternity,
Immensity, Wisdom, Omnipotence, etc. of which it is equally true, that no one
either absolutely or relatively considered, involve a contradiction, that make
it impossible for the Supreme Being to possess it; Is it not perfectly
inconsistent to attribute to Matter the lowest and most contemptible of all
Beings, the highest and most noble Perfection, an Independent Existence? One
may assert it in words, but not seriously without the utter deserting of
Reason. Man incomparably excels this Matter, he understands it, and that
understands not him, yet he has a derived being in time. It Is therefore
necessary that that should have some cause of its being. But supposing the self
subsistence of Matter from Eternity; could the World, full of innumerable
Forms, spring by an Impetus from a dead formless Principle? It Is equally
impossible that a blind Cause casual, or fatal, should give being and order to
the Universe.

Besides, all subordinate Causes are sustained in their Beings and Powers by
fresh influences from the first, and directed in their operations. To attribute
the manifold Effects in the World to Second Causes working in a blind manner,
without an Universal Intellectual Mover, that disposes, tempers, and governs
them, is as unreasonable, as to attribute humane Works to the common
Instruments of Art, without the direction of the Understanding that uses them.
The Hand or Pencil has not skill to do any thing, but as it obeys the Mind,
that gives it the impression of Art, and regulates its Motion. The Earth knows
not the various Fruits that spring from it, nor the Sea its living Productions.
And the Sun, though a more specious, is not a more intelligent and artificial
Agent. Nature under another name is the ordinary Power of God, that by its
intimate concourse with Second-Causes produces and supports things. And it is
one of the considerable Wonders of his Providence, that the stream of perishing
things, always emptying, is always full; there being a supply from the
Fountains of continual Productions, of what is lost in the dead Sea: so that
the World is always the same, and always new.

And from what has been argued, we may judge how unreasonable it is to doubt
whether there be a Principle in Nature of excellent Wisdom, because not seen
in his own Essence: for if Reason compel us to acknowledge that the works of Art
wrought by manual Instruments, proceed from an unseen mind that directed their
motions according to the idea framd in it self, we ought more strongly to
conclude there is a (...). Gal. de Opifice hominis.
Divine Mind though invisible to mortal eyes, that contrived at first, and with
knowledge performs all the works of Nature. To deny the Existence of a Being not
subjected to our outward Senses, is equally of no force in both the instances.
By the same Reason St. Austin confounds the Atheist objecting that he could not
see the Deity. To whom he propounds this question, That since his Body was only
visible, and not his Soul, why should it not be buried? And upon the reply,
That the Vnde scio quia vivis, cujus animam non video? Vnde scio? Respondebis,
quia loquor, quia ambulo, quia operor. Stulte ex operibus corporis agnoscis
viventem, ex operibus creaturae non agnoscis creatorem?
quickening presence of the Soul was evident in the actions of Life performed by
the Body; he truly infers, if a vital principle imperceptible in its self is
discovered by vital actions, the Deity, though by the perfection of his Nature
undiscernable to our senses, is clearly seen by the light of his effects. And
those who are wilfully blind, if God should by any new sensible effects make a
discovery of himself, yet would remain inconvincible: For the arguments of his
presence from extraordinary effects, are liable to the same exceptions
pretended against the ordinary.

CHAP. V. Chap. V.

The beginning of the World proved from the uninterrupted tradition of it
through all ages. The invention of Arts, and bringing them to perfection, an
argument of the Worlds beginning. The weakness of that fancy that the World is
in a perpetual Circulation from Infancy to Youth, and to full Age, and a
decrepit state and back again, so that Arts are lost and recovered in that
change. The consent of Nations a clear Argument that there is a God. The
impressions of Nature are infallible. That the most Men are practical Atheists;
that some doubt and deny God in words, is of no force to disprove his
Existence. There are no absolute Atheists. Nature in extremities has an
irresistible force, and compels the most obdurate to acknowledge the Deity.

I Shall now come to the second head of Arguments for the existence of the
Deity, drawn from the proofs of the Worlds beginning; from whence it follows
that an Eternal intellectual Cause gave it being according to his pleasure. For
it implys an exquisit contradiction that any thing should begin to exist by its
own power. What ever is temporal, was made by a Superior Eternal Power, that
drew it from pure nothing. And the other consequence is as strong, that the
Cause is an intellectual Being that produced it according to his Will. For
supposing a Cause to be entirely the same, and not to produce an effect that
afterward it produces, without any preceding change, it is evident that it
operates not by necessity of Nature, but voluntarily, and therefore with
understanding: As a Man who speaks, that before was silent, according to the
liberty of his will.

Now of the Worlds beginning there is a general tradition derived down through
the uninterrupted course of so many Ages to us. It Is true, the Philosophers
renewed the confusion of Tongues, that disunited the Builders of Babel, in
their account of the Architecture of the World; Yet they generally agreed 'twas
made by a most wise Agent. And this Doctrine is so agreeable to Reason, that
you may as soon bridle the current of Nilus, and make it return to its
Fountain, as suspend the persuasion of it in the minds of Men, or make it turn
back as false. Now what account can be given of this uncontrollable Opinion?
It Is most rational to conceive that it came from the first Man, (instructed by
his Creator) when the Tradition was easy, the World not being numerous. Add to
this, the rudeness of former Ages, and the simplicity of living, becoming the
new-made World. This account the most ancient Histories give of the rise of
Commonwealths, that the first Nations were a confused chaos, till the soul of
society was infused to regulate them. But that which I shall particularly
insist on as a convincing proof, is this; The invention of many Arts beneficial
to Men, and the bringing them to perfection by degrees. If the World were
without beginning, it would have had no age of childhood and ignorance, but
being always old, and instructed by infinite study and experience, it would
have always known what it successively learnt in the School of the last three
thousand years, since the memorials of profane Histories are transmitted to us.
Some that asserted the Eternity of the World, were sensible of the force of
this Argument, and made a pitiful shift to evade it. They fancied that though
the World had no beginning, yet as Animals proceed by different ages, till they
arrive at extreme and impotent old age; in like manner it happened to the
Earth, not in all its parts at once: for then in that vast succession of Ages,
the World and race of Men had been spent; but sometimes in one part, and after
in another. But with this difference, that whereas Man after decrepit age never
renews his youth, a Country once wasted with age, returns by virtue of the
celestial influences to its former vigor, and is in a perpetual circulation to
new infancy, new youth, and so to old age. And from hence it is, that it learns
again those things that were well known in former ages, the remembrance of
which was entirely lost. But the vanity of this fiction is easily discovered.

1. Is it possible that in such a number of years, of which Memorials remain
before and since this Fiction, that in no part of the World should be seen or
heard of this decrepit age and new childhood, which according to this opinion
has innumerable times happened in the circle of Eternity, sometimes in one,
sometimes in another Province? If we fancy Nature were so changeable according
to the revolution of the Heavens, we may with equal Reason believe, that by
various conjunctions of the Stars, it has and may fall out, that Water should
burn, and Fire cool; that Serpents should be innocent, and Lambs pernicious;
that Flys should live an age, and Eagles but a day.

2. Since it is affirmed that the whole World does not sink into this Oblivion
at once, it must follow that in some vigorous parts the knowledge of Arts still
remained, and from thence should be derived two other parts (that were
ascending from their ignorance) as it is usual in the commerce of distant
Regions. So that it will never fall out that Arts and Sciences once invented
should be totally lost. It Is true, some particular Nation, not by change of
Nature, but humane accidents, may lose the Arts wherein it formerly flourished;
as is eminently visible in the Greek, that is now far more ignorant and
unpolisht then in former ages. But this cannot with any pretense of Reason be
said of the whole World. It Is evident therefore if the World were Eternal, it
had always been most wise and civil, and that its gradual attaining the
knowledge of things of public advantage is a sufficient conviction of its
beginning in time, by the Counsel and Will of an Intellectual Agent.

3. To the still voice of Reason, the loud voice of all Nations accords in
confirming this Truth. The Civil, the Barbarous, those who by their distance
are without the least commerce, and are contrary in a thousand fashions and
customs that depend on the liberty of Men that is mutable, yet Omnes duce
natura eo vehimur, ut Deos esse dicamus. Cic. lib. de not. Deor. Arist. lib. 1.
de Coel. Plat. lib. 10. de Leg. Plut. cont. Cole in fine.
all consent in the acknowledgment of a God, being instructed by Nature that is
always the same, and immutable. It Is as natural to the humane understanding by
considering the frame of the World, to believe there is a God, as it is the
property of the Eye to see the light. The assent to this truth is unforced,
but, without offering extreme violence to the rational faculties, none can
contradict it. Indeed in their conceptions of him, few have the glass of the
mind so clear and even as to represent him aright. Some divide what is
indivisible, and of one make many Gods. Some attribute corporeal parts to a
pure spirit; some figure him in Statues to make the invisible seen; and in
other manner deform him. Yet no error, no ignorance has absolutely defaced the
notion of him. And that no societies of Men are without the belief of a first
Being, superior to all things in the World, and of absolute power over them,
and consequently worthy of supreme Honor from all reasonable Creatures, their
Prayers, Vows, Sacrifices, Solemnities, Oaths, are a visible Testimony. The
force and weight of the Argument is great: for that which is common to the
whole species, and perpetual from its first being through all its duration, is
the Dos animae a primordio. Tertul. Quis quamne est hominumqui non cum istius
principii notione diem primae nativitatis intraverit? cui non sit ingenitum,
non impressum, non insitum, esse Regem and Dominum, caeterorumque quaecunque
sunt moderatorem? Arnob. l. 1.
Impression of Nature, which in its universal Principles either of the
Understanding, or the Will, is never deceived. Thus the inclination to that
good that is convenient to our faculties; the approving as most just to do to
another what we desire in the same circumstances should be done to us, are
natural principles, whose rectitude and verity are so evident, that no Man is
so contumacious as to require a proof of them. If we discredit its authority in
this single instance, that there is a God, we may with equal reason suspect its
testimony in all other things; that the persons we converse with are phantomes,
that the objects that strike our senses are only shadows, that what appears
white is black, that what is felt as cold is hot, that what is evident to all
Men's minds is false, viz. that the whole is greater than a part. In short, the
most rational Discourses would have as little firmness and certainty, as the
incoherent Fancies of one that is distracted, or dreams. We must renounce Sense
and Reason, having no assurance of such things as are clear and manifest, but
the instinct of Nature that determines our assent. Now what account can be
given of the sense of the Deity indelibly stamped on the minds of Men? If there
be no God, from whence comes it that Nature has impressed such a strong belief of
a being not only false but impossible? For if there be no God, it is impossible
there should be. There is no middle between the two Attributes of Being,
necessary and contingent. And that an Eternal Being should now begin to exist,
is a palpable contradiction. We must therefore conclude that the Author of the
Humane Soul has so framed it, that by the free use of its faculties it
necessarily comes to the knowledge of its original. From hence, it is universal
and constant. And can there be a testimony of equal authority, clearness and
sincerity as this of Nature, understood in every Language, and received in
every place; and where it is most simple, it is most the same, and therefore more
convincing.

To elude the force of this Argument there are several weak evasions.

I. That the most Men are practical Atheists, and live without God in the
World; and that some are speculative Atheists, either denying or doubting of
his Existence. But the answer is easy.

1. That Men deny God in their Works, is of no validity to disprove the natural
notion of him; for by this confession we must cancel almost all the Law of
Nature. How many notoriously rebel against the infallible principles of common
Reason? How many dishonor their Parents? Yet there is no Precept more clearly
natural, and acknowledged by the rudest Nations, than the obligation to the
immediate Authors of our lives. How many by fraud or rapine enrich their
Estates, or violate the honor of the Marriage Bed, and do that to others they
would not have done to themselves? But though they contradict the Law of Nature
in their actions, can they abolish it in their hearts? can they make Conscience
dumb, that it shall never reproach their Impieties, because they are deaf to
its voice? It Is as impossible as to transform themselves into another kind of
being, and become Brutes in nature, because they resemble them in their
dispositions and practices.

2. Supposing that some are Atheists in opinion, it does not follow that the
belief of the Deity is not a pure universal Principle of Nature. For by all men
we must understand those in whom the sense of Nature is not perverted. Things
of the clearest certainty have been denied by some. We feel Motion, yet a
Philosopher disputed against it. The Argument is convincing that Snow is white,
because it appears so to all Men's Eyes; tho to the Eye that wants its native
sincerity, and infected with a vicious tincture, it appears of another color.
Now it is certain that Atheism is not produced by generation from the natural
discourses of the Mind, but from the putrefaction and rottenness of Manners.
Those who have lost their Reason in Sensuality, and submit their understandings
to the guidance of their corrupt affections, that is the seeing faculty to the
blind, are most inclined to Atheism. And they can never come to that impious
height without obliterating in the guiltiest manner, the lively characters of
Reason and Humanity. Such are as prodigiously irregular from the true
constitution of the minds of Men in respect of belief, as a (...) Max. Tyr.
Bird without wings would be from the natural composure of the Bodies of all
others, in respect of parts. Monsters cannot dishonor, and are no pattern of
the species. And shall the contradiction of a few bribed by their lusts,
disauthorise the consenting testimony of mankind?

3. There is no absolute Atheist, i. e. of such a firm persuasion that there is
no God, as excludes all doubts and fears of the contrary. It Is true, as a
pretext for their licentiousness, and to give boldness to their fearful
impiety, some obdurate wretches may desperately deny the Supreme Eternal Power,
to whom they are accountable: But no violence can entirely choke this natural
Principal, it has such deep and strong root in the Humane Spirit. The vital
spark will fly in their Faces, notwithstanding all their endeavors to tread it
out. Of this we have convincing evidence from some, who in great troubles have
been compelled to acknowledge God, whom they boldly denied before. I shall
produce two instances. The first is recorded by Aeschilus. That the Persian
Messenger in his Narrative to the King, of the overthrow of his Army by the
Grecians, related that those Gallants who before the Fight in the midst of
their Cups and bravery denied God and Providence as secure of Victory, yet
afterward when furiously pursued by their Enemies, they came to the River
Strymon, that was frozen and began to thaw, then upon their knees they
mournfully implored the favor of God, that the Ice might hold and give them
safe passage over from the pursuers. Nature in extremities has irresistible
workings, and the inbred notions of the Deity, though long suppressed by
imperious lusts, will then rise up in Men's Souls. The other instance is of Bion
the Philosopher, a declared Atheist, till struck with a mortal Disease, and
then, as a false Witness on the Rack, confessed the truth, and addressed himself by
Prayers and Vows to God for his recovery. Egregious folly, as the (...) Laert.
in Bion
Historian observes, to think that God would be bribed with his gifts, and was
or was not according to his fancy. And thus it happens to many like him. As a
Lamp near expiring shines more clearly, so Conscience that burned dimly for a
time, gives a dying blaze, and discovers him who is alone able to save or to
destroy. But how just were it to deal with them as Sext. Empir. l. 1.
Herofilus with Diodorus Cronus, a wrangler that vexed the Philosophers, by
urging a captious Argument, against the possibility of Motion. For thus he
argued: A Stone, or what ever else, in moving it self, is either where it is,
or where it is not; if where it is, it moves not; if where it is not, then it
will be in any place, but where it is. While this disputing humor continued,
one day he fell, and displac't his shoulder. And sends in haste for Herofilus,
of excellent skill in Surgery. But he desirous first to cure his Brain, and
then his Shoulder, told him that his Art was needless in that case: for
according to your own opinion, this Bone in the dislocation either was where it
was, or where it was not, and to assert either, makes the displacing of it
equally impossible. Therefore 'twas in vain to reduce it to the place from
whence it was never parted. And thus he kept him roaring out with pain and rage
till he declared himself convinced of the vanity of his irrefutable Argument.
Now if, according to the vanity of Atheists, there is no God, why do they
invoke him in their adversities? If there be, why do they deny him in their
prosperity? there can no other Reason be assigned but this, that in the state
of health their minds are dispersed, and clouded with blind folly, in sickness
they are serious and recover the judgment of Nature. As it is ordinary with
distracted persons, that in the approaches of Death their Reason returns:
because the Brain distempered by an excess of heat, when the Spirits are wasted
at the last, is reduced to a convenient temper.

CHAP. VI. CHAP. VI.

The Belief of the Deity no Politic Invention. The asserting that it is
necessary to preserve States in order, is a strong proof of its truth. No
History intimates when this belief was introduced into the World. The
continuance of it, argues that its rise was not from a Civil Decree. Princes
themselves are under the fears of the Deity. The multitude of false Gods does
not prejudice the natural notion of one true God. Idolatry was not universal.
The Worship of the only true God is preserved where Idolatry is abolished.

II. It Is objected, that the belief of the Deity was at first introduced by the
special invention of some in power to preserve the civil Sat; and that
Religion is only a politic curb to restrain the wild exorbitance and
disorders of the multitude. This admits of an easy refutation.

1. Those corrupted minds that from pride or sensuality presumed to exempt Men
from the Tribunal of Heaven, yet affirmed that a City might rather be preserved
without Fire and Water, the most necessary Elements, than without the religious
belief of a God. Egregious lovers of mankind! and therefore worthy of esteem
and credit, since they divulge that Doctrine, that if believed, the World must
fall into dreadful confusion by their own acknowledgment. But such is the
Divine force of Truth, that its enemies are constrained to give Testimony to
it; For is it conceiveable that an error not in a light question, but in the
Supreme Object of the Mind, should be the root of all the Virtues that support
the Civil State, and Truth if discovered should have a fatal consequence on
Government, subvert all Societies, and expose them to the greatest dangers? How
can they reconcile this with their declared principle, that the natural end of
Man is the knowledge of Truth? It were less strange that the constant feeding
on deadly Poison, should be requisite to preserve the natural life in health and
vigor, and that the most proper food should be pernicious to it. So that the
objection if rightly considered will confirm the Religious belief of a Deity.
Indeed it is evident that all Civil Powers suppose the notion of a God to be an
inseparable property of humane nature, and thereby make their authority sacred
in the esteem of the People, as derived from the Universal Monarch.

2. They can give no account of what they so boldly assert. What Historian ever
recorded, that in such an age, such a Prince introduced the belief of a Deity
to make obedience to his Law's, to be a point of Religion. It Is true,
Politicians have sometimes used artifice and deceit to accomplish their ends.
Lycurgus pretended the direction of Apollo, and Numa of the Nymph Egeria, to
recommend their Laws to the People. Scipio and Sertorious made some other God
to be of their Council of War, to encourage their Soldiers in dangerous
interprises. But this mask only deceived the ignorant. The more intelligent
discerned the finess of their politic contrivance.

3. Is it conceiveable that the belief of the Deity, if its original were from
a civil decree, should remain in force so long in the World? False opinions in
Philosophy, adorned with great eloquence by the inventors, and zealously
defended for a time by their followers, though opposite to no Man's profit or
pleasure, yet have lost their credit by further inquiries. And if the notion of
a God were Non tam stabilis opinio perm ineret, nec confirmaretur diuturnitate
temporis, nec una cum saeculi aetatibus hominumque invererare potuisset. Cic.
sophisticate Gold, though authorized with the Royal stamp, could it have
endured the Touchstone, and the Fire for so many ages without discovery? could
it have past the test of so many searching Wits, that never had a share in
Government? can we rationally suppose that in such a succession of time no
discontented person, when the yoke of Government was uneasy, should disclose
the arts of affrightment, and release the People from imaginary terrors, that
with courage they might resume their liberty? It Is a true observation, no
single person can deceive all, nor be deceived by all. Now if there be no God,
one person has deceived all by introducing the general belief of a God into the
World, and every one is deceived by all, believing so from the Universal
Authority of Mankind.

4. The greatest Princes are under the awful impressions of the Deity. Those
raised to the highest Thrones are not free from inward anxieties, when the
guilty Conscience cites them before his dreadful Tribunal. Of this we have
their unfeigned Declarations in the times of their distress. Now it is
unconceivable they would voluntarily preplex themselves with a fancy of their
own creating, and dread that as a real Being, which they know to be feigned.
This pretense therefore cannot without an open defiance of Reason be alleged.

3. It Is objected that the consent of mankind in the acknowledgment of a God is
no full conviction of his existence, because then we must believe the false
Gods that were adored in the World.

1. The multitude of Idols created by superstitious fancies is a strong
presumption that there is a true God. For all Falsehood is supported by some
Truth, Deceit is made credible by resemblance. The Heathen Worship though
directed amiss, yet proves that a religious inclination is sound in its
original, and has a real object to which it tends, otherwise Idolatry the
corruption of it had not found such a facility and disposition in Men to
receive it.

2. Idolatry has not been universal in all Ages and Nations. The first causes
of it and motives that preserved it are evident. The Nation of the Jews was
freed from this general Contagion: for we may as rationally argue from their
own Histories concerning their belief and practice, as from the Histories of
other Nations. And when a veil of darkness was cast over the Heathen World,
some were inlight'ned by true Reason to see the folly of the superstitious
vulgar that stood in awe of their own imaginations. The Philosophers privately
condemned what in a guilty compliance with the Laws of State they publicly
owned. Nay even the lowest and dullest among the Gentiles generally
acknowledged one Supreme God and Lord of all inferior Deities. As Tertullian
observes, in their great distresses, guided by the internal instructions of
Nature, they invoked God, not the Gods, to their help.

3. That the belief of one God is a pure emanation from the light of Nature is
evident, in that since the extinction of Idolatry, not a spark remaining in
many parts of the World, it is still preserved in its vigor and luster in the
breasts of Men. Since the plurality of Gods have been degraded of their Honor,
and their Worships chased out of many Countries, and the ideas of various
ancient superstitions are lost, the only true God is served with more solemn
veneration. Time, the wise discerner of Truth from Falsehood, abolishes the
fictions of fancy, but confirms the uncorrupted sentiments of Nature.

To conclude this Discourse; what rational doubt can remain after so strong a
witness of the Deity, External from the Universe, Internal from the frame of
the humane Soul? If we look through the whole compass of natural Beings, there
is not one separately taken, but has some signature of wisdom upon it. As a
beam of light passing through a chink in Wall of what figure soever, always
forms a circle on the place where it is reflected, and by that describes the
image of its original, the Sun. Thus God in every one of his Works represents
himself tanquam Solis radio scriptum. But the union of all the parts by such
strong and sweet bands, is a more pregnant proof of his omnipotent mind. Is it
a testimony of great military skill in a General to range an Army composed of
diverse Nations that have great antipathies between them, (...). Arist. de Mund.
in that Order as renders it victorious in Battle? And is it not a testimony of
infinite Providence to dispose all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth so as they
join successfully for the preservation of Nature? It Is astonishing that any
should be of such a reprobate mind, as not to be convinced by the sight of the
World, a visible Word that more gloriosly illustrates the perfections of the
Creator, than the sublimest Eloquence, Tantum enim sapientiae in aetate jam
fracta dedit, ut Severitatem Tribunalis in Theatri favorem verteret. Hier.
Epist. ad Nepot.
that conceals what it designs to represent. When Sophocles was accused by his
ungrateful Sons, that his Understanding being declined with his Age, he was
unfit to manage the affairs of his Family; he made no other defense before the
Judges, but recited part of a Tragedy newly composed by him, and left it to
their decision whether there was a failure in his Intellectuals: upon which he
was not only absolved, but crowned with Praises.

What foul ingratitude are those guilty of, who deny the Divine Wisdom, of
which there are such clear and powerful demonstrations in the things that are
seen? Abhorred impiety! worthy of the most fiery indignation; and not to be
expiated with a single death. None except base stupid spirits that are lapsed
and sunk below the rational Nature, (as a noble (...). Max. Tyr. orat. prim.
quid sit Deus.
Philosopher justly censures them) are capable of such prodigious folly and
perverseness. Yet these are the pretenders to free reason and strength of mind,
and with a contemptuous smile despise the sober World, as fetterd with servil
Principles, and foolishly softened by impressions of an unknown, uncertain
being, and value themselves as more knowing than all others, because they
contradict all. Ridiculous vanity! as if a blind Man in a crowd sometimes
justling one, sometimes another, should with impatience cry out, Do ye not see?
when he is under a double blindness, both in his eyes and understanding, not
seeing himself, and reproaching those that see, for not seeing. In short, this
great Truth shines with so bright an evidence, that all the sons of darkness
can never put out, and can only be denied by obstinate Atheism and absurdity.

CHAP. VII. Chapter VII.

The duties of understanding Creatures, to the Maker of all things. Admiration
of his glorious perfections visible in them. This is more particularly the duty
of Man, the World being made eminently for him. The Causes why the Creator is
not honored in his Works, are men's ignorance and inobservance. Things new
rather affect us, than great. An humble fear is a necessary respect from the
Creature, to the Divine Majesty and Power. Love and Obedience in the highest
degrees are due from men to God, in the quality of Creator. Trust and reliance
on God is our duty and privilege.

LEt us now briefly consider the indispensible Duties of rational Creatures
with respect to the Maker of all things. And those are,

1. To acknowledge, and admire the Deity, and his perfections that are so
visible in his Works. For there must be a first Cause from whom that receives
being, that cannot proceed from it self. In all the forms of things there are
some Characters stamped of the Divine Wisdom, that declare his Glory, some
footsteps impressed of his Power that discover him; some lines drawn of his
Goodness that demonstrate him. And so much praise is justly due to the
Artificer, as there is excellence of Art and Perfection of workmanship
appearing in the Work. This Duty is especially incumbent on Man, because the
World was made with a more eminent respect for him, than for Angels or Animals.
For if we consider the diversity of its parts, the multitude and variety of
sensitive Natures, of which it consists, and the Art whereby it is framed
according to the most noble Idea and design of highest Wisdom, it is evident it
was principally made for Man, there being an adequate correspondence between
them, with regard to the faculties and the objects. It Is true the Angels
understand more perfectly than Man the union order and beauty of the World, an
incomparable proof of the Makers perfections, but they are not capable of
knowledge or pleasure by tastes, smells, sounds, which are only proportioned to
make impressions on material Organs. And is it agreeable to Wisdom that an
Object purely sensible should be chiefly intended for a Power purely Spiritual?
Neither are the Beasts fit spectators of the Divine Works. For the material
part to which sense can only reach, is the least notable in the frame of
Nature, and the economy of the World. They cannot discover the dependence
between Causes and Effects, the Means and End, nor the Wisdom that ordered all.
These are only for the vision of the mind, which they want. The volume of the
World to them is like a fair printed Book composed of sublime matter and style,
but opened to one that sees the beauty of the Characters, without understanding
the Language it speaks, and the Wisdom it contains. An Eagle by fixing its eyes
on the Sun cannot measure its greatness, nor understand the ends of its motion.
The World would be lost, if only for them. But the wise Creator united these
two distinct natures in Man, and placed him in this Theater of his
Magnificence, that by the ministry of the senses he might have perception of
the external part, and by his reason discover what is most worthy to be known;
the admirable order that distinguishes and unites so many and such different
natures, and guides all their motions, that it is clear they depend upon one
principle without knowing it, and conspire to one end without willing it. How
should this raise his mind in the just praises of the Maker?

The true causes why the Creator is not duly acknowledged and honored for his
Works, are either Ignorance, or a guilty neglect and inobservance of them.

1. Ignorance in the composure of the World, and of the several beings in it. A
Philosopher asked by one, What advantage the instructions of Philosophy would be
to his Son? replied, If no other, yet that when he is a spectatour in the
Theater, one Stone shall not sit upon another. An ignorant person encompast
with all the varieties of Nature, wherein omniscient skill appears, is
insensible as a Stone carved into the shape of a Man. Nay the most learned
Professors know little more than the several kinds of things, and the causes
and manner of some particular effects. How often are they forced to take refuge
in occult qualities when pressed with difficulties? or only assign universal
causes of things, and sometimes the same for operations extremely contrary? How
many mysteries of Nature are still vaild and hid in those deep recesses where
we can go only in the dark? How much remains undiscovered that is truly
wonderful in the Works of God? They are the Objects of the Eye and Mind, but
what is visible to the Eye is least worthy of admiration. From hence the value
of the Works, and the Glory of the Author is much lessened. Besides, the
rational pleasure of the mind is lost by not discerning the wise order that is
infallibly observed in universal Nature. It Is not the viewing a musical
Instrument, the variety of the parts, and of the strings in their size and
length, that produces delight, but hearing the harmonious and pleasant
diversity of their sounds contemper'd by the proportion of numbers. Thus it is
not the sight of the mere outward frame of things, but the understanding the
intellectual Music, that springs from the just Laws of Nature, whereby they
are perfectly tuned, and the conspiring harmony of so many mixed parts without
the least harsh discord, that ravishes the Soul with true pleasure.

2. The inobservance of Man is another cause why the great Creator is not
magnified for all his Works. If we did consider the least, even one of those
Tertullian.
unius puncti animalia, a Flea or Mite, we should find what is admirable in
that scarce-visible Atom of matter. But the Assiduitate cotidiana, and
Consuitudine oculorum assuescunt animi, neque admirantur, neque requirunt
rations earum rerum quas semper vident. Quasi novitas magis quam magnitudo
rerum debeat ad exquirendas causas excitate. Cicer. c. 2. de not. Deor.
novelty, not the excellence of things, draws our thoughts. The greatest works
in Nature, that are not Miracles, only because common and usual, are past by
with a careless Eye. Their continual presence is not moving, but lessens our
regard and attention. The Arabia atque India medendo aestimatur, ulterique
parvo medicina a rubro ma^i imputatur, cum remedia vera pauperimus quisque
caenet, nam si ex horro petatur aut herba, aut frutex quaeratur, nulla artium
vilior fiet. Plin. lib. 24.
Naturalist observed it to be one of the solemn follies of Men, to value
Medicines not for their Virtue, but the Country where they grow, the Climate
from whence they come; if they have a Barbarous name, they are reputed to have
a mysterious efficacy, and those Plants are neglected as unprofitable, that are
natives of their own Soil. The rarity is esteemed more than the merit of
things. It Is a greater wonder to give light to the Sun, than to restore it to
the blind, yet its daily presence does not affect us. If a Chemist should
extract a Liquor of such an extraordinary virtue, that by pouring a few drops
of it on the dust, a Body should be formed, animated, and move, would any one
be induced to believe it without the testimony of his own eyes, and would it
not be a surprising wonder? Yet innumerable living Creatures spring from the
Dust by the falling of Rain, and few think it worthy of observation. The
raising a dead Body to life would astonish us, but we are unaffected that every
day so many living Men are born. Yet, if we consider things aright, the secret
forming a Body in the Womb is an equal Prodigy of Power, and as truly
mavelous, as the restoring the vital congruities to a carcass, that prepare
it for the reception of the Soul. What more deserves serious reflection, than
that from the same indistinct Seed, so many and such various parts in their
substance, figure and qualities should proceed? hard and dry for the Bones,
liquid for the humors, moist and soft for the flesh, tenacious for the Nerves,
perforated for the Arteries and Veins, hot for the Liver and Heart, cold for
the Brain, transparent for the Eyes? How should it raise our wonder that that
matter which in it self is simple and equal, in Gods hand is capable of such
admirable Art? But the constant sight of living productions causes our neglect,
and deprives him of his just Honor. Thus, Magni artificis est, clausisse totum
in exiguo.
that from almost an invisible Seed weak and tender, Sen^^.
should spring a great Tree of that strength as to resist the fury of the
Winds, Naturae miraculo est tam parvo gigni arbores. Plin.
what miraculous virtue is requisite? The enlightened observing Mind ascends from
Nature to God, whose instrument it is, and with deliberate admiration praises
Him for his excellent Works.

2. The most humble fear is a necessary Duty from Man to the Majesty and Power
of the Creator. A barren admiration of his omnipotent Art in his Works is not
sufficient, but it must be joined with awful respects of his Excellent
Greatness. He has the right, and to him is due the reverence and homage of
universal King. With what solemnity and composedness of Spirit should we
approach the Divine Presence? What a jealous watch ought to be placed over our
Hearts in all our addresses to Him, lest by carelessness and inadvertency we
should disparage his Excellencies. To think of Him without reverence is a
profanation. The Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods; and from
hence the necessary consequence is, O come let us worship and fall down, and
kneel before the Lord our Maker. What ever is Glorious, is in Him in the most
excellent degrees of Perfection. The World, with the innumerable variety of
Creatures, is but a drop compared to his Transcendent Greatness. And what part
is Man of that drop? as nothing. Time is but a point of his Eternity, Dominion
but a shadow of his Sovereignty. It Is the most natural duty of Man to walk
humbly with his God, and to fear above all things to displease Him. The whole
Creation, even the insensible part, and that seems least subject to a Rule and
Law, and least conducted by Reason, obey his Will. What is more light and rash
than the Winds? yet they do not breath but by his Command. What is more fierce
and impetuous than the Sea? yet it does not transgress his Order. When it
threatens to overrun the whole Earth, the weak Sand stops its foaming rage,
and it retires, respecting the bounds set by the Creator. What then will be our
guilt, if we are regardless of his Majesty and Authority, who are enlightened
with Reason to understand his Will, when the most rebellious and unteachable
things in Nature readily and constantly obey Him? He is present everywhere, the
whole compass of Heaven and Earth is but an inch of his Immensity; He sees all,
observes all, is more intimate with our Hearts than we are our selves; and dare
Man trample on his Laws before his face? Who can by resistance or flight escape
from inevitable punishment, that offends him? He can bind the most stubborn
enemies hands and feet; and cast them into utter darkness. As he made all
things by the mere act of his Will, so without the least strain of his Power he
can destroy them? What does not a mortal man arrogate to appear terrible, and
make his Will to be obeyed, when he has but power to take away this short
natural life? The proud King of Babylon commanded the numerous Nations under
his Empire, to prostrat themselves like Brutes in the lowest adoration of the
Image he set up; and when the three Hebrew young Men refused to give Divine
Honor to it, he threatened, If ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour
into the midst of a burning fiery Furnace; and who is that God that shall
deliver you out of my hands? This is the language of a Man (poor Dust) that can
heat a Furnace with Fire, and has a Squadron of Soldiers ready upon the least
intimation of his pleasure to throw into it any that disobeyed, as if no Power
either in Heaven or Earth could rescue them from him. 'Twas impious folly in
him thus to speak. But God can give order to Death to seize on the stoutest
Rebel, and cast him into an eternal Furnace, and say in truth, Who shall
deliver out of my hands? His Power reaches beyond the Grave. Carnulius me
evasit. Suit.
Tiberius intending to put to death by slow and exquisit torments one who
killed himself, cried out in a rage, Carnulius has made an escape from me. But
no Sinner can by dying escape God's Justice, for Death it self takes the
Condemned, and delivers them to endless Torments. There are no degrees of fear
can be equal to this cause, the Wrath of the great Creator. Is there any
pleasure of sin so sweet, but this, if considered, would make it to be as
Poison or Gall to the taste? Is any Joy so predominant but this would instantly
make it die in the carnal heart? The due apprehension of Almighty Anger is
sufficient to subdue the most vicious insuperable passions that so violently
transport to sin. But O Astonishing stupidity! The most of Men without fear
provoke the living God, as if he were like the Idols of the Heathens, a dead
stock or stone, insensible and powerless, so that the Spiders made their Webs
on the Beard of Jupiter, and the Birds their Nests in his Thunder. Where is
their Reason, where is their self-love, to challenge so dreadful an Adversary,
who is able in the very act of Sin to strike them with Death Temporal and
Eternal. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there is none to deliver.

3. Love and Obedience in the highest degree are due to the Author of our
Beings, and all things for our use and profit. What motion is more according to
the Laws of Nature, than that Love should answer Love? and so far as the one
descends in benefits, the other should ascend in thankfulness? If we consider
the first and fundamental benefit with all its circumstances, in the pure order
of Nature, that we are Men consisting of a rational Soul, and a Body admirably
prepared for its convenient habitation, and in this regard the most wonderful
work of God; can a humane Breast be so hard and flinty as not to be softened and
made receptive of impressions by this effect of his pure goodness? Is it
possible that any one should be of such a stupid savage temper, so void of all
humanity, nay of the sentiments of the lower Nature, as not to be touched with a
grateful affection to the Author of his life, when Lions and Tigers, the most
untractable Beasts of the Forest, are by an innate principle so tenderly
inclined to their Dams? It unspeakably enforces our obligation, that beside the
inherent excellencies of Nature he made us by privilege above all Creatures in
this sensible World, and furnished it with innumerable objects excellent in
their beauty and variety, that are not mere remedies for necessity, but for the
delight of this present life. And having tasted the good of being, and the
fruits of his magnificent Bounty, can we be coldly affected to our great
Benefactor? The Beneficiis tuis illum cinge, quocunque se convertit, memoriam
tui fugiens ibite videat.
Moralist advises, as the best expedient to make a person grateful, encompass
him with thy benefits, that wherever he turns, something may recall his fugitive
memory, and render thee visible to him. Senec.
This cannot be done by Men. But where ever we turn our thoughts, or fix our
eyes, either on our persons or comforts, on the present state, or the future,
(for he has given Eternity to our duration) we find our selves incircled with
innumerable and inestimable benefits from God. It Is impossible we should ever
forget them without the greatest guilt. Every minute he renews our lives and
all our enjoyments. For the actual influence of his Power is as requisite to
preserve our being, as at first to produce it. The Creature has nothing of its
own, but a simple non-repugnance of coming into act. How frozen is that Heart
that is not melted in love to so good a God? Let us look into the depth of our
native nothing, that we may understand the height of the divine Love, in
raising us from the pure possibility of being into act, and that merely for his
Sovereign pleasure, and most free benignity. There was no necessity that
constrained him to decree the making the World, or Man in it: for it is a plain
contradiction that there should be a superior Power to determine a Being of
infinite Perfections. And for that Reason also he gives all his Benefits
without the least possible advantage to himself. 'Twas commended as a
miraculous Virtue in Theodosius the Emperor, A te nova benignitate is honos
amicis tuis habitus est, qui totus esset illorum quibus deferebatur, nihilque
ad te redundaret nisi dandi voluptas.
that he was bountiful merely to satisfy his own Goodness: But it is the
propriety of God's Nature. Is He not then worthy of all our thoughts, all our
affections, for his most free and admirable Favors? If there be but a spark of
Reason, we must judge that the immense Liberality of God to us, Plaeat.
without respect to his own interest, is so far from lessening, that it
increases our duty to correspond in all possible thankfulness.

Consider further, that which adds to the greatness of the Gifts we receive, is
Illa quanto gratiora sunt, quantoque in partem interiorem animi descendunt, cum
delectat cogitantem magis a quo, quam quid acceperis. Senec. de benefic. lib. 1.
the greatness of the Giver. The price of a benefit rises in proportion to the
worth of the person that bestows it. A small gift from a great hand may be
justly preferred before a richer from a less estimable donor. Now if we
consider that the glorious God (in comparison of whom the greatest Kings are
but vain shadows of Majesty) has made a World full of so many and so excellent
Creatures for our refreshment, that our being on Earth may not be tedious in
the short space of our journey to Heaven, will it not overcome us with an
excess of wonder and affection, and cause us to break forth, What is Man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of Man that thon visitest him? Thou made
him a little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor;
Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, thou have put all
things under his feet.

And as our most ardent Love, so entire Obedience is due to the Creator, both
in active service for his Glory, and an absolute resignation to his Will. The
strongest title to acquire Dominion according to the Law of Nature, is that of
the Cause to the Effect. The Mind cannot rebel against the light of this
Principle. It Is most just therefore we should employ all our powers, even from
the early rise of Reason to the setting point of Life, wholly in his service
from whom we received them. It Is an excellent representation of St. Sicut dedit
figuram, cor daret, and spiraculum vitae. Sermon. de verb. Dom.
Austin; If a Sculptor, after his fashioning a piece of Marble in a humane
Figure, could inspire it with Life and Sense, and give it Motion, and
Understanding, and Speech, can it be imagined but the first act of it would be
to prostrate it self at the feet of the Maker, in subjection and thankfulness,
and to offer what ever it is, and can do, as homage to him? The Almighty Hand
of God formed our Bodies, He breathed into us the Spirit of Life; and should
not the power of Love constrain us to live wholly according to his Will?
methinks nothing should be pleasing to us but as we make it tributary to Him.
If we only regard Him as our Creator, that one quality should for ever engage
us to fidelity in his service, zeal for his Interest, Obedience to his Laws,
and an inviolable respect for his Honor. And this duty binds us the more
strongly, because as God made the World for Man's profit, so he made Man for his
own Glory. And what the Loadstone is to the Steel, or the sensible good to the
appetite, the same attractive is the end to the intelligent Nature. And the
higher the end is, and the more the mind is fitted to understand its
excellence, the more powerfully it should excite the faculties, in pursuit of
it according to their uttermost capacity. Now what horrid unthankfulness is it
to be insensible of the infinite Debt we owe to God? what disloyalty to pervert
his Favors, to slight his Commands, and cross the end of our Creation? The
serious consideration that God has given us such a noble Nature, capable to
know, love and enjoy Him, and that we have so little improved our faculties,
for these excellent ends, should put us in two contrary excesses of Spirit, the
one of joy, for his unspeakable Goodness, the other of confusion, for our most
unworthy neglect of it. Our duty and our disobedience have the same measure.
The Goodness and Bounty of our great Benefactor regulates the one and the
other. The more we have received from Him, the more we are engaged to Him, and
the more we are engaged, the more guilty, and worthy of punishment will our
neglect be. Among Men an ungrateful perfidious person is an object of horror,
and favors abused become motives of hatred. To employ our faculties rational
or sensitive to the disservice of our Maker, is the same kind of villainy though
of incomparably greater guilt both in respect of the object and degree; as if a
Traitor should turn the very same Weapons against his Prince, that he received
from him for his defense. To turn his benefits into occasions of sin, and by
the same things to dishonor him by which we should glorify Him, is extreme
perverseness. In this, unthankful Man imitates the Earth from whence he was
taken: for that makes use of the heat of the Sun to send up Vapors that
obscure the Beams of Light he communicates to it. This is to despise the Divine
Majesty, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, that are united, and so eminently appear in
his Works, and will provoke his severe Vengeance. Let us therefore every day
revive the sense of our obligations, and by intense thoughts kindle the
affections of Love and Reverence, of praise and thankfulness, that in them as
flames ascending from an Altar, we may offer our selves a holy living
Sacrifice, which is our reasonable service. Our All is due to him, what ever we
are, what ever we have, our Bodies, our Souls, our Time and Eternity.

And an humble resignation to his Will in all things is the essential duty of
his Creatures It Is true that upon the account of his Wisdom and Power, it
becomes us with the most respectful submission to yield our selves to his
pleasure. Authority and Dignity naturally result from their union in a person.
Therefore it is Supreme in him who possesses them in their greatest excellence.
When God himself speaks to Job of his transcendent Majesty, and of his right to
dispose of Men according to his Will; he produces his Works as the conspicuous
testimonies of his great Power and exquisite Wisdom: But the reason of our
submission will be more convincing if we remember that God has an absolute
unalienable propriety in us, and all that we enjoy; for our being and comforts
are the liberal gifts of his hand. If therefore he shall please to take away
any of his Favors, even Life it self, though not to exchange it for a life
infinitely better, it would be the most unnatural rebellion to to resist the
dispositions of his Providence, the most vile unthankfulness, to be stormy and
passionate, or to consent to any secret murmuring and discontent in the Heart,
as if our own were taken from us, either unseasonably or unjustly. And though
our troubles immediately proceed from second natural Causes, yet according to
right Reason, we must esteem them but as instruments of his invisible Hand, and
governed by his Counsel, in order to such effects and in the time he pleases.
It is our duty even in the saddest circumstances, with an entire readiness of
mind, and conformity of desires to say to our Maker, Thy will be done.

4. Truth and Reliance on God is our duty and privilege. Every being has a
necessary dependence on Him for its subsistence; but Man of all the visible
Creatures is only capable of affiance in Him, by reflecting upon his own
Impotence, and by considering the Perfections of the Creator, that render him
the proper object of trust. It Is is incommunicable honor of the Deity, to be
acknowledged and regarded as the Supporter of all things. To put confidence in
our selves, in the advantages of Body or Mind or Estate, as if we were the
Architects of our own felicity, is a sacrilegious usurpation. Yet vain Man
foments a secret pride and high opinion of himself, as if by his own prudence
and conduct he might acquire an happiness, till experience confutes his
pleasing but pernicious error. The truth is, were there no God, whose powerful
Providence governs all things, and has a special care and respect of Man, he
were of all creatures the most miserable. So that besides the wickedness, we
may clearly discover the folly of Atheism, that deprives Man of his chiefest
Comfort at all times, and his only Comfort in the greatest exigencies. For in
this mutable state he is liable to so many disasters and wretched accidents,
that none can have an assurance of prosperity one day. How frail and uncertain
is Life, the foundation of all temporal Enjoyments? It depends upon so many
things, that it is admirable it subsists for a little time. The least vessel in
the Body that breaks or is stopped, interrupting the course of the Blood and
Humors, ruins its economy. Sometimes in its vigorous consistence, when most
distant from Sickness it is nearest to Death. A little eruption of Blood in the
Brain is sufficient to stop the passages of the Spirits, and deprive it of
motion and life. And the changes of things without us, are so various and
frequent, so great and sudden, that it is an excess of folly, a dangerous rest
to be secure in the enjoyment of them. The same person sometimes affords an
example of the greatest Prosperity, and of greater Misery in the space of a few
hours. Henry the fourth of France, in the midst of the triumphs of Peace, was
by a blow from a sacrilegious hand dispatched in his Coach, and his blody Corpse
forsaken by his Servants, exposed to the veiw of all; so that as the Mazaray
Historian observes, there was but a moment between the adorations and oblivion
of that great Prince. All flesh is Grass, and the glory of it as the flower of
the Grass. What ever disguises its imperfections, and gives it luster, is but
superficial, like the color andornament of a Flower, whose matter is only a
little dust and Water, and is as weak and fading. Who then can possess these
things without a just jealousy, lest they should slip away, or be ravished from
him by violence? And in this respect Man is most unhappy; for besides the
affliction of present evils, Reason, that separates him from other Creatures,
and exalts him above them, is the fatal instrument of his trouble by the
prevision of future evils. Ignorance of future miseries is a privilege, when
Knowledge is ineffectual to prevent them. Unseen evils are swallowed whole, but
by an apprehensive imagination are tasted in all their bitterness. By
fore-thoughts we run to meet them before they are come, and feel them before
they are truly sensible. This was the reason of that complaint in the Lucan.
Poet seeing the prognostics of misery many years before it arrived, Sit
subitum quodcunque paras, sit caeca futuri
Men's hominis fati, liceat sperare timenti.
Let the Evils thou preparest surprise us, let us not be tormented by an
unhappy expectation of them, let the success of future things be concealed from
our sight, let it be permitted to us to hope in the midst of our fears.

Indeed God has mercifully hid the most of future events from humane curiosity.
For as on the one side by the view of great Prosperity, Man would be tempted to
an excess of Pride and Joy, so on the other (as we are more sensibly touched
with pain than pleasure) if when he begins to use his Reason and apprehensive
faculty, by a secret of Optics he should have in one sight presented all the
Afflictions that should befall him in the World, how languishing would his life
be? This would keep him on a perpetual Rack, and make him suffer together and
at all times, what shall be endured separately and but once. But though the
most of future things lie in obscurity, yet often we have sad intimations of
approaching evils that awaken our fears. Nay, how many Tempests and Shipwracks
do Men suffer in Terra firma, from the suspicion of Calamities that shall never
be? Imaginary Evils operate as if real, and produce substantial Griefs. Now how
can such an infirm and jealous creature, in the midst of things that are every
minute subject to the Laws of Mutability, be without inward trouble? What can
give him repose and tranquillity in his best condition, but an assurance that
nothing can befall him but according to the wise Counsel and gracious Will of
God? And in extreme Afflictions, in the last Agonies, when no humane things can
afford relief, when our dearest Friends are not able to comfort us, but are
miserable in our miseries, what can bear up our fainting hope but the Divine
Power, a foundation that never fails? what can allay our sorrows, but the
Divine Goodness tenderly inclined to succor us? Our help is in the Lord who
made Heaven and Earth. The Creation is a visible Monument of his Perfections.
The Lord is a Sun, and a Shield. He is all-sufficient to supply our wants, and
satisfy our desires. As the Sun gives Life and Joy to all the World, and if
there were millions of more kinds of beings and of individuals in it, his light
and heat are sufficient for them all; so the Divine Goodness can supply us with
all good things, and ten thousand Worlds more. And his Power can secure to us
his Favors, and prevent troubles; or, which is more admirable, make them
beneficial and subservient to our felicity. He is a sure refuge, an inviolable
Sanctuary to which we may retire in all our streights. His Omnipotence is
directed by unerring Wisdom, and excited by infinite love, for the good of
those who faithfully obey him. An humble confidence in him, frees us from
anxieties, preserves a firm peaceful temper in the midst of Storms. This gives
a superiority of Spirit, a true empire of mind over all outward things.

Rex est qui posuit metus,
Occurritque suo libens
Fato, nec queritur mori.
What was the vain boast of Philosophers that by the power of Reason they could
make all accidents to contribute their happiness, is the real privilege we
obtain by a regular trust in God, who directs and orders all events that happen
for the everlasting good of his Servants. In the worst circumstances, we may
rejoice in Hope, in a certain and quiet expectation of a blessed issue. In
Death it self we are more than Conquerers. O Lord God of Hosts, blessed is the
Man that trusts in thee.

CHAP. VIII. Chapter VIII.

The Immortality of the Soul depends on the conservative influence of God.
Natural and Moral Arguments to prove that God will continue it for ever. The
Soul is incapable of perishing from any corruptible principles, or separable
parts. Its spiritual Nature is evident by the acts of its principal faculties.
The understanding conceives spiritual Objects; is not confined to singular and
present things: Reflects upon it self: Corrects the errors of the sense: Does
not suffer from the excellence of the Object. Is vigorous in its operations
when the body is decayed, which proves it to be an immaterial faculty. An
answer to objections, against the Souls spiritual Nature. That the first
notices of things are conveyed through the senses, does not argue it to be a
material faculty. That it depends on the temper of the Body in its superior
operations, is no prejudice to its spiritual Nature.

HAving dispatched the consideration of the prime fundamental Truth, that there
is a most Wise and Powerful Creator of all things, I shall next discourse of
the Immortality of the humane Soul, and the Eternal recompenses in the future
State.

In treating of the Souls Immortality I shall not insist on nice and subtle
Speculations, that evaporate and leave nothing substantial for conviction or
practice: but consider those proofs that may induce the mind to assent, and
work upon the will to make its choice of objects with respect to their endless
consequences hereafter. And first, it must be premised, that Immortality is not
an inseparable perfection of its nature; for it is capable of annihilation. What
ever had a beginning may have an end. God only has immortality in an absolute
sense, and communicates it according to his pleasure. The perpetual existence
of Souls is a privilege that depends on his sustaining virtue, without which
they would relapse into a state of not Being. His Will is the measure of their
duration. I shall therefore consider such things as strongly argue that God
will not withdraw his conservative influence that is necessary to their
Immortality. The Arguments are of two sorts, Natural and Moral. The first prove
that God has made the Soul incapable of Death by any Internal Causes of
perishing from its Nature, and in that declares not obscurely that he will ever
preserve it. The second sort are drawn from the Divine Attributes, the visible
Economy of Providence in the government of the World, that are infallible, and
will produce a sufficient conviction in minds equally inclined.

1. The Soul is incapable of Death by any Internal Causes of perishing in its
Nature. The dissolution of things proceeds from the corruptible principles of
which they are compounded, and the separable parts of which they consist, and
into which they are resolved. Therefore all mixed and material Beings are
subject to dissolution. But the humane Soul is a spiritual substance, Et quum
simplex animi natura esset, neque haberet in se quiequam admixtum dispar sui,
atque dissimile, non posse cum dividi. Cic. de Senec.
simple, without any disagreeing qualities, as heat and cold, moisture and
dryness, the seeds of corruption. The essences of things are best discovered by
their peculiar operations, that argue a real distinction between them, and from
whence arise the different notions whereby they are conceived. The soul of a
Brute, performs the same vital acts, as the soul of a Plant, yet it is visibly
of a more elevated nature, because it performs the functions of the sensitive
life that are proper to it. The rational Soul performs the same sensitive acts
as the soul of Brutes, but that it is of a higher order of substances, appears
by its peculiar objects and immediate operations upon them.

The two principal faculties of the humane Soul are the Understanding and the
Will, and the Actions flowing from them exceed the power of the most refined
matter however modified, and transcend any Principle that is only endowed with
the powers of sense and imagination confined to matter.

To proceed orderly, I will first consider the Mind with respect to the quality
of its objects, and manner how it is conversant about them.

1. The conception of things purely spiritual, God, Angels, separate Souls, the
Analogies, the differences, and various respects of things, argue it to be of a
spiritual nature. For it is and evident principle, there must be an Analogy
between the Faculty and the Object. A material Glass cannot represent a Spirit;
it has no receptivity to take into it an object without figure, color, and
diversity of parts, the affections of matter. A spiritual object can only be
apprehended by a spiritual operation, and that can only be produced by a
spiritual Power. The being of things is the root of their working. Now rarifie
matter to the highest fineness, reduce it to imperceptible Atoms, it is as truly
Matter as a gross Body. For lightness and tenuity are as proper Attributes of
matter, as weight and density, though less sensible.

If a Beast could apprehend what discourse is, it were rational. The Soul
therefore that understands the Spirituality of things is Spiritual; otherwise
it should act extra sphaeram. The intellectual eye alone sees him that is
Invisible, understands the reasons of Truth and Justice, looks beyond the
bright Hills of Time into the Spiritual Eternal World, so that it is evident
there is an affinity and likeness in Nature between them.

2. Material faculties are confined to the narrow compass of singular and
present things; but the Mind abstracts from all individuals, their pure Nature,
and forms their Universal Species. The Eye can only see a colored object
before it, the Mind contemplates the nature of Colors. It ascends above all
the distinctions of Time, recollects what is past, foresees what is to come,
Celer and Diis cognatus, omni mundo, and omni aevo Par. Sen.
no interval of space or time can hinder its sight. Besides, the Sic mihi
persuasi, sic sentio, quum tanta Celeritas animorum sit, tanta memoria
praeteritorum, futurorum providentia, tot scientiae, tot inventa, non posse eam
naturam quae res eas continet mortalem esse. Cic.
swift flight of the thoughts over Sea and Land, the soaring of the Mind in a
moment above the Stars, as if its essence were all vigor and activity, prove
that it is not a material Power.

3. Sense only acts in a direct way, without reflecting upon its self or its
own operations. It Is true there is an experimental perception included in vital
and sensible acts; but it is far below proper reflection. The Eye does not see
the action by which it sees, nor the imagination reflect on it self: for that
being conversant only about representations transmitted through the senses,
cannot frame an Image of it self and gaze upon it, there being no such
resemblance conveyed by the mediation of the outward organs. But the rational
Soul not only contemplates an object, but reflects on its own contemplation,
and retired from all commerce with External things, views it self, its
qualities and state, and by this gives testimony of its Spiritual and immortal
Nature.

4. The Mind rectifies the false reports of the Senses, and forms the Judgment
of things not according to their impressions, but by such rational evidence of
which they are not capable. When the Object is too distant, or the Medium
unfit, or the Organs distempered, the Senses are deceived. The Stars of the
brightest magnitude seem to be trembling sparks of light: but the Understanding
considers that the representations of things are imperfect and less distinct
proportionably to their distance, and conceives of their magnitude accordingly.
A straight Oar appears crooked in the Water, but Reason observes the error in
the refractions, when the Image passes through a double medium of unequal
clearness. Sweet things taste bitter to one in a Fever, but the mind knows
that the bitterness is not in the things but in the viciated Palate. Moreover,
how many things are collected by Reason that transcend the power of fancy to
conceive, nay are repugnant to its conception? What corporeal Image can
represent the immensity of the Heavens, as the Mind by convincing arguments
apprehends it? The Antipodes walk erect upon the Earth, yet the Fancy cannot
conceive them but with their Heads downward. Now if the Mind were of the same
nature with the corporeal Faculties, their judgment would be uniform.

5. The Senses suffer to a great degree by the excessive vehemence of their
Objects. Too bright a light blinds the Eye. Too strong a sound deafs the Ear.
But the Soul receives vigor and perfection from the excellence and sublimity of
its object; and when most intent in contemplation, and concentered in its self,
becomes as it were all Mind, so that the operations of it as sensitive are
suspended, feels the purest delights far above the perception of the lower
faculties. Now from whence is the distemper of the Senses in their exercise,
but from matter, as well that of the Object as the Organ? And from whence the
not suffering of the Mind, but from the impressing the forms of Objects,
separated from all matter, and consequently in an immaterial faculty? for there
is of necessity a convenience and proportion, as between a Being and the manner
of its operations, so between that, and the subject wherein it works. This
strongly argues the Soul to be immaterial, in that it is impassible from matter,
even when it is most conversant in it. For it refines it from corporeal
accidents, to a kind of spirituality proportioned to its nature. And from hence
proceeds the unbounded capacity of the Soul in its conceptions, partly because
the forms of things inconsistent in their natures, are so purified by the Mind,
as they have an objective existence without enmity or contrariety; partly
because in the workings of the Mind, one act does not require a different
manner from another, but the same reaches to all that is intelligible in the
same order.

6. The Senses are subject to languishing and decay, and begin to die before
Death. But the Soul many times in the weakness of Age is most lively and
vigorously productive. The intellectual Offspring carries no marks of the
decays of the Body. In the approaches of Death, when the corporeal faculties
are relaxt and very faintly perform their functions, the workings of the Soul
are often raised above the usual pitch of its activity. And this is a pregnant
probability that it is of a spiritual Nature, and that when the Body, which is
here its Prison rather than Mansion, falls to the Earth, it is not oppressed by
its ruins, but set free and injoys the truest liberty. (...). Plutarch. in Romans
This made Heraclitus say that the Soul goes out of the Body as Lightning from
a Cloud, because it is never more clear in its conceptions than when freed from
matter. And what Lucretius excellently expresses in his Verses, is true in
another sense than he intended; Cedit item retro de Terra, quod fuit ante,
In Terram; sed quod missum est ex Aetheris oris,
Id rursus Coeli fulgentia Templa receptant.
What sprung from Earth falls to its native place:
What Heaven inspired releast from the weak tie
Of flesh, ascends above the shining Sky.


Before I proceed, I will briefly consider the Objections of some who secretly
favor the part of impiety.

1. It Is objected, That the Soul in its intellectual operations depends on the
Phantasms, and those are drawn from the representations of things conveyed
through the senses.

But it will appear this does not enervate the force of the Arguments for its
spiritual nature. For this dependence is only objective, not instrumental of
the Souls perception. The first images of things are introduced by the
mediation of the senses, and by their presence (for nothing else is requisite)
the mind is excited, and draws a Picture resembling, or if it please not
resembling them, and so operates alone, and compleats its own work. Of this we
have a clear experiment in the conceptions which the mind forms of things so
different from the first notices of them by the Senses.

The first apprehensions of the Deity are from the visible effects of his
Power, but the Idea in which the understanding contemplates him, is framed by
removing all imperfections that are in the Creatures, and consequently that he
is not corporeal. For whatsoever is so, is liable to corruption, that is
absolutely repugnant to the perfection of his nature. Now the common Sense and
Fancy, only powerful to work in Matter; cannot truly express an immaterial
Being. Indeed as Painters by their Colors represent invisible things, as
Darkness, the Winds, the Internal affections of the heart, so that by the
representations, the thoughts are awakn'd of such objects; so the fancy may
with the like Art shadow forth Spiritual Beings by the most resembling forms
taken from sensible things. Thus it imagins the Angels under the likeness of
young Men with Wings, to express their vigor and velocity. But the Mind by its
internal light conceives them in another manner, by a Spiritual form, that
exceeds the utmost efficacy of the corporeal Organs, so that it is evident the
Soul as intellectual in its singular and most proper operations, is not
assisted by the ministry of the Senses.

2. It Is objected that the Soul in its superior operations depends on the
convenient temper of the Body. The thoughts are clear and orderly when the
Brain is composed. On the contrary when the predominancy of any humor
distempers it, the Mind feels its infirmities. And from hence it seems to be of
a corporeal nature, depending on the Body in its being, as in its working.

But this, if duly considered, will raise no just prejudice against its
Spiritual Immortal Nature. For,

1. The sympathy of things is no convincing Argument that they are of the same
Nature. There may be so strict a union of Beings of different natures, that
they must necessarily be subject to impressions from one another. Can any
Reasons demonstrate that a Spiritual substance endowed with the powers of
understanding and will, cannot be united in a vital composition to a Body, as
the Vegetative Soul is in Plants, and the Sensitive in Beasts? There is no
implicit repugnance in this that proves it impossible. Now if such a complex
Being were in Nature, how would that spiritual Soul act in that Body, that in
its first union with it (excepting some universal Principles) is a rasa tabula,
as a white Paper, without the notices of things written in it? Certainly in no
other imaginable manner than as Man's Soul does now.

Indeed if Man as compounded of Soul and Body, were a sensitive Animal, and
only rational as partaking of the Universal Intellect, bent to individuals for
a time, and retiring at Death to its first Being, as Averroes fancied* there
would be no cause of such a Sympathy: but the Soul as intellectual, is an
informing, not assisting form. And it is an evident proof of the Wisdom and
Goodness of the Creator, by this strict and sensible union, to make the Soul
vigilant and active to provide for the convenience and comfort of the Body in
the present state, and that notwithstanding such a discord in Nature, there
should be such a concord in inclinations.

2. Though the mental operations of the Soul are hindered by the ill habit of
the Body, yet the mind suffers no hurt, but still retains its intellectual
power without impairing. A skilful Musician does not lose his Art that plays on
an harp when the strings are false, though the Music is not so harmonious as
when it is justly tuned. The visive faculty is not weakened, when the Air by a
collection of gross vapors is so thick, that the eye cannot distinctly
perceive distant objects. When by the heats of Wine or a Disease the Spirits
are inflamed, and made fierce and unruly, and the Images in the Fancy are put
into confusion, the mind cannot regularly govern and use them: When the fumes
are evaporated, the Brain is restored to its temper and fitness for
intellectual operations, but the mind is not cured, that was not hurt by those
Distempers.

Briefly, the Deniers of the Souls Immortality, resemble in their arguings some
who opposed the Divinity of our Savior. For as Apollinaris and Eunomius from
Christ's sleeping so profoundly in a storm, Basil Seleuc* Orat. 2.
instead of concluding that he was a real Man, falsely inferred that he was not
God: Because sleep is not the satisfaction of a Divine appetite, the Deity is
incapable of it. But they considered not his more than humane Power in rebuking
the Winds and the Sea with that Empire, that was felt and obeyed by those
insensible creatures: so those whose interest inclines them to believe that Man
is entirely mortal, alledg that he acts as a sensitive Creature, for he is so,
but consider not that he has also more noble faculties, to understand objects
purely spiritual, and God himself the most perfect in that order, which no
material principle, though of the most subtle and finest contexture, can reach
unto. Besides, the more it is disengaged from Matter, and retired from the
senses, the more capable it is to perform its most exalted operations, and
consequently by an absolute separation it is so far from perishing, that it
ascends to its Mihi quidemnunquam persuaderi potuit animos dum in corporibus
essent, mortalibus vivere, quum exissent ex iis emori. Nec vero tum animum esse
insipieutem quum ex insipienti corpore evasissit, sed quum omni admistione
corporis purus and integer esse caepisset, tum esse sapientem Cic. de Sen.
perfection. For the manner how it acts in the separate state it is to no
purpose to search, being most secret, and 'twill be to no purpose to find, as
being of no influence to excite us to the constant and diligent performance of
our duty. It Is therefore a fruitless curiosity to inquire after it. But to
imagine that because the Soul in the present state cannot understand clearly
without the convenient disposition of the Body, therefore it cannot act at all
without it, is as absurd as to fancy because a man confined to a Chamber
cannot see the objects without but through the Windows, therefore he cannot see
at all, but through such a Medium, and that when he is out of the Chamber, he
has totally lost his sight.

CHAP. IX. Chapter IX.

The acts of the Will considered. Its choice of things distastful to Sense, and
sometimes destructive to the Body, argue it to be a spiritual principle. The
difference between Man and Brutes amplified. The Spiritual operations of the
Soul may be performed by it self in a separate state. This is a strong proof
God will continue it. The Platonic argumeut that man unites the two orders of
Natures intelligent and sensible, Immortal and perishing.

2. THe acts of the Will that imperial faculty, prove it to be of a higher
order of substance than the sensitive Soul. The Brutes are acted by pure
necessity; their powers are moved and determined by the external application of
objects. It Is visible that all kinds of sensitive Creatures in all times, are
carried in the same manner by the potent sway of Nature toward things suitable
to their corporeal faculties. But the rational Will is a principle of free
election, that controuls the lower appetite, by restraining from the most
pleasant and powerful allurements, and choosing sometimes the most distastful
things to sense. Now from whence arises this contention? If the rational Will
be not of a higher nature than the sensual appetite, why does it not consent
with its inclinations? How comes the Soul to mortify the most vehement desires
of the body, a part so near in Nature, so dear by Affection, and so apt to
resent an injury? And since it is most evident that sensitive Creatures always
with the utmost of their force defend their Beings, from whence is it that the
rational Soul in some cases against the strongest recoile and reluctance of
Nature, exposes the body to Death? If it depended on the body for subsistence
it would use all means to preserve it. Upon the sight of contrary motions in an
engine we conclude they are caused by diverse springs, and can such opposite
desires in Man proceed from the same principle?

If the rational Soul be not of a sublimer order than the sensitive, it follows
that Men are Beasts, and Beasts are Men. Now it is as impossible to be what they
are not, as not to be what they are. But do the Beasts reverence a Divine
Power, and at stated times perform acts of solemn Worship? Is Conscience the
immediate rule of their Actions? will Lectures of temperance, chastity, justice
arrest them in the eager pursuit of sensual satisfactions? Do they feel remorse
in doing ill, and pleasure in doing well? Do they exercise the Mind in the
search of Truth? have they desires of a sublime intellectual good that the low
sensual part cannot partake of? have they a capacity of such an immense
Blessedness, that no finite Object in its qualities and duration can satisfy?
Ask the Beasts, and they will tell you. Their actions declare the contrary. But
the humane Soul has awful apprehensions of the Deity, distinguishes of things
by their agreement or disconformity to his Laws: Its best and quickest
Pleasures, and most piercing wounding Troubles are from Moral Causes. What
color, what taste has Virtue? yet the purified Soul is inflamed by the views
of its most amiable tho not sensible beauty, and delighted in its sweetness.
How often is it so ravished in contemplation of God, the great Object of the
rational Powers, as to lose the desire and memory of all carnal things? What
stronger Argument and clearer Proof can there be of its affinity with Hoc
igitur Argumentum habet Divinitatis suae, quod illum Divina delectant. Senec.
God, than that Divine things are most suitable to it? for if the rational Soul
were of the same order with the sensitive, as it could not possibly conceive
any being more excellent than what is corporeal, so it could only relish gross
things wherein Sense is conversant.

The Sum of what has been discourst of, is this, that by considering the
different operations of Man and of Brutes, we may clearly discern the different
powers of acting, wherewith the rational Soul is endowed in the one, and the
sensitive in the other. The Soul in Beasts performs no operations independent
on the Body that serves it either as an instrument, or matter of their
production: such are the use of the Senses, Nutrition, Generation, all the
internal work, and the preparing the Phantasms, without which they would be far
less serviceable to Man. It Is not strange therefore that it perishes with the
Body, there being no reason for its duration in a separate state, since it is
fit only to act by the ministry of the Body. But the Soul of Man, besides the
operations that proceed from it as the form of the body it animates, such are
all common to man with Plants and Animals, understands, discourses, reflects on
it self, that are acts proper to its nature, and included in its true
conception, whereby it is distinguished from that of Brutes. Indeed the exercise
of sensitive operations depends so absolutely on its union with the body, that
they cannot be performed, nor conceived as possible without its presence, and
the use of corporeal organs. But the more excellent operations that proceed
from the higher faculties, wherewith it is endowed not as the form of a material
Being, but as a spiritual substance, such as subsist for ever without any
communion with Bodies, so entirely belong to it by the condition of Nature,
that for their production it is sufficient of it self. The Understanding and
Will are Angelical Powers, and to know and will, and to be variously moved with
pleasure or grief according to the qualities of objects suitable or disagreeing,
are proper to those Natures that have no alliance with Bodies. It follows
therefore the Soul, in its separate state, may contemplate, and delightfully
enjoy intellectual objects, or torment it self with reflection on things
contrary to its will: Nay, it understands more clearly, and is affected more
strongly than before. For these operations during its conjunction are not
common to the Body, but produced by it in the quality of a mind, and are then
most vigorous and expedite, most noble and worthy of it, when the Soul
withdraws from all sensible things into it self, and is most raised above the
manner of working that is proper and proportioned to the body. And from hence
it is reasonable to conclude that it survives the Body, not losing with it the
most noble faculty, the mind, that is peculiar to it, nor the necessary
instrument of using it. For as the universal Providence of God supports the
lower rank of Creatures in their natural Life, so long as their faculties are
qualified for actions proper to that life, we may strongly argue that his
conservative Influence will not be withdrawn from the humane Soul that is apt
and capable in its own nature to exist, and act in a separate state. In short,
the understanding and elective powers declare its descent from the (...). Plato.
Father of Spirits, whose image is engraven in its nature, not as in brittle
glass, but an incorruptible Diamond.

I shall add to the natural arguments an observation of the Platonists, that of
all other Philosophers approach nearest the truth in their discourses of God
and the Soul, of the Majesty of the one and the excellence of the other. They
observe that the unity of the World is so closely combined in all its parts,
the several beings that compose it, that between the superior and inferior
species there are middle Natures, wherein they meet, that no vacuum may
interpose in the series of things. This is evident by considering that between
inanimate bodies and living, insensible and sensible, there are some beings
that partake of the extremes, and link them together, that the order of things
not being interrupted, the mind by continual easy degrees may ascend from the
lowest to the highest in perfection. And from this just and harmonious
proportion that is proper to essences, the intelligible beauty and music of
the World arises, that is so pleasing to the considering mind. Now what band is
there to join the two ranks of Beings, intelligent and sensible, but Man, that
partakes of Sense, common with the Beasts, and Understanding to the Angels. For
this reason they give him the mysterious name of Horizon, the ending and union
of the two Hemispheres, the superior and inferior, the two orders of Natures,
immortal, and that shall perish.

CHAP. X. Chapter X.

The moral Arguments for the Souls Immortality. The restless desire of the Soul
to an intellectual eternal happiness, argues it survives the Body. The lower
order of Creatures obtain their perfection here. It reflects upon Nature, if
the more noble fails of its end. That wicked Men would choose annihilation, is
no proof against Man's natural desires of Immortality. The necessity of a future
state of recompenses for moral actions, proves the Soul to be immortal. The
wisdom of God, as Governor of the World, requires there be Rewards and
Punishments annexed to his Laws. Eternal Rewards are only powerful to make men
obedient to them in this corrupt state. Humane Laws are no sufficient security
of Virtue, and restraint from Vice.

2. I Will now consider the moral Inducements to confirm our belief that God
will preserve the Soul in its being and activity hereafter. And of this we have
sufficient evidence by internal light, the natural notions of the Deity, and by
many visible testimonies in his Government of the World.

1. The restless desire of the Soul to an intellectual and eternal Felicity not
attainable here, is a strong argument that it is reserved to a future state. The
Understanding is inclined to the knowledge of Truth, the Will to the fruition
of Goodness; and in what degrees soever we discover the one, and enjoy the
other in our present condition, we are not content. As one that is burnt up
with such a Thirst that only an Ocean can quench, and has but a little stream
to refresh him. God is the only satisfying Object of the rational faculties,
and here our conceptions of him are so imperfect, that we approach nearer the
Truth by denying what is inconsistent with his Nature, than in affirming the
proper Perfections of it. And the communications of his Love to us inflames the
Soul with new desires of fuller enjoyment. This desire of Happiness is
essential to Man, as Man. Now it is universally acknowledged that Nature is not
a vain Principle, it produces no superfluous inclinations in any sort of
Creatures, much less in Man, and in that which is most proper to him, and in
order to the raising him to his Perfection. The natural motion of a Stone has a
center where to rest; Plants arrive to their full growth and beauty; the Beasts
have present satisfaction, and are happy Animals. But Man, in whom the two
lower lives and the Intellectual are united, is here only in his way to
happiness, his best endeavors are but imperfect essays toward it.

Now if the Soul does not survive the Body, and in a separate state obtain its
desires, it will reflect upon Nature for imprudence or malignity, in dealing
worse with the most noble order of visible Beings. The Beasts excel Man in the
quickness and vivacity of the powers of Sense, being their perfection, and in
him subordinate faculties, and are more capable of pleasure from sensible
things; and Reason, his eminent Prerogative, makes him more liable to misery.
For Man ardently aspiring to a Spiritual Happiness, that here he cannot enjoy,
much less hereafter if the Soul perish, is under a remediless infelicity. His
Mind is deceived and stained with Errors, his Will tormented with fruitless
longings after an impossible Object. But if we unveil the face of Nature, God
appears (who is the Author of our being, and of this desire so proper to it)
and we cannot suspect, without the highest Impiety, that he would make all Men
in vain, and deceive them by a false appearance. But he gives us in it a
faithful presage of things future, and indiscernable to sense, to be enjoyed in
immortality. This Argument will be the more forcible, if we consider that holy
Souls, who excel in Knowledge and Virtue do most inflamedly long for the
enjoyment of this pure felicity. And is it possible that the Creator should
not only endow Man with rational powers, but with virtues that exalt and
enlarge their capacity to render him more miserable? to imagine that he cannot,
or will not fully and eternally satisfy them is equally injurious to his
perfections. It therefore necessarily follows that the Soul lives after Death,
and fully enjoys the happiness it earnestly desired whiles in the darkness of
this earthly Taber^^cle

Add further, that Man alone of all Creatures in the lower World understands
and desires Immortality. The conception of it is peculiar to his Mind, and the
desire of it as intrinsic to his Nature as the desire of Blessedness. For that
Blessedness that ends, is no perfect Blessedness, nor that which every one
desires. Man alone feels and knows that his Nature is capable of excellent
perfections and joys. Now if he shall cease to be for ever, why is this
knowledge and desire but to render him more unhappy, by grief for the present
shortness of life, and by despair of a future Immortality? In this respect also
the condition of the Beasts would be better than of Men. For though they are
for ever deprived of Life, yet they are incapable of regret, because they
cannot by reflection know that they possess it, and are without the least
imagination or desire of immortality. They are alive to the present, but dead
to the future. By a favorable ignorance they pass into a state of not being,
with as much indifference, as from watching to sleep, or from labor to repose.
But to Man that understands and values Life and Immortality, how dark and
hideous are the thoughts of annihilation? let him enjoy all possible delights
to sense, or desirable to the powers of the Soul, How will the sweetness of
all be lost in the bitterness of that thought that he shall be deprived of them
for ever? Mors iis terribilis, quorum cum vita omnia extinguuntur. Cic.
How frightful is the continual apprehension of an everlasting period to his
being, and all enjoyments suitable to it? After that a prospect of Eternity has
been shown to him, how tormenting is the thought that he must die as the stupid
Ox, or the vilest Vermin of the Earth, and with him the fallacious instinct of
Nature that inclined him to the most durable happiness? If it were thus, O
living Image of the Immortal God, thy condition is very miserable! What the
Romans wished in great anguish for the loss of Augustus, that he had not been
born, Vtinam aut non natus esses, aut non morereris.
or had not died, is more reasonable in this case: it were better that the
desire of eternal Life had not been born in Man, or that it should be
fulfilled. If it be objected that many Men are not only without fear of
annihilation, but desire it, therefore Immortality is not such a privilege that
thereasonable Creature, naturally aspires to.

I answer; the inference is very preposterous, for the reason of their choice
is, because they are attentive to an object infinitely more Plerosque
conscientia meritorum, nihil esse post mortem, magis optare, quam credere.
Malunt enim extingui, quam ad supplicia reparari. M. Fell.
sad and afflictive, that is, a state of everlasting torments, which the guilty
conscience presages to be the just recompense of their crimes. So that enclosed
between two evils, an eternal state of not Being, and an Eternity of misery,
it is reasonable to venture on the least, to escape the greater. But supposing
any hopes of future happiness, they would desire immortality as an excellent
benefit. As one that has lost the pleasure and taste of Life, by consuming
sickness, and sharp pains, or some other great calamities, may be willing to
die, but suppossing a freedom from those evils, the desire of Life as the most
precious and dear enjoyment would strongly return. And that the desire of
Immortality is natural, I shall add one most visible testimony. For whereas the
lower sort of Creatures that finally perish in Death are without the least
knowledge of a future estate, and are therefore careless of leaving a memorial
after them: on the contrary, Men are solicitous to secure their names from
oblivion, as conscious of their souls surviving in another World. This ardent
passion not directed by higher Principles, excites them to use all means, to
obtain a kind of immortality from Mortals. They reward Historians, Poets,
Orators to celebrate their actions. They erect Monuments of durable Brass and
Marble to represent the Effigies of their faces: They endeavor by triumphal
Arches, Pyramids, and other works of Magnificence, to eternize their Fame, to
live in the eyes, and mouths, and memories of the living in all succeding
times. These indeed are vain shadows, yet argue the desire of immortality to be
natural. As it is evident there is a natural affection in Parents to preserve
their Children, because when they are deprived of their living presence, they
dearly value and preserve their dead Pictures, though but a poor consolation.

2. The necessity of a future state wherein a just retribution shall be made of
rewards and punishments to Men according to their actions in this life,
includes the Souls Immortality. For the proof of this I shall lay down such
things as certainly establish it.

1. The first Argument is drawn from the Wisdom of God in governing the
reasonable World. In the quality of Creator, he has a supreme title to Man, and
consequently is his rightful Governor, and Man his natural subject. Now Man
being endowed with free faculties, the powers of knowing and choosing, is under
a Law clearly impressed on his Nature by the Author of it, that strictly forbids
moral evil, and commands moral good. And to enforce the Authority of this Law,
the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, and the temper of the Subject requires, that
willing obedience should be attended with certain rewards, and voluntary
disobedience with unavoidable punishments. For Man being so framed as to
foresee the consequences of his actions, the inward springs of hope and fear,
work and govern him accordingly. And these necessary effects of Virtue and Vice
must be so great, as may rationally induce Man to reverence and observe the Law
of his Maker, in the presence of the strongest Temptation to the contrary. Now
if we consider Man in this corrupt state, how averse from good, and inclined to
evil, how weak his directive faculty, how disordered and turbulent his
Passions, how many Pleasures are pressing on the senses, to precipitate his
slippery disposition into a compliance, it is very evident, that besides the
rules of Morality, eternal Reasons are necessary to preserve in him a dutiful
respect to God. Take away the hopes and fears of things hereafter, what
Antidote is of force against the poison of inherent Lusts? what can disarm the
World of its Allurements? how can Man void of Innocence, and full of Impurity,
resist the delights of Sin, when the inclinations from within, are as strong as
temptations from without? how greedily will he pursue the advantages of this
mortal condition, and strive to gratify all the sensual appitites? The Romans
when the fear of Remoto Carthaginis metu, sublataque Imperii aemula non tam
gradu, sed praecipiti cursu a virtute descitum, ad vitia transversum est.
Pat^rc.
Carthage, that aspired to a superiority in Empire, was removed, presently
degenerated from Military Valor and Civil Virtues, into Softness and Luxury. So
if Man were absolved from the fear of Judgment to come, no restraint would be
strong enough to bridle the impetuous resolutions of his depraved will. If
there were no evil of punishment after Death, there is no evil of Sin but will
be continued in, till Death. And Man, that by nature is incomparably above, by
Vice would be incomparably beneath the Beasts: insomuch as joining to their
natural brutishness, the craft and malice of wit, he would become more
monstrously (that is, designedly and freely) brutish. Now is it conceivable
that God, to keep his subjects in order, should be constrained to allure them
with a beautiful deceit, the promise of a Heaven that has no reality, or to
urge them by the feigned terrors of a Hell, that is no where? This is
inconsistent with his Wisdom, and many other Attributes.

If it be objected, That humane Laws are a sufficient security of Virtue, and
curb from Vice.

I answer, This is apparently false: For,

1. Sovereign Princes are exempted from temporal penalties, yet their faults
are of the greatest malignity by the contagion of their examples, and the
mischief of their effects. Their Actions are more potent to govern than their
Laws. Innumerable perish by the imitation of their Vices. Now to leave the
highest rank of Men unaccountable, would cause a great disorder in the conduct
of the reasonable Creature, and be a spot in the Divine Providence.

2. Many Sins directly opposite to Reason, and injurious to the Divine Honor,
are not within the compass of Civil Laws. Such are some Sins that immediately
concern God, the disbelief and undervaluing his Excellencies; and some that
immediately respect a Man's self, as Sloth, Luxury, etc. And all vicious
Principles that secretly lodge in the heart, and infect it with deep
pollutions, and many sins that break forth, of which the outward acts are not
pernicious to the public.

3. Many eminent virtues are of a private nature, as Humility, Meekness,
Patience, a readiness to forgive, Gratitude, for which there are no
encouragements by civil Laws: so that they are but a weak instrument to
preserve Innocence, and restrain from Evil.

CHAP. XI.
The Justice of God an infallible Argument of future recompenses. The natural
notion of God includes Justice in perfection. Chapter XI.
In this World sometimes Virtue and Vice are equally miserable. Sometimes Vice
is prosperous. Sometimes good Men are in the worst condition. The dreadful
consequences of denying a future state. Gods absolute Dominion over the
reasonable Creature, is regulated by his Wisdom, and limited by his Will. The
essential beauty of Holiness, with the pleasure that naturally results from
good actions, and the native turpitude of Sin, with the disturbance of the mind
reflecting on it, are not the complete recompenses that attend the Good and the
Wicked.

2. THe second Argument arises from the Divine Goodness and Justice. God as
Universal Sovereign is Supreme Judge of the World. For Judicature being an
essential part of Royalty, these rights are inseparable. And the natural notion
of the Deity includes Justice in that Perfection, as infinitely excells the
most just Governors on the Earth. This gives us convincing evidence for
recompenses hereafter. For there is no way of proof more certain, than by such
maxims as are acknowledged by all to be undoubtedly true by their own light.
In the motives of intellectual assent, the mind must finally rest on some that
are self-evident, without depending as to their clearness on any superior
proof; and are therefore called first Principles, the fountains of Discourse.
Now that God is most righteous and equal in his Judgment, before whose Throne,
Man must appear, that he will by no means condemn the Innocent, nor justify the
Guilty; that He is so Pure and Holy that he cannot suffer Sin unrepented of, to
go unpunished, is a prime Truth, declared by the voice of Nature. The weakest
twylight of Reason discerns the Antipathy of this Connection, an unjust God
indifferent to good or evil. Never any Sect of Idolaters formed such an
unworthy Deity, that was absolutely careless of Virtue and Vice, without
distinguishing them in his Affections and Retributions: This were to debase him
beneath the most unreasonable men, for there is none of such an impure mind, so
perfect a despiser of moral goodness, but has some respect for Virtue, and some
abhorrence of Vice in others, especially in their Children. From hence it
certainly follows, that as Virtue and the reward, Sin and the punishment are
allied in a direct line by a most wise Constitution; so it is just that the
effects should truly correspond with the quality of men's actions. If they
reverence God's Laws, it is most becoming his Nature and Relation to make them
happy: if they abuse their Liberty, and violate his Commands, it is most
righteous that they should feel the effects of their chosen wickedness. Now if
we look only to things seen, we do not find such equal distributions as are
suitable to the clear Light wherewith God has irradiated the Understanding of
Man, concerning his Governing-Justice.

1. Sometimes Virtue and Vice are equally miserable here. In common Calamities
is there a difference between the Righteous and the wicked? is there a peculiar
Antidote to secure them from pestilential infection? or a strong retreat to
defend them from the Sword of a conquering enemy? have they secret provisions
in times of Famine? are not the Wheat and Tares bound in a bundle and cast into
the same fire?

2. Many times the most guilty offenders are not punished here. They not only
escape the justice of Men, by secrecy, by deceit or favor, by resistance or
flight, but are under no conspicuous marks of Gods Justice. Nay, by wicked
means they are prosperous and happy.

3. The best Men are often in the worst condition, and merely upon the account
of their Goodness. They are oppressed because they do not make resistance, and
laden with sufferings, because they endure them with patience. They are for
Gods sake made the spectacles of extreme misery, whilst the insolent defiers of
his Majesty and Laws enjoy all visible felicities. Now in the judgment of
Sense, can Holiness be more afflicted if under the displeasure of Heaven, or
Wickedness more prosperous, if favored by it? But this is such a monstrous
incongruity, that unless we abolish the natural Notions of the Divine
excellencies, it cannot in the least degree be admitted. If therefore we
confine our thoughts to humane affairs in this life, without taking a prospect
into the next World, where a new order of things presents it self, what direful
consequences will ensue? This takes away the Scepter of Providence from the
hands of God, and the reverence of God from the hearts of Men, as if the
present state, were a game wherein Chance reigned, and not under the inspection
and disposure of a wise, just and powerful Governor. If there be no Life after
Death, then Natural Religion in some of its greatest Commands, as to
Self-denial, even to the suffering the greatest evils rather than do an unjust
unworthy action, and to sacrifice Life it self when the Honor of God and the
public Good require it, is irreconcilable to that natural Desire and Duty,
that binds and determines Man to seek his own felicity in conjunction with the
Glory of his Maker. But it is impossible that the Divine Law should foil it
self, that contrary obligations should be laid on Man by the wise and holy
Lawgiver. And what terrible confusion would it be in the minds of the best Men?
What coldness of affection to God as if they were not in the comfortable
relation of his Children, but wholly without his care? What discouragements in
his Service? what despair in suffering for him? What danger of their murmuring
against Providence, and casting off Religion as a sour unprofitable severity,
and saying, Surely I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence; or exclaming with Brutus in a desperate manner, when he was overcome
in battle, and defeated of his design, to recover Rome from Tyranny; O infoelix
Virtus! itane, cum nihil nisi nomen esses, Ego te, tanquam rem aliquam exercui?

And the enemies to Holiness restrained by no respects to a superior Power,
will obey their brutish Lusts as their supreme Law; And if such diseases or
troubles happen that the pleasant operations of Life cease, they may release
themselves by a voluntary easy Death, and fall into a sleep never to be
disturbed; so that they would be esteemed the only happy persons.

In short, if we only regard things as they pass in the sensible World, we
shall be in danger of being over-tempted to Atheism, and to rob God of his
Glory and Worship, and that Faith, Fear, Love and Obedience that are due to
him. Of this I will produce only two Examples. Diagoras saw a Servant of his
stealing from him, and upon his denial of the theft, brought him before the
Statue of Jupiter thundering, and constrained him to adjure Jupiter for the
honor of his Deity, and of Justice and Fidelity, to strike him dead at his
feet with Thunder, if he were guilty of the fact, and after three times
repeating the dreadful Oath, he went away untouched without harm. Upon the
sight of this Diagoras cried out, as in the Poet; -- Audis
Jupiter haec, Juvenal. Satyr. 13.
nec labra moves, cum mittere vocem
Debueras vel marmoreus, vel ahaeneus?
Do hear
This Jove, not mov'st thy lips, when fit it were*
Thy Brass or Marble spoke?
And whereas he should have been convinced that a Statue could not be a God, he
impiously concluded that God was nothing but a Statue; and from that time was
hardened in irreclamable Atheism. So that other Alii in ipso capitolio fallunt,
and fulminantem pejerant Jovem; and nos scelera juvant.
Atheist reports of some of the Romans, that they successfully deceived by
false Oaths, even in their most sacred Temple, in the presence of their supreme
Deity, Plin. lib. 2.
the reputed Avenger of Perjury. And because Vengeance did not immediately over
take Guilt, he acknowledged no other God but the World, and Nature, unconcerned
in the governing humane affairs. The disbelief of the future state strikes
through the vital principles of Religion, that there is a God, the rewarder of
Men's good or evil actions.

It may be objected, That God's Dominion over the reasonable Creature is
absolute: For Man ows to him entirely his Being, and all that his Faculties can
produce, so that without reflection on Justice, God may after a course of
obedience, annihilate him.

To this I answer. The Sovereign Dominion of God in its exercise toward Men is
regulated by his Wisdom, and limited by his Will, that is Holy, Just, and Good.
Hence though the Creature can challenge nothing from God as due to its service,
yet there is a Justice of condecence that arises from the excellencies of his
own Nature, and is perfectly consistent with the liberty of his Essence, to
bestow the eminent Effects of his Favors on his faithful Servants. His
Holiness inclines him to love the image of it in the Creature, and his Goodness
to reward it. His Government is paternal, and sweetened by descending Love in
many Favors and Rewards to his obedient Children. There is a resemblance of
our duty to God, and his rewards to us in the order of Nature among Men.
Parents may require of their Children entire obedience, as being the second
Causes of their natural Life. And Children may expect from their Parents what
is requisite for their welfare. Now God, who is the Father of Men, will be true
to his own Rules, and deal with them accordingly, but in a manner worthy of his
infinite Greatness. There is not the least obligation on him, but his
unchangeable Perfections are the strongest Assurances, that none of his shall
obey him to their final prejudice. It Is a direct contrariety to his Nature,
that Men for Conscience of their Duty should part with temporal Happiness in
hopes of eternal, and lose both.

2. It may be objected, That such is the essential beauty of Holiness that it
should ravish our Affections without Ornament or Dowry, that it is its own
Reward, and produces such a sweet Agreement in the Rational Faculties, as fully
compensates the loss of all lower delights, and sweetens the troubles that
befall a virtuous man in the sincere practice of it. And on the contrary, that
such is the native foul deformity of Sin, as renders it most odious for it
self, that it is its own punishment, being attended with inward disquiets and
perplexities, much exceeding all its seeming pleasures. Therefore we cannot
certainly infer there will be future recompenses. But this receives a clearer
Answer.

1. It Is true, that Holiness is most amiable in it self, and in true comparison
infinitely excells all the allurements of Sin.

2. It Is true, that as natural actions that are necessary to preserve the
Species, or the Individuals, are mixed with sensible pleasures, as an attractive
to the performance of them; so there is joined to actions of Virtue that are
more excellent, a present complacency of a superior Order to all carnal
pleasures. But it is a frigid conceit that this is the entire reward. For,
first, besides the inward satisfaction that naturally results from the practice
of Virtue, there is an excellent Good, that is properly the reward of the
supreme Governor of the World. We have an Example of this in humane Justice,
which is an image of the divine. For those who have been eminently serviceable
to the State, besides the joyful sense arising from the performance of Heroic
Actions for the Good of their Country, are rewarded by the Prince with great
Honors and Benefits.

2. This inward Joy is not here felt by all Holy Persons. In this militant
state, after vigorous resistance of carnal Lusts, they may change their
Enemies, and be assaulted with violent Fears, and instead of a sweet calm and
serenity fall into darkness and confusion. The Soul and Body in the present
conjunction mutually sympathize. As two things that are unisons, if one be
touched and moves, the other untouched, yet moves, and trembles. The Tanta vis
est convenientiae, ut rem insensualem sponte se movere faciat, quia ejus sociam
constat agitatam Cassiodor.
cause is from the Vibrations the sound makes in the Air, and impresses on
solid Bodies, moving them according to the harmonious proportion between them.
Thus the Soul and the Body are two strings tempered to such a correspondence,
that if one be moved, the other resents by an impression from it. If the Body
be Sanguin, or Choleric, or Melancholy, the Soul by a strange consent feels
the motion of the humors, and is altered with their alterations. Now some of
excellent virtue are oppressed with Melancholy. Others are under strong pains
that disturb the free operations of the mind, that it cannot without
Supernatural strengih delightfully contemplate what is a just matter of
content. The Stoical Doctrine, that a wise Man rejoices as well in torments, as
in the midst of Quare sapiens si in Phalaridis tauro peruratur, exclamabit,
dulce est, ad me nihil pertinet. Senec.
pleasures, that it is not in the power of any external evil to draw a sigh or
tear from him, that he is sufficient in himself for happiness, is a
Philosophical Romance of that severe sect, an excess unpracticable, without
Cordials of a higher nature than are compounded by the faint thoughts of having
done what is agreeable to Reason. All their Maxims are weak supports of such
triumphant Language. It Is true in a Body disordered and broken with Diseases
and Pains, the mind may be erect and composed, but it is by virtue of Divine
Comforts from the present sense of Gods favor, and the joyful hopes of eternal
felicity in his presence hereafter.

3. Those who suffer the loss of all that is precious and dear in the World,
and with a cheerful confidence submit to death, that, singly considered, is
very terrible to nature, but attended with torments is doubly terrible, and all
to advance the Glory of God, cannot enjoy the satisfaction of mind that
proceeds from the review of worthy actions, if their being is determined with
their life. Now that love to God expressed in the hardest and noblest service
should finally destroy a Man, is not conceivable.

To render this Argument more sensible, let us consider the vast multitude of
the Martyrs in the first times of Christianity, more easy to be admired than
numbered. It would be a History, to describe the instruments of their cruel
sufferings, invented by the fierce wit of their persecutors, the various
torturs to destroy Life with a slow death, such as were never before inflicted
on the guiltiest Malefactors. All which they willingly endured, with an
invariable serenity of countenance, the sign and effect of their inward peace,
Nay with triumphant expressions of Joy. Now to what original shall we attribute
this fortitude of Spirit? were such numbers of all conditions, ages, sects,
induced by rash counsel, by frenzy of passion, by a desire of vainglory, or any
like cause, to part with all that is precious and amiable in the World, for
Swords, and Fire, and Crosses, and Wheels, and Racks, to torment and destroy
their Bodies? No humane Reasons, neither the Virtue nor Vice of Nature,
Generosity nor Obstinacy could possibly give such strength under such Torments.
This was so evident, that many Heathen Spectators were convinced of the Divine
Power miraculously supporting them, and became Proselytes of Christianity, and
with admirable cheerfulness offered themselves to the same punishments. Now
this is an extrinsick testimony incomparably more weighty than from a bare
affirmation in words, or a mere consent of judgment, that there is an unseen
state, infinitely better, and more durable than what is present, the hopes of
which made them esteem the parting with all sensible things, measured by time,
not to have the shadow of a loss. And this was not a mere naked view of a
future blessedness but joined with an impression of that sweetness and
strength, that consolation and force of Spirit, that it was manifest, Heaven
descended to them, before they ascended to Heaven. From hence they were
fearless of those who could only kill the Body, but not touch the Soul. As the
breaking a Crystal in pieces cannot injure the light that penetrated and
filled it, but releases it from that confinement. So the most violent Death was
in their esteem not hurtful to the Soul, but the means to give it entrance into
a happy immortality. Now is it in any degree credible that when no other
principle was sufficient to produce such courage in thousands, so tender and
fearful by nature, that the Divine hand did not support them, invisible in
operation, but most clearly discovered in the effects? And can it be imagined
that God, would encourage them to lose the most valuable of all natural things,
life it self, and to their great cost of pains and misery, if there were not an
estate wherein he would reward their heroic love of himself, with a good that
unspeakably transcends what ever is desirable here below?

2. Though Vice in respect of its turpitude, be the truest dishonor of Man,
and be attended with regret as contrary to his Reason, yet there is a further
punishment naturally due to it. Malefactors besides the infamy that cleaves to
their crimes, and the secret twinges of Conscience, feel the rigor of civil
Justice. And if no Physical evil be inflicted as the just consequent of Vice,
the viciously inclined would despise the moral evil, that is essential to it,
as an imaginary punishment. And when the remembrance of Sin disturbs their
rest, they would presently by pleasant diversions, call off their thoughts from
sad objects.

2. Supposing no other punishment but what is the immediate effect of Sin, the
most vicious and guilty would many times suffer the least punishment. For the
secret Worm of Conscience is most sensible, when vice is first springing up,
and has tender roots. But when vicious habits are confirmed, the Conscience is
past feeling the first resentments. There are many instances of those who have
made the foulest crimes so familiar as to lose the horror that naturally
attends them. And many that have been prosperous in their villanys, dye without
tormenting reflections on their guilt. So that if there be no further
punishments we must deny the Divine Providence, of which Justice is an eminent
part.

CHAP. XII.
Two Arguments more to prove future recompenses. It Is not possible for civil
Justice to dispense rewards and punishments according to the good and evil
actions of Men. All Nations agree in the acknowledgment of a future state. The
innocent Conscience is supported under an unjust Sentence, Chapter XII.
by looking to the superior Tribunal. The courage of Socrates in dying, with
the cause of it. The guilty Conscience terrifies with the apprehension of
judgment to come. Tiberius his complaint to the Senate of his inward tortures.
An answer to the objection that we have not sensible evidence of what is
enjoyed, and what is sufferd in the next life. Why sin, a transient act, is
punished with eternal death.

3. It Is not possible for humane Justice to distribute recompense exactly
according to the moral qualities of actions, therefore we may rationally infer
there will be a future Judgment. This appears by consideriug.

1. That many times those crimes are equally punished here, that are not of
equal guilt: because they proceed from different sources, that lie so low as
the strictest inquisition cannot discover. And many specious actions done for
corrupt ends, and therefore without moral value, are equally rewarded with
those wherein is the deepest tincture of virtue. The accounts of civil Justice
are made by the most visible cause, not by the secret and most operative and
influential. Therefore a superior Tribunal is necessary, to which not only
sensible actions, but their most inward principles are open, that will exactly
judge of moral evils according to their aggravations and allays, and of moral
good according to the various degrees that are truly rewardable.

2. No temporal benefits are the proper and complete reward of obedience to
God. Not the proper; for they are common to bad and good: but the reward of
Holiness must be peculiar to it, that an eminent distinction be made between
the obedient and rebellious to the Divine Laws, otherwise it will not answer
the ends of Government. And they are not the complete rewards of obedience. For
God rewards his Servants according to the infinite treasures of his Goodness.
The sensible World, a Kingdom so vast, so rich, so delightful, is enjoyed by
his enemies. We may therefore certainly infer he has reserved for his faithful
Servants a more excellent felicity, as becomes his glorious goodness.

3. The extremest temporal evils that can be inflicted here, are not
correspondent to the guilt of Sin. Men can only torment and kill the Body, the
instrument and less guilty part, but cannot immediately touch the Soul, the
principal cause, by whose influence humane actions are vicious, and justly
punishable. From hence it follows, that supposing the Wicked should feel the
utmost severity of Civil Laws, yet there remains in another World a dreadful
arrear of misery to be endured as their just and full recompense.

4. In testimony of this Truth, that the Souls of Men are immortal to Rewards
and Punishments, not only the wisest Men, but all Nations have subscribed. The
darkest Pagans have acknowledged a Deity and a Providence, and consequently a
future Judgment. Indeed this spark was almost drowned in an Abyss of Fables:
for in explicating the process and Recompenses of the last Judgment they mixed
many absurd fictions with truth: but in different manners they acknowledged the
same thing, that there remains another life, and two contrary states according
to our actions here. Of this we have a perfect conviction from the immortal
hopes in good Men, and the endless fears in the wicked. The directive
understanding that tells Man his duty, has a reflexive power, and approves or
condemns with respect to the Supreme Court, where it shall give a full
testimony. Hence it is that Conscience so far as innocent, makes an Apology
against unjust Charges, and sustains a Man under the most cruel Sentence, being
persuaded of a superior Tribunal that will rectify the errors of Man's
Judgment: But when guilty, terrifies the Offender with the flashes of Judgment
to come, though he may escape present sufferings. Of this double power of
Conscience I shall add some lively Examples.

Plato represents his admirable Socrates after an unjust Condemnation to Death,
Phaed.
in the Prison at Athens encompast with a noble circle of Philosophers
discoursing of the Souls Immortality, and that having finished his Arguments for
it, he drank the Cup of Poison with Et quum poene manu sua mortiferum teneret
poculum, loquitus est, ut non ad mortem rudi, verum in Coelum videretur
ascendere. Ita enim c^ns^bat, itaque disseruit, duas ^ss^vias, duplicesque
cursus animorum e corpore excedentium. Nam qui se humanis vitiis
contaminassent, and se totos libidinibus dedissent, quibus caecati, vel
domesticis vitiis and flagitiis se inquinassent, vel in republica violanda
frauds inexpiabiles concaepissent, iis devium quoddam iter esse seclusum a
Concilio Deorum. Qui autem se integros Castosque servassent, quibusque suisset
minima cum corporibus contagio, seque ab his semper se^ocassent, essentque in
corporibus humanis vitam imitati Deorum, his ad illos a quibus essent profecti
facilem reditum patere. Tull. de Socrat. lib. 1. Tusc. quaest.
an undisturbed Courage, as one that did not lose but exchange this short and
wretched life for a blessed and eternal. For thus he argued, That there are two
ways of departing Souls leading to two contrary states, of felicity and of
misery. Those who had defiled themselves with sensual Vices, and given full
scope to boundless lusts in their private conversation, or who by frauds and
violence had been injurious to the Commonwealth, are dragged to a place of
torment, and for ever excluded from the joyful presence of the blessed Society
above. But those who had preserved themselves upright and chaste, and at the
greatest distance possible from the contagion of the flesh, and had during
their union with humane bodies imitated the Divine Life, by an easy and open
way returned to God from whom they came. And this was not the sense only of the
more virtuous Heathens, but even some of those who had done greatest force to
the humane Nature, yet could not so darken their Minds, and corrupt their
Wills, but there remained in them stinging apprehensions of punishment
hereafter. Histories inform us of many Tyrants that encompast with the
strongest Guards have been afrighted with the alarms of an accusing Conscience,
and seized on by inward terrors, the forerunners of Hell, and in the midst of
their luxurious stupifying pleasures have been haunted with an evil Spirit,
that all the Music in the World could not charm. The persons executed by their
commands were always in their view, showing their wounds, reproaching their
cruelty, and citing them before the High and Everlasting Judge the righteous
Avenger of innocent Blood. How fain would they have killed them once more, and
deprived them of that life they had in their memories? but that was beyond
their power. Of this we have an eminent instance in Tiberium non fortuna, non
solitudines protegebant, quin tormenta pectoris suasque poenas ipse fateretur.
Tacit.
Tiberius, who in a Letter to the Senate opened the inward wounds of his
Breast, with such words of despair, as might have moved pity in those who were
under the continual fear of his Tyranny. No punishment is so cruel as when the
Offender, and Executioner are the same Person. Now that such Peace and Joy are
the effects of conscious integrity, that such disquiets and fears arise from
guilt, is a convincing Argument that the Divine Providence is concerned in the
Good and Evil done here; and consequently that the comforts of Holy Souls are
the first fruits of eternal Happiness, and the terrors of the Wicked, are the
gradual beginnings of sorrows that shall never end.

Before I finish this Discourse it will be requisite to answer two Objections
that Infidels are ready to make. 1. They argue against the reality of future
recompenses; That they are invisible, and we have no testimony from others who
know the truth of them by experience. As Alexanders Soldiers after his
victories in the East, refused to venture over the Ocean with him for the
conquest of other Kingdoms beyond it, alleging, facile ista finguntur quia
Oceanus navigari non potest. The Seas were so vast and dangerous that no ship
could pass through them. Who ever returned that was there? who has given
Testimony from his own sight of such rich and pleasant Countries? Nothing can
be more easily feigned that it is, than that of which there can be no proof
that it is not. And such is the Language of Infidelity: Of all that undertook
that endless Voyage to another World, who ever came back through the immense
ocean of the Air to bring us news of such a happy Paradise as to make us
despise this World? do they drink the Waters of forgetfulness, so as to lose
the memory of the Earth and its Inhabitants? If there were a place of endless
Torments, of the millions of Souls that every day depart from hence, would none
return to give advice to his dear friends to prevent their misery? Or when they
have taken that last step, is the precipice so steep that they cannot ascend
hither? Or does the Soul lose its wings that it cannot take so high a flight?
These are idle fancies. And from hence they conclude, that none ever return,
because they never come there, but finally perish in the dissolution of the
Body, and are lost in the Abyss of nothing: when they cease to live with us,
they are dead to themselves. And consequently they judge it a foolish bargain to
part with what is present and certain for an uncertain futurity. Thus they make
use of Reason for this end, to persuade themselves that men are of the same
nature with the Beasts, without Reason.

To this I answer. First, though the evidence of the future state be not equal
to that of sense as to clearness, yet it is so convincing, even by natural
light, that upon far less Men form their Judgments, and conduct their
weightiest affairs in the World. To recapitulate briefly what has been
amplified before; Is there not a God the Maker of the World? is there no
Counsel of Providence to govern it? no Law of Righteousness for the distinction
of Rewards? Are there not moral Good and Evil? Are Reason, Virtue, Grace, names
without truth, like Chimaeras of no real kind, the fancies of Nature deceived
and deceiving it self? Are they only wise among Men, the only happy discoverers
of that which is proper, and best, and the All of Man, who most degenerate to
brutishness? shall we judge of the truth of Nature in any kind of beings, by the
Monsters in it? What generation of Animals has any show of veneration of a
Deity, or a value for Justice, either peace or remorse of Conscience, or a
natural desire of an intellectual happiness in life, and an eternal after
death? Is there not even in the present state some experimental sense, some
impressions in the hearts of Men of the Powers of the World to come? These
things are discernable to all unprejudiced minds. And can it be pretended that
there is not a sufficient conviction that Men and Beasts do not equally perish?

2. There is a vail drawn over the Eternal World for most wise Reasons. If the
Glory of Heaven were clear to Sense, if the mouth of the bottomless-Pit were
open before Men's eyes, there would be no place for Faith, and Obedience would
not be the effect of choice but necessity, and consequently there would be no
visible descrimination made between the Holy and the Wicked. The violent
inclinations to sin would be stopped as to the act, without an inward real change
of the Heart. If the Blasphemer or false Swearer were presently struck dumb, if
the Drunkard should never recover his understanding, if the unclean wretch
should immediately be consumed by a hidden Fire, or his sinning flesh putrify
and rot away; if for every vice of the mind, some disease that resembles it in
the Body were speedily inflicted as a just punishment, the World indeed would
not be so full of all kinds of wickedness, so contagious and of such incureable
malignity. But though in appearance it would be less vicious, yet in truth and
reality not more virtuous, For such a kind of goodness, or rather not
guiltiness of the outward sinful act, would proceed not from a Divine
Principle, a free Spirit of love to God and Holiness, but from a low affection,
mere servile fear of Vengeance. And love to Sin is consistent with such an
abstinence from it. As a Merchant that in a Tempest is forced to cast his Goods
into the Sea, not because he hates them, for he throws his Heart after, but to
escape drowning. Now that the real difference between the Godly and the
Impious, the Just and Unjust, the sober and intemperate may appear, God affords
to men such evidence of future things that may satisfy an impartial
considering person, and be a sure defense against temptations that infect and
inchant the careless mind, and pervert the will to make a foolish choice of
things next the senses for happiness. Yet this evidence is not so clear, but a
corrupt heart may by a secret, but effectual influence, darken the
understanding, and make it averse from the belief of unseen things, and
strongly turn it from serious pondering those terrible truths that control the
carnal desires.

3. How preposterous is this inference? Departed Souls never return, therefore
they have no existence, therefore we are but a breath of wind that only so long
remains in being, as it blows, a shadow that is only whiles it appears; let
our hours then that are but few, be filled with pleasures; let us enjoy the
present, regardless of hereafter, that does not expect us. Philosophy worthy of
Brutes! But prudence will conclude if the condition of Souls that go hence be
immutable, and in that place where they arrive, they must be for ever, it
should be our chiefest care to direct them well: if upon our entrance into the
next World Eternity shuts the door upon us, and the happiness and misery of it
is not measured by time, but the one excludes all fear, the other all hope of
Change, it is necessary to govern all our actions with a final respect to that
state. This is to discourse as a Man according to the Principles of right
Reason.

2. If it be objected that it seems hard that a transient sin should be
punished with Eternal Torments: a clear and just answer may be given.

This conceit in Men proceeds from a superficial deceitful view of sin in the
disguises of a temptation, as it flatters the senses, without a sincere
distinct reflection on its essential malignity. From hence they judge of their
sins, as light spots, inevitable accidents, lapses that cannot be prevented by
humane frailty, errors excusable by common practice. Thus the subtilty of Satan
joined with the folly of Men represents great sins as small, and small as none
at all, to undervalue and extenuate some, and to give full license and warrant
to others. And thus deceived, they are ready to think it disagreeing to the
Divine Goodness to punish sin so severely as it is threatened. But did they with
intent and feeling thoughts look through the pleasing surface into the
intrinsic evil of Sin, as it is rebellion against God, and the progeny of a
will corrupted by its own perverseness and pernicious habits, they would be
convinced, that God acts in a manner worthy of his Nature, in the ordaining and
inflicting eternal punishment on impenitent sinners. And it is observable that
most dangerous effects follow by separating these two in the minds of Men. For
if they consider eternal death without respect to the merit of Sin, they easily
conceive of God as incompassionate, an enemy to his Creature, that is pleased
with its misery. And such fearful conceits, such black melancholy vapors
congeal the heart and stupefy its active powers, and cause a desperate neglect
of our duties, as if God would not accept our sincere endeavors to please him.
But if on the other side, they regard their Sins abstracted from the dreadful
punishment that ensues, they form the notion of a Deity soft and careless,
little moved with their faults, easy and indulgent to pardon them. Thus the
sensual presumer becomes secure, and incorrigible in his wickedness. But we
must consider these two Objects as most strictly joined; the Judgment of God
with respect to Sin that always precedes it, and Sin with respect to the
punishment that follows it, in the infallible order of Divine Justice. And thus
we shall conceive of God becoming his perfections: that he is gracious and
merciful, and loves the work of his hands; but that he is Holy and Just, and
hates Sin infinitely more than Men love it. These are the two principal ideas
we should form of God, with respect to his moral Government, and are mainly
influential on his Subject. For the correspondent affections in us to those
Attributes, are a reverent love of his Goodness, and a tender apprehension of
his displeasure, the powerful motives to induce us to the practice of Holiness,
and avert us from sin.

Now that the Divine Law is not hard in its Sanction, forbidding Sin upon the
pain of Eternal Death, will appear by a due representation of the essential
evil of Sin. This is discovered by considering,

1. The Glorious Object against whom it is committed. It Is a Rule universally
acknowledged, that from the quality of the person offended, the Measure and
Weight is taken of the offense. Now as the Nature and Perfections of God, so
his Dignity and Majesty is Infinite, and from hence the transcendent guilt of
Sin arises. The formalis ratio of Sin is disobedience to the Divine Law, and
the least breach of it, even a vain thought, an idle word, an unprofitable
action, is in its proper nature a rebellious contempt of the Authority of the
Wise and Holy Lawgiver. Now that a poor Worm should dare to rebel against the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and if it were possible dethrone him, what
understanding can conceive the vastness of its guilt? No finite sufferings in
what degrees so ever are equal reparation for the offense. After the revolution
of millions of years in a state of misery the sinner cannot plead for a
release; because he has not made full payment for his fault, the rights of
Justice are not satisfied.

If it be objected, that this will infer an equality between all Sins.

I answ. Though there is a great disparity in Sins with respect to their
immediate Causes, Circumstances, complicated Nature and Quality, by which some
have a more odious turpitude adhering to them, yet they all agree in the
general nature of Sin, relating to the Law of God, and consequently in their
order to Eternal Death. The least disobedience has as truly the formality of
Sin, as what is so in the Supreme degree. This may be illustrated by a
comparison. As the Parts of the World compared with one another, are of
different elevation and greatness; the Earth and Water are in the lowest place,
and but as a point to the Celestial Orbs, that are above the highest regions of
the Air; yet if we compare them with that infinite space that is without the
circumference of the Heavens, they are equally distant from the utmost extent
of it, and equally disproportioned to its immensity. For greater or less,
higher or lower, are no approaches to what is Infiniter. Thus there are several
degrees of malignity in sins, compared one with another, but as they are
injurious to the infinite and incomprehensible Majesty of God, there is the
same kind of malignity, and so far an equality between them. Rebellion in the
least instance, is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubbornness in the smallest
matters is as Idolatry; that is, the least Sin is as truly repugnant to the
Divine Law, as those that in the highest manner are opposite to the Truth and
Glory of the Deity. And from hence their proportion to punishment is not
distinguished by temporal and eternal, but by stronger or remisser degrees of
Torment, by suffering the Rods or Scorpions of Justice in that endless duration.

It Is a vain excuse to say that God can receive no hurt by Sin, as will appear
in a case of infinitely a lower nature. The counterfeiting of the Broad-Seal
does no hurt to the Person of the King, but it is injurious to his Honor and
Government, and the Offender incurs the guilt of High Treason, and is punished
accordingly.

2. Consider Man's relation to God as the Creator and Preserver, who gives him
life and innumerable benefits, who conferrs on him the most shining marks of
his favor, and this unspeakably inhances the guilt of Sin against God, by
adding Ingratitude to Rebellion, the abuse of his Goodness to the ignominious
affront of his Majesty. The degrees of Guilt arise in proportion to our Duty
and Obligations. For Man then to turn Enemy against his Father and Sovereign,
to deprave and pervert his Gifts, to deface his Image, to obscure his Glory,
justly provokes his extreme Anger. If in the Judgment of Mankind some heinous
Offenders, as Parricides, the Assassinates of Kings, the Betrayers of their
Country, contract so great a guilt as exceeds the most exquisite Torments that
the Criminal can endure, and no less than Death, that for ever deprives of all
that is valuable and pleasant in this natural life, is an equal punishment to
it; What temporal Sufferings can expiate sin against God? For besides the
transcendent excellence of his Nature, infinitely raised above all other
beings, there are united in him in an incomparable degree, all the Rights that
are inherent in our Parents, Princes, or Country, for benefits received from
them. And may he not then justly deprive ungracious Rebels for ever of the
comforts of his reviving Presence?

3. The necessity of Eternal Recompenses to excite a constant fear in Men of
offending God, makes the Justice of them visible. For (as it has been proved
before) whiles they are clothed with flesh and blood, the disposition
inclining from within, and the temptation urging from without, if the
punishment of sin were not far more terrible, than the pleasures of it are
alluring, there would be no effectual restraint upon the riots of the carnal
appetite. Now if civil Justice, for the preservation of society, wisely decrees
such penalties for offenses as are requisite to maintain the honor of Laws
that are founded in equity, either by preventing, or by repairing the the
injury done to them; Is it not most righteous that the Supreme Lord of the
World should secure obedience to his most holy Laws, by annexing such penalties
as are necessary to induce a reverence of them in his Subjects, and to execute
the sentence in full severity upon presumptuous Transgressors? without this the
Divine Government would be dissolved.

4. Eternal Life, and Eternal Death are set before Men, to encourage them to
obedience and deter them from Sin, so that none dies but for wilful
impenitence. And can there be the least aspersion of unjust rigor cast on
God's proceedings in Judgment? If it be said, it is so contrary to the most
inviolable inclinations of Nature, that no Man can choose his own destruction:
to that a full answer may be given. It Is true Man cannot divest Reason and
Sense so as to choose directly and intentionally Eternal Misery, but vertually
and by consequence he does. For the deliberate choice of Sin as pleasant or
profitable, though damnable in the issue, is by just interpretation a choosing
of the punishment that attends it. And to make it clear, that sinners are in
love with perishing, let us consider,

1. The inestimable reward of Obedience they refuse. It Is a felicity worth as
much as the enjoyment of God himself, and as durable as Eternity. Now what is
put in the Balance against Heaven? Only this World that passes away, with the
lusts thereof. And it argues a violent propension in the will to carnal things,
when the little fleeting pleasures of Sense (how empty, how vanishing!)
outweigh in the competition the substantial everlasting Blessedness of the
Spirit. And what a vile contempt is it of the Perfections of God, that such
base things, such trifling Temptations should be chosen before him? Were it not
visibly true, Reason would deny the possibility of it. It Is as if the Wife of a
Prince should prefer in her affections before him a diseased deformed Slave.
Or, as if one should choose the food of Beasts, Hay, Acorns or Carrion, before
the provisions of a Royal Table. This is no Hyperbole, no Exaggregation, but
the reality, infinitely exceeds all Figures. And is it not perfectly reasonable
that sinners should inherit their own option?

2. This rejecting of Eternal Life by sinners, is peremptory against the best
and often renewed means to induce them to accept of it. They are allured by the
sweetest Mercies, urged by the strongest terrors, to forsake their beloved
lusts and be happy. And till the riches of goodness and forbearance are
despised, they are not past hopes. For though the sentence of the Law be
decisive upon the first act of sin, yet it is not irrevocable but upon
impenitence in it. But when sin has such an absolute Empire in the Will, that
no obligations, no invitations can prevail with it, it is manifest, that
obstinacy is an ingredient in the refusal of Heaven. And is it not most just
that an obstinate aversation from God should be punished with an everlasting
exclusion from his Glory? This will clearly vindicate Divine Justice, and
render sinners excuseless in the day of accounts. God will overcome when he
judges, and every mouth be stopped. This will be a fiery addition to their
misery, and feed the never dying Worm. For by reflecting upon what they have
irrecoverably lost, and what they must for ever suffer, and that by their own
wretched choice, the awakened Conscience turns the most cruel fiend against it
self. In Hell there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Extreme Misery and
extreme Fury, Despair and Rage, are the true Characters of Damnation.

CHAP. XIII. Chapter XIII.

What influence the Doctrine of the future state should have upon our practice.
It must regulate our esteem of present things. And reconcile our affections to
any condition here, so far as it may be an advantage to prepare us for the
better World. The chiefest care is due to the immortal part. The just value of
Time and how it should be improved. It Is the best Wisdom to govern our whole
course of life here, with regard to Eternity that expects us.

I Will now briefly show what influence this principle of Natural Religion
should have on our practice. It Is not a matter of pure speculation, but
infinitely concerns all. For whatever inequality there is between Men with
respect to temporal Accidents in the present state, yet there is no difference
with regard to things future. Their Souls are equally immortal, and capable of
the same blessedness, and liable to the same misery. It is most necessary
therefore to reflect upon what so nearly touches us. If the eternal state
hereafter were not an infallible Truth, but only a probable opinion, and the
Arguments for and against it were so equal, that the Understanding remained in
suspense, yet the importance is so vast, either to enjoy for ever the clear
vision of God, or to be cast into an everlasting Hell, that Prudence requires
all possible diligence in whatever is necessary to obtain the one, and escape
the other. But this Doctrine is not merely within the terms of Probability, but
is clear, by irrefutable evidence. And if those profane Miscreants who
endeavor by frigid Railleries to expose the serious care of Salvation to
scorn, and by trifling Arguments would fain weaken their assent to this great
Truth, had not lost the humane property of blushing, they would be covered with
Confusion, whilst they contradict not only what the wisest and best Men have
unanswerably proved, but what their very opposition confirms. For the doubting
of the Soul's Immortality, is a strong Argument that it is immortal. Because,
only a spiritual being, and therefore not liable to dissolution and death, is
capable of reflecting whether it shall continue for ever.

It does not require subtilty of wit, or strength of Reason to draw out the
proper uses of this Doctrine, as Gold from the Mines by digging into the bowels
of the Earth; but the Consequences are clear and sensible to all that will duly
consider things. If in the next World there are good things and evil things,
great, as the possessing or losing an infinite Felicity, and lasting as
Eternity, and distant from us no farther than Death is from Life, that is, then
a Candle from being blown out that is exposed to all the winds, it is absolutely
necessary to regulate our selves in the present state by a continual respect to
the future. As the Travelers in the Desert of Arabia, (that is all Sand,
movable by every blast, so that no visible path remains to prevent their
wanderings) observe the Stars to direct them in their Journey to the place they
intend. Thus we must look not to the things that are seen, but to things that
are not seen, eternal above, to conduct us safely through this material mutable
World to Felicity. More particularly,

1. This should regulate our Judgment of all temporal things. Worldly happiness
is but a Picture, that seen by Sense, the false light of the present time, has
an alluring appearance, but if looked on by Faith the true light of Eternity,
it is discovered to be a disfigured and unamiable confusion of spots. This
unbinds the Charm, and discovers the vanity and illusion of what ever is
admirable in the eyes of flesh. Can any carry the least mark of Honor, one
farthing of their Treasures, any shadow of their Beauty, one drop of their
Pleasure with them to another World? As in the Night all Colors are the same,
the Crimson cannot be distinguished from Black, nor Purple from Green: when the
light is withdrawn that gave them life, they cease to be visible, and are
buried in the same indifferent obscurity. So in the state after Death, the most
remarkable differences of this World are no more. And is that worthy of our
esteem that attends us for a little time, and leaves us for ever? Can that be
our happiness that when we die and cease to be mortal, ceases to be ours? If
Man did only live to die, and there were an absolute end of him, present things
were more valuable in the quality of an earthly Felicity, as being his All; but
if he dies to live in another World, and all that in the language of the Earth
(full of Improprieties and moral Soloecisms) we call ours, must be left at the
gates of Death, the entrance of Eternity, they cannot be the materials of our
happiness.

Seneca, contemplating the beauty and greatness of those Orbs of Light above,
cast down his Eyes to find out the Earth hardly visible at that distance, and
breaks forth in a Philosophical disdain, Is it this to which the great designs
and vast desires of Men are confined? Is it for this there is such disturbance
of Nations, Wars and shedding of Blood? O folly, O fury of deceived Men! to
imagine great Kingdoms in the compass of an Atome, to raise Armies to divide a
point of Earth with their Swords! It Is just as if the Ants should conceive a
Field to be several Kingdoms, and fiercely contend to enlarge their borders,
and celebrate a Triumph in gaining a foot of earth, as a new Province to their
Empire. Sursum ingentia spatia in auorum possessionem Animus admittitur.
And from hence he excites Men to ascend in their thoughts, and take an
intellectual possession of the material Heavens, as most worthy of their minds.
But the Soul that raised by Faith looks beyond the Starry Heavens, how much
more justly is it filled with noble wonder at the Divine and truly great
things, in the Spiritual World, and looks down on the lower Scene of things,
and all that has the name of felicity here, as sordid and vile? The foresight
that within a little while this World shall be dissolved, and time shall be no
more, makes it not seem to be in the Eyes of a Believer that great thing, as
it is represented to the rest of Men. He looks upon those who shine in Pomp and
flow in Pleasure, and think themselves happy, to be as a Beggar in a Dream,
that thinks himself rich in treasures: for present things are only colored
with the appearence of felicity, and are as vanishing as the fictions of fancy.
While carnal Men will believe nothing but what they see, feel and enjoy by
their Senses, and embrace mere shadows as solid felicity, he considers them
with compassion. For it is with them, as with one that in the rage of a Fever,
laughs, sings, triumphs. Tell him that he is not himself, he thinks you are mad
for saying so. Tell him when his fiery spirits shall be wasted, and that heat
of Blood that makes him so lively and strong, shall decline and cool, he will
be in extreme danger of Death; he replies he was never in better health. But
who envies him that happiness which he seems to enjoy? none but one that is a
madman like him. Nay, a Father, a Brother, a Friend look on him with a
mourning Eye and Heart: For he is only happy in his own conceit, and that
conceit proceeds from his distraction. Thus the power of Truth is victorious in
sober men, and does not suffer them to be cheated with the false show of good
that respects the Body. No credit is given to the appearance of Sense, when
Reason discerns the Deception, and judges otherwise. And thus the clear
infallible light of Faith directs the Judgment of things present with respect
to the eternal Interest of the Soul. This makes a Believer prefer severe Wisdom
before the sweetest Follies, unpleasing Truth before all the dear Deceits of
sensual Persons.

In short, Faith removes the thick Curtain of sensible things, that intercepted
the Eye of the Mind, and its first Effect is to show the incomparable
disproportion between what is present and what is future: and this is as great
as between the living of a few years, and an incorruptible state; between the
wretched enjoyment of things that cannot satisfy the Senses, and the enjoyment
of a universal Good that can fill all the desires of the Soul; as between a
inch of Time and entire Eternity; between Nothing masked with a false
appearance, and infinite Felicity.

2. The consideration of the Souls immortality should reconcile our affection
to all things that may befall us here, so far as they are preparatory for our
welbeing in the future state. The original Principle from whence are derived
all Rules for practice, and of main influence upon our Comforts is, that Man is
created for a supernatural happiness hereafter, and that present things are to
be chosen or refused with respect to our obtaining of it. For the means,
whatever they are in their absolute nature, yet considered as such in order to
an end, are qualified and become either good or evil, as conducive to it, or
unprofitable, and prejudicial. A Way that is thorny or dirty, or steep or
stony, is good if it leads me to my Country where I can only live happily. On
the contrary, a plain flowery carpet Way is bad, that leads me from it. Now
since the present life conveys us to another, Poverty or Riches, Sickness or
Health, splendour of Name or Obscurity, an high or a low Condition, become good
or evil to us, and accordingly are eligible, as they prepare us for our last
and blessed End, or divert us from it. If the clearness of this principle be
obscured, we shall stumble every step, and wander from the way of life. But
duly considered, it makes us judge of things as they are, not as they appear.
This unravels the doubts of the entangled Mind, corrects the mistakes of the
erring Eye, levels the greatest Difficulties, clears all the Objections against
Providence, and makes an afflicted state not only tolerable, but so far amiable
as it promotes our supreme Happiness. Let us consider the two Worlds, the
visible wherein we are, and the invisible to which we are going, and
impartially compare what is proper to the one and the other. The present and
the future, the sensible and divine, the apparent and real, the transitory and
perpetual happiness. And what reference these two Worlds have to Man, the one
serves him only as a Passage, the other is his ever blessed Country. Therefore
whatever the present state has of sweet or bitter, whatever is desired or
feared, as it passes with Time, should little move us. Who is there, unless
disordered in his Mind, that when the Sun is present in its full luster before
his eyes, rejoices to have, or is sorry that he has not a Candle, that he may
see more clearly? And this Life to Eternity is not so much as a spark of Light
to the Sun, and accordingly the Prosperity or Adversity of it should not
transport us to an excess of Joy or Sorrow, but with an equal temper of Mind,
and calm Affections, we should receive the dispensations of Providence.

3. How just is it that the Soul should have the preeminence in all respects
above the Body. The one is the fading offspring of the Earth, the other of an
heavenly extraction, and incorruptible nature. When Quis nunc extremus ideota,
vel quae abjecta muliercula non credit animae immortalitatem? Quod apud Graecos
olim primus Pherecides Assyrius cum disputasset, Pythagoram Samium illius
disputationis novitate permotum, ex Athleta in Philosophum convertit. Nunc vero
quod ait Maro, Amomum Assyrium vulgo nascitur. Aug. Ep. ad Volust.
Pherecides the Assyrian first taught among the Grecians the doctrine of the
Souls Immortality, his discourse so prevailed on Pythagoras of Samos, that it
changed him from an Athleta into a Philosopher. He that before wholly attended
upon his Body to make it excel in strength or agility, that he might contend
victoriously in the Olympic Games, then made it his business to improve and
advance his Soul in Knowledge and Virtue. And if the glimmering appearances of
this great Truth were so powerful upon him, how much more should the clear and
certain discoveries of it be operative to make us chiefly regard the interest
of our immortal part.

The state of Nature requires, that Reason should have the supremacy in Man,
and Sense should obey; but if the lower part tyrannises over the superior, and
that which was so offensive to Solomon, to see Servants on horseback, and
Princes walking on foot, be verified in a more ignoble sense, it is the greatest
degeneracy and vilification of the humane nature. Now the predominant Object
discovers what is the ruling faculty. If sensual things have the superior
esteem and love, Sense reigns. And what a contumely is it to Man, when the
Understanding, that was made to contemplate Objects of a spiritual sublime
nature, is principally exercised for the acquiring of earthly things, and the
Affections that are capable of enjoying heavenly delights, run with a full
stream in the channels of Concupiscence. As if the reasonable Soul were not for
higher ends than to be the slave of the Body, to be employed to digest the
confused Chaos of Meats and Drinks wherewith it is filled, to give it a quicker
perception of its pleasures, and keep it from corruption for a time. If sensual
Wretches could obtain what the unclean Spirits desired of our Savior, when
dispossessed of the man in the Gospel, they would request in their last hour when
they are ready to be cast out of the Body, permission to enter into the Swine,
and wallow in mire and filthiness. This is an indignity equally dishonorable
and pernicious. As 'twas said of Caligula, Nec Servum meliorem, nec deteriorem
Dominum, while a Subject none more obedient, but when advanced to the Throne,
he became the Reproach of the Empire, and Plague of the World: So while the
Body obeys the sanctity and sovereignty of the Mind, it is an useful Instrument,
but if it usurp the Government, the Spirit is deprest in the most ignominious
Captivity, and Man becomes like the Beasts that perish. Briefly, the common
fountains of Temptation are Pleasure and Pain that affect the outward senses,
and 'til the Soul has an established dominion over the Body, it is continually
exposed to ruin by fleshly lusts that war against it.

The proper business of Man is to purify his Spirit from all Pollutions, to
adorn it with all Graces in order to its everlasting Communion with the Father
of Spirits. And though in this state of union with flesh, he cannot be always
contemplative, nor exercised in the highest and noblest work, but must relax
his intense thoughts by refreshing intermissions, yet all that is allowed the
Body, must be only to make it more ready and disposed for the service of the
Mind. But alas! the Soul that should be incomparably dearest to us, in respect
of its preciousness and danger, is neglected as the only despicable or safe
thing belonging to us. Of the twenty four hours in the day how much is wasted
on the Body, how little is given to the Soul? as if all the time were lost that
is spent on it, when it is truly gained. What an unequal division is this? Can
there be imagined a more hurtful and monstrous profuseness, and covetousness in
the same persons? If the Body be shaken with Diseases, what are they not
willing to do, or patiently to suffer, to recover lost Health? Long and
rigorous Diets to overcome some obstinate Humors, Potions distasteful to the
Palate and painful to the Stomach, Sweatings, Bleeding, the Knife, and the Fire,
to cut off the gangreen'd part, and sear the vessels, and many more sharp
Remedies it is counted prudence to suffer, to preserve the life of the Body. And
can that be preserved always? No. All this is done not to escape, but to delay
Death for a time. If we are so sollicitous that the mortal Body may dye a
little later, shall we not be more diligent and careful that the immortal Soul
may not die for ever?

4. This should make us set a just value upon time, and consecrate it to those
things that are preparatory for the future state of blessedness. Indeed the
present Life, though spun out to the utmost date, how short and vain is it? But
as it is the price of Eternity, and our wel-being hereafter depends upon it,
it is above all esteem precious. When Live.
Popilius, by order of the Roman Senate, required Antiochus to withdraw his
Army from the King of Egypt, and he desired time to deliberate upon it, the
Roman drew a Circle with his Wand about him, and said, In hoc stans delibera,
give a present Answer before you move out. Thus Eternity, whose proper Emblem
is a Circle, a Figure without end, presents to us Life and Death, that after a
short time expects all men, and here we must make our choice. And shall a
mortal coldness possess us in an affair of such importance? We cannot so fast
repair the ruins of the Body, but that every day Death makes nearer
approaches, and takes away some spoils that cannot be recovered, and will
shortly force the Soul to leave its habitation; and shall we not secure a
retreat for it in the Sanctuary of Life and Immortality?

Can any make a Covenant with Death? Is it to be overcome by the strength of
the young, or appeased by the tears and supplications of the old? It Is equally
invincible and inexorable. The greenest Age is ripe for dying; the Fruit that
does not fall, is plucked and gathered. Every one is under the same sentence,
and so far equally disposed to dye. None can assure himself the continuance of
a day, and shall we be desperately careless of our main Concernment? shall we
waste this unvaluable Treasure in idleness, or actions worse than idleness?
shall we spend it to purchase transient vanities? The gaining the whole World
is not worth the expense of this light of Life. 'Twas given us for more
excellent ends, to work out our own Salvation, to secure our everlasting
Interest. How should we redeem every hour, and live for Heaven? This is our
chief and indispensible affair, and the neglect of it for a day, is of infinite
hazard. Our season is short, our omission irreparable. If we could clip the
wings of Time, and stop its flight, there might be some pretense for delay; but
the Sun drives on apace, we cannot bid it stand still one hour. Cum celeritate
temporis utendi velocitate certandum: tanquam ex torrente rappido, nec semper
casuro cito hauriendum est. Senec. de brevit. vit.
Our diligence in improving Time should be equal to its swift motion: We should
speedily draw from it what is necessary, as from a rapid Torrent that will
quickly be dried up.

'Twas a wise Answer to one that asked why the Plut. Apoth.
Lacedaemonians were so slow in passing Capital Judgments; why so many
Examinations taken, so many Defenses permitted to the Accused; and after
Conviction and Sentence, such a space of time before Execution. The reason of
it is, because an error in that case is incorrigible. They might kill the
Living, but could not revive the Dead. Now, since after Death is inflicted on
the guilty Soul it is lost for ever, how should it stop Men in the voluntary and
precipitate Condemnation of themselves, by the wilful rejecting of the Grace,
that is offered to them upon their present acceptance?

To draw to an end; it follows from what has been discoursed, that it is the
most necessary and highest point of Wisdom, to conduct our Lives with a respect
to the Tribunal above, that will pass a righteous and unchangeable Sentence
upon Men, for all the good and evil done here. The Consequence is so manifest
and palpable that nothing but perfect Madness can deny. If there be a spark of
Reason, a grain of Faith, the Mind must assent to it. For if Prudence consist
in the choice and use of means to procure the Good we want, and in preventing
the Evil we justly fear, certainly according as the Good is more noble and
difficult, or the Evil more dangerous and destructive, the more eminent is the
Wisdom in obtaining our end. Now what is the chief Good to which all our
desires should turn, and our endeavors aspire? What are Crowns, Scepters,
Robes of State, splendour of Jewels, Treasures, or whatever the Earth has in any
kind or degrees of good? They are only the little entertainments of the Body,
the viler part of Man: But the perfect and perpetual Fruition of God, is the
Blessedness of the Soul, and infinitely excels the other. And proportionably
it is not the loss of temporal things that is the greatest Evil, but the losing
Heaven and the immortal Soul is above all degrees of valuation. Now it is
strange to amazement, that those who profess to believe these things should
live in a constant opposition to their belief. How vigorously do they prosecute
their secular designs? they build Estates, and make Provisions tanquam semper
victuri, as if they were Omnia tanquam mortales timetis: Omnia tanquam
immortales concupiscitis. Sen. de brev. vit.
eternal Inhabitants here. But how remiss and cold are they in order to Heaven?
and to escape the Wrath to come. Libertines are uniform and regular according
to their Principles; they are Infidels, and live as Infidels: there is no
contradiction between their thoughts and actions. The remembrance of Death
rather inflames than checks their Appetites to sinful pleasures; as the
sprinkling Water does not quench the Fire, but makes it more fierce. They know
they shall continue here but a short time, and resolve to make the best of it
for carnal purposes. But infinite numbers of those who in title are Citizens of
another World, and declare their belief of a future state, yet are as careless
to prepare for it, as if the great Judgment, and the dreadful Eternity that
follows, were Romantic Fables. They are Believers in their minds, and Infidels
in their lives. From whence comes this monstrous Composition of two Extremes,
so contrary and difficult to be united, as the Sun and Darkness, or Fire and
Water in their actual forms? For Men to believe there is a Heaven, and to be in
love with the Earth; to believe an everlasting Hell shall be the reward of Sin,
and yet to go on in Sin? O the sottish Folly of Men! What enticing Sorcery
perverts them? It Is because, that temporal things are sensible and present, and
eternal things are spiritual and future. But how graceless and irrational is
this? Has not the Soul perceptive faculties as well as the Body? are not its
objects transcendently more excellent? Is not its union with them more intimate
and ravishing? Must the sensual Appetites be heard before Reason, and the Soul
be unnaturally set below the respects of the Body? If the most splendid
temptations of the flesh are but dross to the happiness of the Spirit, is it
not true Wisdom to distinguish and despise them in the comparison? For this end
God has placed us in the World, that with equal Judgment we may balance
things, and preferring the great and solid Good before a vain appearance, our
choice may be unconstrained, and his mercy take its rise to reward us. And how
foolish is it to neglect eternal things because they are future? Is it not a
common complaint that Life is short, that it flies away in a breath? and if
Death be so near, can Eternity be so distant? Besides, do Men want an
understanding to foresee things to come? In their Projects for this World, how
quick-sighted and provident are they, to discover all probable inconveniences
afar off, and lay the Scene to avoid them? And is Reason only useful in the
affairs of the Body, and must Sense, that cannot see an hands-breadth beyond
the present, be the guide of the Soul? Well, though the most powerful Reasons,
the most ardent Exhortations, and stinging Reprehensions cannot prevail with
the Sons of the Earth now to be apprehensive of the Evils that threaten them,
but they live in a blind manner regardless of the Soul, yet in a little while
Extremities will compel them to open their eyes. When they are departing hence,
with one foot upon the brink of Time, and the other lift up to enter Eternity,
how will they be astonished to see the distance between this World and the
next, which seemed to them so wide, to be but one step? The present Life, that
in their imaginations would never end, and the future that would never begin,
(so intent were they for the provisions of the one, and neglectful of the
other) behold the one is gone, and the other come. Time is at their back with
all its vanities, and Eternity before their faces with its great realities. How
are their thoughts and discourses changed in that terrible hour, that will
decide their states for ever? they did foolishly for themselves, but then speak
wisely for the instruction of others. How piercing and quick are their
apprehensions then of Heaven and Hell, which before were neglected as unworthy
of regard, or only touched the surface of their Souls? what amazement, what
dejection of Spirit, to find themselves in a sad unpreparedness for their great
Account? the remembrance, that for the poor advantages of time, they forfeited
Eternal Glory, and ventured on Eternal Misery, cuts more sorely than the pangs
of Death. But suppose they harden their hearts to the last minute of life, and
are more stupid than the Beasts that tremble upon a precipice, at the sight of
extreme danger, yet a minute after Death, (O the heavy change!) when they shall
feel themselves undone infinitely and irrecoverably, What fierce and violent
workings will be in the mind? what a storm of passions raised? But then
Repentance will be with perfect sorrow, without the least profit. There are no
returns to the possibility of mercy.

I will conclude this Discourse with a passage from the most humble and
excellent St. Austin. He bewails, in his Confession, his long bondage under
Sin. His carnal lusts, adhered as closely to him, as the Ivy twines about the
Oak, that there can be no separation without eradicating it, and plucking the
Bark off the Tree. He felt an inward continual Combat between the Flesh and
Spirit. He often shook the Chain wherewith he had voluntarily bound himself,
but had not the resolution to break it. And thus for a time his Judgment
abhorred what his Affections were inclined to, and he was neither victorious nor
vanquished. But when God was pleased by his omnipotent Grace to set him at
liberty, the last and most violent Assault of the Flesh, and that which made
his Conversion most difficult was this; His Youthful Lusts presented themselves
to his Imagination, and as that impure Mistress did with chaste Joseph,
Succutiebant vestem meam carneam, and murmurabant dimittisne nos? and a momento
isto non erimus tecum ultra in aeternum? and a momento isto non licebit tibi
hoc et illud ultra in aeternum?
shook the Garment of his Flesh, and whispered, Will you renounce us? shall
there be a divorce between you and your ancient Loves for ever? shall not this
or that desire of the Senses be contented for ever? And what was that for ever?
it only signified the short remainder of his time after thirty three years,
which was then his Age. And this is the most effectual hinderance of the
reclaiming of Sinners still. They will not be induced to make an irrevokable,
unreserv'd dedication of themselves to God, and firmly to resolve never to
taste forbidden sweets more, but always abhor the relish of them. But if it be
so hard and intolerable always to abstain from unlawful pleasures, and much
more to suffer pain in the short space, the moments of this Life, that it seems
an Eternity to corrupt Nature, what will it be in the true Eternity to be
deprived of all Good, and tormented with all Evils, despairing of release, or
quenching one spark of that terrible Fire? O that Men were wise, to consider
their latter end, and the consequences of it, their Mortality and Immortality.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. 1. page 1.
ATheism is fearful of public discovery. Three heads of Arguments to prove
the Being of a God. 1. The visible frame of the World, and the numerous Natures
in it, exactly modelled for the good of the whole, prove it to be the work of a
most wise Agent. The World considered in its several parts. The Sun in its
situation, motion, and effects, declare the Providence of the Creator. The
diurnal motion of the Sun from East to West is very beneficial to Nature. The
Annual course brings admirable advantage to it. The gradual passing of the
sensible World, from the excess of Heat to the extremity of Cold, an effect of
Providence. The constant Revolutions of the Day and Night, and of the Seasons
of the Year, discovers that a wise Cause order them.

Chap. 2. page 19.
The Air a fit medium to convey the Light and Influences of the Heavens of the
lower World. It Is the repository of Vapors that are drawn up by the Sun, and
descend in fruitful showers. The Winds of great benefit. The separation of the
Sea from the Land the effect of great Wisdom and Power. That the Earth is not
an equal Globe, is both pleasant and useful. The League of the Elements
considered. Excellent Wisdom visible in Plants and Fruits. The shapes of
Animals are answerable to their properties. They regularly act to preserve
themselves. The Bees, Swallows, Ants, directed by an excellent mind.

Chap. 3. page 34.
The Body of Man formed with perfect design for Beauty and Usefulness. A short
description of its parts. The fabric of the Eye and Hand admirably discovers
the Wisdom of the Maker. The erect stature of the Body fitted for the rational
Soul. Man by speech is fitted for Society. How the Affections are discovered in
the Countenance. The distinction of Persons by the face, how necessary. The
reasonable Soul the image of a wise and voluntary Agent.

Chap. 4. page 51.
The vanity of Epicurus's Opinion of the Worlds original, discovered, from the
visible order in all the parts of it. Chance produces no regular effects. The
constant natural course of things in the World, proves that it is not framed nor
conducted by uncertain Chance. The World was not caused by the necessity of
Nature. In the search of Causes the mind cannot rest till it comes to the
first. Second Causes are sustained and directed in all their workings by the
first. The Creator, though invisible in his Essence, is visible in his effects.

Chap. 5. page 71.
The beginning of the World proved, from the uninterrupted Tradition of it
through all Ages. The Invention of Arts, and bringing them to perfection, an
Argument of the Worlds beginning. The weakness of that Fancy, that the World is
in a perpetual Circulation from Infancy to Youth, and to full Age, and a
decrepit state and back again, so that Arts are lost and recovered in that
change. The consent of Nations a clear Argument that there is a God. The
impressions of Nature are infallible. That the most Men are practical Atheists;
that some doubt and deny God in words, is of no force to disprove his
Existence. There are no absolute Atheists. Nature in extremities has an
irresistible force, and compels the most obdurate to acknowledge the Deity.

Chap. 6. Page 22.
The belief of the Deity no Politic Invention. The asserting that it is
necessary to preserve States in order, is a strong proof of its truth. No
History intimates when this belief was introduced into the World. The
continuance of it, argues that its rise was not from a Civil Decree. Princes
themselves are under the fears of the Deity. The multitude of false Gods does
not prejudice the natural notion of one true God. Idolatry was not universal.
The Worship of the only true God is preserved where Idolatry is abolished.

Chap. 7. page 105.
The duties of understanding Creatures, to the Maker of all things. Admiration
of his glorious Perfections visible, in them. This is more particularly the
duty of Man, the World being made eminently for him. The Causes why the Creator
is not honored in his Works, are Men's ignorance and inobservance. Things new
rather affect us, than great. An humble fear is a necessary respect from the
Creature, to the Divine Majesty and Power. Love and Obedience in the highest
degrees are due from men to God, in the quality of Creator. Trust and Reliance
on God is our duty and privilege.

Chap. 8. page 146.
The Immortality of the Soul depends on the conservative influence of God.
Natural and Moral Arguments to prove that God will continue it for ever. The
Soul is incapable of perishing from any corruptible principles, or separable
parts. Its spiritual nature is evident by the acts of its principal faculties.
The Understanding conceives spiritual objects; is not confined to singular and
present things: Reflects upon it self: Corrects the errors of the sense: Does
not suffer from the excellency of the object. Is vigorous in its operations
when the Body is decayed, which proves it to be an immaterial faculty. An
Answer to Objections against the Souls spiritual nature. That the first notices
of things are conveyed through the senses, does not argue it to be a material
faculty. That it depends on the temper of the Body in its superior operations,
is no prejudice to its spiritual nature.

Chap. 9. page 170.
The Acts of the Will considered. Its choice of things distastful to Sense, and
sometimes destructive to the Body, argue it to be a spiritual principle. The
difference between Man and Brutes amplified. The spiritual operations of the
Soul may be performed by it self in a separate state. This is a strong proof
God will continue it. The Platonic Argument that Man unites the two orders of
Natures, intelligent and sensible, immortal and perishing.

Chap. 10. page 181.
The moral Arguments for the Souls Immortality. The restless desire of the Soul
to an intellectual eternal happiness, argues it survives the Body. The lower
order of Creatures obtain their perfection here. It reflects upon Nature, if
the more noble fails of its end. That wicked men would choose annihilation,
rather than eternal torments, is no proof against Man's natural desire of
Immortality. The necessity of a future state of Recompenses for moral actions,
proves the Soul to be immortal. The Wisdom of God, as Governor of the World,
requires there be Rewards and Punishments annexed to his Laws. Eternal Rewards
are only powerful to make men obedient to them in this corrupt state. Humane
Laws are no sufficient security of Virtue, and restraint from Vice.

Chap. 11. Page 198.
The Justice of God an infallible Argument of future recompenses. The natural
notion of God includes Justice in Perfection. In this World sometimes Virtue
and Vice are equally miserable. Sometimes Vice is prosperous. Sometimes good
Men are in the worst condition. The dreadful consequences of denying a future
state. Gods absolute Dominion over the Reasonable Creature, is regulated by his
Wisdom, and limited by his Will. The essential beauty of Holiness, with the
pleasure that naturally results from good actions, and the native turpitude of
Sin, with the disturbance of the mind reflecting on it, are not the complete
recompenses that attend the Good and the Wicked.

Chap. 12. Page 223.
Two Arguments more to prove future recompenses. It Is not possible for civil
Justice to despense rewards and punishments according to the good and evil
actions of Men. All Nations agree in the acknowledgment of a future state. The
innocent Conscience is supported under an unjust Sentence, by looking to the
superior Tribunal. The courage of Socrates in dying, with the cause of it. The
guilty Conscience terrifies with the apprehension of Judgment to come. Tiberius
his complaint to the Senate of his inward tortures. An Answer to the Objection,
that we have not sensible evidence of what is enjoyed, and what is suffered in
the next life. Why Sin, a transient act, is punished with Eternal Death.

Chap. 13. Page 257.
What influence the Doctrine of the future state should have upon, our
practice. It must regulate our esteem of present things. And reconcile our
affections to any condition here, so far as it may be an advantage to prepare
us for the better World. The chiefest care is due to the Immortal part. The
just value of Time, and how it should be improved. It Is the best Wisdom to
govern our whole course of Life here, with regard to Eternity that expects us.

FINIS.
There is lately Reprinted a Book, entitled The Harmony of the Divine
Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of Man's Redemption by the
Lord Jesus Christ. Or, Discourses, wherein is showed, how the Wisdom, Mercy,
Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God are glorified in that great and
blessed Work. By W. Bates, D. D. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three
Pigeons over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil


