(...) Or a LETTER To a Friend; tending to prove, I. That Valid Ordination
ought not to be repeated. II. That Ordination by Presbyters is Valid.


WITH AN APPENDIX, In which, some brief ANIMADVERSIONS Are made upon a Lately
Published Discourse of M. JOHN HUMFREY, concerning REORDINATION.

By R.A. a Lover of Truth and Peace.

Nulla ostenditur causa, our ille qui ipsum Baptismum amittere non potest, jus
dandi amittere possit, utrumque enim Sacramentum est; and quadam consecratione
utrumque homini datur, illud cum baptizatur, istud cum ordinatur, ideoque in
catholica utrumque non licet iterare, nam si quando ex ipsa part venientes
etiam preapositi pro bon^ pacis correcto schismatis errore suscepti sunt, and
si visum est opus esse, ut eadem officia gererent quae gerebant, non sunt
rursus ordinandi, sed sicut Baptismus in iis, ita ordinatio mansit integra;
quia in praecisione fuerat vitium, quod unitatis pace correctum est, non in
Sacramentis quae ubicunque sunt, ipsa vera sunt: and cum expedire hoc videatur
Ecclesiae, ut praepositi little venientes ad Catholicam societatem honores suos
ibi non administrent; non eis tamen ipsa Ordination is Sacramenta detrahuntur,
sed manent super eos, ideoque eis in populo manus non imponitur, ne non homini,
sed ipsi Sacramento fiat injuria, Aug. Con. Epist Parmen.

Lib. 2. Cap. 13. London, Printed for J. S. and are to be sold in
Westminster Hall and Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

Eruditissimo Viro Joanni Humfreio in agro Somersetensi, Concionatori
fidelissimo, R.A.S.P.D.
POstquam hanc qualemcunque Responsionem non ad umbilicum modo, sed and ad
calcem perduxeram, incidit mihi in manus Libellus tuus de Re-Ordinatione, in
quo nihil reperi, quod Humfreium non spiraret, i.e. Virum Doctum, Candidumque
and Pacis Ecclesiasticae studiosissimum: nondum tamen a me obtinere potui, ut
in sententiam tuam pedibus eam; sed e contra, dum Argumenta tua ad examen
revoco, firmius mihimet persuadeo Ordinationem sine insigni divinae Legis
violatione, and gravissimo Ecclesiae scandalo non posse iterari. Patefiet illud
ex Animadversionibus in diatriben tuam, quas ideo publici juris feci, ut tu vel
veritatem a nostra part stare agnoscas, vel saltem nos sine ratione non errare
fatearis. Hanc Opellam meam, si dignam judices cui quicquam reponas illud unum
exorandus es, ut nolis Adversarium (si tamen Adversarium) tuum contumeliose
tractare. Satis acerbitatis nostrae virus evomuimus. Sciat jam Orbis
Christianus nos Presbyterianos posse placide dissentire, and totius causae
definitionem solius Sacrae Scripturae Arbitrio permittere. Hac Ratione quae
Argumenta praeponderent gravitate sua facilius pendent aequi Lectores. Eterna
illa lux Spiritu suo mentem tibi illustret, Dux iste maximus Manum dirigat, ut
quae vera and salutaria sunt, and comprehendas certo, and promas fideliter;
idem ille Deus me cui non ulterius permittitur in vinea laborare, dignetur
aeterna in coelis requie, (...)

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Should needlessly show my self a Non Conformist, if I should send thee into
the book without prefacing something concerning the Author, matter, and
occasion, of what is here exposed to thy view: For the Author, thou art
entreated to look upon him, as one who loves not to see his face in troubled
waters, but would gladly spend his All upon those fundamental practical truths,
in which all sincere Christians are agreed, having sadly observed all along
this disputing Age, that the best of men in handling Controversies, have
discovered more corruption in themselves, then mistake in their Adversaries;
nor have thou any reason to be offended, that he has concealed his Name, which
is published, would not have advantaged the Treatise, but rather have
prejudiced some against the reading of it, and tempted the Respondent (if any
one count so slight a piece worth answering) to make personal reflections, with
which men's writings now a days are as full, as is the night of darkness: The
matter discoursed of, is Reordination, a thing as generally condemned by the
ancient Church, as Re baptization, yet now hugely justified, even to the
censuring of all those who cannot submit to it. Men Renowned for their Piety
and Learning, men that have been Ordainers of others lead the way, and those
who have been ordained by them follow after, never considering whether the
nature of the Ordinance be not such as makes it uniterable, nor whether they
shall not hereby justify the rigid Prelatists in all their hard speeches
against Presbyterian Ordination; for why should they be blamed who called it a
Mock-Ordination, seeing the men who gave and received it, are content to let it
be accounted such, taking the very same Orders that they do who were never
looked upon as Ministers? all the Answer that is given is, that they do not
renounce their former Ordination, nay, they openly declare, that they look upon
it as valid, only they take a Confirmation from the Bishop, a License, as it
were, to exercise that Ministerial Authority which has been already conferred
on them: But one would think rational men should not so easily suffer
themselves to be deceived, Is there any thing in that form and manner of making
and consecrating Priests and Deacons, that looks like a bare Confirmation? Are
not all things so contrived and managed, that Ordainers and Ordained would be
ridiculous, if they should intend any thing less then the conferring of the
esse Ministeriale. I present unto you, Reverend Father in God, these persons
present, to be admitted Deacons. If any one here can help himself by a mental
reservation, and say, that he is presented to be admitted Deacon, which he is
already, yet when presently after the Bishop says, Brethren, if there be any
of you, who knows any impediment, or notable crime in any of these persons
presented to be ordered Deacons, sure he cannot think, that to be ordered
Deacon, is only to be confirmed Deacon. Likewise, in the form by which a man is
made Priest, there are many phrases used, which make it not at all to look like
an admission, ad eundem gradum; and the very fees themselves that are paid,
declare it to be something more. As for the occasion of writing what is now
published, thou may soon perceive it was the Letter of a Friend, desiring
the Authors judgment in the case: it is now published, to this end, that if
any one be of a contrary mind, he may be induced to let us know his own
reasons, and his Answers to ours, and this will be a work of high charity, to
convert us from such an error, as is like to hinder us from exercising our
Ministry. But let not any man think, he shall be able to convert us by railing,
by bitter jeers, or Sarcasmes; the wrath of man works not the righteousness
of God. We shall think the cause is but weak, which must be supported by
opprobrious language. This, good Reader, is all the trouble that is thought
meet to be given thee by way of Preface. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem!

(...): OR, A Letter to a Friend, tending to prove, 1. That Valid Ordination
ought not to be repeated. 2. That ordination by Presbyters is valid.
SIR;
THat when you were invited to the constant preaching of the Word, I persuaded
you to be ordained, is no matter of my repentance, nor need it be any matter of
your repentance, that things standing as they then did, you made choice to be
ordained by mere Presbyters, without a Bishop.

I had in my eye that of the Apostle, How shall they preach, except they be
sent, Romans 10.15. that of the Prophet, Jer. 23.21. I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied; v. 32.
I sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this
people, says the Lord. Nor could I forget what holy, zealous Luther, has in
his Commentary on the Galathians: Non satis est habere verbum and puram
doctrinam; aportet etiam ut vocatio certa sit, sine qua qui ingreditur, ad
mactandum and perdendum venit, nunquam enim fortunat Deus laborem eorum, qui
non sunt vocati, and quanquam quaedam salutaria afferunt, tamen nihil
aedificant.

You, it is like, had in your thoughts the example of the Transmarine Reformed
Churches, and the judgment of our own Protestant Divines at home unanimously,
till of late, determining Ordination by Presbyters to be valid.

But now it seems you begin to question, whether you may not do that which will
be a virtual and interpretative renouncing of your former Orders, take a second
Ordination from some Bishop, and his Chaplains; the grounds you go upon are: 1.
Because else it will not be possible to get any preferment in the Church: 3.
Because some that were voiced formerly to have more of the Presbyterian in them
then you, have already actually submitted to such a second Ordination.

To deal plainly with you, either you are not the man that I have ever taken
you to be, or else you have always had pectus praeparatum against all objections
of this nature; either you did not sit down and consider before hand, what it
would cost you to be a Minister of the Gospel, or it is not possible that the
two things you mention should weigh much with you.

Suppose the Anabaptistical Sectarian Frenzy should have so possessed the
late Governors, as that they would have collated no livings but on those, who
though baptized in infancy, would afterward take a second baptism at adult
years. Suppose also that some learned, and seemingly godly men had yielded to
Re-baptization, would you forthwith have betaken your self to some pond or
river, and been dipped in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? If so,
then your Religion is very much at the mercy of your Superiors, and we may
thank the Parliament for your Orthodoxy.

I presume you will reply the case is different, that you may with better
conscience take a second Ordination, then a second Baptism: But I pray you
where lies the difference? Is Baptism an Ordinance of God? so is Ordination:
Is Baptism a Sacrament? so is not Ordination in the strict sense, but quid hoc
ad Iphicli boves? It might be a Sacrament, and yet be iterable; for the Lords
Supper is in the most proper and strict notion a Sacrament, and yet by the
appointment of God it is to be received more then once by all that have
opportunity: That Ordination is not a Sacrament, makes it not iterable, because
the end unto which it is by God appointed, is sufficiently attained by one
administration of it, and the end of Ordination being once attained, to receive
it a second time, would be to take an Ordinance of God in vain, as I shall by
and by have occasion to prove more largely.

For this is the method I intend to use with you: 1. To show that you ought not
to take Ordination from the Bishop, except your Ordination by Presbyters was a
mere nullity, and in natura rei invalid. 2. To show that your Ordination by
Presbyters was not, cannot be rationally accounted, a mere nullity: These two
things done, 'twill not be difficult for you to gather my sense about the case
of conscience by you propounded.


As to the first, I must premise two or three postulata, and they shall be such
things, as to save my self a labor, I shall desire may be granted, but if they
should not be granted, I should be able easily to prove them.

1. I suppose that you are certain, you were ordained by Presbyters; for if
there could be an invincible doubt, whether you were de facto, ordained or no,
I should then grant you might for sureness sake be ordained in an Hypothetical
form, si non ordinatus sis, etc. 2. I suppose that when you were ordained by
Presbyters, such a form of words was used as made you a Minister, not of any
particular, but of the Catholic Church, for had you been made Minister only of
that particular Church unto which you were first called, then your relation to
that Church ceasing, you ceased to be a Minister, and so are returned to the
condition of a private Christian; and therefore you know that the rigid sort of
Independents do judge, that when their Pastor preaches out of his own
Congregation, he preaches only as a gifted Brother, and charitative, not as a
Church Officer, or authoritative. 3. I suppose that if you be ordained by a
Bishop, you are to be ordained in such a form of words as is used when men are
made ex non Ministris, Ministri, ex non Clericis, Clerici. This I suppose,
because I have all along heard, that as many as have been re-ordained by the
Bishops, have been by them looked upon and considered as Laics, being first
made Deacons, then Priests in the very self-same form and order that they are
ordained, who never had any Consecration to the Ministerial Office.
Were your former Ordination only to be completed and confirmed, I would not
inject the least scruple into your mind, because I know, that though your
Ordination by Presbyters was lawful, and sufficient to make you a Minister, yet
it was perhaps not exactly legal and Canonical (at least, if there be any Law
extant in England, declaring those, and those only that are ordained by
Bishops, to be lawfully ordained) and it is but prudential to procure some
instrument to ratify that which pievish people will be apt to take exception
against.

You know the late Parliament has made an Act, in and by which, all, whether
ordained by Bishops or Presbyters, are confirmed in their livings, though not
instituted and inducted according to the letter of Laws in force, before these
most unhappy unnatural divisions. In this Act Ministers rejoice, and plead it
against those who disturb them, yet do not think that they have been all this
while Intruders, and Usurpers.

Semblably would our Prelates so far consult either their own credit, or the
peace of the Church, as to emit a general confirmation of all Ordinations by
Presbyters, provided that the persons so ordained, be upon examination found
sufficient, such a confirmation would not only be submitted to, but also most
thankfully received, for in so doing we should stop the mouths of gainsayers,
and yet give no occasion to our friends to call into question the validity of
any Ministerial Acts done by us all this while.

Nor would I in the least dislike it, if our Bishops (such of them as are holy,
and may be supposed to have any interest and favor at the Throne of Grace)
would when any are removed to a new charge, call their Presbyters, and pray for
a blessing upon the endeavors of persons so removed, yea, and lay hands on
them. I am much mistaken, or else such a practice may be warranted from Acts
13.2, 3. As they ministered and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, separate now unto
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them; and when they
had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. You
need not tell me that Chrysostom, and some other Commentators of good esteem,
do understand this place of Ordination to an Ecclesiastical Office, I know they
do; but yet seeing Paul was an Apostle before this time, seeing he expressly
affirms, Gal. 1.1. that he was an Apostle not of men, neither of man, but by
Jesus Christ; seeing also it is not said, separate unto me for the office, but
for the work ((...)) whereunto I have called: I judge it most probable, that
the (...) that is there spoken of, was not Ordinativa, but Optativa. Of this
judgment is the learned Samuel Maresius, in his Examen of some of the
questions determined by our judicious Prideaux, p. 32. So was Mr. Richard Vines
in his excellent Sermon before the Parliament, upon the day of humiliation for
the growth of Errors, Heresies, etc. p. 16. where you may find him also quoting
Spalato, lib. 2. de Rep. Eccl. cap. 2. parag. 12.

But this I say, that he who has once been ordained to the office and order of
a Presbyter, and knows himself so to be, ought not by a second Ordination to be
set apart to the same office.

This I prove to you 1. from the (so called) Canons of the Apostles, Can. 67.
Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus secundam

About the Authority and Antiquity of these Canons I will not contend with you,
Dr. H.H. in his Reply to Dr. Owen, p. 10. acknowledges. that they were not
written by the Apostles, nor by Clemens at the appointment of the Apostles, p.
12. and that his meaning in calling the second Canon genuine, was only to
intimate, that it was not one of those 35 later Canons that were esteemed by
learned men Novitii and Adulterate. The truth is, the opinion and esteem of the
Latin and Greek Church has been very differing and contrary, concerning these
Canons: It Is certain, that the Synod assembled in Trullo, Can. 2. speaks
honorably of all the eighty five Canons, for these are the words they use,
(...). John Damascen fears not to reckon them among, and equal them with the
divinely ^nspired books of the New Testament; De fid. Orth. lib. 4. c. 18. But
a Synod at Rome, about the year 494. decrees, that these Canons, as well the
first fifty, as the other thirty five, are all spurious, and to be reckoned
among those writings quae ab Haereticis sive Schismaticis conscripta vel
praedicata sunt, quaeque nullatenus recipit Catholica and Apostolica Romana
Ecclesia. Nor does it signify much, that Dionysius Exignus, who lived not long
after that Roman Synod owneth fifty of those Apostolical Canons, for he was, as
Mr. D' ailee has noted, p. 439. Homo ortu, ac natu, cultuque ac eruditione
exterus; and therefore was willing to set off those Canons the best he could to
the Romanists; yet seeing all these Canons are of some considerable Antiquity,
I thought it not amiss to quote one of them, and let the Argument drawn thence
fare as it will.

Marian Persecution was ordained beyond the Seas, I find not that it was
required of him, that he should be again ordained according to the form and
mode used in the English Churches.

I could name you hundreds that were acknowledged as Ministers, and suffered
quietly to enjoy Ecclesiastical Benefices, and to perform all sacerdotal
offices, merely on the score of their Ordination by Presbyters beyond the Seas,
or in Scotland: But lest I should be tedious, I shall only mind you of one
example related in the History of Scotland, penned by A. Bishop Spotswood, When
some were to be ordained Bishops for Scotland at Londonhouse, Anno Dom. 1609. a
question was moved by Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Ely, touching the
Consecration of the Scottish Bishops, who, as he said, must first be ordained
Presbyters, as having received no Ordination from a Bishop; the Archbishop of
Canterbury Dr. Bancroft, who was by, maintained, that thereof there was no
necessity, seeing where Bishops could not be had, the Ordination given by
Presbyters must be esteemed lawful. This applauded to by the other Bishops, Ely
acquiesced, and at the day, and in the place appointed, the three Scottish
Bishops were Consecrated.

In which story I desire you to take notice, that the ground of Bishop Andrews
question, whether they were not to be made Priests before they were consecrated
Bishops, was his supposition, that having been ordained by mere Priests, they
were not Priests: When it was once carried against him, that the Ordination by
Priests was valid and lawful, he without scruple proceeded to the Consecration
of them, though never made Priests in the way that Priests are made in England.

I was also told, that in the late conference before his Majesty, when it was
moved, that they who had been ordained by Presbyters, during the late
distraction, might not be compelled to take any other Ordination: The Episcopal
Divines refused to yield to that motion, and being pressed with the judgment
of Antiquity against Reordination; they answered, that in calling such persons
to be ordained by a Bishop, they did not call them to Reordination, but to
Ordination, their former Ordination being not only irregular, and
non-Canonical, but also null: And had they not fled to this, they must of
necessity have been brought to repeat the Ordinations, that during the
distractions, were made by Bishops, they being not done without manifold
irregularities, as to time or place, or some other such circumstances.

I prove thirdly, that he who is ordained with a valid ordination, Seaman, M.
Lyford, the London Ministers, who have largely discussed that question, and
irrefragably proved, that Ordination is so necessary, that no man can
ordinarily, without breach of Gods Law; enter the Ministry without it: You will
rather say, that by being reordained, a man does not contract the guilt of
taking an Ordinance of God in vain; but if that be your answer, I thus assault
you, To take an Ordinance of God either for no end, or for no such end as God
has appointed it unto, is to take an Ordinance of God in vain; but to be
reordained after preceding valid Ordination, is to take an Ordinance of God
either to no end, or to no such end as he has appointed it unto. Ergo. If
either Proposition need confirmation, it is the minor; but of the truth of that
you will not long doubt, if you will but a little consider what the end of
Ordination is, and that cannot better be gathered, then from the definitions
that are usually given of Ordination, they are to this purpose, Ordination is
an act, whereby in the Name of Christ, meet persons are separate and set apart
to the work and office of the Ministry. Now I ask when you were ordained, were
you thus separate and set apart or not? If you were not, then you were not
ordained; if you were, what use serves your reordination unto? Perhaps you will
say, by that means you shall procure institution from the Bishops, and be the
more acceptable to the people: But I pray you, where do you find any (I will
not say precept, but) allowance of God, to take Ordination to satisfy the
humor of unreasonable men? what example in Antiquity to encourage you to such
a compliance? Friend, think on it impartially, was the (...) the Apostle speaks
of, conveyed to you by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery? if it was
not, you have much to answer, for taking upon you to command the people to
recieve you as one of Christ's Ambassadors, they might have told you, that they
were as much Ambassadors as your self; if it was, do you think it would be any
thing less then ludere sacris, to submit to another examination, and to have
the Bishop and his Chaplains pray, that you may now receive that gift?

I will conclude this first head of my discourse, when I have first minded you,
that it is not long since, through the iniquity of the times, some Episcopally
ordained, were constrained to have their residence either in the Gallican or
Belgic Churches, where there is no Ordination but by Presbyters, would these
Divines have been content to be reordained after the mode of those Churches,
before they had been permitted to receive the double honor due to them as
Ministers? if they would not, (as I presume they would not) why do they require
that from others, which they would not have been content others should have
required of them?

If you should plead on their behalf, that their Ordination was valid, so is
not Ordination by Presbyters; that I shall prove to be false and Popish by and
by.

If secondly you should allege, that our Prelatists would not require
reordination from Divines ordained beyond the Seas, because they were not in a
capacity to receive Ordination from a Bishop, but so were we that lived in
England; and therefore deserve to be looked upon and dealt with as Laics, till
we have repented of our Schism and Heresy, and that there is no better way to
manifest our repentance, then by humbling our selves, and receiving orders from
them.

Unto this allegation I have two things to say: 1. Supposing, (but not
granting) that it was Schism for our young Divines to take Orders from
Presbyters, when as with some little cost and trouble they might have received
them from some Bishop. I say, that men's being Schismatics, does not invalidate
or make null either the Orders which they give or receive, nor has the Church
of God ever been wont to punish Schism, by compelling the Schismatic to
receive new Orders: For this, you may please to read Gisber. Voetius Desper.
causa Papat. lib. 2. sec. 2. cap. 13, 14. Nay, nor do our Episcoparians call
such as were ordained by Episcopal hands to reordination, though sundry of them
have fallen off from their Government, and joined in with Presbyterians, which
yet they must have done, if Schism do evacuate and annihilate their Orders; if
by being ordained by Presbyters, we fell into Schism, repentance, and the
blood of Christ must take off the guilt of that sin, not reordination, and
paying fees to the Bishop, or his Officers.

But secondly, I am still so blind, as not to see, that it was any Schism to
be ordained by Presbyters, for all Schism is sin, and all sin is a
transgression of some good and righteous Law; but there was no transgression of
any good righteous Law, in receiving orders from Presbyters, for if so, then
either of a divine or humane Law; not of a divine, for there is not a Law of
God requiring us not to be ordained by any but a Bishop; not of humane Law: For
1. I cannot find any Law of the Nation enacting, that all Ordinations shall be
made by a Bishop, and his Presbyters, and no otherwise. 2. If there had been
any such Law, it might be questioned, whether it could oblige the conscience in
such times of confusion as we were fallen into. 3. If a man had been ordained
by a Bishop in those days, he could not have got any Ordination every way
argeeable to the Laws of the Land: Our Bishops tell us, that the Canons of
1603. are Law, if they be so, they themselves, during the late distractions,
did transgress them with a witness: What if I should further add, that seeing
our Bishops had clogged Ordination with Subscription to things unnecessary,
disputable, to our apprehension sinful, they are the Schismatics who enjoin
such Subscriptions, not we who refuse them.
Several weighty Arguments to prove this, might be transcribed out of Mr. Hales
his Tract of Schism, a Discourse so solid, and yet become so scarce, that if
in stead of being re-ordained your self, you would get that reprinted, it would
much oblige me.

But it is time to come to the Second Part of my Task; which is to show, That
Ordination by Presbyters is valid: which I shall endeavor by these following
Arguments:

1. If Presbyters and Bishops be not different in Order, then Ordination by
Presbyters is valid: But Presbyters and Bishops are not different in Order,
Ergo.

The Consequence of the Major is founded on that Maxim, so frequently used by
the most Reverend Usher, Ordinis est confer Ordines; Proposition so evident,
that it is acknowledged even by Dr. H. Fern, one of the greatest upholders of
the lately declining Episcopacy, in his Compendious Discourse, Page 115, 116,
117, etc.

The Minor, That Presbyters and Bishops are of the same, and not a different
Order, shall be proved by as good Authority and Testimony, as is produced, or
can be expected in a Controversy of this Nature, viz. It shall be showed, that
this was the general Sentiment. 1. Of our Protestant Divines, whether English
or Transmarine. 2. Of very Learned, Famous Papists. 3. Of Ancient Fathers
living before some of the Controversies depending betwixt the Papal and
Reformed Churches were in being.


In writing of the Judgment of such Divines as are commonly called Reformed and
Protestant, I might be large: Indeed I scarce know one against me. The Late
Archbishop of Canterbury, when he was to answer for his Degree, did give this
for one of his Questions, An Episcopatus sit Ordo distinctus? Affir. But he was
sufficiently checked for that Heterodoxy, by Dr. Holland, the Regius Professor,
as you may find in Mr. Prynnes History of him. If you should be so curious, as
to ask whence Mr. Prynne had that Relation? I can tell you, he had it from Dr.
Prideaux, who was present at the Disputation. I can further assure you, that
the Doctor of the Chair was so moved, that he told his Wife when he came home,
that he had a Papist that day to answer under him in the Schools. Setting him
aside, and some violent Followers of his, Protestants generally hold, that a
Presbyter and a Bishop do differ, Gradu, not Ordine: I Will not trouble you with
Quotations from the Transmarine Divines, lest you should say they did (...).
Nor yet will I transcribe any thing from Dr. Field or Dr. Whitaker, or Dr.
Rainolds, because it is yielded, that these, and several others held Episcopacy
to be only some superior Degree and Eminence. Mr. Francis Mason renowned for
his Defensio Ministerii Anglicani, has in a set Discourse maintained, that
Episcopacy and Presbytery are not distinct Orders, and that therefore the
Ordinations of the Churches beyond the Seas are good and valid.

Go we to the Times of King Edward the Sixth, in which, he Foundations of our
Reformation were first laid. You may gather from Mr. John Fox, Vol. 2. Page
658. Edit. London 1631. That that young Josiah, by the Authority of his own
Regal Laws, appointed certain of the most Grave and best Learned Bishops, and
other of his Realm, to assemble together at his Castle of Windsor, there to
argue and entreat, etc. Much I have longed to meet with an Author, from whom I
might learn what was done at that Meeting; but could not hear of any one hat
had met with any thing that might give me or others satisfaction, till of late
casting mine eye cursorily upon a Piece Published by Mr. Edward Stilling fleet,
a very Judicious and Peaceable Divine, I understood, that by some singular
Providence, there came to his hands an Authentic M.S. of the Proceedings here.
From that, we are assured, that T. C. A. of C. afterward Martyr, gave it in as
his Judgment, That Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were not two
things, but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion. And from the
same M.S. it further appears, That the Bishop of Asaph, Therleby, Redman, Cox,
all employed in that Convention, were of the same Opinion, that at first
Bishops and Presbyters were the same; Redman and Cox expressly citing with
approbation the Judgment of Jerome. Of the same Judgment undoubtedly were the
Composers of that Tract, called the Institution of a Christian man, as may be
seen in what they delivered about the (then so called) Sacrament of Orders. In
a word, our Martyrs did so generally opine, that Episcopacy was no superior
Order to Presbytery, that Dr. Heylin. in his Historia quinquarticular is, Part
2. p. 17. does on purpose caution us that we should not attribute too much to
them, or measure the Doctrine of our Church by them, lest we should be forced
to allow the parity or Identity rather of Bishops and Priests, because John
Lambert (he might have named many others) did so conceive. In the Primitive
Church, says he, there were no more Officers in the Church of God then Bishops
and Deacons, that is to say, Ministers, as witnesses, beside Scripture, St.
Hierom in his Commentaries on the Epistles of St. Paul: Whereas those whom we
now call Priests, were all one and no other but Bishops, and the Bishops no
other but Priests, men ancient both in age and Learning, so near as could be
chosen; nor were they instituted and chosen as they be now a days, the Bishop
and his Officer, only opposing them, whether they can construe a Collect: But
they were chosen also with the consent of the people amongst whom they were to
have their Living, as shows St. Cyprian: But alack for pity such Elections
are banished, and new Fashions brought in. By which, says the Doctor, Truly
(if it may serve for a Rule) our Bishops must be reduced to the Rank of
Priests: But falsely does he add, that then the right of Presentation must be
put into the hands of the people, to the destruction of all the Patrons in the
Kingdom.

If I would produce all the Testimonies of the Learned among the Papists, my
Papers would swell to too great a Bulk. D. Forbes the Scotchman, who has
deserved well of the Hierarchy, does amply prove, that it was the general
Opinion of the Schoolmen, that Episcopacy and Presbytery are the same Order:
See his Irenicum, Lib. 2. Cap. 11. P. 154, 155, 156, 157, 158. You may also
have recourse to Mr. Mason in the before commended Treatise concerning
Ordination beyond the Seas by Presbyters. This also did so much stick with
Bishop Hall, that he would not maintain Episcopacy to be a superior Order,
though he were by Archbishop Laud much pressed so to do. See the Letters that
passed betwixt these two Prelates, recorded by Mr. Prynne in Canterburies Doom.

Would you have me go higher yet to the Fathers, that deserve more reverence
then these Popish Schoolmen.

I might bring you Michael Medina, a Pontifician Writer, acknowledging that
Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose, were of the same mind with Aerius: See him, Lib.
1. De Sacrorum Hominum Origin and Continentia, Cap. 5. But because he is so
severely chastised by Bellarmine for this concession, c. 15. De Clericis: I
desire you to consider seriously, and impartially to ponder what is by
Presbyterians produced out of these Authors themselves.

Ambrose his words are these; Post Episcopum Diaconatus Ordinationem subjicit:
Quare? Nisi quia Episcopi and Presbyteri una Ordinatio est. Uterque enim
Sacerdos est. Sed Episcopus primus est, ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non
tamen omnis Presbyter, Episcopus. Hic enim Episcopus est qui inter Presbyteros
primus est. But these Commentaries, 'twill be said, though bearing the name of
Amb. are not his. To avoid trouble and Dispute about a Controversy, which is
not much ad rei summam; I grant the Commentaries are not the Commentaries of
Ambrose: but then they are the Commentaries of one Hilary, as ancient as
Ambrose, a Deacon of the Church of Rome. For it is observed by D. Blondel, that
under that name Aug. quotes some words still extant in those Commentaries; and
Augustine had a very reverend esteem of this Author. Though, if I mistake not,
B. Hall in one of his replies to Smectymnuus, speaks of him very slightly and
contempt^bly.

Chrysostom in a Piece of his, never that I find, excepted against as
spurious, his Homilies on 1 Timothy (...). There Is not, says this Holy Father,
much difference betwixt Presbyters and Bishops: What think you? Did he mean
they were of different Orders? He would then have said, they differ as much as
may be, as much as Presbyters and Deacons do.

The Collection of Questions on the Old and New Testament was very anciently
ascribed to St. Augustine, it is not now by Learned men thought to be his; but
the Author, whoever he was, had Antiquity and Learning enough to set him above
Contempt. These are some of his words, Quid est Episcopus, nisiprimus
Presbyter, hoc est, summus Sacerdos? Now I pray you, do not these words plainly
imply, that a Bishop is but of the same Order with a Presbyter? Suppose you
should meet with these words in any ancient Author, Quid est Praesidens, nisi
primus Socius? Would you not quickly thence infer, that that Author judged the
President to be of no higher an Order then that of a Fellow?

If this make you not of Michael Medina's Opinion, I then turn you over to
Sixtus Senensis Bibl. Sanctae, Lib. 6. Annot. 324.

Only you must give me leave to reply before I leave this Argument to two
Objections, which would not be so great, had they not been used by so great
Scholars.

Aerius is by Epiphanius reckoned among Heretics, for asserting the Parity of
Bishops and Presbyters.

Aerius is by Epipha. on that account among others, branded for an Heretic,
Heresy 75. with whom also jumps St. August. de Haeres. c 53. But, 1. There Is no
mention of any Aerian Heresy either in Theodoret, or Socrates, or Sozomen, no
not yet in the History of Eustathius, Bishop where Aerius was Presbyter. 2.
It Is acknowledged by most Protestants, that some things charged upon Aerius as
Heretical, are not truly such. And if Epiphanius miscalled some of his other
Opinions, so might he this also about Church Governors. 3. This Opinion of
Aerius about Bishops and Presbyters, was not condemned, nor so much as heard in
any Council; and therefore some have judged that Epiphanius, though otherwise a
good man, yet being hot and choleric, and incensed against Aerius, might
condemn him out of private hatred. 4. If Aerius was, as he is represented,
turbulent, and factious and causelessely separated from those Churches in which
there was a Bishop; I will easily grant, that he might justly be reputed an
Here^ick in that large sense in which the word (...), is taken by Epiphanius
and some other ancient Writers; for it is evident enough, that with them
sometimes it denotes only a schismatic.


I must not conceal it from you, that Dr. Jer. Tailor has made some reply to
all or most of these Ans. in his Episcopacy Asserted. Which Reply I am obliged
to take notice of, lest I should seem to wave any thing that is brought against
us. Thus therefore he, page 330. A Dissent from a public or a received
Opinion, was never called Heresy, unless the contrary Truth was indeed a part
of Catholic Doctrine: For the Fathers many of them did so; as St. Austin, from
the Millenary Opinion; yet none did ever reckon them in the Catalogues of
Heretics; but such things did only set them down there, which were either
directly opposite to Catholic Faith, though in minoribus articulis, or to a
holy Life.

This is rather peremptory than satisfactory, If the Reverend Doctor had said,
that nothing ought to be called Heresy, unless the contrary Truth was indeed a
part of Catholic Doctrine, I might have let his Affirmation pass without a
censure. But to say, that never any thing set a man in the Catalogues of
Heretics made by Epiphanius, August. Philastrius, but what was either directly
opposite to Catholic Belief, or to a holy life, is such a -- as has scarce
dropped from the Pen of a Learned man. What thinks he of the Quartodecimani?
Was their Opinion contrary to a holy Life, or to the Catholic Belief? I trow
not. Yet are they listed among Heretics. Philastrius also reckons those in
the number of Heretics, who thought, that the breath of life was the rational
Soul, and not the Grace of the holy Spirit: but I do not imagine, that the
Doctor can think that this Opinion was either contrary to the public Faith of
the Church, or to holy Life. Let him proceed. p. 331. It is true that
Epiphanius, and St. Austin reckon his denying Prayer for the dead, to be one of
his own Opinions, and heretical; but I cannot help it if they did, let him and
they agree it, they are able to answer for themselves, but yet they accused him
also of Arianism, and shall we therefore say that Arianism was no Heresy,
because the Fathers called him Heretic in one particular upon a wrong
Principle? We may as well say this, as deny the other.

Why then may not we also say, if Epiphan. and Austin condemned his asserting
the parity of Ministers for heresy, we cannot help it; let Aerius and they
agree it, etc. This is our Argument, they miscall one of his Opinions,
therefore it may be, they did miscall the other. If they justly accused him of
Arianism, (which whether they did or no, I find Learned men to doubt) then
indeed he was an Heretic; but it will not thence follow, that whatever else he
held was Heresy. He has not yet done; for ibid. He was not condemned by any
Council. No. For his Heresy was ridiculous, and a scorn to all wise men, as
Epiphanius observes, and it made no long continuance, neither had it any
considerable party. This is but just affirmed; and therefore it will be
sufficient Confutation to deny it. He that reads Hierom and Ambrose, will not
think the Opinion ridiculous, or a scorn to all sober men. I shall follow him
no further: for what he brings out of the Canon of Constantinople, is a huge
Impertinence. Let it be Schism and Heresy (which with the Fathers assembled
in that Synod seem to be all one) to divide from Canonical Bishops (such are
not they who are neither chosen by the Clergy, nor by the People) and to set up
Conventicles contrary to theirs: How will it hence follow, that it is Heresy
to hold that Presbytery and Episcopacy are the same Order? To as little
purpose, or less, is what follows out of the Council of Paris. And concerning
the Acephali, p. 332, 333. The Acephali were so called, says Isidore, because
the Head, Chief, and First of them, could not be found. That seems to be a
mistake, for Severus was the Head of them. Let us therefore betake our selves
to Nisephorus, (an Author certainly not very Reverend) to see whether he can
give us any better Information about them. He tells, lib. 18. c. 45. That these
Acephali were a madder sort of Eutychians, who maintained, there was but one
nature in Christ: Never did I hear of any Presbyterian that was of that mind;
but it may be there is something in the Name that will touch them, and all that
follow Hierom. Acephali says Nicephorus, dicti sunt, quod sub Episcopis non
fuerint: Proinde Episcopis and Sacerdotibus apud eos defunctis, neque
Baptismus, juxta solennem and receptum Ecclesiae morem apud eos administratus,
neque oblatio, aut res aliqua divinafacta, Ministeriumve ecclesiasticum, sicuti
mos est, celebratum est. They would it seems, have no Black-Coats, as the late
Phrase was. What is this to them, who would have Bishops willingly enough, only
deny that they are of a distinct superior Order to Presbyters?

English Church, which seems to make Episcopacy and Presbytery different in
Order: For in the Preface of the Book Entitled, The Form and Manner of
Consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons: It is said expressly, That it is
evident to all men diligently reading Holy Scriptures, and ancient Authors,
that from the Apostles time, there have been these Orders of Ministers in
Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, Deacons. It follows not long after, And
therefore to the intent these Orders should be continued, and reverently used
and esteemed in the Church of England, it is requisite that no man (not being
at this present, Bishop, Priest or Deacon) shall execute any of them, except he
be called, tried, examined and admitted according to the Form hereafter
following: In the body of the Book it self, we find a Prayer in these words
following; Almighty God, Giver of all good things, who have appointed diverse
Orders of Ministers in thy Church, mercifully behold this thy Servant, now
called to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop, etc.

Peter Heylin, so very strong, that he has urged it in two several Treatises,
the one called Respondet Petrus, p. 98, 99. The other called Certamen
Epistolare. the particular Page I do not now remember: But, 1. In Dr. Hammonds
Opinion, it is so far from being evident to any one reading the Holy
Scriptures, that there were from the Apostles times these Orders of Ministers
in the Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, that he does magno conatu
endeavor to prove, that from no Testimony of Scripture it can be proved, that
there were in the Apostles time any Priests or Presbyters in the notion in
which the word Presbyter is now taken. He thinks that in the Apostolical
Writings, (...) does constantly signify a Bishop, and that all the Churches,
of which any mention is made in Scripture, were governed only by Bishops and
Deacons. 2. The Doctor might have remembered what he pressed against Mr.
Hickman, That Apices Juris nihilponunt; then would he not so confidently have
urged passages in the Preface. 3. At least he might have done well to consider,
that his so much magnified Objection is a stale one, and has received its
Answer from Mr. Mason, in the before-commended Treatise. It most unhappily
falls out, that I have not the Book at hand; but if my Memory fail me not, more
then ordinarily it does, the Author of the Necessity of Reformation, gives you
his full sense, if not his very words. That Book when it speaks of the making
of Bishops, calls that a Consecration, not an Ordination, as it does when it
speaks of making Deacons and Presbyters; calling one the Manner and Form of
Ordering Deacons; the other, the Form of Ordering Priests: But when it speaks
of the other, it changes this word Ordering, and calls it the Form of
Consecrating an Archbishop or Bishop; which shows plainly, that the Book of
Ordination never means to make Bishops to be not only in Degree and Office of
Prolocutor, but in a distinct Order of Christ and his Apostles Institution,
superior to a Presbyter. Indeed the Preface does not say, these three Orders,
but only these Orders of Ministers, and in the Prayer, it is not said, that the
Bishop is called to the Order, but to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop.


I had thought, here to have concluded my first Argument: But there is one
Medium seems to me so considerable, to prove that a Presbyter is of the same
Order with a Bishop, that I cannot omit it. You know, that it was required that
a Bishop should be Ordained by three Bishops at least: Yet Anastasius in the
Life of Pope Pelagius, tells us, that he was Ordained An. Dom. 555. by two
Bishops and one Presbyter, who is by him called Andreas Ostiensis. Does it not
hence manifestly appear, that the Church at that time took a presbyter to be of
the same Order with a Bishop, and empowered in case of necessity, to confer the
very degree of Episcopacy? At this Example, the Learned Author of Episcopacy
asserted, is very angry, and tells us, p. 166. That, Pelagius his taking in the
Priest, was but to cheat the Canon, and cozen himself into an impertinent
Belief of a Canonical Ordination. Pelagius might as well not have had three, as
not three Bishops, and better, because, so they were Bishops, the first Canon
of the Apostles approves the Ordination, if done by two. But this is too slight
a way of answering Antiquity. We must not till we see better reason, think that
Pelagius and the two Bishops were so unworthy, as to go about to put a cheat on
the Canon, or so wicked, as to make use of an hand, that being imposed,
signified no more then would the Imposition of a Lay hand. Nor do I think, that
in those days it was counted an indifferent thing whether three concurred to
the Ordination of a Bishop or no: For the Council of Nice requires three at
least, and the consent of those that are absent signified by their Letter. And
Pope Damasus in his fifth Epistle to the Bishop of Numidia, and other Orthodox
Bishops, has these words; quod Episcopi non sint, qui minus quam atribus
Ordinati sunt, ordinati Episcopis, omnibus patet, quoniam ut been nostis.
prohibitum a sacris est partribus, ut qui ab u^o vel a duobus sunt ordinati
Episcopis, nominentur Episcopi. Si nomen non habent qualiter Officium habebunt.
And in the 16 Canon of the African. Council, at which were present no fewer
then 217 Bishops, it was decreed in haec verba; forma antiqua servabitur, ut
non minus quam tres sufficiant, qui fuerint a Metropolitano directi, ad
Episcopum Ordinandum: And this usage they seem to have borrowed from the
Synagogue, for it was a fundamental Constitution among the Jews, that
Ordination of Presbyters, by laying on of hands, must be by three at least, as
may be seen, Misna and Gem. tit. Sanhe. cap. 1. By the way, I desire you to
take notice, how our Episcopal Brethren deal with us in this controversy; they
call upon us to show them an example of a Presbyter laying hands on a Bishop;
this case could not happen, but in the defect and absence of Bishops, for
modesty will not permit a Presbyter to lay on hands, Bishops sufficient to do
the work being present, and such defects of Bishops could be but very rare; but
once we find there chanced to be such a defect, and then a Church of no mean
denomination thought a Presbyter sufficient to do what a Bishop was to do: Now
when we bring this example, they rail against it, and say, that it was done
only in the want of a Bishop, and it had better have been left undone.

My second argument to prove the validity of Ordination by Presbyters, I Will put
into this form; Either Ordination by Presbyters is valid, or else something
essential to Ordination is wanting in Ordination by Presbyters: But nothing
essential to Ordination is wanting in Ordination by Presbyters; ergo, etc.

The major is evident, grounded on this plain Proposition, that it is only some
essential defect that can make a thing invalid or null; he that wants either
body or soul, is no true man, he that has them, is truly a man, though he want
many of the integral parts which concur to the integrity and perfection of a
man.

The minor I thus prove, if any thing essential to Ordination be wanting in
Ordination by Presbyters, it is either material, formal, final, or efficient
cause; but neither of these is wanting, ergo, nothing essential is wanting.

Let the material, formal, final causes be what they will, doubtless they may
be found in Ordinations by Presbyters, as well as in Ordinations by a Bishop,
only we are told there is not a due efficient cause, for God has appropriated
Ordination to a Bishop, and it cannot have its effect, if performed by any
other then him that has attained Episcopal Dignity.

This being that foundation, upon which the confidence of those who nullify
all Ordinations by Presbyters, whether at home or abroad, is built, I shall
take liberty to enquire, 1. Whether if there were a Law of God appropriating
Ordination ordinarily to a Bishop, it would follow, that all Ordinations
without a Bishop are null? 2. Whether there be any such Law of God
appropriating Ordination to a Bishop?


As to the first, I humbly conceive, that if a Law could be produced,
appropriating Ordination ordinarily to a Bishop, it would not follow, that
Ordination without a Bishop were always invalid and null, my reasons are; 1.
Because it is generally agreed, that Jus Divinum rituale cedit morali, and
necessitas quod cogit defendit. 2. I find, that whereas by the Law the Priests
were to kill the sacrifices, yet at such a time, when the Priests were too few,
the Levites did help them, 2 Chronicles. 29.34. and neither God, nor the King, nor
the people, offended at their so doing. 3. Baptism is appropriated to the
Ministers of the Gospel, yet if at any time it were administered by a Midwife,
who neither was a Minister, nor was capable of being made such, such baptism
was not by us here in England judged a nullity; yea, it is affirmed by sundry
Schoolmen, that if baptism were administered by one Excommunicate, it were
valid, and not to be repeated; and either my notes do fail me, or else this was
the judgment of St. Augustine, for Melancthon out of Austin, ad Fortunatum,
tells us this story, That two men were in a ship which was like to perish in a
storm at Sea, the one very godly, but yet not baptized, the other baptized, but
excommunicated; there being no other Christian in the ship with them, and they
fearing they should be both cast away, knew not what to do in that condition;
he that was not baptized, desired baptism by the hands of him that was
excommunicate, and he that was excommunicate, desired absolution from the
other, whereupon the question was moved, whether these acts were valid and
good; Austin answers they were, and commends the actious.


I come now to enquire, Whether there be any Law of God appropriating
Ordination to a Bishop; I say, there is not; if any say there is, illi incumbit
probatio, he must proferre tabulas, produce the place where such a Law is
recorded: For my part, having read the Scriptures with my best eyes, I could
never find any such place, nor could I ever meet with that Episcopal Divine who
could direct me to such a place; some have sent me to Tit. 1.5 (...); and of
late one has ventured to tell us in print, Mr. Sandcrof Ordination Sermon.
that this Text is as it were a kind of Magical glass, in which an eye, not
blind with ignorance, nor bleered with passion, may see distinctly the face of
the Primitive Church in that golden Age of the Apostles, the platform of her
Government, the beautiful order of her Hierarchy, the original and derivation
of her chief Officers, and their subordination both to one another, and to
Christ the great Bishop of our Souls in the last resort; together with the
manage, and direction of the most important acts of Government, both in point
of Ordination and Jurisdiction too. This learned man's phrasifying thus
concerning his Text, puts me in mind of that Impostor mentioned by Scultetus in
his Annals, who persuaded certain Noble men, that he had adorned their Temple
with very exquisite pictures, but such as could be seen only by those who were
begotten in lawful wedlock; the Noble men, lest they should be thought not
lawfully begotten, said, that they very well saw that painting: So here we are
told of great matters that may be seen in this Text, but only by those whose
eyes are not blinded with ignorance, nor bleered with passion; and so men will
be ready to say, that they see these things, lest their eyes should be judged
under these sad distempers; but I (who have my conscience to bear me witness,
that I have often prayed for the eye salve and Grace of the Spirit, that my
understanding may neither be darkened with ignorance, nor bleered with passion)
do ingenuously profess, that I am not able from this Scripture to collect, that
the sole power, either of Jurisdiction or Ordination, does reside in either
Bishop or Archbishop. For,

1. It Is not improbable that Titus was left in Creet, and acted there, not as a
fixed Bishop, but as an extraordinary Officer, an Evangelist. 2. It Is here
said, that Titus was left to ordain Elders, but how? as Paul had appointed him:
So that the question still emains, how Paul had appointed him to ordain,
whether alone, or with his Sym-presbyters: Paul himself ordained not alone, for
ought appears; for though he once spoke of the gift that Timothy had received
by the laying on of his hands, yet elsewhere it is called, the gift received, by
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: If it should be said, that this
Presbytery was a company of Bishops, who in that first age of the Church, were
called Presbyters, there needs no other answer, but that this is only said, and
not proved: If it should be said, that this Presbytery did only act
associative, and not authoritative, which, if I mistake not, is the destinction
and (...) of the learned Bishop Prideaux in his Fasciculus: I could easily
reply, that the terms are not opposite, and that the gift and authority is
plainly said to come by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, as well
as by the laying on of the hands of the Apostle; which answer will also serve
to that evasion which is excogitated concerning the Canon of the fourth Council
of Carthage; Presbyter cum ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente, manum super
caput ejus tenente, etiamomnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta
manum Episcopi super caput illius teneant; brought by Presbyterians to prove,
that there is an intrinsecal power of Ordination in Presbyters, and that in the
judgment of those who made that Canon, the Bishop alone should not ordain.
Doctor Downham, and another learned Doctor, (but lately dead) would bear us in
hand, that this was only done for greater solemnity, not as if the Presbyters
had any power to confer orders, but only to testify their consent. But can any
one who is inquisitive after truth be thus satisfied? Let any one instance be
produced of any ones laying on of hands in Ordination, only to testify their
consent: The people did in the first and purest Ages, testify their consent,
as might be proved, by six hundred testimonies, yet were they never allowed to
lay on hands in any Ordination of Presbyters, or Deacons. 3. I do much
question, whether if this example did every way fit and suit our Episcopal
Ordinations, it were sufficient to argue a Divine Right. I know no party, no
interest, no persuasion of men, that count themselves obliged to conform to all
Apostolical examples.


Divine Right: Secondly, give you my reasons why I conceive it is not of Divine
Right.

1. I say, the Prelatists have not been able to prove its Divine Right; to
evince this, I must examine the arguments brought by them.

Lately one preaching at St. Mary's, Oxon, took an occasion, where his Text
offered him none, to assert the Divine Right of Episcopacy in his Sermon, he
quoted a place out of the Old Testament, in which the 72 Interpreters have
(...): Now, quoth he, had there been but (...), it had been (...). And some
say, that Elijah was Bishop of Samaria, and we know that our Savior was a
Bishop, and he made his Apostles Bishops, and they made Timothy and Titus
Bishops; and therefore Episcopacy being founded on Old and New Testament, I
cannot but think it is Jure Divino, for I cannot imagine, that it was a
Ceremony to be abolished at the coming of John Calvin: Are you able to stand
before this mighty argument? does not the reading of it cause a greater
trepidation in you, then ever was in the eighth sphere? Well, to cure you of
your palpitation, I shall tell you, that the same Gentleman made Hernia to be a
Fever, and yet Physicians notwithstanding are resolved to think it is bursted
belliness, and that Hercules brought the River Eridanus through the Augaean
Stable; and yet the unhappy School-boyes will say, it was not the River
Eridanus, but the River Alpheus; and therefore it is not impossible that the
Gentleman might be out in his Divinity also, and that he was so, you will
easily discern, so soon as your fear is a little over. I might put you upon too
merry a pin, if I should play upon all the weaknesses of this Theologasters
argumentations, and therefore I shall let it pass,

Take notice of those arguments which are brought to prove the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, by men of better learning and judgment, having only premised this,
that a thing can be of Divine Right but one of these two ways, either by the
Law of Nature, or by some positive Law of God; they that would go about to
prove that either Prelacy or Presbytery, or any other particular form of Church
Government, is determined by the Law of Nature, would quickly bewray their
weakness, all the divine right that Hierarchy can pretend to, must be founded
upon some positive Law of God, and must be either some Law under the Old
Testament still obliging, because not repealed, or else some new Law made under
the Gospel. Our Prelatists love to have both these strings to their bow: 1.
They insist much on the inequality that was in the Tribe of Levi under the Old
Law, to prove, that there should be still an inequality among Church Governors
under the Gospel, the strength of which will soon be tried, if we first enquire
what inequality there was in the Tribe of Levi, it must be acknowledged, that
there was no universal equality in that Tribe, the Priests doubtless were above
the Levites, being employed in a nearer attendance upon Gods service: It Is also
obvious, that among the Priests there was a superiority, Eleazer is by God
placed over the Priests; but then I judge (as do most skilled in Jewish
Antiquity whom I have met with) that much, if not all of this inequality, which
is so largely described, Numb. 3.4. did not belong to the Tribe of Levi, as it
was a Tribe, consisting of persons called out for the service of God, but as it
was a Tribe: Every one of the Tribes of the children of Israel had its chief
father, as may be seen, Numb. 34. The several families of the Tribe of Levi had
their several heads, and Eleazar was appointed to be the head of these heads;
so that to prove any thing hence, we must first suppose the Judicial Law to be
in force, which would gratify the Anabaptists, and some other Fanatics, more
then we are aware of: I demand, would our brethren prove hence, that as there
was superiority and inferiority of offices under the Law, so there may be, or
must be under the Gospel; we'll not contend, for we can yield it to them,
without any detriment to the cause of the Presbyterians, they have Presbyters
and Deacons, and the office of a Presbyter is by all thought to be above the
office of a Deacon; but I had thought they would from the Jewish pattern, have
endeavored to prove the Bishops power of Jurisdiction and Ordination, whence
they will fetch that I wot not, not, I hope, from the supereminent power of the
High Priest, the type of Christ, for then we shall bring in a Pope, not from
the superiority of the Priests over the Levites, for the Priests had no
Jurisdiction over the Levites, they had the several heads of their families,
under whose jurisdiction they were; as for any power of Ordination, it could
have no place, the Levites coming to their honor without Ordination, by
succession; besides, in a case of necessity, I proved before, that a Levite
might do the work of a Priest: If our brethren will grant, that a Presbyter
may, in such a case, do the work of a Bishop, we shall be nearer an agreement
then as yet we are. Thus have we, without any great difficulty, rid our hands
of the argument drawn from the Old Testament.

Come we to enquire, whether J. Chapter by any action of his, did institute any
such Hierarchy as is contended for; that he did, is thus argued by a learned
Doctor, Episco. Asser. p. 22, 23. This office of the ordinary Apostleship, or
Episcopacy, derives its fountain from a rock, Christ's own distinguishing the
Apostolate from the function of Presbyters; for when our blessed Savior had
gathered many Disciples, who believed him at his first preaching, Vocavit
Discipulos suos and elegit duodecem ex ipsis, quos and Apostolos nominavit,
says S. Luke; he called his Disciples, Luke 10.
and out of them he chose twelve, and called them Apostles, that was the first
Election: Posthaec autem designavit Dominus and alios septuaginta duos, that
was his second Election; the first were called Apostles, the second were not,
and yet he sent them two by two: We hear but of one Commission granted them,
which when they had performed, and returned joyful at their power over devils,
we hear no more of them in the Gospel, but that their names were written in
heaven; we are likely therefore to hear of them after the passion, if they can
but hold their own, and so we do, for after the passion, the Apostles gathered
them together, and joined them in Clerical Commission, by virtue of Christ's
first Ordination of them, for a new Ordination we find none, before we find
them doing Clerical Offices. Ananias, we read, baptizing of Saul, Philip the
Evangelist, we find preaching in Samaria, and baptizing his Converts; others
also we find, Presbyters at Jerusalem, especially at the first Council, for
there was Judas surnamed Justus, and Silas, and S. Mark, and John ( a
Presbyter, not an Apostle, as Eusebius reports him) and Simeon Cleophas, who
tarried there till he was made Bishop of Jerusalem: These, and diverse others,
are reckoned to be of the number of the 72, by Eusebius and Dorotheus. Here are
plainly two Offices of Ecclesiastical Ministers, Apostles, and Presbyters, so
the Scripture calls them; these were distinct, and not temporary, but succeeded
to, and if so, then here is clearly a divine institution of two Orders, and yet
Deacons neither of them.

I understand not; I think that Christ did neither institute Bishops nor
Presbyters, in this first or second Mission.

Both these Missions seem only temporary, and the 70, after their return,
remained in the nature of private Disciples, till after the Resurrection they
received a new Commission to preach and plant Churches; and the twelve, after
this Mission, must needs be but a kind of Probationers, till Christ solemnly
authorized them, and gave them that plenitude of power, which we find him not
to do, till after his Resurrection from the dead, Mat. 28.18. Joh. 20.21.

Of any power of jurisdiction or order that the twelve had over the seventy, by
virtue of their Mission, there is not the least vola or vestigium in Scripture;
the seventy had their power immediately from Christ, as had the twelve, and
their Commission was as full and large, as was the Commission granted to the
twelve, as will soon appear, by comparing Mat. 10. with Luke 10.

I observe indeed from John 4.2. that Christ's Disciples did baptize, but see no
necessity of restraining that phrase to the twelve, who were called his
Disciples; (...). All the Writers of the harmony of the Gospel do agree, that
this baptizing was before any Gospel Ministry was instituted, yea, before that
Peter and Andrew, James and John, were called to be fishers of men; that
baptism therefore might be administered by any of these that did usually
accompany the Messiah, he appointing them so to do, and so being chief in the
action, the learned Isaac Causabons words are considerable, Etsi non Christus
ipse, sedejus Discipuli baptizabant; Christi tamen, non Discipulorum baptismus
and creditus est, and vocatus: qua de re placet perelegantem Tertulliani locum
proferre, sic ille in libro de baptismo: Sed ecce, inquiunt, venit Dominus, and
non tinxit. Legimus enim, and tamen is non tingebat, sed Discipuli ejus; quasi
revera ipsum suis manibus tincturum Johannes praedicasset, non utique sic
intelligendum est, sed simpliciter dictum more communi, sicut est verbi gratia,
imperator proposuit edictum, aut praefectus fustibus caecidit, nunquid ipse
proponit, aut nunquid ipse caedit: semper is dicitur facere cui
praeministratur, simile est quod Jurisconsulti tradunt videri eum facere, qui
per alium facit.

Besides, Christ in his administrations did, though in some things forsake, yet
in many, if not in most things, follow the Jewish mode, and Mr. Lightfoot in
his harmony of the New Testament, page 18. tells us out of Maimony in Issure,
that to the Jewish baptism, it did suffice, if there were but three, though
private persons present.

In a word, we do not find that Christ before his Resurrection gave any order
for the gathering of Gospel Churches, and therefore gave not any power to his
Apostles over them, or any Officers belonging to them; consider we therefore
what he did when he was risen from the dead, we find him appearing betwixt his
Resurrection and Ascension seven times, at the third time of his appearance, he
said to the Disciples, John 20.21. As the Father sent me, so send I you, and
when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them, and whosoever sins
ye retain, they are retained.

In these words, Totius familiae (...) aut principatus in ipsa clavium
promissione ante promissus singulis concredebatur, says the learned Doctor
Hammond, Disser. 3. page 150. and presently after, page 151. His duodecim in
terris Christi vicariis ejus mandato aut diplomate munitis, eademque ratione a
Christo Missis, qua ille a patre mittebatur; adeo omnis in Ecclesia authorit as
in solidum and in integrum commissa est, ut non ea cuivis mortalium (demptis
pauculis, etc.) recte tribui possit, nisi quem Apostolorum aliquis in
profectionibus aut Provinciis ipsorum aut immediate aut mediate in potestatis
and authoritatis suae participationem aut successionem admiserit.

Let us therefore a little view that text in St. John 1. there are who say,
that in those words, no Apostolical power is given, but only promised, As the
Father has sent me, even so send I you, i.e. says Grotius, Brevi mittam
praesens pro futuro: In this Exposition he is not singular, some antienter then
himself, by many years, went that way before him; his, and their ground so to
do, was the speech of our Savior, John 16.7. I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

But I judge, with Tolet, that Christ's very breathing on them, makes it highly
probable, that he gave them present Commission and Authority to that place,
John 16.7. Cyril answers, that Christ did anticipate his promise, and that it
was usual with him to give before hand some specimina of those things which he
promised to do after his return into heaven: Another observes, that Christ does
not say, if I depart, I will give him unto you, but if I depart, I will send
him unto you; and that the spirit is not properly said to be sent, but when he
appears in some visible shape, which he did not till Pentecost, the Disciples
did now receive the Holy Ghost, yet they did not now receive (...): To use
Theophilacts phrase, they received him not to all the intents and purposes unto
which they were afterward to receive him, they were to wait at Jerusalem to
receive the spirit, in order to those extraordinary gifts of working Miracles,
speaking with Tongues, etc.

But to whom is this Commission given? surely to all the Apostles, for though,
as we read in the following verses, Thomas was absent at this apparition, yet
his absence notwithstanding, the spirit might be, Vid. Cyrillum.
and was given to him: When the spirit of Moses was to be put on the seventy,
it came upon Eldad and Medad, though they were in the Camp, Number. 11. The
greatest question to me is, whether these words were spoken only to the eleven,
and not also to the seventy, or at least some of the seventy, because I find,
that the two Disciples that were going to Emaus, told the joyful news of
Christ's Resurrection to the eleven, and to them that were with them, Luke
24.33. And as they thus spoke, Jesus stood in the midst of them, and says unto
them, Peace be unto you, ver. 35. Nor is there any thing in Saint John, that
can necessitate me to think otherwise: yet nevertheless, upon some other
reasons, I am content it should be supposed, that this Commission was granted
only to the eleven, as also that Mat. 28.18, 19.

But what hence can be gained, that will in the least prejudice Presbyterians,
I wot not, the Apostles were all equal, and for those forty days that Christ
continued with them, it appears not that there were any Church Officers besides
them; and therefore it cannot from any action of Christ be collected, that
there ought to be an inequality among the Ministers of the Gospel.

Doctor Hammond supposes that Matthias was one of the seventy, who was by the
Apostles and Disciples, or rather by God himself, designed and chosen to come
into the room of Judas, and this he calls Exemplum Presbyterianorum (...)
pessi^^^ ^^^inans* page 153.

But why he should so call it, I know not, for the Presbyterians do not say,
that there are not diverse Orders in the Church, but only that there are not
diverse orders of Ministers of the Gospel, and that Matthias his being chosen
from a private Disciple, to be an Apostle, should prove, that there are diverse
orders of preaching Ministers, would be strange.

Indeed, should Presbyterians grant the Bishops do succeed Apostles, and
Presbyters do succeed the Seventy, then Matthias his being chosen to be an
Apostle (supposing him to have been one of the Seventy) might with some color
be urged; but many Presbyterians there be, who grant no such thing, nor does
Dr. Hammond think, that the Seventy were Presbyters by virtue of their Mission:
For he contends for the opinion of Epiphanius, who makes seven of the seventy
to be the men that were chosen Deacons, and further adds, that the rest were
made Evangelists, but that Evangelists and Deacons were much the same: In idem
plane recidit quantum ad 70 Discipulos attinet sive ad Evangelistarum, sive ad
Diaconatus gradum ascendisse eos dicamus, page 159.

Yet he thinks not meet to quit Christ's making and Commissionating of the
eleven Apostles, till it have afforded him an argument for his Episcopacy,
which is briefly propounded in his answer to the London Ministers, page 4. The
power derived, as from God the Father to Christ, so from Christ to the
Apostles, was derived to them, not as to a Common Council of social Rulers,
but as so many several Planters and Governors of the Church, each having all
power committed to him, and depending on no conjunction of any one or more
Apostles for the exercise of it. This is more largely deduced in his Latin
book against Blondell, Diss. 3. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.

The Reverend Doctor has no where put this argument into a syllogistical form,
nor will I venture to do it, because I am not able to frame out of it any
conclusion that will any way incommodate the Presbyterian platform of
Government. Be it so, that a single Apostle had power over the Churches planted
by him, what is that to a single Bishops having power, sole power of
jurisdiction, not only over the Churches in his Diocese, but also over the
Presbyters and Rectors of those Churches? 2. How does it appear, that it was
the mind of Christ, that any single Apostle should put forth his power of
Ordination without the conjunction of some other or others, either Apostles, or
Apostolical persons, or Presbyters, in all the New Testament, I cannot find
they did so, but I find many Instances and examples, by which it appears, that
either they might not do so, or at least did not think meet so to do. When Paul
was Ordained, if Ordained, was it not by three? When Timothy, was it not by a
Presbytery?

But I will not go about further to fit a shoe to a foot I know not; only give
me leave to tell you, that there is one Hypothesis which I perceive, the Doctor
lays much stresse upon in that and other Discourses, the which, unless it be
granted to him, (and Adversaries are not now adays so kind, as to grant much)
he can never be able to prove: I Will give you it in his own words, Disser. p.
147, 148. speaking of the words of Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 28.19. He thus
expresses himself; Illud sine dubio non universorum ad omnes, sed singulorum
ad singulas mundi plagas, ut ad totidem Provincias, aut (...), administrandas
profectione praestandum erat, etc. Quod and factum juxta videmus cum Act. 1.
Matthias in traditoris Judae, locum surrogandus and eligendus proponatur, (...)
simulque (...), v. 25. (Sic ut verba ista, non ad Judam defunctum, sed ad
Successorem ejus superstitem pertineant adeoque in praecedente (...),
conjungantur) ut ad locum, i. e. Provinciam propriam, aut peculiarem, aut
singularem proficiscatur.

You see to gain some countenance to his Opinion from Scripture, he is fain to
make those words, from which Judas fell, to come in by way of Parenthesis, and
to refer the last words, that he might go to his own place, not to Judas the
Son of Perdition, but to Matthias or Barsabas, one of which was now to be, by
the Lot falling on him, chosen to make up the number. But whom does the Doctor
follow in so doing? Our English Translation? No. His Friend Grotius? Neither.
His words are, significatur eventus scelera ipsius justo Dei judicio
consecutus. Proprium, i.e. qui ipsi melius conveniebat quam Apostolica Functio:
And both he and Pricaeus make mention of a Greek Manuscript, a very ancient
one, in which, in stead of (...), it is (...), the place which he deserved,
that is the Gallows, or Hell it self.

I would fain know, whether Provinces were divided to several Apostles by
Christ, or by agreement among the Apostles themselves. If Christ designed each
Apostle his distinct Province, let it be shown where and when. If it be said,
that such Division was agreed upon among themselves, I ask when? Before their
Masters Ascension or after? It Is not like 'twas made before, the Disciples then
not being out of their Golden Dream, of a temporal Kingdom, as appears, Acts
1.6. After the Ascension, we find them all waiting at Jerusalem for the Promise
of the Father, and when they had received it, V^de hanc hypothesin solid and
proliae refutatam a doctissimo Stilling-fleet, Irenici, p. 233, 234, 235, 236.
they still at least for some time, continued at Jerusalem, Acts 8.1. When they
removed, common Prudence dictated to them not to go all one way, nor do I think
they did, but they disposed of themselves as God in his Providence directed,
and offered opportunity. But so far were they from parcelling out of the world
among themselves, that sometime passed ere they were convinced, that it was
their duty, or so much as lawful, to preach unto the Gentiles.

By this time, I hope you see, that if there be any ground for the Divine Right
of Episcopacy, it must be Apostolical practice, and I shall easily grant that
the Apostles being by their Commission entrusted with the Government of the
Church of God, whatever they did with an intent to oblige succeeding ages, may
well be accounted to be established Jure Divino.

But then I do with some confidence challenge all the Prelatists to show me in
Sacred Writ any one example of a Bishop having Presbyters under him, and yet
engrossing all power of Jurisdiction and Order to himself. Yea I do challenge
them to show me any one Bishop that had under his Charge so many Souls as are
in your Parishes of Stepney and Cripplegate.

I take the Apostles to be unfixed Officers, and such were Timothy and Titus.
Dr. Hammond himself (who has deserved best of the Episcopal Cause) Annot. on
Acts Chap. 11 p. 407. has these words, Although this Title of (...), Elders,
have been also extended to a 2d Order in the Church, and is now only in use for
them, under the name of Presbyters, yet in the Scripture times it belonged
principally* if not alone to Bishops, there being no evidence, that any of that
second Order were then instituted; though soon after, before the writing of
Ignatius his Epistles, there were such instituted in all Churches.

Well then, if there be no evidence that any such were instituted, we shall
think there were none such; for de non existentibus and non apparentibus, eadem
est ratio. And if there were no Presbyters, then there were no Bishops
exercising Jurisdiction over Presbyters. And it is plain enough, that every
worshipping Congregation had its Bishop in the Apostles times.

But the Reverend Doctor in his Answer to the London Assemblers (as he calls
them) p. 107. thus brings himself off; John I know was an Apostle, and John I
believe, ordained Presbyters, and thence I doubt not to conclude the
Apostolical Institution, i. e. in effect, the divine Right of the Order of
Presbyters.

I also know that St. John was an Apostle; but what should induce me to
believe, that he instituted a second sort of Presbyters, who were only to
preach and administer Sacraments, but had no power either of Order or
Jurisdiction? Must I believe this with a Divine or humane Faith? If with a
divine Faith, show me some infallible Testimony for it. If an humane Faith be
the greatest and highest Faith a man can attain unto, what a pitiful pickle are
the poor Presbyters in, that can only have some probable persuasion that their
Order is Jure Divino. Who would take upon him the Office of a Presbyter, that
can have no greater assurance that it was the mind of Christ, that there should
be any such Office in the Church? Had Paul and Peter in their Provinces power
to institute this second Order of Presbyters, as well as St. John in his? If
they had not, how was their power equal? If they had, why did they not put it
forth? It will not I suppose, be said, they wanted care, but only that the
number of Believers was not so increased, during their abode in the earthly
Tabernacle, as to require such kind of Presbyters. Well then they leaving the
Churches by them planted, to be governed by a Bishop and Deacons, how will it
be clearly and evidently proved, that it was those Apostles intention, that the
Bishop, who when they left him, had power over the Deacons and people only,
should when the Churches necessity did require, constitute Presbyters, and have
power over them. This Intention must be manifested and declared from some
passages in Scripture, or else it will not by Protestants be looked on as a Law
of Christ, or as a thing of perpetual concernment to his Church: For either the
Scripture is a sufficient and full Record of Christ's universal Laws, or it has
not that Perfection, which the Reformed in their Controversies with Catholics,
do ascribe unto it.

But why do I stay so long about this? The place produced out of Clemens
Alexandrinus, to prove that St. John in Asia instituted these secondary
Presbyters, proves no such thing. Read it, and you will agree with me: It is
recorded in Eusebius, l. 3. c. 23. after the Greek division. (In Mr. Hanmers
English Translation, it is the 20 chap.)

As for the place in Epiphanius, that so often occurs in Dr. Hammond, of the
(...), etc. 1. It Is a place very obscure, and so unfit to build an Opinion on.
2. It may seem to savor of the opinion of those who say, there is no
particular Form of Church Government by divine right. 3. It has nothing in it
peculiar to St. John: It no more proves that St. John instituted second
Presbyters, then that St. Peter instituted such. 4. I might tell you that as
Ancient and Reverend Ecclesiastical Writers as Epiphanius, when they have been
engaged, have boasted of a false matter, and talked of Records and Traditions
where there were no such things.


You will now expect before I take my leave of the Arguments brought for
Episcopacy, that I should answer that brought from Succession: For it is said,
that in all places Bishops did succeed the Apostles. But this Argument I have
always accounted but slight, such as will not weigh much with you, if you
consider,

1. That the Question is not whether Bishops did succeed, but whether Bishops
exercising Jurisdiction over Presbyters?

2. That the Catalogues that are brought of the Successors of the Apostles were
made by conjecture, and delivered down to us by men that lived at a great
distance from the Apostolical times. Read the ingenuous Confession of Eusebius,
l. 3. c. 4. If he, so studious in searching into antiquity, that he is by a
Learned man of our own called the Father and Fountain of Ecclesiastical
History, was at such a loss in the matter of Succession, at what a loss must
they needs be that lived after him? Lest this should seem a mere shift, I will
take notice of one Authority produced, I think by almost every one, who has
engaged in the Episcopal Cause, but most magnified by Dr. Jer. Tailor, in his
Episcopacy asserted. These are his words, p. 79, 80. I shall transcribe no more
testimomonies for this particular, but that of the General Council of Calcedon,
in the case of Bassianus and Stephanus: Leontius the Bishop of Magnesia spoke
it in full Council, (...). The splendid Name of the General Council of
Calcedon, made me curious to enquire into the very bottom of this Testimony. I
have so done, and thus I find the matter to stand: The Calcedonian Council was
called by the Emperor Martian, Anno 451. or 452. or 454. as some compute. In
it, says Dr. Prideaux, Matters were mostly transacted by favoring Parties
between Leo the first of Rome, and Anatholius Patriarch of Constantinople; Let
that pass: In the 11th. Action of this Synod, I find in Binius and Crabbe, that
Leontius did use the words that are quoted from him: But what was this
Leontius? A man, says the L. Brooks, in his Discourse of Episcopacy, p. 66.
whose Writings have not delivered him Famous to us, for Learning, nor his
exemplary Holiness (mentioned by others) famous for Piety. Surely not of Credit
enough to sway our Faith in this Point, because he is contradicted and
convicted of falsehood, by Philip, a Reverend Presbyter of the Church of
Constantinople, and by Aetius, Archdeacon, who instance in diverse others
besides Basilius, that had been Ordained by the Bishop of Constantinople: So
that the General Council of Chalcedon proves to be the Testimony but of one
man, and of one who was either ignorant of the Truth, or else did love
Falsehood. In a word, what is it in antiquity, from whence out Episcopal
Brethren will argue the Divine right of Episcopacy? From the word (...)? We
will grant, that all along from the Apostles times, there have been those in
the Church, who were called, and might not unfitly be called (...), or Bishops:
But we deny that those whom the Ancients did call Episcopos, were Bishops in
our sense, i.e. We deny, that they were looked on as having the sole power of
Jurisdiction and Order. Let the Prelatists prove, that for 1500 years, or for
800 years, Presbyters have been looked upon as poor inferior Creatures, having
only power to preach the Word, and not to administer Discipline, I for my part,
promise faithfully to yield the Cause; and my heart would even leap for joy,
that I were so conquered: For I do assure you, it goes more against the hair
with me, to put forth one act of Discipline, then to study twenty Sermons. Are
our Brethren offended with us, that we argue from the word (...), in Scripture,
and will they argue from the word (...) in Ecclesiastical Writers? That is not
fair play.

But I shall now give you my Arguments to prove that Episcopacy is not of
Divine Right, and they shall be two: The first, I shall cast into the Form of a
disjunctive Syllogism, thus; If Episcopacy be of Divine Right, then either the
Romish or the English Episcopacy: But neither the Romish nor the English: Ergo,
none at all. As for the Major, it contains a sufficient enumeration: For though
there be Episcopacy of a different mode exercised in other places, yet that
Episcopacy which is established in the Roman Churches, and the Reformed English
Church, does most pretend to Divine Right. You dodbtless will deny my Minor,
and say, that our English Episcopacy is of Divine Right. But I prove it is not:
thus, If our English Episcopacy be of divine Right, then either all the
Circumstances and Appendages are of Divine Right, or only the substance of it:
But neither: Ergo. All the Circumstances or Appendages of it, to be sure, are
not Jure Divine.

1. their way of Election is not jure divino; there is no Command of Christ for a
Conge d'eslire, I would not be thought to say, that the Magistrates interposing
in making of Church Governors, is against the Law of Christ; I only say, that
there is no Law of Christ requiring, that the Civil Magistrate should either make
Bishops, or require others to choose. I add, that we have no Primitive Example
of such a thing as a Conge d'eslire. Rather we find, that all Bishops were made
and chosen, not without the consent and suffrage of the Clergy, and all the
people over whom he was to praeside and govern. I confess, I had thought as to
the people, this had been plain from the Epistle of Clemens ad Corinthios: The
words are these, Page 57. Edit. Junianae. (...), etc. But Dr. Hammond has
rendered the last words applaudante aut congratulante Ecclesiatota; and says
upon the Phrase by way of Parenthesis, Disser. 5. p. 278. Nihil hic de
acceptatione totius Ecclesiae, sine qua Episcopos and Diacones ab Apostolis and
Apostolicis viris constitutos non esse, concludit D. Blondellus, quasi qui ex
Dei jussu and approbatione constituebantur, populi etiam acceptatione indigere
putandi essent. The Grammatical sense and meaning of this Parenthesis, I think
I understand, but the Purport and Drift of it, I cannot guess at. The blessed
Clemens says, that Church Officers were made, the whole Church applauding or
consenting. Is there nothing in this Phrase from whence Blondel might conclude,
that Bishops and Deacons were not then made without the Acceptance of the
whole Church?

It may be I shall be able to find out the meaning of the Learned Doctor; by
his Reply to Dr. Owen: In that thus he expresses himself, p. 86. Blondel made
the peoples acceptance a sine qua non, a necessary condition; affirming that
Bishops, etc. were never constituted by the Apostles and Apostolical men, nisi
unless they had this; which I suppose, makes the peoples acceptance praevious
to the Apostles Act: For, if it followed after, it can be of no moment; the Act
of the Apostles was complete without it, and stood valid without it: and though
it was most happy when it followed, yet still this, as any other consequent,
must be accidental to the Constitution of Bishops, as that which advenit enti
in actu existenti, comes to it, when it is, is no way required to, or
constitutive of its Being.

'Twas no doubt, the Opinion of Blondel, that the Peoples consent was
praevions; but I do much question, whether any such thing can be inferred from
the word nisi, used by him, p. 11. of his Apology; and I see not but that so
much may be fairly inferred from the (...), I do not say, the phrase does
necessarily import so much; for I might properly say, that the King was Crowned
(...), though the Consent of the City be not Conditio sine qua non, of his
Coronation: But if either Law or Custom did require that the King should not be
Crowned except the City of London did consent, then if I should say that he was
Crowned consentiente amni Civitate, all would say and think my Meaning was,
that the Consent of the City was first asked, and obtained, before he was
Crowned. Now this is our Case, we are sure from the 6. of the Acts, the
Apostles would not ordain any to the Office of Deacons, till the Disciples had
chosen them; nor do we find, that ever they did otherwise, except happily where
God himself made the Choice; therefore Clemens his Genitive put absolutely, may
well be thought to imply so much.

But I need not much contend about Clemens his Meaning: Cyprian a very ancient
Father and pious Martyr, is plainer then that he can be eluded. I Will not
transcribe all that he has said to this purpose, but yet enough to prove the
Point, out of that 68 Epistle sent to the Clergy and people of Spain, in answer
to a Question propounded to the African Churches. Plebs obsequens Praeceptis
Dominicis, and Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare se debet, nec se
ad sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia miscere, quando ipsa maxim habeat
potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi; quod and
ipsum de Divina auctoritate descendere videmus, ut Sacerdos, plebe present,
sub omnium oculis deligatur, and dignus atque idoneus publico judicio atque
testimonio comprobetur, sicut in Numeris, Dominus Moisi praecipit, dicens,
Apprehende Aaron fratrem tuum, and Eleazarum filium ejus, and impones eos in
montem, coram omni Synagoga, and exue Aaron stolam ejus, and indue Eleazarum
filium ejus, and Aaron appositus moriatur illic. And not long after, Propter
quod diligenter de traditione Divina and Apostolica observatione observandum
est and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and fere per Provincias universas
tenetur, ut ad Ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad eam Plebem, cui praepositus
ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus
deligatur, Plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, and
uniuscujusque actum de ejus conversatione perspexit; quod ut apud vos factum
videmus in Sabini Collegae nostri Ordinatione, ut de universae fraternitatis
suffragio, and de Episcoporum, qui in praesentia convenerant, quiq, de eo ad
vos Literas fecerant, judicio, episcopatus ei deferretur, and manus ei in locum
Basilidis imponeretur. How horribly Pamelius is put to it to reconcile the
Papal Ordinations to the several expressions of St. Cyprian in this Epistle,
you may see in his Annotations, and in the Replies of Simon Golartius, to them,
which also will sufficiently fortify you against the (in this case I hope I
may say it without offense) trifling and weak Objections of the Author of
Episcopacy asserted, p. 273, 274.

2. I suppose it will not be said, that there is any Divine Law requiring that
our Bishops should be Lords, have Votes in the Upper House of Parliament, and
exercise Temporal Dominion and Jurisdiction in their Diocesses. Rather it may
be questioned, whether any of these be so much as lawful. The Work of an
ordinary Presbyter, much more of an English Bishop, requires the whole man. Who
is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The Apostles put off from
themselves the very burden of distributing to the necessities of the poor, Acts
6.4. And Paul lays it down as a general Rule, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth,
entangleth himself with the affairs of this Life, that he may please him who
has chosen him to be a Soldier. Shall I plant two or three of the Canons
called Apostolical, against our Prelates meddling with secular affairs? Can. 6.
vel 7. Episcopus, aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus, nequaquam seculares cur as
assumat, sin aliter dejiciatur. And the 82. vel 83. Episcopus, aut Presbyter,
aut Diaconus, qui militiae vacaverit, and simul utrumque retinere voluerit, tam
officium Romanum, quam functionem sacerdotalem, deponitor: Quae enim Caesaris
sunt, Caesari, quae Dei, Deo. Read also the 7th. Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon, but especially the 66 Epistle of St. Cyprian, in which you shall
find the Holy Father puritanizing to purpose. Hugo Grotius is but of yesterday,
yet because he is much magnified by our Prelatists, I shall account it no lost
labor, to transcribe something out of him upon the 12 of Luke and 14. These are
his words, Si quis expendat quantum sit negotii sermonem divinum, recte
dispensare, quod ut facerent ipsi Apostoli tanto instructi spiritu curam
Pauperum aliis delegavere, facile intelliget quosvis alios potius adhibendos
componendis privatorum controversiis, quam eos quos docendi munus occupat. Est
quidem horum imo horum praecipue discordias praecidere, sed si in brevi
admonitione fieri possit, quomodo Onesimum Philemoni reconciliat Paulus, non si
causae ambages discutiendae, and magno temporis dispendio constabit res
paucorum.

3. Nor can it be thought that it is of divine right that Bishops should
delegate their power of Jurisdiction to Chancellors, Commissaries, and other
Lay-Officers. Rather again, it is questionable, whether this be not flatly
against the Law of Christ. To be sure, it is contrary to the practice Primitive,
as is acknowledged even by B. Downam, one of the greatest sticklers for
Episcopacy. See his Defense of his Sermon, L. 1.

I believe therefore it will be said, that only the substance of our Episcopacy
is of Divine Right. Well, what is that? One W. C. at the end of that Discourse
Printed at Oxom, called Confessions and Proofs of Protestant Divines, that
Episco. etc. has these words; If we abstract from Episcopal Government all
accidentals, we shall find it no more but this, an appointment of one man of
eminent sanctity and sufficiency, to have the care of all the Churches within a
certain Precinct or Diocese. Then belike if one be not of eminent sanctity and
sufficiency, he is no Bishop, cui non convenit definitio, etc. But to let this
pass, one man, it is said, must have the care of all the Churches, within a
certain Precinct or Diocese: Well, but how big must this Precinct or Diocese
be? Must it be the whole Christian world, as the Pope says, or will it suffice
that it consist of 2 or 3 Parish-Churches?

For this I am told by Mr. Sandcroft, p. 21. That the Apostles preached the
Gospel not only in Cities, but in the Countries adjoining, yet planted Churches
in Cities still, and settled single persons their Successors there, to govern
both the cities and Regions round about (from whence a City and a Church come
to be equipollent terms, even in the Apostolical Writings, (...), Acts 14.23.
the same with (...); Tit. 1.5. And yet further, that they left the Churches of
inferior Cities, and their Bishops in dependence upon the Metropolis, which
were the chief according to the civil division (and that the only true ground
of the Superiority of one Church above another) has been rendered as manifest
as any thing almost in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, against all Adversaries (both
those of the hills, and those of the Lake too) by the Learned and well placed
Labors of those excellent persons in both pages of the Dipticks, whom I shall
not need to name, since their own works praise them in the gate. And p. 23.
(...) is the standing Rule and fails nor, a City and a Bishop, generally
adequate one to another: For as on the one side, an Universal Bishop, with the
whole world for his Jurisdiction, is a proud pretense, and too vast for
Humanity to grasp; so on the other side, Rural Bishops too is a poor and mean
design, and not only retrives the Italian Episcopelli, so scorned at Trent, but
worse, and p. 2.4. (...), non in vicis, aut villis, aut modica Civitate. No
Bishops there, lest they grow contemptible, so run the Canons of the Ancient
Church, both Greek and Latin, and therefore the Twelfth Council of Toledo
unmitred one Convildus, formerly an Abbot in a little Village, and dissolved
the Bishopric which Bamba the Gothic King had violently procured to be
erected there, and that by this Rule of the Church; and the very (...) of my
Text, which they actually plead in the Front of their Decree, to justify their
Proceedings.

But (with reverence to so Learned a man be it spoken) much of this seems to be
delivered with more Confidence then Truth. And indeed before we can gather the
Divine Right of any particular Form of Government from Apostolical Practice, we
must first prove the Universality of that Practice. We must evince, that not
some few, but all the Apostles did so practice. Now I think it huge difficult,
if not impossible, from any credible Records, to make out what Order and Method
was observed by all the Apostles in their planting of Churches, it being but
very little, if any thing, that is said by Historians, concerning some of them.

2. If we could prove universality of Practice, we must also prove, that such
universal practice was not upon some grounds, proper and peculiar to those
Times in which the Apostles lived.

Well, I for my part, will take no advantage from either of these two
Considerations, but yet will give you my Reasons, why I cannot look upon the
Platform by him laid down, as Apostolical.

1. It savours strongly of (...) or (...), both which were undoubtedly far from
any one of Apostolical Spirit. For seeing the Gospel was preached in Towns, as
well as Cities, let us imagine, that by preaching of the Gospel, five hundred
were converted in a Town, but one hundred in a City, would it not be a sinful
accepting of persons, to appoint the hundred Citizens a Bishop, and to leave
the five hundred without a Bishop? It matters not whether this case did ever
actually happen, it is plain it might have happened, and we may argue a
possibili. And let any rational man say, whether it be probable, that this is
an Apostolical Institution, that Peterborough and Ely should have a Bishop
resident in them, Northampton, Leicester, Cambridge none.

2. This model is destructive to Episcopacy it self, for if this be an
Apostolical Institution, that there should be no Bishops but in Cities, then if
it should seem meet to any Christian Magistrate to have no Cities in all his
Territories, we must have no Bishops; if he should see meet to make all Cities
equal, we must have no Archbishops or Metropolitanes: We know, that lately a
certain thing, that called it self the Supreme Authority of England, did uncity
Chester; suppose this had been done by a lawful Authority, so as that it could
not have been recalled, the Church of England would have been loath to have
lost a Bishop, yet she must, if this be true, that no City, no Bishop: Or what
if our King, by the advice of his Council, should make every market Town in
England and Wales a City, must our Bishops presently be multiplied according to
that proportion.

3. It Is plain, that in one City there was more Bishops then one, plain from
Scripture, for S. Paul writes, Phil. 1.1. To all the Saints in Christ Jesus,
which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons.

To this I know it is replied, that Philippi was a Metropolis, and so in
writing to the Bishops in the plural, he would be understood of all the Bishops
in inferior Cities, subject to that Metropolis: But I affirm, there is no
ground for such a reply, Philippi was not a Metropolis, but (...), as we learn
from Theophilact. But it is said, this description belonged to it as anciently
it was, not as it was when the Apostle did write to them: If once it were no
Metropolis, how can it be proved, that it was such at the writing of this
Apostolical Epistle; forsooth, from Acts 16.12. the words are, (...). But this
is too obscure and ambiguous a place to build an opinion upon, the best
Critics not agreeing concerning the Syntax here used: If any thing can hence
be gathered, that may prove Philippi a Metropolis, it will be either its being
called (...), or its being (...): As for its being called (...), that will not
prove any thing of that nature, for there is no necessity of rendering (...),
the chief City, it may as well signify the first for situation; this way very
learned men go, particularly Zanchius in his Commentaries on the Philip.

Against this it may be objected, that not Philippi, but Neapolis, was the
first City of Macedomia; but perhaps Neapolis was not urbs but pagus, perhaps
it belonged rather to Thracia then Macedonia: These two answers are hinted by
Causabon, but a more satisfactory answer is suggested by Zanchius, I Will
transcribe his words, though somewhat large, that the doubt may be wholly
removed: Neapolis civitas est ad mare, ex adverso Thraciae. Inde venitur ad
flumen quod Strymon vocatur: ultra quod flumen est urbs Philippi. Fluvius autem
Strymon ( ut ait Plinius) terminus est Macedoniae, hoc est, ejus partis, quae
Thraciam versus spectat, ex quo fit, ut prima, cis Strymonem fluvium in
continenti, urbs Macedoniae, sit ipsa urbs Philippi; atque huc spectavit Lucas
in Actis: consentanee cum Plinio, and aliis Prophanis Scriptoribus loquens.
Coeterum licet terminus dividens Macedoniam a Thracia esset, and sit ille
flavius Strymon, tamen Neapolis quoque quae erat ultra fluvium ad Mare,
pertinebat ad Macedoniam and confinium quoddam erat Macedoniae and Thraciae;
and hoc sibi voluerunt Prolomaeus and Plinius and alii, cum inter urbes
Macedoniae primo loco posuerunt Neapolim. Philippi, prima urbs est Macedoniae,
si verum terminum spectes, fluvium sc. Strymonem, dividentem Macedoniam a
Thracia; non fuit autem simpliciter prima, sed ipsa Neapolis fuit prima si quae
etimm ultra Strymonem ad Macedoniam pertinentia complectaris. But seeing it is
called a Colony, it must needs be a Metropolis. I answer, if it had been the
only Colony in Macedonia, we might have thought it probable, that it was a
Metropolis in the civil sense, but it was not the only Colony, as is evident
from History. Further, the officers before whom Paul was brought, ver. 19, 20.
of this Chap. make it somewhat more then probable, that the Proconsul of
Macedonia had not his residence at Philippi; and it is evident, that
Thessalonica was the Metropolis of Macedonia, in the civil sense: Thessalonica
Metropolis est, utnorunt omnes Macedoniae; so we find it was in the
Ecclesiastical sense also; some hundred of years passed ere Philippi had the
honorary title of a Metropolitan Church. Indeed, I think, I might have spared
my self and you all this trouble, for I believe it never came into your head to
think, that when the Apostle writes to the Church of Philippi, he intended to
write to aany more then the Christians and Officers of that City of Philippi,
for had he intended it to all the other Churches that were in Macedonia, then
must the Epistle to the Church of the Thessalonians be intended to all the
Churches of Macedonia; and so the learned Annotator fears not to assert, that
he may make the (...) spoken of, 1 These. 5.12. be Bishops, and yet not grant a
plurality of Bishops in one City. But do you try to carry on this notion
throughout the whole Epistle, and you will make strange work: The Apostle, 1
Chap. 1. salutes the Church of the Thessalonians, commends their faith and
charity, and receiving the Word in much affliction, so as that they were
ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia, ver. 7. and he meant in
ver. 1. by the Church of These. all the Churches of Macedonia, then he must in
ver. 7. say, that the Christians of Macedonia were ensamples to the Christians
of Macedonia.

If I would descend to Ecclesiastical History, I would not thank any man to
grant me: 1. That there have been Bishops in Villages and Towns, or at least in
Cities not so populous, not so wealthy, as many Market Towns among us are;
Basilius Caesareae Cappadociae fuit Episcopus; Gregorius autem Nazianzenae
civitatis omnino vilissimae, quae est posita vicina Caesareae Histo. Tripar.
lib. 7. cap. 22. libro 9. cap. 3. we find one Maris made Bishop of Dolicha,
which was but a little City: Of what a poor place Spiridion was Bishop, may be
seen lib. 1. cap. 10. and lib. 6. cap. 4. there is a most famous history of
Maioma continuing to have a Bishop, even when it ceased to have any longer the
privileges of a City. In Ireland, S. Patrick is said to have settled 365
Bishoprics at the first plantation, I scarce think there were then so many
Cities. 2. That there have been two Bishops in one City. Vid. Possid. in vita
Aug. 3. That sometime there was but one Bishop to many Cities, examples are too
obvious and common to be produced: We in England are not without some
Presidents of this nature: If Councels be produced against this, you will
remember, that Councels, mostly consisting of Bishops, they may be looked on as
parties forward enough to establish any thing that might make for their own
pomp and grandeur.


Lastly; whereas it is so confidently affirmed, that the Apostles did leave the
Churches of inferior Cities, and their Bishops, in dependence upon the
Metropolis: I do with some confidence reply, that there is no sufficient proof
for such an assertion: I do not, in my poor reading find, that the proof of it
from Scripture, has been much attempted, only he, whose diligence nothing is
wont to escape, argues, by comparing Acts 16.1.4. with Acts 15.2. I shall give
you his words, as he himself has Englished them to us. Ans. to D. Owen; p.
195. According to the Image of the Civil Government among the Jews, and the
like again in their Temple, the Apostles appear to have disposed of Churches
every where, and in all their plantations, to have constituted a subordination
and dependence of the Churches in the inferior Cities, to those in the chief
or Metropolis: An example of this we have in the story of the Acts, concerning
Syria and Cilicia, and the several Cities thereof, in relation to Antioch the
Metropolis; for when the question Acts 15.2. was referred, and brought to
Jerusalem from the Church (peculiarly) of Antioch, Chap. 14.26. and 15.3. and
the Decree of the Council returned to them by whom the question was proposed,
i. e. to the Church of Antioch, ver. 22. yet in the Epistle in which that
Decree was contained, we find the Brethren through Syria and Cilicia, i. e. all
the Christians of that Province, to be expressed and joined with those of
Antioch, v. 23. and after, when that Decretal Epistle was delivered to the
Church of Antioch, v. 30. Paul and Sylas went over Syria and Cilicia, v. 41,
42. and as they went, they delivered to every City the Decrees of the Council,
cap. 16.4. which is an evidence, that the Churches of those Cities, related
either immediately to Antioch, or as Antioch it self did to Jerusalem, and were
in subordination to it, as to the principal Metropolis of so wide a Province,
etc.

I heartily wish this argumentation had been put into a Syllogistical form,
then it would have been easy enough to find out a Proposition that might
safely be denied: But seeing the Author has not thought meet to put his
discourse into that dress, I shall not do it for him, lest I should be thought
not to do it according to his mind: Taking it as we find it, I say:

1. That which he supposes, may well admit some dispute, viz. Whether the
question referred to Jerusalem, was referred to it by the single Church of
Antioch ( but that as Metropolis of all Syria) for if it can be proved, that
this reference was made only by the Church of Antioch, and that Antioch was
Metropolis of all Syria, it will still be unproved, that the reference was made
by Antioch as Metropolis; for many things are done by a Metropolitan Church,
which are not done by it as such.

2. There Is no evidence, that the ground of the reference to Jerusalem was,
because that it was the principal Metropolis, more probable it is, that the
reasons of referring this controversy to a determination at Jerusalem, were
because of the authority of those Apostles that were at Jerusalem, in which it
was supposed those who contended with Paul would acquiesce, and because those
Judaizing Teachers pretended the Commission of the Apostles for their doctrine.

Against these, let us examine what is objected; it is said, page 204, 205. That
the first taken alone could not be the reason, because there being but two
Apostles there at that time, Peter and John: 1. There might be so many in some
other City. 2. Paul and Barnabas being before this separated, by Gods Commands,
to the Apostolic Office, were in this respect of equal authority with them,
and so in this sense the words of S. Paul have truth, Gal. 2.6. (...). 3. The
reference is made not to the Apostles alone, but to the Apostles and Elders,
Acts 15.2. 4. The cause of the reference, was not only the contention of those
who came out of Judea, but the Antiochean Christians being taught, i. e. being
seduced by them, Acts 15.1. and accordingly the Decree respected them
peculiarly; and so this first reason is of no force.


1. It Is certain, that the reference was made not only to the Apostles, but
also to the Elders (from which perhaps something might be deduced, no way
advantageous to the cause of the Episcoparians.) 2. We'll grant it probable,
that these Judaizers did not only teach, but also had persuaded some of the
Antiochean Christians to embrace their error: But then 3. We deny that there
were at Jerusalem but two Apostles, viz. Peter and John, James undoubtedly was
there, and it is by very learned men thought, that when the other James had run
his course, he was taken into the Apostolical rank, office, and employment. Now
it will never be proved, either from Scripture, or any other credible
testimony, that there were in any one City three persons so fit to be appealed
to as these three: As for Paul and Barnabas, granting them to be separated by
Gods command to the Apostolic Office, and so of equal authority with Peter,
etc. yet their Apostleship might be more questioned by these Judaizing
Teachers, to stop their mouths, and let the Antiochean Christians know, that
they did not go about to abolish any thing which Peter, James, and John (who
did mostly converse with those of the Circumcision) did reckon obligatory, this
reference is made, this journey undertaken.


The learned Doctor seems not to deny, but that those who came from Jerusalem
might pretend Commission and Commandment from the Apostles to teach what they
taught, but thinks this is useful, not disadvantagious to him: For hence he
thinks it follows, That if these certain men had been truly sent and
commissionated by the Church of Jerusalem, then this would have been of some
force at Antioch, which it could not be, if Antioch were perfectly independent
from Jerusalem, page 205. But who can swallow this? what Christian does not
think, that if these men had come at that time into England, with a Commission
to preach, that except we be circumcised, we cannot be saved, it should be of
no force, because we are a Church independent on Jerusalem?

3. Therefore we deny that the Decrees did therefore oblige the Churches of
Syria and Cilicia, because Antioch or Jerusalem was their Metropolis, but
because the Decrees were made by Apostles, men acted by an infallible spirit,
who could not but know the mind of Christ their Lord and Master: Such Decrees
did concern and oblige all Christians that had any certain knowledge of them,
whether they were under the Metropolis of Jerusalem or no.

My second argument, to prove that Episcopacy is not of Divine Right, shall be
taken from the testimonies of those Authors who do clearly, and plainly make it
to be but of humane institution. I begin with Jerome in his Commentaries on
Titus, made Anno Dom. 387. Sicut Presbyteri sciunt se ex Ecclesiae consuetudine
ei qui sibi praepositus fuerit, esse subjectos, ita Episcopi noverint se magis
consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores.
In his Epistle to Evagrius, Quod autem unus postea electus est, qui caeteris
praeponeretur, in Schismatis remedium factum est, ne unusquisque ad se trahens
Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. If you say that Hierom was a Presbyter, and
provoked, and so may be thought to write all this in a fit of spleen and
malice, I shall (without retorting the argument, which you know is obvious)
refer you to Isidore, who was a Bishop himself; he says in his second book, De
Divinis Officiis, cap. 7. that Presbyters have most things in common with
Bishops, Sed sola, propter authoritatem, summo sacerdoti Clericorum Ordinatio
and Consecratio reservata est. And the Council of Sevill says, that the
Consecration of Presbyters, Deacons, etc. is forbidden, Novellis and
Ecclesiasticis regulis.

To answer that, the Council follows Isidore, and Isidore follows Hierome, and
so all three make but one single testimony, is too easy a way of answering,
not worth taking notice of, therefore we are further told: 1. That Ignatius is
a more considerable Author then Hierome, and that Ignatius, all along his
Epistles, bears witness to Episcopacy: I acknowledge more reverence is due to
Ignatius then to Hierome, because he lived nearer the age of the Apostles: But
then 1. We are not so sure that Ignatius his writings are incorrupt, as we are
that Hieromes are. 2. Ignatius does no where, that I can find, assert the
Divine Right of Episcopacy; and yet I have read over all Ignatius his Epistles,
and read them over with an impartial desire to find out any thing from which I
might collect what was the ancient form of Discipline: I am confirmed, that I
was not mistaken, by reading the dissertations of the very learned Dr. H.
Hammond: The second of those four dissertations, is concerning Ignatius, and
his testimonies, the whole 25th Chap. of that dissertation, is taken up in
producing testimonies out of that holy Martyr, and blessed Father in favor of
Hierarchy: In the 26 Chap. he gives us the opinion of Ignatius in six
conclusions. The second is, Episcopos singulares, per omnes mundi plagas
ubicunque Christiana fides viguit, Christo si non praecipiente, saltem
approbante, institutos fuisse: But wot you how he proves this conclusion? why,
he proves it but by one testimony out of Ignatius his Epistle to the Ephesians,
the words, as by him quoted, are these, (...).


But 1. These words are not to be found in the old Greek Editions of Ignatius:
Now seeing this Doctor does himself, in some particulars, prefer other Editions
to the Edition of Isaac Vossius, what if I should so do in this matter, what
would become of the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy?

2. The Laurentian Copy does not exhibit the words, as they are by the Doctor
represented to us, for in it I find not (...), but (...): The old Latin Version
reads thus: Etenim Jesus Christus, incomparabile nostrum vivere patris
sententia, ut and ipsi secundum terrae fines determinati Jesu Christi sententia
sunt; not mentioning the word Episcopi.

3. I can give the Doctor his own reading, and yet the place will not make for
him, for a sense different from that which he affixeth to them, may be given of
them, and is given by Master Stilling fleet, page 309. And all this, you know,
by a friend of ours, was asserted in a Latin supposition at a public act in
Oxford, four or five years ago. Indeed, there is in the Epistle to the
Magnesians, a place which might with good color and probability be urged for
the Divine Right of Presbytery.

But if this first answer succeed not, we are further told, that Hierome is not
against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, but rather for it; or else, if one
while he be against it, at another time he is for it. We have proved plainly
enough, that he was against it, let us therefore hear whether any thing can be
produced out of him that makes for it; two places are most insisted on, the one
in the Epistle to Evagrius, Ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas 01 sumptas de
veteri Testamento, quod Aaron, and filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt,
hoc sibi Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vindicent in Ecclesia. Here the
superiority of Bishops above Presbyters, is placed among Apostolical
Traditions, that the learned Dissertator, page 123. Disser. 2. breaks out into
these words, Quid ad hoc responderi possit; aut quo (...) artificio deliniri
aut deludi tam diserta affirmatio, fateor ego me divinando assequi non posse,
sed e contra ex iis, quae D. Blondellus, quae Walo, quae Ludovicus Capellus,
hac in re praestiterunt, mihi persuasissimum esse, nihil uspiam contratam
apertam lucem obtendi posse. But this Reverend Doctor need not make use of, or
puzzle his divining faculty, to find out how this place may be answered, it was
answered, and satisfactorily answered by Gersom Bucer, De gubernatione
Ecclesiastica, almost forty years before the coming out of these
Anti-Blondellian Dissertations; the sum of the answer is: 1. That traditio
Apostolica need not signify that which was instituted by the Apostles, it may
denote no more then an Ecclesiastical custom.

But can there be any reason to imagine that Hierom or any man should set down
that for an Instance of Apostolical Tradition, which the same person does not
believe to be delivered by the Apostles, but to be of a later Date? Answ. to
Land. Minist. 176. Why sure a reason may well be imagined, as well as there may
be a reason imagined, why Dr. Hammond calls those ancient Constitutions and
Canons, Canons and Constitutions Apostolical; though he do not think, that they
were either of them made by the Apostles, but by persons far inferior to them,
for Authority, and born long after they were fallen asleep. It was not unusual
to call that an Apostolical Tradition, which had been long practiced. To this
end, let Dr. Jer. Tailor be read in his Liberty of Prophesying, sec. 5. p. 88,
89.2. He answers, that Hier. intended not here a particular and disjoined
Comparison, first of Bishops with the High Priest Aaron, then of Presbyters
with the Sons of Aaron, and Lastly of Deacons with Levites: but his meaning is,
that as Aaron and his sons the Priests were above the Levites; So under the New
Testament, the Bishop and Presbyter are above Deacons: And therefore it was
intolerable Pride in the Deacon of his age, to set himself above the
Presbyters. Audio quendam in tantam erupisse vecordiam ut Diaconos Presbyteris,
i. e. Episcopis anteferret. So he begins his Epistle; and in the Process of it,
he does magno conatu, labor to prove, that Presbyters are the same with
Bishops: and at last concludes with these words, ut sciamus Traditiones
Apostolicas, etc.

The second place urged out of Hierom, to prove the Divine Right of Episcopacy,
is in his Comment on Titus; Idem est ergo Presbyter qui and Episcopus, and
antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in
populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum
consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur, postquam vero unusquisque eos quos
baptizaverat suos putavit esse, non Christi, in toto Orb decretum est: ut unus
de Presbyteris electus, superponeretur caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura
pertineret, and Schismatum semina tolerentur.

Before this can any way advantage the pretensions of those who ascribe a Jus
Divinum to Episcopacy, it must be proved, that the in toto orb decretum est
does refer to some Decree made by the Apostles, and that the time of the
Institution of Bishops was when it was said at Corinth, I am of Paul, etc. Now
that neither of these will ever be proved, you will soon see, if you read the
Annotations of Blondel on the Text of Hierom.

I pass now, having only begged your pardon for my prolixity in this Second,
unto a Third Argument for proof of the validity of an Ordination by Presbyters;
it shall be drawn from the practice among the Jews; and thus I form it:

If among the Jews any one that was ordained himself, might ordain another,
then may Presbyters ordain Presbyters: But, among the Jews, any one that was
himself ordained, might Ordain others: Ergo.

The Consequence of the Major is founded upon that which is acknowledged by
most Learned men, that the Government of the Church-Christian was formed after
the Jewish Pattern; Christ all along accommodating and lightly changing the
Jewish Customs into Christian Institutions.

The Minor I prove, there was among Jews, as Dr. Lightfoot has observed, Harm.
p. 97. an Ordination with laying on of hands, and without laying on of hands.
Maym. in Sanhed. 4. How is Ordination to be for perpetuity? Not that they lay
on their hands on the head of the Elder, but call him Rabbi, and say, behold
thou art Ordained, etc. But there was also Ordination by the laying on of
hands. Take Ordination which way you will, 'twill never be proved, that he who
was himself in Office, might not ordain another to the same Office. For though
we are told of a Constitution, that none should ordain, but those to whom leave
was granted by Rabbi Hillel, yet a principio non fuit sic. To which purpose, I
shall only need to transcribe the words of P. Cunaeus, one as well skilled in
the Hebrew Rites and Customs, as any that ever did write concerning them, l. 1.
de Rep. Heb. c. 12. Senatoria Dignitas, quoniam amplissima erat, nemini data
sine legitimo actu est, manuum enim impositione opus fuit, quam Judaei (...)
vocant, at Graeci (...) dixerunt. Ita Moses Josuae and 70 Senatoribus manum
imposuit; qua solennitate peracta, statim delapsus aetheriis sedibus Spiritus
pectora eorum implevit, and hi porro, in hunc modum initiati cum essent, alios
eadem lege auctoraverunt; non tamen potuit is ritus extraterraem sanctam peragi
quia vis ejus omnis conclusa Palestinae finibus erat. Perinsigne est quod R.
Maimonides tradidit in Halacha Sanh. c. 4. Cum enimosim solennem hunc actum pro
arbitrio suo omnes celebrarent, quibus imposita semel manus fuerat coarctatum
esse, id jus a sapientibus esse ait, constitutumque uti deinceps nemo illud
usurparet nisi cui id concessisset divinus Senex R. Hillel, is autem magni
concilii princeps erat, and alterum sub se Praesidem habuit Sameam hominem
truculentum, ambitiosumque, etc. Tandem haec manuum impositio quae usitata diu
fuerat recessavit recitatum tantum enim carmen quoddam conceptis verbis est.
The Learned Seldom in his first Book de Synedr. c. 14. takes notice of this,
and says, that St. Paul's creating of Presbyters, was according to the Jewish
custom of creating Elders; that Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, as
his disciple: This Gamaliel was the Nephew of Hillel, and Prince of the
Sanhedrim at that time, and therefore no doubt but he had created his Scholar
Paul a Jewish Elder, before he was a Christian; and that afterward, when Paul
became an Apostle, knowing that the true Judaisme was by the appointment of
God, to be communicated to Gentiles, as well as Jews, and thinking that it was
lawful to create Elders out of the Holy Land, and that he and other Apostles
were free from that new super-induced Law of not making Elders without the
License of the Prince of the Sanhedrim, and so the custom prevailed in creating
Christian Elders, that every one that was duly created himself, might also duly
create his own Disciples; he did upon this account, create or appoint Elders in
every Church, Acts 14.23. Dr. Hammond in his six Queries, p. 344, 345, 346,
347. mustereth up many Inconveniences, which seemed to him, necessarily to
follow this Conjecture or Observation. I cannot think my self obliged to defend
Mr. Seldom. The Reverend Doctor grants as much as I would wish, viz. p. 349.
That the Government of the Church was formed after the Jewish Pattern: And p.
324. That Imposition of hands in Ordination, so often mentioned in the New
Testament, is answerable to the laying on of hands used by the Jews, when they
did create Successors in any Power, or communicate any part of their Power to
others as assistants. If all this be true, why may not a Christian Presbyter
ordain a Presbyter, as well as a Jewish Elder ordain an Elder?

My Fourth Argument to prove the validity of Ordination by Presbyters, shall be
taken from the many Examples that do occur in Antiquity of such Ordinations,
which were never reputed null and void.

I begin with that known place of Hierom in his Epistle to Evagrius:
Alexandriae Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos
Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant; quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi eligant de se,
quem industrium noverint, and Archi-Diaconum vocent. To this Testimony it is
wont to be answered, that only the Election is ascribed to Presbyters, the
Ordination might notwithstanding be performed by Bishops.

But the Question is not, what might be done, but was done?

And Eutychius published by Mr. Seldom most plainly and expressly affirms,
that from the time of Mark the Founder of the Church of Alexandria, unto
Demetrius Bish. of the same Church, the several Patriarchs of the Church of
Alexandria were chosen and ordained with Imposition of hands, by the 12
Presbyters, and that by special command from St. Mark himself. To this the
Learned Dissertator says, p. 177. Facilis est Responsio, nullam hac in re
Eutychio fidem deberi, ut qui assertioni huic aperta (...) viam muniverit. This
is indeed an easy answer, but a little too easy to be received by one who is
awake, to which nothing need be confronted save only this, that some Credit is
due in this matter to Eutychius.

And from him, we shall go, to those who speak concerning the Church of
Scotland, in her first Conversion. Jo. Major, in the Second Book of his
History, c. 2. writes that the Scots were instructed in the Faith by Priests
and Monks without bishops, until the year of our L. 429. So as that that Church
must needs be without Bishops above two hundred years; as is acknowledged by
the Learned Forbes, in his Irenicum, p. 159. To this, the Doctor answers
without book, not having John Mayor by him to consult, he says, that John
Maior's affirmation has very little appearance o^ ruth in it, Answ. to Land.
Minist. p. 160, and 161. that neither Bid nor any other affirms, that before
the coming of Palladius, they were ruled by a Presbytery, or so much as that
they had any Presbyter among them. But this is too great confidence. Blondel,
who he chose for his Antagonist, had produced Johan. Fordonus, who in his
Scotischron. l. 3. c. 8. has these words, Ante Palladii adventum, habebant
Scoti fidei Doctores ac Sacramentorum Ministratores Presbyteros solummodo, vel
Monachos, ritum sequentes Primitivae Ecclesiae. And if it should be said, that
these Presbyters and Monks were commissionated by some Bishop, thus to preach
and administer Sacraments, the same Blondel, Apol. Sec. 3. p. 315. quoteth
Hector Boethius Scotor. His. l. 6. fol. 92. in these words, Caepere nostri eo
temporis ^^circa annum 263.) Christi dogma accuratissime amplexari; Monachorum
quorundam ductu and adhortatione (qui quod sedulo praedicationi vacarent,
essentque frequentes in oratione) ab incolis cultores dei sunt appellati.
Invaluit id nomen apud vulgus in tantum ut sacerdotes omnes ad nostra pene
tempora vulgo Culdaei, i. e. cultores Dei sine discrimine vocitarentur.
Pontificem inter se communi suffragio deligebant, penes quem divinarum rerum
esset potestas; is multos deinceps annos Scotorum Episcopus (ut nostris
traditur Annalibus) est appellatus. and lib. 7. f. 128. Palladius primus omnium
qui sacrum inter Scotos egere Magistratum, a summo Pontifice, A. D. 430.
Pontifex creatus; cum antea populi suffragiis ex Monachis and Culdaeis
Pontifices assumerentur.

Now that I am upon the Isle of Great Britain, it will not be amiss, to take
notice what Walsingham the Monk relates concerning the Lollards, A. D. 1389.
Winning very many to their Sect, they grew so audacious, that their Presbyters,
like Bishops, created and ordained new Presbyters; affirming that every Priest
had received as much power to bind and loose, and to minister other
Ecclesiastical things, as the Pope himself gives, or could give. This Power of
Ordination they exercised in the Diocese of Salisbury, and those who were
ordained by them, thinking all things to be lawful to them, presumed to
celebrate Masses, and feared not to handle divine things, and administer the
Sacraments.

I might also reckon up the Ordinations made by the Chorepiscopi, among
Ordinations by Presbyters: For I am not yet convinced by all that is written,
that they were Bishops. See what is said in this matter by Forbes Irenicum,
lib. 2. c. 11. Nor do I yet believe that the Sayings of those two Ancient
Authors, Apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus. In
Alexandria and per totum Aegyptum, si desit Episcopus, consecrat Presbyter: are
impertinently alleged to prove Ordination by Presbyters. For I judge it more
probable that consignare and consecrare do signify ordinare, then that they
should signify only conficere Sacramentum Eucharistiae, But let these pass.

Cassianus as you may find in Blondel, p. 357. reports, that Paphanutius a
Presbyter, did make Daniel his Disciple first Deacon, then Presbyter, the
Bishops that at that time governed the Ch^^ch, not censuring him for it. More
Examples you may find in Blondel; If you have him not by you, you may find some
of them transcribed out of him, as I suppose, by Mr. Stillingfl. toward the
latter end of the second Book of his Irenicum.

And for Examples of latter times, Mr. Prynne will furnish you in his
Unbishopping of Timothy and Titus.

Lastly, I thus prove the validity of Ordination by Presbyters, If the Ministry
of those who have been Ordained by Presbyters, has been ordinarily blessed to
the Confirmation and Conversion of souls, then is Ordination by Presbyters
valid: But the Ministry of those, etc. Ergo.

The Consequence of the Major is proved, because God cannot any way more
eminently attest and own the Ministry of any person, then by making him
instrumental to the Conversion and Confirmation of the souls of his Hearers
and Followers. When the Apostleship of Paul was called in question, how did he
prove it? 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen
Jesus Christ our Lord? Are not ye my work in the Lord? You see he does not lay
more stresse upon his having seen Jesus Christ the Lord, then he does upon
their being his Workmanship in the Lord. More plainly in the second verse: If I
be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you; for the Seal of my
Apostleship are ye in the Lord. The Learned Grotius would have us after (...)
to supply (...), you are the Seal of my Apostleship, eo ipso quod estis in
Christo, quod estis Christiani. Because this Author is so much admired by those
against whose oppositions I am now fortifying you, I shall transcribe his whole
Annotation on this second Verse. Si Alii dubitarent, an Apostolus essem, vos
certe dubitare non deberetis, propter ingentia signa apostolatus quae apud vos
edidi: Sicut per signa apposita constat instrumentum aliquod esse sincerum, ita
per vestram conversionem constat me esse Apostolum.

As for the Minor, if any one should be so monstrously uncharitable and
impudent, as to deny it, he need only enquire in Germany, Holland, France,
Scotland, and he will hear of hundreds of Thousands of Examples to convince
him. As for England, it has been the sad complaint of many, that God has of
late much withdrawn his converting presence from his Ordinances. But has he
more withdrawn it from his Ordinances administered by those that were
Presbyterianly ordained, then from the same Ordinances administered by such as
were Episcopally Ordained? Nay, has not the success of Presbyterians been
greater, if their Adversaries should be Judges? Were it convenient to boast,
many of us could say invenimus Ecclesiam Christi lateritiam, reliquimus
marmoream. We had profane, rude ignorant people left us by our Episcopal
Predecessors; but our Successors will find them civil, knowing, praying
Christians. Might we but find so much Favor in the eyes of our Sovereign, as
to be permitted to exercise our Ministry, if at the years end it did not
appear, that we and our People were as good Subjects to God and his
Vicegerent, as any that favor the Hierarchy, we would not then refuse to
suffer the punishments due to men really as bad as we are falsely reported to
be: But if we must, because we cannot embrace an opinion which was never till
of late maintained by any that called himself a Protestant, be accountted
Heretics and Schismatics, nothing remains, but that we commit our cause to
God, and till he see meet to plead it, possess our souls in Patience.

There are some Objections against the validity of a Presbyterian Ordination,
to be removed, and then I shall exercise your Patience no longer.

1. The first is grounded upon the Authority of two Fathers, Hierom and
Chrysostom: Hieroms words are in his Epistle to Evagrius, Quid enim facit
Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione, quod non faciat Presbyter? To answer this
Testimony, I might observe, that they who produce it, will not stick to it, but
are verily persuaded that there are many things besides Ordination, which a
Bishop may do, that yet a Presbyter cannot do. But I need not flee to so
indirect an Answer: For, 1. Marsilius Patavinus, in his Book which he calls
Defensor Pacis, takes the word Ordinatio to signify quite another thing then
the conferring of Holy Orders. His words are these; Ordinatio ibi non
significat potestatem conferendi, seu collationem sacrorum Ordinum, sed
Oeconomicam potestatem regulandi vel dirigendi Ecclesiae ritus, atque personas,
quantum ad exercitium divini cultus in Templo; unde ab antiquis Legumlatoribus
vocantur Oeconomi reverendi. 2. It Is certain that sometimes the word Ordinatio
does signify the external Rite or Ceremony used in Ordination, viz. Imposition
of hands; if so it be taken here, as why may it not? I can grant that
Ordination in many places was so managed; it is freely confessed by Calvin:
Unum puta (...) vices sustinentem ut plurimum omnium nomine manus imposuisse.
3. Grotius says, nothing hinders, but that we may so interpret the place, as
that it shall mean no more then that Presbyters can ordain none in contempt of
the Bishops. 4. I finally answer, that Hierom speaks not here of any Divine Law
appropriating Ordination to Bishops, but only of the Ecclesiastical custom that
obtained in his age; it is as if he had said, what is there now adays done by a
Bishop, that a Presbyter may not do without Breach of Ecclesiastical Canons,
except only the business of Ordination? He had before said, that a principio
non fuit sic, originally the Presbyters might and did make the very Bishop
himself.


The place of Chrysostom. is in his 11 Hom. on 1 Timothy the words are, (...). Here
again I might tell you, that if this Saying of Chrysostomes must determine the
Controversy, our Prelatists must throw open that which they account the best
part of their Enclosure, they must acknowledge that the Presbyters have a
(...), that they exceed the Presbyter in the Power of Order only not in the
power of Jurisdiction. 2. I could much weaken the Authority of Chrysostom as
to the point of Ordination by acquainting you that it was one of the
accusations made against that Father, that he did engrosse Ordination to
himself, not taking in the assistance of his Presbyters, (...), are the words
of his Charge in the Synod ad Quercum, An. 403. But if these two Answers seem
to you but shifts, (though why they should seem no more then shifts, I wot not)
I reply thirdly, that (...), the word used by Chrysostom is ambiguous, used by
good authors in very different, if not quite contrary significations; as is
noted (among others) by Suidas, his words are these, (...). (that (...) with a
Genitive case signifies to exceed or excel; but with an Accusative, to injure
or do wrong.) Now if we should so render the word (...) here, seeing it has an
Accusative case after it, Bishops must from hence be concluded not lawful
possessors, but usurpers of the power of sole Ordination.

If yet you are not satisfied, I turn you over fourthly to Gersom Bucer, who
page 357, 358. takes notice of this authority, as placed by Bishop Downham in
the margin of that Sermon which he took upon him to confute; one of his answers
is, that Bishops are here made Superior to Presbyters, only by the voluntary
election of their Sym-Presbyters, or Colleagues, not by any Divine Right, he
renders the words thus, Sola-enim horum (subaudi Presbyterorum) electione
ascenderunt, atque hoc tantum plus quam Presbyteri videntur habere; then the
plain meaning is, that the Presbyters, for order sake, do choose some one to be
their President; and this is all that the Bishop has above the Presbyters.

The second objection against the validity of Ordinations by Presbyters, is
taken also from Ecclesiastical Writers, among whom we do find Ordinations by
Presbyters pronounced null and void: Of this nature there are three principally
insisted upon, the which before we particularly examine, I shall crave leave to
premise this one thing, viz. that it is very manifest, that Councels have
pronounced some Ordinations null and void, which yet could not be null in
natura rei. I instance only in the Councels of Chalcedon and Antioch,
pronouncing Ordinations, though made by a Bishop to be void, if the person
ordained, were ordained either without a title, or in another Bishops Diocese,
yet such Ordinations are not nullities, many examples of this nature are
brought by the learned Blondell, page 168, 169. Now so it might be in the case
of Ordinations by Presbyters, and so it is by many averred that it was; but let
us hear the examples.

One Colythus, a Presbyter, took upon him, being but a Presbyter, to ordain
Ischiras, this Ischiras, notwithstanding this Ordination, was looked upon but
as a Laick.

I answer, there are so many dissimilitudes betwixt the Ordinations of
Colythus, and those Ordinations made by Presbyters, which we contend for, that
from the condemning of his Ordinations, no argument can be drawn to prove, that
ours ought to be condemned. 1. Colythus acted not as a Presbyter, but pretended
himself to be a Bishop, so do not our Presbyters. 2. He acted alone, whereas
our Ordinations are not by one single person. 3. He was an open declared
Heretic. 4. He that was ordained had no title, he was not (...): He was not
chosen by any Church, but our Ordinations are not of sine-titular persons.


A second example is the case of Maximus, who being no Bishop, yet ordained
Presbyters, but all his Ordinations were by the Fathers assembled in Council at
Constantinople pronounced null.

Maximus is too large to be here recited, see it in Blondell: I say briefly,
that what was by the Synod determined against his Ordinations, is not
prejudicial to Ordinations made by Presbyters, for (as Blondell well) if
Presbyters had never so full power of Ordination, yet had the Synod good reason
to depose those who were ordained by Maximus, because he was a Presbyter, as
well as a Bishop in the air, never had he been ordained Presbyter, either by
Gregory, or any other.

A third example, is that of the blind Bishop, who did lay hands on one
Presbyter, and two Deacons, but his Ordinations were pronounced invalid,
because not he, but his Presbyters read the words of Ordination.

This was decreed, says Dr. J. Tay. Episcopacy asserted, 182. by the first
Council of Sevill, too hastily, for it was done not by the first, but second
Council of Sevill, about the year 619. He that reads the Decree of those
Fathers, would think they were blinder then the deceased Bishop, whom they
condemned; for what if the Presbyter did at the command of his Bishop read the
words which the Bishop could not read, does this make the Ordination void? by
what Law, either of God, or man; shall we say, that the Judge with us does not
condemn the malefactor, because he appoints the Clerk to read the sentence? Be
it as it will, the Decree it self says, that the Presbyter in reading the
words, did only sin contra ecclesiasticum ordinem; and we cannot think that an
Ordination is presently void, because all Ecclesiastical Rites are not observed
in it.

Against these examples I might, if it were needful, bring the judgment of
Leo, Anno 452. in his Epistle to Rusticus Narbonensis, but in this Master
Stilling fleet has prevented me, page 380.

The third objection against the validity of an Ordination by Presbyters, is
taken from the words of the Apostle, Heb. 7.7. without contradiction, the less
is blessed of the better.



But I must come to that argument in which Dr. H. Ham. does so triumph, that he
confesses he was not acute enough to see what could be replied to it, you will
find it in his praemonition to the Reader, before his Latin Dissertations, he
frames it into a Dilemna, either Hierome had power to Ordain, or he had not, if
he had, why then does he say, Quid facit Episcopus excepta ordinatione quod non
faciat Presbyter; if he had not, how come our Presbyters to have that power,
which he the Hyperaspistes of Presbyters had not.

I answer, Hierome had power to Ordain, taking in other Presbyters to his
assistance; what he meant by his Quid facit excepta Ordinatione, I told you
before.

But the same learned Doctor proceeds, It shall suffice us to remember thee of
one thing, viz. that no Presbyter Ordained by Bishops here in the English
Church, had any power of Ordaining others bestowed on him, and therefore can no
more take any such power to himself, then can a Deacon, or a mere Laick.

Oxon. some years since, and urged by a learned Doctor, against one who
maintained the validity of a Presbyterian Ordination, it was then, in the
judgment of the hearers, satisfactorily answered, and so, I doubt not, but it
will be now in your judgment: I say, those Bishops who Ordained Presbyters
here in England, did give them a power of Ordaining others, whether they had
any intention so to do, I know not, but this I say, that he who makes any one
a Priest, gives him a Power of Ordaining, and if when he is made a Priest, he
should through fear or ignorance promise not to Ordain, if he should afterward
be convinced, that as Priest he has a power of Ordaining, he ought to repent
of his promise, and it notwithstanding, to join with his brethren in laying on
of hands, if either there be no Bishops, or none that will ordain, without
imposing such subscriptions, as contain in them matters very doubtful, if not
unlawful.

2. The form of words used in ordaining a Presbyter in the Church of England is
this, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou remittest, etc. did these words,
when used by our Lord Christ to his Disciples, confer a power of Ordaining? If
they did not, I then demand when, and by what form of words was that power
conferred on the Apostles? If they did, how come they not to convey a power of
ordaining others unto the Presbyter, in whose Ordination they are used? If a
man, when he is made a Priest in the Church of England, receive not a power of
Ordaining others, nor does he receive it when he is consecrated Bishop, for
having read over the Form appointed for the consecrating of a Bishop, I cannot
find any words that give the Bishop a power of Ordaining, except any one be so
hypercritical, as to imagine, that Take the Holy Ghost impowers a person to
Ordain, and Receive the Holy Ghost does not: But why then do Presbyterians
complain, that the Bishops reserve the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction to
themselves, indulging to Presbyters only some inferior Acts (ab omni
excusatione eos procul esse concludimus, qui, quas sibi neutiquam concessas
conquerantur, potestates, sibi sic sacrilege arripiunt.) A. Presbyterians do
not complain, that they had such an Ordination as did not confer on them a
power of Ordaining, but they complain, that they are not permitted the exercise
of that power; nor do they say, that they have no power to suspend and
excommunicate, but that they are not suffered to put forth that power, but only
(which the simplest Churchwarden may do) to present scandalous offenders.

But it is further objected, That when one is by the laying on of the hands of
the Bishop, advanced to the degree of a Presbyter, an indeterminate and
indefinite power is not by the Fathers of the Church committed to him, but a
power, suis finibus fiquido dispuncta, suis cancellis and limitibus distincta,
and dilucida actuum specialium ad quos admittitur enumeratione definita and
conclusa; there is a particular enumeration of all the Acts unto which the
power of a Presbyter does extend, among which there is no mention of creating
of Presbyters and Deacons. D. H.H. in his preface to his Dissertations.



Id. ibid.

England says so? What one man eminent in our Reformation, or before our
Reformation, said so? Do not Usher, Davenant, Mason, Field, etc. say,
Ordination by Presbyters is valid, which it could not be, if they had no power
of ordaining? For my part, I shall as soon be brought to think there were no
such men as Cran^^er, Peter Martyr, Martin Bucer, Jewel, as to think, that they
judged that Presbyters had not power to make either Deacons or Presbyters; I
may now at last, I hope, conclude with the learned and industrious Gerhard, Ex
toto codice biblico ne apex quidem proferri potest, quo demonstretur,
immutabili quadam necessitate, ac ipsius Dei institutione potestatem ordinandi
eo modo competere Episcopo, ut si minister ab Episcopo ordinetur, ejus vocatio
and ordinatio censeatur rata, sin a Presbytero, quod tunc irrita coran^ Deo,
and frustranea sit habenda. Loc. Com. de Minis. Eccles.

But methinks after all this, I hear you say, you are not satisfied, because
that when you talk with Episcopal men, they constantly tell you, that in
receiving Ordination from Presbyters, you go against the judgment of the
Catholic Church for 1600 years and upward. Let me ask you who are those
Episcopal men that tell you so? are they such as you can suppose to have read
the most considerable books that were written in all ages of the Church? For my
part I have usually observed that those who thus boast of all Antiquity, are
very strangers to all Antiquity, and never so much as saw the Fathers and
Councels they so prate of. If you are resolved to close with every one that
says he has all the Fathers on his side, you must presently turn Papist, for
who more pretends Antiquity for his opinions than does the Papist? But if you
will not believe every one that pretends to have all Antiquity on his side,
then I hope you may think it reasonable to examine the Episcoparians pretenses
to Antiquity; which if you will do, you will find that prime Antiquity is no
friend to such an Hierarchy as they now would obtrude upon us. My advice to you
is, 1. That if it be possible, and as much as in you lies, you would avoid all
Disputations of this nature, which I have but rarely observed to have any good
success. 2. If you cannot avoid Disputation, then if it be possible confine
your dispute to Scripture times: Put him that contends for Episcopacy as
earnestly as if the very being of the Church did depend upon it, to prove the
Divine Institution of it; and assure your self, that which cannot be proved out
of the Scriptures, is not necessary to the being of the Church; 3. If you must
needs enter into the lists about the Antiquity of your Opinion, then my
counsel is, 1. Do not take every thing to be the saying of a Father, which is
quoted as such, but forbear answering, till you have time to examine whether
that be indeed in the Fathers, which is brought out of them: For nothing is
more common than for men in the heat of Disputation, to lay the brats of their
own brain at the Fathers doors. 2. If you find that which is produced out of
any Father, to be indeed in him, then enquire whether it were the intent of the
Father to deliver his mind in that place concerning that matter, for which his
authority is urged. For if we will gather the opinion of Fathers from passages
let fall on the by, we may easily make one Father contradict another, yea every
Father contradict himself. 3. You must also enquire, whether what a Father
delivers, be delivered by him as his own private opinion, or as the opinion of
the Church; and if as the opinion of the Church, whether only as the opinion of
that part of the Church in which he lived, or of the Universal Church: If it be
but his own private opinion and judgment, you cannot think your self obliged
to believe it, except confirmed by strength of reason and evidence of
Scripture. If it be delivered as the opinion of the whole Church, more
reverence is to be given to it; but then it is certain that the Fathers did
humanum aliquid pati, and sometimes affirm that to be Doctrine of the Church
Universal, which was far enough from being such. These and many other
directions are given to you by the Incomparable D'aillee in his learned
Treatise of the Right use of the Fathers, which Book is most heartily
recommended to your reading, as you are to the grace of God and guidance of his
Spirit, by, Sir,



Your most affectionate friend and servant, R. A.
For his much respected Friend H. A. Minister as --

Postscript.



An Appendix.
Whilst I was waiting for a fit Messenger to send you these Papers, something
fell out which is like to multiply your trouble, viz. Mr. Humf. Book of
Reordination came to my hands, wherein he disputes, Whether a Minister
ordained by the Presbytery may take Ordination also by the Bishop? and
determines the question affir. I was the more desirous to read over his Book,
because I find him in the very 2d Page intimating, That since he had suffered
himself to be re-ordained, it has pleased God to exercise his Spirit with many
perplexities, and that he does not see what end the Lord had with him in his
thoughts and workings of that nature, unless it be that these throws, as it
were, of his be for the delivery of something for one or other of his Brethrens
satisfaction. M. Humf. being a Scholar, and having sought God often upon his
knees for direction, it would be somewhat unchristian to adhere to my former
determination without so much as considering what he had written and printed
against it. And if I know any thing of my self, I am able to say, that I come
to the examination of his Papers without the least prejudice against his Person
or against his Tenent. Nay I can safely say, that I am hugely desirous to be
his Proselyte. But the eminent Mirandula has taught me that which I also
experimentally find, nemo credit aliquid verum praecise quiavult credere illud
esse verum, non est enim in potentia hominis facere aliquid apparere
intellectui suo verum, quando ipse voluerit. Though I would fain think it
lawful to be re-ordained, yet unless my Arguments to prove it unlawful, be
answered, I shall never be able to change my mind.

This Learned Presbyter, p. 3. plainly tells us, that repeating or doubling of
Ordination is odd and uncouth in its first and naked consideration. And p. 5.
(...), he affirms, that he dare not justify our Church-Rulers in the imposing
of it. (by the way he may do well to consider, whether his overhasty
submitting to reordination be not a virtual, at least interpretative
justification of those that require it.) But he faith also, that he puts it in
the number of such things as the necessity of convenience renders tolerable for
the time, p. 5. Notionally he suspects it is not good, but morally he judges
it an indifferent (...), good or bad, though unequally, as it is used. I will
not now enter into the dispute about things indifferent, but will rather then
quarrel, grant this reverent Author, and Dr. Sanderson, that as there are
indifferentia ad utrumlibet, so there are indifferentia ad unum too, that is,
things which though they be neither universally good, nor absolutely evil, yet
being barely considered, sway more or less rather the one way then the other.
There are some things which of themselves do notably and eminently incline unto
evil rather then unto good; so that if the Question were barely propounded to
me, whether they be evil, I could not be blamed if I did indefinitely answer,
they are evil, which things yet in some cases and circumstances may be lawful.
But for the present I must deny to this judicious Brother, that the
Reordination he persuades us to is such a thing; as yet I think there is a
moral evil in it, and not only a notional, fantastical or imaginary evil.

Here we might close and join issue, but because he tells us that in his first
Paper he only made scattered efferts, and that he would more roundly and freely
lay down his Opinion with a larger compass in the whole matter, sect. 2. we
will attend his motion thither. His four first Propositions I assent unto. In
his fifth, p. 18. he distinguishes between what Ordination is required to the
setting apart a man to the Office of a Minister in the sight of God, and what
is requisite to the making him received as a Minister among men, and give him
Authority or full repute to exercise that Office in the Church or place where
he shall be called.

He believes that Ordination by Presbyters sufficing but a little while ago to
both, suffices still to the former, but seeing Ordination by a Bishop is
necessary to the latter, he thinks his being ordained by the Presbytery hinders
not, but he may be again ordained by the Bishop, because he seeks not to be
ordained by him to make him a Minister again, but to have authority to use his
Ministry, and be received as such in Foro Ecclesiae Anglicanae.

For my part, I readily acknowledge, that he who is already a Minister, may
betake himself to a Bishop, or to any one else whom the Magistrate shall
appoint, to procure a License to exercise his Ministry quietly; but the
question is, Whether when I am made a Minister, I may go and take another
Ordination, and that the very Ordination which the Church uses, when those who
before were no Ministers are made Ministers. I incline to the Negative this
Learned Casuist to the Affirmative.

In which Opinion he says, p. 19. he is a little justified, because when he
was ordained by the Presbytery, the very words used at the point were, Whom by
the laying on of hands, we set apart to the Office of the Ministry; and in the
Ordination by the Bishop, they are, Take Authority to preach the Word and
minister the Sacraments in the Congregation where thou shall be appointed, that
is, in thy place. Sure this can but a little justify him in his Opinion; for
the words by him mentioned, are not all the words that were used in his
Ordination by the Bishop: 'Twas then also said, Receive thou the Holy Ghost;
whose sins thou remittest, they shall be remitted, and whose thou retainest,
they shall be retained: and several Prayers were used, that did evidently imply
him to be no Minister before.

He says in the same place, that the words used in Episcopal Ordination, do
confer the Ministerial power to the un-ordained, but that hinders not, but
rather argues, if they confer that, and the other too, they may doubtless, (and
actually do) confer one (and can but the one only) to such as are in his
case. All this sure makes much against him; for if the Presbyterial Ordination
leave him not capable of having any thing conferred upon him but only the free
use of his Ministry in the English Church, why will he submit to such a Form of
Ordination, as was purposely instituted to confer the very Ministry it self?
Why is the Right Reverend troubled to do that which is already done? Why are
such Prayers put up to God as manifestly suppose me to be no Minister, when as
I all the while suppose my self to be a Minister? Let Mr. Humfrey but procure
us to be ordained in such away, as shall only license us to exercise that
Ministerial Authority we already have, and to be prayed for with such a Form of
Prayer, whose tendency shall only be to implore a Blessing upon us in the use
of that Sacerdotal Function we have already received, and then he need not
doubt, but we shall most readily and thankfully accept of it. But till this be
done, let him not blame us, if we keep our ground, and choose rather to lose the
exercise of our Ministry for a season (which yet is an affliction heavier then
the Sands of the Sea) then to take gradum Simeonis (that I may allude to the
Form of the Oath by which we are sworn when we are made Masters of Arts in the
University.) Either I am mistaken, or I have already suggested that which will
help you to solve all Mr. Humfreys Arguments by which he labors to justified
his submission to a Second Ordination.

Let Us try: p. 21. He querieth: What evil is there more in reordination, then
in second Marrying? If it be required of me, why may I not be ordained twice as
well as once, and thrice as well as twice, if there be still reason sufficient?
Humfrey can produce any one instance of a person forced to a second Marriage,
that had been before validly married, though not according to the Canons in
force. I desire Mr. H. whom I look upon as a serious person, that he would one
time in his Study read over the Form of Marriage, and try whether it would not
go much against the hair to use it to two persons, who for many years had lived
in Matrimony, and begotten Children.

He proceeds in his Queries: May not the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy be
repeated, and yet Gods Name not taken in vain? Is it enough to make our Liturgy
unlawful, because we have in one Service the Lords Prayer twice over?

English Liturgy is never a whit the better for appointing the Lords Prayer to
be twice used in one Service; they think it looks somewhat too like that vain
Battology condemned by our Savior. But I for my part think not that it is
simply unlawful to use the Lords Prayers twice in one Service; but how it will
be hence inferred, that therefore it is not unlawful to repeat Ordination, I am
not so quick-sighted as to perceive: The things we pray for in the Lords Prayer
are things which some of the congregation have not at all, which every one had
need to have renewed, hence it is we use it often and if we use it with faith
and affection we have hope our using of it will not be in vain, but as he that
is in the state of Justification and is persuaded that he is in it, should sin
if he should pray to be put into it: so I think that he who is already by
ordination made a Minister, should sin if he should again pray to be made a
Minister, or submit to any other Divine Ordinance, the end whereof is to make a
man a Minister.

[ I read of one Baptism in Scripture and a stress is laid upon it, but I read
not so of one Ordination: where there is no Law to the contrary, where I pray
lies the Transgression? ] Just thus I have heard that one who is lately sent
into another world, argued in the Pulpit, that he read of Unity, but never of
Uniformity, Ergo, etc. But does it indeed follow, that Ordination may be
repeated, because we do not find those words, one Ordination in Scripture: Why,
if we had read of one Ordination, Ordination might have been repeated
notwithstanding: For it is not therefore unlawful. To repeat Baptism (though
upon other accounts the repetition of it be sinful) because it is said one
Baptism; for the unity there spoken of is not numerical, but specifical. One is
as much as common to all; non respicitur (says Vossius, in his Thesis de
Anabaptis.) unitas usurpationis, sed unitas partium substantialium, aquae^sc.
and verbi. But as I say, that Ordination might have been iterable, though we
had read of one Ordination, so I say, that though we read no such words as one
Ordination, it may be uniterable, and that it is so, will appear, by the
Arguments used in the Letter, and others suggested to Mr. H. if his Answers to
them, or to any one of them prove unsatisfactory.

The first Argument he brings against himself, is that of scandal, which he
thus propounds, p. 24, 25. Many Brethren do think it unlawful to be ordained
again, and by seeing such an one as Mr. H. re-ordained, will be imboldned to do
so likewise; which if they do, whilst they believe (or doubt) it to be
unlawful, they perish; and when we sin against the Brethren, and wound their
weak Conscience, we sin against Christ. To this he answers, That if a man who
is satisfied of a thing as indifferent and lawful, must yet forbear, upon the
account that by his example, others may be emboldened to the same, who having
not that knowledge, do judge it unlawful, and so sin if they do it; then is the
way of poor Christians (the Lord knows) very straight; and that he is through
Grace something enlightened to judge, that a man may sometimes do much good in
leading an example to the doubtful, when a thing is becoming necessary, p. 26.

This Argument is none of mine, and therefore it need not much trouble me what
becomes of it; nevertheless I think not meet to pass it over without
acquainting you a little with my thoughts concerning it.

1. Methinks that of Mr. Rutherford, in his Treatise of Scandal, p. 53, 54.
has a great deal in it, viz. We read not of scandals culpable in Gods Word,
but there be some moral Reasons in them. If there were no probable reason to
imagine there were sin in reordination, I could not be under obligation to
abstain from it, for fear of offending my Brother: therefore do I not forbear
to turn up the hourglass, or to wear a Gown when I preach, because there is
not any apparent moral reason why either the one or the other should
scandalize, both the Glass and the Gown being of mere civil use, and having no
moral influence in my preaching: For I use and may use my Glass and my Gown in
reading an humanity or Philosophy-Lecture to Fresh men.

2. I do also judge that of Gregory de Valentia, to have truth and favor in
it; that the Law for the avoiding of the scandal of a weak brother, does not
oblige us to forbear any thing, which cannot be forborne sine maxima aliqua and
pene intolerabili difficultate; wherefore if it should come to pass, that I can
neither preach nor have a livelihood unless I be re-ordained, I should not
stick to say that I were to submit to reordination (supposing it be lawful)
though thereby some through their ignorance or weakness, should be scandalized.
I would become any thing to any one, rather then lose the opportunity of
gaining souls. But then first Mr. Humf. might do well to consider, whether this
necessity be not a necessity which he has brought on himself and others.
Possibly an humble and peaceable, but yet earnest Perition to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, might have prevented all this necessity of reordination. 2.
He may do well to weigh this, whether he did before he took Orders a second
time, endeavor to satisfy those Brethren about him that were like to be
scandalized by that his practice: For many things may be lawful^y done after we
have given a reason, and labored to prevent stumbling, which could not else be
done without sin.

He proceeds p. 28. to that which is indeed the main Argument against
reordination; which he thus propounds: Ordination is that which according to
Divines, does give a man the Office of the Ministry, this is the end they
account of Ordination: now when a man is Minister already, there is not this
end. If there be not its end, it is to no purpose, an Ordinance of God taken in
vain, which is against the Third Commandment. To this he answers, p. 29. There
are more ends then one in Ordination, as in Baptism and other Institutions; it
is not necessary to the taking or using an Ordinance, that a man be capable of
all its ends (I might add if need were, nor the grand end) so long as there is
some right and sufficient end of the same. To this, the Reply is not difficult:
We easily grant, one may take or use an Ordinance, who is not capable of all
its ends; but then he must take it in such a Form of words as is expressive
only of those ends of which he is capable. I will illustrate my self by the
Instance of Marriage; one end of it is procreation, I question not but he may
marry, who in a natural way is not capable of begeting children, else must I
condemn all the Marriages of aged persons (which I have no warrant to do.) But
then this persons dead body must be so far considered, as that no Prayer be put
up of this nature, that God would bless him with Issue; else I tempt God, and
pray unto him to work a Miracle: This, the Composers of the English Liturgy
thought upon, and therefore appoint the Prayer for Children to be omitted, in
case there be no natural hopes of Children. In like manner one that is ordained
already, and so a Minister, he may be again ordained in order to the free
exercise of his Ministry, but not ordained with that Ordination, whose chief
end is to give the very Ministerial Commission and Authority: He proceeds, p.
30.

The common and general end of Baptism was for Remission of sins, yet was Jesus
Christ baptized, who was not capable of that end, but some others. True, our
Lord Christ was baptized by John, but some say, that he was not baptized for
himself; others say for himself; and these latter I judge have the Truth on
their side: Why might he not use the Sacraments as a Profession of the true
Religion? as parts and acts of the Instituted Worship appointed by God? Yea,
why might he not use them as Seals of the Divine Promises made to him as
Mediator? Yea, why might he not use the Sacraments for the Confirmation of his
Faith in these Promises? But let M. Humf. if he can prove that in the Baptism
of Christ any words were used by John expressive of such an end as Christ was
not capable of. Bellarmine says, John used no Form of words. Some Fathers, and
most Schoolmen think that he made use of this Form, I baptize thee in the Name
of the Messiah to come. If that were his Form, no sober man I trow, will think
that he kept that Form when he baptized the Messiah himself.

Ibid. Paul is made a Minister by Christ himself, Acts 26.16, 17, 18. yet was
he ordained after by the hands of men, Acts 13.3. It Is plain then, that a man
who is a Minister already, may be ordained, or that it is not necessary to be
ordained only to this end, to have the Office conferred on him.

1. That Paul was before a Minister, and not only a Probationer and Candidate
to that Office. Now this is denied by very Learned men, and the place Gal. 1.1.
reconciled to their Opinion. 2. Or else it is supposed that Paul was now in the
13th. of the Acts made a Minister: But this also is denied by others.
The circumstances of the Story make it more probable, that the laying on of
hands mentioned, was rather Optative then Ordinative.

Where as therefore we are bid p. 31. tell the Bishop, if he should ask,
wherefore will thou be Ordained? that we desire to be ordained to that end,
that very end St. Paul was here ordained to. I say, this is very good wholesome
Counsel and Advice: But if the Bishop will not use Means proper to that end, if
he will, instead of giving me the Canonical stamp of Allowance, break in pieces
my old Seal, and give me another, what must I do then? Why this Ingenuous
Author has found out a Salvo for that, page 51, 52. If a man do both clearly
and unfaignedly before and after this reordination declare himself, renouncing
of his former Ordination, will not by the Lord, ought not by man, to be laid to
his charge, and that upon this evident reason, because Expression in this case
does give Construction to the action; the denomination must be a fortiori, and
there can be no doubt to the unbyassed, whether a manifest Declaration by
mouth, or a dumb show or act is the clearer, and so the stronger signification.
But poor dull I was wont to think, Protestatio non valet contra factum. If I
should take the Engagement, and plainly declare both before and after, that I
intended not to renounce or to go against either Covenant, or Oath of
Allegiance, would this justify me in the sight of God or men? If it would,
Monarchs have not so fast hold of their Subjects, as I have always deemed them
to have.

Page 42, 43. The Question being only this at the highest, whether an Authority
or Commission to an Office or Work, in the Nature of the thing may be renewed
or refreshed? There is one Instance alone may, I think, pluck the superstitious
doubt up by the root from the heart: The Apostles beyond question, had Mission
and Commission, and so the Gift, whatsoever it is, from Christ, when he made
them Ministers in his Life, and yet we find their Commission or Authority
Ministerial renewed expressly again after Christ's Resurrection, John 20.21,
22, 23. Which herein has the more support in it, that it is the same Form
which is used to us, without repetition.

How different are the apprehensions of men? That which to him seems strong
enough to pull the superstitious doubt up by the root, to me seems not to
shake, or so much as touch the root: For it is judged by some, that the
Commission Mat. 10. was but temporary, and so expired upon the return of the
Disciples: But I do not think, that the Presbyters ordained Mr. Humf. to be a
Minister only till the Restitution of the Bishops. 2. However all grant the
Commission then granted, was but partial, such as did not authorize to all
Ministerial Acts, not to administer the Eucharist, not to absolve Penitents,
not to confirm the Baptized, etc. But the Ordination by Presbyters was full and
complete, 'twas so thought by the Ordainers, 'twas so thought by the Ordained,
and the people upon this Ordination received men as Ministers, as complete
Ministers, receiving all Ordinances from them, as occasion offered it self, and
giving them the double honor, etc. so that all that can hence be inferred, is
but this, that they who have only been made Deacons, may be made Presbyters,
and of that there is no scruple made; but hence it follows not, that they who
have been made Priests, and acted for some years as such, may now be made
Deacons again, and afterward be made Priests, Quod crat Demonstrandum.

There Is but one thing more in all Mr. Humf. book that can trouble you, and
that is about the Argument taken from Baptism, which may be put into this
Enthymem, Baptism may not be repeated, therefore Ordination may not. The
consequent I have proved in my letter, and so proved it, as that what Mr. Hum.
says against it, will not much stagger you: he propounds something therefore
as to the antecedent, page 85, 86. Not accounting it any absurdity, that
Baptism it self should be repeated, which he proves from Acts 19. where some
seem to be baptized, that had been before baptized with John's Baptism,
whereas John's Baptism was one with Christ's, as to Author, matter, form, end.

Now this deserves to be well thought on, and soundly chewed, before we swallow
it, lest while we plead for Reordination, we also open a wide gap to
Anabaptisme; you must therefore know, that the Church of God, the Orthodox part
of it, has always reputed rebaptization, not only superfluous, but also
impious: If Cyprian and some others, be produced to the contrary, it is upon a
mistake; they pressed that which others thought would be a second baptism, not
what they thought so; for baptism by Heretics, was by them thought no
baptism; the constant judgment of the Fathers, the not repeating of
Circumcision, the no example, the no precept for rebaptization, is sufficient
argument, that it is not the will of God, that baptism should be iterated;
this will of God is not irrational, nay, it is grounded, says Vossius, upon
reason, not unknown to us: Proprius enim baptismi finis est ut signet and
obsignet spiritualem Nativitatem nostram sive insitionem in Christum, and
receptionem in familiamejus; hoc in altero sacramento quod est S. Caenalocum
non habet, quiahaec est signum and sigillum non regenerationis sed nutritionis
and alimoniae spiritualis, non faederis initi sed continuati. Nempeut carnalis
generatio semel fit, sed cibum saepe necesse habemus sumere ad corpus
untriendum, ita semel per baptismum renascimur sed saepe per caenam nutrimur.
Of the strength of this reason, Sotus it seems was so confident, that he
thought God could not will or institute, that baptism should be twice
administered; but in this he goes a note above Ela. God might have appointed us
to be often baptized, but he has not thought meet to make any such
appointment, nor does the nature of the Sacrament require any iteration: As to
the place in the Acts, there are as Vossius, and before him Chemnitius have
observed to my hand, no fewere then three opinions about it: i.e. Some building
on the particles, (...) and (...) say, that those words v. 5. When they heard
this, etc. are not the words of Luke, but of Paul, of Paul telling what John's
hearers did, not of Luke telling what was the effect of Paul's speech upon the
Disciples that heard him; if this sense be accepted (and Grotius seems to have
nothing against it, save this only, that Marnixius was the first Author of it)
then there is not here the least appearance of rebaptization: But let us suppose
Marnixius, Beza, Drusius, etc. to be mistaken in their conjecture; Optatus,
whose fifth book is wholly against repetion of baptism, has given us another
account, viz. that before Christ had given a Law and Precept about Baptism,
John's baptism had place, and those who were admitted into the Church by it,
never received any other baptism, but that these Ephesian Disciples were
baptized with John's baptism, after the precept given, and so the baptism was
null. I Will transcribe the whole place as I find it, page 88, 89. of the Paris
Edition, Ubivenit tempus plenitudinis, certo tempore dedit leges baptismatis
filius Dei, and dedit viam qua iretur ad regna coelorum dum praecepit dicens,
Ite docete omnes gentes baptizantes eas in nomine patris, and filii, and
spiritus sancti, ex ea die oportuit fieri quod mandatum est, ante tempus noluit
emendare quod operatum est, ne licentiam rebaptizandi daret quamvis alterum
fuerit baptisma Joannis alterum Christi, baptisma Joannis ante leges plenum
esse voluit, quod non erat plenum and tamen supra memorata milia hominum quia
in Deo crediderant, quamvis ignorarent filium Dei and spiritum sanctum, regnum
coelorum eis denegari non potuit, inde est vox filii dicentis a diebus Joannis
usque in hodierum, regnum Dei vim patitur, and qui vim faciunt, diripiunt
illud: ideo dixit, vim patitur, quia adhuc baptizabat Joannes, denique quia
alterum tempus erat ante praecepta, alterum post praecepta. Qui post praecepta
in nominc salvatoris baptizati sunt, in regnum legibus intraverunt; qui ante
praecepta sine lege vim fecerunt. sed exclusi non sunt ergo ante praecepta
baptisma foannis, cum esset imperfectum pro perfecto judicatum est ab^eo cui
nem^ judicat and quia quasi limes quidam fixus esset jussionis inter tempora
antecedentia and sequentia cum apud Ephesum baptizarentur aliqui in baptismate
Joannis post praecepta, hos videns B. Paulus interrogavit an acceptissont
spiritum sanctum, dixerunt illi se nescire, an esset spiritus sanctus, and
dixit illis ut post baptisma Joannis acciperent spiritum sanctum: Sic enim
baptizatierant quemadmodum multi a Joanne fuer ant baptizati. Sed qui ante
leges baptizati sunt, ad indulgentiam pertinuerunt, quia praesens fuerat, quia
indulgentiam daret, and non erant ex toto rei, qui legibus non fuerant
occupati. Hi vero, qui apud Ephesium post leges, Joannis baptismate baptizati
fuisse leguntur, post leges in Sacramento erraverant; quia jam introductum
fuerat baptisma Domini and exclusum fuerat servi, and ideo, quia post divina
mandata, legibus debuerant ire in regnum, non per violentiam, post hodiernum
jam non licebat quod Heri licuebat, quare nolite vobis blandiri de dicto
Apostoli Pauli, qui non post personam operarii interrogavit, sed post rem cui
res non persona displicuit.

But what need all this. I Will grant these Disciples were before baptized, and
now rebaptized, yet hence will not be proved rebaptization, not that
rebaptization against which I dispute: I say, that a man must not be baptized
again with the same baptism; now John's Baptism was not the same with Christ's,
not the same (...), not so much the same, but that there was as much ground to
administer Christ's Baptism after John's, as there was to administer John's
baptism after Circumcision, a Sacrament not specifically different from
baptism: Of this the learned Vossius speaks succinctly and clearly, Pro
diversa fidelium aetate potuit sacramentum initiationis variare, fidelium enim
alii rediderunt in Christum venturum, alii in eum qui veniret, and quasi in via
esset, alii in eum qui jam venisset. Primis instituta fuit circumcisio, alteris
baptisma Johannis, tertiis baptismus Christi.

I have done with the main body of Mr. Humfrey's Diatribe, and must now
consider of two or three straggling arguments, which may seem to some not
altogether to want weight.

Page 56, 57. He propounds a query, Whether an irrefragable argument may not be
drawn from the Apostles use of Circumcision upon any after the Resurrection of
Christ, to prove, that an Ordinance of God may be used, without breach of the
third Commandment, or other sin, even then, when it cannot be directed to its
principal, no, not its proper end, so long as it will but attain one higher
then all, viz. the promotion of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

Timothy been circumcised in such a way as were the Jews before the passion of
the Messiah, Christ had profited him nothing; Mr. Humf. should have thus
propounded his question, Whether from Paul's circumcising of Timothy an
irrefragable argument may not be drawn, to prove, that in order to the
propagation of the Gospel, it is lawful to use the outward rite or ceremony of
an abolished Jewish Ordinance? had he so proposed it, I should not have counted
my self obliged to return any other answer but this, that the question is no
way pertinent to the matter in hand: For 1. Ordination is not an abolished
Ordinance. 2. We are not called to the bare rite or ceremony of this Ordinance;
the question is not, whether it be lawful to let the Bishop lay his hand on my
head, but whether it be lawful to let him lay his hand on my head, with this
form of words, Receive thou the Holy Ghost; or with any other form of words,
the purport whereof is to confer the Ministerial power, which I already have.


2. He produces the authority of Doctor Baldwin, the Professor of Witten. who
putting the case, whether one ordained by the Papists, may be again ordained by
us, though he maintains there is no necessity why he should so be re-ordained,
yet thus determines, Quod si quis existimat se tranquillius suo in nostris
Ecclesiis officio perfungi posse, si etiam nostris ritibus ad sacrosanctum
Ministerium utatur, nihil obstat, quin ordinationem a nostris accipere possit,
non enim eadem est ratio Ordinationis quae baptismi, qui iterari non potest.
Hoc enim Sacramentum est Ecclesiae, illa autem externus tantum ritus. Lib. 4.
c. 6. cas. 6.

1. Supposing, but not granting, that Baldwin is fully for him, yet Gregory, a
more Venerable Author, is against him: Sicut Baptizatus semel, iterum baptizari
non debet, ita qui consecratus est semel, in eodem iterum ordine non debet
consecrari, Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 32.

There is a Tract among the works of St. Cyprian, entitled, De operibus
Cardinalibus Christi. Pamelius says it is his, or some others as ancient as
he: Our learned James from a book he met with in All Souls Library, thinks it
was made by Arnoldus Bonavillacensis, who lived almost twelve hundred years
after Christ, if so, however his authority and testimony is to be preferred
before Baldwins, these are his words, De ablutione pedum: Baptismum repeti
Ecclesiasticae prohibent regulae, and semel sanctificatis nulla deinceps manus
iterum consecrans praesumit accedere: Nemo sacros ordines semel datos iterum
renovat, nemo sacro oleo lita iterum linit aut consecrat, nemo impositioni
manuum vel Ministerio derogat sacerdotum; quia contumelia esset spiritus
sancti, fi evacuari posset quod ille sanctificat, vel aliena sanctificatio
emendaret, quod ille semel statuit and confirmat. Edit. Goular. p. 513.

The Council also of Capua is against him, as I find in Spondanus, the
Epitomator of Baronius, ad annum 389. If Mr. Humfrey have a man for him, he
has an Army against him. But

2. I do not see that Baldwin is for him, for he determines not, that a man who
is ordained, and judges himself to be so, may take a second Ordination, but
only that he who is ordained, and is not satisfied in his own mind and
conscience about the validity of his ordination, may be re-ordained, which case
is heavenly wide from the case of Mr. Humfrey, for he thinks that he is
ordained, and says, he will tell the Bishop so, yea, and dreadeth not to
affirm, that his Diocesan does amiss in calling him to these second orders.

Now truly, though I would not altogether baulk a way, because no man did ever
walk in it before me, yet I must take leave to suspect such a way, and consider
well before I venture into it: The Poet says, Illi robur and aes triplex circa
pectus qui fragilem, etc. He was a bold man, that did first expose himself to
the Sea in a ship; and King James would say, that he had a good stomach, who
first eat an oyster: May not we also think, that they, who ever they are, were
too hardy, who were the first that submitted to reordination, which if it be
no more, is Ordination redundant, a mishape in our apprehension, page 4.

Page 94. He suggests, That if he should not be re-ordained, many of his people
will not own him, but clamor, they will not receive the Sacraments from him,
and perhaps they will make him Constable or Churchwarden?

Constable or Churchwarden! that were pity indeed; but yet better be either
one or the other, then do that which is so destructive to communion of
Churches, as reordination upon examination will appear to be: It Is not unlike
some peevish people before this turn, might say, that Mr. Humf. was no
Minister, because not ordained by a Bishop; but he did not then judge it any
part of his duty to be re-ordained, that he might stop their mouths, how comes
he now to be so tender of them: And I doubt some of the better sort of our
hearers, should they understand that we are so light, as to take a
non-significant ordination in so solemn a way as we must do, if we come under
the Bishops hands, would be so scandalized, as scarce to account our Ministry
worth attending on. Upon the whole I see not but that they who refuse
Reordination, may be reckoned among men of a tender frame, and serious spirit,
and not among such as are of a scanty soul, and too scrupulously superstitious
conscience: The Lord lead you by his Spirit into all truth, and after you have
suffered for a while make you perfect.

FINIS.

