Imprimatur,

Geo. Royse, RRmo. in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom Johanni, Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
November. 21. 1692.
AN ANSWER TO THE Brief History OF THE Unitarians, Called also SOCINIANS.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just; but his Neighbor
comes, and searches him.

By William Basset, Rector of St. Smithin, London.

London, Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1693.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop
OF Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metropolitan, and One of Their Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council.
IT is the Design of these Papers to baffle and expose those Little Pleas and
Objections which the Late Author of the Socinian Letters has urged against the
Divinity of the Son.

My Lord,

This Cause does merit, as well as the Author want your Grace's Patronage; For
which Reason I humbly presume to prefix so Great a Name, not doubting but they
will meet with what Favor they may either deserve or want. That that God who
has raised, would preserve, guide and strengthen you in those Undertakings
which so great a Place does call, and so Pious a Mind, more Large and Rich than
that Place it self does dispose you to, for the wellgoverning the Church, and
the Uniting us in the True Faith, and in all the Designs and Interests of
Religion, is the earnest Prayer of

Your Grace's Most Humble Servant, William Basset.

TO THE READER.
WHen I first met with these Socinian Letters, and found that words, and
fallacy were their whole composition; I could not but think them so unlike
their Patrons, or their Patrons so unlike the Character they affect, which is
to be men of Wit and Reason, that I Judged them not Worthy an answer. But since
it appears that these, like some other the worst things among us, do not want
their admirers, I thought this performance my duty.

In it I have answered not only the first of these letters, but diverse parts of
the rest, as well as some things in more manly writers, as Eriedinus, Crellius,
etc. By calling in the other letters to asist this, and other Socinian authors,
to supply the weakness of them all, I put the Objections, in their full
strength, to the end their overthrow may be the more conspicuos to the world,
and the more sensible to themselves. If they venture upon argument, and do any
thing, that affects the cause, I am ready to support it, But if they only load
me with words, and cavils, I must neglect them.

If these labors are succesful in recovering any, whom this Heresy has
infected, and in preserving those, who yet are whole; and hereby in giving any
check to the growing errors, and profaneness of the age, I shall place the time
spent upon this argument among my happy minutes. That it may be productive of
such blessed effects, was the hope, and design, and shall be the prayers of

Yours, W. B.

AN ANSWER To the FIRST of the Four LETTERS, ENTITLED, A Brief History.
SECT. 1.
These Letters are Entitled, A Brief History; yet instead of History you find
little, if any, but an abuse of diverse Authors in the end of the First. A Title
as foreign from the Letters, as the Letters from the Truth, that is, neither to
the point.

THat term [Vnitarian] is put as a distinction between them and us: take it as
it signifies him, who believes one only God, exclusive of all others; and then
it makes a distinction without a difference; for we are as entirely in that
Faith, as the Socinian can be: but as they make it signify one, who believes
the Father only to be God, exclusive of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I must
declare it a term suitable to these Letters, i. e. full of Error, and Blasphemy.

That word [Socinian] we leave to the Followers of Socinus, who (their beloved
Sandius says) differed from all the World; which proclaims those under this
denomination, Men of Novelty and Error.

The Title Page quotes Act. 17. 11. They searched the Scriptures daily, whether
these things were so.

Answ. St. Basil says of Eunomius, tom. 1. l. 5 (...), (...). Thou seek,
that thou may find, not Faith, but Infidelity; not to discover a Truth, but
to establish an Error. This (I fear) we shall find too true of our Socinians;
who wrest the Rule of Truth ^o their own prejudicate Opinions. Sure I am, did
men sincerely follow this example, we should find but few of this persuasion;
since their Heresy is founded not upon Scripture, but upon those false Glosses,
and Sophistical Evasions, which make the Scriptures of none effect.

The Preamble to the Letter pretends, that his Friend demands an account of the
Socinians. Their Doctrine concerning God (in which only they differ from other
Christians) the Remonstrants professedly agreeing with them in other points of
Faith, and Doctrine.

Answer, Their Doctrine concerning God is, That the Father only is God; P. 4.
But that they differ from other Christians in other points beside this, is
notorious to the world.

They own the Arians to be Christians, and Unitarians, because they agree with
themselves in this Doctrine; P. 33. But the Arians ascribe to the Son the
Creation of the World, while the Socinians deny his Existence before the
Incarnation: Therefore either the Arians are no Christians, or the Socinians
differ from other Christians in other Doctrines besides this.

But he would prove that in other points the Socinians agree with other
Christians, because in other points they agree with the Remonstrants: Which
implies,

1. That there is no difference between themselves, and the Remonstrants, but
this; which is well known to be false, And

2. That themselves, and Remonstrants are all the Christians in the World:
Because he makes it, that their agreement with these does prove their agreement
with other Christians; but this is false too: Because these Remonstrants were
condemned by the Synod at Dort about the five Propositions.

You have then a double falsehood in the compass of this one Parenthesis; the
one in enlarging the number of his Friends; the other in lessening the number
of his Errors. The design of which must be to persuade the Reader, That there
is but one step between the Orthodox Faith, and this Heresy, to the end he may
the more easily decoy 'em into it. According to this beginning you must expect
but little, if any truth, and honesty in this Letter, which we shall now
consider.

SECT. II.
He says, P. 4. That -- Christ was a Man, the Son, Prophet, Messenger,
Minister, Servant, and Creature of God; not himself God, they think is proved
by these (as they call them) Arguments.

Answer. I Am glad to find any modesty in a Socinian, for they [call] them
Arguments; and they [think] they prove: But with better assurances we declare
they are no Arguments, nor do they prove the point in Controversy: For though
they prove that Christ is Man, yet they do not prove he is no more than Man, or
is not God. This will easily appear from our Examination of his Arguments
themselves, which are these,

Argum. 1. P. 5. If Christ were himself God, there could be no Person greater
than him: But himself says, Joh. 14. 28. my Father is greater than I.

Answ. I deny the Consequence: Because though the Son is less than the Father
in some respects, yet he is equal to the Father in others. None of the former
do destroy his Divinity, but the letter do prove it. For,

1. The Son is less than the Father, in regard of his Humane Nature, and
Offices: But these (we shall prove) are not inconsistent with his Divinity. And,

2. In regard of his Sonship. For the Father is of himself, but the Son is of
the Father. Whence Episcopius infers a Subordination of Persons, but yet
establishes the Doctrine of a Trinity. So the Nicene Fathers taught, That the
Son is God of God, that is, God of, and from the Father; but yet withal
asserted, That he is of the same Substance with the Father; and consequently is
God, as the Father is. And indeed this Subordination cannot destroy his
Divinity, because it does not destroy his Nature: For the Inequality arises not
from the Essence, but from the order, and manner of subsistence. But,

3. In other respects the Son is equal to the Father; this the Apostle asserts,
Phil. 2. 6. Who being in the form of God, thought it not Robbery to be equal
with God, viz. the Father. Now if he thought it no robbery, it could be no
robbery; and if no robbery, he must be equal; and if equal, he must be God by
Nature, as the Father is.

This leads to the true sense of those words [ Being in the Form of God] for
though (...), of it self strictly signifies not Substance, so much as
Accidents; not so much the Nature, as the Appearance of things; whence Erasmus,
and the Socinians, would have these words to signify, not that he is God, but
that he was like to God. yet however the Apostle must here intend it
Substantially: that is, his being in the Form of God, must signify that he is
God; as his being in the Form of a Servant, signifies, that he was a Servant:
And the Reason is, because his equality with God is here inferred from his
being in the Form of God; but there cannot be an equality between a thing, and
the mere likeness of it; between a real Nature, and a bare similitude. Whence
Erasmus understood the force of the Word, but not the reach of the Apostle's
Argument.

Though Erasmus does not deny the Divinity of the Son, yet because he thinks
this Text does not respect his Nature; I shall therefore oppose to his sense
the Judgment of the Ancients; as Arnob. and Serap. conflic. l. 2. Novat. de
Trin. c. 17. Hilar. Pict. Epist. de Trin. l. 8. and 10. Greg. Nys. tom. 2 cont.
Eunom. Ora. 7. etc. Which Judgment of theirs I shall confirm by these
Arguments; viz.

1. By the matter of the Apostle's Argument, he was in the Form of God, and in
the Form of a Servant. If this Text speaks him not God, but like to God; it
must also speak him not a Servant, but like to a Servant: But that he was a
Servant he says himself, Mat. 20. 28. I came to minister; and therefore he
must be God; because the same Phrase, and Sense applied to each Nature, must
import the reality of the one, as well as of the other.

2. The order of the parts speaks our sense: For being in the form of God, i.
e. While he was in the form of God, he took upon him the form of a Servant:
therefore that form was before this. But there was no such difference in the
parts of his Life, or Condition upon Earth, that one should merit to be called
the form of God, the other the form of a Servant: Therefore his being in the
form of God must be antecedent to his humane Life.

3. This was his choice, and voluntary Act, for he took upon him the form of a
Servant: But he had no liberty of choice in this world; because his condition
here was determined and foretold; whence himself says, Luke 24. 44. That all
things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me; therefore this choice was before
this life; and consequently must be the Act of the Divine, not of the Humane
Nature. So evidently does this Text respect the Nature of Christ; and therefore
declare him to be equal to God the Father, as being God by Nature, as the
Father is.

This Equality our Savior himself does prove, Joh* 5. 17. My Father works
hitherto, and I work: whence the Jews concluded v. 18. that he made himself
equal to God: Upon which he does not explain himself, as if they mis-understood
him; which he did in the case of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood: But
v. 19. he proves this equality, what things soever the Father does, these
[(...)] the very same, the Son does likewise. Whence he must be equal to the
Father in Operation, and consequently in Power. So Ambrose de fid. l. 1. c. 13.
and Greg. Naz. Orat. 36.

Hence he requires v. 23. That all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father; which imports an equality of Honor flowing from an equality
of Operation; for the reason of the duty instructs us in the nature of the duty
it self. This Honor is owing from their works, but they both do the same
works, therefore they must both have the same Honor.

Hence Joh. 10. 30. I, and my Father are one; that is, not in concord only, as
the Socinian pretends, but in power: Because the context speaks not of Wills
and Affections, but of keeping his sheep: none shall pluck them out of my
hands; because none is able to pluck them out of my Father's hands; for which
he gives this reason, I, and my Father are one: which must be one in power. And
if they be one in power, they must be one in Nature; unless you make an
Almighty Creature, which is not only an absolute contradiction, but also
confounds the essential properties of God, and the Creature; which is a much
viler Absurdity, than they can with any shadows of Reason pretend against our
Doctrine.

That gloss then of Athanasius cont. Ari. Orat. 4. must be admitted, viz. This
shows (...), (...), the sameness of the Godhead, and the Unity of Power. For
indeed the abscribing to the Son the same Infinite Perfections, and the same
Honor, but not the same Nature with the Father, as the Socinian does,
proclaims not only the perverseness of the Disputant, but the Idolatry of the
Professors too.

In that case of his being the Messiah, he sends Men to his works, whose
Nature, and agreeableness to ancient Prophecies, do sufficiently declare the
point. So here he first asserts his equality with the Father, then improves it
to an Unity in Power, and Honor; and then leaves men to conclude from thence
an Unity of Nature. This is the most rational way of teaching; for positive
affirmations tell us things are so; but Natural, and necessary consequences,
such as these are, prove they must be so. Therefore though the Father is
greater than the Son, as the Father is of himself, and is God only; while the
Son is of the Father, and is both God and Man; yet the Son is equal to, nay,
One with the Father in Operation; and if in Operation, then in Power; and if in
Power, then in Nature: and therefore must be God.

He proceeds p. 5. to manage this Argument from Joh. 20. 17. I ascend to my
God, and your God: whence he fancies, the Son is not God, because another is
his God.

Answ. As Christ is Man, and we his Brethren, so our God is his God: This
proves that he is Man, but cannot prove, he is not himself God, which is the
design of this Letter. Nay, as the Son is God of God, i. e. God the Son of, and
from God the Father, so the Father may be his God, as well as his Father;
without weakening the Doctrine of his Divinity. So far is this Text from
concluding his Point, that it makes nothing against us.

He adds, Joh. 12. 49. The Father, which sent me, he gave me a Commandment: The
Argument is, the Son is not God, because the Father commands, and sends him.

Answ. This has been answered already.

For in what respects the Father is greater than the Son, in the same respects
the Father may command, and send the Son: But as the Father's being greater
than the Son, does not destroy the Divinity of the Son, because (as before) it
does not destroy his Nature; so neither can his commanding and sending him;
because this Power flows as a right, or consequence from his Superiority, And
if the Father's Superiority it self cannot destroy the Son's Divinity; that
Power, which is employed, or wrapped up in the very Nature of that Superiority,
can never do it.

Arg. 2. P. 5, 6. If Christ were God, he could not be the Creature of God: But
that he is the Creature of God, he would sain prove from two Scriptures; the
former is Heb. 3. 1, 2. The High Priest of our Profession Jesus Christ, who was
faithful to him, that appointed him: In the Greek, and in the Margin it is,
faithful to him that made him.

Answ. The meaning is, that appointed, or made him High Priest, respects not
his Being, but the Designation of him to that Office. In this sense we use the
Phrase of making a Bishop. Yet this (it seems) is a Socinian Creation.

His other Text is, Colos. 1. 15. which calls him the Firstborn of every
Creature: whence he would have him to be but a Creature.

Answ. He is the Firstborn of every Creature not in kind as one of them, but
in regard of an Existence prior to them: Whence V. 17. He was before all
things. To this agrees that of St. John Chapter 1. 1. In the beginning was the
Word, i. e. when all things first began, then this Word, this firstborn [was]
or did exist. And both this Apostle and the Evangelist with one consent declare
him not a Creature himself, but the Maker of all Creatures, for Colos. 1. 16.
By him were all things created: And Joh. 1. 3. By him were all things made.
This drives the Socinian to three most palpable falsehoods, viz.

1. These words [By him were all things created, Colos. 1. 16.] are spoke (say
they) not of Christ, but of God, Let. 4. P. 131.

Answ. They grant us, P. 130. that V. 15. which runs thus; the Image of the
Invisible God, and the Firstborn of every Creature, is spoke of Christ: And
consequently, V. 16. must be spoke of him too; because that word [him] by him
were all things created, cannot possibly have any other Antecedent, than the
Image of the Invisible God, and the Firstborn of every Creature; whence
immediately follows this, 16 V. For by him, i. e. by this Firstborn were all
things created.

They would have indeed the [Invisible God] to be the Antecedent, that by him,
viz. the Father, were all things created. But Sense, Coherence, Grammatical
Construction, and other parallel Texts, can never allow this. Because,

1. The subject of that 15th. Verse, is Christ; who is called the Image, and
the Firstborn; but those words [the Invisible God] are but an adjunct,
designed only to show us whose Image he is: But now the Relative must respect
the Subject, not that, which is but a dependent upon it.

2. These words [the firstborn of every creature] do follow those words [the
invisible God] for the Text runs thus; The Image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every creature: Therefore to these, viz. the first born -- the
Relative [him] must immediately refer: that by him, viz. Christ, who is this
Image, this firstborn, were all things created.

Sometimes indeed a Relative may refer to not the next, but a remoter
Antecedent: But this is only in two cases: As either for the sake of sense, or
for the avoiding that interpretation, which may contradict some other text: but
neither of these can be pretended in the case before us. For the sense is as
complete, and natural, as well as the construction more easy, if the Relative
refer to the firstborn, as if it refer to the invisible God; and the referring
it to this firstborn, does not contradict any text* but concurs with all them,
that ascribe creation to the Son. Therefore the Socinian can have no other
reason for his construction, but only the support of an Heresy.

2. They say, That all things were made not [by] but [for] him.

Answ. This is totally over thrown by St. John chapter 1. 3. By him were all things
made; and without him was not any thing made, that was made. Where observe that
the Evangelist does industriously secure thetitle of Creator to the Son.

1. By an Universal Affirmative, which includes all things made, in the number
of his Creatures, for by him were all things made. And,

2. By an Universal Negative, which denis there ever was any creature, which
was not created by him; for without him was not any thing made, that was made.

No Text says so much in reference to the Father; therefore they may at least
as fairly deny the Father to be Creator, as the Son; and doubtless the design
of the Holy Writer is to obviate and expose all Cavils against this Doctrine.

3. They fly to a Metaphorical Creation, that he did not make, but renew all
things after they were made.

Answ. This is impossible: for Colos. 1. 16. By him were all things created,
that are in Heaven* -- whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers. -- By which the Socinian, Let. 4. P. 133.
understands Angelick Orders; but the Holy Angels were not renewed, for they
kept their Stations, and therefore did not want it. And the fallen Angels were
denied it.

The same Letter P. 132. says, That all things were modelled, not created by
him; and P. 133. explains it thus, Christ is said to model and order all
things upon carth, because of the great change he introduced. For which sense
he quotes Camero, Piscator, Diodate, Dallee, Vorstius, Davenant, and Grotius.

Answ. I can find nothing in Camero, Dallee, and Vorstius, upon this Text: Had
they spoke to his purpose, I doubt not but be would have given us particular
References.

Piscator says, all things were per eum condita, made, or created by him; as
the word usually signifies. But for Argument sake, suppose it may in a remoter,
and looser sense signify also to model and order: Yet let the Socinian tell
me, what reason he has to tie Piscator's sense to these, exclusive of that:
Since that is the common import of the Word, and is agreeable to the mind of
this Author, who, upon all occasions, asserts the Divinity of the Son, and
ascribes to him the creation of the world. For upon these words John 1. 3. By
him were all things made; Piscator says, the Evangelist does here assert the
Deity of the Son from the effects, or things, that he has done, videlicet ex
omnium rerum conditarum creatione, from his creating all things made: where
himself applies this word [condita] to the creation of the World by the Son.
Therefore the Socinian is false, and unjust in pretending that this Author
understands it not of creation, but of modelling, and ordering things.

Diodat is so far from the Socinian sense, that upon these words he asserts the
Eternal Generation of the Son, and speaks him with the Father an equal, and
cooperating cause of all things.

Davenant upon this Text thus, Christus non est creatura, sed creaturis omnibus
prior; quia per ipsum conditae sunt: Christ is no creature, but is before all
creatures, because they were all made by him. Where this Author by this word
[conditae] must necessarily mean a creation properly, because he gives this
asareason, why Christ is no creature, but is before all creatures, viz. because
he made them all: But he cannot possibly understand by it to [model] or [order]
because he might model, or order, and yet notwithstanding be a creature, and
after those creatures too. Therefore the Socinian does here pervert the sense
of this Author, and also totally ruins that Argument, by which he proves that
sense: Which is a crime so salse* and malicious, that it can admit no
Palliation.

As for Grotius, he shows indeed, that the word here rendered to create, does
not always signify properly to create, but is sometimes applied to the new
creature. We grant it: But by the leave of so great a man, and of this little
Socinian too; this does not prove it does not signify properly to create, in
this text. That it is taken improperly in some places is no Argument that it
ought to be improperly in this. Though I shall prove in it is place that Grotius
was neither Arian nor Socinian; yet I must say, that he has not in all places
done that justice to this Cause, which he might and ought to have done it.

It is worth our while to observe, that to prove that Christ is a creature,
these men will have (...) (which signifies to create, in as large, and loose a
sense, as the English word [make] does; as to make the World, to make a Verse,
etc.) to signify properly to create in Heb. 3. 2. contrary (as we have shown)
to the evident sense, and design of that place: But to prove he did not make
the World, they will have (...), in Colos. 1. 16. to signify not to create,
but to model and order: Though it does most properly signify to create, and V.
17. by ascribing to him an Existence prior to all things, ought to lead and
determine us to this sense.

This is plain shuffling: And indeed where men will take words of a various
signification in such a sense as is agreeable to their own Hypothesis, but not
to the scope, and design of the place, that uses 'em, they may perplex any
truth, and color over the foulest Heresy in the World; and in fine, turn* the
whole Scriptures into contradictions, and nonsense.

That Christ was no creature, I shall further prove against this Letter, and
the Arian both, by these two steps;

1. That he was before all creatures, and 2. That he was from eternity.
1. He asserts his own Existence before the world: for John 17. 5. He had Glory
with the Father before the world; and therefore he must exist before it: for
non entis nulla sunt praedicata.

They say indeed, this Glory was in decree only, as the Lamb was slain from the
foundation of the world in decree only: But these are not parallel cases; for
then that Lamb could be slain no otherwise. But the Scriptures do abundantly
declare that Christ did actually exist before the world; and therefore might be
actually glorified before it. Necessity requires that interpretation as to the
Lamb; but there is no such necessity in this case; and therefore no such
interpretation is to be admitted: for we must never leave the common, proper,
and literal sense of a Scripture; unless it be for the sake of a concurrence
with, or non-contradiction of some other Scripture, which is not in this case;
because no Scripture says, he did not exist before the world.

This is a fallacy a been conjunctis ad male divisa: when Men put such odd
constructions upon a Text taken by it self, which it abhors, when taken
together with others. For, in this case, was there no Text but this, which
ascribes to him a Being before the World, their gloss might [perhaps] seem to
have a little color of probability in it; and that is the most it could then
pretend to: But take this Scripture together with those, that declare he did
exist, when all things began, Joh. 1. 1. That he was before all things, Coloss.
1. 17. That he made and created all things Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. The case is
so plain from the light, which one text gives to another, that a Man would
think that none, but the wilfully blind, could mistake it.

If in this manner we follow this, or some other point in controversy between
the Socinian and our selves from one text to another, till we have laid all
those together, which speak to the same point; one would think that either the
Scripture is so worded, that it is extremely apt to lead all plain honest minds
into error: or else that the Socinian sense is but mere shuffles, and evasions
of the truth. One of these must be; Judge, and choose, but consider it is on
the part of God, and Socinus, who stand here opposed each to other.

Upon this Scripture Irenaeus in the next age after the Apostles l. 4. c. 28.
Thus, ante omnem conditionem glorificabat Verbum Patrem suum, and
glorificabatur ab eo: Before every Creature the Word, i. e. the Son, did
glorify his Father, and was glorified by him. By which this Father does speak,

1. His Existence before all Creatures: For every thing did glorify it is maker
so soon as it did exist; but the Son did glorify his Father before all
Creatures, and consequently did exist before them. And,

2. His Divinity. For had Irenaeus numbered the Son with the Creatures, as the
first of them in the Arian sense; or as the last of them in the Socinian; he
must have worded it with some respect to them, as thus, before all [other]
Creatures: or the first of all Creatures; the Son did glorify, etc. but this
form distinguishes him from all Creatures, not as one of them, but as being
already distinct from, as well as before them all.

The Son then was before the World, i.e. before the Creation, and consequently
before all creatures, which was the thing to be proved; whence it follows, that
there is no necessity of taking those Texts, which ascribe Creation to him in
an improper sense; and if no necessity, they must be taken in a proper one;
because all Scriptures must be taken properly; unless that sense does
contradict some other Scripture; which is not in the case before us, because no
Text says the Son did not, or that the Father only did create the World.

2. Since the Son was before the world, he must be from Eternity; because the
Scriptures no where suggest a creation between Eternity and Time: But on the
contrary, Moses declares that the creation of the World was the beginning, viz.
of the creature, and consequently there could be no creature before it. Whence
in the Scripture Phrase to be in the beginning, that is, before the world; and
to be from Eternity, are the same thing. For wisdom does thus express her
Eternal Existence, Prove. 8. 22, 23. He possessed me in the beginning of his
ways, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was: and v. 24, 25. when there were no depths, I
was brought forth; when there were no Fountains abounding with water: before
the mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth. Thus to be in
the beginning, and to be before the world, are Phrases, which the Spirit uses
to express the Eternal existence of wisdom: but the Son was in the beginning,
Joh. 1. 1. he was before all things, Colos. 1. 17. and before the world, Joh.
17. 5. therefore the same Phrases must as well express the Eternal existence of
the Son too.

If the Son then was any where called a creature, it must be restrained to his
manhood, as his descent from Abraham is, Romans 9. 5. it was (...) as to the
flesh: which restriction must imply that there is something excepted, as to
which he is no creature; and as to which he did not descend from Abraham; which
can be no other than the Divine Nature: whence the next words say, he is over
all God blessed for ever. Irenaeus l. 3 c. 18. reads it thus, Exquibus Christus
secundum carnem, qui est Deus super omnes benedictus in saecula. Of whom Christ
was according to the Flesh, who is God over all blessed for ever: and Tert.
adv. Prax. c. 13. thus, -- who is Deussuper omnia benedictus in aevum omne: God
over all blessed for ever: which Reading is farther from the Socinian Conceit
of its being a thanksgiving for Christ, Thus, who is over all God be blessed
for ever, than our Translation is. From this Text, which the Socinians have so
miserably disguised, not these Fathers only, but the first Ages of Christianity
too, have always pleaded the Divinity of the Son.

He continues his Argument from 1. Cor. 3. 32. Christ is God's: that is (says
he) God's Subject; and this he fancies must be God's creature.

Answ. Why not God's Son, since the Scriptures so often call him so? but if it
must be [God's Subject] yet it can do him no Service: For he is his Subject in
regard of his Humane Nature, and Offices: Nay, his Subordination to the Father,
as Son; the Apostle (as we shall show) calls a Subjection: which will appear to
be so far from affecting his Divinity, that it gives light, and strength, to
this Doctrine.

He cites Mat. 12. 17, 18. behold my Servant.

His Argument lies thus, p. 5. If Christ were God, it could not without
blasphemy be (absolutely, and without restriction) affirmed of him, that he is
the servant of God.

Answ. It is not affirmed of him absolutely, and without restriction, but in
reference to his Humane Nature, and Offices: and till the Socinian does prove
that it is absolutely affirmed of him, i. e. that Christ is in all respects a
Servant, and not in some only; it has not so much as the face of an Argument.

His next Scripture is Phil. 2. 8, 9. he humbled himself, and became obedient
to death, therefore God has highly exalted him.

Answ. His obedience to death, does indeed prove that he is man, for else he
could not dye: this we all grant: but neither this, nor his Exaltation can ever
prove he is not God, which is the thing in controversy. The truth of this will
appear from our explication of his next Scripture, which is,

1 Cor. 15. 28. Then shall the son also be subject to him, who put all things
under him. Which subjection he conceits destroys his Divinity.

Ans. [Then] shall the Son be subject; that is, at the end of the world, v. 24.
which implies that till then he is in some respect not subject; which is a
demonstration of his Divinity. For all creatures are in all points his
Subjects; therefore if there is any one respect, in which the Son is not
subject, then the Son must be God.

Now his non-subjection is this, that now he has a Kingdom, viz. The Church
given by the Father, in which he reigns himself as Mediator, whence V. 25. He
must reign. This Kingdom the Church is separate from the Dominion of the
Father, which is the World: Therefore so far as he reigns in this Kingdom, so
far he reigns separate from the Father, and that is not subject to him. Hence
he says, Matt. 28. 18. All Power is given me: Phil 2. 9. God has highly
exalted him; and again Psalm. 2. 9. I have set my King upon my holy Hill of
Sion. But at the end of the World, He shall deliver up this Kingdom to the
Father, V. 24. And then he shall reign no otherwise than as subordinate to the
Father, as Son; which the Text expresses by [subject to the Father]. Whence it
must be granted, that when he says, the Father commands and sends me, etc.
These were spoken, and ought to be understood, antecedent to this exaltation.

To close this Argument. On the one hand this exaltation proves no more than
this, That the Son has now a Kingdom, which he had not before; but it does not
prove that he did not reign before with the Father in the Government of the
World: And on the other hand, this subjection proves that the Son shall resign
this Kingdom, but it does not prove, he shall not reign with the Father for
ever: Because this subjection is not a subjection of the creature to God, but a
subordination of one Person to another in the Sacred Trinity.

Argum. 3. P. 6, 7. The true God is not the Minister, or Priest of any other.
But Christ is the minister, and Mediator of God, and Men; Heb. 8. 6. He has
obtained a more excellent Ministry: chapter 2. 17. He is a faithful High Priest. --

Answ. These Texts respect not his Nature, but his Offices; and therefore do
not deny his Divinity. For the same Apostle applies to him those Scriptures,
which can be spoke of none but God; as Psalm. 45. 6, 7. Thy Throne, O God, is
for ever, and ever: Which Heb. 5. 8. declares that God spoke of his Son: And
Psalm. 102. 25. Thou have laid the foundations of the Earth; and the Heavens are
the work of thy hands: This also V. 10. applies to the Son.

These Texts are sufficiently vindicated by the learned Dean of St. Paul's, Dr.
Sherlook, who shows that this word [God] Psalm. 45. 6. is not a Nominative, and
is not spoke of the Father, as the Socinians, and particularly this Letter from
Eniedinus, would have it; who render it [God is thy Throne] i. e. The Father is
a Throne to the Son: But it is an Attick Vocative, and consequently can be
spoke of no other than the Son, whom it styles [God] and to whom it ascribes an
Everlasting Dominion: As the other Psalm does the creation of the World. Those
very Socinians, who have read this answer, do yet still insist upon their own
sense, without taking any notice of that answer; which is an evident Argument
they do not pursue the discovery of Truth, but only serve their own Hypothesis.

Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 4. c. 15. argues the same thing from the Hebrews, and
Aquila's Version. And sure I am that from hence the Apostolic Ages did always
assert the Divinity of the Son. Thus Just. M. Dial. Tertul. adv. Prax. c. 7.
Orig. cont. Cells. l. 1. Cypr. adv. Judae. etc. And certainly since each
Testament, viz. the Old in its Doctrine, and the New in the express application
of it to the Son, do jointly proclaim this Minister, this Priest to be God, as
well as man, the Socinian must be extremely unjust in pleading the one in
contradiction to the other.

He insists, The true God cannot Mediate or Intercede, but Christ Intercedes, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God and Mediator -- the Man Christ Jesus.

They object elsewhere, that Christ the Mediator is here Distinguished from
God, there is one God, and one Mediator, whence they presume this Mediator
cannot be God.

Answ. The Mediator is distinguished from God, not simply, because (as we shall
prove) himself is God: But only secundum quid, as Mediator; for as such he not
only is both God and Man; but also by his Mediatorship stands between both, in
order to the reconciling both together; and consequently, must be distinct from
both. But that this Mediator is God as well as Man, will appear:

1. From the Sense of Antiquity, and the Judgment of the Church in all Ages,
which ever held that the Mediator must be utriusque particeps, Partaker of both
Natures, that there may be some equality between the Mediator, and the Persons
between whom he mediates, to the end he may the more powerfully reconcile both
together. Upon which bottom Irenaeus, who was Disciple to Polycarp, as Polycarp
was to St. John the Evangelist. l. 3. c. 20. thus, adunivit hominem Deo; whence
Theodoret, Dialog. 2. (...), he has United Man to God. And,

2. From the Nature of his Mediatory Kingdom, which requires Omnipotence,
whereby he may be able to support and govern it: and Omniscience, whereby he
may know all the wants and circumstances of it. Therefore since the Nature of
this Kingdom of Christ does require infinite perfections, which are
incompetible to a Creature, it does evidently declare the Deity of this
Mediator; who is accordingly not only styled God, but has likewise the
incommunicable Name, viz. Jehovah, and Perfections of God ascribed to him in
the Scriptures.

3. The design of this Text is not to declare that the Father only is God
exclusive of the Son, and the Holy Ghost; but to teach us that there is but one
God, and one Mediator exclusive of the many Gods, and many Mediators,
acknowledged by the Gentiles. But still (notwithstanding any thing in this
Text) this Mediator may be with the Holy Ghost One God with the Father. They
have therefore brought a Text to disprove our Doctrine, which neither as to
Letter, or design, makes any thing against us.

But this Letter pleads, that God cannot mediate, but Christ does, therefore
Christ cannot be God.

Answ. We grant that God cannot intercede with the Creature, because this would
imply that he is neither Almighty, nor All-sufficient; but the Son may
intercede with the Father without bringing his Divinity into question.

Therefore (to put the Socinian into a right method of dispute, which he yet
seems totally a stranger to, there being nothing proper and concluding in all
his Arguments) let him prove that in this Text these words [One God] are spoke
exclusive of the Son; and that the Son's Intercession with the Father is
inconsistent with his Divinity: This is to his purpose, and most be done, or
else he must give up this Text, and indeed his Cause together.

His Argument is fallacious; for it applies that to God in reference to the
Creature, which we apply to one Person in the Godhead in reference to another;
and lies thus, God cannot pray to the Creature, therefore the Son cannot pray
to the Father: a Socinian Argument indeed, which all men else would be ashamed
of.

But it is said [the man Christ Jesus] true, but this is not simply man, but
man united to the eternal word, or Son of God. So [the man Jesus Christ]
suffered for us; but there was such an Union between the two Natures, that what
was suffered by the One, was imputed to the other; whence, Act. 20. 28. We are
purchased by the Blood of God, that is, by the Blood of Christ united to the
second Person in the glorious Trinity. This Text Tertullian ad Vxor. l. 2. c.
3. quotes without any Anti-Trinitarian gloss upon it; and indeed these
blasphemous Interpretations now in use with these men, were utterly unknown to
the Apostolic Ages.

Argum. 4 p. 7, 8. God does all things in his own Name, and by his own
Authority; he ever does his own Will: and seeks his own Glory: but Christ
says, John 17.28. I am not come of my self: John 5. 43. I am come in my
Father's Name: John 5. 30. I seek not my own Will: and chapter 8. 50. I seek not my
own Glory.

Answ. This is true of God in reference to the Creature; but it is not true of
one Person in the Trinity in reference to another. For though God cannot come
in the Name, and by the Authority of a Creature, yet the Son may come in the
Name, and by the Authority of the Father: because, though the Son is equal to
the Father as God, yet the Father is greater than the Son, as Father. For which
reason Episcopius, whom this Letter bespatters for an Arian, Institut. Theol.
l. 4. c. 32. says, That the Son refers all things to the Father, as the
Fountain of the Deity; of, and from whom the Son is. By this he rejects a
Co-ordination, but asserts a Subordination of Persons in the Trinity: and
therefore at the same time both ruins these Objections, and also establishes
the Doctrine of a Trinity.

He proceeds; God declares himself to be the prime object of Faith and Worship;
but the Son does not so, for John 12. 44. He that believes on me, believes not
on me, but on him that sent me.

Answ. Christ does in this very Text propose himself as the object of Faith and
Worship; for he says, He that believes on me, which asserts that men did
believe on him, and implys that they ought to do so; what follows is but a
qualification of the thing suitable to his subordination to his Father; for
such an one believes not on me, that is, solely, or ultimately: but on him that
sent me, i. e. on him, as well as me; by which he does not exclude, but include
himself with the Father, as the object of Faith and Worship. This sense must be
allowed, else you run into these two absurdities, viz.

1. You make the first clause assert, what the second denies; and the second
deny what the first asserts, viz. That men do believe on him, and yet do not
believe on him: thev do not believe, and yet they believe still.

2. These Scriptures, which make Faith in Christ a condition of Salvation, such
as John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, has Everlasting Life; must be
razed out of our Bibles.

But perhaps he may trifle upon that word [prime] object, which has nothing in
it. For if the Father be the prime object as he is the first Person in the
Trinity; yet the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are the One, and only object in
regard of Nature.

But as the Texts, he here quotes, cannot serve his Hypothesis, so there is One
among them, that totally destroys it, viz. John 8. 42. I proceeded forth, and
came from God: that is, I am not from the Earth, but from Heaven: this is the
Apostles sense, Ephesians. 4. 9. That he ascended, what is it, but that he
descended first? Whence he did not first ascend to receive his Doctrine and
Authority from God, as Socinus dreams; but he first descended from God, with
whom he was in the beginning, John 1. 1. and with whom he was glorified before
the World, John 17. 5. Our sense falls in with variety of Scriptures, which on
every side confirm and support it: but theirs labors with endless difficulties
in wresting and perverting them; that is an Argument of truth, but this os
falsehood.

Argum. 5. pa. 9. God was always most wise, but Christ increased in Wisdom,
Luke 2. 52.

Answ. The Text says, he increased in Wisdom and Stature, which word [Stature]
suits not a Divine Nature, but an Human Body, which shows that the Text speaks
of him, not simply, as if in his whole Capacity, without any exception, he
increased in Wisdom, but only as Man, and consequently this Text proves he is
Man; but does not prove he is not God, which is the design of this Argument.
This is a demonstration of a studied corruption of the truth; for (like the
Devil) he quotes but one part of the Text, to the end he may pervert the whole.

He proceeds, God was never ignorant of any thing; but he makes it that Christ
was ignorant of two:

1. Of the place where Lazarus was buried, John 11. 34. Where have ye laid him?

Answ. This no more proves that he knew not the place, than Gods asking Cain,
Genesis 4. 9. Where is Abel thy Brother, does prove that God knew not what was
become of him? How can we presume he was ignorant of this, who of himself knew
both his death, and the time of it too. That he would not in every thing give
demonstrations of his Divinity, is no argument against it.

2. He pleads that Christ knew not the day of Judgment, for Mark 13. 32. Of
that day knows no Man (in the Greek it is [(...)] none knows) no not the Angels
-- neither the Son, but the Father; St. Matthew, chapter 24. 36. adds, but the
Father only.

Answ. He knew it not as Man; but this does not prove, he is not God, and did
not know it as such. For John 21. 17. He knew all things, and therefore must
know this, or this must be nothing. In 1 King 8. 39. God only knows the Hearts
of Men; but Joh. 2. 25. Christ knew what is in Man: But to know the Hearts of
Men, and to know what is in Man, are the same in Sense; therefore Christ knows
what God only knows; and consequently Christ must be God, and for that cause
Omniscient. Revel. 2. 23. I am he who search the Heart. This Let. 4. p. 154.
does acknowledge that Christ spoke of himself. But this (as we know) is proper
to God, who alone can search the Heart: Therefore our Savior's Application of
it to himself, is a Manifest Assertion of his own Divinity, and consequently of
his Omniscience, which is inseparable from the Divine Nature. Whence it must be
that he knew it not as Man only, but yet at the same time must know it as God.

But here the Socinian pleads, that he knew many things not of himself; but by
Communication from the Father, as the Prophets did, 2 Kings 8. 12. I know the
Evil thou will do to the Children of Israel: Therefore some extraordinary
Knowledges in Christ, do speak his knowledge no more Omniscient and Inherent,
than that of the Prophets. So to this purpose p. 155.

Answ. These are very unlike Cases. For,

1. This Prophet knew this Man so far as concerned his future Dealing toward
this People: But this does not prove, that he knew this Man any farther, or any
other Man at all. Whereas Joh. 2. 24. Christ knew all Men, and v. 25. He knew
what was in Man; and therefore all that is in Man: Which never was affirmed of
any of the Prophets. From which alone it appears, that his Knowledge was much
more extensive than any of the Prophets.

2. He knew all things Joh. 21. 17. which imports an infinite Knowledge; But an
infinite Knowledge can never be Communicated to a finite Understanding: Because
there is an infinite Disproportion between the faculty and the object:
Therefore the Knowledge which Christ had, speaks him infinite, and that is God.

3. This Hypothesis, viz. that such a Knowledge can be Communicated to a
Creature, does confound the Essential properties of God, and the Creature,
because it makes the Creature infinite, as well as the Creator, and

4. Our Savior says, Revel. 2. 23. I am he who search the Heart: Which Phrase
[search the Heart] was never applied to any of the Prophets; but only to
Father, Son and Holy Ghost: Yet he says, not only I do it, but I am he that do
it; which is more Emphatical, and implies, that this is his own Act, and
consequently, that his Knowledge of the Heart, is from his own self. Therefore
his Knowledge was not like the Prophets; for their's was Finite, but his
Infinite: Their's Communicated, his Inherent.

For which Reasons, as well as others, Antiquity put that Sense upon these
Texts, which might not deny, but establish not his Omniscience only, but such
as is not Communicated, but Inherent too: For Greg. Naz. Ora. 36. Athanas. tom.
1. Contr. Ar. Ora. 4. etc. he knows this day (...) as God: And consequently
must know it of himself, but he knew it not, (...) as Man; hereby making those
words [none knows] to exclude not what is God, and therefore not the Son as
God; but all the Creatures, and therefore the Son as Man.

In the same Sense must we take that of St. Matthew Chapter 24. 36. of that Day, and
Hour, knows no Man, no, not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only. For here
[Father] must not be taken personally for the Father, in opposition to the Son,
and the Holy Ghost: But essentially for God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in
opposition to that word [Man] of that Day and Hour, knows no Man -- but the
Father only; therefore these words [the Father only] exclude the Son from this
Knowledge as Man, but not as God. This exposition is cleared, and confirmed
from hence.

1. That in the Scriptures [Father] does often signify God essentially,
including, Son and Holy Ghost, who are of, and from, the Father.

2. This Sense must be granted, else you make this one Text, to contradict all
those which say the Son knows all things, etc. and

3. These Exclusive Particles [none] knows, or the Father [only] i. e. God
[only] knows: Must be so Interpreted in diverse places of Scripture, as
particularly Luke 10. 22. No Man [in the Greek it is here also (...) none]
knows who the Son is but the Father, or the Father only. Whence they may as
well exclude the Holy Ghost from the Knowledge of the Son, as the Son from
knowing the Day of Judgment; because this Particle [none] must be as Exclusive
in that Text, as in this. But this Word cannot Exclude the Holy Ghost from the
knowledge of the Son, because 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things,
even the deep things of God: Which word [search] does imply, that this
Knowledge is perfect, and from himself, when applied to the Spirit, as well as
when applied to the Father in the searching the Heart: And consequently by
parity of Reason, it cannot Exclude the Son from the Knowledge of that Day.

Therefore when I find these Texts cited by the Socinians, confineing these
Knowledges to God; and yet meet with others, which ascribe infinite Knowledge
to the Son, and the Holy Ghost, I must conclude, not that the Son and Holy
Ghost, are either ignorant of some things, for then I must contradict those
Texts, which say they know all things, or that they are Creatures endowed with
an infinite Knowledge; because this (as is Disputed already) is utterly
impossible: But I must conclude they are God; and therefore are not Excluded by
those Texts, from knowing those things of themselves; but are included with the
Father in the Godhead; and therefore are with the Father, that One God, to
whom all things are open, and naked.

He proceeds, Christ ascribed the Infallibility of his Judgment to the Father,
Joh. 8. 16. If I Judge, my Judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and my
Father, that sent me: Which he thinks an Argument against his Divinity.

Answ. I am not alone, but I and my Father -- that is, the Father has not left
me alone, but bears witness to me by Miracles. This speaks not the
insufficiency of his Judgment, but the incredulity of this People, and the
abundant means, that he vouchsafed them. Whence he so often appeals to his
Works Joh. 10. 25. The Works that I do in my Fathers Name, they testify of me,
and v. 38. though ye believe not me, yet believe the Works. Therefore this
proves the Grace of God the Father, but does not disprove the Divinity of the
Son.

He insists, God cannot be tempted, Jam. 1. 17. but the Son was Tempted of the
Devil.

Answ. If God cannot be Tempted, what is the meaning of Mat. 4. 7. Jesus said
-- thou shall not Tempt the Lord thy God? St. James says, God cannot be
Tempted with, or to evil: No more was our Blessed Savior, for he complied not
with the Temptation.

He cites Luke 18. 19. Why call thou me Good? There is none good, save One,
that is God. On which the Letter says, he refused to be called Good, because
God only is Good.

Answ. The true meaning is, he refused to be called good, unless in Relation to
his Divinity, implying that himself is good, not by Participation, as Man is;
but essentially as God is: Therefo r he asks, why call thou me good, viz. as
Man, or as God? That sense he Rejects, this he claims as his due. So
Athanastom. 1. de Hum. Not. Suscept. (...), (...), (...). If you think me Man,
and not God, call me not good. Suppose this Text is of it self capable of those
two senses, the one of which speaks him but Man, the other God: We may easily
determine which Sense to take it in; for their's contradicts all those
Scriptures, which declare his Divinity: But our's comports with them, without
Contradiction to any: Therefore not their's, but our's must be admitted,
because it must be interpreted in concurrence with other Scriptures, but not in
contradiction to 'em.

Arg. 6. p. 10. God gives what, and to whom he pleases, but Christ says, to
Sit on my right Hand, and on my left -- is not mine to give, Mat. 20. 23.

Answ. Is not mine to give, i. e. as Man, not mine Exclusive of the Father, or
contrary to the Divine Economy, according to which, something is ascribed as
peculiar to every Person in the Sacred Trinity. That this is the meaning, is
evident from Joh. 10. 28. I give unto them Eternal Life: Nothing can be greater
than this, yet the Son gives this, as well as the Father. Therefore in what
Sense the other is not his to give, in the same Sense Eternal Life is not his
to give: But in what Sense he gives Eternal Life, in the same Sense he gives
the other too, whatever you please to understand by it. This they know is our
Doctrine, and therefore ought not only to propose this Scripture, but also to
prove an inconsistency between this Scripture, and this Doctrine: This he does
not attempt, not will ever be able to perform. But it seems it is enough for a
Socinian to start an Error, and then leave it to the World, in hope some may
take it, as the Man did the Snake, into their Houses.

He proceeds, God needs no aid of any other; but Christ says, he that sent me,
is with me.

Answ. The thing in Controversy is, whether the Son be God, as well as Man:
The Socinian brings this Text against us; but if we at present only suppose
that he is both, which we must do, till it be disproved, he can never tell me,
why the Fathers presence with the Human Nature of Christ should necessarily
imply a denial of his Divine Nature; and consequently this Text is no due
Medium, whence to conclude his point.

He adds, God cannot Pray for himself, and People, but Christ Prays for himself
and Disciples. Luke 22. 42* Heb. 5. 7. etc.

Answ. We Teach that Christ is both God and Man: Now he Prayed for himself,
only as Man, Luke 22. 42. that this Cup, viz. his Passion, now at hand, might
pass from him. He Prayed for others, as Priest, Heb. 56. Thou art a Priest for
ever, whence v. 7. in the days of his Flesh -- he offered up Prayers: Whence
the Socinian thinks he cannot be God, that is to say, his Praying must hinder
the Human Nature from being united to the Divine; for which he can produce
neither Scripture nor Reason. Nay, as Man he dyed, yet notwithstanding this was
United to the Divinity: And if his Death could not hinder this Union, much less
can his Praying.

But to show the weakness of this Argument, we will add, though he cannot Pray
considered Essentially as God; for so there is nothing above him, yet he may
Pray considered personally, as the Son of God, viz. the Father; for as Son, he
is subordinate to the Father, and consequently as Son may Pray the Father. This
is an Argument then no more to his purpose, than if he had told us a Story of
Abraham's Travels, or Noah's Planting a Vinyard.

He urges farther, Christ Dyed, and the Father raised him from the Dead, Ephesians.
1. 19, 20. Whence also he fancies he cannot be God.

He that dyed, and was raised, must be Man; but his Argument implies, that he
who raised him, must be God, which is enough to our purpose: For he raised
himself, John 2. 19. destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up;
which v. 21. says, he spoke of the Temple of his Body. Therefore (according to
his own Hypothesis) the Son must be God, as well as Man*

But the Socinian pretends, Let. 3. p. 89. That Christ raised his Body by a
Power communicated to him by the Father; and accordingly his being raised is
always attributed to the Father, not to himself.

Answ. This is false; for that Text does attribute it to himself, I will raise
it up. Therefore either the Son must be the Father; or else his Resurrection is
not always attributed to the Father.

2. If he was raised by a power solely from the Father, then he must be raised
by the Father: for he raises the dead by whose Power the dead is raised; and
consequently he could not say, I will raise it.

3. This notion makes the Raiser, and the raised, to be the same: which is as
incongruous as to speak the Maker, and the thing made to be the same. Therefore
when he says, I will raise it up, he speaks not as Man, for as such he was to
be raised: but as God, who alone is the raiser of the dead. And,

4. The ascription of it to the Father does not deny the co operation of the
Son: as the ascription of it to the Son does not deny the cooperation of the
Father; for then those Texts, of which some ascribe it to the Father, others to
the Son, must be contradictory. But the ascription of it to both does declare
the Divinity of both, because now both must be God, or else they could not
raise the dead.

His next Scripture, which is Mat. 28. 18. All Power is given me; is already
answered in Arg. 2. For this Power here given him respects only the Government
of the Church, to which he was now exalted; which the Psalmist expresses by
seting him a King on the Holy Hill of Sion: but this does not prove that he had
not, antecedent to this, a Power with the Father in the Government of the
World. This proves he had now a new Government, but does not prove that
therefore he was not God: because the Father had a new Government upon the
Creation of the World, but yet was God. Such additionals prove an alteration in
the things added, but not in those Divine Persons, to whom they are added. All
the difference is, this Power was given the Son. True, but this (as before)
speaks the Son subordinate to the Father, but does not destroy his Nature, by
which he is God.

Argum. 7. p. 11. Christ in the Scriptures is always spoken of as a distinct
and different Person from God: and is described to be the Son of God, and the
Image of God.

Answ. He is personally distinct, and therefore is not God the Father: but he
is not essentially distinct, and therefore must be God the Son. If the Socinian
then would gain his point, he must prove not only [a] distinction, which we
grant* but [such] a distinction, which we deny.

But he has said that Christ is the Son of God, and the Image of God; whence
he concludes, p. 12. thus, it is as impossible that the Son, or Image of the
one true God, should himself be that One true God; as that the Son should be
the Father, and the Image be the very thing, whose Image it is.

Answ. Profoundly argued, and like a a Socinian! For he falsely supposes that
the Father only is the One true God: when Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are
together the one true God. Therefore take the One true God, and the invisible
God, personally for the Father only; and we grant that the Son of that One true
God cannot be that One true God, because the Son cannot be the Father: and that
the Image of the invisible God cannot be the invisible God, because (as he
says) the Image cannot be that very thing, whose Image it is.

But take the One true God, and the invisible God, essentially for Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and then the Son with the Father, and Holy Spirit, is that One
true God: and the Image of the invisible God, with the Father and Holy Ghost,
is that invisible God; because all three Persons together are the one true and
invisible God.

Now the Son is called the Image of the invisible God, because as an Image
represents that very thing, whose Image it is, so the Son represents the
Father, as having in himself all the perfections of the Father flowing from the
same Essence common to both. Whence he says, John 14. 8. He that has seen me,
has seen the Father; because as Hilar. Pict. Epist. de Trin. l. 9. glosses,
the Father is seen in the Perfections of the Son; and consequently the Son must
be of the same Nature with the Father*

Our Doctrine then is not simply impossible, and contradictory to common sense,
as the Letter pretends: but theirs is palpably false and absurd; for all these
Arguments (as he calls them) run upon these two false suppositions; viz.

1. That there is but one Nature in Christ: for he proves that Christ is Man,
and thence concludes he cannot be God; when the Scriptures abundantly declare
that he is both.

2. That there is but one Person in the Godhead: for he often proves that
Christ is not God, viz. the Father, as many of his quotations must be
understood; and thence concludes he is not God; though the Scriptures prove
that Father, Son and Holy Ghost are God.

Thus he supposes what we deny, that there is but one Nature in Christ, and but
one Person in the Godhead; but proves only what we grant, viz. that Christ is
Man, and that the Son is not the Father.

But let him prove first that there is but one Nature in Christ, and then that
Christ is Man: and again, first that there is but one Person, viz. the Father
in the Godhead; and then that the Son is not the Father; from each of which it
will follow that the Son cannot be God; nothing less can conclude his point:
but this method of his proves nothing against us, but only betrays the
Socinians want either of Honesty or Judgment.

However, he concludes his Arguments (as he calls them) with a Socinian
Confidence; asserting, p. 13. that there is in Scripture no real foundation for
the Divinity of the Son. For proof of which he now flies above common Argument,
and can stoop to nothing below Demonstration.

. Demonst. 1. par. 8. p. 13. -- So many Scriptures expressly declare, that only
the Father is God. For proof of this he quotes, John 17. 1, 3. Father -- this
is Eternal Life, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou have sent.

Answ. The Letter says, that Only the Father is God, which denies the Son, and
Holy Ghost is God: but this Text says, the Father is the only true God: this
excludes the Gentile Gods, but not the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who with the
Father are the only true God. He here removes the exclusive particle [only]
from the praediciate, the [true God] to the subject [thee] for (pardon the
repetition) the Apostle says -- thee the only true God; but the Socinian
says, only thee the true God; which is such a corruption of the Text contrary
to all ancient and authentic reading, that utterly perverts the very sense and
design of it.

You have then a Demonstration indeed, not that only the Father is God, but
that the Scriptures and Socinianism are at odds* and that the one or the other
must be Reformed.

The next words [and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent] do Distinguish the Son
from the Father as to Office, so does 1* Cor. 8. 6. there is but one God -- and
One Lord; but they do not Distinguish him as to Nature. The same is true of
other Quotations under this Head; and consequently none of 'em prove what he
undertakes, viz. that only the Father is God.

Demonst. 2. parag. 9. p. 14. If Christ were God as well as Man, it had been
altogether Superfluous to give the Holy Ghost to his said Human Nature as a
Director, and a Guide: For what other help could that Nature need, which was
one Person with (as they speak) God the Son, and in which God the Son did
personally dwell?

His Quotations are Luke 4. 1. Act. 1. 2 and Chapter 10. 38. Which prove only this,
that the Holy Ghost was given to the Human Nature of Christ: Which the poor Man
thinks a Demonstrative proof, that Christ was not United to the Eternal Word,
or Son of God; and Consequently was not God.

1. This Demonstration (as he calls it) is founded not upon Scripture, but upon
a Socinian Presumption. For no Scripture says, that if the Son was God, he
should not have had the Presence and Conduct of the Spirit of God. And
certainly it is a Monstrous way of Arguing, that this or that is necessary for
God to have done, or not to have done, and then to conclude, he has, or has
not done it: For this is no better, than to limit the Almighty, to give Rules
to Infinite Wisdom, and to make not the Scripture, but our own blind Conceits,
the Rule of our Faith. In this way the Romanists Demonstrate an Universal Head
of the Church: Some the Divine Right of this, or that Form of
Church Government; and after the same Methods, others may as well Demonstrate
away all Religion, and introduce what they please of their own.

2. His Foundation is utterly false. For the Church is the Body of Christ,
which Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. is said to be fitly joined to him our Head, to intimate
that he does actuate, and guide it; and yet notwithstanding standing this, the
Spirit is sent to lead her into all Truth. Where let the Socinian tell me, why
both the Son of God, and the Holy Spirit, may not guide the Human Nature, as
well as Myslical Body of Christ.

3. It follows, that the same works of God are ascribed now to one Person, then
to another: Thus we find it in this of Conduct, in that of Creation, etc. but
this does not destroy, but rather declare and confirm the Doctrine of a
Trinity: Because it proclaims those Powers and Operations, which the Socinian
would Limit to one Person, to be common to all three; whence it follows, that
all three must be God.

Demonst. 3. parag. 10. p. 15. We have an Instance of this in the Demonstration
now before us. For he would not have the Son to be God, because he Ascribes his
Miracles to the Holy Spirit, Mat. 12. 28. I cast out Devils by the Spirit of
God. Now this does not prove the Son is not God, any more than the Ascribing
Creation to the Son, does prove that the Father did not Create. But it is a
good step toward the proving that the Holy Ghost is God; For Miracles cannot be
wrought but by a Divine Power, therefore if the Holy Ghost has such a Power of
Miracles, that they are wrought by him, if he be a Person which we shall easily
prove, he must be a Divine Person, and that is God.

Demonst. 4. parag. 11. p. 15. Had our Lord been more than a Man, the
Prophecies of the Old Testament -- would not Describe him barely as the Seed of
the Woman. --

Answ. They Describe him as such, but not barely as such; for they Describe him
also as God. Thus Isa. 40. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make strait in
the Desert an High way for our God. This is evidently spoke of the Messiah, and
the Evangelists with one consent, apply it to Christ, Mat. 3. 3. Mark 1, 2, 3.
Luke 3, 4. and Joh. 1. 23. Where they all agree, that the Voice in the
Wilderness, was the Baptist; and that the way he was to prepare, was the way of
the Messiah; therefore according to their Application of Scripture, the Prophet
does Style the Son, the Lord our God.

Observe farther, that this Text calls the Messiah Lord, in the Hebrew, it is
Jehovah, which (we shall prove) is an Incommunicable Name of God, which
therefore Asserts the Divinity of him, to whom it is applied: And consequently
the Prophet in this place declares him to be God in a proper Sense.

Compare Psalm. 46. 6, 7. with Heb. 1. 8. and Psalm. 102. 25. with Heb. 1. 10.
and you will find, that according to the Apostle's Application of those Texts,
the Psalmist Ascribes to the Son, an Everlasting Throne, and the Creation of
the World; and certainly this Describes him not as the Seed of the Woman, but
as God.

. 4. This Pen having thus attacked the Divinity of the Son, now turns it self
against that of the Holy Ghost; affirming p. 16. that the Holy Ghost -- is only
the Power and Inspiration of God, at least is not himself God, which they bold
is ascertained by these Considerations.

Consid. 1. The Holy Ghost or Spirit, and the Power of God, are spoken of as
one and the same thing, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. Luke 1. 35. Chapter 11. 2c. Mat. 12. 28.
Luke 24. 49. Compared with Act. 1. 4, 5.

Answ. He is here to prove, that the Holy Ghost is only the Power and
Inspiration of God, but is not himself God, but these Texts say no such thing,
and consequently do not ascertain this Position.

2. The Blessed Spirit is not properly the Inspiration of God, but something
distinct from it. For 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. Wisdom, Faith, etc. are given by the
Spirit: Whence Heb. 2. 4. they are called the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Hence
each Text Distinguishes between the Spirit, and these Gifts: But neither of
them are the Inspiration of God. For Inspiration is the Act, whereby the Holy
Ghost Conveighs these Gifts to Men, which v. 11. is called a dividing them.

This is clear from 2 Timothy 3. 16. all Scripture is (...) inspired, or given by
the Inspiration of God. Here Scripture is the gift or thing inspired, God is
the giver or inspirer; therefore Inspiration can be but the Act, whereby it is
given or Inspired. Therefore as the Graces before mentioned, viz. Wisdom,
Faith, etc. are the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, so the Holy Ghost, must give them
by way of Inspiration. The Socinian then does here confound the Agent and the
Act, making the Giver and the Giving, the same thing; which is as false and
absurd, as to say my Act of Donation is my Person.

3. He Asserts, that the Holy Ghost is only the Power of God, that is, as he
often explains himself, is neither God, nor a Person. But this is neither
proved, nor ever can be; because such Power can know no more of God, than a
Grace or Virtue can do, which are qualities, not persons: But 1 Cor. 2. 10. The
Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God: Whence the Spirit must
be not a simple Power, but a Person endowed with an Infinite knowledge, and
that can be no other than God.

What the Letter opposes, the Scriptures are clear in; for Act. 5. Ananias did
lie to the Holy Ghost, whence v. 4. says, he lied not to Man, but to God.
Therefore the Holy Ghost must be God.

Eniedinus, who is much more Manly in his performances, than this Epistler
Parallels this of Ananias, lying to the Holy Ghost, and to God, with the Jews
Rejecting Samuel and God: Thus, the Jews Rejected Samuel immediately, who was
set over them; but they Rejected God mediately, who did set Samuel over them:
So Ananias lied to the Holy Ghost immediately, who was given to the Apostles:
But he lied to God mediately, who gave the Holy Ghost to the Apostles; whence
as the Jews did Sin differently against Samuel and God, viz. immediately, and
mediately, so did Ananias against the Holy Ghost and God, whence he would have
the Holy Ghost and God, as much distinct, as Samuel and God; and that is
essentially.

Answ. That place as put by the Objector, is not parallel with this: For that
says* they Rejected not Samuel, but God; but this does not say, that Ananias
lied not to the Holy Ghost, but to God. Therefore this Text does not
distinguish between the Holy Ghost, and God, as that does between Samuel and
God: And consequently the Holy Ghost and God, are not here made so distinct, as
Samuel and God.

But take these Texts right, and we may allow a Parallel. But then it must lie
between Samuel and Peter; and again between God and the Holy Ghost; thus the
Jews thought they Rejected Samuel only, as Ananias thought he lied to Peter
only; but says God to Samuel, they Reject not thee, but me: And says Peter to
Ananias, thou have lied to the Holy Ghost; that is, not to Men, but to God.
Therefore while that Text distinguishes between Samuel and God, as different,
this Unites the Holy Ghost, and God as the same.

Consid. 2. p. 17. A Manifest Distinction is made, as between God and Christ,
so also between God and the Holy Ghost: So that it is impossible the Spirit
should be God himself. His Quotations are, Romans 5. 5. -- the Love of God is
shed abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. 36. -- ye are the
Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you, and Romans 8. 27. He (the
Spirit) v. 26. makes intercession for the Saints, according to the Will of God.

Answ. He knows we grant there is a personal Distinction, that as the Son, so
the Holy Ghost is not God the Father. This is all these Texts do prove, without
which there could not be a Trinity. But none of 'em prove that the Son and Holy
Ghost are not God, which is the design of this Consideration.

But because Romans 8. 27. here quoted, Ascribes Personal Acts to the Holy Ghost
-- he makes Intercession: Therefore, that he may at once destroy his Divinity,
and Personality both, he pleads, that the Holy Ghost is spoke of as a Person by
the same Figure, that Charity is described as a Person, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. The
Argument lies thus, Personal Acts cannot prove the Holy Ghost to be a Person,
because they cannot prove that Charity is a Person.

Answ. This does as effectually destroy the Personality of the Father and the
Son, as of the Holy Ghost: For (according to this Argument) Personal Acts do
not prove the Father or the Son to be Persons; because they do not prove, that
Charity is a Person; but that Argument which proves too much, proves nothing at
all.

2. The Scriptures do Ascribe to the Holy Ghost, not only those Personal Acts
which they do not to Charity, or to any thing else, which is not a Person: But
a Subsistence to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, together in the same Text 1
John 5. 7. there are three -- the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
implying, that the Subsistence of the Holy Ghost is as Real and Personal, as
that of the Father, and the Son. They Ascribe to him also Life, Understanding,
Will and Power; For 1 Cor. 12. 11. he divides the Manifold Gifts of God, to
every one as himself Will: Whence these two Cases are so unlike, that even
Biddle the Socinian, was ashamed of it. For (notwithstanding this of Charity)
he Asserts the Personality of the Holy Ghost, even while he denies his Divinity.

3. Scripture must not be taken figuratively, without a necessity, else you may
turn the whole into an Allegory, and loose at once both the Letter and Design
in a Cabalistical Sense. Now this necessity does lie in the Case of Charity, as
much as in that of the Anthropomorphites mentioned, Let. 4. p. 159. For all Men
do as well know, that Charity can be no Person, as that God can have no Human
Parts, as Eyes, Ears, Hands, etc. but this is so far from lying in the Case of
the Holy Ghost, that Let. 3. p. 99. does consess* that all the Arrians, and
many Socinians do acknowledge, that the Holy Ghost is a Person. Whence this is
a conceit so weak, as well as Novel, that even the Unitarians themselves (as he
idly calls them) are divided upon it. It is plain then, that in the Judgment
of their own Party, as well as of the Church in all Ages, here is no necessity
of a Figurative Interpretation; and consequently no such ought to be admitted.
The Socinian Arguments (we see) are like Ghosts, that appear only to whom they
please, since none but a few of their own Party have yet discerned 'em.

Consid. 3. p. 18. The Spirit is obtained for us of God by our Prayers, Act.
15. 8. Luke 11. 13. Whence he thinks the Spirit is not God, because he is given
by another.

Answ. By the Spirit he here understands the Gifts of the Spirit; as himself
explains it: whence he proceeds thus: but they, viz. the Socinians, say also,
That if the Holy Spirit were at all a Person, much more God, his Gifts -- would
be bestowed by himself. which,

1. Convinces him of contradiction: for he says, they are the gifts of the
Spirit, yet denies that they are given by the Spirit: which is as much as to
say, they are given by the Spirit, and yet are not given by the Spirit, which
is a contradiction in terms. And,

2. This utterly destroys his Argument, which is this, that the Spirit does not
bestow his own gifts, therefore the Spirit is not God, but the Spirit must
bestow his own gifts, else they could not be his own gifts, but must be the
gifts of him that bestows 'em; therefore the antecedent being false, the
consequent must be false too.

Now that the Spirit does bestow these things, which he acknowledges to be the
gifts and graces of the Spirit, is expressly asserted by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 8,
9, 10, 11. where he says of these very gifts and graces of the Spirit, that
the Spirit divides them to every one as he will; and if he devides 'em to Men,
he must give 'em to Men; because these are Synonymous Terms, which are both
expressive of the same thing.

The Texts he quotes, do prove these things are given by the Father, we grant
it: but this, and other Texts do prove they are given also by the Spirit; but
those Texts can no more exclude the Spirit, than these can exclude the Father.
Therefore they must be given by both, as indeed they are by the whole Trinity;
for which reason they are ascribed now to one Person, then to another; as
Faith, Repentance, etc. which are the gifts of the Spirit, are attributed not
to the Spirit only, but sometimes to the Father, as himself proves, and
sometimes to the Son, as the Apostle declares, Act. 5. 31. him, viz. the Son
has God exalted -- to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance (which
implies Faith) to Israel; and Act. 2. speaking of the gift of Tongues, says,
v. 32, 33. that Jesus, who was raised from the dead, being by the right hand of
God exalted, [he] viz. the same Jesus has shed forth this, which ye do see and
hear. The result is,

1. That the Socinian is partial and unjust, in quoting one Text of Scripture
in opposition to another; And,

2. He has not only lost his own Argument, but has also furnished us with one
against himself; for he argues thus, the Spirit does not give these gifts to
men; therefore the Spirit is not God; which implies that if the Spirit does
give these gifts, then the Spirit is God; but (we see) he does give these
gifts, and therefore must be God. And indeed he can be no other than God, who
divides these manifold gifts of God according to his own Will.

He proceeds, there is no Precept, nor Example in all Holy Scripture of Prayer
made to the Spirit on this, or any other occasion: which (on the Trinitarian
supposition) that the Holy Spirit is a Person, and God; no less than the
Father, is very surprising, nay utterly unaccountable.

Answ. We deny it, for 2 Cor. 13. 16. we read thus; The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you
all; which Text we shall first explain, and then apply it to the present
Argument.

That word [God] the love of God, must not be taken essentially for God, as if
the Son, and Holy Ghost were not God: but personally for God the Father, and
therefore can distinguish them only from the Father. My reasons are these,

1. Other Scriptures (as we have said) do not only style the Son, and the Holy
Ghost God, but do also ascribe to them infinite Perfections, which are not
competible to any Creature; and likewise attribute to them the Name Jehovah,
which is proper to God, as we shall prove anon. Therefore if you make that word
[God] in this Text to signify God essentially, and consequently to exclude the
Son, and Holy Ghost from the Deity; then this Text must contradict all them:
but that cannot be the true sense of one Text, which contradicts another. And,

2. St. Paul himself does thus explain it, Ephesians. 6. 23. -- Faith from God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ: where he distinguishes the Son not simply
from God, but from God the Father; this denies that the Son is the Father, but
still implies that the Son is God. Now this Text being the more full and
perfect, explains that in the Corinthians, by teaching us to supply these words
[the Father] The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, viz. the
Father, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost -- Now this Text thus supplied and
perfected by that, does make a distinction of Persons, but not of Essences,
that is, it teaches that the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are not the Father, but
yet one God. This sense St. Paul expressed to the Ephesians, and therefore must
intend it to these Corinthians.

Now the Text, thus explained, is not only a benediction to this Church, but
also a Prayer to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, that this
Grace may descend upon it.

We never pray to God, but we pray to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which was the
judgment of Antiquity: For Justin Martyr, who flourished in the middle of the
Age next after the Apostles, says in his Apology, we Christians worship
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and yet against gentile Polytheism in the same
Apology declares, that they worshipped God only; therefore they must necessarily
understand it, that all three Persons together are that one God, whom they
worshipped, and to whom they prayed, which is one part of Worship.

But you will say, what is the reason then, we are not commanded to pray
expressly and particularly to the Holy Ghost, as we are to God?

Answ. 1. In diverse Scriptures [God] is put essentially for Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; therefore in those Scriptures all Commands, and Examples of praying
to God, are to be understood inclusively of all three Persons, who are
essentially one, and the same God.

2. The Father is the first Person in the Trinity* of and from whom the Son and
the Holy Ghost are* therefore as for this reason the Son refers things
principally to the Father, but not exclusive of himself* so for the same
reasons Prayers are directed principally to the Father, but yet are to be
understood inclusive of the Son, and Holy Ghost, but not exclusive of them.

3. The Father is principal Agent in the Government of the World; and the first
mover in all Divine Operations, saying to the Son, and the Holy Ghost, let us
make Man: whence the Son says, John 5. 17. my Father works hitherto, and I
works by which he speaks the Father principle Operator, but himself a
Co-operator with him.

Again, the Son from the Father has the Government of the Church, whence it is
called the Kingdom of Christ, to which the Father Exalted him, and from the
Father and the Son, the Holy Ghost is in the Ministration of it. Upon which
Accounts, Prayers are directed primarily, and expressly to the Father, but yet
are intended as extensive to the Son and Holy Ghost. They are directed most
particularly to him from his Priority of Order and Operation; but yet they
belong to all three in regard of the sameness of their Nature.

These things are suited to the Rules and Methods of the Divine Economy, and
may seem difficulties; but had our Considerer considered well, he had never
made them supports of an Heresy.

Consid. 4. p. 19. If the Holy Spirit, and our Lord Christ are -- God, no less
than the Father, then God is a Trinity of Persons, or three Persons; but this
is contrary to the whole Scripture, which speaks of God as but one Person; and
speaks of him, and to him by singular Pronouns, such as I, Thou, We, Him, etc.

Answ. We deny that any one Text of Scripture, does prove that God is but One
Person. He quotes, Job. 13. 7, 8. Will ye speak wickedly for God? -- Will ye
accept his Person? -- Whence he thinks, there can be but one Person, viz. the
Father in the Godhead. To which we Answer thus.

1. The letter of these Texts does not say, that God is but One Person: Or that
there is but one Person in the Godhead, which is the thing to be proved.

2. The Reason and Design of 'em, cannot possibly import any such thing. For
these expressions are used to signify only the doing unjustly for God, as Men
do for others, when said to accept their Persons. For Job hereby accuses his
Friends of Injustice and Partiality, in that they justified God's Visitations
upon, by Condemning him of Hypocrisy. Therefore these Texts are not suited to
the Nature of God, nor designed to Determine, whether there be only one, or
more Persons in the God head, but to signify unjust Censures; and therefore
must import not a Singularity or Plurality of Persons, but only Partiality in
their Judgment, between God and himself. Will ye speak wickedly for God? and
talk deceitfully for him? Will ye accept his Person?

3. Phrases that are taken from the common ufuages of Men, or as common forms
of Speech, are not to be used in an Argument, in which the Holy Penman did not
intend them to the Contradiction of those Texts, which professedly speak of
that point, this all Men of Reason and Judgment, must grant me; because in
expounding Scripture, we are to consider not only Words, but Phrases, together
with the Scope and design of the place, and if so, it must be granted in this
Case before us, that these Texts in Jobe, which concern not the Nature of God,
ought not to be brought to prove, there is but one person in the Godhead, when
so many Texts on set purpose, declare the Divine Nature of three.

He quotes also, Heb. 1. 1. 2, 3* God -- has spoken to us by his Son, who
being -- the express Image of his Person.

Answ. 1. God here must signify the Father, because he speaks to us by his
Son, whence the Son is the Image of his Father's Person. But however this does
not reach his Case; for it proves indeed, that God the Father is but one
Person, which we all grant: But it does not prove there is no other Person in
the Godhead, which is the thing in controversy. Nay,

2. This Text is not only, not for, but is really against, him. For if the Son
be the express Image of his Father, he must duly Represent the Father, as
Images duly Represent those things, whose Images they are: And if he, the
Living Image of his Father, duly Represents the Father, he must have in himself
all the Perfections of his Father, and consequently must be infinite himself,
else he could not in his own Person or Nature, Represent infinite Perfections;
and that he does so, is evident, not only from his being Termed the Image of
his Father, but also from those words of his once quoted already, Joh. 14. 8.
he that has seen me, has seen the Father. So far is this Text from proving,
but one Person in the Godhead, that it consequentially introduces a second.

He cites, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5. -- the Lord our God is One: the word is Jehovah,
whence the Letter says, Jehovah is one, and that the Jews Morning and Evening
Repeated this Verse, to keep it in perpetual Memory, that Jehovah or God, is
one only, not two or three.

Answ. The meaning is, there is but One God, which is spoke in opposition to
Gentile Gods, which the Jews were so much inclined to, not that there is but
One Person in the Godhead, which was never disputed among them. We say then,
that Jehovah or God, is but One, viz. Nature or Substance, that is, there is
but one God, which is all this Text can pretend to, and all that our Socinian
can prove: But we say likewise, that Jehovah or God, is three Persons, viz.
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. That the Father is Jehovah or God, the Socinian
grants us, and that the Son and Holy Ghost are Jehovah, or God, we will prove.

1. That the Son is Jehovah, or God will appear from hence. In Exodus 33, 1, 2,
3. the Lord, the word is Jehovah, said, I will send my Angel* but I will not go
up into the midst of thee. Now as the Letter supposes, that Jehovah is God, so
in this very place, it can signify no other than God properly. Because,

^. Jehovah is here Distinguished from an Angel, as such, and therefore from
every Angel, I will send my Angel, but I will not go. -- and

2. He declares his propriety in this Angel, for it is [my] Angel: An Angel
that is mine, that is, my Creature, and my Servant: Which gloss I found upon
this bottom, that we never find in all the Scripture, that one Angel speaks
thus of another; for though there be different orders of Angels, yet they are
all Servants of God, not the Servants one of another. Therefore this must speak
this Jehovah to have that Right to Propriety in, and that Power over this
Angel, which God has to, in, and over his Creatures.

Then Genesis 18. 1. The Lord i. e. Jehovah, appeared to Abraham, v. 2. expresses
it by three Men; but v. 3. calls only one of these three Jehovah, or Lord, the
same is so called again, v. 13. 20. and v. 22. does again expressly call these
two [Men] but this [Jehovah] This only was Dignified with these Titles, to this
only did Abraham bow himself, and direct his Discourse. Now since this Jehovah
is so industriously distinguished from these Men, as he was before from that
Angel; and v. 25. is called the Judge of the World; which neither is true, nor
was ever affirmed, of any created Spirit, it must needs be that this Jehovah is
God. But now this Jehovah cannot be the Father, because

1. This Jehovah appeared in humane shape, as, to Joshua, to Moses, so to
Abraham, whence himself, and the two with him, are called Men, v. 2: but the
Father never appeared in humane shape; and the Teaching that he did was
anciently, as well as justly, condemned as part of the Patropassion Heresy: and

2. These three are called Angels Heb. 13. 2, because they were sent, as the
Word imports; but the Father being the first Person in the Trinity, cannot be
sent from any.

The Result then is, here is Jehovah i. e. God appearing in the likeness of
Men, but the Father never did appear in this likeness, therefore this could not
be Jehovah, or God the Father; but must be Jehovah, or God the Son, whom the
Father sent in Humane shape as an intimation of his future Incarnation. This is
evident from Joshua; for c. 5. v. 13. he sees a Man with a drawn Sword, and*
asks, Who he was for? The Man answered, v. 14, As Captain of the Host of the
Lord am I come. Here this Man is Captain of the Host of Jehovah the Lord; and
yet c. 6. v. 2. this Man, this Captain, is himself Jehovah the Lord; for after
he had answered Joshua, and commanded him to put off his shoe, because the
Place was holy c. 5. v. 15, then c. 6. v. 2. Jehovah the Lord, i. e. this Man,
this Captain, said to Joshua -- Therefore the former Jehovah, or Lord, is the
Father, whose Host this was; and the latter Jehovah, or Lord, is the Son, who
was sent from the Father as Captain of it.

This was the Sense of all Antiquity; for so Justin Martyr Dial. so Grenaeus l.
4. c. 15. and 23. and so Tertul. de Incar. c. 6. and adv. Marc. l. 3. c. 9. who
were followed by Cyprian, Origin, and the rest.

Again Genesis 19. 24. the Lord [Jehovah] rained down Fire from the Lord [Jehovah]
in Heaven. The Series of this History shows that the former Jehovah is the very
same with Jehovah chapter 18; whence, the latter must be the Father, who was in
Heaven: This was the Judgment not only of the forecited Fathers, but also of
the first Council of Sirmium. And indeed as this Appearance in humane shape was
a Signification of his future Incarnation, so his raining down Fire from Heaven
was a Type of the last Conflagration, when this Jehovah the Son shall come from
Jehovah the Father to judge the Quiek and the Dead: for which reason Abraham
calls him the Judge of the World, Genesis 18. 25.

We shall confirm and conclude our Point in our Answer to Crellius, who, de
Nomine Jehovah, objects several things against us with a design to persuade
that [Jehovah] is not a Name proper to God, but is sometimes given to Angels
properly taken; and consequently, that this Jehovah was not tht Son, but only
an Angel of God.

Object. 1. These three in Genesis 18. are called Angels Heb. 13. 2.

Ans. They are likewise called Men Genesis 18. 2. whence let the Socinian tell me

1. Why one of these Angels may not be the Son of God, as well as these three
Men be Angels? And then,

2. Why the other two should be called only Men and Angels, but this he styled
Jehovah, whom the Scriptures distinguish from Men and Angels, unless to denote
the distinction of his Nature from all created Beings: and why he should then
be joined with the Father under the same Name Jehovah Genesis 19. unless to
declare the sameness of his Nature with the Creator, God blessed for ever?

Object, 2. He who is called Lord [Jehovah] in Exodus 3. 7. is expressly said to
be an Angel of the Lord, v. 2. Whence he thinks that Jehovah is a Name not
proper to God* but common to Created Spirits.

Ans. Angel does note his Office, as being sent from the Father* and Jehovah
notes his Nature, as being of the same Substance with the Father: for v. 6.
this Jehovah says, I am the God of Abraham; and v. 14. he styles himself
(...), I am; this implies a perpetual Existence from everlasting to
everlasting, which is not competible to any Creature. Hence our Savior says
Matt. 23. 31, 32. Have 'ye not read, not what God spoke to you by his Angel,
but that which is spoke to you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham -- Where
our Savior himself, who is the best Interpreter of Scripture, teaches that
this Jehovah was not a created Spirit, but even God himself. Upon which Justin
Martyr Apol. says, this is (...), our Christ. And Tertul. adv. Prax. c. 14.
Deum i. e. Filium Dei Visum -- Moysi -- God, that is, the Son of God was seen
by Moses: the same you have again c. 16. See Cypr. adv. Judae. 1. 2. etc.

Object. 3. Jehovah is indeed a Name proper to God, but yet is sometimes given
to Angels, as they personate God, i. e. bear his Name and Authority.

Ans. Here was not only the Name and Authority of God, but also that Honor
received which is due to God only; for Moses by special Command did worship
him: but you have not one such Instance of an Angel that any way appeared to be
a created Spirit, that bore the Name and Authority of God, and received the
Honor due to God. The Angel to the Blessed Virgin spoke otherwise, and that to
S. John forbad him to Worship him, and that for a reason common to all created
Angels, Revel. 19. 10. See thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants.

As we find no such thing, so neither can any such thing ever be; for God has
said, My Glory will I not give to another: but this gives a Creature his Name,
his Authority, and his Honor; and these are his Glory. Therefore the matter of
this Objection is not only not found in the Scripture, but is even contrary to
it.

Object. 4. The Law was given by the disposition of Angels, Act. 7. 53. and was
spoken by Angels, Heb. 2. 3. whence he presumes that Jehovah, who gave the Law,
was not the Son of God, but a created Angel.

Ans. This does not follow: for as it was given by Angels, so it was Gal. 3.
19. in the hand of a Mediator, that is, of Christ; as Theophylact and others
take it. But some say this Mediator was Moses: be it so, it is all one. For if
Moses was Mediator, it was only as a Type of Christ, and there must be an exact
Agreement between the Type and the Antitype; therefore if the Law was given by
Moses a typical Mediator, it must be given by Christ the true and proper
Mediator. Whence the Result must be, that Moses gave it immediately to the
People, but Christ gave it mediately by Moses, and by those Angels, which are
ministering Spirits. Therefore when S. John says, c. 1. 17. the Law was given
by Moses, but Grace and Truth, i. e. the Gospel, came by Jesus Christ, he
respects the immediate Delivery of both; the Law was given immediately by
Moses, and the Gospel immediately by Christ: which excludes Christ from only an
immediate, but not from a mediate Delivery of the Law.

But the Difficulty is from Heb. 2. 2, 3. If the Word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a just recompense
of Reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord? Upon which Crellius says, the Gospel,
which is the great Salvation, is preferred before the Law, because the Law was
given by Angels, but the Gopel by the Lord: and consequently Jehovah, who gave
the Law, was not the Lord, but an Angel.

Ans. This Text, which says the Law was spoken by Angels, does no more exclude
the Son, than Joh. 1. 17. which says the Law was given by Moses, does exclude
those Angels: for indeed it was given by all three. Therefore the Opposition
lies not between Jehovah and the Son, who are the same, and gave both Law and
Gospel too, but

1. Between his different manner of giving each: for (as before) he gave the
Law mediately by Angels; but he gave the Gospel immediately by himself, as the
Eternal Word now made Flesh: Upon which account Sin against the Gospel is a
greater Affront to his Person and Authority, than Sin against the Law. And

2. Between the Nature of each considered in themselves: this is a great
Salvation in comparison of that. And because Sin does always arise
proportionate to the means it is committed against, therefore upon this Account
also Sin against the Gospel is greater than Sin against the Law.

Whence this toping Argument of Crellius, which (he says) does penitus
evertere totally overthrow us, does neither exclude Jehovah the Son from giving
the Law, nor yet debase him to a created Spirit; and consequently does not at
all affect us.

In fine, we grant that Jehovah is sometimes called an Angel, as he is sent
from the Father; but we deny that an Angel, which is any way declared to be a
created Spirit, is ever called Jehovah. Let the Socinian prove this, and then
we will dismiss this Argument: else he faith nothing to the purpose.

2. The Blessed Spirit is also called Jehovah: for Exodus 17. 7. they tempted
the Lord, the Word is [Jehovah]. This is repeated Psalm. 95. whence the Apostle
Heb. 3. 7, 8, 9. thus, the Holy Ghost says -- When your Fathers tempted [me].
Therefore (according to the Apostles Application of these Seriptures) the Holy
Ghost is this Jehovah.

The Result is, Jehovah is indeed but one God, but yet is three Persons; viz.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who are in the Godhead, and therefore are this one
God, which was the thing to be proved. Whence his next Scripture, which is Isa.
45. 5. I am the Lord, the Word is [Jehovah] there is no God before me, is
easily answered. For here Jehovah excludes a Plurality of Gods, but not a
Plurality of Persons in the Godhead.

He adds (in his great Wisdom and Judgment) Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Where because [the Lord thy God]
is singular, and that Word [only] excludes all others, he thinks he has found
a proof that the Father only is God.

Ans. This proves indeed that there is but one God, which we all grant; but it
does not prove there is but one Person in the Godhead; or that the Son and the
Holy Ghost are not God; which he undertakes.

But because Suppositions grant nothing, we will suppose that this Text proves
that the Father only is God; but then it must be granted upon this Supposition,
that it does also prove, that the Father only is to be worshipped; for him only
shall thou serve. But the Socinians deny that the Son is God, and yet worship
him as well as the Father. Whence it evidently follows, that either their
Religion must be an Heresy, or themselves Idolaters; for if the Son be God,
they are Heretics in denying it: if he is not, they are Idolaters in
worshipping him. And certainly these Men are put to an hard shift for
Scripture*Proofs, when all the Texts they cite, do either not affect us, or
wound themselves.

He now proceeds to his singular Pronouns, thus; No Instance can be given in
any Language of three Persons; who ever spoke of themselves, or were spoken to,
by singular Pronouns, as I, Thou, etc. Such speaking is contrary to Custom,
Grammar, and Sense.

Ans. To this, that of the Learned Dean of St. Paul's, Dr. Sherlock, is the most
apposite, viz. There is no other Example in Nature of three Persons, who are
essentially one. Whence this is an Impropriety in reference to the Creatures,
which is none in reference to God. For he may speak of himself, or be spoken
to, singularly, because he is but one God; and plurally, because he is three
Persons, without any ungrammatical Solecism. And sometimes he does speak
plurally, as Genesis 1. 26. Let us make Man: whence we conclude a Plurality in the
Godhead. But this cannot be a Plurality of Essences, or Natures, for then there
would be a Plurality of Gods, which is contrary to Scripture, for this declares
there is but one; but a Plurality of Subsistences, which we call Persons,
united in the same Nature. This Plurality other Scriptures, particularly Psalm.
33. 6. do determine to three, viz. the Lord, the Word, and the Spirit, and 1
John 1. 7. the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and this we call a
Trinity, as the Church ever did from the Apostles time.

But to this he says, God does here speak of himself after the manner of
Princes, p. 21. and therefore is but one Person, though he says [Us].

Ans. 1. He could not speak this after the manner of Princes, for then there
was no Prince, nor any Man in the World: nor can he prove any such Custom in
the Mosaic Age. Therefore this is an expounding the first Writings in the World
after the Custom of later Ages, which we cannot allow.

2. In time Princes spoke [of] but not [to] themselves plurally, which yet God
does do, if this Gloss be true. Therefore this Exposition, which he pretends is
after the manner of Princes, is indeed without all Example.

3. God himself expounds this Text our way, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the
Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the breath of his
Mouth; that is by the Lord, viz. the Father; by the Word or Son, and by the
Spirit. Now St. John c. 1. 1, 3. teaches that by the Word, viz. that Word which
was God, that Word, which v. 14. was made Flesh, were all things made. Which
directs us to understand that [Word] in this Psalm, not of the Command, but of
the Eternal, or Substantial Word, or Son of God: to whom together with that
Spirit, who Genesis 1. 1. moved upon the Waters, preparing that indigested Matter
for its several forms, the Father said, Let us make Man.

This was the Sense of all Antiquity. Just. Mart. Dial. Iren. l. 4. c. 37. he
spoke to the Son, and the Holy Ghost, per quos, and in quibus omnia -- fecit,
by, and in whom, he made all things. Tertul. de Resur. carn. c. 6. and adv.
Prax. v. 7. Orig. cont. Cells. 1. 6. and the Constitutions l. 5. c. 6. which
pretend to give us nothing but what is Apostolical.

He proceeds to 2 Cor. 10. 2. Some, who think of [us] -- which he says S. Paul
spoke of himself only.

Ans. It is not probable that S. Paul spoke of himself after the manner of
Princes, when it is evident he lessened himself in almost every thing but Sin
and Sufferings.

2. When a Prince speaks plurally, we know he must speak of himself, because he
is but one: but the Apostles were many, and under the same Censures: therefore
when S. Paul speaks plurally [Us] we have no necessity of understanding it of
himself only, bu^ have reason to believe he spoke of himself and them together.

3. Suppose that S. Paul spoke plurally of himself, as Princes have done for
many Ages, yet what Argument is there in either of these to prove that the
Father is to be understood thus in Genesis 1, especially when the Scriptures so
frequently ascribe the Creation to the Son, and Holy Ghost, as well as to the
Father? There is therefore nothing manly, or cogent in this Quotation. By this
time (I think) his singular Pronouns have done him as little service as his
Scriptures.

Consid. 5. and 22. Had the Son or Holy Ghost been God, this would not have
been omitted in the Apostles Creed, which (they say) p. 23. was purposely drawn
up to represent all the necessary Articles of Religion: but that the Divinity
of each is omitted there he would sain persuade the World.

This very Argument had almost perverted two of my Acquaintance; the one a very
ingenious Merchant in this City. I shall therefore (according to their desire)
give the fuller Answer to it: and shall prove

1. That this Creed under the Apostles name was never composed by the Apostles;
and

2. Though it does not expressly assert the Divinity of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, yet it sufficiently teaches both.

1. This Creed was never composed by the Apostles. Some with more Presumption
than Judgment think Irenaeus and Tertullian against us. But if you consult
those famous Places, Iren. l. 1. c. 2 and 19. Tertul. de Virg. Veland. c. 1. de
Praes. Haer. c. 2. and adv. Prax. c. 2. you will find these Fathers differ so
much from one another, and each from himself, both as to the Order and Points
of Faith they deliver; that they evidently seem to intend not any settled Form,
but the Substance of Faith contained in the Scriptures, whence themselves might
draw the Articles they deliver.

Irenaeus says indeed, that his Rule of Truth, i. e. the Articles there writ,
came from the Apostles; which some have thought sufficient to prove it of
Apostolical Composure. But,

1. Its coming from the Apostles is no Argument for them; for that might be
from their Writings in the N. Test. as well as from this Creed, had they
composed it.

2. His calling it the Rule of Truth is against them; for it was not customary,
so neither is it so proper to call a Creed the Rule of Faith, as the Scriptures
from whence all Creeds are taken, and by which they must be proved. And

3. There is not so much agreement between the Articles in Iren. and this Creed
called the Apostles, as between those Articles, and some of those Creeds, which
are well known to be the different Creeds of different Churches. Therefore
there is nothing in this Father, that can prove the Socinian Assertion; but
something, that may incline to the contrary.

As for Tertullian the Case is more clear; for he says de Praes. Haer. c. 13.
that his Rule of Faith, meaning the Articles there mentioned, were taught by
Christ: but Christ composed no Symbol: and adv. Prax. c. 2. his Rule taught the
Mission of the Holy Ghost: but this Creed teaches no such thing. Therefore from
both he must intend the Scriptures, not a Creed; or if any, yet however not
this.

Arius in Epiphanius adv. Haer. l. 2. to 2. Haer. 69. would fain have justified
his Heresy against the Divinity of the Son from the Creed of Alexandria; which
differs to much from this under the Apostles name, that none can pretend they
are the same. But it must be granted, he would much rather have appealed to
this, had it then been, or believed to be theirs, and also thought not to teach
the Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost, because a Creed composed by the
Apostles themselves would have been of much more force and Authority than one
composed by any particular Church whatever. Therefore his Appeal to that, but
not to this, is to me a Demonstration that this Creed was then not known, or
else not believed either to be theirs, or to import any such Doctrine.

It could not come from the Apostles, at least as we now have it, which ought
very much to take down Men's Presumptions of its Antiquity, and must totally
ruin that of Heylen, and Ashwel in his F^des Apostolica, who will have it to
be unalterable, and therefore to come from them in all Points as it now is. For,

1. Though (...) is brought from the Psalms into the Acts of the Apostles, and
in each place is rendered Hell; and tho Irenaeus and Tertullian both speak of
Christ's going where the Souls of the dead are; yet the strict Phrase [He
descended into Hell] is not in any of the ancient Creeds or Fathers; nor yet in
the Articles mentioned by Irenaeus and Tertullian, from whom they pretend to
take this Creed it self. The first time we find it is in the Interpolat^r and
Tral, but this appeared not till the fourth Century; nor could it be wrote till
the Arian Heresy. For ad Magnes. Vas. edit. p. 147. he says, Christ is the
Word of God (...), (...), not spoken, but substantial. For though the Notion is
agreeable both to Scripture and the most ancient Fathers; yet the distinction
in these very Words was not known till Arian Evasions made it necessary for the
securing the sense both of Scripture and Antiquity.

2. The Word [Catholick] which this Creed uses, was not in use among
Ecclesiastical Writers in the first Ages. For Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. expresses
the thing by a Circumlocution, as the Church (...) to the ends of the Earth.
And Iren. l. 1. ^. 2. the Church (...) all the World over. We find the Word it
self first in Cl^. Alex. Str^m. ^. 7. but it is not in any of the Eastern
Creeds, till that of Jerusalem. S. Gyprian likewise has the Word; but it is in
none of the Latin Creeds, till the fourth Age.

The Epistles of James, Peter, John and Jude, must therefore be entitled
Catholic, not by the Penmen, but by some later hand. The first time I observe
them cited under this Title, is by Cyrd of Jerusalem, who Carech. 6* wrote
seventy years after Manes, who broached his Heresy under Probus the Emperor
about the year 277.

How then to bring Haylen out of the Wood, who places the Apostles with every
one an Article of this Creed in his mouth as a Frontispiece to his Book upon
this Subject, ascribing the Descent into Hell to S. Thomas, and the [Catholick]
Church to S. James, I know not. Or whence S. Austin should have that Story of
the Apostles bringing every one his Article to the composing it, when the four
Ages before him knew nothing of the matter: or why any should quote that Tract
under his name as his own, which all learned Men (unless some Romish Writers)
do now reject as spurious, I can as little imagine.

To conclude this Argument; Had the Apostles composed this Creed, it would have
been found first in the Hebrew or Greek Tongues, in which they wrote: it would
have been part of the Sacred Scriptures, or at least have been mentioned in the
History of the Acts, and have been known to all the Churches founded by the
Apostles, it being pretended to be wrote before their Dispersion from
Jerusalem. But on the contrary we find it not till the fourth Century, and then
known only to the Latin Church, which did obtrude it on the World under the
Name of the Apostles; witness Preuotius, Feu ardentius, Baronius, the Paris
Doctors in their Censures of Erasmus, and others, who take up the Cudgels from
their old Pope Leo in the fifth Age, as he did from Ruffinus, and Ruffinus from
the spurious Clemens in his Epistle to S. James; which was ever rejected by all
considering Men, because it appeared not in the Apostolic Ages; and also
mentions the death of St. Peter, who out lived this James, to whom it is
directed.

From Rome the Reformed Churches received this Doctrine, and that Rubric of
ours which calls it the Apostles Creed, is taken out of the Roman Breviary;
which our Reformers (not foreseeing the advantages the Socinians make of it)
thought of no such moment as to call for an Alteration. But when our Church
composed the Articles of our Religion, she expresses her self thus, Article 8.
that which is commonly called the Apostles Creed: which does not only not
affirm that it is theirs, but suggests that it is not.

Du Pin, who is more judicious and impartial than his Predecessors, grants that
it is the Apostles as to the Doctrine it contains, but denies it to be of their
composure; for he faith they ^' avoient point comopse de formule de foy,
comprise en un certain nombre de mots, have not composed a Formula of Faith
comprised in a certain number of Words: he adds, Irenaeus and Tertullian did
not intend la formule de foy, mais la foy meme, a Creed, or form of Faith, but
the Faith it self. This is the Judgment of Vossius, Erasmus, our Perkins, and
others: however some Men, who make a great noise about Antiquity, are pleased
to take up an Error from others, instead of understanding the Authors they
quote.

Had it not been for these Socinian Impudences discovered in this Letter, and
in the fifth to the Publisher, as well as in other of their Writings both at
home and abroad; I had rested in that of Calvin Instit. l. 2. c. 16. Ser. 18.
Apostolicum nuncupo, de Authore interim minime solicitus: I call it the
Apostles, but in the mean time trouble not my head about the Author.

But after all this, What ground has this Letter for his Confidence? It says,
page 23. this Creed is recited by S. Cyril, S. Cyprian, and Socrates in his
Hist. lib. 1. c. 26. Quotations, that are true Socinian; for they are false,
but if true, are yet insufficient for their end. For did these Authors recite
this Creed, yet how does this prove the Apostolical Composure of it? But Cyril
of Jerusalem explains a Creed peculiar to that Church, which differs nothing
material from that of Nice and Constantinople, except the Consubstantiality The
English Reader may find it at the end of the Life of this Father written by Dr.
Cave. S. Cyprian has it not, unless he means a Piece bound up with him in the
Oxford Edition, which is ascribed by some to S. Jerome, by others to Ruffinus.
Which (if so) must betray either his Ignorance or Sophistry. Socrates indeed
has a Creed in the place quoted, but he there tells us, it was composed by
Arius and Euzoius; and begins thus, (...), (...), (...). We believe in one God
the Father Almighty, and in the Lord Jesus Christ his Son, who was made of him
before all Ages, God the Word, by whom all things were made.

This, he faith, is the Apostles Creed, which he so earnestly contends for;
where observe,

1. What trust we may repose in Socinian Quotations; for if he is so false
where he makes a particular Reference, what must the Reader expect where he
only names an Author? This Answer will prove what I here assert against the
whole Party of 'em, That throughout this Letter, there is not one Quotation in
seven, but what is either false, or not to his Purpose. If they will have this
an Argument of their Learning, they may; but I am sure it is no proof of their
Honesty.

2. The Socinian denies that our Savior did exist before his Incarnation: but
this Creed says, That he was before all Ages, and made all things. I demand
therefore of our Socinians, that they profess this Faith, or acknowledge
themselves the Perverters of Truth, and Debauchers of Antiquity. And indeed
(like the Harpies) they rarely settle upon any place, but they so pollute it,
that it wants a laborious Pen to cleanse, and restore it to it self. He has
then Presumption only, but no color of Proof, that the Apostles composed this
Creed. We therefore proceed to the next part of our Argument.

2. Though this Creed, called the Apostles, does not expressly assert the
Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost, yet it sufficiently teaches both. For,

1. It does style the Son his [only] Son; which Words indeed in themselves
import only this, That he is a Son in such sort as none else is, which the
Socinian would persuade respects not his Divinity, but his being born of a
Virgin: but take them together with the Scriptures, whence they are themselves
taken, and by which they must be explained, and then it will sufficiently
appear that his only Son is a Son by Nature. Whence S. Austin in Symb. l. 1. c.
2. Quando Unicum audis Dei filium, agnosce Deum, the only Son of God is God.
This some other Parts of our Dispute will evince so far as the Letter has led
us to this Argument. But,

2. As to the Holy Ghost, he thinks nothing can be here pretended to prove him
a Divine Person, excepting only the Phrase of believing with the Preposition
[in] which is set also before the Church, and therefore can ascribe a Divinity
to the one no more than to the other.

But his Thoughts are very short, and dull. For though this has been a common
Error, which some at this day will hardly be drawn from; yet we declare that we
neither do, nor need for the establishing this Doctrine, hold any such force in
this Phrase. See Dr. Hammod's Practical Catechism, lib. 5. Dr. Peirson, and
Heylen upon this Article, who absolutely deny it; because not this Creed only,
but all Antiquity apply it to Men, and so do the Sacred Scriptures. They
instance in Exodus 14. 31. The People believed [in] the Lord and [in] Moses; and
1 Samuel 27. 20. Achish believed [in] David. To which we add that of our Blessed
Savior Joh. 5. 45. Moses (...), in whom ye believe, or trust, as we translate
it.

They, with Musculus, and others, impute the Notion to S. Austin and Jerome,
whose Translation first omitted the Preposition in these Texts of the Old
Testament, which other Translations follow.

A little before these Fathers Greg. Naz. acknowledges the Preposition in the
Translations of his time, but yet says this Phrase ought to be applied to none
but the Lord; for the People did believe in Moses not as Moses, but as a Type
of the Lord, and consequently this did not terminate in Moses, but did refer
ultimately to the Lord. But he did not consider that Achish believed in David,
but he could not believe in David as a Type of the Lord, when he knew neither
the Lord, nor that David was any Type at all. Hence Ashwel took his Notion of
the Peoples believing in Moses as subordinate to the Lord; but there could be
no such subordinate Faith in this Heathen Prince, who yet believed in David.
This was therefore an Error growing and settling it self in the Church sometime
before Jerome and Austin; but however it was these two that fixed the Point, and
by that Omission in that Translation, as well as otherwise occasioned others to
ert with them.

But you will say then, where, or how does this Creed teach the Divinity of the
Holy Ghost? I answer that the Son, and the Holy Ghost are put into this Creed
as equally Objects of Faith and Worship with the Father; and this is the very
thing that declares the Divinity of both. Nor is this from Men, but from God;
for it was so done upon the special Precept of our blessed Savior in the form
of Baptism, which is the Original of all Creeds.

I confess the Fathers use this Phrase in their Disputes for a Trinity. So
Greg. Nys. to. 2. cont. Eunom. l. 1. if the Holy Ghost be not God, Ti (...)*
Why do Men believe the H. Ghost? But observe, he does not here Dispute from the
sole force of that Phrase of believing in, but from our believing in the Holy
Ghost as well as in the Father, which makes the Blessed Spirit equally with the
Father a sharer in our Faith, and Adoration. In this sense is Hila. Pict.
Epist. de Trin. l. 9. who teaches that we cannot believe in the Father without
the Son; whence he concludes they must be the same in Nature: But this
Conclusion is drawn not from the Form of the Expression that we believe in, but
from the Matter expressed, that they are both equally the Objects of our Faith.

And indeed there is no such Extravagance in the World as to teach that we
believe in God, in a Creature, and a simple Power; that he, who will not give
his Glory to another, should set a mere Creature, and a naked Power, or
Inspiration, which is no Person, equal with himself in the Faith and Adoration
of his People.

So falsely does this Letter pretend from this Creed, that the Apostles did
believe as the Socinians believe; when neither did the Apostles compose it, nor
is it any way servicable to the Socinian Hypothesis.

SECT. V.
Now, as if he had proved his Point, when he had proved nothing, but what we
may safely grant him, he concludes p. 24. parag. 6. Theirs, viz. the Socinians,
is an Accountable and a Reasonable Faith.

Answ. A Faith just as Reasonable as this Inference: For as this is drawn from
no due Premises, so that stands founded on neither Scripture, nor good
Argument. A reasonable Faith indeed, which makes a Finite God, and an Infinite
Creature! Which denies the Son to be God, and yet does Worship him! A
reasonable Faith, which cannot support itself without expunging some Texts out
of the Sacred Canon, without transposing the parts of others contrary to the
Ancient and most Authentic Reading, and without expounding some contrary to
the very Letter, and most evident Design of the place!

Socinus himself was so sensible of the reasonableness of this Faith, that he
not only rejects the sense of the Church, but in his Epistle to Balcerovicius
he allows the offering any force to the Sacred Scriptures, rather than to their
own Sentiments; in which our present Socinians are his strict Disciples. And de
Jesu Chris. Salvat. parag. 3. c. 6. to. 2. he vents himself thus, if I find
such things, non semel, sed saepe* -- not once, but often in the Scriptures,
non id circo tamen it a re^ pror^us se habere crederem: I will not for all that
belive it. And if this be an accountable and a reasonable Faith, which is
founded not on the Scriptures, but on the Wills of Men, then all Heresies must
be accountable, and reasonable too. But on the contrary, this must be a most
unaccountable, and a most unreasonable, nay a blasphemous, and most dangerous
Faith, which makes the Writings of Socinus, as Ma^^met did his Alcoran, the
Peoples, Bible, and their Rule of Faith!

But that of the Trinitari^^s (he says) is absurd, and contrary both to
Reason, and it self: And therefore is not only false, but impossible. His
Reason is, that we teach there are Three Almighty, and most Wise Persons, and
yet but one God.

Answ. The Scriptures cannot teach any thing absurd or impossible, but the
Scriptures doteach there are three, who are but one God; therefore this
Doctrine of ours is not absurd and impossible. Now that there are three, who
are but one God, is evident as from other Places, so likewise from 1 John 5. 7,
8* There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; and those three are one* And there be three that bear* Witness in
Earth; the Spirit, the Water* and the Blood; and these three agree in one.
Which Texts I will so clear from all their Cavils* that they shall sufficiently
vindicate our Doctrine from being absurd and impossible.

Euiedinus, and the rest, would expunge the last Clause in the 7th Verse, these
three are one. Because*

1. Some Fathers, who wrote professedly on the Trinity, have i^ not: Whence he
makes them to be added by some Enemy of the Arians.

Ans. 1 St. Cyprian in the middle of the Age before Arius has this Text entire
de Unit Ecc^es and St. Jerome soon after Arius censures the Omission of this
Clause. Now that of Eniedinus is impossible, for these Words could not be added
by some Enemy of the Arians, in the time of St. Cyprian, who flourished almost
an Age before Arius himself was. But the careless, or designed Omission of 'em
is necessarily true, because the 4 th Age wanted them, after St Cyprian in the
3 d Age had 'em. Nor do we find many that quarreled with St. Jerome for
censuring this Omission, which some would certainly have done, had he not had a
ground for this Censure: which is an Argument that St. Cyprian himself had this
Clause, and that it was not afterward foysted in by some other hand.

2 They plead, that V. 7. is not in the Syriac, nor Arabic, whence some reject
the whole.

Ans. We grant it; but V. 8. is in both; which is linked to V. 7. by a
Conjunction Copulative [and]; beside which, the Sense, Coherence and Dependence
of these with, and upon one another, speak this imperfect without that. Whence
Beza (whom Letter 4, p. 152 quotes on his side) says both must be expunged, or
retained together; and then concludes for the reteining both. And indeed this
Case is so clear, that since the Socinians receive V. 8, they must receive V.
7. too, or renounce their own reason.

We proceed to confirm the whole Verse to be authentic.

1. These words [I and my Father are one] are allowed on all hands to be St.
John's; therefore rhose Words [these Three are One] from the Likeness both of
Style and Matter, seem to be his too. For such a Likeness between Text and
Text, is as good an Argument (according to the proportion of Matter) to prove
that each have the same Author, as it is between that Gospel and his Epistle;
But all Learned Men allow of this Argument, therefore the Socinian must allow
of that, or differ from the World of the Learned, as they do already from the
World of Christians.

2. Our Learned Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Burnet, in his Letter from Zurie,
observes that among Ten Copies he had seen abroad, Nine had either the 7 th V.
or St. Jerome's Epistle, or Preface, which condems the Omission, while One only
wanted both. Therefore among Ten Copies one only was purely Arian, or Socinian;
because the Omissions in them that wanted, are condemned not only by that
Epistle, or preface, but by them also who added that Epistle or Preface to
those Copies.

3. Suppositions grant nothing; therefore suppose we, that this Text it self is
not authentic; yet the Matter of it is taught by all those Scriptures, which
assert the Divinity of the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and the
Existence of but one God; for they, taken together do assert that these Three
are One; that is, One God, or One in Nature, therefore was the Socinian a Man
of that Reason he pretends, he could not think the expunging this Text out of
the Sacred Canon, of so much moment, when diverse others taken together speak
the same thing. He is then employed about a Work he can never effect; or if
effected, yet can do him but little, if any service. For which reasons they
betake themselves to other Methods.

For they farther plead, If this Text be Authentic yet it cannot intend one in
Nature, but One in Testimony, because each verse speaks of each three as
Witnesses.

Ans. True, each intend Testimony, as Beza Calvin, Erasmus and others observe:
But this does not prove that v 7. intends no more; nor do these Authors Exclude
an Unity of Nature. But the variation of the Phrase implies a restriction of
the matter. For v. 7. says, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are One;
which is equally extendible to Nature, and Testimony: But v. 8. says, the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, agree in One: Which is applicable not to
Nature, but to Testimony, especially where Testimony is mentioned, or evidently
intended; therefore we understand the former of One in Nature, and Testimony
both: else we do not take the Phrase in its full latitude, nor make it comport
with those other Texts, which declare the Divine Nature of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: And yet that these three are but One True, and Almighty God,
because that Nature is numerically one, in which they all agree: But we
understand the latter of Testimony only, because the phrase designs no more,
nor do any other Scriptures declare that the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood,
do agree in Nature, as the other do.

But they insist thus, The Expounding, v. 7. of Nature, does lose the design of
these Texts, which speak of Testimony.

Ans. The Expounding it of Nature only, exclusive of Testimony, would have gave
some color of Reason to his Objection: But we Expound it both of Nature, and
Testimony too; which Exposition does not lose, but secure the design of this
Text. For since they are One in Nature, and that Nature is Divine, they must be
One in Testimony, and that Testimony must be infallible too; because three
Divine Persons, who are one in Nature, can neither agree in a false Testimony,
nor disagree in that Testimony they give.

Can we now think that this Doctrine, which teaches there are Three, who are
but one God, is false, and impossible; when it is so evidently founded on this,
and other concurring Texts, which are the Word of Truth; and which therefore
can teach nothing which is false and impossible? If any thing we teach seems
absurd, and contradictory; or false and impossible (as the Letter words it) it
is not from the Doctrine it self, but from the Socinians Misrepresentation of
it. For,

1. They say we teach that there are but One; hereby suggesting to others, and
arguing themselves, as if we mean in One respect only; which is indeed
impossible. Whereas we teach, that Three in one respect are but One in another;
which (according to their own Doctrine) takes away the Impossibility. For the
Socinian himself grants us, upon these Words, I and my Father are One, that Two
in one respect may be but One in another: And if Two may be One, why not Three?
Since the difficulty lies not between Two and One, but between a Plurality
whether they be Two, or Three, and an Unity. They allow the Thing, it is only
the Modus, or Manner, how Two, or Three, can be but One, in which we differ.
Therefore since we so far agree, they ought to set forth how we hold Three to
be hut One, together with our Reasons for this Doctrine; which would lead even
a prejudiced Reader to some deliberation: and not by a partial and Sophistical
Representation, make our Doctrine seem prima facie, absurd and impossible, to
the end they may huff off all consideration of it.

Indeed their manner of Union is common among Men; but if ours is plainly
founded on Divine Revelation, as we maintain it is, the singularity of the
thing is not able to destroy the Thing it self; and therefore ought in Justice
to be so proposed, as to leave Men to examine and consider it; and not to be
rejected without either.

2. They say, Let. p. 159. we teach there are Three Persons, who are severally,
and each of them the true, and most high God; and yet there is but One true,
and most high God.

Ans. We teach, there are Three Divine Persons, who together are the true and
most high God. They are every one a Divine Person, or God, as they have every
one a Divine Nature; but they are together the true and most high God; as that
Divine Nature is but One, tho common to all Three. The Distinction arises from
the distinct manner of Subsistence; but the Unity from the Sameness of Essence.
This speak Three that are God, but not Three Gods, because these are all within
the Godhead, as having but one and the same Substance; and consequently can be
but One God.

3. Their Objections arise from the want of Parallel Instances in Nature;
whence they speak it absurd, and impossible: but the Absurdity lies on their
side, who measure Supernatural things by Natural, and will believe nothing of
God but what they see in the Creature; as if an Infinite Nature must be in all
things commensurable to the Nature and Thoughts of what is Finite.

4. They declare it absurd and impossible, because we cannot demonstrate the
manner of it, how Three can be but One; when the thing being matter of pure
Revelation we had known nothing of it, unless it had been Revealed; and
therefore now can know no more, than is revealed. Now it is revealed that the
Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; and yet these are not
Three Gods, but One God. But how this is, Revelation does not tell us.
Therefore we are not absurd, who teach what the Scriptures teach; but they are
absurd in demanding more.

The Church indeed uses the distinction of Personal and Essential; that they
are Three Personally, and but One Essentially; that is, they are Three Persons,
and but One God. Not that these Terms are fully, and so clearly expressive of
this Mystery, as to remove all Cavils and Difficulties; but that she may (the
best she can) express her own Sense, the Sense of Antiquity, and the import of
those Scriptures that respect a Trinity. Let them give us more proper, and
significant Terms, and we will use them; but let them not reject a Divine Truth
for the sake of those Terms which Heresy has forced us to make use of.

5. This method of theirs implies a whole train of Absurdities, for we are to
prove, First, [That] a thing is; and then [how] it is: If we prove the former,
that must be granted, because proved; though we should never be able to prove
the Latter. But they (contrary to all the Rules of Art, and method) require us
to prove [how] it is; in order to their believing [that] it is: And do reject
that part, which is proved, only because the other is not. According to this
method they must deny a thousand things, which they see, which all Mankind will
say is absurd with a witness.

They say p. 158, that Interpretation of Scripture can never be true, that
holds forth either a Doctrine, or a Consequence, that is absurd, contradictory,
or Impossible.

Ans. We readily grant it, and such is that of the Anthropomorphites mentioned
in the next Page. For God is a Spirit, but not a Body. Because body is
compounded of parts, is subject to Dissolution, and cannot be in all places at
once; therefore those Scriptures, which ascribe humane parts to God, cannot be
true in a literal sense; but only in an improper one. And when these Men have
proved such an absurdity, contradiction, ot impossibility in the Doctrine of a
Trinity, we will dispute no more.

They may indeed prove that three Men cannot be one; or one Man three; but as
the Learned Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Stillingfleet, observes, they can never
prove that an infinite Nature cannot communicate it self to three different
Subsistences, without such a division as is among created Beings: Because a
Finite capacity can never comprehend the Powers, and Operations of an infinite
Nature. So absurd are these Men as to decry revealed Truths for absurd, and
impossible, only because they cannot understand them. Should they do the like
in natural things, they would quickly become the contempt of Mankind.

We are not ashamed to own a Mystery in the Divine Nature, when we find little
but Mystery in common Nature her self. Nor can we think it unreasonable that
God should command us to believe that a thing is; though he has not told us
how it is; any more than it is unreasonable that Nature should oblige us to
assent, where the most refined reason can find no place of Entrance. God has
revealed so much as is fit for us to know; and ignorance is neither a Sin, nor
a Reproach, where he has not instructed us.

But we must declare it not absurd only, but blasphemous too, to deny what God
has told us, only because he has not told us more; or not baffled our Cavils
by a demonstration; as if, they dare not believe him any farther than they can
see. A right Nicodemus temper, which stumbles at Divine Truths only with an --
How can these things be?

Sect. 6.
From their Reasonable Faith he proceeds to complement its professors for
Learned, and Reasonable Men: Which (he says) is their Character among their
worst Adversaries.

Ans. We do not envy what Learning, and Reason they are thought to have: But we
charge them with the abuse of both* Their Guilt this way will easily appear to
any, that can but understand an Author; their Arguments being fallacious, and
their Quotations false. But as for this Epistler (poor Man) though we cannot
admire his Talents, yet we must declare he misimploys that little he has. This
will abundantly appear as from what he has done, so likewise from his History
of the Sorinians, which we now proceed to.

For p. 26* thus, those, whom we call Socinians, were by the Fathers, and first
Ages of Christianity, called Nazarens, by which name St. Paul is accused before
Felix, Acts 29. 5.

Ans. A Christian signifies a Disciple of Christ; and Nazaren in this place a
Disciple of Jesus of Nazareth: And did then denote nor a Party, but the whole
Body of Christians: So Epiphanius adv. Haer. l. 1. to 2. Haer. 29 (...), all
Christians were then called Nazarens; and that by way of contempt from the
Jews, as they afterward were Galilaeans by the Apostate.

They are indeed branded for a Sect in the place quoted, but not as a party
broke off from the body of Christians, but as the Church of Christ now
separated from the Jews. I beseech you then what peculiar honor, and advantage
can the Socinians claim to themselves from hence, was the thing they plead
true, when, as Christians, they have this honor, but in common with others;
and, as Sorinians, can pretend to but one of the smallest shares of it?

The same Father, c. 7. tells us of a Sect of Nazarens, even before the
Incarnation, tho indeed Petavius rejects the Account; nor can I see any
sufficient grounds for it; but however I mention it to pleasure our Socinians,
who are seeking a Pedigree. Therefore take it thus, some of these (he says)
professed Christ, but denied his Divinity; in other things they were Jews
still* for they observed Circumcision, the Sabbath, and other Ceremonies; and
therefore stood distinct both from Jews and Christians. Whence Jerome* Epist. ad
Aug. gives this Character of 'em; viz. they are called Minaeans, or Nazarens;
sed dum Volunt and Judaei esse, and Christiani; nec Judaei sunt, nec
Christiani; While they would pass both for Jews and Christians, they are
neither. And if these Men will claim from hence, you have in them this
Character of a Socinian, That he is one who is neither* Jew nor Christian.
Hence I suppose this Epistler is none of the Reasonable, or Learned among them,
since he has mentioned this either to no purpose, or to his own disadvantage.

He there says, they were also called Ebionites.

Ans. These were of two sorts, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 27. the one held, that
Christ was born of Joseth and Mary; the other of the Holy Ghost, and the
Virgin. But both observed Jewish Rites, and rejected St. Paul's Epistles,
calling him an Apostate. They received no Gospel but Sr. Matthew, and that
mutilated too: Epiphan. adv. Haer. l. 1. to 2. Haer. 30. which Petavius
observes was depraved by them, and was the same with the Gospel to the Hebrews,
which was used by none but Heretics. Orig. cont. Cells. l. 5. says, they teach
the Law, and reject the Epistles of St. Paul. And Optat* Mileu. l. 4. they held
it was not the Son, but the Father that suffered.

They were these Men who troubled the Apostles, and drew their Disciples back
to Mosaic Rites, under Menander, Cerinthus, and others, whose Heresy was
substantially the same for diverse Ages. Whence St. Paul brands them for False
Brethren, Gal. 2. 4. elsewhere for corrupters of the Word; and such as he in
wait to deceive. This was the Reason they rejected his Epistles, because he so
constantly censures them. And Ebion himself was branded by all Antiquity for
one of the Gnostic Heretics, Tertul* de Praes. Haer. c. 33.

Yet our Socinian Author makes himself, and Party, the same with these! No
matter what poison men suck in* so they deny the Divinity of Christ! This one
Bleasphemy sanctifies all! By this Rule they are the same with Simon Magus, the
Father of Heretics; and with the Devil, the Father of Lies; for they both
denied the Divinity of the Son; the one in making himself a Savior, the other
in tempting him; excepting this, that the Devil afterward confessed this
Truth, which the Socinian still denies. An hopeful Brood indeed, that Glories
in such Fathers.

He proceeds, the Socinians were also called, Artemonites, Theodotians,
Symmachians, Paulinists, Samosatenians, Photinians, and Monarchians.

Ans. Grant this, and it must be granted too, that as these Men were always
condemned for Heretics, so the Socinians were always condemned in them. And
strange it is they should always be in the right, and yet be always condemned
for it?

They were called Artemonites, Photinians, etc. to signify they were the
Followers, not of Christ, but of Artemon, Photinus, etc. And did the Socinians
seriously reflect upon their Blasphemies, and their palpable Corruptions both
of the Letter and Sense of the Sacred Scriptures, as well as of all Antiquity;
it nearly concerns them to consider how far this is applicable to themselves;
that is, in plain English, whether the Name [Socinian] does not better suit
them than that of [Christian.]

The Monarchians boasted, that they held the World was governed by a Monarchy;
that is, by One God, in opposition to the Orthodox, who (they say) introduced
Three Gods, by the Doctrine of a Trinity. Whence I grant, that these, and our
Socinians are Men of the same Pride and Falsehood.

In answer to whom the Orthodox always declared (as we do) that they held no
other than a Monarchy, and that the Doctrine of a Trinity is no way
contradictory to this. For when some in Tertullian adv. Prax. c. 3. cried,
Monarchian tenemus; We profess but One God. he proves, that the Orthodox, or
(If he will) the Trinitarians, did hold but One God too: for Proof of which he
argues, c. 4. that he deduces the Son from the Substance of the Father, and the
Holy Ghost from both; which does no way destroy, but (as he there pleads)
confirms a Monarchy; for being all Three but of One Substance, or Nature, they
can be all Three but One God.

Upon the same bottom the most strenuous asserters of a Trinity did ever
maintain this Doctrine. Athanas. To. 1. cont. Ari. Ora. 5. declares, that the
Government of the World is (...), by but One God. Greg. N^z. who triumphed over
Eunomius, Ora. 35. observes, that there are Three Opinions about God, (...),
(...), and (...); Anarchy, which (with Epicaras) denies the Divine Government;
Pelyarchy, which (with the rest of the Gentiles) asserts its Government by many
Gods; and Monarchy, which is by but One God. The two first (he says) introduce
Confusion, while the last only can keep the World in Order. And Eusebius. de
Eccles. Theol. l. 1. c. 11. observes, that tho the Church teaches that Form
(meaning in the Nicene Creed) God of God, yet she designs hereby not Two Gods,
but Two persons in the God head.

Now had these Sveinians first destroyed this Notion, by proving that a Trinity
must import, not Three persons in the God head, but Three Gods; and then valued
themselves upon these Names of Monarchians, and Unitarians, they had acted like
Men: But their insisting upon these terms without disproving our Doctrine,
speaks them as wretched as their Cause; the one Barren, the other Blind, since
both are forced to call in exploded Cavils to support them.

Hence he proceeds to Glory in some Men of Name among them, as Theodotion and
Symmachus, both of whom Translated the Old Testament into Greek, and by
Eusebius are called Ebionites, or Nazarens.

Ans. Eusebius speaks them Ebionites, but not a word there of a Nazaren; under
which name he vainly strives to sweeten himself, and Party; that they might
seem to appear with some little face of honest Christianity.

We acknowledge their Translation of the Old Testament, but being branded for
Ebionites, we must presume they denied great part of the New: As for Symmachus,
he is expressly said to reject the Gospel of St. Matthew. Therefore since our
Socinians so passionately desire to pass for Ebionites, that I may gratify 'em
what I can; I grant 'em there is one good reason why it should be so, and that
is, as the Ebionites reject some parts of Scripture, and corrupt others; so do
the Socinians too; and now at length scoff at the Divine Authority of the
Whole. The matter is too plain to be denied; I have sometimes heard it my self,
and know of persons that complain of some under their charge, that are
debauched in their Principles and Manners by such Doctrines. But whether these
are the strict fort of Socinians, or Socinians at large* viz. Atheists and
Deists that now heard among them, I think they ought to acquaint us.

But let old Theodotion, and Symmachus be what they will, what is the Glory of
having these two on their side, when the whole Church was against them? It must
be a miserable Crap, where such gleanings are their Vintage.

But they have a third, it seems, Paulus of Samasatum, p. 27* a Man both
Learned and Eloquent.

Ans. He did indeed deny the Divinity of the Son, which is the only thing (it
seems) that makes him great and good. For Eusebius H. l. 7. c. 27. and the
Synodical Letter, c. 30. say, He had neither Wealth, nor Learning, but made
himself vastly rich by Sacriledg, and Oppression. His Pride was unmeasurable,
be walked the Streets with Guards -- He abolished the Psalms Sung in Honor of
our Savior, and had others Sung in praise of himself. He encouraged, and
protected the Wicked, gaining to his side the worst of men.

Prateolus among other things says, He was proud and simple. He taught that
Christ was more for the Jewish than the Christian Religion; whence he taught
Circumcision: Of a Beggar he became Rich by Sacriledg, Oppression and Knavery.

These are the Characters of an Heretie, which neither himself nor Friends
could ever Answer, and whom the vilest object would blush to own, unless a
Socinian, who would fain Adorn themselves with this man's Glories; like the wild
Savages, who dressed up themselves with the guts of Beasts.

His next man i Photinus of Si^mium, who being deposed by the Council, his City
would not part from him, till the Emperor sent an Army to Expel him.

Ans. 1. Praleonus, Haev l. 14. 25* says, Photinus held that Christ was a mere
Man, Ex utroque sexu natum, born of both Sexes; but this the Socinians deny,
for they hold he was Born of the Holy Ghost, and of the Virgin; therefore this
letter is false in reckning Photinus one of them.

2. But however an Heretic he was, and therefore a Party with the Socinians;
and (it seems) so dear to his City, that the Emperor was obiiged to Expel him
by an Army. Suppose it; yet had this man considered how often Constantius
imposed his Arian Creatures by Force and sometimes Established 'em by Blood; he
must have expected to lose more than he thought to have gained by this Plea.

3. This is an Appeal from the Government both Civil, and Ecclesiastical to the
Mob; an Argument that his Heresy had left him but few, if any Friends of Sense
and Judgment.

He proceeds to Eusebius, H. l. 5. c. 2 and Theodoret. Haer. Fab. c. 2. de
Artem. And pretends, they say, that these Nazarens constantly affirmed, that
they derived their Doctrine from the Apostles, -- And that it was the genenal
Doctrine of the Church, till the Popes, Victor and Zepherine, set themselves to
root it up.

Ans. Neither of these in the places quoted, mention a Nazaren: But the Heresy
of Arlemon, renewed by Paulus Samofatensis, who taught that Christ is no more
than Man.

Eusebius says indeed, there were some who affirmed that all the Ancients, and
the Apostles themselves, taught this Doctrine, and that it continued till
Victor and Zepherine. But he calls this an impiouse Lie, and proceeds, Perhaps
this might seem credible, did not the sacred Scriptures, and the Writings of
certain Brethren, more Ancient than Victor, contradict them; I mean Justin,
Miltiades* Tatian, Clemens and many others* in all whose Books the Divinity of
Christ is taught. For who knows not the Writings of Irenaeus, Melito, etc in
which Christ is set forth as both God and Man? The Psalms and Canticles of the
Brethren written (...), from the beginning -- ascribe a Divinity to him. Seeing
then this was so long since the Doctrine of the Church, how can it be, that all
men to the time of Victor could teach that Doctrine which these men hold? --

Theodoret, in the place cited, says, that Artemon pretended the Apostles
taught that Christ was a mere Man, (...). Perverting the sense of the Sacred
Scriptures. This exactly agrees with that of Eusebius Therefore this Letter
wisely refers us to those very places of Antiquity, which declare that Doctrine
to be Heresy, and condemn the Maintainers of it of Falsehood and Impudence,
which yet it self would support. He told us the Socinians are Learned and
Reasonable Men, but I hope this is not one of his Proofs of it.

However, the Letter proceeds, Victor (say the Socinians) began to persecute
the Apostolic Doctrine of One God, or (which is the same) that God is One in
the Year 194 but with little success, till that which was afterward the
Doctrine of the Arians, grew into general credit; -- for Justin Martyr, Origin,
and other principal Fathers, teaching (as the Arians afterward did) that the
Father is before the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in Time, Dignity, and Power; yet
that the Word, or Son, -- was ereated sometime before the World, -- and that
the Holy Ghost was the Creature of the Son.

Ans. The Letter tells us, That the Socinians say this; and indeed it may pass
for a Socinian Story; for it has not one Word of Truth in it. For,

1. The Doctrine of One God, or that God is One; that is, One person, as they
explain it, never was the Apostolic Doctrine, as Eus^bius, now quoted by
himself, does declare, both from the Scriptures, and from the most ancient
Fathers, as well as from the Hymns composed in honor of Christ, from the
beginning of the Cospel.

2. The Doctrine of One God, or that God is One; that is, not One person
exclusive of other persons, but One God exclusive of other Gods, was the
Doctrine of the Apostles and Apostolic Men, appears from the same place in
Eusebius, and from all the same Topics already mentioned.

3. That Victor did persecute, and root out the Heresy be contends for, does
not appear from any Monuments of those times, nor is in any reason to be
supposed, because that Heresy had not then obtained in that Church; and what
he did was only (according to the common Rules, and Practice of the Church) to
quash this Heresy in its beginning.

4. The Letter makes it, that that pretended Persecutition did little succeed,
till it was assisted by the Doctrine of Justin Martyr, and Origin, which
supposes that their Doctrine began under that Persecution, which is impossible:
for this Persecution (the Letter says) began A. D. 194. but Justin suffered
about 30 years before that time, and Origin did not appear till the middle of
the Age after. And,

5. Neither these, nor any other Fathers, from the Apostles, to Origin, did
ever teach any such Doctrine, which might be easily proved by an induction of
Particulars, so far as their Works are come down to our hands.

Justin Martyr says indeed, Apol. p. 60. that beside the Father, we worship
the Son, (...), in the second place; and the Holy Ghost, (...), in the third.
Now here is a Priority of Order or Prace; but where is that of Time and Power?
Not in this Father, I am sure, but in the Socinian Comment only. We charge him
with Falsehood; let him clear himself by a particular Reference.

What Justin here says, ever was, and still is the Doctrine of the Church. So
Novat. de Trin. c. 31. Pater qua pater -- the Father, as Father, is before the
Son, and yet he declares, that the Son is coeternal and co-essential with the
Father; which speaks (as we said) a Priority of Order or Place, but not of
Time, because the Father and Son are coeternal.

This must necessarily be the Sense of our Justin; for in the same Apology, p.
64. he says, (...) We worship God only. Wence any Man in his Wits must
conclude, that they held, that Father, Son and Holy Ghost are God; Else how
could they worship all Three* and yet worship none but God? And if they are
God, they cannot be after the Father, in Time, or Power, but must be
coeternal, and coequal with him.

Had Justin taught, that the Son, and Holy Ghost are after the Father in time,
and yet had worshipped them, he would hereby have totally ruined the very
Reason, and Design of this, as well as of other Apologies; which were purposely
written to justify the Christians, who suffered any thing rather than worship
the Gentile Gods, for this very Reason, that they were not from Eternity, and
consequently were not Gods, but Creatures. Our Socinian (it seems) thinks it
enough to Name an Author, tho he can find nothing in him to his purpose; having
neither Authority, nor Argument for what he says.

Iren l. 3. c 26. Endeavors to prove that the Son is God by Nature, and after
some time spent on this Argument, thus diligenter, igitur significavit Spiritus
Sanctus, per ea quae dicta sunt, generationen ejus quae ex Virgin, and
substatiam quoniam deus. The blessed Spirit diligently signifies by what things
are spoken, his Generation, which is of the Virgin, and his substance as he is
God. By his Generation he intends his humane Nature, and by his Substance as
God the Divine. This (he says) is expressed, Isa. 7. 14. by that word
[Immanuel] God with us, of God in our Nature. He proceeds; his humanity appea^s
from his eating Butter, and Honey, and his Divinity from his choosing the good,
and refusing the Evil, v. 15. This last (he says) is added, least by his
eating Butter, and Honey, mude solummodo eum hominem intelligeremus, we should
think he is merely Man: And again the Word [Immanuel] intimates that we cannot
see God in his own Nature, but as he is manifested in our's. It is therefore
impossible that Irenaeus should hold that the Son is God as to Title, or Office
only, as the Arians afterward did; when he so plainly teaches that he
understood him to be God in the Trinitarian sense, and that is in Substance, or
Nature.

This shows what sense we are to take him in, l. 1. c. 2. where he lays down
this as one Article in the Christian Faith, that Christ is Lord, and God* which
Faith (he faith) the Church throughout the World received, (...), (...) From
the Apostles, and Apostolic Men: And c. 3. this Faith the Church keeps as if
she had but one Soul, and but one Heart; where observe

1. That [God] must here signify God by Nature, or Substance, because he so
explained himself in the place before quoted.

2. It is impossible that the Doctrine against the Divinity of the Son could be
the Doctrine of the Church from the Apostles to Victor; when the Deity of the
Son was the Doctrine of the whole Church from the Apostles to Irenaeus; who was
cotemporary with Victor, as appears from the Fragments of his Epistle to this
Victor himself in Eusebius. H. l. 5. c. 24.

Clemens of Alexandria, who flourished under Victor, and Zepherine both* is as
clear in this matter, ^as Pen can write, for he not only says adm. ad Gent.
that Christ is (...). both God and Man; and Paed. l. 2. he is (...). which I
can render no better than in the Words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God
manifest in the Fiesh, but he also ascribes those things to the Son, which all
Men must grant us, can be true of none, but God: For Strom. l. 7. the Son is
(...) indivisible, removes not from place to place; but is in all places, but
is contained in none. Again he is (...) all Mind, all Eye, beholding all
things. This sufficiently proves Clemens no Arian, since he so manifestly
declares the Divine nature of the Son.

Strom. l. 5. he Collects certain Notions out of Plato, which (he says) can
signify nothing else, but (...). the Holy Trinity. For he puts the Father as
the cause of all things, then descends to (...), and to (...) a second, who is
conversant about second things, and to a third, who is employed about third
things; he seems to understand by the former the Son, who continues; and by the
latter the Holy Ghost, who finishes things. This (he says) Plato had from the
Hebrews; which Argument he abounds in, pleading that the Gentiles had their
choicest Notions from the Jews mediately, or immediately.

But whether this was the sense of Plato or not; is totally foraign from my
Argument. It is enough to me that this Father is so far from being either Arian
or Socinian, that he looked upon the Doctrine of a Trinity as so plain a Truth,
that he thought an Heathen could spell it out of the Old Testament.

Tertullian wrote under Zepherine, if not under Vict r too; and yet adv. Prox.
c. 2. satih, the Divinity of the Son was taught from the beginning: and what he
understands by his Divinity, himself explains c. 3. where he declares that the
Son is of the same Substance with the Father.

These are most undeniable Proofs of the shameless impudence of this Letter,
which will have all the principle Fathers of those times to be Patrons of the
Arian Herefy.

As for Origin, he not only lived in the Age after Victor, but also upon Revel.
1. 8. I am Alpha, and Omega,, the first, and the last, -- the Almighty; does
declare that in these words St. John asserts the Divinity of the Son.

These things so totally ruin this part of the Letter, which would have
Arianism the swaying Religion of those times, that I should persuade my self
they would never more offer these falsehoods to the World; did I not find, they
have the Confidence to revive old rotten Heresies; and both to adorn, and
support their own by them, who were the worst of Men, as well as the most
erroneous of Christians.

However the Letter proceeds p. 28, 29 this Doctrine being advanced by Justin,
Origin, and others, became the more current Doctrine of the Church, till in the
Council of Nice it was Condemned, and another more popular (and so more taking)
than that (as attributing to the Son Eternity, and Equality with the Father)
did generally obtain.

Ans. As Justin, Origin, and others of Note in the Church (as the Letter
speaks) never taught any such Doctrine; so the Council of Nice did Establish no
other, but what had always been the Doctrine of the Church, according to that
of Athanasius de Synod. Nicaen. decret. (...), (...) the Faith Established at
Nice, is the Faith of the Catholic Church. What this Father says, we may
easily prove both as to the Doctrine it self, and also as to the terms, that
express it.

1. The Doctrine Established at Nice is this, that the Son is of the same
Substance, Essence, or nature with the Father; and therefore is properly God as
the Father is; but that this was always the Doctrine of the Church, is
sufficiently evident from what we have already cited from Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Clemens of Alexandria, and Tertullian. To whom I shall add Ignatius,
who was cotemporary with the Apostles.

That his Epistles are Genuine, is acknowledged by their beloved Sandius; and
is Proved by Doctor Peirson against Dailly, even to the shame of all future
doubts, and opposition. These often style the Son God, Epist. ad S nyr. begins
thus, (...) I glorify Jesus Christ, who is God. And p. 7. Vos. Edit. he
asserts the Divinity again. But I refer the Reader to one Place, which can
never be evaded by any Arian, or Socinian Artifice; and that in his Epist. ad
Ephesians. there is (...), (...), (...). (...), (...). (...), (...). In which words
the Author does distinguish between the Humane and Divine Nature of Christ; for
he Catnal and Spiritual; of Mary and of God; he is begotten and unbegotten; i.
e. begotten as Man, and unbegotten as God: For his Eternal Generation respects
not his Nature, by which he is God, but his Person, by which he is the Son of
God. Again, he is passible, and impassible; that is, passible, as Man; so not
only his Body was peirced* and crucified; but Mat. 26. 38. his Soul was (...),
exceeding sorrowful; or encompassed round with Sorrows; whence proceeded his
Agonies and Bloody Sweat: therefore he is Impossible only as God. This (I
think) considered together with the whole Quotation, demonstrates, that it is
the Design of this Author to assert the Divine Nature of Christ, because
nothing but that can be Unbegotten, and Impassible.

2. The Terms in which this Council does assert the Divine Nature of the Son,
are, that the Son is (...), consubstantial, or of the same Substance with the
Father; but this was no invention of that Council. For Iren. l. 3. c. 26. but
now quoted, says* that his generation of the Virgin speaks him man; but his
substance speaks him God: And if so, he must be God in substance; and if God in
substance, he must be as the same substance with the Father; because there can
be but one Divine Substance, Essence, or Nature; as there is but One God.

Tertullian is more large in this Point; for adv. P^ax. c. 2. and 3. he
expressly says, that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are Three; -- non
substantia, not in Substance; that is, they are not substantially distinct; but
they are Vnius substantiae, of one, and therefore of the same Substance. Now, I
pray, what is the difference between the Fa h r and the Son's being Vnius
Substantiae, of our Substance; and between the Son's being (in the Phrase of
Nice) (...) consubstantial with the Father? Even none. For he that is
consubstantial with another, must be of the same substance with that other.

In the same place the same Father varies the Phrase, but keeps to the matter;
saying, that he deduces the Son de Substantia Patris, from the Substance of the
Father; which implies what is imported by the two other Phrases. And this (he
says) was taught ab i^tio Evangelii, from the beginning of the Gospel.
Therefore the Nicene Council did determine no more in this partscular, than
what was taught by the Church, even from the beginning of the Church it self.

So plain is it, that the Nicene Fathers did neither invent any New Terms, nor
impose any New Doctrine; but did only declare and confirm that which was the
Doctrine of the* hurch from the Apostles themselves. This gives Credit to not
only what we have quoted from Athunasius already, but also to that Passage in
his Epistle ad Episc. in Afric. that the Bishop of Rome and Alexandria, did
from an hundred and thirty years since condemn those who denied that the Son is
of the same Substance with the Father.

But the Arian Doctrine, which teaches, that the Son was indeed before the
World, but not from Eternity; and that there was a Time in which the Son was
not, is no where found in the First Ages of the Church; but was condemned as a
New Monster in Religion in the Fourth. So Athanas. cont. Art. Or a. 2. (...) --
who has heard such things as these? And (...), (...). This is not from the
Fathers, but is of Yesterday. And Hilar. Pict. Episc. ad Constant. August. l.
it is novella lu^s, a New Pest; a Pest that has no more of Antiquity, than of
Trnth to sweeten it.

And indeed it was not any of the ancient Fathers (as this Letter falsely
pretends), but Arius, a Presbyter of Alexandria, in the 4 th Age of the Church,
that invented that Heresy, from whom it took the Name of Arianism. As he was
she first, who in this way sought to undermine, and subvert the Divinity of the
Son, so he had somewhat a like Exit with Judas, who betrayed him. For as this
Traitor burst asunder, and his Bowels gushed out; so this Heretic, presently
upon his Perjury, whereby he would seem to abjure, but still retain the Poison
of his Heresy, voided his bowels in a common Jakes.

This was thought a Warning-Piece to the Arians then* and ought to be
considered by the Socinians now; since they have improved this Heresy, as the
Pharisees did their Proselytes, by making it sevenfold more the Child of Hell
than it was; it being in some degrees more gross* daring, and anti-scriptural;
and carried on by no less Falsehood, Treachery, and Wickedness than the other;
excepting the Formality of an Oath, and that Blood, and Tortures, which these
Men have not the power of.

The Letter proceeds, p. 29. But did Superstition stop here ^ No. For there
shortly arose another Doctrine, that the Son and Holy Ghost, are the sa^e God
with the Father, not only (as the Nicene Fathers explained the Matter) by Unity
of Wills, and specific Identity, or sameness of Substance, but by numerical,
or true Identity, and sameness of Substance and Nature.

Ans. 1. This Council did intend a numerical Unity, or sameness of Substance*
that there might be no room left for any Cavils about three Gods.

2. The Church was so far from any new Doctrine, that that Age, as well as the
next did celebrate this Creed as the standing Rule of Faith to all the
Churches. Epiphan. adv. Haer. l 2. to c. Haer. 72. calls it (...) the
Ecclesiastical Rule of Faith. Greg. Nys. to 2. cart. Eunom. l. 1. in our Creed
there is (...) the word consubstantial, which must be the Creed of Nice* and
yet this is Ours. Basil to 3 Epistle 6. recites this, and calls it the Creed
(...), in use with you. Ambros. de fid. l. 1. c. 8, 9. quotes part of this
Creed about the Consubstantiality, and then says, this is the Doctrine of the
Church, which anathematizes them* that teach otherwise. And Evag. H. l 3. c.
17. this was used in Baptism then, as the Creed called the Apostles is now with
us; and was confirmed by the next General Council at Constantinople.

They all kept up to this Rule, and intended the same thing; though they did
not all agree in the manner of explaining, and proving it. What room then there
could be here left for any new Doctrine soon after this Council at Nice, I am
yet to learn.

Sect. 7.
Hence he proceds to some Eminent Authors, who (the Letter says) are either
Arian or Socinian.

1. Erasmus is thought an Arian, p. 31. to color which pretense, he quoates
him upon Philip. 2. 6. and Ephesians. 5. 5.

Ans. The former Text, he thinks, does respect not his Nature, but the manner
of his appearance and behavior: But yet he grants us that Christ is God,
though he thinks this Text does not prove it. And on Ephesians. 5. 5. the Kingdom
of God, and of Christ: he declares that these words do not deny the Divinity of
the Son.

But had this Letter pursued Truth, and not the support of an Error, it would
likewise have told the Reader, that upon John 1. 1. The Word was God; he
asserts that there is Divinam Essentiam tribus personis Communem; a Divine
Essence common to three Persons: Which is all we contend for; and which alone
speaks Erasmus himself as true a Trinitarian, as the Author of the Athanasian
Creed.

His Paraphrase upon this clause [in the beginning was the Word] says, the
Eternal Word was with the Eternal Father] yet by the Word he understands not
the Command, Power or Wisdom of God, but a Person, as appears from the last
quotation before this; and consequently he here asserts both the Personality,
and Eternity of the Word, which is the very Doctrine we teach.

John 8. 5, 8. before Abraham was, I am, he renders, Pri^squam nasceretur,
before Abraham was born; to the end he might distinguish (as he says himself):
the manner of Abraham's Existence from Christ's. Abraham was in time, but
[semper est Christus] Christ is always; which directly contradicts both the
Socinian, who denies Christ's Existence before his Incarnation; and also the
Arian, who denies his Existence from Eternity. Upon these words he quotes St.
Austin, who glosses thus, Abraham was made, but Christ is; that denotes a
Creature, this a being Eternally existing.

It is plain then that Erasmus taught a Trinity. And certainly he would not
think that the ignorant, and dull side of the question (as the Letter speaks)
which he teaches for Orthodox Divinity. All the difference between him and our
selves is this; that we agree in the same Doctrine, but differ only in some of
those Mediums that should prove it. For which reason he ought to be read with
caution and judgment.

The Letter says that this Author in his Scholia on the third tome of St.
Jerome's Epistles, denies that the Arians are Heretics.

Ans. Had he told us upon what Epistle these Scholia are, we might have
examined the place without much loss of time: But I presume, he thinks himself
safe under so loose a Reference, hoping none will turn over a Volume to
disprove him.

In his Epistle to Bilibaldus thus, I (says Erasmas) could be of the Arian
persuasion, if the Church approved it.

Ans. The Author thus, cum Arianis, and Pelagianis sentire possim, si probasset
eccesia quod illi docuerunt: Nec mihi non sufficient verba Christi, sed mirum
videri non debet, si sequor interpretem Ecclesiam, cujus Authoritate persuasus
credo Scripturis Canonicis. I could be of the same mind with the Arians, and
Pelagians, if the Church had approved what they taught: Not that the words of
Christ do not satisfy me, but it ought not to seem strange, if I follow the
Judgment of the Church, by whose Authority I believe the Canonical Scripture,
which place is certainly against him: For

1. He says the words of Christ do satisfy him, i. e. as to Arianism, and
Pelagianism, before mentioned.

2. He puts Arianism, and Pelagianism together, implying that he had no more
favor for that, than for this; which I do not remember he was ever charged
with. Therefore

3. His design is not to favor this, or the other Heresy, but only to show how
far he could give up his Faith to the Judgment of the Church: And consequently
his own sense must be much distant from both these Persuasions, else this could
be no Argument of his wonderful submission to the Churches Authority.

A Romanist may make good advantage of this, and therefore the Paris Doctors
never put it among their Censures: But it no more helps the Socinian, than the
things he calls his Arguments, and Demonstrations.

He proceeds p. 31. Grotius is Socinian all over, and p. 32. there is nothing,
in all his Annotations which they, viz. the Socinians, do not approve, and
applaud.

Ans. Upon Joh. 1. 1. these words [in the beginning] Grotius will have to be
taken from Genesis 1. 1. and understands them of the Creation properly, or of the
beginning of the Creature: As he does also v. 2. [by him were all things made.]
For which he quotes the Epistle of Barnabas, Justin, Athenagoras, Tatian,
Tertullian, and others.

This word [was] he renders jam tum erat, then was, or did exist, when all
Creatures began: By which Existence before time he understands an Eternal
Existence: And yet he holds the [Word] or Son not for the Command or simple
Power of God, but for a Person. Where observe that Grotius teaches that the Son
is a Person eternally existing, who (in a proper sense) made, or created the
World, and if either Arian or Socinian approve, or applaud this they must each
depart from his own Heresy.

Therefore when upon those words, Colos. 1. 16. by him; viz. the Son; as
Grotius himself takes it, were all things, (...) [created]; he says, this word
is sometimes applied to the New Creature; we must understand him, as showing
the Various Acceptations of the word, not as designing hereby to deny the Son
to be Creator, because he so expressly ascribes Creation to him upon that Text
of St. John.

3. In p. 32. he pretends, that Petavius grants, that the Fathers before the
Nicene Council, did agree in their Doctrine concerning God, with the Socinian,
and concerning the Son, and Holy Spirit, with the Arians.

Ans. 1. Petavius says no such thing. Let the Socinian vindicate himself, by
referring us to the places.

2. Had he said so, the Quotations we have given the Readet out of Ignacius,
Justin; Iraeneus, Clemens, Tertullian, and others, would abundantly confute him.

3. Patanius himself was a Trinitarian, as appears from what he has wrote upon
this Argument* And,

4. He did not accuse these Fathers of Arianism, or Socinianism, but only
censured some of those Arguments, by which they would establish the Doctrine of
a Trinity.

4. The Letter reports Episcopius suspected of Arianism p 34, 35. he says, the
Father is so first, as to be first in Order (i. e. in time.)

Ans. 1. Episcopius says, the Father is first in Order which we all grant: But
it is the Socinian Comment, that makes the first in Order to be the first in
time, which we deny. Because though the Father is first in Order, yet the Son
is Coeternal with the Father, as before.

2. This Author denies a Co-ordination, and asserts a Subordination of Persons
in the Trinity: But this Subordination does not destroy, but only Explains the
Doctrine of a Trinity, as is noted already. And,

3. In his Institut. Theol. l. 4. c. 32. He ascribes a Divine Nature to Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and teaches that they are all properly Persons: And if
this be Arianism, or Socinianism, we are all such.

5. He Complements his dear Friend Sandius for a Gentleman of Prodigious
Industry, and Reading: and no less ingenious than Learned.

Ans. Whatever his Industry, and Learning was, I m^st deny both his Judgment
and Honesty.

1. His Judgment. For he knows not how to distinguish between the genuine,
doubtful, and spurious Writings of the Ancients; but thinks Clemens the Father
of the Constitutions under his Name: Which is utterly impossible, because l. 7*
c. 48. the Author mentions three Bishops of Jerusalem made by the Apostles;
James, Simeon, and Judas: But St. John, the last of the twelve Died, and this
Clemens himself suffered Martyrdom in the year 100. while Simeon lived about
seven years after: How then the Apostles could appoint Judas his Successor, or
Clemens, their Scribe Record it, neither their Learned Sandius, nor our
Socinians, those Men of Wit, and Reason, can resolve me. They, as well as the
Apostolic Canons, were probably written about the end of the Second Century,
and seem to owe themselves (excepting their Corruptions) to Clemens of
Alexandria.

He receives likewise the Epistles ascribed to Ignatius; and de Vet. Script.
Eccles. he would prove the Legitimacy of that ad Philip. by this Argument, viz.
Origin, who flourished about the middle of the Third Age, has something upon
St. Luke, like something in that Epistle; where observe.

1. Origin does not mention either Ignatius, or this Epistle.

2. Ignatius, and Origin might hit upon somewhat like Notions without
Communication. And,

3. These ascribed Epistles are not mentioned by Eusebius, Jerome, or any other
hefore them; whence we ought in all reason to reject them. Dr. Peirson, late
Bishop of Chester observes, they appeared not till 400 years after Ignatius,
whence he declares them spurious Vind. Epist. 8. Ignat. c. 10.

2. By such intolerable Errors he creates difficulties to himself. For the
design of his History is to prove that all Antiquity is Arian: Bur the Epis. ad
Heron. which is one of the ascribed, says, that if any asserts that Christ is
(...), a mere Man (which phrase was always used in opposition to his Divinity*
Iren. l. 3. c. 26. and Eusebius in the case of Ebion) the same is a Jew and a
Murderer of Christ. Now had he like a Man of Art, and Judgment, rejected these
Epistles, he had removed this Block, at which he must now stumble and fall.

2. I deny his Honesty. For Hist. l. 1. Secul. 1. he will have the Creed called
the Apostles, to be composed by them, to be the only Creed used in the Church;
and that very Creed too, which was established at Nice: And that Evag. H. l. 3.
c. 17. saying, we are Baptized into a Creed composed by 318 Bishops, intended
no other but this: When this was never mentioned in that Council, and the
Concert is totally Ruined by the Testimonies we have already produced upon this
Argument, Sect. 4.

Should I draw out all the instances of weakness and knavery, I should leave
but little of that book behind me. A fit man for an Ecclesiastical Historian,
whose want of Judgment, and Honesty makes his writings like a sword in some
men's hands, dangerous to them, that come in the reach of it. Sure I am, no
Student ought to read him till he is well acquainted with the true state, and
doctrine of antiquity. His accounts of antiquity, and the brief history of the
Socinians, may go together; and if each will be pretenders to wit, and reason,
I matter not, so long as we have on our side better pretensions to truth, and
Honesty.

Dr. Wallis in one of his letters gives an account of this Sandius's
conversion, and his dying in the Trinitarian Faith. I earnestly pray that the
same Mercy, and Goodness, would open the eyes of all Arians and Socinians, that
they may no longer lie under strong delusions, and the belief of a Lie but may
come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved.

FINIS.
Boeks Printed for John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street.
AN Enquiry into Several Remarkable texts of the old and new Testament, which
contain some difficulty in them: with a probable Resolution of them, In two
parts. By John Edwards, B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in
Cambridge.

A new Discourse of Trade, wherein is Recommended several weighty Points
relating to Companies of Merchants. The Act of Navigation, Naturalization of
Strangers; and our Woollen Manufactures, the Balance of Trade, and the nature
of Plantations, and their Consequences in Relation to the Kingdom, are
seriously Discussed. And some Proposals for erecting a Court of Merchants for
determining Controversies, relating to Maritime Affairs, and for a Law for
Transferrance of Bills of Debts, are humbly Offered. By Sir Josiah Child.

Miscellaneous Essays: By Monsieur St. Euremont, Translated out of French, with
a Character, by a Person of Honor here in England, continued by Mr. Dryden.

Monarchia Microcosmi: The Origin, Vicissitudes, and Period of Vital Government
in Man. For a farther Discovery of Diseases, incident to Human Nature. By
Everard Maynwaringe, M. D.


