THE Peacemaker; OR, TWO Farewel-Sermons PREACHED AT ST. DUNSTANS In the West,
London, August the 17th 1662.

By WILLIAM BATES D. D. late Preacher of the Gospel there.

2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally Brethren, farewell; Be perfect, be of good comfort; be
of one mind; live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you.
Printed in the year, 1662.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
THese two ensuing Sermons, being taken by the careful hand of a ready Writer,
and a very good friend of the Reverend Authors, to prevent abuse by imperfect
Copies (which we hear are coming forth) they are exposed to public view; and
if we may estimate them by the worth of the Author, and seasonableness of the
subject, we cannot imagine but that they will be much valued when they come
abroad; seeing they are not only his last words, but in that they present to
all men such a pattern of peace, as the God of peace, and the necessity of
following peace with all men, in a way of holiness, without which no man shall
see God. We need not mention the vast difference betwixt hearing and reading,
or the luster lost in Printing, which words had in delivering neither how
neatly they might have been clothed if sent abroad by the Author; all that we
shall say, is, thou have them in such adress as they were clad with in their
first delivery: and be they read with as good affection, as they were preached,
and heard, through the Spirits assistance will not prove as a dead letter.

Farewell. N. D.

SERMON I.
Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ:
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
IT would give light to these words, if you consider the scope and design of
the Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews, the sum of which is, He writes to
them, that he might animate their spirits against Apostasy from the Doctrine of
the Gospel; they were liable to this upon a double account: (1) Partly in
respect of those Persecutions to which they were exposed; for the Jews were
filled with a brutish zeal for the Ceremonies of the Levitical Law, and
expressed the greatest rancour against those, who left Moses to follow Christ.
This is the Reason why the Apostle lays down so many preservatives against
their revolting from Religion; and he spends one part of this Epistle in a most
passionate exhortation to perseverance, and does in the tenth Chapter insinuate
himself into them; You have already tasted the first fruits of affliction,
verse. 34. You took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves,
that you have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. This is that
temper that Martyrs have expressed, who have not only parted with their goods,
but with their lives for the Gospel: When they came to the Stake, they would
not so much as shed a tear to quench those flames, wherein they should ascend
to God as in a fiery Chariot, You took joyfully the spoiling of your goods,
knowing in your selves, that you have a better and an enduring substance. Thus
he insinuates himself, by representing what they had done, to encourage them to
perseverance; and partly he fortifies them against Backsliding, by those
terrible judgments which he threatened against Revolters, as you may read, chap.
6, and 7. (2) As they were liable to this Apostasy upon the account of
Persecution, so upon the account of the unsettledness and instability of their
own spirits. There were several of those who had given up their names to
Christ, who did compare the Ceremonies of the Law with the purity of the
Gospel: Now the Apostle, to secure them from this mixture, his great design is
to represent the vanity and infectiveness of all the Ceremonial Law, and to
express and prove the virtue and efficacy of the Lord Jesus his death, which
was the substance of all the shadows. And this takes up one great part of his
discourse with them.

Now in these two verses he sums up, by way of Recapitulation, all that which
he had discoursed of at large; and in them you may observe these two things:
(1) A Description of God, to whom he addresses this prayer. (2) The Substance
of the prayer it self.


The Description of God, that he amplifies by these two things: (1) From the
Attributes and Qualities of God, (if I may so express it) Now (says he) the
God of peace. (2) From the effects of his power and love, That brought again
from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep. And these
Titles, they are not here set down to adorn his discourse, merely as an
ornament, but they have all a peculiar efficacy, as to the obtaining of the
request which here he makes for them.

I shall begin with the first, the Description of God, from that Attribute.
(Now the God of peace) The Title that is used in the Old Testament frequently
is this, [The Lord of Hosts] but in the New he is called, The God of peace.
There were darker representations of the mercy and love of God then, the more
full discoveries of his grace were reserved til the coming of Christ: Their
discoveries under the Old Testament were but as the Day Star, which ushered in
the Sun of Righteousness. Now this Title of the God of peace imparts two things.

(1) That he is the Author of peace, and works it. (2) That he loves and
delights in peace.
First, That he is the Author of it: And if you consider Peace in all its
notions and kinds, it is a fruit of God, and that which descends from him. (1)
Peace in Nature is the harmony that is between all the parts of the world, the
union that is between the dis-agreeing Elements, this is from God; for without
him, the whole Creation would presently disband, and return to its first Chaos
of confusion. (2) Civil Peace, which is among the Societies of men; that which
is so amiable and lovely, and which needs no other foil to commend it, and set
off its luster, than the miseries of War; this Peace comes from God also: When
there is a subjection to just Laws, this is from God. Every rash hand is able
to make a wound, or cast a firebrand; but it is only the God of Peace that is
able to heal breaches, to allay those storms that are in a Nation. You know,
those showers which render the earth fruitful, descend from Heaven, from God;
so all the counsels of peace descend from above: The fiery exhalations ascend
from the earth, counsels of war and disturbance proceed from the devilish
hearts of men. Or (3) If you consider that Rational Peace, which is in the
spirits of men, i. e. when the understanding exercises a coercion and restraint
over our licentious appetites, when all our inferior Faculties are under the
Empire and conduct of Reason; this proceeds also from God: For, since the fall,
there is a great deal of tumult, many riots and disorders in the soul of a man.
Reason hates a bad Guide; and our Appetites, those are evil instruments, and do
many times hurry Reason from its regular actings. But (4) much more, if you
consider Spiritual peace, that peace does not only import an agreement of a man
within himself, but the agreement of the Soul with God. This is the fruit of
the Spirit; and it is only God that is able to convey this peace to us. And
upon a particular account this Title is given to him, by way of eminency and
propriety; as,

(1) He is alone able to allow and dispense this peace to us; for, all our sins
are injuries committed against him, against his Crown and Dignity; all the
Arrests of Conscience are made in the name of God, and therefore it is only he
that can speak peace. As in the Civil State, it is an Act of Supremacy to give
a pardon; only he that can condemn is able to speak a pardon, so, it is that
God that is our Judge, provoked and incensed by us, he that has a judicial
power to cast body and soul into hellfire, is alone able to speak peace, and
pass a Pardon for us in the Court of Heaven: and this is experienced by a
wounded spirit; it is just with such a person as it is with a Malefactor, who
stands condemned at the Bar, he cannot receive encouragement from any of his
Spectators, til the Judge speak peace to him: So, if an Angel from heaven
should come and speak to a wounded Spirit, it were impossible, unless God did
order, command, and dispense it, that the spirit should receive any peace,
because our sins are immediately committed against him.

(2) He is alone able to reveal and discover it. There is nothing harder in the
world, than to calm and quiet a disturbed conscience, it must be the same power
that makes light to spring out of darkness, that must cause a cheerful serenity
in a dark and disconsolate soul. I know there is nothing more easy than that
false peace which is so universal in the world; for the most amongst us cheat
themselves with presumption, instead of peace with God, and security instead of
peace with conscience: but that peace which is solid and true can only be
revealed by God himself. We have an instance of this in David, (Psalm. 51)
although Nathan had told him from God, Thy sin is pardoned; yet notwithstanding
he says, Make thou me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice. He still addresses himself to God, that he would cause him
to hear the voice of pardon and reconciliation, for his soul could not be quiet
by the voice of the Prophet. There is so much infidelity in the soul of a man,
that when he comes to take a view of his sins in all their bloody aggravations,
only the Spirit of God himself is able to allay the terrors of the conscience:
And this he does by an overpowering light, when he does in an imperative and
commanding manner silence all the doubts of the soul, and establish it in peace
with God. Certainly he that shall but consider the terrors, the faintings, the
paleness of a wounded conscience, when you shall see a person dis-relish all
the things of the world upon this account, Fearing lest God is his enemy; when
all discourses that are addressed to him are ineffectual, and but like warm
cloth to a dead carcass, cannot inspire any heat into him. Oh! this shows,
only God is able to reveal peace. So Job, If he hide his face, who is able to
be at peace? There needs no other fury to complete the misery of a man, than
his own accusing conscienee, Conscience is a verier devil than the devil
himself, and able more to torment and lash the creature. Therefore, if that be
once awakened, it is only God, to whose tribunal conscience is liable, which is
able to speak peace to the soul. Now you see in what respect this Title, [The
God of peace] is attributed to him, as he is the Author and worker of it.

2. As he loves and delights in peace. This is that which is so pleasing to
him, that he adopts those into the line of Heaven who are Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the Children of God, Mat. 5. 6. This characterizes persons
to be his children, to be allied to him. God, he only delights in the
reflection of his own Image; for those things that we admire in the world, and
delight in, do not affect his heart: He delights not in the strength of the
horse; he takes not pleasure in the legs of a man. The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. Nothing attracts his eye
and heart, but his own similitude and resemblance; and therefore, where he sees
peaceable dispositions, this is that which indears the soul to him, and makes
it amiable in his eyes. You may judge of his delight in peace by this, it is
that grace which in an especial manner prepares us for communion with him; for,
we can never really honor nor enjoy him, unless we bring to him those
dispositions, which (if I may so speak) are in himself. And therefore it is no
wonder that those have little peace of conscience, who make so little
conscience of peace. You know, when God appeared to Eliah, he did not appear in
the Storm, nor in the Fire, but in the small still voice, and when Elisha was
transported with anger, he was fain to allay that passion by Music, that so he
might be prepared for the holy motions of the Spirit; he called for an
Instrument, and then the Spirit moved in him. I bring it for this end, to show,
how God delights in peace, and he will only maintain communion with those that
are of calm and peaceable spirits. So much way as we give to rash anger, so
much proportionably do we let in the Devil, and cast out the God of peace.

Now, the reason why this Title is given to God is upon a double account,
partly with respect to the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, which made peace
between God and us; partly with respect to the Covenant it self, which is
founded in that Blood.

(1) In respect of the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. For, it was the blood
of Christ that has sprinkled Gods Throne, and made peace in heaven. You shall
read therefore, when Christ came into the world, it is said (Luke 2. 14.) that
the heavenly Host appeared and sang, Glory to God in the highest, on earth
peace, etc. Since the Fall, God and man are enemies, there is a reciprocal
enmity between God and Man, God hates the Creature as it is unholy, and man
hates God* as he is just, the avenger of sin, the Author of the Law: Now,
Christ was the Umpire that composed this difference, he was God and Man in one
person, and so being allied to both, he was a fit person to reconcile both. He
was (as Job speaks) a Days-man between us. He has paid every farthing that was
due: for he did not compound with God, but paid the utmost that was due to him.
He it is that has reconciled us to God by the power of his Spirit, in changing
and renewing our natures and creating in us those dispositions which are like
to God; so that his Blood is the foundation of this peace. And now, God appears
to us, not as a consuming fire, but as a refreshing light, full of calmness,
serenety and peace toward us. Christ he brought more honor to God by his
obedience, than we brought dishonor by our transgression; and therefore
without any injury to God, he might be at peace with us. You know, all our sins
were but the acts of finite creatures, and only infinite in regard of the
object against whom they were committed. But the Blood of Christ was of
infinite value in regard of the Subject; for, he was God, and the enriching
union of the Deity conveyed such value and worth to his Blood, that he was able
to appease God, and not only to free us from condemnation, but to make us the
favorites of God. We are not only pardoned, but preferred upon the account of
his Blood.

(2) He is the God of peace, as with respect to the Blood of Christ, which is
the purchase of peace; so with respect to the Covenant which is made between
God and us (through the blood of the everlasting Covenant) There are three
sorts of Covenants amongst men, some are Covenants of Friendship and Amity,
some are Covenants of Trade and Commerce, and some are Covenants of Assistance
and Help. Mow all these qualifications meet in this Covenant, which is made
between God and Believers: It is a Covenant of Peace and Friendship, for now we
stand upon terms of amity with God, Those who were strangers and enemies, are
now reconciled. And there is between God and us perfect peace, there is a
League (as the Scripture speaks between God and the Creature. It is a Covenant
of Trade, there is now a way opened to Heaven, we may now ascend to God in
duties of holiness, and God descend to us by the excitations of his grace, and
influences of joy. And it is a Covenant of assistance, for he promises not only
to give us the reward of the Covenant, but to secure unto us the Condition; he
promises to enable us to discharge the conditions of Faith and Repentance. Now
upon this account, of that Covenant which is founded in the blood of Christ, he
is the God of peace to his people.

[1 Vse] Is by way of Conviction. This may discover to us how distant their
temper is from God, who are enemies to peace: We unman our selves, we
unchristian our selves, so far as we are opposite to this blessed temper of
peace. Certainly, as disturbed water cannot make any reflection unto us of that
face that looks into it, so when our Spirits are disturbed by animosities,
exasperations heats and divisions, it is impossible for us to see the Image of
God, as he is the God of peace. And certainly, there is no more doleful
consideration in the world than this, That Man, whom God made a sociable
creature, who has all the engagments and endearments laid upon him, which may
cause him to live in peace and gentleness toward those who are of the same
nature with him, yet that in fierceness our heats should exceed those of the
most salvage creatures. Man comes into the world naked, and altogether unarmed,
as if he were designed for the Picture of peace; but could you look into the
hearts of men, you would find there such tumults, divisions, such seeds of
enmity against their fellow creatures, that Tigres and Lions are calm and
peaceable in comparison of them. Now, how is this distant from the temper of
the God of peace? It Is very strange to consider, that when promises are made to
bury all differences, as rubbish under the foundation, that nevertheless the
great work of many persons should be, only to revive those former animosities,
to make those exasperations fresh and keen upon their own spirits: but is this
to imitate the God of Peace? These, to promote divisions and disturbances
amongst us, cloth their enemies with the Livery of shame and reproach, that so
they may be baited by their fury; that make it their design to represent that
party, which they think is dissonant from them, with the most odious
appearances, (you know this is the old Art) and those showers of calumnies
which are in the world, they usually precede the storm of persecution. The
devil was first a Liar, and then a Murderer; and those who are of his seed,
they follow his Art. In the primitive times, all the Persecutions of the
Heathens arose from the reproaches of Christians; so it is now. It is an easy
thing to blast the name of those persons, who are designed for ruin. But if
the contending Parties would consider, (if I may call one Party contending
which is only liable to Penalties, and is resolved to bear them patiently) how
unlike this is to that God of peace, methinks it should allay the rancour that
is in men's spirits, and make an atonement between all the differences that is
amongst them.

(2) If only peace come from God, you may from hence take a trial of that peace
that is within you, (for hitherto I have been only discoursing of Civil peace)
whether it be the effect of this God of peace. I know nothing more common in
the world than presumption; there is a false peace, which does not arise from
the knowledge of a man's happiness, but from the ignorance of his misery: Peace,
which is only like a Torch to shine in the night, or like Players, that glitter
only by Torch-light; so is the false peace men cherish in their bosom, merely
upon this account, because they do not bring their souls to the light of the
Word, they never had it from this God of peace; because,

(1) God never speaks peace to a soul, but in the way of holiness and
obedience: And therefore you shall find it is the counsel of the Scripture,
Acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace. Our peace is found in the way of
duty: and there are none who are more blessed with the peace of conscience,
than those who with the greatest fervor, frequency, and delight, maintain
communion with God in holy Duties: For, as friendship among men is cherished
and preserved by visits and conversations, so, our peace with God is preserved
by those visits we make to Heaven in prayer.

(2) That peace that comes from God, always causes in us a war with sin; for
God's Covenant with us in Offensive and Defensive, and therefore it is
impossible any person should have true and solid peace, that waking tranquillity
of soul, which is the reward of holiness and obedience, that entertains sin;
for every sin thou do wilfully commit, it is an act of hostility against God,
it is that which makes him thy enemy, and makes thee an enemy to him. As Jehu
said, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her
witchcrafts are so many? So, what peace can there be, so long as thou do
indulge thy self in sin, and make it thy business to gra^ifie thy outward
senses, though it be to the displeasure of God? It Is the greatest mercy in the
world to rob such persons of their peace, and to discover to them their danger;
they are only capable of true peace, by the knowledge of that which is false.
Therefore bring your selves to this trial, whether or no does that peace which
now you please your selves in, cause in you an eternal hatred of sin? does it
set you at a distance from your most beloved lusts? Then it is that peace that
springs from God. The greatest part of the world are in a state of war with
God, though they do not feel the effects of that war. True indeed, God does not
always draw the sword, either of Famine, Pestilence, or War, against a Nation,
and yet they may be acting in a most hostile way against God: So for a person,
God may not blast thy estate, or send diseases upon thy person, or raise a
tumult in thy conscience, and make a conspiracy of thy thoughts and passions
against thy peace: thou may be quiet within, and yet have war with God,
because, as in the world, there may be a Truce, when there is no Peace, the War
may still continue, though there be a Truce between two Princes: or rather
there is not a Truce between God and the sinner, but, as a Town that is
besieged for many days, may not feel the battery of their enemy, because he is
undermining them to blow them up at once; so God does not many times make his
battery against sinners, but he is undermining them, and the fall at the last
will be dreadful, if there be not a composition.

[ Use 2.] By way of Exhortation; Let me press you all to follow peace, it is a
duty which the Gospel enjoins with the greatest vehemence, with the greatest
force of words and expressions. The Apostle, when he is to seal up his
affection to them, he does it with that prayer, (2 Thessalonians. 3. 16) Now the God of
peace himself give you peace always, by all means: What strange expressions!
First, he gives you here the Title of the God of peace, and then he says,
[Himself] The God of peace himself. There Is a great deal of force in that word;
Peace is so excellent a blessing, and there is such an abhorrency in our
corrupt nature to it, that it is only the Lord himself that is able to effect
it: As if the Apostle had said, The Lord must bow the Heavens, he must come
down himself to create peace among you; and to express the greater vehemence of
his desire, he says, Give you peace always, by all means. So another
Scripture, pursue peace, Follow peace with all men, a word that imports our
pursuit after it, though it run from us. This is the strain and tenor of the
Gospel, and this becomes you as Christians. When Christ came to purchase our
peace, he came as a Lamb, an Innocent and meek creature, Behold the Lamb of
God. When the holy Spirit descended to seal the privilege of peace to us, he
descended in the form of a Dove; a gaul-less creature in whom there is no
rancor nor bitterness. What a strong engagement should this be upon all of us,
to pursue and promote peace? And for your encouragement consider,

(1) That in the times of the Gospel all the promises, do as it were empty
themselves into this blessing, the blessing of peace. Thus Isa. 11. 6. you
shall find there a gracious promise, respecting the times of the Gospel, The
Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion and the Fatling together, and a little
child shall lead them: and the Cow and the Bear shall feed; their young ones
shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox. That which
I observe from thence is this, that God here promises to cause an universal
peace and unity under the Gospel, though it be as difficult as to persuade the
most disagreeing natures to a peaceable cohabitation. For here the Scripture
instances in those Creatures, between which there is the most natural, and
therefore the most fierce animosities. The Lord will reconcile men, though
their differences be never so great. What is too hard for the God of peace to
effect? Is not God of infinite power, of infinite love? then it should quicken
us to pursue peace. (1) By prayer to him, because he is able to effect it:
certainly that God that was able to bring Order into the World, when it was a
mere lump and mass of Confusion, is able to bring peace and to unite our
spirits. And it is observable, the greater our differences and divisions are,
the more will the power of this God appear in reconciling them. It Is said in
the Psalms, that God's Throne is in darkness, i. e. His ways of providence are
very difficult for us to trace and find out: and therefore when our Divisions
are at the highest, he is able by one word to allay the storm. This should
encourage us in prayer. This is the course of God to glorify himself, by
putting a stop to the greatest Troubles, when nearest to us, and to work out
one contrary by another. To give you some Instances, that so we may encourage
our Faith, and quicken our Prayer to God for this blessing. Consider how still
God has made difficulties the way for enjoyment; for Instance, The promises
that Sarah should be the Mother of a Child; but he made way for that by her
dead womb: for all that numerous Progeny, which like the Stars of the Sky
descended from her. That he first maimed Jacob, and then gave him the blessing.
He brought Joseph from the Prison to a Princely Palace. First David was
harassed with troubles, and then his head was decked with the Imperial Crown.
So if you look into the Kingdom of Christ, who would have thought that a few
Fishermen should have advanced the Empire of Christ in the World; had you lived
to have seen those despicable beginnings, when a few unlearned men were the
Heralds and Preachers of Christ, how would this have caused you to fail and
sink in your spirits? and yet the Gospel has been preached in all the parts of
the World, and that by a few Fishermen. The Providence of God are like those
plated Pictures if you look one way upon them, there is the appearance of a
Serpent; if you look on the other side, there is the appearance of an Angel. So
here, many times God is pleased to suffer exasperations to go very high, that
so his power may appear more eminent in the composure of them. He it is that
enables the faith of his people to draw water out of the Rock, when the
Fountain is dry: that makes meat to come out of the Eater, (as in Sampson's
Riddle) that is able to bring a peaceable harmony out of devouring differences:
and therefore it should quicken our prayers to him.

(2) To make us more serious in our endeavors after peace. Consider, what a
dishonor it is to the Gospel; that those that profess themselves Sons of the
same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the same Spirit; should be at
deadly jars one with another. It is strange and unnatural that Lillies should
prove thorns to one another: that those who are Saints in pretense, should be
Devils in practice to one another: that Gods Diamonds should cut one another;
this is very strange, yet thus it is. But how especially, it is most sad, when
Religion which should restrain and bridle our passions, is made fuel and
insentives of them: How far distant is it from the counsel af the Apostle, Romans
14. 10. where he speaks concerning their lesser differences, One values one day
above another, another esteems every day alike, what is his counsel? he speaks
as a person that was filled with bowels and compassion: Oh, says he, let not
him that does not esteem the day judge him that does; For we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ, there we shall appear all upon a level,
stand upon equal ground, and receive our final doom from him: This therefore
should calm our spirits. Why may there not be some differences in judgment,
without division in affection; for it is as impossible that all judgments
should be of the same extent, as all our faces to be of the same color and
figure. Therefore consider what an injury it is to our profession, how does it
obscure the the glory of God, and luster of our Religion?

(3) Does not the public enemy rejoice over us, I mean the Papists? do they
not warm themselves at the sparks of our divisions: for you know the old Maxim
of Divide and Reign: Therefore it should compose our spirits, and quicken us to
labor after union. Unmortifi'd lusts are thence, whence all Wars and enmities
springs in the world. The Apostle Paul, when he would compose their
differences, he does not lay down Rules to decide their coutroversies, but
corrects their secret passions, pride, self-seeking, revenge, etc. this being
the seed of all disturbances in the Church: And although these lusts may not be
conspicuous and visible to the eyes of men, yet they are certainly the fuel of
our distempers.

The sum of all is this; Those that have the Spirit of God, they cannot but
mourn and be sensible of these divisions. I know a great part among us are
unconcerned: some rejoice, those that are rather buried in the affairs of the
world and encumbered with much business, or those that are steeped in the
pleasures of sense, are altogether unaffected with these things, and stand as
Newters, dis-regarding all events: But the Saints of God cannot but mourn over
them, when our divisions hinder the progress of the Gospel, and are serviceable
to nothing but to the Kingdom of darkness. Therefore I beseech you, let what
has been spoken quicken you in your prayers to God, to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, (that is the least effect of our love and desires after peace) and by
all endeavors to labor to bring back peace to us, that we may see that
Prophecy fulfilled in our time, that the Lord shall be one, and his Name one
amongst us.

SERMON II.
Heb. 13. 20, 21. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ:
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
THe Apostle describes God by the effects of his power and love, [That brought
again from the dead our Lord Jesus] The Resurrection of Christ from the dead is
one of the most transcendent testimonies of God's love and power toward us.

(1) Of his Love; because as the Anger of God was that which crucified our
Savior, so on the contrary, it must be his Love that should raise and restore
him. Christ, when he died, he looked upon God as an Enemy, as a Judge, and as
those Colors which we see conveyed to us are answerable to the Medium through
which we see them; as, if we look through a colored glass, we see the object
of that color: So the Lord Jesus, when he was upon the Cross, looked upon God
through the black cloud of our sins, and through the red cloud of his Father's
wrath, and so died as a sacrifice to Divine Justice. But when he was raised
from the grave, that was the testimony of God's love to him, and of his love to
us; for he died as our Surety, he was arrested for our debt, he was cast into
the Grave as into a Prison: But by his Resurrection he was redeemed from Prison
and Judgment. And therefore you shall find, when Christ was risen, he salutes
his Disciples with this, Peace be unto you, (Luke 24. 31.) There was the
dawning of peace at the Incarnation of Christ, for then the Angels sung, Peace
upon earth; but the complete Sunshine of peace was at his Resurrection, when
he had made full and complete satisfaction to God's Justice; for this was a
clearing of him before all the world, when God raised him from the grave. And
in this respect it was very agreeable for the Apostle to say, The God of Peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus.

(2) It was the effect of Infinite Power. You know, it is naturally impossible
for a dead body to quicken it self, to revive; but for the Lord Jesus, who had
the load of the sins of all the Elect upon him, who was, as it were, secured in
the grave by God's Justice and Power, for him to rise again: This must be an
effect of Infinite Power in the great God. This raising of Christ, sometimes
it is attributed to the Son, being God equal with the Father; but here it is
attributed to God: And therefore, when the Scripture would speak with the
greatest magnificence of the Power of God, it expresses it thus, That Power
which raised Jesus Christ from the dead. When Christ wrought deliverance for
the lost world, (all those who were committed to his charge) This could be no
less than the work of an Infinite Power. And upon this account also it is very
proportionable to the design of the Apostle; for that Prayer he makes to God is
for that, which only can be accomplished by Infinite Love, and infinite Power,
i. e. to make the Christian Hebrews perfect in every good work to do his will.

I come to a further description. He that brought again from the dead [our Lord
Jesus.] The Title of the Lord Jesus was only given to our Savior after his
Resurrection; he was called Lord before, and Jesus before; but these two Titles
were never united til after his resurrection; They came to see the place where
the body of the Lord Jesus lay; the reason was this, Because the Resurrection
of Christ was a solemn Proclamation to the world, that Christ was the Son of
God; it is true, this Title was given him immediately upon his Conception, but
it was never completely declared to the world, til after his Resurrection; for
before, Christ was a Prince in disguise, the beams of his Divinity was abated
by the vail of his Humanity; but then he was declared by power to be the Son of
God.

It follows. [That great Shepherd of the Sheep.] For the opening of this, (1)
We will consider this Title of Christ. (2) The person for whom this Title
relates.


First, This Title, [The great Shepheard] It Is a wonderful condescension in
Christ, that he will take upon him the Title of a Shepherd, that which rather
expresses Love and Care, than Power and Dominion; yet he is pleased to assume
this Title to express his affection to us. For the opening of it, wherein he
appears to be the great Shepherd, I shall lay down these particulars.

(1) He is great in the Dignity of his Person; for he that is Lord of Angels,
is become the Shepherd of the sheep; and the humiliation of his Person in this
respect, is the exaltation of his Office: It is looked upon in the world as a
mean and low employment, to have the care and inspection of a Flock; but now
herein appears the love of Christ, he was pleased to become our Shepherd, that
so he might secure and bring us to the Fold of Heaven, and there make us to
feed upon those Pastures, and to drink of those Rivers of pleasure which flow
from the presence of God.

(2) In the derivation of his Authority; that Authority which is communicated
to him, whereby he is our Shepherd, and that is originally from God himself;
it is not by any mediate deputation, but from God himself. He is our Shepherd,
and has a Title to his Flock upon a double account: (1) They are committed to
him as his Charge and custody, ( Joh. 6. 37, etc.) All the Elect of the World
were given by God the Father to Christ, not by way of Alienation, but by way of
Opigneration, as so many pledges which he was to bring to grace and glory; and
this Charge he does most fully execute, for there is none missing of those
committed to him. (2) They are given to him by way of Reward and Recompense,
for all his Blood and Sufferings, (Isa. 53. 10.) The Lord Jesus put such a
value on souls, that he purchased an interest in them by his own blood; and he
thinks himself exceedingly recompensed for all his Pains on the Cross, Agonies
in the Garden, Temptations in the Wilderness, etc. if souls will submit to his
care. And here observe the course of Heaven, God would endear souls to Christ
upon all reasons, by virtue of his command, and that charge he gives to them,
and by virtue of his own purchase.

(3) If you consider the extent of his care and affection, for all the Saints
of the world, those who are dispersed in all places, in all Ages, they are all
his Flock; and therefore it is the Royalty of his Administration, (Joh. 10, 16.)
There shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd. As Christ is the only Catholic
King, so he is the only Universal Bishop; for all other shepherds have but
particular portions of his Flock committed to their charge; and they should be
such portions as they have regard to, and are under their inspection. And at
the last day, all his sheep shall congregate together, and stand at his right
hand. All the Saints of God that are now scattered, as so many Stars in the
Firmament, shall be united in one Constellation, when they shall appear in
glory before him.

(4) In respect of his endowments and qualificacations, which fit him for the
discharge of his Office* And

(1) Take notice of his affection and love to us, and that is the wonder of
heaven and earth, Christ laid down his life for his sheep, (Joh 10. 11.) This
is strange, that Christ should be a sheep for the slaughter, that he might
become our Shepherd; that he should be a Sacrifice, before he could take this
office upon him: Other Sheep lay down their lives for the Shepherd, but Christ
laid down his life for the Sheep. So great was his love, that it brought him
from Heaven to seek and find those that were lost; he left a Palace to come to
a Wilderness; a Throne of Heaven, to come to a Fold here upon Earth. We read of
David, that he exchanged a Sheep-hook for a Scepter; but Christ quite contrary,
he changed a Scepter for the Rod and Staff of a Shepherd. It was said by one,
There is nothing so conspicuous in Christ as the prodigality of his love to us.
Oh! do but consider how great love that was, that sbould make him to die for
us, that he might bring us home to his Fold. We were all of us like erring
Sheep, who had straid from him, and fell to the Lord of the soil as strange
Cattle: we were gotten into the possession of the god of this world; the Lord
Christ would buy us off from thence: though we forfeited our right in him, yet
he would not lose his right in us, but he laid down his life that he might
reduce us to his Fold; that of Wolves he might make us Lambs, and fit us for
the comforts of his presence.

(2) In respect of his exact diligence and inspection over them: When but one
sheep went astray from his Fold, we read, he left the ninety and nine, and went
and sought for that One, Luke 15. where we have that Parable, to express the
diligence and watchfulness of Christ over his sheep. There is no person, be he
never so mean, never so obscure, though lost in the number and account of the
world, if he be one of Christ's sheep, he is always under his inspection and
watchfulness. We read of the High Priest, that he carried the names of the
Tribes upon his Breast Plate, the Lord Christ carries the names of all his
sheep in his Heart; therefore, Rev. 13. speaking concerning the Saints, all
that dwell upon earth, whose names are writ in the book of life. His diligence
and care is so exact, that he has all their names writ in his Book: He that
tells the stars, counts their hairs, and always exercises the most watchful
providence over them for good. You know sheep are either liable to rage, or
erring and wandering; Christ's diligence is such, that he protects them from the
rage of Satan, reduces them from all their wandering, and brings them home to
himself.

(3) In making proportionable all tbeir services and sufferings to those
degrees of strength which he gives to them, Isa. 40. 11. He shall feed his
flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his arms, and carry them
in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. Christ always
makes a proportion between the services, sufferings and strength he calls them
to. He it is that with that tenderness speaks to Peter, Peter love thou me?
feed my lambs. He has provided for them the most ample and most satisfying
nourishment, the Ordinances of the Gospel, the Word, the Promises, which are
the Breasts of Consolation; these are all provided by him for his People. And
in this respect he is the great Shepherd, for he does not only allow them
means, but blesses the means to them: he is able to enlighten the dark mind,
and he can make pliable the stubborn will, and he can spirituallize drossie
affections, which all other shepherds in the world are not able to effect.

(4) He is the great Shepherd, if you consider his power to preserve them from
danger; not only those dangers which respect Satan, (for that fell under his
care before) but those diseases to which they are liable, which threaten ruin:
Other Shepherds possibly may cure diseases, but not defend them from danger.
Christ it is that gives eternal life to his sheep, he begins the life of
holiness, which though at present is but as a spark in the Sea, yet he keeps it
alive till it shall break forth into a triumphant flame. That life that is
encompassed with so many enemies, and liable to so many weaknesses, the Lord
Jesus will bring forth judgment to victory, and will make them to be powerful
over spiritual and eternal enemies.

The sum is this: The Lord Christ is so perfect a Shepherd, so complete, as to
all the qualifications of that office, that the Prophet David breaks forth into
exultation, ( Psalm. 23.) The Lord is my Shepherd, etc. and then afterward
expresses all those provisions which are made for him by God as a Shepherd, He
makes me to lie down in green Pastures, he leads me beside the still waters.
So that you see, Christ, whether for diligence, love, tenderness, for
preserving us from danger, for securing us to life eternal, he is only the
great Shepherd; he is the God of shepherds, as well as the God of sheep, and
all other shepherds are but inferior to him, and must be accountable to him
for the souls of his sheep, which are more valuable than all the world.

It follows, The great Shepherd [of the sheep.] I shall not spend any time in
making any resemblance between the people of God and the sheep: only,

(1) They are sheep in respect of their Innocence. You know, of all creatures
the sheep are unarmed; other creatures, either they are armed with strength, or
skin, or swiftness, to guard themselves, and offend others; but the sheep has
neither the strength of the Lion, the craft of the Fox, swiftness of the Deer,
and of all creatures is most weak, inoffensive, and most liabl^ (...) dangers
and injuries. Of all persons, Gods people (...) most liable to danger, and when
out of Christ's p^^^^on, the weakest persons in the world.

(...) respect of their Meekness. A sheep is an embl^^ of meekness, that is
their temper, and therein (...) to Christ, who has propounded himself (...)
pattern, Learn of me, for I am meek and (...) both these qualities are expressed
by the Proph(...)) where speaking concerning the times of the (...) says, The
Lamb shall lie down with the Wolf, (...), where the Prophet expresses their
safety, there he expresses their innocence and meekness. This is the reason why
the Prophet says, For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter: because of all creatures most liable to
injuries, that which does least resent them: And, where ever the grace of
Christ comes, it sweetens the most cruel nature, and polishes the most rough
disposition, and makes them to be like Christ, meek and lowly.

3. In regard of their profitableness; for of all creatures, they are most
profitable, the food, as to their flesh, the cloth, as to their fleece. And the
people of God, however they are exposed to the contempts and injuries of the
world, they are the most profitable, for, were it not for them, the whole frame
of Nature would fall into pieces, the Stars would fall like leaves in Autumn,
and all the Elements would fall into confusion; we see it by one Lot, who kept
showers of fire and brimstone from falling on Sodom til he was got out of it.
And it is the people of God, for whom this frame of nature is continued, and
when they are brought into the fold of Christ, the Justice of God will have a
solemn triumph over all the world.

(4) As they are liable to wandering: Sheep are wandering creatures, and when
strayed, not able to reduce themselves. And in this respect the people of God
are sheep, they have a thousand allurements to draw them from the ways of God;
and if God should not guide them by his eye, it is impossible they should go in
the way that leads to heaven. Therefore David says, I have gone astray like a
lost sheep, seek thy servant, Psalm. 119. 176. This shall suffice to make the
Parallel and Resemblance of the people of God and sheep.

The second Argument is this, That he has designed Christ to be the Shepherd
of the Church, The great Shepherd of the sheep; this is another Argument and
evidence that he is reconciled to us, and that he is the God of peace: For when
God gave Christ to be our Sacrifice, and raised him up to be our Shepherd,
these are the most clear testimonies of his love: For, although Christ now sits
in heaven, and all the Angels of God worship him, yet he does not disdain to
exercise the same care, and to express the same love to his people, that he did
when he was upon earth. All the Offices of Christ express Gods love to us, for
he feeds us as a Prophet, died for us as a Priest, governs and defends us as he
is King; and all these meet together in this Title, feeding of us, dying for
us, defending of us; as he was God he loved us, as he was Man he died for us.
This does express the effects of his two Natures in this Title, and therefore
an admirable evidence that God is at peace with us.

It follows, [Through the blood of the everlasting Covenant.] The blood of
Christ is that which cements God and us together: For you must remember, our
original peace with God was broken, that peace we have with him now is called
Reconciliation; it is as a broken bone, which, well set, is stronger than
before, because nature conveys most liberal supplies to the weakest part: so
now, being reconciled to God through the blood of his Son, we stand upon surer
terms with him than we did in Innocence: The blood of Christ speaks better
things for us, than all our sins speak against us, it speaks peace to our
souls, and that in heaven purchased by his death. Christ died as a Testator,
and bequeathed to the Church a Legacy of peace; he lives as the Executor of
that Covenant, and now in heaven conveys to us that blessing of peace, which he
bequeathed in his death. And as our peace was founded in his Blood, so it is
conserved by his Intercession; he appears in the Court of Heaven as our
Ambassador, to make up all those differences which fall out between God and us:
for you know, Amity and Friendship is kept between Foreign States, by their
Residents and Agents that are kept in their several Courts; so, we have an
Agent in the Court of Heaven, the Lord Jesus Christ, that was raised from the
dead: And, as a Believer falls into sin, which is a breach of peace between God
and us, so that peace is made up by the Exercise of Repentance on our part, and
by sprinkling of Christ's blood upon us on Gods part. The renewed exercise of
Repentance, and application of Christ's blood, preserves that peace that is
between God and Believers. And (to sum up the force of the Argument) when we
had fallen from God, and it did not consist with the Majesty of God to make
peace with us without satisfaction, then was he pleased to pay our Ransom out
of his own Treasury, and redeem us by the blood of his Son, so that all his
Attributes might shine forth in their luster, and glory in our Salvation, and
that upon sure terms we might be able to challenge an interest in his favor
and love.

It follows, Through the blood of the [Everlasting Covenant.] Its called an
Everlasting Covenant in two respects.

(1) In opposition to the Old Covenant, which was made with Adam in Innocence;
but th^^ Covenant which secures to us the reward of th^^ (...), did not secure
to us the Condition that was perfect obedience: And in reference to this Old
Covenant, sometimes the Gospel is called a New Covenant, sometimes a Better
Covenant, because it supplies all weakness in the first Covenant; not as if the
Law of God was weak or faulty in respect of it self, for the Law is holy, just
and good, but weak in respect of us; for it is impossible that that Covenant,
by the breach of which sin and death came into us, should reconcile us to God,
and appease his anger; and therefore God contrived another Covenant for us, a
Covenant in the Gospel, that was made with us in Christ, and this is called an
Everlasting Covenant, because it remains for ever, the tenor of it shall not be
changed; for, the first Covenant is only abrogated and made null, while
frustrated as to the intent it was first given.

(2) Its called an everlasting Covenant, as it brings to those that are parties
in it an everlasting glory: So the Lord Jesus his blood is called an
everlasting Redemption, for it ransoms the souls of men from that eternal death
to which they were liable, and gives them a title to everlasting life; for this
Covenant which now God has made with us, it not only secures the Reward, but
the Conditions to which the reward is made; for God says, I will plant my fear
in your hearts, that you shall not depart from me.

I have now gone over the Title, and that in order to the Prayer, which
follows, [Make you perfect to do his will, working in you that which is well
pleasing in his sight,] the general sum of it is this, That God of peace, who
is reconciled to us in his Son, as he is the Father of mercies to us, so he is
the fountain of holiness to us; and in this respect we can only expect from him
the treasures of grace, as he is the God of peace, for God, as he is our Judge,
dispences to sinners nothing but revenge; there is nothing to be expected but
the curse of his Law, the execution of that Sentence of death from him. For
although the world despise holiness as a base and contemptible thing, they had
rather be ungracious than inglorious in the eyes of men, and upon this account
they are afraid to be holy, least they should be the public scorn and
contempt of the place wherein they live: although holiness is of so low a price
in the world, yet in Heaven, next to God, Christ, and the Spirit, Holiness is
the most rich Jewel, That, God can bestow upon us, and therefore we must first
look upon him as the God of peace, before we can beg any grace from him. And
this is the reason why the Apostle represents God by these Titles, that he
might encourage the Hebr^^ to believe God would grant this request. Wh^ Christ
died for us, it was not his design only to qui(...) our consciences, but to
quicken our souls; not on^^ to free us from damnation, but from the dominati^^
of sin: And therefore you shall find these two (...) joined together, (Tit. 2.
14.) Who gave himself (...) us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, an^
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of (...) works. The death of
Christ, as there was a value (...) it to purchase Gods favor, so there was a
virtue it to restore to us God's Image. And the account (...) his dying for us
it is, that we must expect the (...) degree of grace and holiness from God. And
this (...) the reason why the Apostle prefaces this, Now (...) God of peace,
etc.

I know you expect I should say something, as (...) my nonconformity. I shall
only say thus much, It (...) neither fancy, faction, nor humor that makes me
(...) to comply, but merely for fear of offending God. And if after the best
means used for my Illumination as prayer to God, discourse, study, I am not
able (...) be satisfied concerning the lawfulness of what is (...) if it be my
unhappiness to be in an erro^ surely Men will have no reason to be angry with
(...) in this world. and I hope God will pardon me in (...) next.

FINIS.

