THE DANGER OF PROSPERITY: Discovered in several SERMONS Upon PROVE. 1. 27.

Nihil infaelicius faelicitate peccantium, qua poenalis nutritur impunitas, and
mala voluntas velut interior hostis roboratur. Aug. By William Bates, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. MDCLXXXV.

The PREFACE.
THE Experience of all Ages has verified, that none are exposed to more
dangerous Trials than the Prosperous in this World. The great Tempter has found
the Temptations of Prosperity so insinuative and prevailing with Men, that he
attempted our blessed Savior; expecting, by the pleasant prospect of the
Kingdoms of this World, and their Glory, to have fastened an Impression upon his
Spirit, and tainted his inviolable Purity. But he found nothing in our Savior,
not the least irregular inclination to his Allurements, and could work nothing
upon him. It Is otherwise with Men born of the Flesh, in whom there is a carnal
Heart (the Center of Apostasy and Corruption) that is easily enticed and
overcome by charming Complacencies. Prosperity is a disguised Poison, pleasant
to the unwary sense, but deadly in the operation; and the more pernicious in
the Effects, because less dangerous in the Opinions of Men. The Temptations of
Prosperity are so frequent and favored by us, that they give vigor to the
inward Enemy, the sensual affections, and boldness to the malicious Tempter.
They foment the carnal Appetites, that defile and debase the Soul; and are the
more rebellious and exorbitant the more they are gratified.

Prosperity is the strongest obstacle against the Conversion and Reformation of
Sinners. Whilst they are plying their various Pleasures, they have neither will
nor leisure to advert to the Voice of Conscience, so reproachful and stinging
to them, And many times Prosperity stupifies Conscience, that Men are fearless
of Divine Judgments, involved in sensual Security. They will not reverence and
obey God's Authority, till they feel his Power; they abuse his Blessings to
Pride and Vanity, Idleness and Luxury, and are hardened in their Impenitence,
dyed with the deepest tincture of Ingratitude: they drive on through a course
of Sin, till Death puts a period to their Lusts. How destructive, how penal is
Prosperity to such graceless Souls? When God rains Snares upon the Wicked; when
the affluence of this World is abused to satisfy their vicious Desires, it is a
sad forerunner of the Shower of Fire and Brimstone, and the horrible Tempest
that shall overwhelm them at last.

Others in Prosperity are not openly profane, and boldly vicious, yet are
corrupted, and insensibly destroyed by it. They overvalue and over-delight in
the good things of this World, and please themselves in an opiniative Felicity
in their present State. They enjoy the World with more appearance of Reason,
and less Sensuality than the Riotous and Luxurious; but their conversation with
so many charming Objects, alienates them from God. They do not sanctify him in
their Hearts, placing their highest esteem upon his most amiable Excellencies,
and their dearest delight in communion with him. They look upon Religion as a
sour Severity, and count nothing delightful, but what is suitable to the
fleshly Affections. A deceit like that of a sick Person, who feeling no
pleasure but in the easy intervals between his Fits, and the remission of his
Distemper, should imagine that if he were freed from his Disease, he should
lose all Pleasure: whereas the Delights of Health are more full and durable.
The Angels are incapable of sensual Pleasures; their Happiness arises from the
perfection of Good, not the allays of Evil. The Beasts are only capable of
sensual pleasures, the remedies of natural Evils, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, or
accidental Evils, Diseases, and Pains: And many are so sottishly deceived, as
to prefer brutish Pleasures that affect the Senses, before Angelical Joys that
arise from the fruition of God's Favor, and Obedience to his Laws. This is a
sad Symptom of an unrenewed Heart, and an heavy Presage of future Misery; for
God will not be our everlasting Joy in Heaven, if he be not our exceeding Joy
upon the Earth.

Others surrounded with Riches and Honors, are neither thankful to their
Divine Benefactor, nor careful to employ their Prosperity and Power for his
Glory. The Law of Mercy requires a solemn affectionate recognition of God's
Benefits: but the Current of Prosperity drowns their sense of the Divine
Goodness: and incogitant practical Atheism, is as destructive as Absolute and
Speculative. And how many by the deceitfulness of Riches, are apt to imagine,
that they possess with Dominion what they receive in trust: they might be rich
in good Works, and if their Hearts were according to their Ability, be fruitful
as Paradise, but are as barren as the Sands of Africa. They are in a mighty
Debt for so many received Blessings, for which their Account will be heavy and
undoing with the highest Lord. These and many other Considerations, make it
evident how dangerous Prosperity is to the most that enjoy it here.

It Is therefore a Point of high and holy Wisdom how to manage Prosperity so, as
to avoid the impendant Evils that usually follow it, and to improve it for our
eternal Advantage. This is the Design of the present Treatise, and humbly
recommended to the Divine Blessing, from one who most unfeignedly desires the
Salvation of Men's Souls.

W. B.

THE DANGER OF PROSPERITY.
PROVE. 1. 32. The Prosperity of Fools shall destroy them.
IN the former Verses, the Divine Wisdom is introduced in a very elegant and
pathetical manner, reclaiming Men from their miserable Errors, to partake of
Light and Felicity. The Address is directed to them with Upbraidings and
Indignation at their Folly, and with tender compassion for their Ruin. How long
ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and Fools hate knowledge? Thus it is said
of our Savior, the Incarnate Wisdom of God, That Mark 3. 5.
he looked on the Pharisees with anger, being grieved at the hardness of their
hearts. We have also expressed, an earnest desire of their Conversion, Turn ye at
my Reproof. And that is seconded by a gracious Promise, I will pour out my
Spirit upon you, to illuminate and conduct you in the way of Life. But for
their stupid obstinacy in despising the Counsel, and rejecting the Reproofs of
Wisdom, they are surprised with utter destruction. This is described with that
Train of killing Circumstances, that are the most forcible Excitations timely
to prevent that Evil, which neglected, will be remediless: Because I have
called, and ye refused, Verse. 24, 26, 27, 28, 29.
I have stretched out my hand, and no Man regarded; I will also laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes: When your fear comes as a Whirlwind,
when distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call on me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for that
they hated knowledge, and despised the fear of the Lord. In their distress they
supplicate for Mercy; but as they were unchanged, notwithstanding all the
gracious Calls of God to Repentance, so he is not moved by all their mournful
Entreaties, and takes pleasure in his Righteous Judgments upon them. Their
final Ruin is resolved into its proper Cause; the wilful hardness of Sinners,
and the abuse of those Mercies that should have melted them into a compliance
with the Divine Giver of them. For that they hated Knowledge, and did not choose
the Fear of the Lord. For the turning away of the Simple shall slay them; and
the Prosperity of Fools shall destroy them.

The title of Fool, is the usual Character of the Sinner in the Language of
Wisdom; and it is with great reason and congruity attributed to him, in
opposition to Prudence, the universal Virtue and supreme director of humane
Life. For as by Prudence a Man so governs himself, and regulates his actions,
as to avoid impendent Evils* and to obtain that Good that is suitable to his
necessities: So it is the effect of Folly, not to foresee Evils to prevent them,
and to neglect the Season of obtaining what is Good. And by how much the Good
is more valuable and desirable, and the Evil is more pernicious and threatening;
in proportion, the Folly is more unpardonable and woeful, that loses the one,
and exposes to the other. And this is justly charged upon every wilful
impenitent Sinner.

Prosperity comprehends all things in the order of Nature, that are so much
admired and desired by Worldly Men; Riches, Honors, Pleasures, Health,
Strength, Peace, Plenty, and the abundant Variety of what is grateful to the
carnal Mind and Appetites.

These Blessings of God, abused and perverted by the Folly of Men, are turned
into Weapons of Unrighteousness, to offend God, and wound their Souls to
everlasting Death.

The Point I shall insist on, is this; Prosperity abused, is fatal and
destructive to foolish Sinners.

In the treating on this Argument, I will, 1 show how Prosperity is destructive
to the Wicked. 2. That it is folly and madness above all wonder, when Sinners
abuse the Blessings of God to their destruction. 3. How just, and certain, and
heavy their destruction will be.

1. I will show how Prosperity is destructive to the Wicked. In order to the
explicating of this Head, some things are to be premised.

1. This great World, with all the Parts and Creatures of which it is composed,
has an inherent Goodness and Perfection convenient to the End for which 'twas
formed by the Creator, and that was to be useful and comfortable to Man in the
Service of God. There is no Pestilence and Contagion in the nature of things,
that are pleasing to our Faculties: they are dangerous, not as made by God, but
as managed by Satan. They do not pervert the Minds of Men from any noxious
inherent qualities, but as they are corrupted by Concupiscence. Upon this
account St. John dehorting Christians from the Love of the World, as
inconsistent with the Love of God, gives this reason of it, 1 John 2. 16.
For all that is in the World* the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and
the pride of Life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. He signifies the
Objects, Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, by the vicious Affections, that make
them deadly to Men. The Poison is not in the Flower, but in the Spider. And the
Apostle speaking of the purifying Virtue of the Gospel, says, That 2 Pet. 1. 4.
exceeding great and precious Promises are given to us, that by these we may be
partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the Corruption that is in the
World through Lust. This is evident by visible experience: for many Holy Men
have enjoyed temporal Blessings without the offense of God; and have been more
holy and heavenly in themselves, more beneficial and good to others by his
Mercies: whilst the Sensual, like the Ocean that changes the sweet Showers of
Heaven into its salt Quality, turn the Divine Blessings into Provision for
their brutish Lusts. It appears therefore that this Contrariety of Effects is
not to be attributed to the quality of worldly things that is always uniform
and alike, but to the different Dispositions of the Persons that use them. As
the same Food is healthful or hurtful, as the Stomach is clear or foul that
receives it: In some it renews the Blood and Spirits, strengthens and preserves
Life; in others it increases the sickly Matter, feeds the Disease, and brings
Death more painfully and speedily.

2. The primary design of God in his most free and rich Benefits, is to endear
himself to us, and bind us to his Service: for they are the most proper and
convincing expresses of his Love and Goodness, and powerful Motives and
Perswasives to a grateful correspondence of Love and Obedience. I Hos. 11. 4.
drew them, says God, with the Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love. Goodness
duly considered, engages to please the Benefactor. It Is therefore said by St.
Paul, That the goodness of God Romans 2.
leads Sinners to Repentance. It Is the most natural unconstrained Consequence
that the Mind can regularly infer from his Clemency and Bounty. The Hearts of
Men should be melted in tender Resentments of their unworthy Conversation
toward him, and encouraged to return to their Duty, since he will graciously
receive those who unfeignedly repent of their Sins: But the Event does not
usually answer God's Aim. Men are hardened in Sin by his Mercies.

3. When the Wicked abuse God's Blessings, defeat his Kindness, and frustrate
the excellent Ends of it, he most righteously and severely continues their
Prosperity, that foments their Lusts, and renders them more wilful and
incorrigible, and the more guilty of their own damnation. What was said by
Simeon, concerning the most glorious Gift of God, our Savior, is applicable in
this Case; Behold, this Child is set for the fall of many in Israel, and for a
sign that shall be spoken against. When the riches of Grace offered in the
Gospel, are despised and neglected, the blessed Savior of Souls is most justly
ordained to be the occasion of their sorer Punishment. So when the common
Benefits and Mercies of God are ungratefully perverted by Men, to the dishonor
of the Giver, they are by Divine Determination ordered, for the aggravating of
their Sins and Sentence. Prosperity is a fatal Ambush for their surprizal and
ruin, according to that heavy Imprecation of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. 22.
Let their Table become a snare to them: and that which should have been for
their welfare, let it become a trap, an occasion of their falling. This
judgment proceeds from the most terrible and inexorable Displeasure: it is
better and more eligible to encounter all the storms of a raging World, than to
enjoy the calm and security of a prosperous Sinner. For the more afflicted we
are by Men, the more earnest are our addresses to God's propitious Throne, to
incline his Mercy to regard and relieve us: but a Sinner, the more full
fruition he has of the World, the more he forsakes and provokes God, and the
more he is abandoned to his worst Enemies, his Lusts, and Satan. This will be
amplified more in the following parts of the Discourse.

This being premised, we come to show how Prosperity abused is destructive to
Sinners, both meritoriously, as it induces a deadly guilt, and makes them
obnoxious to the revenging Wrath of God; and effectively as it is opposite to
the felicity and perfection of Man, that consists in the renovation of the
Image of God in the Soul, and in joyful Communion with him for ever. This will
appear by the following Considerations.

1. Prosperity is the continual Incentive of the vicious Affections, the
fleshly Lusts that war against the Soul; that deprive it of its Beauty, Order,
Freedom, and Felicity. Man is compounded of Flesh and Spirit; by the one he
communicates in nature with the Beasts, by the other he confines with the
Angels. By the original Law of Union, the Body was subject to the Soul; and tho
taken from the Earth, did not oppress it, and hinder its Heavenly flight: The
Flesh did not lust against the Spirit, nor the Spirit against the Flesh. But as
the motion of the two Eyes in the Head is always uniform, and directed the same
way; so Reason and Sense accorded, the Appetites were regular and concentrick
with the Mind. Upon this established order, the internal Peace and Holiness of
Man depends. But by the rebellious Sin of Adam, the Soul lost its regal Power
and Freedom: and as in the first temptation the Soul infected the Body, so now
the Body infects the Soul. The carnal Appetite, the spring of Lust and Anger
(that infernal pair that reigns so universally) overrules the rational Will,
and gives Law to Men.

The love of sensual Pleasures is natural to Men; as Temptations are more
charming and increased, it is more predominant. The Senses, the Fancy, and the
Passions, are in a conspiracy against the Soul; and there is a continual
circulation in their working, they excite one another. By the Senses pleasing
things obtain an easy entrance into the Fancy; and Fancy has a strange power to
charm or terrify by false Representations; it amplifies the Evil, and heightens
the seeming Good of things; and by the inspiration of Fancy, the Passions are
moved, and the Passions being allured, bribe and seduce the Mind, and draw the
consent of the Will by the actual Pleasure that is mixed in the gratifying of
them. And as Adam lost his Innocence and Paradise by his compliance with the
blandishments of his Wife; so the Soul loses its purity and happiness, by
yielding to the Desires of the Flesh that is in conjunction with it. For this
reason, Man in his fallen State is called Flesh, as if there were no other
Principle in his Nature, and of his Operations. The Spiritual and more noble
Faculties, that were made for delightful Communion with God, are sunk into
Carnality. The description of Men in their natural State, by the Apostle, is a
full proof of this: We all had our Conversation in times Ephesians. 2.
past in the Lusts of the Flesh, fulfilling the desires of the Flesh, and of
the Mind. It Is observable that the lusts of the Flesh, that spring from the
sensual Part, are drawn forth into act by the concurrent Wills of the Flesh,
and of the Mind. The nobler Faculties, the Understanding and Will are depraved,
and freely indulge the Carnal Appetites in their pursuit of Pleasures.
Prodigious degeneracy of the reasonable Creature! Of this we have a resemblance
in the mavelous transforming Power of Nature. If a Cyon be grafted into a
Tree of another kind, the Fruit that grows on it will not be according to the
Nature of the Stock, but of the Graft that overrules the Sap, and turns it to
its own quality. Thus the Beast is grafted into the Man, and the intellectual
Powers are corrupted and carnal. The Mind is employed to disguise the Ignominy
and Guilt that attend the Lusts of the Flesh; and the Will consents to a
submission to those ignoble and unruly Appetites. Man has only this privilege,
that he is a more ingenious Brute, to spring new Pleasures, to make provision
for his sensual Desires, and to accomplish them.

Now in Prosperity, when the Senses are entertained with variety of alluring
Objects, the Fancy is more predominant and contagious: It has more force,
vivacity, and extent, the more it is conversant about sensible things: And the
polluted Imagination is the most active and general Principle of corrupting the
Heart: for the Mind transcribes a Copy of what is written in the Fancy, and
presents it with a false gloss to the Will, that is ready to choose what brings
actual pleasure. And the sensitive Affections are excited by the Fancy, so that
the presence of a suitable Object, foments the warmth into heat, and turns the
heat into fire, and the fire into flame. And the more the carnal Affections are
indulged, the more they are enlarged, the more importunate and headstrong they
become; and the Soul is utterly disabled from recovering it self from the
besotted vile prostitution, to the ignoble and unruly Appetites. Millions had
been less guilty and defiled, and less miserable for ever, if they had not been
surrounded by pleasant Temptations and intanglements of Iniquity.

2. Prosperity occasionally incenses the irascible Appetite: For the usual
Incentives of Anger, are the crossing the Desires, and Contempt; and the
stronger the Desires, the more impatient they are to be controlled; and in
proportion to the height of mind, is the indignation for any contempt that is
offered. Now prosperity makes the carnal Desires more exorbitant, and
consequently raging when frustrated. Violent burning Desires, when controlled,
provoke violent burning Anger: and Anger inflamed, extinguishes the calm Light
of Reason, becomes blind and furious in revenging apprehended Injuries. It Is
the Inquiry joined with Conviction, by St. James, From whence James 4. 1.
come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not from your Lusts that war in
your Members? The voluptuous, ambitious, covetous Passions when disappointed,
are the common and natural Causes of all the bloody Disorders in the World.

The other cause of Anger, is Contempt, either real or supposed; and that is
more provoking to those, who raised by Pro sperity, look with a distance of
Mind upon others below them. Prosperity in any kind, swells Men with a vain
opinion of their Worth and Dignity; and makes them insolent and intolerable.
There is a strange distemper of the Eyes in some Persons, wherever they look,
their own Image visibly encounters them. The reason of it is assigned by an
inquiring Philosopher, 'That the visive Faculty has not spirits and vigor to
penetrate through the Air to see other things, and the Air as a Glass makes the
reflection of their own Image. Thus one of a shallow and weak Understanding, is
continually representing to himself his own conceited Excellencies. And
Prosperity increases their esteem of themselves unmeasurably above their just
value. It Is like a Concave Glass that breaks the Rays, and dilates the visive
Angle; and by a natural Enchantment, makes an exorbitant Figure, a Dwarf to
appear a Giant. Now as Pride is the usual Concomitant of Prosperity, so there
is no Passion so inseparable from Pride, and so proper to it, as Anger. By
Pride Prove. 13. 10.
comes Contention; it is the observation of the wisest Man, confirmed by
universal Experience. Pride makes Men imperious and impatient, boisterous and
stormy against all that offend them. Pride, Anger, and Revenge, like Serpents
twine and wreath about one another. Pride interprets an Offense as an high
Contempt, and raises Anger; and Anger provoked, takes proportionable revenge to
the conceived Injury. We have a Tragical Instance of this recorded in
Scripture. * Hazael 2 Kings 8. 12, 13.
when foretold by the mourning Prophet, that he would stain himself with the
Innocent Blood of the Israelites, slay their young Men with the Sword, and dash
their Children, and rip up their Women with Child: He startled at it as an
execrable Cruelty: And Hazael said, But what, is thy Servant a Dog that he
should do this great thing? And Elisha answered, The Lord has showed me, that
thou shall be King over Syria. When advanced to empire, he divested humanity.
Pride armed with Power is furious at opposition; and the flaming Passion, like
a frightful Comet, presages and produces terrible Effects. Thus it is evident
how the Lusts of the Flesh are fomented by Prosperity.

2. Prosperity inclines Sinners to an impious neglect of God, that is a Sin of
the highest Nature, and prolifick of innumerable Evils. All Sin is an
irregularity, either in the excess or the defective Extreme, either in
overvaluing and loving the Creature, or in the disesteem and indifference to
the Creator, and Prosperity increases the aversion of the carnal Heart from
God, in the same degrees as it strengthens the propensity to the World. For the
opening this, it will be necessary to consider the essential and eternal
Respects due from the reasonable Creature to God. And they are four
comprehensive of all the rest.

(1.) A solemn thankful recognition of him as the Author of our Beings, and all
the Comforts we enjoy. (2.) Supreme love to him. (3.) An humble fear of his
Displeasure. (4.) Entire obedience to his Will. As in this regular. Universe,
every kind of being has its proper End; so it cannot be denied, without the
most evident absurdity, that God in all these respects is the chief End of Man.
(1.) A solemn thankful recognition of God, as the Author of our Beings, and
all our Comforts, is continually due to him. The neglect of this is so
contumelious to the Majesty and Glory of God, and so contrary to those most
binding Obligations to his Mercy and Goodness, that it is an Offense infinitely
provoking. In every Transgression the authority of the Lawgiver is despised;
but this immediately reflects dishonor upon the Deity. As a common Felony is a
breach of the King's Laws, but Treason not only violates his Laws, but strikes
immediately at his Person and Dignity. Now Prosperity inclines sensual Persons
to this wretched neglect of God. The World, with all its desirable things has
the Dominion and full Possession of the Understandings, Memories, and Hearts of
Men, and serious Thoughts, with warm Affections toward God are banished from
them. It Is the Character of a Wicked Person, but most proper to him in his
Prosperity, God is Psalm. 10. 4.
not in all his thoughts. Of this Impiety there are several Degrees: the
highest is explicit Atheism, a disbelief of God and his Providence, of his
Being and Bounty; and this is sometimes occasioned by plentiful Prosperity. And
the Consequences are, Pride that blasts the Mind, as it were, with Lightning,
and Confidence in the things of this World. Of this we have astonishing
Instances in the Scripture. Nebuchadnezzar transported in a vainglorious flush
of Joy, at the view of his magnificent Works, breaks forth in those lofty
insolent Expressions; Is not this great Babel that I have built, for the House
of my Kingdom, by the might of my Power, and the honor of my Majesty? as if he
had been raised by his own power, and did not owe his Greatness to the King of
Heaven. Thus it is charged against the Prince of Tyrus, Thy Heart is lifted up
because of Ezekiel. 28. 2.
thy Riches; and thou have said, I am a God, and sit in the Seat of God; and
thou sets thine Heart as the Heart of God. He presumed that his Throne for
Glory and Stability was like the Divine Kingdom, that cannot be shaken, and
forgot that he was a frail Man in a mutable World. Plentiful Prosperity is so
strong a Temptation to Atheism, that a wise and holy Saint earnestly deprecated
it as a pernicious Snare: Give me not Riches, lest I Prove. 30. 9.
be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? The Carnal Heart, in the full
fruition of the World, is apt to ascribe all to the course of Nature, or to
humane Contrivance and Endeavors, without any serious acknowledgment of the
Divine Liberality and Beneficence. Prodigious Ingratitude, and equal Folly! As
if one should imagine that a Fountain of Water had not its original from the
Sea, but from the Marble Stones, through which it immediately and visibly
springs. Or as if it were requisite the Hand of the Giver should be as visible
as his Gifts.

Now although few arrive to this height of Impiety in actual Thoughts and open
Words; yet prosperous Sinners are always guilty of an interpretative and
virtual denial of God: they have not a solemn grateful remembrance of their
Benefactor and his Benefits, and a due sense of their dependence upon him. It
was the wise and holy Counsel of Moses to Israel, When they should be possessed
of Canaan, a place full of delight and profit, * When thou Deuteronomy. 6. 12.
shall have eaten, and art full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord. The
Caution so enforced, intimates a sinful disposition in the carnal Heart, in
Prosperity to neglect God. There may be a notional remembrance of him in the
Mind, a naked ascription of all good things to his Providence, a complemental
visit in exterior Worship; yet without an inward cordial sense of our dear
Obligations for his most free Favors. The Apostle charges the Rich in this
World, not to trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God. So foolishly
are Men prone to depend for protection, reputation, and provision of all things
upon their Estates, as if they were unconsumable, and neglect God their Rock,
who is the alone sufficient Foundation of all our Hopes and Comfort.

(2.) Supreme Love to God is an indispensable Duty from Men upon the account of
his most amiable Excellencies and Benefits. Thou shall love the Lord with all
thy Heart, with all thy Soul, with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind;
this is the first and great Commandment, and consequently a coldness and
indifferency to God* much more a strong aversion from him, is a sin of the most
heinous nature: now Prosperity has a special malignity to disincline the Heart
from God. The supreme Love of God includes an Act of the Understanding, a
transcendent esteem of his Favor; Thy loving kindness is better than Life; it
inspires the Soul with ardent desires after him; My Soul follows hard after
thee; it produces the most joyful satisfaction in Communion with him. The
Thoughts of God are unspeakably precious and sweet; the Ordinances, the blessed
Means of conveying his Grace, are highly valued; and Sin that displeases and
separates from God, is hated as the greatest Evil. Now the Soul must be refined
to a heavenly temper, to some degrees of Angelical Purity, before it is capable
of Light to see his spiritual Excellencies, and Love to enjoy them. And if the
Soul does not make the Body Heavenly and Spiritual, the Body will make the Soul
Earthly and Fleshly. From hence it is that the affluence of things pleasing to
the Senses, fastens the carnal Heart to the World as its Happiness and Heaven;
it darkens the Mind, and vitiates the Affections, that the Soul can neither
taste nor see how good the Lord is. It Is the universal Character of Men in the
carnal State; they are lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of God. And a
remisser degree of Love is comparative Hatred. A Sin of astonishing guilt, and
not less odious to God, and damning in its Nature, tho little observed and
resented by carnal Men: for the highest dishonor of God is complicated with
disobedience in it. A Sin that deserves and inflicts the sorest Punishment; for
God alone, whose goodness is infinite, can make us perfectly and eternally
happy; and the spiritual separation from him is such an unvaluable An non paena
satis est te non amare? Aug. Conf.
loss, that when truly understood, is the foundation of the heaviest sorrow.

(3.) The Fear of God, is a most distant affection from the Heart of the
foolish Sinner in his Prosperity. The Fear of Reverence, and the awful esteem
of God, that proceeds from the reflection upon his glorious greatness, is a
grace that remains in Heaven: the Angels in all their bright degrees of
Excellence cover their faces before his Throne. The fear of Circumspection that
restrains from displeasing him upon the account of his Justice and Power, is a
proper Affection to Men in the present state. The Blessed in Heaven are above
this Fear, being confirmed in a state of unchangeable perfection and felicity:
the Damned in Hell are below this Fear, in that no change can make their
Condition worse: but it is most useful and congruous in this middle state. This
Fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom, the first and chiefest part of it in
respect of Order and Dignity. For the true Notion of Wisdom, consists in the
foresight of Evils, in the choice and use of effectual means to avoid it, and
it is the best Wisdom that avoids the greatest Danger. This Fear is the
Principle of Conversion from Sin to Holiness; exciting us to make God our
Friend, who is so dreadful an Adversary, so Holy and Just, that he will not
connive at Sin, and spare the Guilty and Impenitent; and so powerful, that with
one stroke he can utterly destroy his most stubborn Enemies. Carnal Security is
directly opposite to this Fear of God, and nothing does more harden and fortify
Men in Security, than a prosperous State. The Voluptuous and Sensual are
without apprehension of Danger, till imminent and in their view. Because they
Psalm. 55. 19.
have no changes, therefore they fear not God. Uninterrupted Prosperity tempted
them to Atheistical Security: and as none are sollicitous and in anxiety, lest
the Sun, whose presence is the support and beauty of the World, should not
arise in the morning, because its regular course is established and constant;
and it would be a Miracle contravening the Order of Nature if it should be
stopped; Thus the long enjoyment of Plenty, and Ease, and Peace, renders Men
constantly secure and fearless, as if the tenor of their Prosperity were
invariable, and no evil could disturb it; or at least they will set back the
expectation of Evil at a great distance, like those profane Scorners mentioned
by the Prophet, They say, the Vision he sees is for many days to come, he pro
phesies of the times afar off, and with a brutish stupidity, slight the Divine
Threatenings. And from hence it follows, that none are so rebelliously and
boldly disobedient, as the prosperous Sinner; which is the fourth thing to be
considered.

(4.) Entire Obedience is due to the Supreme Lawgiver, who is able to save and
destroy for ever: yet he is mercifully inclined to pardon the Infirmities of
Men, and greater Sins retracted by Repentance. There are Sins of Ignorance,
when a Man dashes blindfold against the Law; and of sudden surreption, when
there is no time to deliberate, and for recollection; and the best are not
exempted here from Sins of this nature: there are Sins of deadly malignity,
when Men are careless of God's Commands, and indulge their Lusts, tho not
without some remorse. But the prosperous Sinner is usually most presumptuous,
he sins with a high hand, and incurrs a greater guilt, and shall be exposed to
greater punishment. When the Fear of God is extinguished, Luxury takes the
Reins, and breaks through the Hedge of the Law, without feeling the wounding
Thorns, the fearful Threatenings in it; and drives on through all the degrees of
Sin. It Is the aggravation of the Israelites Ingratitude; Jesurun waxed Deuteronomy.
32. 15
fat, and kicked; and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. They were
like Beasts high fed, that become fierce and untractable, will endure no Yoke
upon them. The prosperous Sinner securely despises the Commands of God, and by
an implicit Blasphemy dares his offended Omnipotence, as if he were stronger
than the Lord. He concludes his safety from his present success, and says in
his Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.
heart, I shall have peace, tho I walk in the imagination of mine heart, and
add sin to sin: The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord shall
smoke against that Man to his destruction.

3. Prosperity exposes dangerously to the tempting Power of Satan, whose
Subtilty, Malice, and Diligence, is always exercised in training Men to
Perdition. His destructive Power cannot make immediate impressions on the Soul,
but he tempts by Objects without, and the Affections within; the World and the
Flesh that are in combination with him. He is accordingly styled, the God of 2
Cor. 4.
this World, as he reigns in the Men of the World, by using the things of the
World, to obtain and establish his Kingdom. He blinds their eyes by glittering
Temptations, deceives and surprises them by his Fallacies. And although it is
difficult to conceive and unfold his internal Agency, and pernicious
Operations; and it is certain he cannot make a forcible entry into the Soul, and
tempt with prevalency and success, without the consent of the Will, yet we are
told, that he is a prime Mover in the sins of Men. He entered into Judas, and by
putting a luster on the Silver, exciting his covetous desires, prevailed with
him to betray the Lord of Glory. He works Ephesians. 2. 2.
powerfully in the Children of Disobedience. They are as it were possessed and
acted by his strong Incitations. They are said to be taken 2 Timothy 2. l.
captive by him at his Will. It Is an allusion to the catching of Beasts; when
by the address and craft of the Hunters, they are drawn or urged into the toil
prepared for them. Now Prosperity furnishes him with the Materials whereof he
weaves the most fatal Snares: for his strength and art to destroy principally
lie in specious Representations, and fallacious Promises of happiness in the
enjoyment of worldly things. This will appear, by considering,

1. That pleasant Temptations are most apt to seduce the Souls of Men to ruin.
As in sowing the Earth, when there is a congruity between the Soil and the
Seed, it is nourished and springs up to a plentiful Harvest. So when Temptations
are suitable to the heart, they are entertained with complacency, and are
productive of actual Sins. Every Man is James 1. 14, 15.
tempted (cum effectu by Satan) when he is drawn away by his own Lust, and
enticed: the sensual Appetite is drawn forth by things grateful to it: Then
when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin; and Sin, when it is finished,
brings forth Death. When the Appetite has obtained the consent of the Will,
the complete act of Sin follows; and Sin habitually indulged, ends in Death.

Some Temptations of Satan are of such a black Complexion, and so terrible to
humane Nature, that the Soul resists them, till by violence and restless
importunity it is overcome: But by the Attractives of Pleasure he easily
prevails. As in cutting of 'Timber, if on strikes cross the Grain, there is
strong resistance; but if the blow follows the Vein of the Wood, it easily
cleaves asunder. The Temptations of Riches, Honor, and Pleasures, are so
delightful, that the Devil commands or persuades Men to a compliance with them.

Besides, his malice in pleasant Temptations is less discernible; and
consequently Men do not by Circumspection, and Prayer for Divine Grace,
preserve themselves from the mischief of them. If we are fiercely assaulted by
unnatural Temptations that cause extraordinary Agonies of Spirit, we seek for
supernatural Assistance, and fortify our selves with holy Resolutions against
the open Enemy. But by the pleasures of Sin, he insinuates into Men's Hearts,
and feeds the deadly Disease so gratefully, that they discover not their danger
till past recovery. Therefore he destroys more by his Serpentine Suggestions,
by winning Charms, than by fiery Rage. Indeed he is never more a Devil, than
when he deceives; and we are divinely warned of his Guile, Devices, and Wiles,
that we may not be surprised and ruined by our invisible Adversary.

2. Plentiful Prosperity affords variety of Temptations, which he makes use of
to prevent the satiety and dislike that the same repeated Temptations would
cause. Since Man was divided from God, the true Center of the Soul, he breaks
into a thousand irregular Desires; and in the Apostle's phrase, serves diverse
Lusts and Pleasures: and the Vanities of the World do rather cloy than satisfy;
that which brings transporting Joy at first, by continuance becomes nauseous
and insipid. Now the Tempter, with the abundance of Prosperity, so orders his
temptations, as to take off the weariness of one pleasure by another, and keeps
his Slaves in the Magical Circle of Variety. As a rich Epicure provides a
Universe of Luxury, commands the four Elements to make a show, Nec mora, quod
pontus, quod terra, quod educat aer, poscit.
the Earth, the Air, the Water, of their Treasures, and the Fire of its Art to
dress them, thereby to excite the languishing Appetite, to give a relish to
Intemperance, and satisfy the greedy Eye, as well as the blind Belly. Thus
Satan, the Architect of Pleasure, brings out of his Storehouse several kinds of
delightful Temptations, to reinflame the Carnal Appetite when sated: without
variety desire often fails the Man, and Pleasure fails the Desire. Voluptuaries
are dissolved in the changing streams of Pleasure.

3. Idleness, that is often the concomitant of Prosperity, gives him a tempting
opportunity, and makes Men more receptive of his temptations. The Sin and
Destruction of Sodom was from hence. This was the Iniquity of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.
49.
Pride, fullness of Bread, and Idleness was in her, and her Daughters. The idle
Person prevents the Devil, beckens the Tempter to do his Office. When the House
is empty, the Mind not exercised with better Employments, and the Heart is
loose and unguarded, the Tempter is invited to take Possession.

Idleness is directly opposite to Life, as well as Felicity. To live, is to be
in action. Inanimate things are only bound with a dead rest. And amongst
inanimate Bodies, as they ascend in Perfection, they are more Active. The
Heavens that excel in situation and qualities all things that are without
Life, are in continual motion. And Man's Felicity consists in the most perfect
Actions of the most perfect Life; in the Vision and Enjoyment of the Blessed
God. Now Man naturally being avers from a state contrary to Life and Felicity,
if he is not employed in business becoming the reasonable immortal Soul, rather
than languish in idleness, is active in making provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. Time is tedious, and that it may pass away
pleasantly, Men seek for Diversions that are usually either sinful in their own
Nature, or connext with Sins.

A lawful Employment, is a double security against Temptations: Partly Divine,
as it entitles us to God's Providence over us; for whilst we are obeying his
Command, we are encouraged by his Promise, that he will keep us in all our
ways; either prevent Temptations, or afford us assistance to vanquish them: And
partly Natural; for whilst we are diligently exercised in a lawful Calling, the
Mind is not at leisure to attend the Temptation, and the Senses do not so
easily admit those Objects that betray the Soul. And it is observable, that God,
who is merciful in his Chastisements, orders that fallen Man should obtain the
Fruits of the Earth to support his Life by the sweat of his Brows, that his
uncessant Labor might preserve him from Idleness; which to corrupt Nature is
the seminary of so many vile Lusts.

4. As the Temptations of Prosperity make Men an easy Prey to Satan, so they
keep them in the most perfect and miserable bondage under his Power. When he
has taken hold of their Affections, he leads them captive at his Will. They are
freely drawn by the pleasing force of his Temptations: they are voluntary
Slaves, and in love with their Captivity. 'Twas the cruel and crafty advice
offered to the Athenians, to keep the subdued Inhabitants of Egina from
rebelling, to cut off their Thumbs, that they might be Ut remos agere possint,
hastas tractare non possint.
incapable to manage a Spear, and by War obtain a victorious rescue from their
Tyranny, but be fit to pull the Oar in the Galleys. It Is an Emblem of Satan's
dealing with his Slaves; for by the pleasures of Sin, their Hearts are weak,
disabled from vigorous and holy Resolutions to resist his power; they cannot
make use of the Armor of God for their Defense: and their Lusts are strong,
they are patient of his Drudgery, constant at the Oar, and faithful to their
Chains. And from hence it is evident that Men are never more dangerously under
the destructive power of Satan than when they enjoy Prosperity.

3. Prosperity is destructive to many, in that it affords them advantages to
corrupt others, and reciprocally exposes them to be corrupted by others.
Persons in Dignity, Wealth, and Power, when depraved in their Inclinations and
Actions, are like public Fountains poisoned, that convey a spreading ruin
abroad. Haec enim conditio superiorum est ut quicquid faciunt praecipere
videantur, and pernitiosissimus est malae rei maximus quisque author. Quintil.
Their evil Example has a pernicious Influence, and more commanding Efficacy as
a Rule, than their Laws they ordain as Rulers. The Manners of Princes are as
current as their Money, that being stamped with their Image and Superscription,
tho the Metal be base, passes freely among the People. The reason of it is
evident, for without the restraints of shame and fear, the sensual Passions are
riotous and licencious.

Shame, is a displeasure at Evils that are attended with dishonor and infamy,
especially at sinful Evils that are so shameful in their own Nature, that the
most sordid things in comparison are less ignominious. Now foul Vices when
practiced by Men of conspicuous Eminence, do not seem with that turpitude and
deformity as is inherent in their Nature. As a muddy Vapor drawn up by the
Sun, and enameled with the Rays of Light, appears amiable to the Eye, not
dreggy and foul as it is in it self. Innumerable miscarry by the vicious
Examples of Persons in Honor; for when Sins are gilded over with
creditableness, many think it necessary to be unholy, that is, truly vile, that
they may be fashionably noble. And when those that are in Power abuse it, as a
privilege for licenciousness in Sin, inferiors are viciously bold, expecting
Facility and Indulgence in the pardoning those Faults of which their Superiors
are guilty: And those who do not fear to be punished, do not fear to sin. Thus
amongst the Heathens, Lasciviousness Ipsa vitia religiosa sunt, atque non modo
non vitantur, sed coluntur. Lact.
was lawless, because they ascribed their vicious Passions to their supposed
Deities, and did not fear their revenging Justice for what was practiced by
them. Besides, Prosperity exposes the Rich and Great to be more corrupted by
others. Servile Spirits will be cruelly obsequious to the Humors and Lusts of
those upon whom they depend, and the ready Instruments of accomplishing their
irregular Desires. It Is their Interest to please them, from whom they receive
Favors and Benefits. And how few have so firm a Virtue, as to break the
twisted Temptations of Pleasure and Profit? The Rich and Great in the World,
are usually attended with a train of Dependents, or vicious Associates, whose
compliance is very influential to harden a vicious Disposition into a corrupt
Habit. These are underworkers to Satan the Mastertempter, and feed the double
Element of infernal Fire, Lust and Rage, in the Breasts of those with whom they
converse. It Is the peculiar misery of Men in a high and flourishing Condition,
that they have many Non me potes uti amico and adulatore. Phocion Antipatri.
Flatterers, and few Friends. Few or none dare faithfully represent their Sins
and Danger, lest the sight of their Guilt in its true reflection, should offend
them. As Love is blind to others, so especially to one's self; and mercenary
Wretches, by the most vile flattery, endeavor to make them believe of
themselves, what is pleasing to them to believe. Such to ingratiate, will
commend the mere shadows of Virtue, as substantial Virtue; and excuse real
gross Vices, as but the shadows of Vice. By deceitful Arts they color and
conceal the native ugliness of Sin, under a thin appearance and name of Nullis
vitiis desunt pretiosa nomina. Plin.
Virtue. The arrogant and revengeful, they call generous; the covetous, frugal;
the lascivious, gentile; the prodigal, magnificent; the malicious, wary and
cautious; the brutish and secure, courageous. The Conversation of such is
infinitely dangerous and corrupting: for under the disguise of Friendship they
are the most deadly Enemies. What greater danger of being poisoned can there
be, than when by Art the taste of Poison is taken away from the Poison, and
there is no suspicion of the Traitor that gives it? Thus it is further evident,
that Prosperity is very dangerous to the Souls of Men.

4. The Prosperity of Sinners usually renders the means of Grace ineffectual,
that should reclaim and reform them, and consequently their Destruction is
remediless. The Means of Grace are Internal or External: Internal, the motions
of the Holy Spirit, and the Convictions and Excitations of Conscience:
External, the Ministry of the Word, and the Counsels of faithful Friends; all
which are usually made frustrate and inefficacious by the Vices and Lusts of
the Prosperous.

1. Prosperity makes Sinners more incapable of receiving the heavenly
Impressions of the Spirit, and obstinate in resisting his gracious working. The
Flesh and Gal. 5.
the Spirit are contrary: And accordingly as the carnal Appetite has dominion
and overrules in Men, such is their opposition to his restraints from Evil, or
his motions to what is holy and good. The sensual have not the Spirit. Jude.
They wilfully refuse to give admission to him, when by inward impulses he
sollicits them; and have a stubborn and active contrariety to his Attributes
and gracious Operations. He is styled the Spirit of Power, and Love, and a
sound Mind. He communicates a sacred Sovereign Virtue to the Soul, whereby the
irregular Passions are reduced to the obedience of the sanctified Mind, and the
reigning power of Sin is dissolved. He is a free Spirit, and restores the Soul
to true and perfect Liberty, by enlarging the Will, and making it commensurate
with the Divine Will: and from hence it is the inseparable Character of a
converted Person, he is willing to do what God will have him do, and to be what
God will have him be. But sensual Persons, by the pleasant infusions of
servility from the Tempter, and carnal Objects, have lost their power and Nec
te posse carere velim.
desire of spiritual Liberty, and resist the holy Spirit, when he offers to
break the Bands of their Lusts. The Spirit in converting the Soul, inspires it
with heavenly Love to God for the ever-satisfying beauty of his Perfections;
and from Love proceeds intellectual delight in communion with him, in
affectionate ascents to him, and his gracious descents to the Soul: but the
Sensual are fastened in the Mire of their sordid Pleasures, and can take no
heavenly flight, and relish no divine Comforts. The Spirit produces a sound
Mind, to judge sincerely of things as they are. And from hence the corrupting
Vanities of the World lose their attractive Charms, and eternal things appear
in their reality and excellency, and are chosen and sought with persevering
diligence. But the sensual Heart is a perpetual Furnace, whose Smoke darkens
the Mind, that it cannot discover sublime and heavenly Excellencies; and whose
impure Heat fires the Will, that it is earnest in the pursuit of fleshly
Pleasures. Briefly, nothing does more quench the Spirit in his illuminating,
quickening, and attractive Operations, than Sensuality: and nothing more
heightens sensuality, and increases the aversness of carnal Men to the holy Law
of God, and makes their Conversion more difficult than Prosperity. Indeed, the
Spirit of God can by effectual Grace convert the most unprepared habituate
Sinner, the most obstinate Enemy of Holiness; he can melt the most rocky
stubborn Heart, into a holy softness and compliance with its Duty; for creating
Power is of infallible Efficacy; and there are some Objects and Miracles of
Divine Grace, that are the everlasting Monuments of its glorious Power in
subduing the most fierce violence of rebellious Sinners. But the Spirit of God
does not work as natural Agents, that are active to the extent of their Power.
The Winds blow with all their force, and the Sun inlightens the Air with all
its luster. The holy Spirit is an intelligent and voluntary Agent, whose Power
in working is regulated by his Will, and directed by his Wisdom. There are some
things repugnant to the Divine Attributes, 'that it is impossible God should do
them: the Apostle says, that God cannot lie, for it is contrary to his Truth,
one of his essential Perfections. And it is as impossible that he should do any
thing unbecoming his Wisdom. He threatened the sensual World, My Spirit shall
not always strive Genesis 6.
with Man, for he is Flesh; that is, corrupt and indulgent to his fleshly
Appetites, and always opposing and controuling the pure Motions of the Spirit.
We read that our Savior could do no mighty Mark 6. 5.
Works in his own Country, because of their unbelief: Not as if their
Infidelity abated his Divine Power, but they were unprepared to receive benefit
by them, his Miracles would have been cast away upon such inconvincible
Persons. Who will sow the barren Sands, or water dead Plants, or give a rich
Cordial to a furious Patient that will spill it on the ground? And it is an Act
of Justice to deprive Sinners of those Inspirations which they have so long
resisted. Those who are tender and tractable, and unfeignedly resign up
themselves to his conduct in the Ways of Life, shall receive more powerful
Influences to perfect the blessed Work begun in them: He will give more Grace
to the humble: But those who are so far from valuing his Graces and Comforts,
that should be received with the highest respect, that they ungratefully
despise them, and rebel against his Motions and Counsels, he righteously
deserts. St. Stephen in his Charge against the Jews, to complete the
aggravation of their Sins, reproaches them; Ye stiffnecked, and uncircumcised
in Heart, Acts 7.
and Ears, ye always resisted the Holy Ghost. The obstinate Sinner rebels
against his Authority, and contemns his Mercy. The Tempter with his Charms is
presently entertained, as the Devils easily entered into the Swine; but the
Holy Spirit with his gracious Offers is rejected. Wretched Indignity! rather to
obey a Slave and an Enemy, than the lawful Sovereign.

If the Saints grieve the Spirit of God, by a wilful neglect of his assisting
Grace, and fall into presumptuous sins, although from the perfection of his Nature
he is not capable of passionate grief, yet he infinitely dislikes their sins.
And as grief when it is oppressing, causes the Spirits to retire to the Heart,
and Nature is as it were shut up in its springs, and obstructed from
communicating agility and vivacity in the ordinary operations of the senses:
thus the holy Spirit when grieved withdraws, and there follows a disconsolate
eclipse and interruption of his reviving quickening presence. But the indulgent
habituate Sinners, provoke him finally to leave them to their own Lusts. It Is
true, his deserting them is usually gradual, as in a consumptive Person the
stomach, the color, the strength, decline by degrees, till Nature sinks
irrecoverably under the Disease; so the motions of the Spirit in those who have
often repelled them, are not so frequent and vigorous as before; his after
calls are weaker, wasting, and dying every day, till his total withdrawing from
them. How fearful and hopeless is the state of such a sinner? This spiritual
Judgment always proceeds from inexorable severity, and ends in the eternal ruin
of sinners. For without the Spirit's supernatural working, they can never be
renewed to Repentance, never reconciled to God. They may for a time live in a
voluptuous course, or follow the Business of the World; and a little breath may
separate between them and Hell, but they shall at last die in their sins, in an
impardonable state for ever. It Is said of the Jews, They rebelled and vexed his
Holy Spirit, therefore he turned to be their Enemy, and fought against them.

2. The Convictions and Excitations of Conscience are prevented, or made
ineffectual by the prosperity of sinners. Conscience is the applicative Mind
that respects Practice; it directs in our Duty, both by inhibitions from what
is evil, and by instigations to what is good; and by comparing our Actions with
the Rule, testifies our innocence or guilt, and approves or condemns us.

This intellectual Ray was planted in us by the wise God in out Creation, and
extended to the Divine Law, the Object and End of it, to keep us to our Duty.
And since our revolt, it is being enlightened and sanctified the vital Principle
of Conversion to God, the powerful means of rescuing the lapsed Soul from its
prostitution to the Flesh, and recovering it to a temper of Purity becoming its
Original Excellence, and Relation to the Father of Spirits. It Is true, the Love
of God is the primary Rule of our Duty, and the Holy Spirit is the Efficient of
our Renovation; but the enlightened Conscience is the immediate Rule, and the
immediate Mover of us to return to our Duty. And if Conscience, which is the
Eye of the Soul, be covered with a film of Ignorance, if it be blear'd with the
false glitterings of the World, if it totally neglects its Office, or makes but
a cold application of saving Terrors that may control the licentious
Appetites, if it be disregarded, when it suggests and excites to our Duty, the
sinner is hardened and settled in his lost state. Now Prosperity foments the
sensual Affections, that obscure the Light of Conscience, that corrupt its
Judgment, that smother and suppress its Dictates, or despise and slight them,
that it is powerless, tho constituted God's Deputy to order our Lives.

1. Affected Ignorance is the usual Concomitant of sensual Lusts: for the
enlightened Conscience will convince, and condemn Men for their Pollutions, and
force them here to feel the beginning of sorrows, and thereby make them
apprehensive what the issues and consummation will be hereafter, and this will
cast an aspersion of bitterness upon their sweet sins, and lessen the full
pleasure of them. From hence our Savior tells us, Every John 3. 20.
one that loves to do Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest
his Deeds should be reproved; that is, by the instructed and awakned
Conscience. Men love darkness to cover their nakedness and foul deformity. They
are averse from knowing their Duty, and will not search, lest they should
discover such terrible Truths that cross their sensual Humor. The Apostle
foretells, That Scoffers 2 Pet. 3. 5.
should come in the last days, who are willingly ignorant of the beginning and
end of the World, as if there were no Divine Maker of all things, who has power
to destroy them, and consequently no Judge to whom Men must be accountable for
their disobedience to his Laws: they assent to the most evident Absurdity, that
all things were and shall continue in the same tenor: and the cause of their
willing ignorance is insinuated in the Character that describes them, that they
might walk after their own Lusts, more securely, freely, and joyfully.

2. Sensual Lusts do not only hinder Men's search after Knowledge, but obscure
the Light of Conscience, and corrupt its Judgment. There is such an intimate
Communion between the Soul and the Body, that interchangably they corrupt one
another: the sins of the Flesh sink into the Spirit, and corrupt the moral
Principles, from whence the sensible Conscience springs of Good and Evil. And
the sins of the Spirit, Infidelity, Incogitancy, Error, Security, break out in
the Deeds of the Body, and make the Flesh more outrageous in its Desires. St.
Paul declares, that Titus 1. 15.
unto the defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but even their Mind and
Conscience is defiled. A purged Heart is requisite for a clear Mind; but where
Lust dwells, it taints and perverts the practical Judgment; from whence so many
Disorders follow in the Life. The natural Conscience in many Cases, in its
simple judgment of things, sincerely declares what is to be done, and what to
be avoided; but when compounded and stained with a tincture of Sensuality; it
judges according to the Desires. The rebellious Israesites in the Wilderness
are described, It is a People that do err in Psalm. 57. 10.
their Hearts: the Heart was the erroneous Fountain of all their Miscarriages,
and forty Years instruction could do them no good. Those who are given up to
carnal Delights, and are in a confederacy with the gross Senses, even their
directive and judging Faculty is carnal in its apprehensions. A reprobate Mind,
and vile Affections, are naturally and judicially the Cause and Effect of one
another. Even natural Truths that are plain and bright, as the essential
distinction between moral Good and Evil, between Virtue and Vice, and the
belief of a Judgment to come, that is inseparably connext with it; yet through
the perverseness and crookedness of Men's Hearts, are strangely darkened. Men wish
according to their carnal Interest; and what they wish, they would fain
believe; and as when there was no King in Israel, every one did what was good
in his own Eyes: so if there were no after-reckoning, Men would, without the
check of Conscience, follow the Wills of the Flesh, therefore they are Atheists
in desire, and if not scared by the pangs of a throbbing Conscience, will be so
in their thoughts.

The Heathens cancelled the Law of Nature, and transgressed all the Rules of
Duty and Decorum; they securely indulged those Lusts that are a derogation and
debasement to the reasonable Creature, and make Men below Men. The reason of
this prodigious degeneracy was, their Manners corrupted their Minds. St. Paul
charges the Ephesians, not to walk Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19.
as the other Gentiles, in the vanity of their Minds, having the Understanding
darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their Heart; who being past feeling, have
given themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. A dead Conscience, and a dissolute Life, are inseparable. And how
many that are surrounded with the Celestial Beams of the Gospel, are as impure
and impenitent, as those in the black Night of Paganism? They stand at the
entrance of the bottomless Pit, yet do not smell the Brimstone that inrages the
Fire there: the flames of their Lusts, have feared their Consciences to a
desperate degree of hardness and insensibility. Of such the Apostle speaks, But
these, as natural 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13.
brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things they
understand not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption; and shall
receive the Reward of Unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot
in the day time; spots they are, and blemishes, sporting themselves with their
own deceivings, while they feast with you. They violated all the Prescriptions
and Restraints of natural Reason, they had lost all the ingenuous bashfulness
of the humane Nature, and pleased themselves in their false licentious
Principles, whereby they endeavored to justify their enormous Actions, and set
a superficial gloss upon their foul Deformities. Now a seduced and seducing
Mind, make the conversion of a Sinner most difficult. Whilst the Judgment
condemns what the Affections approve, Men are not so invincibly and
irrecoverably lost; the enlightened Conscience is an earnest of their return to
their Duty. But when the Spirit is deceived, the flesh always prevails; and Men
are most dissolute, corrupt, and desperately wicked. Our Savior says, If the
Light that is in us be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? how disorderly and
ruinous will the course be? If the Salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? If the Conscience, that should be as Salt to preserve the Soul
from tainting Pleasures, be corrupted, wherewith can it be restored?

3. Fleshly Lusts smother and suppress the Dictates and Testimony of the
enlightened Conscience, that they are not influential upon the Life. The
Dictates of Conscience are in a direct Line, instructing and advising Men in
their Duty: the Testimony is by reflection upon their Errors from the Divine
Rule, and condemning them for their Guilt.

1. The Dictates of the enlightened Conscience are suppressed. It Is the
observation of (...). Arist. l. 7, etc c. 3.
the Philosopher, concerning sensual Persons, that they have Reason in the
Faculty and Habit, but not in the Use and Exercise. The practical Understanding
declares our Duty, that it is absolutely necessary to obey God; and Men assent
to it in the general: but when this Principle is to be applied to Practice in
Particulars that are ungrateful to the corrupt Will, Lust draws a Veil over it,
that it may not appear to check the sensual Inclinations. Whilst the Mind
seduced by the Senses, is intent upon the pleasing Object, it does not actually
and strongly consider the Divine Command; and Conscience is brought under the
control of the impetuous Passions. The Light of Reason, as well as of Divine
Revelation, discovers, that the blessed Beginning, and the happy End of Man, is
to be like God, and to enjoy his Love; but when there is a competition between
his Favor, and the things of the World, the carnal Heart suppresses the
Dictates of the Mind, and makes a blindfold choice of things present and
sensible, as if Man were all Earth, and there were no spark of Heaven within
him.

The Heathens are charged by St, Paul, -- That they with held the Truth in
Unrighteousness. The Notion of God as the Supreme Lawgiver, and to be obeyed
according to his Law impressed upon Conscience, was a natural Truth, and should
have reigned in their Hearts and Lives; but they would not suffer it to exert
its Power in ordering their Actions. There is a natural Miracle seen in Egypt
every Year; when the River Nilus overflows the Plains: many living Creatures
are half formed, and part remains slimy Earth, without Life or Motion.

Altera pars vivit, rudis est pars altera tellus. Such Monsters were the
ungodly and unrighteous Heathens; half Men in their Understandings, and half
Mud in their filthy Affections. And there are innumerable such Monsters in the
Christian world.

2. The Testimony of Conscience is suppressed and neglected by the prosperous
Sinner. If Conscience be in some degree Righteous, and faithful in its Office,
and reproves him, and sets his Sins in order before his Eyes; he will not
regard its earnest Warnings. He is as unwilling to hear that sincere Witness in
his Bosom, as Ahab was the inflexible Prophet Micaiah; of whom he said, I hate
him, for he does not prophecy Good of me, but Evil. Prosperity affords many
diversions, whereby the sinner shifts off conversing with Conscience, and
remains engaged in his sinful state. I hearkened, and heard, says the Prophet
Jeremy, but they spoke not aright; no Man repented of his Wickedness, saying,
What have I done? What foul ignominious Acts, how defiling and debasing my
Soul, how offensive to the pure Eyes of God, who is so glorious in Majesty, and
dreadful in Power? Such a sight of Sin would make the Conscience boil, and
chill the Passions, and urge sinners to return to their Duty. But whilst they
prosper, they are obstinate in Rebellion; Every one turned to his course, as
the Horse rushes into the Battle. As the Horse when inflamed, by the noise and
other Accidents of War, furiously rushes to his own destruction: thus sinners
when they encounter alluring Objects that divert the Mind from serious
consideration, either they do not discern, or will not observe the Dangers
before them, and with as little consideration, and as much fierceness as the
Beasts venture upon their own destruction. Conversion is the product of the
most serious and sad thoughts, from which a prosperous sinner is most averse.

2. The external means for converting sinners, are usually ineffectual upon
them whilst they enjoy Prosperity.

1. The Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation to them that believe; and the
preaching of it is by divine Institution the ordinary means of Conversion. God
could by the immediate illumination of the Mind, and influence upon the Will
and Affections, convert sinners from the Errors of their Ways; but his Wisdom
and condescending Goodness makes use of the Ministry of Men to convey the Word
of Truth and Life to the World. This way is very congruous, both to the
compounded Nature of Man, by the Senses to work upon the Soul, and to the
native freedom of his Will: for tho the supernatural Agent infallibly changes
the Heart, yet the Instrument can only direct and persuade Men, as those who
are endowed with intellectual and elective Faculties; and thus the efficacy of
Divine Grace is insinuated, in a way suitable to the reasonable Nature. The
Ministers are styled the Light of the World, to discover to Men their undone
condition by sin, and to point out the way to their everlasting Peace. Our
blessed Redeemer saves the lost Remnant of Mankind by the sacred Ministry; and
where there are no Evangelical Preachers sent, or only a doleful succession of
blind Guides, what Omnia torpent, omnia rigent, sola feritas calet.
Tertullian says of Scythia, a Country that by the extremity of the cold, is
hard and dry, and perpetually barren, but the residence of fierce Cruelty, is
applicable to a Nation, the Hearts of Men are frozen to their sins, there is no
melting in the tears of true Repentance, no holy Heat, only their brutish Lusts
are ardent and active. But where the Ambassadors of Christ are faithful and
zealous to induce sinners to break off their sins by repentance, and to be
reconciled to God, there are none more incapable of the sanctifying Power of
the Gospel, than sinners in Prosperity.

1. Pride, the Vice of Prosperity, makes them fierce and stubborn against the
holy and strict Rules of the Word. We will not Isa 44. 16, 17.
hearken to thee, but will certainly do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth.
If a faithful Minister represents the inside of their foul Souls, their
uncomely Passions are raised against him: if he recommends the earnest study of
Holiness and Godliness, they entertain his Counsels with derision and disdain.
Those to whom the dearest and most affectionate Honor is due, being spiritual
Fathers and Physicians, are despised in their Persons and Office, by Fools in
their Prosperity. They condemn what they do not understand, and affect not to
understand what condemns them. They hear Sermons to censure, and censure that
they may not be troubled by them. What hope is there of reducing haughty
Scorners to the Obedience of the Gospel? Even the Miracles and Ministry of our
Savior was without success upon the Pharisees, who heard and derided him. If
such are convinced in their Minds, and not disarmed of their Pride and
Self-will, they refuse to yield themselves to the Lord. Meekness is a requisite
Qualification for receiving the Word with its saving Virtue. We are directed to
lay aside all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness; and with meekness to
receive the ingrafted Word, that is able to save our Souls. We are prepared for
Divine Grace, by a serious sense of our want of it, and earnest desire to
obtain it. He fills the hungry with good things, and the Rich he sends empty
away. None are so insensible of their spiritual Wants, and avers from the
humble acknowledgment of them, as the Prosperous Sinner; and none more unlikely
to obtain spiritual Riches.

2. Infidelity, that is occasioned and confirmed by Prosperity in Sin, renders
the Gospel ineffectual to the Salvation of Men. The Word preached did not
profit the Jews, Heb. 4. 2.
not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. A steadfast belief of Divine
Revelations, is the principle of Obedience: without it, Motives of the highest
strain are ineffectual. Eternal things are not within the prospect of Sense,
and tho set forth with the clearest evidence of Reason, and enforced with the
greatest earnestness of Affection, yet the Sons of Darkness sleep profoundly in
their sins. If Heaven with its Joys and Glory be revealed in the most affecting
manner, it has no more efficacy to move them, than charming Music to awaken
one out of a Lethargy: only violent Remedies, bleeding, scarrifying, and
burning, are proper and powerful for his recovery. If they are warned, that the
everlasting King will shortly open the Clouds, and come with terrible Majesty
to the universal Judgment, and require an account for his abused Mercies: their
Hearts are apt to reply, as the Priests did to Judas, What is that to us? see
ye to it. The Terrors of the Lord no more affect them, than Thunder does the
Deaf, or Lightning the Blind. In short, tho charged and adjured by all the
Threatenings of the Law, and the neglected Gospel, tho entreated by all the
precious Promises of Mercy, they continue hardened in their voluptuous sins:
they despise the eternal Rewards of Holiness and Wickedness, as incredible and
impertinent, and Ministers as men of vain talk and imaginations. For the
Infidel Senses are not affected with things future, and Sinners, whilst
prosperous, are under their Dominion.

3. Suppose in preaching the Word, a sharp ray of Truth darts through the deep
and settled darkness of the Heart, yet it is soon dampt, and without saving
effect upon Sinners in their Prosperity. They may be terrified, but are not
subdued by the Armor of Light; for they presently take sanctuary in the World,
to escape the strokes of it. The carnal Passions dare not appear before such
Objects as awaken the Conscience; the Senses strongly apply the Mind to things
that touch them; the Fancy is the spring of of distraction in the thoughts, and
these reign in their full power in prosperous Sinners, so that they do not by
serious consideration apply things of eternal consequence to themselves. The
Heart of Man with difficulty changes its end; the outward actions may be
suspended or overruled for a time, but the love that is natural and
predominant in the Heart to the present World, cannot be purified and raised to
Heaven, without the Divine efficacy of the Word, applied by most solemn and
frequent thoughts. How plain and convincing are the words of our Savior; What
will it profit a Man, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? But
how few in hearing them, have found their Souls that were lost in the
corrupting Vanities of this World? The most seem not to know they have immortal
Souls, whilst they live as if they had none. The Reason is, they will not
consider duly their unvaluable worth, and the woeful folly in neglecting them.
When the Bird often straggles from the Nest, the Eggs are chil'd and
unprolific, for want of its warming incubation. Divine Truths are without life
and vigor, when they only lie in the memory, without serious and frequent
reflections on them. Many are enlightened, but not affected; or affected, but
not resolved; or resolved, but their resolutions are not prevailing and
permanent, because the Word does not sink into their Minds, by deep
consideration.

2. The other external means of recovering a Sinner from the snares of Death,
is private admonition, either authoritative, or merely charitative, by showing
him his Sins, and the fearful Consequences that attend them. The neglect of
this Duty, is a sign and effect of the greatest hatred; as the command of it
implies, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, and suffer Sin to lie
upon him. The performance of it, with prudence and meekness, with dear and
earnest love, has a special advantage and efficacy, being directly applied to
the Person whose Soul is concerned. The Reproofs of a Preacher are levelled in
common against the Sins of Men, but not applied in particular to every Sinner.
It Is the Office of Conscience, to bring home to every Man's Bosom, what is
proper to his Case; and singularly to observe in himself, what is spoken in the
general. But in private Admonition, the Superior or Friend supplies the part of
Conscience. And (in this sense) woe be to him that is alone! that wants a
faithful Friend to supply the Duty of Conscience, either to preserve him from
falling into Sin, or to raise him when down. Now a prosperous Sinner is most
unlikely to receive the Benefit designed by admonition. If the Patient does not
assist the Cure, by receiving holy Counsels with humility, respect, and
thankfulness, they prove ineffectual, and much more if they be rejected with
aversness and contempt. When a Superior, (like a Father that holds a Child
over a Pit, to make him fear where there is danger) with solemnity admonishes
him of his Guilt and approaching Judgments, he is apt to slite his Person as
censorious, and his Admonition as impertinent. When a Friend by faithful
reproof endeavors to save his Soul from Sin and Hell, he entertains his
Reproof with scorn, or with conviction and indignation. Thus the wise observer
of Men declares the careless wretched disposition of Sinners in their
Prosperity, by Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13.
their sorrowful reflections in Adversity: Thou shall mourn at the last, when
thy Flesh and thy Body are consumed, and say, How have I hated Instruction, and
my Heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor
inclined mine Ear to them that instructed me? Instruction to prevent Sin,
Reproof to correct Sin, were disregarded with an implicit hatred, or rejected
with absolute and express hatred.

To conclude this part of the Argument; Experience sadly proves that Sinners
are never reclaimed from their stubborn Folly but by sharp Afflictions. They
will not believe the evil of Sin, till by a real and sensible conviction they
take a measure of the Evil they have done* by the Evil they suffer. Affliction
tames the stubborn heart, and makes it humble and relenting. Even Pharaoh that
was a bold Atheist in his Prosperity, and stood upon high terms with Moses,
saying, Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? yet was an humble Suppliant in
his Distress: And Pharaoh sent, and Exodus 9. 27. 28.
called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned: the Lord is
righteous, and I and my People are wicked. Entreat the Lord that there be no
more mighty Thundrings, and Hail. This is set forth in a true and lively
comparison by the Prophet Jeremy: As a wild Ass Jer. 2. 24*
used to the Wilderness, that snuffs up the Wind at her pleasure: in her
occasion, who can turn her away? When fired with Lust, she ranges about
swiftly, without a Rider to guide, and a Curb to restrain her. All they that
seek her, will not weary themselves; but in her mouth they shall find her: It Is
in vain to pursue her then, but when she is bagg'd and heavy, they will tame
her. Thus when Sinners are prosperous, the call of God, and Conscience, and of
Teachers, do not stop them in their voluptuous course, but affliction confines
and reduces them to obedience.

5. Prosperity renders Men averse from suffering for the sake of Christ, when
they are called to give testimony to his Truth, and support his Cause.
Self-denial, with respect to the present Life, and all the Ornaments, Comforts,
and Endearments of it, is absolutely necessary by the Law of Christianity, when
the preserving of it is contrary to the Glory of Christ, and inconsistent with
our Duty to him. Then said Mat. 6. 24.
Jesus to his Disciples, If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross and follow me. The Cross implies all kinds and degrees of
suffering, from the least afflicting evil, to Death with ignominy and torment.
And how just is it, if we expect to be glorified by his Sufferings, that we
should willingly suffer for his Glory. At the first preaching of the Gospel,
many were offended at 1 Cor. 1. 23.
the Cross of Christ: they esteemed it folly, to expect eternal Life from one
that was put to death, and that he should bring them to the highest Glory, who
suffered in the lowest Weakness. Our Savior was concealed from their carnal
Eyes, by the overshadowing train of his Afflictions. And the Cross of Christ,
that is to be Gal. 5. 11.
voluntarily and obediently taken up by his Disciples, is a greater offense to
the World, than that to which he was nailed. It Is a harder Lesson, that we must
obtain Glory by our own Sufferings, than that it was purchased by our
Savior's. The Mind more willingly assents to the reasons of his Sufferings,
than of ours: in the first, it only encounters with false Prejudices, and vain
Shadows that darken that mighty Mystery; but in the second, it must overcome
the natural Love of this Life, and the Pleasures of it, which is so predominant
in Men. The alliance to the Body, and the allurements of the World, are the
causes of forsaking Religion, when the owning of it will cost us dear. And
those who enjoy Prosperity, are most easily terrified from their Duty to
Christ; the account of which is open to Reason, both from some general
Considerations, and from special, that respect Sufferings for Religion. The
general Considerations are two.

1. The living in Pleasures and soft Delicacy, enervates the masculine vigor
of the Spirit, and damps Resolution, that it presently faints when assaulted
with Difficulties. The Spirit of a Man, encouraged by just, and wise, and
generous Reasons, will stand firmly under heavy Troubles: But Fear breaks the
native strength of Mind, and like a secret sudden Palsy, that slackens the
Nerves, and loosens the Joints, causes a trembling and incapacity of bearing
Evils. The least glimpse of Danger, makes the Fearful to retire: like some,
that apprehensive of the rising Winds, will not venture any further in a Boat,
than that one Oar may be on the Shore, whilst the other strikes in the Water.
The Timorous, when Afflictions attend the faithful profession of the Gospel,
usually are treacherous to God, to their Souls, and to the Truth. To God (whose
Servants they are by the dearest Titles) by contradicting their Duty, which is
to suffer cheerfully for his Gospel and his Glory, when called forth: and by
revolting from his Service, they occasion such dishonorable unworthy
conceptions of him, as if he were regardless of his suffering Servants, and
would not gloriously reward those who are faithful to the Death, the Seal of
their Loyalty and Perseverance: they are treacherous to their Souls, by
preferring the Interest of the perishing Flesh, before the happiness of the
immortal Part: they betray the Truth, by exposing it to a suspicion of
Falsehood; for as the confirming Religion by Sufferings, does most effectually
recommend it to the belief and affections of others; so the denial of it, or
the withdrawing our Testimony in times of Danger, will incline others to judge
that it is not the Truth, or at least of no great moment, that the Professors
of it do not think worth their Sufferings. How many faint-hearted Persons have
thus betrayed the Son of God again, and their Consciences, and their Religion?
Their Faith that sparkled in Prosperous times, when Troubles come, is a quenched
Cole, raked up in the cold pale Ashes of distrustful Fears, without any Divine
Light or Heat.

2. Prosperity makes Men unthoughtful and careless of Evils that may happen. I
said in my Prosperity, I shall never be moved. Carnal Joy (the Affection of
Prosperity) and Folly are nearly allied, and flatter Men as if their Ease and
Calm would never be disturbed: and by supine negligence, they are unprovided
for the encountering with Evils. According to our circumspection in Prosperity,
such is our courage in Adversity; and by how much the less affliction is
expected, so much the more are we perplexed when it seises upon us. The last
Day, that shall strangely surprise the World in its deep security, is compared
to Lightning for its suddenness and terror. Our Savior therefore plainly has
foretold, that the Cross is the Appendix of the Gospel, that it is the Property
of Error to persecute, and the Lot of Truth to be persecuted: He counsels his
Disciples to imitate a wise Builder, that computes the Expense before he begins
the Fabric, lest having laid the Foundation, and not being able to finish it,
he be exposed to the just Censure of Folly. So Christians are to forecast the
Injuries and Troubles they are likely to suffer for Religion, lest when the
Tempest threatens, they shamefully desert it. And how heavy will their Doom be?
The fearful, that Rev. 21. 8.
are not storm-proof, and the Liars, that openly renounce what they believe,
and profess what they do not believe, shall be with Infidels, Idolaters, and
Murderers, cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.

2. The special Reasons why Prosperity makes Men so disposed to quit the Truth
in times of Danger, are, because it weakens the Principles from whence
Christian Magnanimity springs; and those are unfeigned Faith, and divine Love.
As in natural things the formative Virtue determinates the Matter to such a
Being, and disposes to such Operations in proportion to the Principles from
which it results: So in moral things, the Soul is disposed and regulated in its
Actings correspondently to its Principles, and is either Carnal or Spiritual.
The universal Principle of Carnal Persons is to be happy here: their Eyes are
ever engaged upon, and their Desires ever thirsting after sensual Satisfaction:
Who will show us any good? and by consequence their main care is, to obtain and
secure temporal things, the materials of their happiness. The supernatural
Principle of a Saint is to please God, and enjoy his Favor. As Men believe
they love, and as they love they live.

1. Unfeigned Faith of the Rewards of the Gospel, is necessary to keep a
Christian steady in his course, through all the Storms and Tides of this
mutable World. It is a faithful saying, If we die with 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with
him. The Apostle usually prefaces with that strong assurance, It is a faithful
saying, when the Truth is of eminent importance, and contrary to the Sentiments
of Carnal Nature, If we die with him, we shall also live with him. Our Savior
dedicated Martyrdom in his own Person: His Death was a Ransom for us to God,
and a sealing Testimony of the Gospel to Men: He witnessed 1 Timothy 6. 13.
before Pontius Pilate a good Confession. The Terror of the Roman Tribunal, nor
the Rage of the Jews, could not make him retract the Divine Truth which he had
so often declared, that he was the Son of God, come from Heaven to save the
World: and when the Cross with its Infamy and horror was in his view, he
avowed his Heavenly Kingdom. And all those who suffer with him, for his Truth,
and in conformity to his Pattern, with his Meekness and Patience, his Charity
and Constancy, shall reign with him. And what is more powerful for the
consolation and establishment of Christians, than that their Sufferings for
Christ shall end in Glory. This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even
our Faith. 1 John 5.
This did Miracles in the first Ages of the Church, conquering all that was
terrible to Flesh and Blood. The Heathens despised the Hopes of Christians as
wretched Illusions, and with impious scorn upbraided them for their constancy
under Persecutions: Where is the God that can Min. fell.
raise the dead, and not rescue the living? Unbelief is blind, and cannot see
beyond this World to the Eternal State. But Faith in the blessed Redeemer,
opens a Prospect into the World to come, so full of Glory, that no Person that
has an understanding and will to discourse and choose, if he steadfastly
believes it, but must despise all the Evils that the wit and strength of
Persecutors can inflict in comparison of it. I reckon, says the Romans 8. 18.
Apostle, that the sufferings of the present Life, in all their kinds and
degrees, are not to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed.
Enlightened Christians esteemed their Sufferings for the Cause of God, no
Arguments of his Weakness, but his Wisdom, to exercise and try their Loyalty
and cordial Obedience before he rewarded them; and had reason to admire his
Providence, not to suspect his Power and Love. They knew that the power of
Tyrants could only reach the Body, the vile, frail, and mortal part of Man; but
the precious Soul was entirely exempted from their rage; and Faith assured them
of a glorious Resurrection after Death. The Body of a Martyr shall be revived
as a Phaenix out of its Ashes; when the Body of a Persecutor shall be quickened,
as a Serpent out of a Dunghill, the one to be glorified, the other tormented for
ever. The belief of this made them extremely valiant in the face of all their
threatening cruel Enemies. But the evil Heart of unbelief, Heb. 3. 12.
causes a departure from the living God. He that suspects God's fidelity in his
Promises, will suspend his own: Nature will shrink at the first sight of
imminent Dangers. An Infidel, that lives as if he were all Body, and no
immortal Soul, judges the loss of the present Life, and the comforts of it, as
his utter undoing and total perishing. He has an appearance of reason to secure
his present Possessions, whatever becomes of Religion; for he expects no
future Good, that will infinitely more than countervail his present loss: And
that Prosperity inclines Men to Atheism and Infidelity, has been proved before.

2. The Love of God inspires Believers with a heavenly Fortitude, to endure the
worst Evils that may befall them for his sake. Perfect Love casts out Fear;
keeps 1 John 4. 18.
its Supremacy inviolate in the midst of the greatest Dangers. Love is an
active invincible Affection, as strong as Death, that none can vanquish. The
Love of God is a never-dying Flame in the Hearts of the Saints, because it
depends upon the unchangeable Love of God to them. We love him, because he
first loved us. Love 1 John 4. 19.
esteems God as the greatest Reward. A Saint does not so much love God for
Heaven, tho a place of inconceivable Glory, as Heaven for God, because he there
reveals his Perfections to his People. This Holy Love, makes the Christians
faithful and obsequious to Christ, and to prefer his Honor incomparably before
the present World. The Martyrs of the divinest Courage, were animated by this
holy Affection: they loved not their lives unto the death, but cheerfully
offered them as a Sacrifice to his praise. Love kindled in them a sacred
Vehemence, in despising all the glittering temptations of the World. Love
inspired them with a victorious Patience, to blunt the edg of Cruelty. They
never repented the choice of his Religion, but rejoiced when his Glory was set
forth by their Ignominy, and when their love to Christ appeared in its radiancy
and vigor through their Sufferings. Love is the Principle of Constancy, by
which Religion reigns on Earth, and is crowned in Heaven.

On the contrary, when Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, are the Idols of Men's
Heads and Hearts, the chief Objects of their esteem and affections, they will
sacrifice their Souls rather than lose the World, their dear Felicity.
Therefore St. John earnestly dehorts Christians, Love not the World, neither
the things that are in the World. If any Man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him: they are utterly inconsistent; partly because the Heart
cannot be entirely set upon contrary Objects, and partly because love to the
one requires what is directly contrary to love to the other. From hence St.
James vehemently upbraids carnal Professors, Ye Adulterers, and Adulteresses,
know ye not that the friendship of the World is enmity with God? Whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. The World is the
powerful Star, whose Aspect he regards, and tho with the dishonor and
displeasure of God, he will by irreligious compliance secure his temporal
Interests. The pure refined Truth of the Gospel, that has past the fiery Trial,
he will corrupt and embase by carnal temperaments: the precious Truth so dearly
bought by the Blood of the Martyrs, he will vilely sell for the things of this
World. Nay of a Professor, he will by degrees turn Persecutor of those who
steadfastly own the Truth. The love of the World so strangely inchants and
infects the Mind, that a false Religion which a Man did abhor from, yet when
recommended by secular Advantages, will appear tolerable, then eligible, then
necessary; and consequently the divine Truth must be suppressed that contradicts
it.

There are such frequent Examples of this in every Age, that to insist upon
many particular Instances, were to tell great numbers of the dead to prove that
Men are mortal. The Young Man that so earnestly addressed himself to Christ for
his direction how to obtain Eternal Life, when commanded to give all his Estate
to the Poor, and to follow Christ: he would not gain at so dear a rate
Celestial Treasures, but went away sorrowful. Whereupon our Savior declares
with solemnity to his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a rich Man shall
hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. We read of two Tribes of the
Israelites, that chose their Inheritance on this side Jordan, and would not
have a share in the Land of Canaan: thus the earthly-minded prefer the present
World, the Object of their choice and love, before the heavenly Canaan. The
Ecclesiastical Historian Eusebius. lib. 6.
relates, that in the time of Persecution by Decius, the rich Men among the
Christians, were most easily and miserably foiled: the love of the World was a
dangerous earnest in their Hearts, of their revolting back to Pagan Idolatry,
and the Bondage of Satan. And in the time of the Arian Persecution, how many
who by their Titles and Office were specially obliged to be valiant for the
Truth, and to contend earnestly for the Faith; yet did accommodate their
Profession to their aspiring Ambition and greedy* Avarice? The Standard of
their Religion was the pitch of the State: they had a politic Faith, and
appeared either Orthodox or Arian, as the public Favor shined upon Truth or
Heresy. They robbed our Savior of the Honor of his Deity ( O astonishment!)
rather than part with their beloved Dignities and Riches* So powerful are
humane Respects in those who mind earthly things. Great force is requisite to
pluck up a Tree that has its Roots spread and deeply fastened in the Earth; and
it cannot be so entirely separated, but that part of the Roots will be broken:
thus when the Affections are deeply set in the World, and by Pleasures and
Riches fastened to it, how hardly is it rent from it! every Fiber of the Heart
is broken with sorrow. As Lot's Wife, when by an Angel forced out of Sodom, yet
cast a lingering affectionate look after it, and was turned into a Pillar of
Salt. The Separation is as bitter as the Possession is sweet: and none are more
unwillingly divorced from the World, than those who enjoy the confluence of
earthly happiness. Now when secular Interest outweighs Duty, when apparent
Danger induces to deny the Truth of Christ; how terrible and unavoidable will
be the punishment of that disloyalty? Our Savior's threatening is universal;
Whosoever Mat. 10. 33.
shall deny me before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven.
A most righteous and dreadful retribution; They denied him as their Lord, and
he denies them as his Servants. They usurped the Title of Christians, the
Relation of his Disciples, and in the last Day he will publicly disown them.
When that sad Sentence shall come from their Judge, Depart ye cursed, I know you
not; what confusion, what anguish will seize upon them! They shall be banished
from his glorious Kingdom, excommunicated from his blessed Society, and
tormented with the rebellious Angels for ever. It Is true, this universal and
peremptory Threatening* must be understood with an exception of those who after
their falling away are restored* by Repentance. Sometimes a Christian that has
deliberately and entirely devoted himself to Christ* that has sincerely
resolved rather to part with his Life, than that for which Life is worthy the
enjoying; yet by strong temptations has been fainthearted and denied the Truth:
like one that disannuls in the height of a Fever, the Will he made in his
composed Mind: but afterward such have resumed new courage, and have, by
enduring the sharpest Sufferings, confirmed the Truth, and ascended to Heaven
in a fiery Chariot.

Lastly, The Prosperity of Sinners is the great temptation to delay repentance
till their state is desperate. Nothing fills Hell with so many lost Souls, as
the putting off Repentance till hereafter. How many Diseases would be cured in
time, if they threatened present Death? but their Malignity being of a slow
operation, they are despised as not worth the trouble of a Cure, till they are
desperate. It Is in Spiritual Diseases, as it is in those of the Body: for Sin
that is a sickness unto Death, might be prevented by speedy Repentance; but
many, not apprehending present Danger, neglect the precious Remedy till they
are desperately ruined. To day if you will hear his Voice, harden Heb. 3. 7.
not your Hearts. The Command respects the Season as well as the Duty: As our
Obedience must be entire without reserves, so it must be present without delay,
even in our early Age, and continued in the whole tenor of our Life. The Worm
of Conscience sometimes nips Security, and there is a strange union of
Contrarieties in the Breast of a Sinner, that makes him inexcusable and
incurable. He complains of the bondage to his Lusts, yet takes pleasure in it:
he is convinced 'twil be destructive, yet voluntarily continues in that sweet
captivity. If Conscience be troublesome, he pacifies it with an intention to
reform hereafter, and thinks that a future Repentance will be sufficient to
prepare for a future Judgment. And none are so easily and willingly deceived to
their everlasting ruin by this pretense, as those who enjoy the present World.
Prosperity makes them forgetful of the Grave, and humane Vicissitudes, and
hardens them in deep Security. 'Twas the Divine Prayer of Moses, So teach us to
number our days, as to apply our hearts unto Wisdom; implying, that the great
Cause of Men's destructive folly, is from not reflecting upon the shortness and
uncertainty of their Time here. Death is certain to the Old, and Life uncertain
to the Young. There are many back Doors to the Grave, and Men are led
surprisingly thither. The time of their residence here is fixed by the Divine
Determination, and concealed from their Eyes. How many in their Youth and
Prosperity have presumed upon a long Life, yet unexpectedly have returned to
their Earth; as a Wall covered with Ivy, that falls on a sudden with its green
Ornaments, by its weight and weakness. The Hour of Death, is the hour of men's
Destiny for ever. There is no space of Repentance in the interval between Death
and Judgment; but the Soul immediately after its departure, receives a decisive
irrevocable Doom* that is in part executed* and shall be public and entirely
executed at the last Day. Yet Men boldly venture to continue in their pleasant
Sins, upon the forlorn hope of a Season to repent hereafter. Astonishing
enormous Folly! as if they were assured of Time, and the Divine Grace. And thus
it is fully proved how fatal and destructive Prosperity is to the Wicked.

The second thing to be considered, is the Folly of prosperous Sinners. Folly
is the Cause of their abusing Prosperity, and the Effect of their Prosperity
abused. The most proper Notion of Folly is, that the Understanding mistakes in
judging and comparing things; from whence the Will slides into Error, and makes
an unworthy choice: And according to the weight and consequence of things, the
more remarkable is the degree of Folly in not discerning their Differences. Now
when Men value and are delighted in temporal Prosperity as their Happiness, and
Heaven with its Glory and Joys is neglected and vilified in the comparison,
it is Folly above all wonder; Folly of so rare and singular a Nature, that if
the judicative Faculty were not corrupted, it were impossible they should be
guilty of it. This will appear by considering the essential and inseparable
Properties of Man's Felicity; In cane sagacitas prima est, si investigare debet
feras, cursus si consequi; audacia si mordere and invadere. Id in quoque
optimum est, cui nascitur, quo censetur. In homine optimum quid est? ratio.
Haec animalia antecedit, Deos sequitur. Senec. Epist. 76.
it is perfective and satisfying of Man in his supreme Faculties.

1. The perfection of Man does principally consist in the excellencies of his
spiritual and immortal part: As in the various kinds of Creatures, there is
something that is their proper Excellency, for which they were made, and
accordingly are valued: as Strength or Beauty, Swiftness or Courage: so, the
first and chief and proper Excellency of Man, is the rational Mind, that
distinguishes him from the Brutes, and gives him a natural and regular dominion
over them. It Is the highest and divinest Faculty of the Soul; and from hence
the deduction is clear, that our Felicity consists in the perfection of the
Mind. If the Excellencies of all other Creatures were united in Man, they could
derive no true worth to him, because they cannot adorn and perfect what is his
proper Excellence. Now, according to the quality of the Objects, about which
the Mind is conversant, it is either tainted and depreciated, or purfied and
exalted. To apply it to sensual worldly things, how to increase Riches, and
make provision for the Flesh, to fulfill its Lusts, is more truly vilifying,
than if a Prince should employ his Counselors of State, and the Judges of his
Courts, in the Offices of his Kitchen, or to dig in the Colepits. The Mind is
corrupted and debased by application to inferior perishing things, as Gold and
Silver are allayed, and lose of their purity and value, by a mixture with
Copper and Tin. God alone is the Sovereign Object of the Mind, with respect to
its dignity and capacity, its superior and noblest Operations: and by
contemplating his glorious Attributes and Excellencies, who is best in himself,
and best to us; the Mind is enlightened and enlarged, renewed and raised, made
holy and heavenly, full of Beauty, Order, and Tranquillity, and transformed
into the likeness of the Divine Perfections.

2. All the Prosperity in the World cannot bring true Satisfaction to him that
enjoys it: for it is disproportionate to the spiritual and immortal nature of
the Soul. This is so clear by Reason, that it may seem as needless and
impertinent to insist on it, as to use Arguments to prove that Gold and
Diamonds are not proper Food for the Body: but the self-deceiving folly of the
carnal Heart, so enamored of the vanity of this World, (that like the pleasure
of a Charm, is counterfeit and deadly) makes it necessary to inculcate known
Truths, that Men may timely prevent the sad Consequences of such Folly, and not
be accessaries to their tormenting Conviction by experience. It Is true, carnal
and material* Things, pleasantly affect the outward Man; yet such a vanity is
in them, that they are neither a pure nor a prevalent Good, with respect to the
natural and civil state of Man here. Riches, and Honors, and sensual
Pleasures, are not without a mixture of bitterness, that corrupt the content
that Men expect in them; they are not efficacious to remove or allay the Evil
to which all are exposed in this open state. A sharp Disease makes all the Joys
of the World insipid and despicable. But suppose them in their elevation, they
cannot supply the Wants and Exigencies, nor satisfy the Desires of the Soul.
They cannot restore Men to the Favor of God, and blessed Communion with him*
nor renew the Image of his Holiness in them. They are but a vain Name, a naked
shadow of Felicity, and entirely depend upon the simplicity and fancies of Men
for their valuation. The Apostle therefore tells us, that they that will be
rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish lusts. Those who
resolve and labor to get Riches, thinking to find Felicity in them, are misled
by as gross folly, as those who presume by their costly preparations to turn
Brass or Lead into Gold. For if it be Folly to desire and attempt what is
impossible, it is equally so in those who seek for joyful satisfaction in
Wealth, and in any other secular Things, as in the Alchymists, that waste their
real Estates for imaginary Treasures.

Besides; the happiest Condition here, as it is like the Moon, that at the
brightest is spotted and imperfect; so Eclipses are not less strange to it than
to that Planet. The World is at the best of a transient use, and the pleasant
Error of the Carnal Mind, will be of short continuance. Within a little while,
that which was declared with such solemnity by the Angel in the Revelation; He
lifted up his hand to Heaven, and swore by Him that lives for ever, that Time
shall be no more; will be true of every mortal Person. The rich Man that was
surveying his Estate with carnal complacency, and extending his hopes of
voluptuous living to many Years, was surpised with the fatal Sentence; Thou
Fool, this Night shall thy Soul, Luke 12. 20.
be required of thee: then whose shall those Things be which thou have
provided? Now, can that be our Happiness that is of such an uncertain tenure,
that every hour may be snatched from us, or we from it? If one should with
great Expenses build a Mansion House, and plant Gardens in a place subject to
frequent Earthquakes, that would overturn all into confusion; would not his
folly be conspicuous? Yet how many practice themselves what they would deride
in others? They set their Heart upon the things of the World, that are liable
to a thousand changes, and must shortly be parted with for ever. The Slaves of
Honor, that are so swelled with airy Titles of Greatness, and the flattering
Respects of others, must shortly be divested of all; and when laid in their
Tombs, the Trophies of Vanity, will be insensible of the renown and applauses
of the World. Morto all piacer dell' immortal suo nome.
Alexander the Great is long since dead to the pleasure of his Immortal Man.
And Death will make a final separation between the Rich and their Treasures,
and put an end to all the Delights of Men. Now what folly is it to prefer a
Felicity, that is deceitful in the enjoyment, and leaves the Soul empty when it
most fills it, that is so vain and transitory, before an Eternal Heaven; a
blessedness that surpasses our Hopes, that secures our Fears, that satisfies
our immense* Desires; a blessedness that the humane Understanding in all the
capacity of its thoughts is not able to comprehend; a blessedness becoming the
Majesty and Magnificence of God that bestows it. What madness, to despise
Heaven, as if the Eternity of the next World were but a moment, and to love
this World, as if this momentary Life were an Eternity. The full aggravation of
this, dies the Love of the World with the deepest tincture of Folly: as will
appear by considering,

1. It Is a voluntary chosen Folly. Thus the Divine Wisdom with passion
reproaches wretched Prove. 1. 22.
Sinners, How long ye simple Ones, will ye love simplicity? This heightens
their Character to love so obstinately, what is so unlovely and unbecoming the
reasonable Nature. The Light of Reason and Revelation discovers the Vanity of
the World: it is not for want of Evidence, but for want of using the Light, that
Men do not discern their wretched mistake. God complains in the Prophet, My
People does not consider. Isa. 1.
The means of restoring Men to a sound Mind, is by due consideration. The Soul
retires from the World, and makes a solemn enquiry; For what End am I created?
for what do I consume my Time? If my Endeavors are all for the Earth, what
remains for Heaven? what do I prepare, what shall attend me, what shall I meet
in the next State? How long will it be before I must leave this visible World,
and after the irrevocable step into the next, immediately appear before the
enlightened Tribunal of God, whose Judgment is so strict, that the Righteous are
scarely saved, and so heavy, that the strongest Sinners cannot endure? Can the
World prevent my doom to Hell, or release me from it? Will the remembrance of
the Enjoyments here, afford any refreshment in Everlasting Burnings? By such
sad and frequent Soliloquies, the vicious sensual Affections are eradicated,
and the Heart is transplanted from Earth to Heaven. If Men would wisely ponder
things, if Conscience, the sincere and unsuspected Judge did hold the Balance,
and put into one Scale the Glory, the Riches, and Pleasures of this World; and
into the other, the Promises that belong to Godliness here, and hereafter, how
despicably light will they be found? 'Twas truly said, that false Scarlet
appears with luster, till compared with the Rich and True; so the fictitious
Felicity of this World is very specious, and ravishes the Minds of Men, till
compared with Celestial Felicity. Worldly Honor is counterfeit, because it is
no certain Argument of inherent worth: Vainglory and real Infamy, often meet
in the same Person: yet it is admired, and ambitiously sought, till compared
with the Honor of the Saints. What is a Reputation and Honor with the Worms
and Moles of the Earth, compared with the Honor that comes from the esteem of
God, and Angels, and other blessed Spirits above, who incomparably exceed all
Mortals in number, and infinitely in understanding? What is a vanishing shadow
of Reputation, against an eternal inestimable weight of Glory? What are the
Riches of this World, Gold, and Silver, and Jewels, for gaining of which so
many lose their Souls, but vile trash compared with the sacred Treasures of
Heaven, the Graces of the Saints? What are the empty delights of the Senses,
compared with the Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, that can
sweeten all our Sorrows here, and the fullness of Joy that springs from God's
Presence in Heaven? If Men would make judicious Comparisons, their Affections
would cool toward perishing Vanities. But they will only look upon what is
pleasant and attractive in the World, without regarding its miserable Defects,
without considering what is infinitely better, and most worthy of their ardent
desires and vigorous endeavors. They are so pleased with their Error, so
engaged in the sweet captivity of the World, that they cannot extricate
themselves if they would, because they will not if they could.

2. It Is a culpable and guilty Folly. When Children prefer things of Luster
before things of Value, their childish Toys, before real Treasures; when they
choose a little present Enjoyment, before a future Good that is incomparably
better, their Folly is innocent, because Reason cannot display its operations
in them: But when Men, who are capable to distinguish between the things that
are seen and temporal, and the things that are not seen and eternal; when they
sottishly prefer sensible things before Spiritual, notwithstanding the vast
difference between them, both in the quality and duration, their choice is so
criminal, as deserves an everlasting Hell. If Esau had been a Child when he
sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, his folly had been excused; for he
was compelled by hunger; and the glorious dignity of the Birthright was
disproportionate to his Appetite and Understanding: but in his mature Age, when
capable to understand his Interest, to part with so sacred and precious an
advantage, for a little sensual satisfaction, was so profane an Act, that he
was justly deprived of the Divine Blessing that was annexed to the Birthright.
That Beasts are wholly led by their sensual Appetities, is natural and regular,
their voracity and crue^ty, folly and filthiness, envy and fury, are not
vicious passions, because Sense is the superior Faculty in them. But when Men
are so brutish, that the Objects that please their Eyes, and carnal Senses, are
the only Attractives of their affections, it is unnatural and monstrous; because
Reason should have the supremacy in them. If a Woman remain in a single state,
she has power over her Actions, and may freely govern her self; but if married,
is subordinate to her Husband: and disobedience to his Authority and prudent
Counsels, is culpable. The Body considered as the Seat of the Senses, has
natural Appetites, and might enjoy what is suitable to them according to their
capacity; but united with an immortal Spirit, that is stamped with the living
Image of God, its desires must be limited and directed by the Mind, and the
pleasing of Sense in Actions forbidden by the Mind, is rebellion against the
ruling Faculty. If one be under a Disease that Wine inflames and increases, and
the Physician forbids it as deadly, yet the Patient will judge only by his
Palate whether Wine be good for him; were it not a kind of brutishness worthy
of the Evil that attends it? Such perverse Folly are Men guilty of in their
sensual Satisfactions, whereby the Soul is unspeakably wronged, and God highly
dishonored, who has given to Man a more excellent Spirit, than to the Fowls of
the Air, that he may judge of things, not as they appear, but as they are.

3. It Is the most ignominious Folly. Shame arises from the sense of a debased
Excellence: the Understanding is the most excellent Faculty in Man; and nothing
brings a greater disreputation to him, than when he is deceived by the
ignorance or inconsiderateness of his Mind. And the delusion is most shameful
in matters of great moment. Now for a Man to exchange his Soul, that is of
Angelical Eminence, for transitory Vanities; O folly! how enormous, how
astonishing! The Lord Jesus, who as the Creator and Redeemer of Souls,
perfectly knew their Worth, puts the Question, so as to imply the strongest
denial, What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his
own Soul? or, what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? The vanity of the
Purchase, and the value of the Loss, is such, that no Man, conscious of his
Immortality in the next state, but must acknowledge that he is an infinite
loser, and prodigious Fool, that gains the World by the loss of his Soul. It Is
said of the ancient Pretium mirantes accipiunt. Tacit*
Germans, that in their Commerce with the Romans, receiving Silver for their
Amber, that has no virtue but to draw Straws to it, they were amazed at the
price. And certainly the great Tempter cannot but wonder at the foolish
exchange that Men make, in giving their immortal Souls to him for perishing
Vanities; and having this scornful advantage, will much more upbraid them
hereafter, than ever he allured them here.

The shame that attends this Folly, is sometimes felt by Sinners in this World;
when they are shaken out of their stupifying slumber, and fully awaked to
discover their evil Choice. Thus the Apostle speaks, What Fruit had you of
those things whereof you are now ashamed, for the end of those things is death?
When the memory of Sin is revived, with a true judgment of it, that which has
Emptiness in the beginning, and Death Jer. 17. 11.
in the Issue, must have Shame in the middle. The Prophet tells us, He that
gets Riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days,
and at his end shall be a Fool. He was a Fool all along in his deceiving of
others, tho reputed* worldly wise; but in the issue, when that which he gained
cannot be kept; and the Soul being lost, can never be recovered; by the
conviction of his Conscience, he is a Fool, and reflects upon his past folly
with confusion. But at the last day, the shame of foolish Sinners shall be
displayed before the Eyes of the whole World. It Is foretold, that some shall
rise Dan. 12. 2.
to shame and everlasting contempt. Obscurity is the Mask of Shame, but to be
exposed a spectacle of Scorn before a thronged Theater, is the aggravation and
eminence of the Shame. How confounding will the shame of Sinners be in the
universal confluence of Angels and Saints, and the presence of the glorious
God, the Judge of all? the sense of their Guilt and Folly will sting them for
ever.

4. It Is the most woeful Folly. Here such mischievous Effects proceed from it as
deserve the saddest lamentation. The Understanding, the highest Faculty, the
Beauty and Excellency of Man is blinded, the Will is fettered by corrupt
Passions, and the whole Man miserably inslaved to Satan. What a spectacle of
Compassion was Sampson in the slavery of the Philistines? He that had been the
General and Judge of Israel, was deprived of his Sight, and Divine Strength: his
warlike Hands, that had been of equal power with an Army, and performed such
glorious Achievements, were employed in turning a Mill, the Work of a Beast:
and his Misery was pointed and made sharper by the insultation of his Enemies.
The true Emblem of the degenerate State of Men; the Soul that was created in
the Image of God, and had a peaceful sovereignty over the sensual Appetites, a
superiority over sensible things, is now inslaved and employed in the vile
drudgery of Sin, and become the derision of the Devils. This is little thought
of, or lamented, but therefore the more woeful. The loss of the Kingdom was not
so dismal a Judgment to Nebuchadnezzar, as the loss of his Understanding. When
his Reason was taken away, and the Heart of a Beast was given to him; 'twas the
lowest and saddest degradation.

But hereafter the misery of foolish Sinners will be extreme. The Apostle tells
us, that the love of the World causes Men to fall 1 Timothy 6. 9.
into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which
drown Men in Destruction and Perdition. The Expressions are full to exaggerate
the horror of their ruins, and to signify that it is absolute and
irrecoverable. The Lusts of Men are equally foolish and pernicious; they please
themselves in the Enjoyments of the World, and are secure, as if bathing in the
Fountains of Felicity, when ready to be swallowed up in the Whirlpool of Death.
By sensual Vanities they are estranged from God, careless of their Duty, and
are finally separated from his blessed Presence. And as the enjoying God,
without a possibility of losing him, is our consummate happiness; so to lose
him, without hopes of ever enjoying him, is extreme misery. The foolish Sinner
is not affected with this now; whilst he lives in pleasure, he is content to be
without God in the World; but hereafter, when he shall be deprived of these
slight short-lived Pleasures, and shall know the unvaluable loss of his
Happiness, Sorrows will overwhelm him for ever. As it befell that Infidel in the
2 Kings 8. he saw the Plenty, but was not suffered to taste of it; so the
damned shall see the Glory of Heaven shining in the Saints, but shall not
partake of it.

This misery will be amplified under the following Heads.

3. We are to consider the Justice, the certainty and the heaviness of the
Destruction, that shall seize on foolish Sinners that abuse Prosperity.

1. To illustrate the Justice of God in their destruction, I shall only insist
on that Reason that is so admirably amplified in this Chapter for their
conviction; that Prove. 1.
is, their Destruction is the Fruit of their own choice. The Divine Wisdom
allures and invites them, by all the most tender and powerful Perswasives, to
forsake their ruinous Course, and the Spirit of Grace should be poured upon
them, which is the Earnest of Glory; but they would not be convinced and
reformed; they loved simplicity, the vain volatile Pleasures of Sin, though
attended with Perdition: They hated Knowledge, Godliness, though recommended by
the assurance of a blessed eternal Reward: therefore their Destruction is
resolved into their own Choice. Indeed no Man can directly and absolutely choose
Misery, or reject Happiness, but vertually and by real consequence the most do.
A Prodigal that wastes his Estate, does not intentionally and deliberately
choose Poverty, but thus he thinks, this Expense is for my Honor, this for my
Pleasure, and proceeding to innumerable Expenses, he at last becomes poor, and
his poverty is voluntary, because it is the issue of his voluntary exorbitant
profuseness. The evil of Sin, though it be destructive, and in that respect not
eligible by Man, yet it is pleasing to his corrupt Nature: and the depraved Will
is so allured by the present Pleasure, that it anticipates the Reflections of
the Mind, and chooses to gratify the Propensions of Nature, with a brutish
disregard of the terrible Consequences of Sin. And the present disconvenience
of serious Piety to the carnal Heart, causes an averseness from it,
notwithstanding the heavenly Felicity that is promised to it. Men prefer carnal
Sweets before Communion with God; and tho not ignorant of the Issue, continue
in their Sins. And it is the exactness of Justice, to deprive Sinners of that
blessedness which they obstinatly refused, and to bring on them the Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
misery they perversely choose. And when at the last Day the Son of God shall
charge upon Sinners their neglect of his compassionate and repeated Calls, that
he often knocked at the Door to get an entrance into their Hearts, but all in
vain, the World was there, and barred it against him. The guilty graceless
Souls will be struck with a defenseless silence, not able to make a Request for
Pardon, but with despairing Tears must submit to their righteous Condemnation.
The Equity of God's Ways, and the Iniquity of Men's, will at the last be clear
to every Eye. Then all the Blessings they received will rise up in judgment
against them, as proofs of their Wickedness, that makes them more guilty, and
deservedly miserable. Then Conscience, that is now stupefied by sensuality,
will make furious reflections upon the folly of their Choice, and be more
tormenting than the infernal Fiends. When Cresus, the rich King of Lydia, was
bound to the Stake, and the Fire kindled for his burning, he lamentably cried
out, Solon, Solon, Solon; and being asked the reason of it, declared, that in
the height of his Prosperity, that wise Grecian had advised him to prepare for
a Revolution from his Glory and Greatness into a miserable State, and his
neglect of that Counsel was more tormenting than the loss of his Kingdom. How
piercing will the remembrance be to lost Souls of their despising the
Instructions, Warnings, and gracious Methods of the Divine Wisdom, to have
prevented their ruin? that Mercy was so often and so rebelliously resisted?
this will be the Hell of Hell.

2. The certainty of their Destruction is next to be considered. It Is
unchangeably established by the Divine Ordination, that the Pleasures of Sin
shall end in the misery of obstinate Sinners. This is declared in the Word of
God, If ye live according to the Flesh, ye Romans 11.
shall die: And as it is founded in destributive Justice, so it shall be
executed from his Truth. Our Savior tells us, Heaven and Earth Mat. 5.
shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of the Law shall not be unfulfilled.
All the threatenings of it, in their fearful extent, shall be accomplished upon
impenitent Sinners, the proper Objects of Vengeance. God cannot deny himself in
ceasing to be Holy and True, and his Power seconds his Word, to inflict the
full effects of it upon the Guilty and Impenitent; for a time they are spared,
that they might repent: for Mercy is not only over all the Works of God, but
paramount to all his Attributes, it suspends his Power from Acts of Vengeance,
it delays and mitigates his Justice: we may appeal from Justice to Mercy in the
Court of Heaven: but when God's Mercy has been affronted and exasperated, by
the continual abuse of his Benefits, when it is renounced and forfeited by
Sinners, their destruction is irreversible: for it is Mercy alone atones his
righteous Anger; and this being so fearfully provoked, there is no Advocate in
his Bosom to plead for them. Did he not expel from Heaven the rebellious
Angels, Spirits of a higher Order, and more excellent Endowments than Men, and
in their number perhaps exceeding the whole Progeny of Man? Now as the Apostle,
considering that the Israelites, the chosen People of God, and dear to him
above all others, yet when they became unfruitful, were broken off from the
true Olive Tree, and the wild Gentiles were grafted into it, leaves this
Caution in eternal memory, Be Romans 11. 20, 21.
not high-minded, but fear. For if he spared not the natural Branches, take
heed lest he spare not thee. We may strongly infer, If God spared not the
Angels that sinned in their first act of disobedience, but cast them down to
hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment.
Certainly he will not spare sinful Men that hate to be reformed, and continue
in the voluptuous course of Sin to the last. The secure and foolish Sinners,
that now make a mock of Sin, and have so far lost their Innocence and
Ingenuity, that shame and request for their foul Actions is counted a vicious
Infirmity, a degenerous Humor, they shall understand in what degree Sin is
hateful to the Holy God. They who now sleep out all the denunciations of the
Law, will find at last, they have to do with a terrible inexorable God: Because
I have called, and ye refused, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
I have stretched out my hand, and no Man regarded; But ye have set at naught
all my Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your
Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes: When your Fear comes as Desolation,
and your Destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish come upon
you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me. For that they hated Knowledge, and did not
choose the Fear of the Lord. This dreadful Threatening is pointed against foolish
Sinners who abuse Prosperity: When those who shut their Eyes against Danger,
shall be constrained to open them, and see the fearful Face of Death attended
with Judgment, and Judgment with an eternal Hell: when Diseases in the Body,
and Anguish in the Soul, shall assail them at once, like two Clouds that by
collision break forth in Thunder, and they mournfully cry for Mercy, their
Prayers will be rejected with scorn, and their Ruin be remediless.

The carnal Conceit, that God will graciously receive Sinners when the World
has left them; that when by calamitous constraint they are at last brought to
confess their wickedness, and are only sorrowful for the evil Consequences of
it, the conceit that they shall find Mercy, is Atheism of as blasphemous a
nature as the denial of a God: for to ascribe such a Mercy to God, as is
inconsistent with his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, and Truth, is to deprive him
of his purest Perfections, and in effect to ungod him.

In the rebellions of their lives, they expressed open enmity against God; and
their Devotion at their death, is secret Flattery in his account. For thus it is
said by the Psalmist of such Sinners; When Psalm. 78. 34, 36, 37.
he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after
God. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and lied to him with
their tongues. For their heart was not right with him, and they were not
steadfast in his Covenant.

It Is true, God is rich in Mercy, and most willing to pardon returning Sinners,
when their contrition is sincere; when they are truly sorrowful, that Sin has
made them unholy as well as unhappy, that they have abused the Mercies of God,
our gracious Creator and Preserver, compassionate Redeemer, and blessed
Comforter, as well as provoked his Anger: and when the resolutions of amendment
are so deeply rooted, as would prove effectual if they should be tried by the
lengthning of their Time in this World. But those who defer their repenting
whilst God defers punishing, and like the unjust Steward, never think of making
provision for their Souls, till they are cited to give an account of their
unrighteous and ungrateful abuse of his Blessings: those who renounce their
Sins when unable to commit them, and resolve to live well when they can live no
longer, have great reason to suspect their own hearts, and to be fearful of
their future state. If a Minister be called to assist such in their dying
hours, there is infinite reason he should be cautious of assuring them of
Pardon and Salvation, lest natural Sorrow be mistaken for godly Sorrow, and the
Repentance declared by them, would be retracted upon new temptations: it is safe
to imitate a Stat anceps medicus, non videt bonum quod promittat; timet malum
pronunciare ne terreat: modestam tamen istam concipit sententiam, Deus bonus
omnia potest, orate pro illo. Aug.
discreet Physician, that is unwilling to declare what he fears will be the
issue of the Disease, but modestly infinuates the Danger to those that are
about the sick Person: The good God can do all things, he can revive the almost
spent and expiring, O pray for him. It Is advice given by a skilful Herbalist,
that particular care is necessary in planting the Seed of the Cardus, for if
they are not set upright, they degenerate and produce a wild Herb. The Gospel
is compared to Seed, and if the conditional promises of Pardon and Salvation
are not received in the Heart aright, if the comfort of them be not applied
according to the Qualifications that are requisite to give us an interest in
them, they produce a vain Presumption, a false Hope, a delusive Peace, instead
of an unfeigned Faith, a purifying Hope, a solid Peace. God declares it with
the most sacred solemnity, As I live, Ezekiel. 33. 11
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked; if the
carnal Heart (like the Devil who abused Scripture, by leaving out part of it)
shall not consider what follows, but that the Wicked turn from his way and
live, but shall harden and fortify it self in Sin, with hopes of impunity, God
will rejoice in their just destruction. He tells us that a converted Sinner
shall be forgiven* but that conversion must be uniform and lasting; If the
Wicked Ezekiel. 18. 21
turn from all his Sins that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and
do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live and not die. He has
promised to be found of those that seek him; but we are commanded to seek the
Lord whilst he may be found: implying* it is not in our power when we please to
find him with his pardoning Mercy and assisting Grace. To apply the Word of God
against the Mind of God, is injurious to his Honor, and pernicious to deluded
Souls.

3. The heaviness of the Destruction will be according to the aggravation of
their Sin, who abuse Prosperity.

1. It Is a Sin most contrary to the acknowledged Duty of Man, and unbecoming
the reasonable Nature. It Is an universal concession that springs from the
purest Light of Reason, that we should return good for good: the Mat. 5. 46.
Heathens agreed in it. To be defective in observance, and thankful respects to
a Benefactor is unnatural, but to requite Evil for Good, is so direct a
violation of the ingenuous Principles of Humanity, that one is prodigiously
wicked in doing it: he ceases to be a Man, and becomes a Devil. Now this black
Guilt cleaves to those who abuse Prosperity. The Blessings of God are strong
and sweet obligations to love him, yet their perverse Hearts are thereby
alienated from him: his Mercies engage and enable them to serve and glorify
him, but are used to gratify their Lusts, and to make them more capable and
presumptuous to offend him. Prosperity makes them luxurious and secure; Riches
makes them sin at a higher rate; the patient Providence of God, that waits for
their Repentance, (such is their desperate corruption) fortifies them in their
rebellion against him. This was the reason of that stinging Reproach of Moses
to Israel, Do ye thus requite Deuteronomy. 32.
the Lord, O foolish People and unwise?

2. The abuse of Prosperity is most injurious and provoking to God. To sin
against his Law, is an high affront to his Majesty; but to sin against his Love
and Benefits is more contumelious to him. The Apostle calls it, a despising
Romans 2.
of God's goodness: what is more contumelious, than to employ his Benefits for
the pleasing our dishonorable vile Affections? as the Gift of a Friend is
slited that is put to a base use; or as one that will not be reconciled by the
Presents of a Friend, despises his Gifts: thus when the Favors of God do not
melt the Heart into kindly resentments, and endear him to us, they are despised.

If a Favorite, that were raised by a Prince to the highest Honor and Trust,
should betray his Magazines, both Arms and Treasures to his Enemy, could there
be a fouler wickedness? and of this heinous nature is their Wickedness, who
abuse the Mercies of God in the Service of Sin, and implicitly betray them into
the Devil's hands, who maliously wars against God. What a contumelious
indignity heightened with the basest ingratitude was Jeroboam guilty of, who
changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image like a corruptible
Beast. Deus illum ad solium evexit, and iste Deum ad boves demisit. Pet. Mart.
God advanced him to the Throne, and he deprest the Deity to the rank of stupid
Calves. What a hateful abuse of his Bounty was it, that the Israelites turned
the Jewels of Gold wherewith he inricht them by the Egyptians, into a
detestable Idol: of such Wickededness are Men deeply guilty, when the precious
Blessings that God bestows upon them, are made the Idols of their heads and
hearts, and rob him of the Honor and Love that is incommunicably due to him.

What can more provoke the jealous God? Mercy is his dearest Glory, in which he
peculiarly delights; it is the Attribute of which he is most tender, and the
abuse of it is to stab him to the Heart.

From hence we may justly infer, the punishment of such Sinners will be most
heavy, in exact proportion to their most odious ingratitude. Damnation is the
recompense of every impenitent Sinner, and is the most fearful effect of God's
Wrath. Temporal Judgments are but the smoke of Deuteronomy. 29.
his Anger, the flaming Coals are in Hell. But there are degrees of torment in
Hell, according to the number and quality of Men's Sins. Those who despise the
goodness of God, treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath. As they
continually abuse his Bounty and Patience* they increase his Vengeance, which
will be as terrible as his Patience was admirable. The Judgment of Babylon was
a strict proportion to her Luxury: How Rev. 18. 7.
much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much troment and
sorrow give her. Justice will exact all the Arrears of abused Mercies. The
lovers of this World shall pass from their good Things, to the Flames that live
by the Breath of God's revenging Wrath. Doleful exchange! an hours feeling of
that Fire is more tormenting, than an Ages enjoyment of this World in all its
abundance is pleasing. But tho the Word of God has discovered the swift and
thick-coming Sorrows that shall seize upon the Wicked, yet so foolish and
obstinate are Sinners in Prosperity, they will not be persuaded to fly from the
Wrath to come! The Light of Reason, and Illumination of Faith, is too weak to
make them sensible of their Danger: they will not be convinced, till shut up in
the darkness of Hell.

It now follows, that by Application we should make this great Doctrine more
useful to our selves.

In the general, it is of excellent use to rectify our Judgments about the
Things and Men of the World. The most are miserably deluded, and live in a
blindness so gross and misleading, that they are secure when near steep ruin.
Asclepius being blind, mournfully complained, that he was fain to be led by a
Child: but carnal Men are voluntarily guided by Sense and Fancy the false
Lights that rule in Children, and blindly follow, without considering who is
their Leader, and whether they are led. Or like one in a slumber, is strongly
affected with slight things: a Scene of Fancy in a Dream transports him as a
glorious Reality: a prick of a Pin makes him start as fearfully as if a Viper
bit him: thus carnal Men are as deeply affected with temporal good and evil
things, as if they were Eternal, wherein their Blessedness or Misery consists.
And there is nothing of greater use and defense to the Soul, than to make a
true judgment of things that greatly and nearly concern us. From thence
proceeds a wise Choice, a wellordered Conversation, and upon it our blessed End
depends. For as the Rudder is to a Ship, the Will is to Man; if it be duly
turned, it conducts him safely to Felicity.

The particular just Inferences from the Doctrine are,

1. Temporal Prosperity is not a certain sign of God's special Favor. There
are some Benefits dispersed by a general Providence to all, like the common
Benefits of a Prince to all within his Dominions: some are like special Gifts
to his Favorites: Of the first kind are Riches and Honors, and whatever is the
support or comfort of the present Life: of the second are spiritual and
heavenly Blessings, the Graces and Comforts of the holy Spirit of God, the
infallible Seal of his Love to us. The Psalmist prays, Remember me, O Lord,
with the favor Psalm. 106. 4.
thou bear unto thy People: O visit me with thy Salvation: there is a Favor
common to all Men as his Creatures, and the Fruits of it are promiscuous to the
Evil and the Good: but the Favor from whence proceeds Grace and Glory, is the
privilege of his Chosen.

The temporal Prosperity of the Wicked, is consistent with God's Hatred. When
Men turn his Blessings into the fuel of their Lusts, and his Patience into an
advantage of sinning more securely, how flourishing soever they are in the
World, he looks on them with an avenging Eye. He hates all the workers of
Iniquity. His seeming connivance is no Argument that he is not highly provoked
by their Sins, or that they may obtain an easy Pardon. Yet this is the inward
principle of the gross and outward Sins in the lives of Men, tho unobserved by
them. As the vital Heat is not felt in the Heart, that is the Cause of all the
Heat that is felt in the outward parts of the Body. These things have thou
done, (says God to the rebellious Sinner) and I kept silence, that is,
suspended Psalm. 50.
the terrible Effects of Justice, thou thoughts I was altogether such a one as
thy self. Astonishing blindness! not to discern the apparent antipathy of such
Connexions. As if God's forbearance of the Guilty were forgiveness: and
rebellion against his Commands, and the love of Sin which is enmity to him,
were consistent with the fruition of his Favor. But we have the most clear and
convincing assurance, God cannot be pleased with Men, without their being made
like him in Righteousness and true Holiness. He sees and hates Sin, and abhors
the Sinners tho for a time they are spared. Justice and Patience are his
Attributes: He is slow to Nahum 1. 3.
anger, and great in Power, and will not acquit the Guilty. He endures with
much long-suffering the Vessels of Romans 9. 22.
Wrath, till they are fitted for destruction* The presumptuous Sinner that is
encouraged and hardened, as if Sin were not so hateful to God, because he
enjoys the World in abundance, and expects an easy remission at last, fearfully
deceives his Soul: He sows the Wind, and shall reap the Whirlwind.

3. The Prosperity of the Wicked is so far from being a sign of God's love,
that it often proceeds from his deepest Displeasure. It Is a Curse candied over
with a little vanishing sweetness, but deadly in the Operation. It makes them
careless of God and their Souls, of Heaven and Eternity, and they become
incorrigible in their perverse Wills and wicked Ways, and irrecoverable in
their lost State. Prosperity induces Security, that presages and accelerates
their ruin. It Is expressed as the most fearful and sorest Judgment by the
Prophet, The Lord has poured out upon you Isa. 29. 10.
the spirit of deep sleep, an insensibleness of the worst Evils, their Sins,
and the infinite danger that attends them. This Judgment is usually inflicted
from the righteous God by the prosperity of the Wicked, and extremely provokes
him, it being a Sin of the greatest Guilt, as well as a Punishment of former
high provocations. It Is a distinguishing Judgment inflicted upon his Enemies,
from which his Children are exempted. Other Judgments that cause grief and
trouble to Sinners, often incline his Compassions to them; but this Judgment
inflames his Wrath. In short, the Prosperity of the Wicked here, is a fatal
sign they are reserved for the severity of Justice, for their abuse of the
Riches of his Mercy: and of all Judgments that is the most terrible, that
insensibly destroys, and certainly brings damnation.

4. From hence we are instructed to look upon Prosperous Sinners with pity, not
with envy and indignation. They please themselves, and triumph in their conceit
and happiness, as the Psalmist expresses it, Whilst he lived, *he blessed his
Soul. But how contrary is the Opinion of vain Men to the Judgment of Christ; He
pronounces (and upon his Sentence depends Eternity) Woe unto you that are rich,
for ye have received your Consolation? Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall
hunger: Woe unto you that laughnow, for ye shall mourn and weep. And we are told
by the inspired Prophet, Man that is in honor, and understands Psalm. 49.
not, (that does not consider the Vanity and frail Tenure of his present
flourishing State; nor his Duty and Interest to employ his Riches, Power, and
Greatness, for securing his everlasting Felici^ty) is like the Beasts that
perish, stupid and insensible of approaching Ruin; as the Beast that was to be
sacrificed, did not perceive that the guilding its Horns, and adorning it with
Garlands, was a sign it was destined to Death. They now live in ease and
pleasures; but they must shortly remove from their rich Possessions, and
splendid Palaces, to the dark Regions of Woe, and Death will be an entrance
into endless Sorrows. The laughter of Fools is like the crackling of Thorns
Eccles. 7.
under the Pot, a short Blaze soon damped and extinguished.

It Is a dreadful Imprecation of the Holy Psalmist; Let their way Psalm. 35. 6.
Horrenda via tenebrae, and lubricum. Tenebras solum quis non horreat? lubri cum
solum quis non caveat? In tenebris and lubrico qua is? ubi pedem figis? sunt
istae magnae poenae hominum. Aug.
be dark and slippery; and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. To fly in
the dark, and in slippery places, and so to fall into the Mire and Pits, is a
fit Emblem of their Condition, who are prosperous and wicked. They are
hoodwinked by Prosperity, in a voluntary darkness, and see not the Precipices
that surround them: And how slippery is their way by so numerous and
insinuating Temptations? how easily, how frequently and dangerously do they
fall, and both defile and wound themselves? Briefly, they are truly miserable
here, even whilst they most pleasantly and contentedly enjoy the World, they
are accumulating the Treasures of Wrath, and preparing new Torments for their
Souls: they stand upon brittle Ice, and Hell is beneath ready to swallow them
up in its deepest Gulf. As it is said by the Apostle, concerning the Saints
darkend by Sorrows here, that their glorious Life is hid Col. 3.
in God, and shall illustriously appear with Christ at his second Coming: So
the terrible Death of the Wicked, whilst they flourish here* is hid from the
Eyes of Sense* but shall be revealed in the Day of Wrath. And to a wise
Observer, to a serious Believer, the prosperous Sinner is the most unhappy and
compassionable Object in the World; for he perishes by such a flattering kind
of Death, that he is neither apprehensive, nor affected with his Danger.

And when an illuminate Christian sees the Marks of Damnation in Sinners, whom
Prosperity deceives and hardens, he cannot but be tenderly moved, and is
obliged most earnestly to pray to the merciful Father of Spirits, whose Grace
is Omnipotent, that he would recover their lapsed Souls, bleeding to eternal
Death. If there be any heavenly Charity in our breasts, it will melt our hearts,
and dissolve us in tears to prevent, or at least to solemnize and lament their
heavy Destiny.

5. From hence we are instructed to judge truly and wisely of Afflictions: they
are the necessary and merciful Dispensations of Heaven to recover Sinners
corrupted by Prosperity, and to return them to God. Sense, tho its principal
end is to preserve the Body, is not always a fit judge of things beneficial to
it: the Appetites and Aversions are sometimes pernicious: One in a Dropsy
drinks to quench his Thirst, and increases his Distemper. A bitter Potion is
rejected by a sick Child, not considering that a Medicine, not Sweetmeats, can
cure his Disease. The pleasure of the taste, is no certain indication of what
is wholesome for Health: much more incapable is Sense to judge of what is useful
for the Soul. Reason is entirely renounced, and fallacious Sense is in the
Throne, when Prosperity with its gaudy Allurements is esteemed as our
Happiness, and Adversity is abhorred as the worst Misery. The Wise Man
instructed by dear Experience, tells us, It is better to go to the House of
Eccles. 7. 2, 3, 4.
Mourning* than to go to the House of Feasting: for that is the end of all Men,
and the living will lay it to heart. Sorrow is better than Laughter: for by the
sadness of the Countenance, the Heart is made better. The Heart of the Wise is
in the House of Mourning, but the Heart of Fools is in the House of Mirth.
Prosperity irritates and fortifies the sensual vile Affections, the pleasing of
which is fatal to the Vino debimus quod etiam non sitientes bibimus. Plin.
Soul. As it is observed by the natural Historian, that the sparkling Color and
delicious Relish of Wine, tempts Men to drinking without thirst; and from
Intemperance, innumerable Diseases flow.

Prosperity diverts the Mind from considering the things that belong to our
eternal Peace, and the Will from consenting to them. The Thoughts are so
scattered abroad, that few are left at home, duly to ponder the miserable
Effects of Sin. Now in this the Rules of natural and spiritual Medicine agree,
that one Extreme is to be cured by another. The Devil cruelly destroys the Nemo
venenum temperat fell and Elleboro, sed conditis pulmentis id mali injicit.
Ita Diabolus letale quod conficie, rebus gratissimis and acceptissimis imbuit.
Tert.
Souls of Men by the pleasures of Sin; and God, the wise and compassionate
Physician, recovers them by bitter Sorrows, the most congruous and powerful
means for that blessed Effect.

Affliction makes us retire within our Hearts, and shuts out the noisy throng
of worldly distracting Objects; and then Truth and Conscience, that were under
unrighteous Restraints, will break the Fetters, and speak loudly and terribly
to the Sinner. Affliction fixes the Mind upon those Objects, that duly
considered, are able to terrify the most determined and resolved Sinner. There
is no Man so prodigiously bad, so perfectly a Brute, but has at times some
twinges of Conscience, some workings in his Spirit, some desires of Salvation.
Even Balaam, who in the judgment of the Angel was more stupid than the Ass he
rode on, yet had some springings in his heart toward Heaven; O that I might
die the Death of the Righteous, and my last end may be like his: but these are
fleeting and variable, and so weak in comparison of the Opposite desires of the
Flesh, while Prosperity continues, that they prove abortive. Now affliction
deads the flaming edge of the Affection to Vanity. When the Sinner feels the
truth of the divine Threatenings, then he is effectually convinced of the Evil
of Sin, and understands, by the beginning of Sorrows here, what the Issues will
be hereafter, and retracts his foolish choice. In the time of Affliction, our
Sins find us out; and it is most likely we shall then find our Sins out, and
with repenting tears acknowledge them, and with hatred renounce them.

Now the consideration of the designed Benefit by Afflictions, should reconcile
them to our Wills, and persuade us, with patience and thankfulness, to accept
of them as the Testimonies of God's peculiar favor. Our Savior declares, As
many as I love, I Rev. 3.
rebuke and chasten; be zealous and repent. God is often most angry, when he
makes no sensible discovery that he is so: thus he threatens the rebellious
Jews, I will Ezekiel. 16. 42
make my Fury toward thee to rest, and my Jealousy shall depart from thee, and
I will be quiet, and will be no more angry: implying a final divorce, a leaving
them to their impure Idolatries, without more correction. If there be such a
hardness of heart as the Fire cannot melt, such a rust that the Fire cannot
purify, God will not waste his Judgments on such desperate Sinners. He
withdraws his chastising hand, as hopeless of their amendment, and that
desertion is a fatal signature of Reprobation. And on the contrary, many times
God's Love is most tender and compassionate to us, when to Sense there is the
least evidence of it. Even the Heathens, in the twilight, Senec. de providentia.
between the darkness of Idolatry, and the light of Nature, discovered that
Afflictions were the privilege of those that are singularly beloved of God. And
Christians have a more sure word for their instruction, Whom the Heb. 12.
Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every Son whom he receives. There is not
a stronger evidence of his fatherly wise Love, than the discipline of the Rod;
and the afflicted returning Sinner may, with an adoptive assurance come to the
Throne of Grace. By afflictions the World is less enticing and hurtful to us,
and Heaven is more amiable and desirable: the things that are seen, are
vilified and distasted; and invisible things are sought with our highest esteem
and respect, and zealous endeavors. Those Lusts that spring, and grow, and
flourish in Prosperity, are blasted and wither, and die in adversity. Those who
forget God when prosperous Inter adversa melior. Tacit.
in the World, are taught by the voice of the Rod to adore his Majesty, obey
his Laws, imitate his Holiness, and humbly to accept of his Mercy. By
Afflictions the sensual Appetites are sudu'd, and brought into order a low
state, is a protection from many strong and destructive Temptations. Sickness
that brings near the Grave, and makes us feel how frail we are, renders Optimos
nos esse dum infirmi sumus. Plin. lib. 3.
the World despicable, that by their Lusts so powerfully infatuates Men to
their ruin. Sanctified Affliction, is a happy preparative for the fullness of
Joy in the blessed presence of God.

The first to whom our Savior promised the Rest and Joy of Paradise, was the
Companion of his Cross.

Let us therefore, with free Judgments, and sincere Affections, make an
estimate of all sensible things, not judge our selves to be in the favor of
God, by the good Things received here, nor under his Wrath by Evil: Let us not
be surprised at the Prosperity of the Wicked, nor shaken at the Afflictions of
the Godly, but regulate our Thoughts by the Propitius Deus cum male amamus,
negat quod amamus: iratus autem dat amanti quod male amat. Aug.
unerring Wisdom of God, so clearly revealed in his Word. He is propitious,
when he denies or takes from us those temporal Enjoyments that we are apt to
abuse; and severe when he bestows them, and seems to indulge Men's carnal
Affections. It is but a little while, and the Pleasures of Sinners; and the
Afflictions of the Saints, will end in a state directly contrary to what is
enjoyed or suffered here. With God a thousand Years are but as one day: the
World is not of a weeks standing in the Divine Account: he measures all things
by Eternity: the Vessels of Mercy are by sanctified Afflictions made fit for
Eternal Glory. The Vessels of Wrath are by the abuse of his Bounty and
Patience, fitted for eternal destruction.

In the last place, from hence we should be warned to be always circumspect to
avoid the Evils that usually attend Prosperity, to improve it to our eternal
Advantage. Prosperity is not like an infected Garment, that transfuses a
contagious Malignity into every one that wears it. A Person that is rich and
honorable, and in Power, may not only be a Saint, but the more a Saint by his
dedicating and employing the Gifts of God to his Glory, and the Public Good.
It Is a Point of high and holy Wisdom, and only taught in the School of Heaven,
how to manage the opposite states of the present Life, so as not to be vainly
swelling in Prosperity, nor broken and flagging in Adversity, but to preserve
an aequanimity, a constant composed mind, the blessed imitation of the divine
Unchangeableness. St. Paul says, without vain arrogance, I know both how to be
abased, Phil. 4. 12.
and I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. 'Twas a secret
of Spirit, not learned from Men, but from the holy Spirit of God. In some
respects it is a more difficult exercise to manage Prosperity than Adversity.
Many are like Hannibal, victorious in Arms, whilst conflicting with Adversity,
and vanquished by enticing Pleasures. It Is observed of the Lamps in some of the
Roman Tombs, that have burnt for many Ages, and are bright whilst kept close;
that as soon as they are opened to the Air, a breath of Wind extinguishes them:
Thus the Virtues of some shine in a low retired Condition, when there are no
Temptations, no occasion of quenching them: but when brought forth into the
open World, and should appear in conspicuous Operations, their Virtues are of
so weak and consumptive a Spirit, that the Light expires and dies. Even the
Piety of David was chilled by Prosperity. It Is said, with an emphasis,
concerning Jehosaphat, that he 2 Chronicles. 17. 3.
walked in the first Ways of his Father David: Intimating that his Religion was
not so exact when he was in the Throne, as in his Banishment.

It Is equally excellent as difficult. To be holy and heavenly in the midst of
sensual tempting Objects, is the clearest discovery of the Truth and Power of
Divine Grace, of the piety, ingenuity, and generosity of the Christian Spirit.
Humility and Modesty in a low Condition, are not so praise worthy, as the
absence of them is odious: but Humility in a state of Honor, is more
illustrious than the Splendour of external Dignity. Temperance in a Cottage,
where are only supplies of hunger and thirst, seems rather the effect of
Necessity, than of wise Choice: but to be temperate when abundance and variety
tempt the sensual Appetites, when the sparkling color and delicious relish of
the purest Wines tempt the Fancy and the Palate, is Virtue in a height and
excellency. To be pious, and weaned from the World in Afflictions, is no
wonder; but in Prosperity and Power to be serious in Religion, and despise the
splendid Vanities of the World, is Virtue of a superior Order. What is observed
of the perfuming Gums of Arabia the Happy, is applicable in this matter: those
that distill freely from the Tree, Sponte manans pretiosior sudor est, elicitus
corticis vulnere vilior judicatur. Solin.
excel in purity, in fragrancy and value, what comes from it when the Bark of
it is cut. Thus Obedience that comes from the heart in love with God for his
Benefits, is more valuable and precious than what is the effect of Compulsion,
that comes from the heart wounded with terrors in adversity.

I shall add farther; The using Prosperity aright is most comfortable. The Love
of God can sweeten Afflictions, and make a Dinner of green Herbs as savory as
if they grew in Paradise: and it gives a quick and high taste to all our
temporal Blessings. When his Love is conveyed and sealed to us by the Gifts of
his Providence, we have the purest enjoyment of them. Now when Prosperity is
made subservient to his Glory, when it endears Obedience to us, we have an
infallible testimony it is from his special Favor to us.

The Rules how to manage Prosperity for our everlasting Good, are,

1. Let us preserve an humble sense of our original meanness, continual
frailty, and sinful unworthiness in the midst of Prosperity. Men are apt to be
high-minded, and to cherish undue Conceptions of their worth when raised in the
World: as if they were not as inferior to the Majesty of God, and as liable to
his impartial Justice as others: they lose the knowledge of themselves in a Mist
of Vanity. This provokes the high and holy One that inhabits Eternity, to blast
them in their most fluorishing and secure state, and convince them how
deceitful and insufficient the grounds of their pride are. He puts them in
fear, Psalm. 9.
that they may know themselves to be but Men. There are such great and just
Allays of the vain Mind, such Correctives of Pride, that it is strange that any
temporal Prosperity should occasion swelling Arrogance. The Psalmist
considering the Glory of God shining in the Heavens, is in an ecstasy at his
condescending Goodness. What is Man that thou art mindful of him? or the Son of
Man that thou regardest him? His Original is from the Earth, the lowest
Element: all that he possesses, to supply his want and satisfy his desires, is
from pure Mercy: and the more eminent the advantage of some is above others in
this World, the greater are their Receipts and Obligations: and who would be
proud that he is in a mighty Debt? rich and poor, honorable and mean, are
distinctions among Men; but in respect to God all are equally mean and low.
Neither do these things give any inherent worth, and make Persons more
acceptable to God. Poor Lazarus who was a miserable Spectacle, his Body
corroded with Ulcers, yet had a precious Soul under it: the glorious Angels
descended from Heaven to receive it at the point of Death, and convey it to the
reviving presence of God: but the rich Man was cast into Hell. Besides, how
uncertain are all the admired things of this World!

Is he truly rich whose whole Estate lies in a Ship abroad, that is to pass
through Seas exposed to Tempests, and infested with Pirates, and runs a double
hazard of being robbed or cast away? And the Consideration thereof, is a proper
Argument to cause us to keep a low Mind in a high Condition. It Is the Apostle's
counsel, Let the rich, and the great in Jam. 1. 10.
the World, rejoice in that he is made low: because as the Flower of the Grass
he shall pass away: when the florid Beauty is displayed, it presently withers.
How many survive their Estates and Dignities, and by unforeseen Revolutions
become poor and low. Many that were overflowing in Riches and Pleasures, are as
dry and desolate as the Desert. And is it not a disparagement to our Reason to
admire Shadows, and be proud of transient Vanities? But suppose they continue
with Men here, can they preserve the Body from Diseases and Death, or the Soul
from oppressing Sorrows? And is it not miserable folly to pride themselves in
secular Greatness, that is so insufficient to prevent the worst Evils? But
especially the consideration how Man is vilified by Sin, should make him be
abased and low in his own Eyes. As that blessed Martyr, Bishop Hooper says,
Lord, I am Hell, thou art Heaven; I am a Sinck of Sin, thou art the Fountain of
Holiness. And the more gracious and bountiful God is to Men, the more sinful
should they appear to themselves. Humility discovers our native Poverty, in the
midst of rich Abundance; our true Vileness in the midst of glittering Honors,
that nothing is ours but Sin and Misery; and makes us say, with the Spirit of
that humble Saint, We are less than the least of all God's Mercies. Now the
more of Humility, the more of Heaven is in the Soul: it is that disposition that
prepares it to receive the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit in an excellent
degree. God resists the Proud; the Selfconceited and Aspiring he is at defiance
with, and abhors them; he justly deprives them of Spiritual Treasures, who
value themselves and bear it high for the abundance of this World: But he gives
Grace to the Humble. The due sense of our Wants and Unworthiness, makes us fit
to partake of Divine Blessings.

2. A meek temper and deportment, is an excellent preservative from the evil of
Prosperity. Humility and Meekness are always in conjunction, and most amiable
in the Eyes of God and Men. A meek and quiet Spirit, which is in 1 Pet. 3. 4.
the sight of God of great price. They are the brightest Jewels that adorn
Humanity, and shined so gloriously in our blessed Savior, the supreme Pattern
of Perfection, and are propounded as signally imitable by us* Learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly. When he came in his Regal Office, he is thus described,
Rejoice greatly, O Zach. 9. 9.
Daughter of Sion: Behold, thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and having
Salvation, lowly; the Church is excited to rejoice in his mild Monarchy. And
Christians, who in Profession are his Disciples, are commanded to be gentle,
and to show all Tit. 3. 3.
meekness to all Men. This especially concerns those who are in a superior
Order: for Prosperity is apt to make Men insolent and intolerable, and to
treat with an haughty roughness those that are below them. But there is nothing
more becoming Men in Prosperity and Power, than a sweetness of Spirit, not
easily provoked by Injuries, and easily pardoning them; a gracious
condescension expressed in Words and Actions, even to all Inferiors. And
especially meekness is necessary in a submissive receiving Reproofs for Sin,
whether by the Ministry of the Word, or by a faithful Friend. Prosperity is
never more dangerous, than when Sin takes sanctuary in it, when Men think
Riches and Power to be a privilege to free them from sound and searching
Reproof, and damn themselves with less contradiction. And an humble submission,
with respect to the Authority of God, and an ingenious tractableness* with
respect to the sincere affection of those who are faithful in their Counsels
for our Souls, is an eminent instance of Meekness, and preserves from the
danger of Prosperity.

3. Solmn and affectionate Thanksgiving to God for his Mercies, sanctifies
Prosperity.

This is the certain consequent of an humble disposition of Soul. Pride
smothers the Receipts of God's Favors: Thankfulness is the homage of Humility.
This is infinitely due to God, who renews our Lives as often as we breath, and
renews his Mercies every moment; yet so unjust and ungrateful are Men,
especially in Prosperity, that they strangely neglect it. From hence are those
Divine Warnings so solemnly repeated to the Israelites, When thou Deuteronomy. 6. 11,
12.
shall have eaten, and art full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord. And,
lest Deuteronomy. 8. 12.
when thou have eaten and art full, and have built goodly Houses, and dwelt
therein, then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God. This
was the wicked effect of their Prosperity: According to their Hos. 13. 6.
pasture so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted:
therefore have they forgotten me. There is a great backwardness in a carnal
heart to thanksgiving for Mercies. Prayer in our distress, is a Work of
Necessity, but thankful Praise is an Act of Duty; carnal Love is the cause of
the one, divine Love of the other. Even David how ardently does he excite his
Soul to the performing this Duty; Bless the Lord, O my Soul, Ps. 103. 1, 2.
and all that is within me bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and
forget not all his Benefits. The earnest and repeated Address to make a lively
and fervent Impression upon his Soul, is a tacit intimation of the drowsy
negligence he found in himself. This Duty is Spiritual, and to be performed by
the Soul that is our noble part, and capable to understand our Obligations to
the Divine Goodness. Indeed, it is often expressed in the Psalm. 34. 2.
vocal praises of God, for there is a natural correspondence between the Tongue
and the Heart, as between the Hand of a Clock, and the Motion of the Wheels
within: but the chief part is performed in the Soul, and is only of value and
acceptance with God, who is the Maker, the Searcher, and the Judge of our
Hearts. Therefore the Holy Psalmist calls upon his Soul, and all that is within
him, every Faculty to unite in the Praises of God: the Understanding to
consider the several Arguments of Praise and Thankfulness, to esteem and to
admire the divine Goodness, to ascribe the Glory that is due to God for his
Mercies: the memory to register his Benefits; the Will and Affections to love
him for his Mercies, and above them.

Thankfulness implies a solemn recognition of the Mercies of God, with all the
Circumstances that add a luster to them, to affect us in as vigorous a manner
in our Praises for the Blessings we enjoy, as we are in our Prayers for what we
need. Not only signal Mercies, but common and ordinary should be continually
acknowledged by us. And since our Memories are so slippery as to the retaining
of Favors, Injuries are inscribed in Marble, Benefits written in Dust: We
should every day review the Mercies we enjoy, to quicken our Praises for them,
and to make Impressions not soon defaced. Thankfulness implies a due valuation
of God's Benefits: This will be raised, by considering the Author, the great
God: the meanest Mercy from his Hand, is a high Favor. As the Guilt of Sin
arises from the greatness of the Object, tho some Sins are comparatively small,
yet none is in its intrinsic Nature a small Evil: so tho of Mercies, some are
in comparison eminent, and some are ordinary, yet every Mercy is great with
respect to the Author from whence it comes: And the thankful esteem of Mercies,
will rise in proportion to the sense of our unworthiness. A constant poverty of
Spirit in reflecting upon our own vileness, that there is not merely a want of
desert in us, with respect to God's Blessings, but a desert of his heavy
Judgments, will heighten our esteem of them. For this end it is very useful,
that the Prosperous would consider those below them, how many better than
themselves are under oppressing Wants, tormenting Pains, heartbreaking
Sorrows, whom you may trace by their Tears every day; and what free and rich
Mercy is it, that they enjoy the affluence of all things: this distinguishing
Goodness, should be acknowledged with a warm rapture of affection to the Divine
Benefactor. To compare our selves with those that excel us in Grace, will make
us humble, and with those who are below us in outward Blessings, will make us
thankful.

The Prosperous have special Obligations to be most conversant in this
Celestial Duty: there are various Graces and Duties that are only useful in
this imperfect state, and shall expire with us: as Repentance, Faith, Hope,
Patience, etc. the Reward of them will be Eternal, but the exercise is limited
to present Life; but Love and Praise remain in Heaven. The Saints eternally
admire, love, and bless God for his Mercies. And the sincere and constant
performance of this Duty, is most pleasing to God, and profitable to us: for
thankfulness to our blessed Benefactor, engages his Heart, and opens the
Treasures of his Bounty more liberally to us. The way to obtain new Benefits,
is not to suffer former Favors to be lost in ungrateful oblivion. In short,
it is the best and surest evidence of our thankfulness to God, when his Mercies
are effectual Motives to please him. We cannot always make an actual
commemoration of his Benefits, but an habitual remembrance should ever be in
our Hearts, and influential in our Lives. Thy loving kindness is before Psalm.
26.
mine eyes, (says holy David) and I have walked in thy Truth; unfeignedly
respected all thy Commandments.

4. The Fear of God, and a vigilant care to avoid the Sins that so easily
encompass us, is necessary in Prosperity. The Secure assist Satan in his War
against the Soul: but watchfulness disarms the Tempter. Circumspection is never
more a Duty, than when Pleasures without, and Passions within, conspire to
betray us. It Is useful to reflect upon the great numbers who have been
corrupted and ruined by Prosperity: that the Vices of the dead may secure the
Virtues of the living. The fear of God is clean, effectively, as it preserves
from Sin. It Is Solomon's advice to young Men, that enjoy the World in its
Flower, and in the season of their sinning, that they would remember that God
for all their Vanities will bring them to Judgment. This Consideration will be
powerful to prevent the risings of the corrupt Affections, or to suppress their
growth, and hinder their accomplishment. But with the excellently tempered
Soul, an ingenuous Fear from the consideration of God's Mercies, is an
effectual restraint from Sin. It Is said, they shall fear the Lord, and his
Goodness: fear to offend, and grieve, and lose his Goodness. This Fear does not
infringe the comfort of the Soul, but preserve and improve it: Servile Fear,
when the Soul is afraid to burn, not to sin, is a judicial forced Impression,
the Character of a Slave; but an ingenuous grateful Fear, that springs from the
sense of the Divine Goodness, is a voluntary Affection becoming a Child of God,
and cherished by him. The Fear of the Lord is his Treasure. This watchfulness
must be universal against all Temptations to which we are incident by
Prosperity: otherwise we shall be guilty of a like folly with those that shut
and fortify one Gate, and leave the other open to the Enemy. And it must be as
continual as our Temptations. Blessed is the Man that fears always.

5. A moderate use of worldly things, is an excellent preservative from the
Evil adhering to them. It Is a Divine Blessing, to partake of the Gifts of God
with contentment and tranquillity, especially it is sweet to taste his Love in
them. God gives to a Man that is good in his sight, Wisdom, and Knowledge, and
Joy: that is, to use temperately and comfortably, outward Blessings. But the
Flesh is the Devil's Solicitor, and persuades Men with a freer Fancy, and
looser Affections, to enjoy the World, than is consistent with the prosperity
of their Souls. When Diogenes observed with the many sick and languishing
Persons, the Hydropick, Consumptive, and other Diseases, that came to the
Temple of Esculapius for recovery, and that after their Sacrifices they made a
luxurious Feast, he cried out, Is this the way to recover Health? If you were
sound, it is the speedy and effectual way to bring Diseases, and being diseased,
to bring Death to you. It Is applicable in a higher sense; the intemperate use
of sensual Delights, weakens the Life and Vigor of the Soul in a Saint, and
certainly brings Death to diseased Souls, that habitually indulge their corrupt
Affections. The Apostle says of the licentious Woman, She that lives in
pleasure, is dead while she lives: an allusion to a Torch that is consumed by
its own flames. Sensual. Lusts are cherished and pampered by Prosperity, and
the carnal Heart overrules the whole Man. Our Savior charges his Disciples to
beware of surfeiting and drunkenness. The indulging the lower Appetites, is
natural to Men, but chiefly incident to those in Prosperity. Utentis modestia,
non amantis affectu.
The great care of such should be, to use worldly things with that modesty and
measure, that the Divine Part, the Soul, may be untainted by them: that it may
neither overvalue nor overdelight in them. The first degeneracy of Man is by
sensual satisfaction. This expelled him from Paradise, and keeps him out ever
since. The excess of Pleasures darken the Mind, stupify the Conscience,
extinguish the radiancy and vigor of the Spirit. Wine and Women take away Hos.
4. 11.
the Heart. The Apostle speaks of those who are abandoned to Pleasures, they
are past feeling; without Ephesians. 4. 19.
a quick and tender sense of their Sin and Danger. That we may not in an
unlawful degree use lawful things, we should always be ordered by the
Principles of Fear and Restraint, not indulging our selves to the utmost of
what may seem allowed: for to be upon the Confines of Sin, exposes us to be
easily overthrown by the next gust of a temptation. It Is a Divine Command, that
Christians should rejoice, as tho they rejoiced not, and 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
buy as tho they possessed not; and use the World as not abusing it. A
Christian should converse with the World, as a carnal Person converses with
Heaven; he prays for spiritual Blessings with that coldness, as if he had no
desire to obtain them; he hears the Word with that carelessness, as if he had
no desire to profit by it: He performs other Religious Duties without a Heart,
as if he had no desire to be saved: such an indifferency of Spirit in outward
Enjoyments, is our Duty and Safety. It Is a prodigious disorder, and the great
Omnis humana perversio fruendis uti velle, and utendis frui. Aug.
Cause of the Sins and Miseries of Men, that their Affections are lavishly
wasted upon Trifles, their Love, Desires, and Delights are let forth in their
full vigor to the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of this World, but are
wretchedly remiss to spiritual and eternal things. They would enjoy the World
as their Heaven and Felicity, and use God for their Necessity. And thus by
embracing vanishing Shadows, they lose the most substantial and durable Good.
It Is a Point of great wisdom to consider the several respects of temporal
things, as they respect our sensitive Part, and the present Life, and as they
respect our Souls and the future State: and to use them, that the outward Man
may be a more active and ready Instrument of the Soul in working out our own
Salvation.

6. Let the Favor of God, and Communion with him be most precious and joyful
to us in the midst of Prosperity. The highest esteem and most ravishing
apprehensions of God, the dearest delight in him as the most excellent suitable
Good, and in whom the Soul has the most intimate propriety, is the honor due
to his incomparable Perfection. The Holy Psalmist often declares his
transcendent Valuation, and inflamed Affection toward God; How precious are
thy Thoughts unto me, O God! (no artifice Psalm. 139. 17, 19.
of words could fully express it) how great is the sum of them? If I should
count them, they are more in number than the Sand; when I awake I am still with
thee. As if he breathed not oftener than he thought of God with reverence and
complacency. Thus also he despises all that carnal Men pursue with violent
desires, in comparison of God's Favor, There be many that say, Who will show
us any Good? that is, a sensual Good, for nothing is pleasant to them, but what
appears in a fleshly fashion. Lord, lift thou up the light Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in
the time that their Corn and their Wine increased. The carnal Man, who is a
stranger to spiritual Joys, has a sweeter relish of carnal things, than a Saint
that has a new Nature, that deads the Appetite to dreggy Delights: and in the
Vintage and Harvest there is a Springtide of carnal Joy: yet David feels a
more inward joy and cordial contentment in the fruition of God's Favor, than a
natural Man has in the flower of his worldly Felicity. Nay, he prizes the
Favor of God before Life it self, which is our most precious possession in
this World. Thy loving kindness is better than Life, Psalm. 63.
therefore my lips shall praise thee. Communion with God, is the beginning of
Heaven, and differs from the fullness of Joy that is in the Divine Presence
above, only in the degrees and manner of Fruition. As the Blushes of the
Morning are the same Light with the glorious brightness of the Sun at Noonday.
The natural Man is averse from this heavenly Duty, and most in Prosperity. It Is
the observation of holy Job; They spend their days in Wealth; therefore they
say to the Almighty, Depart from us; we desire not the knowledge of thy Ways.
It Is the malignant property of worldly things, to deface the Notions, and cause
a disrelish of sublime and spiritual things. The Objects that pleasantly affect
the carnal Faculties, draw the Soul from God. This is the principal and
universal temptation of the present World, by the corruption of our Hearts, and
never so dangerous as in our Prosperity. It Is a rule in Building, that chief
care must be taken for the contriving of Windows, for the transmission of a
liberal Light to refresh the Inhabitants. Now to build in a Plain where the
Heavens are open on all sides, and the pure Light shines, it is easy to make the
House convenient: but to raise a luminous Fabric in a City thick set with
Houses, and straightened for room, requires Art, and the Building must be higher:
thus a Person that is surrounded with the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of the
World, that are so apt to darken the Soul, and to exclude the Influences of
Heaven, has need of holy Skill to preserve a free communication with God, and
to be always receptive of his Grace. Then holy Duties should be frequent and
fervent, wherein the Soul ascends to God by raised desires, and God descends
into the Soul, by the Operations of his sanctifying and comforting Spirit. And
as we see in Nature, the Flowers of every kind open their Leaves to the rising
Sun, to be revived with his vital Heat; so we should every day open our Hearts
to God in Prayer and Praises. And since all his Mercies invite and conduct us
to the blessed Author, and temporal Benefits are sensible Arguments of his
Love; those who most richly enjoy them, are obliged infinitely more to value
and delight in the Giver, than in the Gifts themselves. If the Heart be set
upon Riches, which it is very apt to be when they increase, or upon pleasures,
God is neglected and vilified: and tho many are not openly vicious and profane,
yet so pleasantly the things of the World insinuate into their Affections, that
they cannot taste how good the Lord is; a sad indication of their unregenerate
state: for the Divine Nature in a Saint, inclines him to God as his supreme
Good, his only Treasure and exceeding Joy; and as soon as he begins to breath
the Life of Holiness, he dies to the Vanities of the World. And when Prosperity
alienates the heart from God, it is as surely destructive, as when it draws
forth the sensual Appetites into exorbitant and foul actions. A Consumption
kills as surely as a Calenture. Those who abuse the Favors of God to impiety
and luxury, throw themselves headlong into the bottomless Pit; and those who in
their abundance are remiss and cold toward God, gradually descend thither: for
God will not be our Joy for ever in Heaven, if he be not our exceeding Joy upon
the Earth.

But when in the midst of Prosperity the Soul is filled with a noble admiration
of the Divine Excellencies, when it tastes incomparable more sweetness in the
Love of God, from whence outward Blessings are derived, than in the things
themselves, when the chief Joy arises from the contemplation of his Favor in
Christ, whereby we are pardoned, and preferred to be his Brethren, Coheirs with
him of the immortal and undefiled Inheritance, then we know how to abound. Our
Savior commands his Disciples not to rejoice that Luke 10. 20.
Spirits were subject to them, tho an admirable testimony of his Favor, but
that their Names were written in Heaven. Much less should this perishing World
be the matter of our Joy, in comparison of our Title, and the blessed hope of
Heaven. Spiritual Joy purifies and fortifies the Soul against the insnaring and
corrupting Allurements of the World. The Joy of the Lord is their strength;
that of which he is the Author and Object, is both productive and preservative
of the Vigor of the Soul, to resist the Charms of the World. It Is said of
Orpheus, when he past by the Sirens, who by their charming Voices subdued Men
to sleep, and then destroyed them, that he played on his Harp, and the sweet
sound made him despise their singing, and prevented the danger. The Fable is
fitly moralized: Joy in the Lord, as our Portion, and that infinite sweetness
that is in communion with him, makes such an impression upon the Soul, that the
insnaring and destructive Pleasures of the World are abhorred in comparison
with them. That firm Peace and pure Joy, passes the Understanding, our most
comprehensive Faculty; whereas all the Pleasures of the World do not satisfy
our Senses.

7. When Riches and Power are employed for the Glory of God and the good of
others, they are a happy advantage to those that possess them. All Benefits are
virtual Obligations; and the greater our Receipts are, the greater our Accounts
will be. God has a sovereign Right in all things we have, and they are not to
be employed merely for our Pleasure or Profit, but according to his Will, and
for his Honor. It Is true, he enjoys his own Eternity, his own Glory and
Blessedness, to which there is no possibility of accession: his essential Glory
cannot be increased, but his declarative Glory may be more manifested in the
Eyes of Men: and he strictly requires that we should use his Gifts, so as to
show forth his Glory, to declare how highly we value his Glory, and how
ardently we desire and endeavor that others should bless and praise him. Thus
Men in high Dignity should govern their Greatness so, as to make it subservient
to this blessed End, that the Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, and Mercy of
God, may be manifested in their administration. And those who enjoy a present
abundance, should, according to their capacity, relieve the Wants of others.
The wise God has ordered several degrees in the Society of Men, the Rich and
Poor; that the inequality may be an occasion of the exercise of Charity. And
it is a special favor, that he is pleased to make some his Treasurers to
dispense his Benefits to his Family. Whilst others can only be charitable in
their compassionate Desires, he gives to some an ability os diffusive Goodness:
and it is Injustice mixed with foul ingratitude, not to pay that Tribute of which
he has appointed the Poor to be his Receivers, not to abound in good Works,
when from his most free and special Favor, he enables Men to imitate and
honor him who is rich in Mercy. It Is more blessed to give than to receive. The
present Reward is excellent: it is our Savior's encouragement, Give Alms of
such things as you have, according to your Capacity, and behold all things are
clean unto you. As under the Law, by offering the first Fruits in the Temple,
the whole Harvest was consecrated and blessed; so by a charitable distribution,
the Rich have a pure and comfortable enjoyment of their Estates. And the Reward
hereafter will be glorious by infinite degrees, exceeding the most costly and
liberal Charity. It Is the Encouragement used by the Apostle, Charge them that
are rich in 1 Timothy 6.
this World, that they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation for the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal Life. Some
by corrupt prodigality waste their Estates, are profuse as the Sea; some heap
up Riches as the Sand, and both must be responsible to the Righteous Lord, who
will severely call them to an account for the abuse of his Blessings. But those
who according to their utmost ability honor him with their Substance, and by
their charity and beneficence open the hearts and lips of many in thanksgivings
to God, shall be accepted and rewarded from the Divine Mercy.

Especially doing good to those whom God loves, who bear his Image, who are
peculiarly related Mat. 11.
to him, shall have an excellent Reward. The Apostle tells us, that some by
entertaining Strangers, received Angels: the honor is incomparably greater,
that in relieving the Godly, Jesus Christ, the Lord of Angels, is fed and
clothed in his Members. And at the last Day he will publicly own those Acts
of Mercy as done to himself: Then he will give to the contented Poor the Crown
of Patience, and to the charitable Rich the Crown of Liberality. In short,
Riches and Honor, Power and Prosperity, are Temptations to the Carnal, that
draw forth their Lusts, and increase their Guilt and Misery; but to wise and
faithful Christians, they are Talents improved for their Master's Honor, and
their own everlasting Good.

7. A firm resolution to part with all Possessions and Dignities, when God's
Honor, and the testimony of his Truth requires it, is an excellent Antidote
against the Evil of Prosperity. God does sometimes call forth his Servants to
hard Trials, to declare with more strength and evidence their love to his Name,
their zeal for advancing his Glory: Satan is an irreconcilable Enemy to God
and his Saints; and inspires the perverted World with his own Malice against
them. Rage has no Reason: the Jews would excommunicate the blind Man, because
he saw, and ascribed the Glory of the Miracle to our Savior: and Lazarus must
die, because he was raised from the Grave. Now when a Christian is prepared for
this noble Act of Self-denial, to forsake all things when his Duty to Christ
requires it; this preserves him from the ensnaring temptations of Prosperity.

It Is observable, the same Divine Disposition of Soul, makes us temperate in
the use of present Abundance, and patient in the loss of it. The low esteem of
earthly things, joined with the lively hope of Heaven, renders the enjoyment of
the World less delightful, and the loss of it more tolerable. The Philosopher
Intervallum inter me and illa magnum habui: itaque abstulit illa non avulsit.
Senec. Cons. ad Helv.
and Courtier says of himself, that he always in his Prosperity kept a great
distance between his Affections and Riches with Honors; and in the change of
his state, they were rather taken easily away, than rent from him. According to
the temper of the Mind, the difference is as sensible in the parting with
outward things, as between clipping the Hair, and tearing it off with violence.
Nay, the Glory of Heaven does so eclipse the faint and fading luster of this
World, that a Believer not only patiently but cheerfully makes the exchange of
the one for other. Moses Heb. 11.
preferred Affliction with the People of God before the Crown of Egypt, because
of the Reward above that was in his view. And the Christian Hebrews took
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing that they had in Heaven a better
and an enduring substance. The blessed Hope will preserve us from being foiled
by Prosperity when it surrounds us, and from sinking in Adversity. Like
Mertyllus his Shield, that secured him in the Field, and saved him being
Shipwrack'd at Sea, by wasting him to the Shore.

Lastly; Earnest and constant Prayer to God for Divine Grace, is a sovereign
means to preserve those who are in Prosperity from the danger that attends it.
I know how to abound, says the Apostle; and immediately adds, I can do all Phil.
4.
things through Christ that strengthens me. Supernatural Strength in an eminent
degree is requisite to keep us entire and upright in the dangerous conflict
with the pleasant Temptations of the World: and that Strength is derived from
Christ, and obtained by humble Aelizaeus cum magno honor and seculi dignitate
prophetiae donum habuit: Elias profugus and persecutus.
Prayer, It Is St. Austin's observation, that Elisha wanted a double portion of
Elijah's Spirit, because he was in public Honor; and exposed to a more
dangerous trial, an extraordinary Grace was necessary for him: But Elias was
under continual persecution. The Trees that are exposed to storms, are strong
and firm; but those in the sunny Valleys are brittle and easily blown down. We
are directed to ask Wisdom of God for the governing of our selves in
Afflictions, that in patience we may possess our Souls, and the turbulent
Passions may not cause rebellious disorders, but the sanctified Mind may use
Afflictions for our spiritual and eternal Good. And it is as necessary to beg
Heavenly Wisdom for governing our selves in Prosperity, that when Temptations
are frequent, and favored by our joyful Affections, which are equally vehement
and exorbitant as the sad Affections, Reason may keep the Throne, and manage
Prosperity, so as we may obtain our blessed End. Such is the malice of Satan,
that he incessantly desires leave to tempt us, and love to our Souls should
make us pray continually for confirming Grace against his Temptations. Briefly,
if the good things of this World make us more humble and holy, more fearful to
offend God, and careful to please him; if they are Motives to renew our Homage
and Thankfulness to him, if they are used in subordination to his Glory, they
are the Testimonies of his present Favor, and the Pledges of our future
Felicity. Our blessed Savior keeps the best Wine for his obedient Friends till
the last.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 68. line 10, for Love, read Law.

P. 134. l. 1. for Man, r. Name.

P. 181. l. 12. for conceit and, r. conceited.

Some Books printed for Brabazon Aylmer in Cornhil.
THe Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. Or, Discourses, wherein is showed,
how the Wisdom* Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God are glorified
in that Great and Blessed Work. By William Bates, D. D. in Quarte.

Considerations of the Existence of God, And of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the Future State. To which is now added, The Divinity
of the Christian Religion* proved by the evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation^ for the Cure of Infidelity the Hectic Evil of the Times. By
William Bates, D. D. in Octavo.

The Sovereign and final Happiness of Man, with the effectual means to obtain
it. Also the Joys of Heaven, and Torments of Hell are discoursed of* By William
Bates, D. D. in Octavo.

Several Sermons upon Death, and Eternal Judgment. By William Bates, D. D. in
Octavo.

The great Duty of Resignation to the Divine will in Afflictions, enforced from
the Example of our suffering Savior. By William Bates, D. D. in Octavo.


