INSTRUCTIONS ABOUT Heart-work. What is to be done on Gods part, and ours, for
the cure and keeping of the HEART, that we may live in the Exercise and Growth
of Grace here, and have a comfortable Assurance of Glory to Eternity.

By that eminent Gospel-Minister Mr. RICHARD ALLEIN Author of Vindicioe
Pietatis.

ZEC. 1.5, 6. -- The Prophets, do they live for ever? but my words -- did they
not take hold of your fathers? etc.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Greenwood at the Crown in the Poultry, near
Grocers Alley. 1681.

TO THE READER.
THis was the last Work of this blessed Author, and I wish the improvement of
the scope of it, may be the first and last work of every Reader. That his Works
have done good, very few have so many Heart-epistles of Commendation. O let
nothing be wanting on your part, but that this may do more good. Were all our
Swords of Contention beaten into Plough-shares and Pruning Hooks, for ploughing
up the fallow ground of the Heart, for pulling up the weeds, and cutting off
the luxuriances of the Heart; were this the only Contention, who should most
promote gracious heart-work both in themselves and others: this work would
afford comfort both living and dying. We are every one readier to find fault
with others than to mend our selves; but were heart-work more minded, we should
have no time to spare for such excursions. This Treatise will instruct you in
downright Christianity, which, would all those heartily mind that wear the name
of Christian, we need not fear what Men or Devils could do against us. Let me
assure you, it is more than a probable opinion, that unless we heartily mind
plain practical godliness, it is presumption, not faith, to expect Deliverance.
God holds us hovering upon our good behavior; our most infallible
Prognostics, what God will do with us, are within us. It is not what we seem,
but what we are; God looks at the heart: When the bent and frame of the heart
is right, this cannot but influence the life; and when heart and life please
God, nothing can come amiss to us; Gods severest strokes will be blessings to
us, but where the heart is neglected those Providence that are most grateful
to flesh and blood will be curses to us. Christians, you know it is granted on
all hands, that God looks most at the heart; therefore brutish Sinners, when
they would evade conviction, boast of their hearts to excuse their ignorance
and sottish profaneness, they will tell you their hearts are good; and thus the
Father of Lies flatters them, and ruins them, with a good conceit of their
hearts. On the other hand, the most serious Christians are always complaining
of their hearts, that they are dead, fickle, false, unspiritual; and thus the
Father of Lies discomforts them, by souring their very graces, their
mortification, humility, holy jealousy, their hatred of sin, and sense of its
encroachments, are warped by Satan to their discouragement. But now a clear and
practical understanding of the way of Grace, the way of Temptation, and the way
of Duty about the Heart, will steer us right through all the difficulties and
dangers we shall meet with on this side Glory. That this Book may be blessed to
this end, is the hearty desire of a willing Servant of Christ and Christians,

SAMUEL ANNESLEY.

Instructions about Heart-work, etc.
Prove. 4.23. ad finem. V. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, Wash thine
heart from thine Iniquity, that thou may be saved.
for out of it are the issues of life.

V. 24. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.

V. 25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight
before thee.

V. 26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.

V. 27. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, remove thy foot from evil.


IN these words you have observable, 1. A great Office that every man is set
in, with respect to Himself; he is a Keeper. 2. The great Trust that is
committed to his care and keeping: that is, in general Himself; in particular,
1. his Heart, Keep thy heart. 2. His Lips, v. 24. Put away from thee a froward
mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee. Keep thy mouth and thy Lips in
order, keep them from speaking frowardness and from uttering perverse things.
3. His eyes v. 25. Let thine eyes ^ook right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee. Keep thine eyes open, look with thine eyes, and keep
thine eyes from wandering, look right on. 4. His feet, v. 26.27. Ponder the path
of thy feet, remove thy feet from evil. Let thine eye look right on, and let
thy foot walk right on. Let thine eye see thy way before thee, and let thy foot
walk in it, not turning out to the right hand or to the left.

Doctrine 1. Every man is appointed by the Lord to be his own Keeper. Where
there is a depositum, there is a custos, he is a Trustee to whom there is a
trust committed. Here take notice, 1 Every man has other Keepers besides
himself. God is his keeper. Psalm. 121.5. The Lord is thy keeper. Our Governors
and our Teachers are our Keepers, every man is, or should be his brothers
keeper. Magistrates are the Keepers of their Countries. Ministers are the
Keepers of their Flocks and Congregations. Parents are the Keepers of their
Children and Families. We should have but ill looking to, had we no other
Keepers than our selves; and all our other Keepers, Magistrates, Ministers, and
Parents could do little toward the keeping of us, if the Lord also were not
our keeper, Psalm 127.1. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches
but in vain. Magistrates will but govern us in vain, Ministers will but guide
us in vain, Parents will but rule us in vain, unless the Keeper of Israel be
our keeper. Oh bless the Lord, who though he has put the care of us upon our
selves, yet has not cast off the care of us himself. Let us bless the Lord for
his care and custody, and let us both take care of our selves, and also commit
the care of our selves to him. To both we are exhorted in one word, 1 Pet.
4.19. Commit the keeping of your selves to him, in a way of well-doing. Take
all the care you can of your selves, and your own ways, and then cast your
selves upon Gods care. Commit the keeping of your selves to him, as unto a
faithful Creator. Let us commit the keeping of our selves to the Lord, and let
us comfort our selves in this, that the Lord will take us into his custody,
there we are in sure hands. He is faithful, and will keep what is thus
committed to him. Beware you abuse not this comfort. Dare not say thus, God
will look to me, and therefore I need not look to my self He that will not keep
himself, God will be no keeper of him. He that will not take care of his own
soul, says in vain, I have committed that care to the Lord. If thou will not
take care of thine own soul, thou leavest it to the custody of the Devil; and
if thou do, God will leave thee to him also. To say I commit the keeping of
my self to God, and will not take care of my self, is the same in effect, as to
say, I com^it my soul to the custody of Satan. If thou take not care of thy
self, God will not take care of thee; and if thou be kept neither by thy self,
nor by the Lord, into whose hands art thou like to fall, but into the hands of
the Devil? The Devil is a Keeper, yet not a Protector, but a Jailer, the Keeper
of the Prison. All the Sinners of the Earth are Prisoners to this Jailer: and
there is no man that escapes this Keeper, till he will faithfully keep and look
to himself, and so commit himself to the Keeper of Israel.

2. Every man has others to keep ^^^des himself. Not only Magistrates, who
are to keep their People; or Ministers, who are to keep their Flocks; or
Parents, who are to keep their Children; but every man is to look to his
Brethren. It was the Question of a wicked one, and it was a wicked Question, Am
I my Brothers keeper? Yes thou art so, thou art to watch thy Brother, and to
warn thy Brother, to prevent his falling into evil, and to restore and recover
him when fallen, Gal. 6.1. If a man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore, etc. Thus every man has other Keepers, and every man has
others to keep besides himself: But

3. In special, every man is his own Keeper; Deuteronomy. 4.9. Keep thine own soul
diligently. And so in the Text, Keep thy heart with all diligence.

Reason 1. If thou will not keep thy self, all the World is not able to keep
thee. Ministers will but preach to thee in vain, instruct thee in vain, warn
and watch over thee in vain; Magistrates will but govern thee in vain; Parents
will look to thee in vain; if thou will not look to thy self. God himself will
not keep thee, if thou will not keep thy self. Men cannot, and God will not; he
will be no keeper of the careless ones.

2. If thou will not keep thy self, the Devil will be thy keeper. He will keep
thee to thy wickedness, if thou will not keep thy self from it. This is every
man's especial charge, to keep himself out of the hands of the Devil. The Devil
will have thee, man, if thou look not to thy self; nay the Devil has thee
already, if thou be careless of thy self. God will keep none but those, that
under him, will keep themselves. Those that will not keep themselves, the Devil
may come and take them into his custody The Devil goes up and down the World,
to see if he can find any Sheep without a Shepherd; and he that is not his own
Shepherd, God will be none of his Shepherd. If thou will not keep thy self, God
will not keep thee, thou art a Sheep without a Shepherd. Here Is a man for me,
says the Devil, he has none to look to him, nor will he look to himself. This
is a man for me, I will be his keeper. He will not keep himself for God, I will
keep him for Hell. He is none of Gods Sheep, I will take him for one of my
Goats. He is left out for me, he has left out himself, a^ therefore God has
left him out, and I will take him into custody.

3. If thou will not keep thy self, then thou will never keep those others that
are committed to thy keeping. What a Parent, what a Neighbor art thou like to
be, who art careless of thy self? How are thy poor Children like to be looked
too? How is thy Family like to be governed by thee, if thou keep not thine own
soul? He that will not keep his own Vineyard, how will he keep another man's? He
that neglects himself and his own soul, how will he mind the souls that are
committed to him?

Use 1. Then no man must be a Sleeper or a Loyterer. Keepers must watch, yea
and must work too; he that is set to keep himself, is as the Keeper of a
Garden, or the Keeper of a Vineyard, and so it is expressed, Cant. 1.6. Mine own
vineyard have I not kept. The Garden has a Wall to be kept up, has Weeds to
be kept under; the Vineyard may have wild Vines springing up and exuberant
branches that must be pruned and lopt off. Thou have thy hands full of work who
have such a Vineyard as thy self committed to thy keeping. What, stand thou
all day idle? Work in thy Vineyard we live most of us, as if we wanted work and
had nothing to do. We find something to do for this World, and our outward man,
and therefore here we are busy; but we see not, we consider not how much we
have to do for our souls, and therefore here we are idle, as if we had nothing
to do; and those that have the greatest work lying upon them, whose work lies
most behind hand, who have let all within them run to ruin, and lie all out of
order, these are usually the men, that live as if they had nothing to do. Thou
art a Keeper, man, a keeper of thine own soul and life; Is all in safety? Is
all in good order* Look into thy self, and see to what a miserable case, for
want of good looking to, thou art grown Conscience which is thy Wall or thy
Fence is broken down, that little good that was in thee, thy Flowers are
withered and plucked up, and how does Weeds abound in thee, Pride and Lust and
Covetousness? and those Thorns, the Cares of this life, how have they overrun
thy ground? And do thou yet loyter, as one that has nothing to do? Thou have
work for every day, thou have work for every hour. The Foxes are waiting, the
wild Bea^^ Satan with his temptations) are breaking in, the we^^s are growing
up every hour, behold thy case is growing worse and worse, thine eyes more
blind, thy heart more hard, and senseless daily, up and be doing, look to thy
self, keep thy self with all diligence, lest thou let all run to ruin so long,
that it be past recovery.

2. Then every man must give an account of himself. Whoever has a trust
committed to him must be brought to a reckoning, how he has discharged his
trust. Romans 14.12. Every one of us must give an account of himself to God. God
that now says, keep thine heart, look to thy self, will then say, how have thou
kept thy self, What care or what pains have thou taken? and oh, what account
will the most of us be able to give!

Sinner, thou art a careless heedless soul, thou take no thought about thy
self; thou take thought for thy Sheep and Oxen, thou take care of thy House
and thy Ground, but what thought do thou take about thy self, thy miserable,
sick soul, thy blind and dead soul,; thy proud and earthly mind, thy envy and
thy frowardness and thy malice and enmity against God and his holiness, those
cursed weeds that thou art overgrown withal, that miserable plight that thy
poor soul is in, do sufficiently evidence what a miserable keeper thou have
been of thy self. But man, what a reckoning do thou think thou shall give!
Do never think of being brought to a reckoning? Do think that God will ever
let thee alone? Do think thou shall never hear of thine idleness and this
carelessness of thy self. Thy Parents must give an account how they have done
their duty, how they have kept thee whilst under their power, whether they
have taught, whether they have governed thee and educated thee in the Lord, and
thou must give the same account how thou keep, and teach and governest
thy child. Ministers also must give an account of thee, how they have
instructed thee, warned thee, and watched over thee, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls
as they that must give an account. Think not much that we deal so plainly, and
so closely with you, that we are so instant, in exhorting, in reproving, in
warning, and watching over you; We must give an account how we discharge our
duty toward you. Pa^^nts must keep their Children, Ministers must look to
their Flocks, and must give an account hereof to God; but besides this every
man must give an account of [himself] to God. Romans 14.12. How he has obeyed
them, that were set over him in the Lord, how far he has hearkened to their
counsels, whether he has received instructions and submitted to their
exhortations and reproofs whether their discharge of their work toward him,
has set him faithfully to his own work concerning himself. And, oh, what
account will you give of your selves to God? what have many of you done more
than others, that have never had Ministers to take care of them? how little
have many of you lived, better than those that never have been taught. Sinners,
look into your hearts, look upon your lives, and understand, if you have so
much understanding in you, in what a miserable case you are to this day. Is it
not a miserable thing there should be so much ignorance, after so much
teaching? Are not those hard hearts, those barren and unsavory lives, much
more, those lewd and wicked lives that some of you live, that Lying, and that
Drunkenness, and that Sabbath-breaking, and that Covetousness that some of you
still live in, are not these sufficient evidences, that whatever Ministers have
been to thee, thou have been a miserable keeper of thy self? And what a
reckoning must you be brought to for this? Do not think that God will reckon
with thee for all? Reckon with thee for thy Lying, reckon with thee for thy
Drunkenness, reckon with thee for all thy carelessness and negligence? What
will thou say for thy self, when God shall demand of thee, How have thou kept
that Vineyard committed to thee? How have thou kept that soul of thine? How
have thou ordered thy Life? How will thou stand speechless in that day, and
receive the sentence of an unfaithful Steward, and an unprofitable Servant!

From V. 24. Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from
thee. Note two things:

1. The unruly evil must be ruled. The Tongue is an unruly evil, James 3.8. It
is one of the hardest works that some Christians have to rule their Tongues:
but yet it must be done.

Object. It is said it cannot be done, the tongue can no man tame. What, does
Religion put us upon impossibilities, to tame that member which cannot be tamed?

Sol. The meaning there is, that (...) man can tame another tongue. Thou may
rule thine own tongue, but if thou will not do it thy self, it is more than all
the World can do to tame it for thee. Who can stop uncircumcised lips, who can
silence the tongue of the froward? Neither Laws nor Penalties will do it,
neither softest nor hardest answers will do it; when the tongue is set on fire,
there is no water will quench it, and yet it must be done.

2. That which cannot be ruled, must be put away. Put away your froward mouth,
put away perverse lips. Put away frowardness and perverseness from thee;
frowardness cannot be ruled, perverseness cannot be kept in order. When we have
done all we can, frowardness will be froward, perverseness will be perverse; and
therefore that is the way to rule the tongue, to put away that frowardness
which will not be ruled.

1. What frowardness is. I need not say much to answer that; most men know it
too well in their own experiences of the froward ones they dwell, or have to
deal withal. There are few men but know what frowardness is, unless it be those
that are froward; the eye that sees others, yet cannot see it self. He that is
of a froward mouth is hardly brought to understand that he is froward. He that
has a froward wife, she that has a froward husband, they that have a froward
neighbor, need not be told what frowardness is: but he that has a froward
heart, it is he that has most need to be told it.

1. He is froward that is hard to be pleased, apt to be provoked, that is ever
finding fault, who is like Tinder, apt to catch on fire by every spark, and
that fire is quickly kindled, but hardly quenched; no arguments, no patience,
no forbearance will do; but there it burns and will not be quenched, Eccl. 7.9.
Anger rests in the bosom of Fools: of these froward Fools we are speaking of.
Frowardness is folly. That fire which is intended as a revenge upon others,
does burn, and vex, and fret out their own hearts.

II. He is of froward mouth, that gives vent by his lips to the frowardness of
his heart, in virulent and bitter and provoking language.

2. The necessity (...) putting it away. 1. The Lord commands us to put away
froward mouths. What if thy Friend or thy Neighbor cannot pacify or silence
thee, shall not God pacify thee neither? If thou will not hear Man pleading
for peace and quiet, will thou not hear the Lord God neither? God commands thee
silence, God commands thee to hold thy peace, and to utter not a word more of
thy furious folly: what a perverse spirit art thou of, on whom the authority of
the Almighty will not prevail. What do thou say in effect, but I will speak
my mind whether God like it or not? 2. It is a sign whilst it prevails, that
men's Religion is in vain, James 1.26. If any man among you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
Religion is in vain.

1. There are some professors of Religion, whose Religion is but an outside and
pretense; they do but seem to be religious, they seem so to themselves, and
seem so to others, but they are deceived, there is no such thing as Religion in
them.

2. Some seem to be religious but bridle not their tongues, they pretend to be
of circumcised hearts, but are of uncircumcised lips.

3. The unbridleness of their tongues, is an evidence that their Religion is in
vain. When is Religion in vain? Why, when it cannot reach its end, when it
cannot save the soul; and sure that Religion which cannot bridle the tongue
cannot save the soul. Man, in what a case art thou? Thou professest Religion,
and hopest for salvation; but if thou art of an unbridled froward tongue, thy
Religion is vain, and cannot save thee.

III. Frowardness hinders all that little Religion that such men have in the
exercise of it; it puts them besides Prayer, or Reading, or Meditation, or
spending one serious thought upon Eternity, all Religion is thrust behind the
doors when the froward fit is up.

Friends, pray do not make light of this grievous evil, turn every one of your
eyes homeward, and reflect upon your own spirits and carriages; do not
presently say, I am not guilty, or I am not much guilty this way, it may be it
is for want of observing thy self. Look again, and again, how thou carriedst it
at such a time, how to such or such persons; and you tha^ ^re guilty, do not
make light of it, do not count it a^ ^ll fault. Is that but a small evil which
proves thee an hypocrite? Where this evil reigns and is not checked nor
controlled by thee, is not mourned over, nor art thou ashamed of it, nor wilt
resist it; when this evil reigns, it is a sign thou art but an hypocrite, and
thy religion is in vain.

Christians, our Lord Jesus, whose Disciples we profess our selves to be, and
to learn of him, was meek and lowly, in heart, Mat. 11.29. and art thou his
Disciple, who art of a proud and furious spirit? The Apostle tells us, that a
meek and quiet spirit is an ornament to the Gospel, and of great price in the
sight of God, 1 Pet, 3.4. If meekness be an ornament, then frowardness is a
blot and a blemish, and a stain upon our Profession. If meekness be precious,
then frowardness is odious in the sight of God. Would thou make thy self a
disgrace to the Gospel, an odium and an abomination unto the Lord? If thou
would not, then cease from thy frowardness, and study, and follow after that
gentleness, that sweetness, and candor, and meekness of heart and behavior,
which is so grateful both with God and men.

Friends, though I would not say much, yet finding it lie in my way, I would
not pass by this evil without saying something, though but thus briefly to it.
But though I have said but little, yet pray let not this little be forgotten,
especially by any such among you, whose Consciences may tell you, God has sent
this Word as an Item to me.

Doctr. from V. 26. Every foot has his path. There are two paths, in one of
which every one is walking. There is the good path, or way; and there is the
evil path. These two are distinguished by their ends or term to which they
lead; that is, the good path that leads to Good, called the path of life, Psalm
16.11. that is the evil path that leads to Evil, the way of death and
destruction, Mat. 7.

2. By their Adjuncts or Qualities. The good way is general, the way of
Holiness; in particular, the way of Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Patience,
etc. the way of Faith, and Love, and Prayer. The evil way is the way of Sin in
general; and in particular, it is either the way of Lying, or the way of
Covetousness, or the way of Pride, or Envy, etc.

But here note ^^at the good way is made up of all these good Qualities, or
else it cannot be the good way; but any one of the evil Qualities makes the way
evil.

He that is humble and is not temperate, he that is temperate and is not
patient, he that is patient and is not merciful, he whose life is not led in
universal holiness, that has any one grace wanting, is not in the good way,
one Fly spoils the whole Box. Christians must stand complete in all the wills
of God, Col. 4.12. But for the evil way, he that walks in any one particular
branch of that, his way is evil. He that is not a Liar, if he be a Swearer; he
that is not a Swearer, if he be a Drunkard; he that is not a Drunkard, if he be
Covetous; he that is none of all these, if he be carnal, and walks after the
flesh, or any one particular Lust thereof, he is in the evil way; the path of
sin, if it be but any one sin, that is our path, or our way wherein we use and
allow our selves to walk; the path of sin is the way of death.

Now every one in the World has his path, is either in the good way, the way
of Holiness; or the evil way, the way of Sin. And of those that are in the way
of Sin, some are in the way of the Proud, others in the way of the Scornful,
others in the way of Lying, others in the way of Covetousness, every one has
his way.

Doctr. 2. Every path must be pondered. To ponder our ways, is to weigh and
consider them; the same which is charged, Hag. 1.5. Consider your ways, spend
some deep and serious thoughts upon them. Now there is,

1. A consideration of the ways that we have hitherto gone on in. A bethinking
our selves, a reviewing our course; this is that which the Psalmist did, Psalm.
119.59. I thought on my ways that I had hitherto been walking (...) I thought
and repented of what I had done, I thought and turned. And this is that for
which Israel was reproved, No man said, what have I done? No man said in his
heart, no man thought with himself, what have I done?

For the Objects of these thoughts must be,

1. The matters that we have done, the particular actions of our lives. Carnal
men never observe, or mark what they do; they never review or reflect upon
their actions. How many words do ^^en speak, how many works are men engaged in,
that they never observe, or mark, or bestow one thought upon, they cannot
remember their ways, because they do not observe their ways. Think what you
have been doing all your life long; think what you have neglected to do, and
think what you have done, and are doing to this day; let your eye be upon the
particular actions of your lives.

2. The Quality of our ways, whether they are good or evil, whether they are
holy or sinful. Thy way has been the way of Lying, the way of Covetousness,
the way of Pride, a carnal, careless, fleshly way; think with thy self, Is this
a good way, or an evil way, do these my ways please God, or are they contrary
to God?

3. The end of our ways, or whither they tend, and to what issue they will come
at last. Is this my way to God? Is this the way of the everlasting Kingdom? Is
this the path of life? Have I been all this while in the strait and narrow way
that leads to life, or have I not hitherto been traveling in the broad way
that leads to destruction? This worldly way, this fleshly way, it is that which
has pleased me at present; but whether will it bring me at last?

Sinners, bethink your selves thus, Whither is it that I am going? What is like
to be the end of this course I am taking? Either to God or the Devil, either to
Heaven or Hell, every one of you have been going, and which of the two have you
been making toward? Is lying the way to God? Is Drunkenness and carnal mirth
and pleasure, is this the way to Heaven? Is hardness of heart in your way? Is
impenitence in your sin, is this the way to blessedness? Do not your own hearts
tell you, I must turn out of these evil paths, I must take a new course ere
ever I can be saved?

Be so wise as to spend some such thoughts. This is sinners great folly and
their great misery, that they run on in their ways and we cannot persuade them
to think whither they are going. But what is it of so little weight with you
whether you are saved or damned, that it is not worth a few serious thoughts.
Sure you could never go on at that senseless rate you do, if you did think
whither you were going. We come and preach Christ and righteousness and
holiness to you, as the only way of life; you have been often told that Christ
is the way, and that no man comes to the Father but by him, Jo. 14.6. And you
have been told that there is no coming to God by Christ, to Heaven by Christ,
unless there be a coming to Christ, a joining your selves to him as his
disciples and followers. Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Jo.
6.37. but will bring him to Life* you have been often told that without
holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. That this way of Faith in Christ and
this way of holiness is the only way of life, this has been told you, this
has been preached to you over and over again and yet we cannot persuade you
into this way. The reason is because you will not consider what we preach, you
will not consider what it is to be damned and perish for ever; you will not
consider whether you can think of any other way by which it is possible to
escape damnation but this way of faith and holiness. If you did consider and
understand what an Hell it is whither your neglect of Christ and running on in
your ways is leading you, how hot that furnace is into which you are like to
fall within a few days, how dreadful it will be when you are in once, and shall
feel the scorching of those flames. What think you, would not such scalding and
burning thoughts make you weary of your sins, and willing of Christ. Would they
not awaken you, would they not affright you out of this secure and vain course
that you are now going on in.

Where do you think your fellow-Swearers, and fellow-Drunkards and
fellow-Worldlings that have been cut off in their sins and carried away into
the other world in there impenitence, that were laughing with you, and mocking
and scoffing with you a few years ago; where do you think they are now? What do
ye think they are doing at this hour? O, it would make an heart of stone to
tremble and quake to think what their companions that are dead in their sins do
now see and feel. Think with thy self man, those that were a while agone
drinking with me and laughing with me making a mock of Christ and of sin as I
do, O where are they now? It would make thine eyes stare, and thine hair stand
on end, and thy bones shiver to think where they are. O consider this ye that
forget God lest he tear you in pieces and there be none to deliver you from
that place of the dead, that place of Pitch and burning Brimstone, where you
have reason to fear your companions in sin are frying at this hour. Whilst
Christ is preaching to you, whilst God is yet a warning you to fly from the
wrath to come! Oh how are they tearing their hair, and biting their tongue and
wringing their hands to consider, that preaching of Christ to them shall be no
more, that all their warnings are over, that they must for ever feel and faint,
and perish under that wrath which is now too late for them to fly from, or
escape. Bestow some thoughts upon your companions that are dead and gone, and
then consider your self, whether if you keep on the ways you are walking in,
you must not shortly be with them, in the same condemnation, and if yet you
will not consider it presently as Jer. 23.20 in your latter end you shall
consider it perfectly. Therefore yet again I say to you, and charge you from
the Lord, consider your present evil ways and to what a fearful end they will
certainly bring you, if you speedily turn not out of them.

2. Considering the ways that are before us, that we should for the future go
on in. God has given sinners there choice whether to continue as they are in
the same way, or to take up a new and a better way of life. Think what you have
done and how you have lived, and think what you have now to do for the future,
let thine eyes look straight on, etc. What course do you think it is best for
you to take for the future? Do thou think it is best to continue as at
present, to hold on your worldliness, in your drunkeness, in your lying, in
your carnal careless course; or is it not best for you to hearken to Christ,
and to turn from your sins, and to betake your self to a serious, godly and
holy life? Which of the two is best? May be, it never came into your thoughts
to put the question to your self, but you have run on from one day to another,
without asking, What were I best to do? Why, now here is that I would persuade
you to; to look before you, and consider, What is best for you from henceforth
to resolve upon; What would a wise man do in this case; what choice would a
wise man make? Sure methinks, a little consideration should bring you to this,
If I be wise I should turn and knock off from my wonted ways, I shall be a fool
and a mad man if I go on thus. What does God offer to pardon my neglects of
Christ, my neglects of my soul, and all my sins, if I will yet but turn to him?
What, does Christ yet offer to bring me to God, and to save me from the Eternal
Dungeon, if I will yet come unto him, and become a new creature? What will my
going on as I have hitherto done, my spending the remainder of my life, as I
have spent that which is past in sin and vanity, will this a running on upon
mine own death, and a shutting up the door of mercy forever against me, and yet
shall I continue as I am? Is there a way of life yet before me, is there a door
of mercy, yet open to me, and shall I not get into the Way and be making
toward the door? Consider sinners what is the best, the wisest and the only
safe course to take from henceforth, and do accordingly.

2. Why must we ponder our paths?

1. God pondereth them. Is. 26.7. Thou weighest the path of the just.

2. The devil pondereth them, Luke. 22.31. That he may sift you as wheat.

3. Wicked men our enemies ponder them.

4. Our way may be right in our own eyes for want of consideration, when yet
upon consideration it may appear to be the way of death. Prove. 14.12. There is
a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.

1. There is a way of some men that is not so much as right in their own eyes,
who, as little as they do consider it, do see their way to be the way of death,
and not of life; the way of the openly Profane, the way of the Drunkard, and
Adulterer, the way of the Swearer, and Blasphemer. Prophanness does not pretend
to be the way of life, Drunkards and Adulterers know they are out of the way,
their consciences tell them this is not the way of God, this is not the way to
heaven; their conscience tells them I must turn I must repent, and take up a
better way ere I die, I must not die a Drunkard I must not die a Blasphemer, or
a Scoffer, I must repent or I am lost; and hopes they have that they shall
repent, and this their hope hardens them, The consideration that such men
should take up, is not to convince them that they are out of this way of life,
that they know already; but to convince them of the necessity of a present
turning and changing their way. Dare thou not to die a Drunkard, or a
Libertine, or a Licentious Liver, how then dare thou to live so a day longer?
Art thou sure but that death may meet thee before thy turning day comes? And
how if it should? thou know that then there is no hope of thee, but
Everlasting wrath must be thy portion. Thou countest upon turning and
repenting, but consider what is the reason thou do not repent at present,
that thou do not this day give a divorce to all thy wickedness, shake hands
with all thy companions, and forthwith become a new man. Why not now? O I
cannot bring mine heart to it. And do thou in good earnest think that it will
be easier hereafter? Has the Lord been persuading thee to a change all thy
life long, and thou see his word cannot prevail, thou see it does not after
all thy convictions, and fears, and threatenings of the Word and checks of thy
conscience, hitherto thou go on, thy lust is too hard for thy conscience, or
convictions, and do thou think in thy heart that this is the way to make it
easy to repent, to continue longer in thy sin? A course of sin hardens thee,
sinner. Thine heart is not so hardened against repentance this year, but look
for it, thou art like to find it harder the next year. The farther thou go
on in sin the farther off art thou from repentance.

2. There are others whose ways are right in their own eyes, which
consideration would make appear to be the way of death and not of Life. I shall
instance in two sorts.

1. The ways of moral unbelievers. These are they that are sober and temperate,
and harmless, and just in their dealings with men, and courteous and good
natured, this is their way and this way seems right unto them, in this way they
hope to come to heaven, though whatsoever they have of morality they have
nothing of Christianity in them. Conversion or Regeneration are as strange
things to them as they were to Nicodemus. Jo. 3.3. who when Christ told him,
except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God, he answered, how
can these things be? And they have need to ask as Pilate did, what is truth? So
they, what is this new birth? what is this new creature? what is this
conversion? Consider man, what do thou think of this plea at last when this
is all thou can say, I am an honest man, but God help me, no good Christian,
I am no drunkard, but yet an unbeliever: I am no Liar nor Swearer, but yet no
convert to Christ. Consider those scriptures. Jo. 3.3. except a man be born
again he cannot see the kingdom of God: ^^d Mat. 18.3. Except a man be
converted he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And do thou bless thy self
in thy harmless and less vicious way, when thou have never felt any such thing
as Regeneration upon thee? This thy way is thy folly, and though it be right in
thine own eyes yet it is, and thou will find it to be the way of death.

2. The way of hypocritical professors* some hypocrites know themselves
hypocrites, and the way seems not right to them; others are hypocrites, and yet
take themselves to be sincere and the deceit of their hearts may be so deep
that there is need of deep consideration to discover it. They pray and they
hear, and have some face of Religion upon their ways; they will speak of God,
and the things of God with some affection and live in the visible communion of
the church with good approbation, they are it may be, well reputed and well
reported among all men, and yet for all that, the root of the matter may not be
in them, they may be unsound and rotten at heart, and neither themselves know
it, and others suspect it, there may be some secret reigning lust in their
hearts, they may be lovers of the world, lovers of their ease or their
pleasures more than lovers of God, Whatever they have, there may be one thing
lacking, as it was the case of the young man, Mar. 10.21. whose life was
commendable in many things, yet says Christ, one thing lackest thou, and that
one lack was loss of heaven. And have we not all need to consider our selves,
and to consider deeply how it is with us. A sincere Christian is an entire
christian. psalm. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled that is the entire in their
way; that labor to be entire lacking nothing; and sure we had need consider
whether we are or no.

Some Professors are so lame and halting in their way that they lack many
things almost all things of serious Christianity. Thou have the profession of
christianity, but is not the power of it lacking? Thou do some of the works
of righteousness, but may not the Lord complain of thee as of Sardis. Rev. 3.2.
I have not found thy works perfect before me; thou do some of the works of
Christians, but are not the inward graces lacking? Some of the inward graces
thou seem to ha^^ but art thou not wanting in others? Thou seeme^^ (...) ^ve
faith, but is not love lacking? Art thou not (...) ^^us, revengeful,
quarrelsome Professor? thou seem to have love, but is not humility lacking?
Art thou not proud and haughty, and high minded? Thou seem to be humble, but
is not meekness lacking? Art thou not fierce and froward, and peevish in thy
way? Thou seem to be meek, but is not patience lacking? How can thou bear
affliction, do thou not murmr and repine and vex thy self in the day of
adversity? Thou seem all this; but art thou true in thy sayings, righteous
and exact in thy dealings, merciful and compassionate, and bountiful to those
that are in necessity? Thou seem to have all these inward graces; but is not
a bold profession of Christ lacking? Thou art bold to own Christ and hear his
Word, even to come in hazard; but whatever thou can say of thy hearing, is
not Prayer lacking? if thou pray in secret, is not prayer in thy Family
lacking? If thou pray in thy family, is not secret prayer lacking? If Prayer be
both in secret, and in thy Family, is not Family-instruction, the teaching thy
family, the care of their souls, lacking? If there be some care of others in
thee, is not the communing with thine own heart lacking? Is not self
examination lacking? Do thou search thy heart, and try thy ways as thou
ought? do thou make a diligent search, a narrow search in fear lest thou
should be mistaken? If there be self converse, and self acquaintance, do
thou maintain a converse with God, is not holy Meditation lacking? How often
do thou look heaven-wards, what time do thou spend daily in serious
meditation of God and the things above? If there be such acts exercised, the
actings of Faith, the actings of Love, the actings of holy Prayer, the actings
of holy Meditation, What life is there in these actings? Are they not all as
dead things, Sacrifices without an heart, Images without life? If thou think
there be the presence of every Grace, a will to every Duty, an enmity against
every Sin, what power is there accompanying them? what power in duty, what
power against every sin? Does not the corruption of thy heart bear down that
grace thou think thou have, and ^^rry thee down the stream of an evil and
vain life (...) there be some good will to a godly life, is not pov^^ ^^^^ing?

It is t^^e the best of Christians have much lacking in degree, their faith is
weak, their love is imperfect, but is there nothing lacking of the essential
parts of a christian? Thou not only lackest strength of Faith, but it may be
thou lackest Faith, thou not only lackest strong love, but thou lackest love. A
child, though he has not the understanding of a man, or strength of a man yet
may be a true child, but if he want the soul of a man, or the head, or the
heart of a man, he is a monster and no humane child. Is not the soul, or the
life of Christianity, the head and the heart of a Christian, the life of a
Christian lacking in thee? If so, thou art but a Monster and no Christian. Is
there not the conscience of a Christian lacking in thee? Is not thy Christian
covenant lame and imperfect? Have thou covenanted universally for all the parts
of christianity, for every duty, against every sin without any reserve, of the
least liberty from our duty to any sin? And is thy conversation entire
according to thy covenant? Is there nothing allowedly lacking in thy
conversation of all that thou have covenanted with the Lord? Or what ever thou
do, Is there not life, and soul, and heart lacking, in all that thou do?
Thou prayest, but do thou not pray without an heart? Thou hear, but do
thou not hear without a soul? Thou seem a follower of Christ, and live in
the practice of his precepts, but is there not life lacking in all thy duties?

O consider over all these particulars, and consider how many things are
lacking in you. 1. Consider, and fear, lest when you come to be weighed in the
balance, you should then any of you be found wanting; lest when you come to
die and expect entrance into the Everlasting Kingdom, Christ should then say to
you, no, you cannot come in, one thing is lacking in thee, one thing that is
necessary to thy entrance, one thing lacking in thee of the essence of a
Christian, all would be lost, thy soul lost, the everlasting kingdom lost.
Consider therefore and fear.

2. Consider and be humbled, and be ashamed, that after all the time you have
had, and all the helps and means you have had, and all the tenders and offers
the Lord has made to supply all your lacks; be humbled and be ashamed, that
yet there is so much la^king, and all this for want of an heart to accept and
improve what has been offered; let us be humbled and ashamed, friends, that if
we have any thing of the faith of Gods elect in us, yet We are so weak in the
Faith, that if we have any thing of the love of Christ in us, yet that our love
is so cold, and imperfect, that if we are found walking in the way of the Lord,
it is so slowly, and so haltingly. This is our shame and matter of great
humiliation, that we have gotten no more grace, that we live no better lives.
But what shall I say to you that want not only the strength of Faith, zeal of
Love, a more even and steady, and fruitful life, but want Faith, and want Love,
and are not yet come into the ways of the Lord. I say to you, as I said before,
fear and tremble; think what it will be to be found thus in the day of the
Lord. But to you that have Faith, and have no more, that do in some degree live
by Faith, and yet live no better, consider, and be ashamed; consider, and be
confounded in your selves; consider, and be humbled under all your wants and
haltings.

3. Consider, and make up what is lacking. Get those poor weak souls to be
strengthened; pray the Apostles Prayer, Ephesians. 3.16. That the Lord would grant
unto you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened with might in
the inner man, and your hearts may be filled with all the fullness of God. Get
those poor weak souls to be strengthened, and get those halting and barren
lives to be established, and filled with the fruits of righteousness. Take the
counsel of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.6. Giving all diligence, add to your faith
virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly-kindness, and
to brotherly-kindness charity, that these things may be in you and abound, that
ye be no longer barren, and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

Brethren, whilst heedless and inconsiderate ones are upon the losing, oh,
consider how you may be upon the getting hand; whilst they are abating, be you
for abounding, let there be an adding daily to you, be not satisfied with the
grace you have, with the duties you do; but let your eye be upon adding daily
to your store, whilst others add sin to sin, guilt to guilt, let it be in your
hea^s to add grace to grace, fruit to fruit. Consider what is lacking in you,
and follow after a supply; follow after it by your earnest desires, follow
after it by diligent labor, and endeavors, and follow after it by uncessant
and importunate prayer unto the God of all grace, that he would cause all grace
to abound toward you, and in you, that having all sufficiency in all things,
you may abound to every good work.

Brethren, it will be a mercy if these words may have such fruit upon you, as
to set your hearts upon getting and adding daily to your grace, and good
fruits, and then a considering how you may most effectually improve
accordingly. I pray receive the Exhortation in the name of the Lord, I beseech
you forget it not, ponder your paths, consider what is lacking, what is lacking
within, to set your outward man a going, what is lacking without, in your
goings that need a supply. Consider what you would have God do more for you
than yet is done; consider what you would do more for God than you have done;
in what particulars you fail, and wherein you would be especially helped
forward. Consider and desire, desire and labor, labor and pray that the Lord
would fill up what ever is wanting in you, and then I shall be bold to assure
you in the words of the Apostle, Phi^. 4.19. My God shall supply all your
needs, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for
ever. Amen.

Doctr. The great care that lies upon every man in the World, is to keep his
heart. There are many cares that lie daily upon us, we have our Estates, and
our Names, and our Families, and our Bodies to take care of; but our great care
must be of our Hearts

1 What is meant by Heart. This is sometimes taken for the principal part of
the body of man, sometimes for the soul of man; so Jer. 17.9. The heart is
deceitful and wicked: that is, the soul is deceitful. Sometimes for the will
and affections of the soul, so 1 Chronicles. 28.9. here it is taken for the whole
soul, and this command, keep thy heart, is the same with that in Deuteronomy. 4.9.
keep thy soul diligently.

What is the Soul? Most men know not what, and none of us know perfectly what a
Soul is. It is our inward and invisible substance which gives life to our
bodies; it is an essential and the most excellent part of us, That has most of
the nature and image of God in it. It is our immortal part, that has life in
it, and gives life to the body, and never dies. Our Reasons and Wills, whereby
we differ from Brutes, these are the essential faculties of our souls. The Soul
is that, in which our capacity lies, of the highest blessedness, and the
extremity of misery. The blessedness of the Soul is the highest blessedness.
The Body as such, is capable of no greater happiness than a Beast is capable
of; only the pleasures of sense: the Soul is capable of spiritual and eternal
pleasures; the torments of the Soul are most exquisite and intolerable
torments: the burning of the Body is nothing in comparison of the wrath of God
burning in the Soul.

The excellency of the Soul above the body, you may guess at, by considering
what the Body is when the Soul is departed. What a ghastly thing, what a
stinking and rotten Carcass does the most beautiful Body become when it is
dead, and the Soul is departed. It was this, the Soul of Man that was the great
prize that Christ had in his eye, when he died to redeem us, he died to redeem
souls, especially to recover that blessed immortality that our Souls had lost;
the natural immortality they had not lost. That is a great part of our misery,
that sin left us immortal Creatures, such, of whose misery there shall never be
an end. It was not our natural immortality, that Christ died to recover, that
was not lost, but our blessed immortality. This invisible, immortal, most
excellent part of Man, his Soul; this is it which we are to understand by
Heart. Keep thy heart, that is, keep thy soul.

2. What it is to keep the heart.

1. There is somewhat that is supposed to the keeping of our souls, and that
is, the recovering them out of their lost state. The Devil has the keeping of
Sinners souls, whilst they are sinners, and the first work they are to do in
order to the keeping their souls, is to get them back out of the Devils hands.
That they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 2.26.

Here I shall show you these three things: 1. The Souls of all men naturally
are lost. 2. Men's souls are not so lost here, but that they are recoverable 3.
This must be man's first care, to recover their lost souls.


1. The souls of all men naturally are lost souls. It may be said of every
sinner, as the father of the prodigal said of him, Luke. 15.32. This my son was
lost, Fathers, you may say of every child you have, whilst they are in their
natural state, this my son is lost, this my child is a lost child, yea and you
may say the same of your selves, whilst in your sins, mine own soul is a lost
soul; and whether you will say it or no, we must say to every one of you,
fathers and children, that are yet in your sins, you are lost souls. As Christ
came himself, so he has sent us in his name, to seek and to save them that are
lost. Luke 16.10. What is it to be lost? Why, it is the same as to be damned;
to be damned persons, signifies to be lost, and to be lost, in this spiritual
sense is to be damned* So that word, 2. Cor. 4.3. If the Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are l^st, to them that be damned, that is, in a state of
damnation, and in the way to actual and everlasting damnation. O tremble
sinners, tremble all you that are yet in your sins; what will you tremble at,
if not at being damned; the word calls every man of you, that are not in
Christ, Reprobates from God. 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? Is Christ in thee? Art thou a convert to Christ?
No? Then thou art a reprobate from God, thou art a damned, lost soul; live and
die in this estate thou art in at present, and thou art eternally lost. What
mean you sinners, that you are so much at ease so much at rest in your state of
sin? Is it nothing to be damned? Is it nothing to be Reprobates? O think what
it will be, to be found Reprobates at Judgment, and then to have the sentence
of reprobation pronounced upon you why sure sinners, the very next misery to
that, is to be in a state of reprobation. O take this home to you, as your
portion from the Lord, every unconverted one, take this word home to you; take
it into your own mouths, O what shall I do! I am a lost child, I am a lost
soul; woe is me I am undone, a son of perdition and an heir of damnation. What
is it to me, that I have kept my body in good case, that I am in health? What
is it to me, that I have kept my estate, and have not been such a prodigal of
that? that I have my house, and my lands, and my money, what is it that I have
kept my credit, and my friends? O my soul, my poor soul is lost, and what good
shall my estate, or my health, or my credit, or my friends, or my life do to me.

2. Men's souls are not so lost here, but that they are recoverable. In a little
time, if they look not to it, they will be past recovery for ever. Yet a little
while and the Gospel will be a sealed Book to you, never again to be opened,
yet a little while, and the door of mercy and grace will be shut against you,
never again to be unlocked. When death has once sealed up sinners eyes, when
the grave has shut her mouth upon them, then every one of you that is found in
his sins, the Gospel is sealed up, the door of mercy is shut up, and thou will
be lost forever, irrecoverably lost. But yet sinners, these lost souls may be
recovered. There is great hazard at present, that thou may not be recovered,
but yet there is hope.

1. There Is great hazard at present that thou may not be recovered. Do not
make light of the hazard that is, do not make sure, say not such a word, I
doubt not but by the grace of God I shall have mercy, and be saved, There Is
great hazard that that soul of thine which is a lost soul this day, may be lost
for ever, and never be converted and saved.

How great that hazard is, I have formerly told you out of the Pulpit, and now
you may read the same things from the Press, namely in my discourse on Prove.
28.14. read that book carefully once especially from p, 171. to page, 198,
where you may understand how great hazard there is, that lost souls may not be
recovered.

2. Yet there is hope thou may be recovered. For;

1. Your souls are yet every one of them, within the reach of the blood of
Christ. You are come to that blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Which speaks
better things then the blood of Abel. There is not one Sinner among you, but at
present the blood of Christ speaks for you; and what does it speak? Father, if
this Sinner turn and repent, let him not be rejected; let him be pardoned and
be saved. For Believers, it speaks thus, Father these my Friends have believed,
and have repented, and therefore I pray thee, let them not fail of having the
benefit of my blood, let them not fail of their pardon and salvation. Thus for
Saints, and even for every unconverted Sinner it speaks conditionally, ut
supra, if they will believe, if they will yet turn, let them also have the
benefit of my blood. Hitherto every one of you are thus far within the reach of
the blood of Christ; it pleads thus with the Father for you, and if you will
come in, will make an atonement for, and redeem and recover you from all your
sins.

When once Death has closed your eyes, in your unconverted estate, you are
gone for ever out of the reach of the blood of Christ, it can now no longer
profit you, nor plead for you. There is nor one drop of that precious blood
shall ever fall into the Pit, nothing of the blood of Christ shall come into
Hell, and find you out there, but only the guilt of his blood, that shall fall
upon Sinners in Hell, the guilt of despising his blood, the guilt of trampling
on his blood. This is all that shall be said to sinners there, in the Pit,
these are they that would none of me: I would have washed them with my blood,
but they would not be washed; I would have saved them by my blood, but they
would not be saved: I called upon them to turn from their sins, and come unto
me, but they would not turn, they would not come: I offered to purge them from
their sins, to pardon and make, reconciliation for their iniquities, but they
would not be pardoned nor purged; they loved their sins, and hardened their
hearts, and threw back my blood in my face, they would none of me; and now let
the guilt of my blood, be upon them, to heighten their flames, and burn in
their bowels for ever.

The guilt of his blood shall reach to Hell, but the expiation and atonement
of his blood shall never come there. After Death, there is nothing but Hell,
and out of Hell there is no recovery, those Sons of Perdition are lost for ever.

O thank God, Sinner, that thou art not yet fallen in thither; thank God that
that soul of thine is not in Hell. How many younger sinners than thou are there
already, roaring under the sense of their madness, in neglecting Christ and his
Redemption. O thank God, that thou art here, thank God that thou art yet alive,
that Christ yet calls to thee to come to him, that Christ yet offers thee, that
if thou will but turn and repent, his blood shall cleanse thee from all
unrighteousness, and save thee from coming into condemnation.

Sinner, there is yet hope of thee, that thou may be saved, though there be
hazard, great hazard, that thou will yet harden thy heart to thy destruction,
that thou will never be converted and be saved; there is great hazard that
though thou be yet out of Hell, thou will be there shortly, though thou art yet
within the reach of the blood of Christ, thou will in a little time be without
its reach; but though there be such great hazard that thou may die for ever,
and be irrecoverably lost, yet there is at present hope concerning thee, that
thou may be recovered; and there is this hope concerning thee, that thou art
yet within the reach of the blood of Christ. O thank God for it, and do not go
on to harden thy heart, till thou art past recovery. I say again, thank God
that thou art here, but yet I must add, thank God and repent, thank God and be
converted, or else it were even as good that thou were in Hell this hour, as to
be here in thy sins: nay, it were better for thee that that body of thine were
now rotting in the Grave, and that soul of thine were now roaring in Hell, this
would be better for thee than to be here hearing the Gospel, if after all thou
should live and die unconverted, and so go to Hell at last. These very
warnings that now thou have, if they should not work upon thee to turn thee
from thy sins, and bring thee to Christ; if the Gospel should leave thee in the
case thou art this day, thou will to Hell as sure as if thou were there
already; and then all that thou now hear, or shall ever hear whilst thou
live will but heat thy Furnace seven times the hotter against thou come
down. But because there is yet hope, thou may be converted, thank God thou
art here, for there is hope as from this first ground, because thou art within
the reach of the blood of Christ; so

2. There is hope from this, that sinners are yet under the ministry of
reconciliation: as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19. To us is committed the word of
reconciliation, So we may say to sinners, to you it is given to hear the word
of reconciliation; it is for your sakes that this word of reconciliation is
committed to us, that we might preach it unto you. God has not only continued
you within the reach of the blood of Christ, but under the teachings of his
Ministers, whose work it is to tell you how you may have the benefit of his
blood, to make a tender and offer of this blood of Christ to you, and to
persuade and make you willing to accept it; we are sent to preach Christ unto
you, and to make known unto you what help there is in Christ for you, and what
freedom you have given you to lay hold on Christ; and also to persuade and
bring you into Christ, that you may have the benefits of his blood. It is a
strange word we have given us, Luke 14.28. Compel them to come in. Go and call
poor sinners to me, and if they be not willing to come, compel them in; not
force them in whether they will or no: Christ will not have any sinner against
his will, but compel them, that is, use all the importunity you can, to make
their unwilling souls willing; use such arguments, as if it be possible, they
may not be able to resist; and though they do resist, yet do not give them over
so, but do your your best by your importunity to overcome their resistance.

Go, says Christ to his servants, fetch in all the sinners in the Country to
me, here is room for them all, as many as there are come already, yet there is
room for more, v. 22. Let my house be filled with guests, filled with Converts;
go find out these poor wretches where they lie rotting and perishing in their
sins, and bring them in. Christ does not say to his Ministers concerning
sinners, as once he did to his Disciples concerning little children, Mat. 9.14.
[Suffer] little children to come to me, suffer poor sinners to come to me, do
not put them back, or discourage them when they would come, but persuade them
in, help them in, press them to come in, beseech them to come and be reconciled
to God, I am not willing that any of them should perish, but that all should be
brought to repentance, and obtain everlasting life, 2 Pet. 3.9. This is the
business of our Ministry, and this Ministry of reconciliation, thou poor sinner
art under to this day.

Now does not all this give sinners hope that yet they may be recovered? Why,
has God let thee live to hear this word? Why has God brought thee hither this
day to hear it? What, can thou not say, I hope it is that I may be converted,
I hope it is that I may be recovered? The Lord yet comes among you to tell you
what you must do to be saved, what you must do to get Christ to be yours, to
preach repentance to you, that you may recover your selves out of the snare of
the Devil, who are held captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Sinners, You are all Prisoners and Captives, but yet you are Prisoners of
hope? you are dead souls, but there is hope you may be made alive; you are lost
souls, but there is hopes you may be found. There is hazard that you may be
quickly irrecoverably lost, but some hopes there is you may be recovered.

O will you come to Christ, will you come to the means grace, as men of hope!
Hear the Word, in hope that it may work savingly upon you; pray for such a
work, in hope that God may hear, though all the sinners among you, in one sense
are men of hope, yet in another sense the most of sinners are men of no hope;
in this sense you are all men of hope, that there is a door of hope yet open to
you; but in this sense you are men of no hope, that is, if you continue as you
are, there is no hope but you must perish. A wild and groundless hope too many
sinners have; they hope against hope, they hope for recovery without using the
means of recovery, they hope for salvation without reconciliation, they hope
for remission without repentance, they hope to be redeemed from death without
being redeemed from iniquity; this is to hope against hope, this is to hope for
that of which there is no hope. There is no hope of salvation without
repentance, no hope of escaping without returning. Ministers of the Gospel are
to break down such false and deceitful hopes, not to build them up.

That which, from what has been said, I would persuade you to, is to hope for
salvation, and in that hope to look after conversion; to hope for conversion,
and in that hope to hear the converting word; to hope for a new heart and life,
and in that hope to pray that God will give you this new heart. Dare not to
sleep in hope, to sin in hope, to harden your selves in your sins, in hopes of
forgiveness; pray in hope, hear in hope, humble your selves in hope, turn in
hope, that God will accept and be merciful to you. When you come to hear, do
not come as most sinners do, not knowing or considering wherefore they come
together: but when thou go to hear and to pray, go with this hope in thine
heart, I am going to hear the word of Faith, the word of Repentance, and I hope
God will bless it to me, that it may work Faith and Repentance in me. I am
going to hear the heartbreaking and the heart-humbling word, the converting
word, and I hope the Lord will humble, and break, and convert me by it. I have
often heard, and have been never the better; hitherto I have not been humbled,
and broken by it: this wretched heart is as dead and as hard as if it had never
been preached to. Well but does the Lord yet again call me forth to hear this
word? O I will go in hope, that yet at last it may work upon me.

Hope has two things in it, Desire and Expectation. This is the hope I would
persuade you to come to the word in, to come with desire to be wrought upon,
and expecting and looking for such a gracious work. We may say concerning this
first coming of Christ into the heart, as is said concerning his coming to
Judgment. Heb. 9.28. To them that look for him shall he appear without sin unto
salvation. So to those that look for him, shall he appear to their
sanctification. Look to meet with Christ this day in his word, look for Christ's
coming down to meet with you this day, desire that he would, pray that he
would, and expect and look for his coming down, and appearing to you. This is
the hope, wherein I would exhort you to attend on the means of grace, with
desires and expectations of the gracious success of them upon you. And if you
would thus come to hear in hope it would much encourage us, to preach in hope
to you, and to pray in hope for you.

Well to conclude this, let every sinner of you know that whilst the word of
reconciliation is continued to be preached to you, so long there is hope
concerning you, that you may be recovered. There is hazard, great hazard, a
great doubt whether you may be saved, a great fear that many of you may never
be converted and saved, but though there be hazard yet there is hope.

3. The great care that lies upon every sinner in the world, should be that he
get to be rec^vered out of his, lost state, 2 Timothy 2.25.26. Instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance that they
may recover themselves, out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by
him at his will.

Here observe. 1. That lost sinners are in the hands of the Devil, taken
captive by the Devil, held in the snares of the Devil. That is a lost soldier,
that is fallen into the hands of his enemies; That is a lost sheep that is
fallen into the paw of the Wolf; That is a lost soul that is fallen into the
snares of the Devil, and in those hands are every lost soul. How art thou so
secure sinner, how so merry, how so much at ease? Do thou know where thou
art? Thou art in the hands of the Devil, that soul of thine is taken captive by
the Devil, and lies bound in his snares; the Devil has taken thee, and the
Devil has bound thee that thou can not get loose. O it were well if sinners
understood their case and in whose hands they lie. There is never a one of all
the sinners among you, but the Devil has him in custody. Whither ever thou
go, the Devil goes with thee, to watch thee that thou may not escape him.
If thou go to read, the Devil goes with thee to thy Bible, to hinder it from
working upon thee, if thou go to pray, the Devil goes with thee to hinder
thy praying; and now thou come hither to hear, the Devil comes to Church with
thee, to harden thine heart against the Word.

Thou do not see the Devil here, and thou do not think he is here, but thou
may know by the effect, that he has been here with thee, every day and at
every Sermon, thou may know it by this, that the Devil has been here with
thee, that the Word has prospered no more with thee, to the rescuing thee from
his snares, and he that has been here is now come again, and he is now
watching thee that thou hearken not to the recovering Word.

2. That lost sinners oppose themselves against their own recovery.
[Instructing those that oppose themselves] that is, that resist the word of
grace, that Deafen their ears and harden their hearts against it. Acts 7.51. Ye
have always resisted the holy ghost. The word of God comes, and the spirit of
God comes to convert sinners, but they resist their own mercy. The enmity that
is in their hearts, opposes it self against the Word and spirit. Mat. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered you, but you would not!

3. The end of preaching the gospel to sinners, is to recover their lost souls;
Instructing them etc. that they may recover themselves out of the snares of the
Devil. To open the blind eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God, Acts. 26.18. We are sent as Christ was, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the opening the prison to them that are bound;
and not only so, to preach upon the prison doors, but to persuade the prisoners
to come out of prison. Is. 46.9. That thou may say to the prisoners, come
forth. God has sent us with this word to you, that are imprisoned under
Satan, come forth poor prisoners, come forth out of prison. Sinners give no
better entertainment to us, than if our word to them were, come into prison,
come into bondage; they take that word, come into Christ, as if it were the
same, with come into into prison, come into bondage; that christianity which we
persuade sinners to, they look upon it as mere bondage: but what ever sinners
think, our business is to persuade them out of their house of bondage. Come
shake off your chains, knock off your fetters, break that yoke of the Devil
which is upon your necks, get you loose from those sins and those lusts,
wherewith the Devil has held you, and come unto Christ; it is no bondage to be
a Christian, Christ's servants are all freemen; you are all bondmen already,
in the bond of Iniquity. Acts. 8.23. But who among you would be set at liberty?
What do you mean sinners, will ye die Bondmen? We may say concerning you as
Christ concerning the woman, Luke 31.16. Whom Satan has bound these 18 years.
You are the men whom Satan has bound; not only these 18 years but some of you
these 38 years, nay some it may be those 60 years or more. Have you been bound
so long bound by the Devil, and are you not willing to be loosed? will you go
prisoners to the Grave? From this upper prison, shall the Devil carry you down
into the eternal prison? O sinners, that is our business from God to you to
persuade you to make an escape, and to be recovered, out of the snares of the
Devil.

4. Sinners recovery begins in their repentance. If God give them repentance
that they may recover. They are only the penitent, that are recovered souls, As
long as thou art an impenitent sinner thou, art a lost soul. Acts. 28.27. Lest
they should be converted and be healed; a converted sinner, is an healed, a
recovered sinner.

5. It is God that recovers lost souls. If peradventure God may give them
repentance that they may be recovered. It is the Devil that takes sinners
captives, but it is God that rescues the prey from his teeth. It is the Devil
that leads men to sin and holds them under sin, but it is God that gives them
repentance. Is thine heart hardened in thy sin? Is thy heart hardened against
repentance? Can thou not turn? Can thou not repent? Go to God, poor sinner,
it is he that must give thee repentance. Go to Christ, it is he that God has
exalted, and set upon purpose, that he may give repentance and remission of
sins. Acts. 5.31. Ministers are to preach repentance, but they cannot give
repentance we must every one of us say, it is not ours to give. We can tell you
to whose door you must go for repentance, we can tell you in what way you are
to go to God for it, and we would persuade you to God, but when we have faid
all we can, it is he alone that can give repentance to you and work it in you.

6. Whatever God does to the recovery of lost souls there is something lies
upon themselves to do toward it. That they may recover [themselves] No that
they may be recovered, but may recover themselves. Now here I shall show you
more particularly.

1. What the recovery of lost souls means, or wherein it stands.

2. What sinners may do toward their own recovery.

3. How men may know whether they are recovered or no.

1. What the recovery of lost souls means, or wherein it stands. Now it stands,

1. In there coming to themselves.

2. In their coming to God.

1. In their coming to themselves, and recovering their senses and
understanding. The first step of the prodigals recovery that we read of, Luke
15.17. Was this, that he came to himself, when he came to himself, he said etc.
He was besides himself before. Sinners are besides themselves, they have lost
their wits and the free use of their reasons; they are so drunken in
sensuality, that like Drunken men or mad men, they have lost their
understandings. Therefore the Prophet exhorts those foolish Idolaters, that
worshipped stocks the Gods of their own making, Isa. 46.8. Remember this, and
[shew your selves men] what, are you so brutish as to think those to be Gods,
which are made with hands? Where are your reasons? Show your selves men, and no
longer such brutes. Sinners recovering from their sins, is as Nebuchadnezzar
returning from among the beasts. Then says he. Dan. 4.34. Mine understanding
returned into me. When the Prodigal forementioned came to himself, then we find
him, presently fall a reasoning with himself, How many hired servants of my
fathers have bread enough and to spare and I perish with hunger; What do I
here! why dwell I among these strangers! I see I am like to starve for want; in
my Fathers house there is bread enough, were I not better to go to my Father? I
will arise and go to him.

Sinners, whilst they are besotted with lust and sensuality, cannot reason
thus, their senses have drowned their understandings. If they had but their
understandings and their wits about them they might reason thus with
themselves, what a miserable case is this that I live in? this poor soul of
mine is ready to starve and die. I live amongst Swine, and I am fit for no
better company, whilst I am thus, for I am even one of the Swine, and if I
live like a Beast, I am like to die like a Beast. Is there no way for recovery
out of this brutish state? May not this mad soul of mine be recovered into his
wits again? I have lived a mad life hitherto, else I should never have fed upon
husks, these pleasures of sin, whilst bread, the bread of God might be had. I
have not the understanding of a man in me, or sure I should get me out of this
miserable estate.

Sinners, who has bewitched you? What is it that has so unmanned you, that
neglecting and running away from God, you should run thus after the Devil, and
live among his Herd of Swine, and feed upon trash and dross; the best of your
sinful pleasures are no other, nor better. You have your feeding among the
Swine, and your lodging with them, wallowing with them in the mud and mire. You
may know what your feeding is, by the starveling case your souls are in; and we
may see what your lodging is, by the filth and dirt that is upon you. Behold
the mud and the mire cleaving to thee, thy filthy lusts and vile affections,
and spiritual uncleanness, wherewith thou art polluted. When will thou come
to thy self, sinner, and bethink thy self of returning from the Husks to Bread,
from thy Trough to the Table, from the Stie of Swine to thy Fathers house? Is
it not better to be a servant of God, than a drudge to the Devil? Is it not
better to be of Gods holy ones, than of the Devils bemired and mudded ones? Is
it not better to return into favor with God, rhan to live in exile and
banishment from God? Do thou not think, that those that love God, and fear
God, and walk with God, that those that know Christ, and are washed with his
blood, and walk in his steps, and have laid hold on his righteousness, and
shall be partakers of his salvation; Do not thou think in thy heart, that
these Saints are in better case than thou art? Is it as well with thee now thou
art such an ignorant, sensual, swinish, carnal, stupid soul? Is it as well with
thee now, as if thou were changed into the image, and made partaker of the
holiness, and entitled to the salvation of God? Do thou bless thy self that
thou art none such? Is it well for thee that thou art no Believer, or sincere
Convert to God? When will thou come to thy self? Show your selves men, Sinners,
let your understandings once return into you. You will never come to be
Christians, till you come to your selves. Show your selves men, and that you
have the understanding of a man in you; recover your reasons, and then make use
of your reasons, and fall a reasoning with your selves, What shall I do? Shall
I continue as I am? a Drunkard as I am, a Worldling as I am, a Sensualist as I
am, a servant of my Flesh and of the Devil, as I am, or shall I arise and go to
my Father? Which do I really judge to be better for me, to go on as I have
done, or to make out after a sudden and saving change? To go on after my cups,
and my companions, after my pleasures, and my worldly profits, or to return to
the Lord? Have thou recovered so much of thy reason, as to judge it to be
better for thee to turn, and become a new man, have thou so? then from a man of
reason, become a man of resolution. Judge what is best, and choose what is best,
Hos. 2.7. Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband, for
then was it better with me then now. Sinner, Will thou take up such a
resolution? Will thou take up such words? Well, I see now what I have been
doing all my life hitherto, I see to what a sad pass my foolish and carnal ways
have brought me; I see the poverty and the misery, and the straits, and the
dangers, that by running away from God, by running after this World and the
lusts thereof, I have run my self into. Well, I have done with this vain and
foolish life, I will go and return unto the Lord, and then it will be better
with me than now.

2. The next step to this recovery is coming to God; the first is coming to
your selves, and the use and exercise of your reason and understanding. And who
among poor sinners shall these words preach into your right senses? You have
been foolish, senseless souls, is there any of you that are yet come to your
selves? Do you judge it better for you to come back from your vain ways, and to
come about to the Lord? Is this voice heard in your hearts, Oh, if I could
break off from my sins, and become a real Convert to Christ, then would it be
better with me than now. It would be an happy change, this day would be an
happy day, this Sermon would be to me an happy Sermon, if the Lord would bless
it so to me, as to bring me off from my sins and bring me to God, O how
wonderfully better would it be for me than it is now.

If any of you are come so far to your selves as to judge and to say, it would
be better for me, let me go on with you and ask you further; What will you
resolve upon? Will you say on with the Prodigal, well, I will arise and go to
my Father. It is better for me so to do, and I will do it, through the help of
God I will return. Now for Repentance, now for Religion and Righteousness, now
for a new heart, and a new life, I have done with my old heart, Satan I have
done with my old life, sin and vanity I have done with, henceforth through the
grace of God, I will be for God and godliness.

Do you say so? Are you resolved so? Come on but one step further; if you say
the word, come on, and do likewise; the Prodigal when he said, I will go to my
Father, he arose and went accordingly. Be not like the Son in the Parable, who
said, I go Sir, but went not; but say, and do, come and join your selves to the
Lord, come into his house, come into his ways, give your selves to him for his
servants, and go on and serve him, then were your souls recovered. Then should
it be said to you, as concerning him, These my children were dead and are
alive, were ^ost and are found; and we should say over you, as the Father did,
It is meet we should make merry, that this day should be a glad day, a joyful
day; it is meet that we should rejoice, for this our Brother is recovered, he
was dead and is alive. O let the Lord God thus rejoice over you; O let all his
Saints rejoice with you: Come sinner, make a joyful day of it, come unto the
Lord, come to your Father, and he will be ready to meet you, and with open
heart and open arms would receive and embrace you.

2. What men may do to recover. They cannot recover themselves of themselves,
it is God that must do it, but they may and must do something toward it.

1. Men can pray for their recovery. Even carnal men may pray, and though there
be no full promise that God will hear, yet God has both required them to pray,
and has appointed this as a means of their recovery. Acts. 8.22. The Apostle
bids Simon Magus pray that the thoughts of his heart might be forgiven him. It
is an hopeful sign that God has a purpose to give grace, when he sets sinners a
praying for grace; at least, if they cannot pray themselves they can speak to
others that can, and desire them to pray for them. This that Simon Magus did,
he begged the Apostles to pray for him, O what a wretched case are those in,
that will neither pray for themselves, nor so much as beg Christians to pray
for them! Sinner, when did thou ever do such a thing? When did thou ever
go, either to a Minister, or a Christian with such a word in thy mouth, pray
for me. It may be when thou have been sick, thou have sent to the Congregation
to pray for thy bodily recovery, but when did thou send or speak to them to
pray for thy souls recovery? Is not thy soul more precious than thy body? Is it
not thy soul more desperately sick, than ever thy body has been? is not prayer
for sick souls as needful, and as much prevailing, as prayer for sick bodies?
And yet how many bills have we sent in, to pray for recovery from bodily
diseases, to one sent in, to pray for the conversion of a soul? But whether
thou do it or not, this thou can not deny, but thou can do this toward thy
conversion, thou can pray for it, and desire others to pray for thee.

2. Men can hear the Word. This is another means of m^ns recovery. Is. 55.3.
Incline your ear and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live. And this
means also they can use. The same feet that will carry them to an Alehouse, can
as well carry them to Church; The same ear that can hear a Song, or foolish and
idle talk, c^^^s well hear a Sermon. Thou will say, this I do, and yet am not
recovered. Therefore

3. Men can give heed to what they hear. They can mark and observe what the
Word speaks, Luke. 8.18. Take heed how ye hear; Give heed to what you hear, and
do not sleep under the sound of the Word, or fit heedlesly or carelessly,
without minding what the Lord speaks. And herein is the great neglect; Sinners
will come to a Sermon, but mind as little what is preached to them as those
that never come here This is a wretched neglect, and the common case of many
hearers. Mat. 13.13. Hearing they hear and do not understand. Our words could
not have such poor success if people would mind more the things that we speak.
O sinners bethink your selves, how often have you been here, and not heeded one
word that has been spoken?

4. Men can think. What is easier than thoughts; we use to say good words are
cheap, but good thoughts are cheaper than good words: the exercising of men's
thoughts is noted to be the first step to repentance. 1 Kings. 8.47. If they
shall bethink themselves, and repent, and so, Ps. 119.59. I thought on my ways
and turned etc. Thou say thou can not recover thy self. I but can thou
not bethink thy self neither, what a case thou art in? Thou hear sometimes
from the Ministry of the Word, that thou art a lost man, a lost soul; But when
thou hear it preached to thee, can thou not think upon it? Thou do not
think upon it, it is too true, no longer than the Word is a speaking, nay it
may be nor then neither. What thoughts have you had of it, since you were told
that naturally you are lost, and what a miserable case it is to be a lost soul.
Have you since thought such a though, Woe is me I am a lost soul, oh what a poor
wretch am I, while my soul is lost? You have been told how these lost souls may
be recovered, but What thought has there been in thine heart since about
taking the course for thy recovery? Thou [dost] not think of these things, it
is true, but [canst] thou not think of them? Thou know thou can.

5. Men can stop, and make a stand in their evil ways, from going on further
in them, from making their condition worse than it is and their recovery more
difficult. Can thou not lay thine Hand upon thy mouth, when thou art about to
lie, or to swear or to scoff, and bite in those evil words, that are coming
out? Can thou not keep thee from thy Companions, and thine old drunkenness
and riot? Can thou not keep thee out of the Alehouse or the Tavern? Thou
can do it, such outward acts are in the power of the will to restrain. Men
may be true if they will, and sober if they will; If thou will be a Drunkard or
a Swearer, or a Liar, who can help thee? But if thou will thou may help it
thy self. It is true thy case is miserable enough and thy cure hard enough, by
thy continuing in thine evil way hitherto; but as bad as it is with thee, it is
growing worse and worse; every sin thou go on to commit, is a new gash
wherewith thou give a deeper and more deadly wound to thy poor perishing
soul. If thou stop thy course, that is something toward a^ recovery. Well
these things thou can do toward thine own recovery. Thou can pray, thou
can hear, thou can give heed to what thou hear, thou can think, and
thou can stop and make a stand in thy evil ways. And if thou will but do what
thou can, thou may have hope that God will do that for thee which thou
can not.

3. How we may know whether we are recovered or no. This I shall show, 1.
Negatively.

1. Those whose understandings are not recovered, their souls are not
recoverd. Those whose understandings are still lost their souls are lost. Those
that are not come to themselves, are not come to Christ. Every ignorant soul is
a lost soul. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that are
lost* from whom is the Gospel hid? see v. 4. From those whom the God of this
world has blinded their minds lest the light of the glorious Gospel should
shine unto them. Art thou an ignorant soul, ignorant of the Gospel? Does not
the light of the glorious Gospel shine into thee, (i. e.) do thou not
understand the Gospel? So long is the Gospel hid from thee, and if the Gospel
still be hid to thee, thou art a lost soul.

What multitudes are there, to whom the Gospel is preached, that yet understand
nothing of it? Thou have been an hearer of the Gospel these many years, but
what do thou understand of it. As Philip said to the Eunuch, Acts. 8.30.
Understand thou what thou read? So it may be said to thee, understandest
thou what thou hear? No, thou do not understand, though the light shines
round about thee, yet not a beam of it has shined into thy heart. It is all
dark within thee, what ever light be shining round about thee. Though the light
has shined into thy darkness, yet thy darkness comprehends it not. Ioh. 1.5.
Poor ignorant ones, in what a case are you? you are every one of you lost
souls. And what is like to become of you? We bring the light among you, but we
cannot open your eyes; we preach Christ to you, we instruct you in the knowledge
of God, we cry unto you, get knowledge, seek understanding, seek for it as
silver, search for it as for hid treasures, But say what we can, you will not
be persuaded, you will not receive instruction. The God of this world has
blinded your minds, and we cannot heal your blindness. There bosom of you that
know you are ignorant, that will confess it, (yet not to bemoan your selves but
to excuse your selves) I am but ignorant, I am not book learned; What not
learned in the book of God? What not acquainted with the book of life? No, God
help me, I am not, what then? Why therefore I hope it is not so bad with me, as
with others that know. I hope God will forgive me, because I am ignorant This
is a wretched principle that is gotten into the hearts of the ignorant, that
because they are so, God will not be extreme to mark what is done amiss by
them. O remble in pleading your ignorance, you therein confess that which will
prove you to be lost souls. You may as well say I am a damned soul as say I am
an ignorant soul.

2. These whose consciences are lost. Who though they may be recovered to be
men of understanding, yet are not recovered to be men of conscience. We trust
we have a good conscienc willing to live honestly in all things. Heb. 13.18.
Thus it is with recovered souls, they are men of a good conscience. Where
conscience is laid waste, the soul still lies open to the government and
dominion of the Devil. Conscience is a bar and a bulwark against his assaults
and temptations. Where conscience is not, the soul is as a City that has
neither Gates nor Bars, but is left open to the Devil, to rule it at his
pleasure. God has not recovered the rule of any soul, till Conscience be
awakened and has recovered its authority.

Art thou an unconscionable man or woman? Do thou make no conscience of thy
ways? Have thou slighted conscience, have thou wounded conscience so long, that
now it lets thee alone to thy will and thy lust? Or if it checks thee
sometimes, for thy evils, yet thou bear it down, and go on thy way
against its reproofs and contradictions? Art thou a man of no conscience? Is it
not against thy conscience to lie, or to defraud, or to drink to drunkenness,
to live without praying or minding God or thy soul? Does conscience let thee
alone to live thus? Or if it does smite thee, yet go thou still on against
it? Art thou a man of no more conscience than this, what do thou think of thy
self? What ever thou think thou art a lost soul, while conscience is lost,
thy soul is lost. Till conscience be recovered thy soul is not recovered and
conscience is never recovered, till it has recovered its authority, and has
gotten the rule and the Government of thee.

3. Those who make light of their disease and their misery. Men are never
recoverd till they are first made sensible of their disease. Sin is thy
disease, and thy death, and thou art never recovered from that death, till thou
art brought to a sense of thy disease. Where there is life there will be sense.
They were dead souls, alienated from the life of God who were past feeling,
Ephesians. 4.18.19. Those that make light of sin, it is a sign they are not
recovered. Sin is felt as an heavy thing, by those souls that have the life of
Christ begotten in them.

O what multitudes of lost souls are there among us, if every soul be lost that
makes light of sin! What account do thou make of it? Thou sinnest daily, thou
live an idle and a careless and a sinful life, thou art proud or covetous, or
a sensual flesh-pleaser, and is not all this this sin? Thou art a Liar, a
Promise-breaker, a defrauder, and is not this thy sin? Thou art perverse and
peevish and of a froward heart, and is not this thy wickedness? But what
account do thou make of all this? Is it an heavy thing to thee, to be thus
sinful? No, not at all, thou make light of thy pride, and light of thy
covetousness, and light of thy frowardness, thou make just nothing of them,
or at least but small matters. Thou do not feel them to be such a weight and
burden to thee, but thou can bear them and go out with them well enough. Or
if thou do sometimes feel some smart or pain by them, yet it is but such a
light touch, that what ever thou think at present thou will quickly after
them again, at thy lying again, at thy swearing again, at thy froppish and
froward carriages again.

It is such a deep sense of sin, as will make us beware of it for the future,
that will prove our recovery. What shall we then think of them that make a mock
of sin, that make a sport of sin, that take pleasure in iniquity? Without all
controversy these are lost souls, and those that make but little reckoning of
it, that pass by their sins as small matters, that are either not touched at
all, or but lightly touched for them, so lightly, that their sin has still the
power and dominion over them; thou that art but such a one, thou art a lost
soul, thy soul is lost and not recovered.

4. Th s^ that make light of Christ their recoverer. Christ that is sent down
as the Physician of souls, to seek and to save them that are lost, has
ordinarily the same entertainment as the King in the Parable had amongst the
Guests that he invited to his Feast, Mat. 22.5. but they made light of it. Here,

1. There are some sinners that do make light of Christ. Jesus Christ is worthy
of all acceptance. What is Jesus Christ? He is the Son of God, full of grace
and truth, Joh. 1. God equal with the Father, the brightness of his Fathers
glory, the express image of his person, and upholdeth all things by the word of
his power, Heb. 1.3. He is the Head of all Principalities and Powers, the
Prince of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 1:5. What is Jesus Christ to sinners? He
is the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Is. 9.6. his name shall be
wonderful. What comes this Jesus into the world for? To reconcile them to God,
to save them from their sins, to die for the sins of the World, and to wash
them in his own blood. And to what end comes he to particular sinners?
wherefore is he preached to them, wherefore is he offered to them? To what end
is it that sinners are so importunately invited to entertain and accept of him,
to be willing that he that was the Savior might become their Savior; that he
that was the Reconciler, might become their Recoverer to recover them from the
snare, of the Devil, and to bring them into the everlasting Kingdom. This is
that Jesus that by the Gospel is preached unto you.

Who could imagine that such a great, and mighty, and glorious one, who is the
everlasting King, the God of all the earth, who would think but he should be
reverenced wherever he come? They will reverence my son, said the King in the
Parable, Mat. 22.37. It might be well presumed they would, however it proved in
the issue. Who could imagine that one that came upon such a gracious design, to
reconcile poor Rebels unto God, to redeem poor Prisoners out of Prison, to
recover and raise the dead to life, and ransom them from the Pit, and give them
an entrance into the everlasting kingdom: who would think but Christ coming
upon such a gracious and glorious design, should have wonderful cheerful
entertainment? Who would think but that the whole World should ring with
acclamations of joy, and praise, at his appearing amongst them? Who would think
but when Christ comes to particular sinners, and makes a free offer of himself
to them, to be theirs, their Redeemer, their Savior, but such an offer should
be greedily catched at, and readily embraced? Does the King of Glory come unto
me? Have thou shed thy blood, and poured forth thy soul, and laid down thy
li^e, and purchased pardon and an interest in Heaven for me? And do thou now
come to give thy self, and all that thou have purchased to be mine? What answer
would any one think would be given by lost souls to such questions? Will thou
be mine? Shall I be thine? Art thou willing to be redeemed, to be washed from
thy sins, to be healed of thy diseases? Shall my blood, which is shed for the
salvation of sinners, shall my blood be thine, and the peace and reconciliation
it has made be thine? Shall I come into that miserable soul of thine, and
dwell there, and rule there, and cast that Devil out that has been thy
destroyer and murderer? Shall I love thee, and delight in thee, and bless thee
with my salvation? What answer would any one think that undone lost sinners
should give to such questions? What, will thou come unto me, love and bless me?
With all my soul, Lord, come in thou blessed Lord, all that is within me shall
rejoice that thou will thus enter upon me, and take me for thy possession and
habitation. This one would think should be the answer that sinners would give.
But behold, such miserably foolish souls are sinners become, that they make
light of all this. A cup of drink, a carnal companion, a lust, a sensual
pleasure, is made more reckoning of than Christ and all his love. As it is said
of those Builders, the Scribes and Pharisees, Acts 4.11. It is true of all
sinners, this stone, this precious stone, this corner stone, this foundation
stone, upon which alone their hopes of salvation might be built, this stone is
set at naught by them, Is. 53.3. He was despised and rejected of men, they made
no account or reckoning of him, but even tread under foot the Son of God. And
this is the general entertainment that Christ has among the sinners of the
earth, so light do they make of him; he comes to them, but they will not
receive him. How often, says he, would I have gathered you, Mat. 23.37. but you
would not.

And what is the common case of sinners, is it not [thy] case? Art not thou one
that make light of Christ? He has been preached unto thee, he has come and
tendered himself to thy soul. That vile heart of thine, sinner, that dark hole,
where the Devil and Lust, and every abomination dwells, Christ has come and
called to thee, open to me, let me come and dwell there, and cast the Devil
out. How many knocks has he given at thy door? How many Messengers has he
sent to thee with this word, Open those wretched hearts, open the everlasting
doors, and the King of Glory shall come in? And have not thou slighted all
this, and put a contempt and a scorn upon an offered Jesus? Who, I? God forbid;
I adore and honor that worthy name, I acknowledge him to be the Son of the
living God, and the Savior of the World, and worthy of all acceptance. I, but
have thou accepted? Have thou opened unto him? Have thou received Christ Jesus
the Lord? Is Christ within thee? Is the light of Christ, the love of Christ,
the holiness of Christ in thee? Have thou resigned up the throne and dominion
of thy soul to him, and given him hearty leave to put all that is within thee
in subjection to himself, and to cast out what ever is an offense to him? to
cast the World out, to cut the flesh down, and the lusts thereof? Has he new
made thee, and new molded thee.

Is there another Spirit begotten in thee? a new heart bestowed upon thee? Has
he made a Christian of thee, a sincere inward Christian, not in word, nor in
tongue, but in deed and in truth? Art thou become his hearty Disciple, and his
follower in holiness? Has he given thee the understanding of a Christian? Do
thou know God, and art thou now acquainted with the mystery of the kingdom of
God? Do thou know Christ, and the mystery of Christ crucified? Has he given
thee the heart and affections of a Christian? Has the World lost thine heart,
have thy companions lost thee, thy carnal pleasures lost thine heart? Is thine
heart set upon Christ, and upon all his holy ways? Art thou now brought about
from sinful pleasing of men, or affecting to live in their good repute and good
will, to be all for pleasing God? Is thy soul that was bent upon earth and the
vanities thereof, now bent for God, and for heaven, and for holiness the way to
the Kingdom of heaven.

Sinner, If thou have received Christ into thy soul, there are all these works
begun, there is such a change as this wrought upon thee, 2 Cor. 5.17. He that
is in Christ is a new Creature, and if there be no such change, if thine old
ignorance, thine old worldliness, thine old delights in the lusts, or
friendship or fellowship of the World remain, if thou have not the inwards of a
Christian, an holy heart, an heavenly mind; yea, and something of the outward
of a Christian, an holy conversation, an heavenly life: If there be not such a
change wrought in thee, but thou art of the same life and the same spirit thou
were of, thou have not received Christ: he has been offered thee, but thou
would none of him; he has come unto thee, but thou have refused him. And
what ever honor thou have in thy mouth for Christ, if thou have refused to
receive him, thou art one of those that have made light of Christ, yea and set
him at naught. That which is rendered refusing, Psalm. 118.22. The stone which
was refused by the builders, is expressed, Acts 4 11. to be setting at naught.
This is the stone which was set at naught. Sinners, every one of you that have
not received Christ into your hearts, you have set Christ at naught, you have
despised and trampled him under your foot; and if you go away from his word to
day, as you have used to do other days, and return home without accepting of
him, you go on to set Christ at naught. You that hear Christ preached, and will
not receive him, if you should be asked when you come home, what you have done
at Church to day? You must answer, I have put a slight, and contempt upon
Christ; he was preached to me, and I was told of his wonderful excellencies,
and his worthiness, but I have despised and neglected it all; I have been at
Church, but to mock Christ, and to set him at naught. This do every one of you,
to whom Christ is preached, and yet you will not receive him.

2. Those that make light of Christ are not recovered by him. This is so
evident from what has been said, that I shall add no more concerning it but
this, if Christ be the only recoverer of lost souls, then those that refuse him
are not recovered. He is our Redeemer, and there is no other savior. He is our
Physician. and there is no other helper, neither is there salvation in any
other. Act: 4.12. If there be no other Savior but Christ Jesus the Lord, if
there be none recovered by Christ, but those that prize and put such an high
value on Christ, as to embrace and accept of him, then those that make light of
Christ and refuse him are lost souls to this day. These are the negative marks
which evidence souls still lost. If you are not grossly ignorant, but have
understood something of the doctrine of Christ, If you have something of
conscience, If some prizing of Christ, yet you may not be recovered; but if
not, thou art a grossly ignorant soul, and of no conscience, to be sure thou art
a lost soul to this day.

2. Affirmatively:

1. The man whose eyes are opened: that is, who has recovered his
understanding, and the saving knowledge of God. The first step toward the
conversion of a sinner, is the recovery of his sight, Acts 26.18. To open blind
eyes etc. And it is not every little opening the eyes, and the getting in a
little knowledge, that is a sure sign of conversion; There are knowing sinners,
knowing hypocrites, It is an enlightening of the mind, and a renewing of the
mind. Romans 12.2. Be ye transformed, by the renewing of your minds. The mind of
the Convert, does not only see other things, than it saw before, but looks upon
them with another eye, as he has another heart, so he has another eye, a
renewed mind, a sanctified understanding, that perceives the beauty and
excellency of God and his ways, of Christ and his graces, that sees wisdom and
goodness, and an excellency and desirableness in them; the carnal mind, what
ever it perceives of the things of God, yet they are foolishness to him. 1.
Cor, 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them.

Where see, 1. What account carnal men have of spiritual things, they look on
them as foolish things, poor and weak and contemptible things, and look upon
them all as a company of fools, and giddy brainsick folks, that will have any
thing to do with them.

2. That whilst he looks on the things of God as foolishness, as such
contemptible and unworthy things, he does not know them, nor can he know them
whilst he continues to be such a foolish soul. Thou take upon thee to censure
those that fear God as fools, and to charge Religion, with folly! Proud Fool!
get thee a little more understanding, and then thou will see what an ignorant,
poor mistaken soul thou art. The convert looks upon the Gospel, and the
goodness of God, and the grace of Christ, and the holiness of the Spirit, as
mavelous things, excellent things; he sees an excellency in Religion, a
beauty and desirableness in all the ways of God; he sees the folly of Sin, and
the wisdom of Religion, the baseness and unworthiness and the filthiness of
Sin, and the worth and the purity of Religion; he sees himself to have been a
very beast and a fool, whilst he continued and went on in his sins, and can
never have a good thought of himself, but as far forth as he is changed from
his sins, he looks upon that little change that is begun as a blessed change
and a comfortable change. Now I have something of the understanding of a man
returned into me, Now I thank God I begin to live and stand up from among the
dead; O I thank God for this little wisdom that is begotten in me. I was a very
fool till now, I have been told I was a fool, I have been told I was a beast
many a time, but I could never see it till now, until the Lord has thus opened
mine eyes; this is some degree of the sinners recovery, such an opening of his
eyes, though it is possible he may be very much recovered in this respect and
yet be a sinner still.

2. The man whose heart is opened. Thus Lydia's conversion is expressed, Acts.
16.14. Whose heart the Lord opened. There is a double opening of the heart.

1. An opening of the heart to the Lord, so as to receive and embrace him when
offered. The hearts of natural men are shut against the Lord, they are not only
void of grace, and without Christ, but bolted and barred up against Christ and
his grace, they are unwilling of conversion, unwilling of sanctification. Jer.
13.27. O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean? No, they will not. O sinner
will thou not have the Lord to be thy God, will thou not have Jesus to be thy
Lord? Will thou not that he should come into that soul of thine, and wash thee
with his blood, and govern thee by his spirit, make thee a new soul and of
another spirit than thou have been? No, thou will not, thine heart is shut
against Christ. To the Devil thou will open, to the world and its lusts and its
pleasures thou will open thine heart, nay, it stands open night and day to
these, but it is shut against Christ and his grace; thou art not willing that
Christ should come in. Sinners, if your hearts would but open, Christ would
come in this very hour and bring in his salvation to thee. There is not one man
amongst you all, that shall go home this day, without Christ, without the
sanctifying grace of Christ, that is but unfeignedly willing to give
entertainment to him. Art thou willing of Christ, willing to have grace? Will thou so receive Christ as to resign up thy self to his guidance and government,
art thou really willing? this is the very opening of thine heart to the Lord
wherein thy conversion stands. Thou art the man whose heart the Lord has
opened.

2. An opening the heart to godliness or christianity. The former opening notes
a readiness of the heart to receive Christ in, and his Grace in. This opening
of the heart notes the souls letting it self out after Christ and his holy
ways, a letting its self out in holy desires. in love and holy affections, in
resolutions and holy purposes to serve and cleave to the Lord. When the heart
is open to Christ, it is open to Christianity. When it has received Christ
Jesus the Lord, it will be for walking in him. The heart of the Hypocrite,
though it professes to be open to Christ, yet it is shut against Christianity.

Hypocrites are willing of a part in Christ, in the privileges, and hopes, and
comforts of the Gospel, and so will trust in Christ, and boast of Christ, and
glory and rejoice in Christ Jesus; but as to the exercise of Christianity,
especially in those harder and severer parts of it, the mortifying the flesh,
the denying themselves, the being crucified to the World, the close, and
downright and industrious following the Lord in holiness; of this they are not
willing, their hearts are shut against it. That heart that is sincerely opened
to the Lord, and has indeed taken Christ in, does freely open it self to all
the ways of the Lord, and has a propension and disposi^ion, and resolution for
powerful and practical Christianity. He is a resolved Disciple of Christ, a
resolved follower of Christ. Now this is the recovered soul, the man whose eyes
are opened, who has the knowledge of God, of the beauty, and excellency, and
goodness of all the ways of God; and the man whose heart is opened, who has
both received Christ Jesus the Lord, and who is resolved to walk in him, this
is the soul that was dead and is alive.

Use. Are sinners lost souls, then let us take up a lamentation over them. What
a lamentation did the Prophet take up over the sinful Jews, Jer. 9.1. O that my
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the slain of the daughters of my people. O what a slaughter has sin
made amongst us, our Houses our Streets, our Congregations, how full are they
of the dead, dead souls whom sin has slain! Behold the dead that are in every
place; so many sinners, so many dead and lost souls. Here be the dead, but
where are the mourners? Verse 17. Consider ye and call for the mourning women,
that they may come, and send for cunning women, skilful at mourning, and let
them make have and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with
tears, and our eyelids gush out with water. Women are more pityful than men,
and more apt to mourn, Call says he, for the pityful among women, let them take
up a wailing for us, and let them set us a mourning, let the women set the men
a mourning. that [our] eyes may run down with tears: and v. 20. let the Mothers
teach the daughters wailing, and every one her neighbor lamentation. Why what
is the matter? v. 21. O Death is come up into our windows, and is entered into
our palaces; our houses are houses of the dead. It is not only with us as with
Egypt, when their firstborn were slain, when there was not an house in the
Land wherein was not one dead; there are but few houses in our Land where there
is one alive; they are almost all dead, dead Fathers, dead Children, dead
Husbands, dead Wives, dead in trespasses and sins. Death has not only entered
in at our windows, and slain here and there one, but the doors have been set
open to it, whole Families are destroyed. Our houses are become Sepulchers,
places of the dead.

But why should we mourn over lost souls?

1. Because there are such multitudes of them. Come where you will, into what
Country, into what Family, into what Congregation you will, and you may see
almost as many dead men as you may see men. It is but here and there one living
soul is to be found; such a great slaughter as sin has made, calls for great
lamentation.

2. Because they are in such a pitiful and lamentable case. What is it to be a
dead and lost soul? where shall we have them a little while hence? Those that
are under the power of death, are under the power of the Devil, and those that
are under the power of the Devil, you may look to find them shortly in the
place of the Devil. At present they seem to be in a paradise, they live at
ease, and in plenty, and in peace; there are none seem to be so much alive, as
the sinners of the earth, as Mal. 3.15. We call the proud happy, and the
profane and flesh-pleasers, and the covetous, these are counted happy ones.
They are far, they shine, they glitter, who but sinners! These are the only
men, the only happy men, as the world counts them; but what ever there be upon
their backs or in their bellies, their poor hearts are dead, and where shall we
find these flourishing and prospering ones a few days hence? It would pity ones
heart to think where; What if you should see all these dead buried, buried in
Flames, cast into the Pit of everlasting darkness, and everlasting burning? You
cannot but foresee, that there they will be shortly, thither they are
traveling; their way is the way of death, and their steps lead down to hell,
and how suddenly may they be swallowed up of the Pit? O pity these lost souls!
have you any bowels? Parents, have you any bowels for your sinning children?
Friends have you any bowels for your sinning Friends? Draw forth your bowels in
sighs and lamentations, pour forth your hearts at your eyes, and fall a weeping
over them, look upon the ignorant and sottish ones, look upon the loose and
profane ones, the lying children, the swearing and cursing and drinking and
unruly children among you, and let your eye affect your heart. Yea, weep not
for them only, but as. Luke. 23.28. Weep for [your selves] and for your
children.

3. Because they will not mourn for themselves. They are not sensible of their
own misery, nor will lay it to heart. These lost souls are men besides
themselves, distracted ones, out of their wits ut supra. The prodigal was out
of his wits whilst he was running his wild course, he was not himself. What
sense have mad men of their misery? They count themselves to be wise and happy
men, and all others to be fools but themselves. How shall we hear distracted
souls talking of their lands and inheritances, boasting some of them that they
are Kings, and Lords, and Gentlemen, though they be even stark naked, half
starved, bound with Thongs and chains, yet still they have high thoughts, and
make great boastings of themselves. Such mad souls are the miserable souls of
sinners. Job 11.12. Vain man would be wise though he be as a wild Asses colt.
These wild men that run a wild course, that have lost their reasons it their
lusts, they would be taken for wise men, and they will not be persuaded out of
their vain conceits of themselves. Bray a fool in a mortar. Prove. 27.22. Yet
will not his foolishness depart from him. Now this is cause of great
lamentation, that these lost souls are such stupid and senseless souls that will
not mourn for themselves, nor be brought to understand that they are objects of
pity and lamentation; they think they are wiser than their teachers, that they
have more wit than to become sober and serious Christians, that they have no
need of the Physi^ian, no need of counsel and instruction, and thereupon are
ready to fall a laughing at those that mourn over them, and mock at repentance
and conversion. Surely those that are in such a miserable case, and have not
the heart to mourn for themselves, or to count themselves mournful and pitiful
spectacles, there is the more reason we should take up a lamentation over them.

Let us lament therefore, that there are such multitudes of miserable souls,
that there are so few amongst those multitudes of lost ones, that we ever see
to be recovered. O how few are the Converts to Christ? How seldom do we hear of
any lost sheep brought into the Fold? You that are brought in, pity those that
are left without, mourn for them, let fall a tear over them, lift up a prayer
for them, that though they have gone astray like lost sheep, yet at length they
may return to the Shepherd and B shop of their souls.

And you that are these lost souls, how is it that you are no^ yet come so far
to your selves, as to see what pitiful case you are in? Sinners, will you yet
go away conceited that it is well enough with you? Is it better with you than
if you were Converts? Are the B^ick-kilns of Egypt, as long as you can eat of
the Leeks, and On ons, and Melons, better than the freedom of Canaan. Do the
pleasures of sin make your chains pleasant to you? Is it better to go on to
serve the Devil and your Lusts, than to come about and be the servants of the
Lord? Or whether it be better or worse, wisdom or folly, discretion or madness,
are you resolved however, to continue as you are? Have you not the sense in you
as to be able to say, it is a sorry case I am in? Or do you see it is bad
enough with you, and yet have not the power to make out after a recovery? Have
thou not pity upon that poor soul of thine, but thou will give it up to be
racked, and torn, and burned forever, rather than for its sake thou will deny
thy will, or thy lust, or thine appetite? Art thou still so mad, as to say live
or die, heaven or hell, what ever be the issue, I will not turn out of my
course, I will not come unto God and be his servant? If there be a God, I will
venture his wrath; if there be an Hell, I will venture on its flames, rather
than not enjoy my will, or mine ease, or my pleasure? Is this thy case? Judge
then if thou be not a pitiful and lamentable thing, and an object of mourning;
and if thou can get so much of a man in thee, so much of the reason and
understanding of a man, so much of the heart and compassion of a man, O pity
thy self, pity thy poor soul; pity and mourn over it, mourn and repent, repent
and pray, that if it be possible thou may recover thy self out of the snare
of the Devil, who art thus held captive by him at his will.

2. Let us take up a rejoicing over the recovered souls. Our great joy should
be every man over the recovery of his own soul. With what joy should this word
be spoken, this [my] soul was dead, and is alive: and we should rejoice over
any other recovered souls; It is matter of rejoicing when we can say, this my
Child, or this my Brother, or this my Neighbor, was dead and is alive. What
joy is it to a travailing woman, when she is safely delivered of a living
child. J h. 16.21. A w^man when she is in travail has sorrow because her hour
is come, but as soon as she is delivered of the chil^, she remembers no more
the anguish for joy that a man child is born into the World. Sinners, your
deliverance may cost you pain and travel, but when you are once delivered, and
recovered, you will forget all this pain; then you will, and then you ought to
rejoice. What joy is the day of victory to the triumphing Soldier? What joy
was the year of Jubilee to the indebted, or the servants, when they were to go
out free from there debts and service? What joy to the Mariner, who has been
tossed with tempests, to have gotten safe to shore? Have thou shot the gulf,
and gotten safe to land? Have thou gotten death and hell under thy feet? Is
death destroyed, and is life and immortality brought to light in thy soul? Art
thou passed from death to life? O what a day of joy, what a day of praise
should this be to thee. Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, and again, I say
Rejoice. Phil 4.4. Stand Christian, stand and look back on that death that was
lately feeding on thy soul; stand and look down into the hole of the pit from
whence thou art delivered. Remember how it was with thee, not long since, when
thou were without Christ, and without hope, and without God in the World; when
thou were a slave to every lust in thy heart, to every vile companion, when
thou were by led by the Destroyer, and posting on to destruction; When thou
Were without fear and without sense of that danger, and misery which was
running upon thee like a flood. Remember how it was with thee when God first
opened thine eyes and thy fears came upon thee. How did thy soul cry out, I am
lost, I am undone, when thou saw what a gulf there was fixed between thy
natural estate and the state of grace? When thou saw a necessity of
conversion, and yet were astonished at the difficulty of obtaining it? When thy
proud heart would not stoop, thine hard heart would not break, nor yield unto
the Lord? When thou were afraid that thou should have perished in the birth,
and never have seen life; remember how it has been with thee, and how it is
now. What, has the Lord delivered thee from thy fears, conquered to thee thy
difficulties? Is thine heart broken and brought about to the Lord? Is the day
broken, and the day star risen in thine heart, art thou passed from death to
life? What s yst thou now? Is it not meet thou should rejoice? Is not this
birth day, the day of thy new birth, a day of joy and praise? Do thou not
bless thy self, that it is not with thee as it has been? Does not thine heart
shake to think, what if I had been let alone, let to go on in the way that I
was going? I went with the Drunkards, I was among the Liars, and Swearers, and
Covetous, and the Scoffers, I was one of them; As much against a new heart, and
new life as any of them, as true a drudge to my flesh, and this world, as the
worst of them; How is it that the Lord God singled my soul out of that wicked
crowd and brought me up out of that state of the dead and brought me into the
light of life, and has written me amongst the living in Jerusalem! Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Magnify the
Lord, O my soul, and let my spirit rejoice in God my Savior. He that is mighty
has done for me great things, and holy is his name.

3. Let us again take up a lamentation over the imperfection of our recovery.
Rejoice in the Lord, but rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice that the
work is begun, that thou art come to the morning of the day of redemption; that
the day is dawned, that the Sun is risen upon thee, yet lament that there are
still such clouds; yea, so much of the darkness of the night remaining upon
thee. Rejoice that thou art born again, but yet lament that thou art but as a
new born Infant, so imperfectly washed from thy pollution in thy blood, and
that so much of the shame of thy nakedness is yet appearing: that though thou
art made a child of light, yet there is so much of thine old darkness, of thine
old ignorance and unbelief abiding upon thee; that though thou art born from
above, yet thine heart should be so much below; that though thou art risen with
Christ, thy affections should be so little set on things above; that though
thou art born of the Spirit, the Flesh should still have such power in thee.
Lament and bewail it, that thou art no more perfectly recovered, that it can
yet hardly be discerned whether thou be alive or dead, or if it appear thou art
alive, lament that thou art such a a dwarf still, or such a sickly and
unthriving child, that thou art such a froward and unruly child.

Lament that thy recovery is so imperfect and be growing up toward perfection
be working out those remains of thine old corrupt state, be working out this
carnality and this earthliness and working [up] thine heart to more
spirituality and heavenliness, and let both thine heart and thy life be as the
path of the just which shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prove. 4.18.

Christians, whilst I have hope of many of you that you are passed from death
to life, and in this hope do rejoice over you, yet I have sorrow in mine heart
for you, that you that have life, have it no more abundantly, that you are yet
so imperfectly recovered from among the dead, and that you are not (which I
doubt is the case of too many among you) contending and reaching forwards
toward perfection. How many living Christians soever there be of you, yet I
can see but few growing Christians among you. Pray Friends look inwards, what
sensible improvement have any of you made of late years? Yea how many of us are
there that do not lay it to heart, that do not lament it that they are improved
no more? Who of you can say, that you are breathing and thirsting after an
increase? or if you thirst for more grace, how very few are reaching forth, and
laboring, and that in so good earnest that they are impatient in their
spirits, and restless, till it may be better with them. O what might I do to
whet your appetites after an increase, to set you a running and striving and
fighting against all that hinders? Oh what might be said to get those creeping
souls upon the wing, to quicken your motions heavenward? O how might I help you
off with those weights that h^ng on, those weights of earth, and flesh, of
cares, and lusts, and sins, that you might run with patience, and run with
alacrity and joyfulness the race that is set before you. O consider the
imperfect state you are in, consider and lament it, lament and make on,
forget^ing the things that are behind, reach forth unto those things which are
before.

2. Are sinners yet recoverable? Oh lose not the present season but seek your
recovery. as Is. 55.6. Seek the Lord whilst he may be found, So seek your souls
whilst they may be found, seek recovery while it may be had. But what shall I
do to recover? 1. Get you to be heart-sick of the misery that is upon you. If
ever God recover you, he will first smite you, he will wound you that he may
heal you. Micah. 6.13. I will make thee sick in smiting thee, said God in
another case. The Devil smites with a deadly wound, but Gods wounds are healing
wounds. Hos. 6.1. Come let us return to the Lord, for he has smitten and he
will heal us. The Devil smites with blindness, the Devil smites with hardness,
and insensibleness of heart. What is the reason thou art such a blind and
hardened and senseless soul? O the Devil has smitten thee into this blindness
and hardness. Gods smiting of the heart is like Moses his smiting of the rock.
Exodus 17.6. He smote the rock and water issued out. God will so smite these
rocks as to fetch a stream of tears, and sighs and groans, out of the hard
heart, he will make those stones to feel The Devils work is, to put sinners
past feeling, and O how successful has he been at this work? Poor sinners, the
Devil has been at work with you smiting you into insensibleness, and what
senseless souls has he made you. Though the word of the Lord which is sh^rper
than a two edged sword and pierces to the dividing asunder of the soul and
spirit, of the j ints and marrow, has been driven home upon you, yet you feel
it not. The Devil has made th^e such a stupid senseless soul, that thou can
feel nothing, but God smites to recover your feeling, he will make you sick in
smiting you; He will ^o so if ever he means to heal you.

O sinner, do not resist, bur help forward this work of God upon you. Do what
you can, to recover your own sense, do not harden your hearts against the word,
do not harden your hearts in your sins, pray that God would make you sick at
the heart, under all your misery. It would be some encouragment to Ministers to
bring an healing word unto you, if we could once find you to be sick. If we
could but recover your sense, we should have hope to save your lives; but here
it is that our work sticks, we cannon by all that we can say, recover you to
sense, to a sense of your lost estate. Woe is me for I am undone, said the
Prophet, in another case. Is. 6.5. O might we hear such a word from sinners
mouths! Woe is me, for I am undone, I am an undone soul, I am a lost soul. You
are undone, you are lost souls, and before ever you be soundly recovered, you
will by the sense and sickness of your hearts, be forced to acknowledge it. Woe
is me for I am undone! Sinner, do thou think thy self well? art thou whole
and ailest nothing? This is thy senslessness and this senslessness is the most
deadly part of thy disease, a sick man that is grown senseless is the next step
to a dead man; if his sense be recovered there is more hope of his life. What a
word of hope would it be, might we hear this word running through all the
company of hardened sinners here, woe is me for I am undone, what shall I do,
what will become of me? I am a lost soul dead in trespasses and sins, held
under the power of the Devil, and dragging on to destruction. I am well enough
as to my body and my outward condition, but O my poor soul, my poor blind soul,
my poor hardened soul, my poor guilty soul, in what a woeful case is it? Could we
perceive such a sense of your case, could we hear such bemoanings and
complainings of your misery, this were hopeful, we should then hope you were
upon recovery, if we could by any means work you to such a sense of your
estates. But how is it with you sinners? Is there any such good token to be
found upon you? Sinners here be (God knows) enough of you, but where be the
smitten sinners? Where be the sensible sinners, the broken sinners, the fearing
sinners, where be the men that the word of God, has made them sick in smiting?
As it is with some Physic for the body, so it is with Gods Physic for souls,
it never works kindly, but it makes men sick in the working. Where be the
sick sinners? In one sense, you are all deadly sick; but were be the sinners,
whom Gods Physic has made sick? Whom the word has made sick? whom conscience
has made sick, that is, has made them feel their sickness? No, no, the Lord
be merciful to you, your Soul-physick will not work, it leaves you at your
ease, under the hardness and senslesness of your hearts, as if you were indeed
sound men and needed nothing. But sinners know that till you are wrought to a
sense of the misery you are in, there is no hope of your recovery. Do but
^enture on a while longer in this stupid hardened state, and you will be past
recovery; You are at present without feeling, but if you once be past feeling,
you are past recovery for ever. O get you broken hearts; O cry unto the Lord,
that he would smite you and make you sick in smiting you; That he would set you
a trembling, that he would affright you and afflict you for your sins. O stir
up and awaken those sleepy souls! O study and consider, and get a little
understanding what a woeful case you are in! Believe God; he tells sinners that
they are sons of death, sons of perdition, under condemnation; Beheve God
before the Devil, and your own hearts; these have agreed together to tell you a
lie, to tell you your case is not so bad, you shall do well enough you shall
escape well enough; believe not the Devil, believe not your deceitful hearts;
believe God, believe the scriptures, read over that word, and see how
dreadfully it speaks of the case of sinners, and know that all this it speaks
to thee; all the plagues and terrors of the Lord, which you read or hear out
of the Scriptures, these words belong to you who are yet in your sins.

Sinners, I would fain preach you to Christ, and preach you to life; I would do
mine utmost to save and recover your lost souls and O let me help you to
Christ, let me be a means of your recovery; But that I have no hope of, unless
v^^n will so f^r heed and believe the word that I pr^* and ^^v^^ so close and
so home upon your hearts, (...) no longer be hardened through the deceit^ (...)
might be said concerning you, up^ (...) ^ords, as concerning them. Acts (...)
heard this they were pricked at their (...) Brethren what shall we do?

(...) so concerning thee? Has this (...) heart? Do thou feel thy heart
(...) art thou afraid, and in that fear do thou cry out, Men and Brethren
what shall I do? Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? Has it made
thee so sick, that thou art calling after the physician? Is there such a cry in
thy soul, Help Lord, save Lord or I perish? Woe is me I am undone, what must I
do to be saved? If the Lord has made thee thus sick in smiting thee, sick of
thy covetousness sick of thy wickedness and of that bondage thou art hitherto
held under; If the word of the Lord has pricked thee to the heart, and put
thee to pain, so that nothing but a deliverance from thy wretched state can
ease thee, or satisfy thee, if it be thus with thee, if thou art thus sick,
thus pricked at the heart, then be of good comfort, it is an hopeful sign, that
thou art upon recovery there is now good hopes concerning thee that though thou
art dead thou may be made alive

2. Understand what Christ has done, and must do for your recovery. Christ is
our only Reedemer and Reconciler, and Christ redeems, 1. By price. 2. By power.


1. Christ redeemeth by price. 1. Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price. Christ
himself was that price, and he laid down his life, as a price for us. In this
respect he is called our ransom. Mat. 20.28. He gave his life a ransom for
many, And his redeemed ones are called his ransomed ones. Is. 35.10. We by sin
are become prisoners and captives; Prisoners to the justice of God, to whom by
sin we had forfeited our lives; and Justice took hold of us as a company of
Traitors and Malefactors, whom it condemned to death. Now Christ paid, himself,
to divine justice, gave himself to die, that he might ransom us from death. Let
me stand in these Sinners stead, let thine hand be upon me, and let them
escape; death is the wages of sin, let my death, says Christ, pay that wages.

2. Christ redeemeth by power. Sinners were prisoners to divine justice, and
captives to the Devil, 2 Timothy 2 26. By price he redeems them from the revenging
justice of God, and by power be redeems them from the Devil. In the former
sense he redeemed us as a purchaser, he bought our lives; in the latter sense
he redeemeth as a Conqueror, the Devil held us, and Death held us too; death
reigned over all: Christ conquereth both Death and the Devil; He overcame
death, and him that has the power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14.
Having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in himself, Col. 2.15. He brake the Serpents head, as it
was promised he should, Genesis 3. that he could no longer hold his captives. The
Devil tempted him to sin, but he overcame the temptation and sinned not. The
Devil set the Jews to slay him, but he overcame death by his resurrection from
the dead. The Devil got him among the dead, but he could not hold him, he rose
from the dead, by which it was impossible for him to be holden beyond the time
appointed. And as Christ conquered the Devil, and conquered Death, so he
conquereth Sin too. He conquered the Devil as our Captain, so called Heb. 2.10.
The Captain of our Salvation, he broke the power of the Devil, and led out his
captives, as a Captain does his recovered prisoners. He conquers sin as a
Physician, healing all those wounds and diseases which the Devil had brought us
under; he is therefore called a Physician, Mat. 9.12. The whole have no need of
a Physician. This now is that which Christ has done, and has to do for our
recovery, to give himself a price or ransom to the justice of God, by laying
down his life for sinners, to break the power of the Devil, and rescue us from
his captivity, and to heal us of our sins, and thereby destroy the works of the
Devil.

2. Understand what sinners have to do toward their own recovery: that they
may obtain the benefit of what Christ has done and performed. This I shall sum
up in this one word; To perform the conditions of their recovery. What are
those conditions?

1. To accept of Christ as your ransom; to give off all other hopes of
recovery, and to take him as our only Redeemer. Some sinners reject Christ, and
will none of him; they care not for a ransom, nor will mind any such thing as
their recovery, but are content to be slaves to Sin and the Devil for ever;
like those slaves under the Law, who when they might, would not go out from
their Masters, but would have their ears bored to the threshold, that they
might not depart for ever. How many such desperate wretches are there among
sinners? Sinners they are, and sinners they will be; slaves to the Devil they
are, and they will not accept of deliverance. Christ is preached to them a
Redeemer, and tendered to them as their ransom, and liberty is offered to these
captives, but they will not accept him: they say in their hearts as that
servant, I love my old Master, I love my sins, I love my lusts, those very
chains by which the Devil holds them, and reject Christ who comes to ransom
them.

How is it sinner, that thou art yet a captive to the Devil, and a slave to thy
sins? How is it that thou art left out from among the redeemed ones of the
Lord? There is a ransom paid, there is a price laid down, to buy out that soul
of thine from the wrath of God; and this ransom has been offered thee, and
thou have been persuaded to come out of the prison, but yet there thou art, yet
thou art a bond-slave to the Devil and thy sin. Why is it thus with thee? Why?
only because thou will not accept of thy ransom, thou will not accept of
Christ who would redeem and recover thee. Thou art such a stupid, senseless
soul, that thou do not mind any such thing as thy recovery or redemption:
thou mindest thine ease or thy pleasure, thou mindest thy trade and thy gains,
and thy business in the World, but thou never mindest the redemption of thy
soul; never have such a thought, how shall I escape out of the hands of the
Devil? How shall my soul be delivered from sin and everlasting wrath? When do
thou use to mind seriously any such thing? Not being sensible of thy misery,
thou mindest not thy recovery; and not minding thy recovery, hence it is that
thou mindest not thy ransom or Redeemer, but make light of Christ and his
redemption, and make so light of him, that thou will not accept and embrace
him when offered to thee. Well, but whatever thou have done, take heed thou do
so no more. Have thou yet this price in thine hand, is there yet a ransom to be
had for that miserable soul of thine? Does Christ yet stand over thee, offering
thee his blood, offering thee himself to be thy redemption? Take heed how thou
go away again, neglecting to accept and make him thine own. This is one
condition upon which redemption may be yours, if you will accept of Christ as
your ransom.

2. To accept of Christ as your Captain: To list your self under him as his
Soldier, to give up your self to be commanded, and ordered and governed by
him; to follow your great Leader, when he has broken the bars, and opened the
Prison doors and knocked the Jailer in the head, and commands you out of
Prison, and calls to you all, Follow me. This is another condition of your
recovery, Follow your Captain.

There is no man that shall have the benefit of Christ's ransom, that will
voluntarily stay behind in prison. Art thou resolved to serve the Devil still,
to follow thy lust still? Do thou refuse to follow Christ, and to be
commanded and governed by him? Then thou can have no benefit by his ransom.
Heb. 5.9. He became the author of eternal salvation to them that obey him.
Well, would you be recovered by Christ, then list your selves under him as your
Captain, be commanded and governed by him.

3. To accept of Christ as your Physician. This accepting of Christ as your
Physician, notes three things.

1. A willingness to be healed by Christ. Some sinners, though they will say, I
accept of Christ for my Physician, yet they are not willing to be healed by
him: they love their disease, and do not love their health. Sin is their
disease, and holiness is the health of their souls. Sin is their disease, and
yet they love their sin: Drunkards love to be Drunkards, the Voluptuous love
their pleasures, the Covetous love their covetousness, and the carnal their
carnality. Swine do not more love the mud and the mire, and to be wallowing in
it, than swinish sinners do the mire of their lusts and sins. Sometimes they
pray for recovery, pray for repentance, pray for new heart and life, but they
would be loath that God should hear their prayers; Sin, which is their disease,
is that they love; and holiness, which is their health, they loath and hate. If
Christ call to them, come to me, and I will make a Saint of thee, I will fetch
thee off from thy drunken Companions, I will cure thee of thy Covetousness, I
will wash thee from thy filthy lusts, and make thee one of mine holy ones; what
would they answer? No, I desire no such cure; I love my pleasures, and my
company, and my covetousness, and carnality; and for holiness, let them hearken
to thee that have a mind to it, I have no list to be of those holy ones. When
Christ came to cure bodily diseases, the blind and the lame, and the lunatic,
and the possessed of Devils, how glad were they to be cured? But blind souls,
and lame and lunatic souls, sick and diseased souls, are not willing of
Christ's cure. The carnal mind is at enmity against God, Romans 8.7. Psalm. 50.17.
Thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Sinners had rather
that Christ would let them all alone as they are; they would that he should
save them from Hell, but they would not that he should turn them from their
sins.

Christ will never save men from wrath, who will not be healed of their sins;
and Christ will not heal, till men be willing to be healed.

1. Christ will never save men from wrath, who will not be healed of their
sins. Unless he wash thee, he will not bless thee, Joh. 13.8. If I wash thee
not, thou have no part with me. Whilst thou art a Sinner thou art a Swine thou
art a Viper, thou art a Leper; thy very nature is swinish, viperous and tainted
with an hereditary leprosy. Christ will make another manner of creature of
thee than thou art, ere ever thou shall see his salvation. Do thou think that
Christ will drive over these herds of Swine, into the Land of Promise? Will he
people Heaven, with a generation of Vipers? or with such an unclean leprous
brood, as the unconverted sinners are? Be not deceived, nothing that is unclean
shall enter in thither. That heart of thine must be changed, that corrupt
nature of thine must be purged; of a Swine thou must be made a man, and the old
man must become a new man, or thou will never be made a blessed man. If Christ
do not heal thee he will never save thee.

2. Christ will heal none but those that are willing to be healed. His first
question to those he comes to cure, is the same as that which was put to the
impotent man, Joh. 5.6. Will thou be made whole? This question Christ is daily
putting to you, You that are blind, will you that I should open your eyes? You
that are possessed of a Devil, of an unclean Devil, of a proud Devil, of a
covetous Devil, will you that I should cast this Devil out? You whom Satan
has bound these many years, bound under a sensual, sinful, hardened heart, will
you be loosed from these bonds? You whom the Devil has been leading on after
your pleasures, or your carnal liberties, by the chain of your evil natures,
will you that I should cut the chain, and put a stop to the Devil, and turn you
back from your course, and never suffer you to be Drunkards any longer, or
Flesh-pleasers any longer, or Covetous any longer? Is it thy disease, that thou
have been such a vile liver so long, will thou that I should put a stop to
thee, that thou be never such any more? Christ does ask such questions of you,
will you that I should thus cure you of all this? And what do your hearts
answer? Some, if they speak their hearts, must answer, O this curing me would
be the killing of me, I cannot endure to think of such a change, it vexes my
heart to think of parting with my beloved sins, which are as dear as my life to
me. But what say [thou] sinner, for thy part? Art thou one of these unwilling
souls, or art thou willing that Christ should cure thee, and cleanse thee from
all thy sins? O get a willing heart; what art thou such a sick soul, and not
willing of the Physician? such a blind soul, and not willing to have thine eyes
opened? such a senseless hardened soul, and not willing that Christ should humble
thee, and break thee? such a vile and polluted soul, and not willing that
Christ should wash thee? Art thou not willing that Christ should come and make
a Saint of thee? Has Sin made a very Devil of thee, and art not thou willing
that Christ should make thee a Saint? What would thou do in Heaven, if thou will not be made a Saint? or do thou think thou may continue a Devil,
whilst thou live on the earth, and yet at last be a Saint in Heaven.

What say you sinners? There be some, it may be, of you, that have made a mock
at holiness, that have despised the saints that are on earth, and made them the
objects of your scorn rather than your desire, but speaks man, art thou yet
willing that Christ should come this day and make [thee] a saint? Will thou
that he should humble thee, and bring thee to repentance? Will thou that he
should wash thee and bring thee to holiness? Would thou, who came hither an
ignorant sinner, an hardened sinner, an impenitent sinner, be glad at thine
heart, if thou may r turn an enlightened, a convinced, yea a converted sinner,
a beleiver, a sincere, christian? Would thou carry home another heart than
thou broughtst hither, a new heart transformed and changed into the image of
him that created thee, or art thou content to go home as thou came such an
ignorant hardened polluted creature, as thou came hither? If thou be heartily
willing of such a change as this, that is a great part of thy cure. Art thou
willing to be cured, willing to be cleansed? Then bring forth that leprous soul
of thine, lay it at the feet of Christ, and speak to him as the leper did. Mat.
8.2. Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. As vile a state as this soul
of mine is in, as deadly as my diseases are, as very a Leper as my soul is
become, yet Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Let Christ hear such
a word from thee, Lord help me, Lord heal me, if thou will thou can; And then
there is hope, that thou may hear the same words from Christ, as that poor
Leper did, I will, be thou clean; And immediately his Leprosy was cleansed.

2. Take Christ's medicines. To what purpose is it that the physician comes to a
sick man, and prescribes to him, and advises him to what will recover him, if
he will not take what he prescribes. Christ has medicines to recover sick
souls, but his medicines must be taken or they will not recover them. Christ's
medicines are,

1. His blood. His blood is purging and cleansing blood. Heb. 9 14. 1 John 1.7.
Therefore he is said to wash us in his blood. By the blood of Christ is meant
the same with the death of Christ. There is virtue in the death of Christ to
destroy the life of sin. Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, Romans 6.6. It is the body of sin that must be first laid
at; The inward pravity of our natures, our original corruption. Christ's physic
must be firstly applied to the root and fountain of our disease; those sinful
natures, those depraved habits and sinful dispositions within you, must be
changed; The inward enmity must be slain, and there is nothing will do that,
but the blood of a crucified Jesus. That is the sovereign medicine that must
help and heal you. But how must this medicine the blood of Christ be taken.

1. Christ himself must be taken. Christ offers himself to you to be yours, and
you must accept of him for your own. Your hearts must by faith consent unto
Christ, to put your selves into his hands, to put your life into his hands,
expecting and depending upon him, trusting your selves with him for your
recovery. It is Christ alone, with whom I lay up all mine hopes, upon whose
sufficiency and faithfulness I will venture my soul: If I die, I Will die under
his hand, and if I live I look for life only from him. Put your selves thus
into the hands of Christ, and take Christ into your hearts; Take him as your
own, he gives himself to you to be your own, Christ offers to every sinner
among you, I will be thine own, thine own Jesus, thine own Savior, if thou be
willing to have me. Take him at his word; Since he says to thee I will be thine
own, if thou will, let thy heart lay hold on this blessed word, and say,
content Lord, since thou will, thou shall be mine own, I accept thee with all
my heart. Now if Christ be once yours, his blood shall be yours, his death
shall be yours, and all the benefits of his death. Whereas nothing of Christ
can be yours, nor any fruit of his death, if he be not first yours. Let Christ
be once embraced by you, and if there be any purging or cleansing, or
sin-killing ver ue in his blood, your sins shall be purged away. If all that
the blood of Christ can do for thee, will recover thee, thou shall be recovered.

2. You must have frequent recourse to the blood of Christ, by renewed acts of
faith. Look up to this crucified Jesus, Cast thy polluted soul into the
fountain of his blood. Zach. 13.1. He is a fountain opened for sin and for
uncleanness. His blood is the fountain, cast thy soul into it. You are come
into the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Christians are so, and they may
freely lay hold on it for their cleansing. 1. Believe that there is such virtue
in him to cleanse thy soul: Say with the woman. Mat. 9.21. If I may but touch
him I shall be made whole. 2. Believe that it is free for the^. Thou may come
with boldness to him; Christ would have thee to be bold with him, and to lay
thine help upon him. Believe that it is free for thee to lay hold on the blood
of Christ; and 3. Come and lay hold upon it. Lean upon him for his help, and
trust him for it. 4. Lift up a prayer to him. Lord here is a polluted dying
soul, that is even lost and choked up in the mud and mire of my sins, there is
no help for me, but I must die and perish in them, if thou will not look upon
me and save me. In thy bowels I have hope, in thy blood I have hope, and that
is all the hope I have. O sprinkle me with thy blood, wash me in thy blood, and
my soul shall live; Wherefore Lord did thou die? Wherefore did thou shed
that precious blood? Was it not for the recovery of lost souls, for the
cleansing of polluted souls? Is not my poor soul one of the number of those for
whom Christ died? Have not I as great need of of thee as any? Is it not thou
thy self that have brought this my soul to thy door, crying for thine help?
Lord Jesus hear, let some drops of that blood, some of the virtue of thy death
be shed abroad upon my sinful heart and it shall live. My sins must die Lord,
or my soul will never recover; I must get this lust destroyed, this enmity
slain, this proud and hard and stubborn heart broken, and nothing but the blood
of Christ the lamb will ever melt this hardness, or wash me from this
uncleanness. This will do it, and therefore here I am come before the throne of
thy grace, and here I will stand, and look, and beg, and hope till thou hear
and answer me, Help Lord for in thee I trust, and look for thy salvation only.

2. His word. The word of God as it is food for souls, so it is medicine or
physic for souls; And it has in it a remedy for every disease.

1. It is an awakening word to sleepy souls. On these it thunders; that it may
awaken them. Ministers must be as Barnabas, sons of consolation, so also as
Boanerges sons of thunder; And all their thunder bolts they are to have out of
the word of God. O how many trumpets have been sounded in your ears, how many
thunder claps have you heard, how many thundering Sermons have thou heard in thy
time? What, and yet art thou asleep still? Man, what is that heart of thine
made of? What a dead sleep art thou in, that art not yet awakened? This world
is all asleep, asleep in their sins, and therefore the Ministers of the word
are to do as the Prophet was to do, Is. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift thy
voice like a trumpet and tell my people of their sins.

Our first work is to call unto them as the mariners to Jonah, Arise sleeper,
carest thou not that you perish! Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the
dead. This thunder is the voice of the Lord. Psalm. 29.6, etc. The God of glory
thundereth; the voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the Lord is full of
majesty, it breaks Cedars, it makes the wilderness shake; This word of the
Lord which is his voice is a thundering voice: It breaks the Cedars, the tall
and mighty sinners, and it shakes the wilderness, shakes up those Beasts of the
earth out of sleep. This sleepy evil is the disease of sinners, and it binds
them up under a senselessness of all their other diseases, till the voice of
the Lord does shake them up out of sleep.

2. It is an enlightening word that gives sight to the blind. In this word is
that eye salve. Rev. 1.18. Wherewith sinners eyes are to be anointed, that they
may see. This eye salve are the instructions of God.

3. It is for the breaking and mollifying hard hearts. In the word is revealed,

1. The righteousness and severity of God. Herein is the wrath of God revealed
from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Romans 1.18. And
thus it is Gods Hammer, whereby he breaks the rocks, and Gods Axe, Whereby he
hews the blocks in pieces.

2. The goodness and kindness of God. And thus it is, Gods oil, whereby he
supples and dissolves, and melts them into a plyableness to his will.

4. It is for the changing the tempers and inward dispositions of sinners. It
is a transforming word, we are changed into the same image. 2. Cor. 3.18. a
sanctifying word. Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth.

This is one of Christ's medicines, and this medicine is to be taken. But what
is it to take this medicine? Why, it is to hear the awakening word and to
suffer it to work upon you, to be awakened by it, to receive the instructions
of the word, and so to be enlightened by it, to be broken and mollified, to be
transformed and changed by it.

Now this is that which I exhort you to, if you would recover, let the word of
God come, let it have a free passage into your hearts, and let it do its work
upon you. Be awakened, when you hear an awakening word, let it shake you up out
of your sleep. Awake sinners, awake you that sleep, hear the voice of the Lord,
and rouse you up out of that secure and senseless state. Where is it that thou
sleep? At the very mouth of the Lions Den, on the top of a Mast. I have
heard of a drunken man riding in the night on full speed, he knew not whither,
rode to the top of St. Vincents Rocks near Bristol, and the horse and man
tumbled down; the horse was crushed in pieces, the man caught by the boughs of
a Tree, and there fell asleep till morning. It was a strange place to sleep in,
none but a drunken man could have ever slept in such a place. In such a
desperate sleep art thou, as upon the brow of a Rock, on the bough of a Tree,
whence thou art every moment in danger of dropping down into the deep. Sleeping
sinners, this is the case of every one of you; it is a wonder you have not
broken your necks, that you have not fallen into the deep before this day, and
yet here thou art asleep still. Awake you that sleep, and understand the danger
you are in. 2. Get those blind eyes of yours to be opened, and receive the
instructions of the Word. Here we bring you eye salve, be anointed with it,
that you may see. 3. Get those hard hearts to be broken and melted. Gods hammer
is lifted up, lay that stony, that hard heart of thine under it, that it may be
broken. Gods Ax is a hewing, come bring that knotty piece under it, that it may
be cut and cloven asunder. Consider the severity and kindness of God: his
severity, if thou still continue in thine hardness; if his Hammer do not break
thee, his Millstones, his wrath and indignation will shortly grind thee to
powder. Consider his severity, and consider his goodness and kindness; what a
wonder is it that after thou have so long abused the goodness of God, and
hardened thy self against mercy, that mercy should not have given thee off, and
let thee alone to perish without remedy. It is a mercy of God, that he is yet
preaching to thee of his severity: it is the mercy of God that he is yet
hammering and hewing at that hard heart of thine: God is so good and so kind to
thee, that he has sent his Word once more, to try if any good may be done
upon thee: he is loath thou should perish, he would fain thou should recover
and live: he has pity upon thee, he has compassion upon that wretched soul of
thine, and thence is it that he continues to be dealing with thee for thy
recovery. O wonder, wonder that such mercy should not melt thee, that such
goodness and kindness should not wound thee to the soul, that thou should
abuse such strange grace; that thou should yet resist and stand it out against
such a God of compassion. Wonder at thy self and be ashamed, wonder and be
confounded, and blush, and weep, and fall down now at last, and yield unto God.
What, art thou hardened still? a stone or a stock still? Will thou go away as
far from remorse, as far from repentance as thou came hither? God forbid,
man; God forbid, that yet thou should provoke the Lord farther against thee.
Thou have gone away hardened from many a Sabbath, thou have gone away hardened
from many a Sermon, and must this Day and this Word leave thee as all the rest
have done? When do thou hope to be recovered, if thou will not be broken?
Will thou say, it is no matter though I never be recovered, though I perish and
die in this hardened state? Would thou fear to be let alone till thou be past
recovery, to be lost forever? Then yield to the stroke of the Word, and let
thine heart be humbled and broken, and brought to repentance.

4. Get the temper of your hearts to be changed. Let the Word work to the
mollifying you, and to the changing of you; to the renewing you after the image
of God in righteousness and holiness. And what ever awakenings there have been
of your sleepy consciences, what ever light or understanding there may be
conveyed into your minds, yea, and what ever wounds and breaches there have
been made upon your hard hearts, yet till you be renewed in the very frame, and
temper, and dispositions of your hearts, never count your selves to be
recovered. Thou art a lost soul till thou art a sanctified soul: that is, till
thine heart be broken off, and brought back from the love, and lusts, and ways
of this World, and brought about unto God and his holy ways, till godliness be
gotten into thine [heart] and formed into thy nature, and thou have a love of
it, and hearty good liking of it, and the very bent of thine heart, which was
formerly toward sin and vanity, be now toward holiness and heaven. When thou
art brought to this, this new frame of heart, then thou art recovered.

Now Sinners, let this be that you have in your eye, and upon your hearts, let
this be your endeavor, let this be your prayer, that God would so bless his
Word to you, that it may awaken your sleepy consciences, enlighten your blinded
minds, soften and break your hardened hearts, that you may be changed and
renewed after the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness, that you
may be wrought into a new temper, changed into another spirit, loving, and
savouring, and delighting in the holy ways of God; that Religion may become
sweet and pleasant to you, that your spirits may be made suitable to God and
his holy ways, that the food of God may relish with you, and the work of God
may be more easy to you. Sick men can neither relish their food, nor endure
their work. Do thou find no relish in Religion, Does the work of holiness
seem contrary to thee? Do thou groan under it, as that thou can not bear?
Do thou groan under this praying, and repenting, and watching, and striving
against sin, and denying thy self, and mortifying thy flesh? Can thou not
endure to be held to such work? It is a sign that thy sickness is still upon
thee, and thou art not recovered. O get your hearts to be so changed and
renewed by the Word and Spirit of the Lord, that both the food of God may
relish with you, and his work may be pleasant.

3. His Rod. Sinners are fools, and the Rod is Physic for Fools. The rod is
for the Fools back, Prove. 26.3. Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went
astray, but the Rod reduced me, now have I kept thy word. Sinner, thou hear
the awakening word, but it does not awaken thee, thou sleep on: Thou hear
the mollifying and breaking word, but it does not break nor mollify thee, thou
art still a wilful, stubborn soul, and thine heart is so obstinately set upon
thine own loose and wild ways, that thou will not be broken off thy will, nor
broken off from thy course; but God may bring some affliction upon thee, bring
thee into poverty, cast thee on thy sick bed, set death at thy beds foot to
stare thee in the face, and this will tame thee: then thou may be spoken to,
then the Word, there is hope, will enter into thee, and work upon thee. Indeed
some sinners are so desperately hardened that neither word nor rod will do.
What afflictions come, they rather stupifie than awaken them; They continue as
very stocks under the smitings of God, as they are under his teachings, and
therefore take heed, the longer thou go on to harden thine heart against the
word, there is the less hope that thou will be humbled by afflictions. Dare not
to encourage your selves and harden your hearts against repentance, by hopes
and purposes that when sickness comes, and death looks thee in the face, then
thou will repent, no no, the longer thou hardnest thy self against the word,
the less hope there is that thine heart will be broken by afflictions. But some
hope there is, that when the word awakens not, the rod may. But if that do not
neither, then God be merciful unto thee, there is but one thing more and that
will certainly do it, the unquenchable flames will awaken thee, Hell will do
that which all the means under Heaven cannot do; But that fire will not be thy
physic to cure thee, but thy plague to kill thy soul for ever.

The afflictions of this life are Gods physic for the recovering thy soul; O
take this cup at the hand of the Lord, take this physic for thy soul; But what
is it to take this medicine so as it may be recovering physic?

1. Submit to afflictions when God lays them on. Be patient and contented that
the Lord should afflict thee. Do not fret nor murmur at the afflcting hand of
God. Some froward patients, if their Physician be forced to give any harder
physic it will not down, but they fret and fume against the physician, as if
he were cruel, and will not submit to take what he offers them. Be patient
under the hand of God, and submit to what ever he lays on.

2. Consider thine afflictions. Eccl. 7.14. In the day of adversity consider.
Affliction is a considering time. Sinners, you will not consider now, but you
may have time enough to consider it afterward. You will neither consider what
you do. Ecles. 5.1. They consider not they do evil, Nor will you consider what
the Lord speaks to you, you hear our words that we speak to you from the Lord,
but we cannot persuade you to consider them. Consider what we say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things. Think over the words that you hear; It is
a miserable plague that has seized upon your hearts, this inconsideration, and
that which hinders you from profiting by the word, and holds you under your
senselessness and hardness of heart. Think of what you hear, think what a
wretched case the word declares you to be in. When you hear such words, He that
commits sin is of the Devil, 1. Joh. 3.8. He that lives after the flesh
shall die. Romans 8.13. He that is not born again, cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God. When you hear such words as these, then consider, then think with your
self, what a word have I heard to day? Am not I concerned in it? Was not this
word spoken to me? Am not I one that commits sin? Do not I live after the
flesh? Was I ever regenerated or born again? What then? Why, then think
farther, Is it nothing to be of the Devil? Is everlasting death nothing? Is it
nothing to be shut out of the kingdom of God? Awaken O my sleepy soul; yet
break and melt and tremble; oh mine hardened heart, awaken, escape for thy Life,
there is but a step betwixt thee and everlasting death. Consider this now,
whilst the day of adversity comes nor, but if thou should be so unwise as not
to consider at present, yet at least in the day of thy distress consider; Then
think how little the word has done to the breaking and awakening of thee; What
a stock, what a senseless stone has it left thee! Then think, now God is using
one means more to cure me of this sleepy hardened heart, God has laid this
sickness upon me, or this poverty upon me, to humble me and awaken me; And now
I am come to my last remedy, if affliction, if distress, if sickness, if the
sight of death, and the grave do not work upon me, nor cause the word which I
have heard to work yet upon me, what then? Why then I am undone forever, I am
within a step of the Pit, just dropping in, and then this lost soul of mine
will be past recovery forever.

O sinners how does this word sit upon your hearts? Are not you greatly
concerned in it? Does not thy life lie at stake, thy soul lie at stake, upon
thy considering or slighting thy warning? O consider, let present consideration
prevent the great necessity of sickness consideration, of deathbed
consideration. At least when any of you shall come to be in distress, when
pains shall come upon you or poverty come upon you, or death make its approach
to you, then remember the warning of this day. In the day of adversity consider.

3. Take your physicians counsel and follow his rules. Physicians besides their
medicines do usually give rules to their Patients for their well ordering
themselves, and these rules they must observe, or they are never like to
recover and there are these three rules, which ordinarily Physicians give,
which our great Physician of souls, gives also to them that will be recovered
by him.

1. Keep a good diet. 2. Use good exercise. 3. Take heed of taking cold.

1. Keep a good diet. Abstain from all such things as will nourish and feed
your diseases. What is it that has brought thee to this wretched pass? That
has made thee this sick and miserable soul. Thou have been with the prodigal,
Luke 15. Feeding upon husks. Thou have been with Israel, Is. 44, 20. Feeding
upon ashes. Thou have been with Ephraim. Hos. 12.1. Feeding upon wind. These
husks, and these ashes, and this wind have been all thy poor soul has been
feeding upon, the vanities of this world, the lust and the pleasures, the
carnal delights and the profits of this world, these are but windy food for thy
soul, these are the very ashes and husks, that have filled thee with such sore
diseases, thou have fed thine heart so long with these carnal things, thy soul
has been eating these ashes, and drinking this wind so long, that it is even
turned into ashes and wind, it is become an earthly soul, a fleshly soul, a vain
frothy soul, and never think to be recovered to a better case, till thou feed
upon better food. Would thou be recovered, and get thee a new heart, and a
new soul? Then abstain from thy old feeding, Abstain from fleshly lusts which
war against the soul. 1. Pet. 2.11. Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof. Romans 13. ult. Deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. Tit.
2.12. My meaning plainly is this; If ever you would recover, allow not your
fleshly appetites the liberty as formerly; Come off from your carnal pleasures,
which have been such a band to you; Come off from your carnal companions, drink
no more with the drunken, run not with them to their excess of Riot, No more
such vain sportings and revellings; Not in chambring and wantonness, not in
Riot and Drunkenness. Come off from this greedy worldly life, feed not your
souls upon your lands, or your moneys, or your trades; Though you must have
something of these for your bodies, yet feed not your hearts with them. Set not
your hearts upon them, that is the advice of the Psalmist, Psalm. 62.10. If
riches increase, or whether they do increase or no, set not your hearts upon
them. Let not your souls be drudges to your flesh, to gather in provision for
it, nor let them feed with your flesh at the same trough.

You have better things for your souls to feed upon, you have God to feed on,
you have the blood of Christ, the Covenant of grace, the hope of Salvation, the
joys of the spirit, the pleasures of Eternity, the bread that comes down from
Heaven, the wine that makes glad the city of God; Let these be the food of your
souls, feed your thoughts upon them; Think often of God, of his infinite
goodness and grace, of his eternal treasures, and everlasting pleasures; Think
of Christ, what he has done for you, what he has purchased for you, how he
has loved you, and washed you in his blood, and saved you by his death. Feed
your affections on God, and his Glory to come, feed your desires upon him, let
this be your voice. Js 26.8.9, The desire of my soul is to thy name. Enlarge
your desires here you cannot be too greedy and of too eager an appetite.
Delight your selves in the Lord; get the savor and relish of things spiritual,
taste the pleasures of religion, taste the sweetness of Christianity. Do not
only spend now and then a sudden thought upon God, and the things above, but
live in such frequent and serious meditation, that you may get down something
of the sweetness and fatness of heaven, and digest holy meditations into holy
affections. Never count you have thought of God to any purpose, till you can
love, and taste, and get out good nourishment for your souls, by which you may
thrive and flourish, and with which you may be so delighted, as to wean you
from the Love and Lusts of this world.

Believe it friends, as loath as you are to let go your pleasant morsels, the
stolen waters of your own Cisterns, as hard as you find it to diet your souls,
so as to deny your selves the pleasures and contentments of a worldly fleshly
life, as strongly as your hearts lust after ease, and lust after the world and
the contentments thereof, get but once to be so inwardly acquainted with
religion, as to taste the pleasure thereof, and you will be able to despise
this carnal life, and all its advantages, and wonder at your selves, that ever
you should find out contentment in such a life as you have lived.

And now your souls are like to flourish amain, when you are come to this once,
to disrellish your old delights, and to feed your thoughts and feed your
affections on things above, and to forbear, and come off from the love and
lusts and companions and pleasures of this world, then you will live and thrive
and flourish in the House of the Lord, and grow up before him as his peculiar
children whom the Lord has saved.

The sum of this direction I shall give you in short, in these three
particulars. If ever you would recover, 1. Abstain from that carnal worldly
life in which hitherto you have lived. 2. Abstain from those carnal companions
in whose converse you have delighted. 3. Delight your selves in God, feed your
thoughts and affections upon things above.

2. Use good exercise. Stir your selves out of your lazy humors, and keep
doing. Idleness breeds diseases, exercise will help to the cure. Particularly
exercise your selves, 1. To prayer. 2. To repentance. 3. To the keeping a good
conscience.


1. Exercise your selves to prayer. The prayer of the faithful shall save the
sick. Jam. 5.15. The sick soul as well as the sick body. Prayer is a stirring
exercise, that (if performed as it ought) sets all the powers of the soul on
work; it is a striving with God, it is a wrestling with God, it is the lifting
up of the heart, and the pouring out the soul to God. When thou set thy
self to praying, it is both a sign that thy recovery is begun, and an hope it
will be perfected. Set your selves to praying, Sinners, stir up your selves to
prayer; There is none that stirs up himself to take hold on thee, Is. 64.7.
Pray and stir up your selves in prayer. It is not sleepy, lazy, cold, formal
praying, but stirring prayer that must do the cure. Stir up your desires in
prayer, be passionate and affectionate seekers, stir up your fears in prayer,
consider, what if I should not prevail? What if the cry of my sins should be
louder than the cry of my prayers? I come for the pardon of my sins, I come for
power against sin, I am begging my life, and the saving my soul from going down
into the Pit; my very life, my soul lies at stake, if God should not hear me, I
am lost for ever. Awaken, oh my soul, and pour forth strong cries, bow thy self
with thy might before the Lord.

Plead with God, poor sinner, for that poor miserable soul of thine, plead with
him upon his mercies, upon his bowels, upon his promises, upon the blood of
Christ. Take unto thee words, Lord I am a miserable sinful soul, I am a lost
creature, I am sick unto death, I am bound in the chains of my sins, and cannot
get loose, I am a blind, hardened, defiled creature; these eyes must be opened,
this heart must be broken, this filth and pollution must be washed away, or I
shall be swallowed up of the pit. Where are thy bowels, O Lord? Art thou a God
of pity, and have thou no pity for me? Where is thy promise, Lord? Thou have
said, Ask and you shall have, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. To whom have thou spoken this word? Is it not to me as well as
to others? Where is the blood of Christ, does it not speak for sinners? Does it
not make intercession for transgressors? It does Lord, thou have said it does.
And what does this blood speak? Lord forgive this poor sinner that comes to
thee for pardon; Lord purge him with thy blood, Lord heal him with thy blood,
Lord give him that new heart and life which he comes for. O, does this precious
blood speak thus for me, and will thou not hear?

Sinners, if ever you would be recovered, set upon this exercise, and keep you
to it. Go to God this night, be with him again to morrow morning, and again in
the evening, and every day as duly as the day comes, go alone and retire your
selves into the presence of God, fall upon your knees, and pour forth your
souls in your requests to him. Beware you neither neglect it, and beware you do
not trifle at it: do not deceive your selves with the shadow or image of Prayer
in stead of Prayer. Consider, thou art upon a matter of life and death when
thou go to prayer; and let that awaken and stir up all thy powers in it.

Friends, I doubt either that you do not pray, or that it is but mock-praying,
that too many of you satisfy your selves withal. O what pitiful, hasty, short,
dead praying is it, that thou satisfiest thy self with? Trace thy self into thy
praying corners, consider how seldom thou art there, how quickly thou have
done, how miserably thou shufflest over thy duties, without life or affection;
what is this but mock-prayer, will such praying recover thy lost soul? No, thou
see it will not: thou art the same man, of the same spirit, running the same
course, from one week to another, from one year to another, without any change
for the better. It may be said of such praying, as it was said of the false
Prophets preaching, Jer. 6.14. They heal the hurt of my people slightly. Slight
praying is attended but with slight healing: something it seems to do, it skins
over the wound that it smart not for the time, it keeps people quiet for the
time, but it will never work a thorough cure. Your wound is deeper, your
disease is eaten into your flesh and your bone, to your heart and your soul,
and your medicine must go as deep as your disease. There must be deep sighs and
groans, and deep desires that must come up from the bottom of your hearts, or
they will never reach the bottom of your disease. Be ashamed of your
slightness, be ashamed of your folly, that you should ever think that God would
help you the sooner for such trifling and mocking prayers.

Oh pray, and exercise your selves in prayer. Stir up all within you to this
work; look to your selves, I am afraid that this duty, which is a means of
recovery, may prove the loss of your souls: I am afraid lest the Lord, the
jealous God that will not be mocked, I am afraid that he may damn you for your
prayers, your trifling mocking prayers. Dare not to trifle any longer; dare not
for thy life, that the Lord ever again meet thee in thy closet, meet thee on
thy knees with nothing but the sacrifice of Fools, a few heartless words upon
thy lips. Beloved I can hardly pass over this word thus, there being so much
weight lying upon it, and yet there being so much hardness of heart under this
soul-deceiving and soul-damning practice shuffling in prayer. What say you?
Have I said enough yet? Are you yet made sensible how much you are, many of
you, concerned in this word? Are you yet sensible how greatly guilty you are of
this miserable hypocrisy? Will all that I have said yet do, to bring you to be
serious and in good earnest in every prayer you make? Are you come to this,
well, I hope I shall mock God no more, I hope I shall trifle in prayer no more?
Are you resolved to put your hearts to it, and to try what you can do, and
never leave trying till you are come to it, to make every prayer, one of the
most serious and hearty exercises of your life? Then would there be hope of
recovery out of all your diseases.

2. Exercise your selves to repentance. Repentance signifies a change, a change
of the mind originally; so those two words by which it is expressed in
Scripture, signify post factum sapere, after we have played the fools by sin,
to come to be wise, so wise as to see our folly, so to see our folly as to
grieve for it, and so to grieve, ut corrigere, to amend and do so no more. This
change is ordinarily brought on by convulsions and troublesome commotions in
the heart; there is a sorrow that works this repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly
sorrow works repentance to salvation. This Repentance is not dispatched all
at once, but is carried on and perfected by degrees. Repentance is a grace, and
it is an exercise. A grace it is, as it is given us of God through Jesus
Christ, Acts 5.31. To give repentance unto Israel, etc. An exercise as it
respects our own acts, which this grace causes us to put forth, 2 Cor. 7.10.
This self-same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly manner, what carefulness
it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, what indignation, what
fear, what desire, what zeal, what revenge?

Get the grace of repentance, and live in the daily exercise of repentance.

1. Keep your minds working, to maintain that change that is begun. Have you
seen the folly of sin, and the misery of sin, and how much better it is to turn
and come about from it to holiness? Are you come to be of this judgment, that
you were mad to follow the Devil, and your lusts; that you could never have
lived in such a state, and gone on in such a course as you have, unless you had
been mad men? Are you gotten into so good a mind? Keep you in it. Exercise your
thoughts, cast an eye back upon your former evils, and that which God has made
known to you of the misery of them. Think often what it is to be a lost soul, a
captive to the Devil; think what a Fool, what a Beast thou were whilst thou
livedst such a proud, and covetous, and carnal, sensual, lascivious, and
sottish life: and by such thoughts make thy self as odious to thy self as thou
can; get to a loathing and abominating of thy evil ways. This is that which
is promised Ezekiel. 6.9. They shall loath themselves, for the evils they have
committed.

Get this self loathing by studying and remembering what thou wast, and ripping
up all thine old sores, that foolish filthy heart and life of thine; hereby
work thy self to this loathing, and maintain a constant disgust and dislike of
thy former state. Art thou now in so good a mind, as to hate thy self for thy
sin? be never reconciled to it, so as ever to think good thoughts of thy evil
ways as long as thou live.

2. Exercise your affections: Your sorrow for sin, your fear of sin, your
indignation or anger against sin your desire after power and victory over it.
Keep these penitent affections working, maintain that godly sorrow, and fear,
and indignation: Keep your sorrow alive, keep your fears working, and your
indignation burning against your iniquities. Let these zealous passions and
affections against sin, be so raised, as never to be allayed; let the fire of
your holy jealousy be so kindled, as never to be quenched; let the thoughts of
the evil and odiousness of sin, be the fuel to keep that holy fire burning, and
the Bellows to blow it up into a greater flame.

3. Exercise your care and consideration how you may complete and confirm your
recovery. The word it may be, is but yet begun with you; You do but begin to be
wise, begin to be sober and serious; there is many a good and hopeful beginning
goes back, and comes to nothing; live in a daily care of reforming and amending
farther what has been amiss. The top of repentance stands in amendment, if
you should see your sins to be foolish, and odious never so much, if you should
be grieved and ashamed of your selves for them, if the thoughts of the course
you have lived, should make you afraid, and set you a trembling over your old
wonted state and way, if you do not amend that is no repentance. If you should
say, I hate sin, and hate my self for it, I hate my self for this pride, I hate
my self for this covetousness, I hate my self for this frowardness, and yet you
have not the power to resist it, and come off from it, you sorrow and sin, you
fear and sin, you are angry with your self for sin, and yet go on; this is no
repentance. Is. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his wickedness etc.

The top of repentance stands in amendment, and the amendment of repentance,
must be completing every day. Jer. 7.5. If ye thoroughly amend your ways, if ye
thoroughly execute Judgment etc. Then will I cause you to dwell in the Land. It
is not an half recovery, a partial amendment, but a perfect recovery that must
be in your eye. There is a great difference betwixt these two, being upon
recovery, and being recovered. Are you upon recovery? it is well you are, it is
more than the most of sinners are; there is not the least sign of recovery,
there is not the least sign of amendment, there are nothing but death tokens
upon them. Sinners I doubt this may be many of your cases, you are not so much
as beginning to recover; your disease is still in its strength, and growing
upon you; you are not amending, but you are hardening daily in your sins, going
on to have less sense, and so less hope of a cure. But art thou O sinner, art
thou upon recovery? It is well thou art; but let not that satisfy thee, that
thou art upon the recovering hand, but get thee to be recovered. And this is
that you are to be exercising your self in, to get you to be on the mending
hand every day; labor to grow better and better, not only to get a deeper
sense of sin, but to get more power over sin, more victory over your evil
hearts, more contempt of the world and its temptations, more scorn of your
carnal companions, and more indignation against a carnal sensual life, and more
firmness and resolvedness of heart, to have done with every evil and vain way,
and the temptations to it. I say, the temptations to it, for whatever
opposition there seems to be of the heart against sin, yet if there be a
venturing upon temptations, if thou think thou hate drunkenness or a jolly
vain life, and yet wilt be thrusting in amongst those that are such, if thou
say thou hate this worldly mindedness, and yet art never well but when thou
art greedily heaping up what should feed thy worldly disease, never talk of
hating the sin; if thou fear not, if thou shun not the temptation, thou still
love the sin.

Well sinners, set your hearts upon a perfect amendment, and keep your selves
in such a constant exercise of repentance, that you may amend more and more
every day. Consider, is it better with thee to day than it was yesterday? or at
least, is it better with thee this year than it was last year, or some years
agone? Is it better or is it worse? Or art thou in the same case? What hope
have thou to be recovered, if there be no amendment all this while?

To provoke you to the present and constant exercising your selves to
repentance. I will propose some questions to you.

Q. 1, What do you think of your former state, and your ways hitherto? Is it
well with you? Are you not lost souls, and your carnal ways are they not the
ways of perdition? Have ye lived like wise understanding men? Do ye think ye
have? Will you say, I have done wisely in following the wine and strong drink,
in following my companions and my pleasures? I have dealt wisely to live such a
covetous and worldly life, I should have been a fool to have been a Christian,
or a convert, to have left all and have followed Christ, from my first time!
You have lived a fleshly and worldly life you cannot deny that, but let me ask
you as the Apostle did the Romans. Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye of those things
whereof ye are now ashamed. Are you come so far toward repentance as to be
ashamed of your former folly? What fruit have you? What is there now remaining
to you, as the fruit of your former ways? O I have some good fruit, I hope I
have lived a worldly life I have got the world about me, I have got me an
estate, and am become a rich man, I should have been poor enough, if I had
hearkened to Christ and come back from the world sooner, this house is the
fruit, this money is the fruit, these lands are the fruits of my labors. Would
praying and repenting and forsaking the world, have ever brought me to such an
estate as now I have? And do you yet ask me what fruit have ye of your
worldliness!

Answer. 1. But are these the fruits you can satisfy your selves in? Are these
the fruits you can bless your selves in? Will these estates answer for you to
your Judge? And make way for you into the everlasting Kingdom? Will this be a
good plea for entrance into Heaven, set open the door for here comes a rich
man, a monied man, a landed man, let him have entrance into the Everlasting
Kingdom? Friends, what you have thus gotten, will sink you, and drown you in
perdition, and destruction, but never he p you to glory, and this is the good
fruit you boast of, that you have gotten such weights about your necks, as will
drown you in the Pit.

But 2. What fruit have [you] of your ways that have lived at ease, and lived
in pleasure, in idleness or wantonness, or excess of riot, in sporting and
laughing, and carnal jollity? What is become of all the pleasures of your life?
What fruit is there remaining of all thy crackling thorns? Are they not all
burnt to ashes and vanished away as a dream?

3. Have all your former ways done any thing to the recovering of your lost
souls? Have not they left you sons of perdition, nay, are you not become seven
times more the children of Hell by these practices than you were by nature?
Thou were naturally a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and you have by practice been
children of disobedience, as verse 2. and has your disobedience delivered you
from wrath?

I say therefore again, What do you think of your selves, and your ways. The
Judgment of God, you see what it is, you are a child of disobedience, and a
child of wrath, and what is your Judgment? What are your own thoughts of your
selves? Does not your Judgment, and your conscience tell you, sure it is an
evil case that I am in? No wise man would ever stay a minute longer in such a
state or way. Have you come so far toward repentance as to change your mind?
Are there any of you of better minds than you have been? Is this now your mind
and your settled judgment, It would be good for me to repent, and come about to
God? Have you any mind to Christ, any mind to godliness, and serious
Christianity?

Q. 2. Will you continue in your former state and way, or will you endeavor
for recovery? If you say you have a mind to be a Convert and become a new man,
will you set your hearts to it, will you exercise your thoughts about it? will
you set to praying for repentance, to resisting and striving against your old
sins? Will you go on as before, or will you come back? Who is there among you
that has yet the heart to say, O I have done with my old ways, I have done
with my old companions, I have done with this World, I have done with this
fleshly life, I am ashamed, I am afraid, I repent that I have lived such a life
hitherto: the Lord change my heart, the Lord help me to change my way. What say
you Christians, it is an important question to answer, the Lord God puts you
this day to it, to be plain and downright, and in good earnest to resolve what
you will do. What say you? Who of you are for repenting, and who for going on
in your sins? God puts you to it, and in the name of God put your selves to it,
to give in your answer. What do you mean to do, will you hearken to the Lord,
or will you yet go on to harden your hearts? Have these words so far prevailed
upon you, as to bring you into a good mind? Have you a mind and purpose to
return.

Q. 3. Shall it suffice you to take up with the beginnings of repentance, or
will you make thorough-work. Shall it suffice you to set your faces toward
God, or will you come home to him? Jer. 4.1. O Israel, if thou will return,
return unto [me.] Come not toward me, and then stay at half way; but come home
to me, come thorough to me. Repentance is dispatched by degrees; first those
that were running away are brought about to be looking, and making toward God;
then those that are afar off, are coming near to God; then those that are come
near, do come in to God; and then those that are come in, do by degrees fix and
confirm their hearts upon God, that they may never go back to the way of sin.

What is it that will satisfy you? Shall it suffice you to be looking toward
God, or coming half way toward Heaven? or are you for coming home, for coming
in to the Lord? for making sure work, for making thorough work? If you are so,
for being thorough-Converts, this will require time, this will require pains,
and constant exercising your selves to repentance as long as you live. You must
continue repenting, as long as you continue sinning; you must confirm and
establish your hearts against all returns to the old state and course, as long
as there is danger of relapsing. What if you should begin well, and then give
off or make a stand? What if you should lay by your sorrow for sin, lay down
your fear of sin, and run into temptations to sin without fear, if you should
give off your watch and your warrings against sin? What do you think would
become of you if you should? How would you tumble back into the Pit, from which
you seemed to be delivered? Do what you can Friends, to make sure work; Have
you gotten any sense of sin, and of the necessity of turning? Exercise your
thoughts and your hearts upon this thing while you live. You will never whilst
you live here, see to the bottom of the evil that is in sin. Have thou by
thinking, and searching, found out something of the evil of sin? Think again,
search again, and thou shall yet see greater abominations, greater malignity in
it. You may as easily see to the height of heaven, or to the depth of hell, as
to the bottom of sin. Sin can never be thoroughly known till God be thoroughly
known. It is an abuse of God, an abuse of infinite grace, and goodness, and
holiness: as often as thou sinnest, thou affrontest and abusest the God of
heaven and earth. Thou think it a small matter to tell a lie, or to pilfer
and purloin, if it be but trifles thou stealest; but is it a small matter to
abuse the Almighty God? to tread upon his authority, who has said, lie not,
thou shall not steal, thou shall not covet? Is it a small matter to spit in his
face, to slight his bowels, to tread upon his mercy, and to throw it back upon
him, and refuse it when he offers it? Such and much more malignity is there in
sin than all this, and therefore be thinking and searching out the evil of sin
more and more, as long as you live. Study much the evil of sin, and the
preciousness of Christ, and give not over till you can no longer either make
light of sin, or make light of Christ; and when sin is become grievous, and
Christ is become precious; when sin is so grievous that you cannot bear it,
when Christ is so precious that you cannot want him, that is a sign of a
recovered soul, 1 Pet. 2.7. To them which believe he is precious. And where
Christ is precious, it is sure there sin is odious. O if Christ has once
recovered you, how dear will he be to you? You will prize him in your very
hearts, you will love him while you live, you will be afraid how you grieve or
offend him. And when you are recovered from sin, how will you look back upon
it? will you love, will you lust after your old ways again? Will you wish your
selves Worldlings again, Sensualists again? Will you bethink the ease you have
lost, the pleasures you have lost, the companions you have lost? Will you not
thank God that you are come out from among them, and have escaped that misery
that is coming upon the World? The more you live in the constant exercise of
repentance, the more you will admire the recovering grace of God, and the more
you will abhor to return to folly.

Repentance is your recovery, if God give you repentance, you may recover, and
your continuing in the exercise of repentance is your maintaining, and
perfecting, and confirming your recovery. You are not gotten so far off from
the state of sin, but your continued exercise of repentance will get you
farther off daily. Your repentance is your getting upon sure ground, and your
continued repentance is your standing your ground; your giving off at your
repenting work will be your relapse, and it may be into a worse case than
before, Joh. 5.14. Behold thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee. Behold thou art made whole, O what a word is that? How do you
think that poor impotent man, that had been so 38 years, was ravished at that
word? What if the Lord should now speak the word to any sinner among you that
had been even astonished with the sense of his sin and his guilt; that had lien
as long at the Ordinances as the poor man at the Pool, expecting and hoping for
a saving change, and could find none. If Christ should come to thee this day,
and say, Behold thou art made-whole, thy sins are forgiven, and thy soul is
cleansed from them; If that word should be spoken to thee this day, how would
thine heart leap for joy? What should we hear from thee but praises and
thanksgiving? Well, but yet consider the words that follow, sin no more, stand
thy ground, lest a worse thing come to thee: thy case has been very sad
formerly, but as sad as it has been, look to find it worse, if thou return to
folly, Psalm. 85.8. God will speak peace, but let them not return to folly: at
their peril let them look to it, that they do not return. But of this more in
the next.

Now Sinners, will you yet at last be persuaded to set upon this work of
repenting? Will you say you cannot? Why then you must die of your disease, die
eternally. But why, can you not? O it is a painful life, it is contrary to me,
I have found such ease and such pleasure, and such gain in mine old ways, that
I cannot part with them: what, not for the saving of thy life? Is thine ease
better than Christ? Are thy gains more worth than thy soul? Will thou to hell
rather than turn? As sure as thou live thither thou must, if thou repent not,
Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. God has said, the
soul that sins shall die, Ezekiel. 18. and God will never repent of that word
as to thee unless thou repent of thy sins. What, art thou resolved for hell?
Art thou resolved to sacrifice that flesh and those bones of thine to the fury
of the Devil? Art thou a captive to the Devil, and will thou never recover out
of his snares? Shall he carry thee with him to his home? Shall be that has had
the leading of thee, have the burning of thee? O why will ye die? Turn and
live, count upon it, there is but one way with you, every one of you, either
turn or die.

3. Exercise your selves to the keeping a good conscience. Acts 24.26. Herein
do I exercise my self.

This is an hard exercise and will hold us in continual work. There are many
things required to the keeping a good conscience, all which must be well looked
to. Amongst others,

1. Get a good conscience; or get conscience recovered from those evils it
labors under. There are two special evils in and upon conscience.

Guilt. Guile.
1. Guilt, there is guilt upon the conscience, every sin leaves guilt behind
it, The whole world is become guilty before God. Romans 3.15. Because the whole
world are sinners, or subject to the Judgment of God. But then there is guilt
upon the man, and guilt upon the conscience. There are some sins, that leave
guilt upon the man, but do not, immediately leave guilt upon the conscience as
sins of ignorance, these leave guilt upon the man, but not allways upon the
conscience, because such sins conscience does not, nor can take notice of, and
so they cannot be called sins against conscience. Guilt there is upon
conscience: 1. When conscience through remissness or neglect does not take
notice of them, nor charge the soul to take heed of them. 2. When though
conscience does know sin to be sin, and those particular acts, that I am
tempted to, to be sinful acts, yet lust prevails to bring us on upon the
commission of them against conscience. Thou know that lying is a sin* thy
conscience tells thee so and yet thou will lie; Thou know that drunkenness,
that defrauding, that profaning the sabbath, that neglect to pray, and to hear,
are sins; And thy conscience tells thee they are, and yet thou will lie, or be
drunk, or work, or travel upon the Lords day, neglect to pray, etc. This leaves
a guilt upon thy conscience. O how great, O how dreadful guilt is there upon
the consciences of many of us? How many bills of indictment will thy conscience
have, to bring forth against thee before thy Judge? The guilt of neglecting
Christ, the guilt of hardening thy heart against mercy, besides all the guilt of
thine oaths, and of thy drunkenness, and of thy covetousness, and of thy lying,
and stealing and scoffing, all this guilt lies upon thee, and this is one thing
that conscience must be recovered from, ere it can be a good conscience.

2. Guile, or falsehood, or treachery of conscience. Conscience will juggle and
deal deceitfully, it will dispense with, or give allowance of sin, it will
connive and wink at iniquity. Some sins which can be better spared, it resists,
others, such as interest or inclination lead more strongly to, it lets them
pass, and will not see them to be sin, and therefore dares not examine whether
they be sin or no. This is a guileful conscience, it is true of Christians what
is said of Nathaniel. Joh. 1.47. An Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile.
Psalm. 32.2. Blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile. This is a
good conscience, that is plain and honest and faithful. Heb. 13.18. We trust ye
have a good conscience in all things willing to live honestly.

Now these being the diseases in conscience, guilt and guile, from these we
must get them recovered, and their recovery must be wrought, by blood and
water. By the blood of Christ, Heb. 5.14. How much more shall the loud of
Christ purge your consciences? And by water also, by he water of
sanctification, and by the water of repentance. Penitent tears have their use
to the washing of conscience. Sinners take heed, have no guilt upon your
consciences, have you no guile in your consciences. O how dreadfully guilty, O
how miserably guileful has that conscience of thine been! Get your consciences
purged, get the blood of Christ to be sprinkled upon them. Draw water, so the
pouring forth penitent tears is expressed.. 1. Sam. 7.6. They drew water and
poured it forth before the Lord and fasted that day. Draw water sinners, weep
before the Lord for your sins, and this will be the washing your consciences
from the guilt and guile that is upon them.

2. Keep conscience working? Though method would require that I speak to this,
of keeping conscience under the next general, the keeping of the heart yet I
choose rather to speak to it here. Keep conscience working. A lazy sleeping
conscience is good for nothing, it is a stirring working conscience that does
its office, that must industriously be maintained. Conscience has 1. An eye.
2. A Book. 3. A Tongue. 4. A Scepter.


1. An eye. And the eye of conscience must be kept open The eye of conscience
is even as the eye of God, it may be said of conscience in its measure, as of
God, Psalm. 139.2.3. Thou know my down fitting and uprising, thou
understandest my thoughts, and art acquainted with all my ways. The eye of
conscience beholds our very inwards, all things are naked and open, even before
that conscience with which we have to do, and this is something you have to keep
you doing, to keep the eye of conscience open. Let not conscience wink at your
follies, let it see and observe what ever you do.

2. A Book. A Register or book of records, where it writes down what it sees.
Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah is written -- It is graven upon the tables of the
hearts, the meaning there is, it has entered into their hearts, it has
corrupted and eaten into their hearts, there are the scars and impressions of
it upon them; Their iniquities have marked them, and marked them in their very
hearts for vile and ungodly ones. This graving of sin upon the heart, notes the
hearts defilement; the corrupting of the heart; But then there is a writing for
remembrance, a writing of scores, or books of account; and thus men's sins are
written in the book of conscience* now this also must be looked to, that
conscience be faithful, and book down all our sins, that they may be remembered
by us and repented of.

The book of conscience will be written, whether men will or no, if conscience
will be negligent, and will not write down its own faults, God will do it and
will write down all our sins, if conscience will not; If we mark not, God will
mark them. Jer. 2.22. Thine iniquity is marked before [me]. If we record not,
God will record them. What conscience writes conscience may read and remember,
but what God writes (upon the neglect of conscience) sinners cannot read, or
remember now, but there it shall all be to be seen at the great day of
accounts, when the book shall be opened, and read before Angels and men.

Sinners, what is there written in those books within you? Are your sins
written there? Has conscience kept a record of them? It is well if it have;
look into that book, read over and remember all your ways; go and ask thy
conscience, if thou have not been a Liar, if thou have not been a swearer, a
Drunkard, a covetous liver, a flesh pleaser, ask thy conscience if it has not
been so. How many have been thy lies, how many have been thine oaths, how many
drunken bouts, how many rioting days how many greedy and covetous practices,
have thou been guilty of? Look into that book in thy bosom; if conscience has
been faithful there thou may read and remember, and so come to be humbled
for them. But if conscience has not noted these things, but has been asleep,
and let thee alone to run thy course, without its keeping an account, yet God
has written down all. Though thou have forgotten what thou have been, though
thou have forgotten or taken no notice of what thou have done, yet God has his
book of remembrance against thee, thine iniquities are all marked before him
These things thou have done and I kept silence, but I will reprove thee, and
set thy sins in order before thee, Psalm. 50.21 -- The Lord stood by and saw
thee, when thou were in thy cups, the Lord hearkened and heard all thine oaths,
and thy lies, and though he kept silence, and let thee alone for the time, and
said little to reprove or affright thee, yet thou shall see, and know, that he
saw thee where ever thou were, and marked what ever thou have done, thou shall
know it by this, that he will hereafter reprove thee and set all thy sins in
order before thee. And O what a fearful sight will that be, when thou shall
have the black roll of all the wickedness that thou have done in thy life, at
once presented to thy view. Now you would be ready to say, I know nothing by my
self, or no great matters at least, thou have but a few things against thy
self, and those few thou countest small matters; But when God shall bring forth
the whole roll, and force thee to read every line, and to see every sin in its
colors, then shall thou see every one of thy sins, as so many Devils to
torment thee forever. Sinner how do thou think thou shall look in that day?
how will thy face grow pale, and thy countenance be changed, and thy bones
tremble at such an horrid sight of all thy sins at once? O prevent this misery
by getting Conscience to be faithful; let Conscience keep its Book open, and
write down all thy ways, that there thou may read them at present, and
remember them in order to thy repentance, and their being blotted out by the
blood of the Lamb.

3. A Tongue. Conscience is called by a Proverb, the Preacher in the bosom: How
shall this Preacher preach if he has not a tongue to speak? God be merciful to
those Congregations which have dumb Priests, and to those sinners that have
dumb Consciences. How long may poor Congregations sit under a dumb Priest, ere
they hear any thing to purpose, either of their duty or their faults? they may
be blind and ignorant souls, and never hear one word of instruction, or of the
danger of their ignorance; they may be without Christ, and without God in the
World, and so may continue to their dying day, and never hear one word to bring
them to Christ, or turn them to God. They may be Liars, Drunkards, Swearers,
Sabbath Breakers, or what they will; and whatever they be, they never hear a
word to bring them to repentance. They may live without prayer, reading, or so
much as thinking of God, or their everlasting state, and not a word spoken to
bring them to these necessary duties. And just thus sadly it fares, with people
that are under dumb consciences. They may do what they will, be as wicked as
they will, and conscience lets them alone. Sinner, do thou not find this to
be true, in thy case? Thou can go all thy days without serious prayer, no
prayer in secret, no prayer in the family, thou can live in this respect,
like a very heathen, and thou can lie, and swear, and drink, and scoff, and
be covetous, and what says conscience to all this? Not a word. Thy conscience
may say in its wickedness, as God said in his righteousness, These things thou
have done and I kept silence. Such men's consciences, it may be said of them as
concerning David toward his son Adonijah. 1. Kings. 1.6. His father had not
displeased him at any time, in saying why have thou done so. Men's consciences
will not displease them, will not displease their lusts, but will let them
alone, and say nothing to them, good nor bad. How often do thou hear of thy
conscience? When did it check thee, or reprove thee, or warn thee? When do
thou hear such a word within thee, How shall I do this wickedness and sin
against God? With what conscience can I be thus false or fraudulent, or
froward? With what conscience can I keep such vain or lewd company? With what
conscience can I live without prayer, or any thing of the worship of God in my
house? Is there any conscience in this lying, or promise-breaking, or deceitful
dealing? Is there any conscience in this idle careless life, to live thus in
the neglect of God and my soul? When do thou hear such a word within thee?
thou have a conscience such as it is, but it has lost its tongue, and will not
reprove thee, or warn thee, but let thee alone to follow thy lust and humor,
without control; and in what a woeful case art thou, that art under such a dumb
conscience? We read that Christ, in great wrath said to his Disciples,
concerning the Pharisees, Mat. 15.14. Let them alone, they be blind leaders of
the blind, let them alone, say nothing to them. Has Christ said thus to
conscience, concerning thee? Let him alone, say not a word to him, let him be
blind while he will, let him be hardened while he will, speak no more to him to
awaken him? Is not this a dreadful case?

O Friends, pray for a faithful conscience, that will not cease to warn you
from day to day. Do not muzzle the mouth of conscience, encourage your
consciences to speak to you, by giving them free leave to speak; yea, by asking
and enquiring of conscience, Conscience what say thou to this course I am
going on in? If I ask my will or my affections, or my lusts concerning these
vain ways, these all are pleased, and like it that I go on thus: But what
say thou, O my conscience? Is it good that I be a Worldling, or a
Sensualist, or a Liar, or unjust or unmerciful? Is this as God would have it?
Is this the life that God is well pleased with? Ask conscience such questions,
and put conscience to it, to give in its answer, and there is hope it will
speak: And then hear what conscience speaks. If conscience speak and speak, and
men will not hear, this is the next way to stop its mouth; a deaf ear will make
a dumb conscience. If conscience speaks and it cannot be heard, if the warnings
and items of conscience be born down by lust and appetite, this is the next way
to put conscience to silence, that it speaks no more.

Sinners, you have been hitherto consulting with flesh and blood, taking
counsel of sense and appetite, and carnal interest; and whilst conscience has
kept silence, you see in what away you have gone on. Would you have conscience
speak, or have it hold its peace? Will you henceforth enquire of conscience,
what it does in earnest judge of your present life? what it does judge best for
you from henceforth to do? Will you hear conscience when it speaks? Will you be
guided and governed by conscience? I will not henceforth please my self, but
will endeavor to please God and conscience, to live a conscientious life: that
is the best way to recover thy conscience, to recover its speech. Thy
conscience is ready to die, if it become speechless. When sick men are come to
be speechless, we count them dying. That conscience of thine that has so long
lien speechless, it will die if thou take not some sudden course to recover its
speech. O get you a stirring lively conscience that will not hold its peace.

4. A Scepter. Conscience is to be the Governor in the soul; God has said to
Conscience as he said to Christ, Psalm. 110.2. Be thou ruler in the midst of
thine enemies. Thou live in the midst of enemies; all within, the carnal
mind, the carnal will, the carnal affections, every lust of the heart, these
are all enemies to conscience; but yet God says to it, conscience be thou ruler
in the midst of thine enemies. Those that are under the government of God he
puts them all under the government of Conscience; as Isaac said to Esau, when
he came for a blessing after Jacob had been blessed before him, I have, says
he, made him thy Lord, and thou shall be his servant; though thou shall break
his yoke from off thy neck. So God says to the heart and all within it, I have
made conscience your Lord, you will break its yoke from off your necks, you
will all conspire to rebel and to resist conscience, to blind, and to muzzle,
and destroy conscience, [Lust is Consciences deadly enemy] but yet I have said
to conscience, be thou ruler in the midst of thi^e enemies.

All the World are governed by God or the Devil, and both these Governors have
their Viceroys; Conscience is the Viceroy of God, and Lust is the Viceroy of
the Devil. Now these two Viceroys contend who shall have the dominion, who
shall have the government in the soul. Lust cannot endure that Conscience
should bear any sway. Carnal earthly minded men will rather mock at conscience
than be governed by it. Lust will not endure that Conscience should bear the
sway, and Conscience can never be safe or successful in its government, till
lust be trodden under foot.

Whilst Conscience is kept as an underling, and is checked and controlled and
put to silence by Lust, so long it is in an evil case. Conscience is never
recovered, till it has recovered its authority and dominion.

God that has given the dominion to Conscience, and under Christ, laid the
government upon its shoulder, has also put a Scepter into its hand, to execute
its government withal; and has given to Conscience a twofold Scepter:

1. An Iron Scepter, and he has said to it concerning Sinners, obstinate
sinners, as he said concerning his enemies, Rev. 2.27. Thou shall rule them
with a rod of iron. This iron Scepter put into the hand of Conscience, has
teeth in it; hence do sinners, who will not hear the commands, sometimes feel
the bitings of Conscience, and the teeth of a provoked Conscience will bite
worse than the teeth of a Lion or a Bear. Thou that rebellest against
Conscience, that abusest and wrongest Conscience, take heed of the bitings of
Conscience; thy conscience is a Lion, and though now it be a sleeping Lion, and
thou dare play with it, or use it at thy pleasure, yet look to it, when this
sleeping conscience is awakened, then thou will feel the teeth of this Lion. As
it is said of Wine, Prove. 23.32. In the end it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. So it is true of every sin, every sin will bite: those
carnal pleasures, those worldly gains that look upon you with a pleasant
fawning face, all your sins and sinful pleasures will bite, bite like a
Serpent, with ^ poisonous deadly biting; sin will thus bite, and sin bites with
the teeth of Conscience. O the gripes that some sinners feel, the deadly
gripes, when they fall under the teeth or talons of a sin-provoked Conscience.
Sinners I warn you to take heed of ever slighting Conscience again. Come under
the dominion of Conscience, let Conscience govern thee, let Conscience rule
thee, or look for the Iron Scepter to fall upon thee, the teeth whereof will
bite thee as a Serpent and sting thee as an Adder.

2. A Golden Scepter. Conscience does not only enforce its authority, and our
submission to it, by the terrors of its iron Scepter, but encourages
submission, by the comfort of holding to us its Golden Scepter. King Ah^suerus
his holding out the golden Scepter to Esther, was in token of his favor and
her acceptance with the King, Esth. 5.2. She found favor in his sight, and the
King held out to her the golden Scepter. Those that find favor with Conscience
(as all those that observe, and obey, and live under the government of
Conscience do) those that find favor with Conscience, Conscience will hold out
the golden Scepter to them; will speak peace, will speak comfortably to them;
and to have Conscience speak peace (an upright Conscience) is the same as to
have God speak peace: to be able to stand comfortably before Conscience, is the
same, as to be able to stand with comfort and boldness before the face of God.
1 John 3.20, 21. If our hearts condemn us -- If our hearts, our consciences
condemn us for falsehood and unfaithfulness, God will condemn us; but if our
hearts condemn us not, if conscience acquit us, and say to us, well done good
and faithful servant, thou have been faithful; if our upright consciences
acquit us, then have we confidence and boldness before God. The comfort and the
rejoicing that flows into the heart from the testimony of a good conscience,
see in the 2 Cor. 1.12.

Friends, how would you have your Conscience to deal with you? Would you that
it hold out the golden Scepter? Would you that Conscience speak peace, that
Conscience should say, well done, thou have been faithful, would you have this
testimony from conscience, that you have had your conversation in simplicity
and godly sincerity? Is the peace of conscience, the joy of that peace, the
sweetness, and calmness, and serenity of heart, which is the fruits of
consciences speaking peace, Is this peace, is this rejoicing of any value with
you? Whilst others are under the checks and rebukes, under the terrors; and
the sting of an abused conscience, whilst conscience bites them and worries
them, with the teeth of its iron Scepter, whilst conscience affrights and
terrifies them, whilst conscience judges them, and condemns them for their
following their lusts; whilst it is so dreadful with men of an abused griping
conscience, if you would prize and desire, and rejoice in the peace and the
comforts of conscience, then hearken to conscience, and be governed by
conscience in all your ways. And if conscience may but govern you, it will
certainly comfort you.

Therefore, 3. Live under the government of conscience: that is, live a
conscientious life, make conscience of your duties, and perform them, make
conscience of sin, and avoid it. Approve your hearts to your consciences in all
things; be conscientious livers, and be universally conscientious. Be able to
say with the Apostle, Acts 23.1. I have lived in [all] good conscience: and as
Heb. 13.18. I have a good conscience willing in all things to live honestly. To
obey conscience in some things, and to rebel against it in other things, is not
to live a conscientious life; be universally conscientious of every duty, of
every sin.

O Friends, how many are there of us even among Professors, that do halt after
conscience, are very lame and deceitful in our ways; some things we do, and
other things we neglect; some sins we forbear, and other sins we venture upon.

You that are Professors, and seem in a fair way of recovery, consider how you
come off here, it may be, you are afraid of gross sins, you dare not be drunk,
or swear, and curse, and blaspheme, but are you afraid also of taking the name
of God in vain? Mingling O Lord, O God, O Christ, with your common and ordinary
discourses? It may be you are afraid to be found in an alehouse, companions and
partakers with the drunken, and the riotous but are you afraid to be found
unnecessarily among the vain ones, and to become vain with those that are vain?
It may be you are afraid to cousen and cheat, your consciences will not suffer
you to do that, but yet do you not covet, or be inordinatly eager and greedy
after the world? It may be you dare not work, or travel on the Lords day
(though some among us will venture to do that also, the conveniences for their
markets or their fairs, and the shortning their expenses, what ever conscience
says to the contrary, will put them upon this Sabbath profanation.) One word
by the way to such; I remember a story told me by a reverend man that a
professor of his flock, being about to travel upon the Lords day to a Fair that
was next day, being reproved of it by his minister, and asked if he thought it
not a sin, yes I do says he, but I have repented of it. His meaning was, he
meant to travel the next Lords day, but he had repented of it already.

It is a strange kind of repentance, for a man that is going to an alehouse or
to a whore, first to do something that he could call repenting and then to go
and commit the fact. You that are guilty (if there be any such among you) let
me ask you, have you repented of your former Sabbath profanations, or have you
not? If you have not repented, there is the guilt of all your former journies
of this kind still lying upon you, you are guilty to this day, guilt is never
taken away without repentance.

If you say you have repented of your former practice, then I hope you mean,
never while you live to be guilty again. You have not repented of any sin, till
you are resolved through the grace of God, to forsake it for ever. Remember
this unless you resolve to have done with all such journeyings hereafter, you
have not repented of what is past, and if you have not repented of what is
past, there is the guilt of all still lying upon you, and your souls liable to
answer for it before the Judgment of God.

But thou that allowest not thy self such a liberty of working, or journying
upon the Lords day, yet do thou make conscience of sleeping, or loitering, or
idling out a great part of the day? It may be thou will not be then found in
the fields, or at thy sports, for conscience sake, but may thou not be found
walking about the streets, or idly visiting, or vainly spending thy time with a
neighbor? Though thou will not be abroad when thou should be in the
Congregation, yet will thou not be out of doors when thou should be teaching,
or instructing, or praying with thy family? It has often troubled me to think
how little help some poor families have from their governors, even on the day
of the Lord.

It may be you will not be unjust or deceitful in your dealings, but are you
not unmerciful or uncharitable? It may be you bear no rooted malice or grudge
in your hearts, God forbid you should, that is for a Devil, rather than a
Christian, but suppose you do not, yet it may be you do; What ever you think
you may have routed malice from resting in your hearts; But if you do not, yet
you will be fretful and furious, and sour, and sullen, and can express it in
bitter looks, in strangeness and keeping your distance, in biting words, and
backbiting stories, and this conscience lets you alone in.

It may be you are not of a vicious conversation, but are you of a gracious
conversation? It may be there may be no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouths, your breath does not stink of ribaldry, and obscene discourses,
but yet are you not frothy and unsavory in your communication If your speech be
not rotten and corrupt, yet is it seasoned with salt, that it may administer
grace to the hearers?

It may be you dare not neglect praying, but yet will not your consciences
suffer you to trifle and shuffle in prayer? It may be you pray and are serious
in prayer, and feel some workings of conscience, and meltings of heart, and
enlargement of affection, and some sense of God and religion, whilst you are
upon your knees but when you have done, and go out of your closet, do you not
then leave your consciences behind you, your religion behind you? Do you carry
conscience into your shops, and into your fields, and unto the markets? You
pray as a man of conscience, and hear as a man of conscience, but do you buy
and sell, eat and drink, and converse in the world as a man of conscience. Take
you out of duties, and may we not take you out of your religion? What are you
at other times, but even as other men? Is this to be universally conscientious?
Can you be sincerely conscientious, if you be not universally so? He that is
not conscientious in every thing, is truly conscientious in nothing. Brethren
take heed you do not give conscience a kiss and a kick. Kiss it, and comply
with it, in the things you like, and kick at conscience when it presses too
hard upon you in the things you like not. If in any thing you give conscience a
kick, conscience may remember you and give you a gripe for it another day.

O if you would recover the authority of conscience, if you would have
conscience hold out the golden Scepter to you, if you would have conscience
smile upon you, if you would have true peace of conscience, and live indeed
under the power of conscience, be universally conscientious; exercise your
selves to it, to live holily in all things, honestly in all things, and at all
times. This exercise of keeping to conscience is a painful exercise, you can
never live a conscientious life, unless you will be content to live a painful
life, to take pains with your hearts, to take pains with your thoughts and
affections, to take pains with your tongues and all your members, to hold them
close to the rule of conscience: this painful exercise will get you an heat,
will beget warmth in those cold and careless hearts. The most conscientious
Christians are the most warm and lively Christians, and according as you get
and keep your hearts warm, so will your diseases waste, and the health of your
souls return into you. Remember what I have said, if ever you would recover
your lost souls, recover conscience; if ever you would recover conscience, get
the guilt and the guile of conscience purged away by the blood of Christ, and
water of repentance; keep the eye of conscience open, let conscience be the
Supervisor of all your ways; let the book of conscience be kept clear from
blots and blurs, and let there be a faithful record kept there, of all your
ways; let the tongue of Conscience have leave to speak and warn you from day to
day, and submit to its Scepter and government; be no longer governed by Will or
by appetite, or by lust, or by the fashions and customs or examples of men, but
be governed by Conscience. Do not give Conscience a Kiss and a Stab, hearken to
it in some things and wound it in other things, but study to live in (all) good
Conscience; on your Sabbath-dayes, on your working-dayes, in the House of the
Lord, in your own houses, in the houses of your Friends, in the Field, in the
Market, in the matters of God, in the matters of the World, when you are alone,
when in company, when you are in good company, when you are fallen into evil
company, wherever you are, whatever you are a doing, still have an eye upon
Conscience, an ear open to Conscience, and let Conscience prescribe to you,
what you should do, and how you should carry it in every affair.

3. Beware of taking cold. That Is a special rule Physicians use to give to the
recovering Patient; when Persons are upon recovery of their bodily diseases,
how ordinary is it, that upon a little cold, they relapse, and sometimes die of
their disease. Is thy Soul upon recovery? take heed of Colds. Soul, such there
are, who when they begin to be wrought upon, and brought to any sense of
Religion, there appears a great heat and fervor of spirit upon them; it is with
them as with the Prophet, Jer. 20.9. Thy Word was in me like fire; their love
and desire, and zeal for God seem all in a flame: O what warm affections have
they! how warm in their Duties! how warm in their converses! they seem to be
all Life and Soul; and then after a time they grow stark cold, and little life
is left in them, and some of them never recover again while they live. Has thy
Spirit gotten an heat? has the Word heated thee, and those Exercises of
Prayer, Repentance and keeping Conscience, gotten thee into an heat? then take
heed of growing cold; keep you constant to those Exercises that have begotten
an heat in you. Keep you in the Sunshine, all your heart-warmth is begotten,
and must be maintained from above; live in the beholding the face of God, live
under the Sunbeams of the Sun of righteousness; keep you close to God, keep
you near to Christ, live in intimate communion with God. Take heed of those
clouds, your sins, that will obscure the Sun. Isa. 59.1. Take heed of an
Eclipse, see that this Earth do not interpose betwixt your Souls and Heaven;
take heed of the damp Influences of the dead that you live amongst. We live in
a cold World, a cold Age: that Age has overtaken us, which Christ Prophesied
of, Mat. 24.20. Wherein the love many of should wax cold. Those that are grown
cold themselves, will serve for nothing, but to chill, and damp the Spirits of
others. Be not unnecessarily conversant with this cold World, trust not your
selves in their Company; have you never found, how much your Souls have lost by
carnal Correspondencies? Professors, how is it with you? Do you still retain
your first, vigor, as when you began to be recovered? May not the Lord
complain over some of us, as of Israel, Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of
thy Youth, and the love of thine Espousals; I remember it as a thing that is
past, that now is not, or as Ephesus, Rev. 2.4. Thou have lost thy first Love;
and what follows from this decay? Hence is it that we are become a Company of
sickly Professors, of Carnal Professors, of Earthly Professors; the World has
returned upon us, the Flesh has gotten head again in us; the things that are
Eternal, and the influences of them upon us, are even lost and swallowed up of
things Temporal; our Stocks, and our Businesses, and our Trades, how have they
even choked up our Religion?

Friends, it is matter of astonishment to consider, how very few lively
Christians there are to be found amongst us. Thus we every one talk, what a
General decay of Religion there is among us; has not thine own Mouth complained
of the coldness of this Age? But whilst thou complainest of the Age, how is it
with thee? Art not thou sick of the same Disease? Look homeward, look inward
into thine own House, into thine own Heart, what Spirit of Religion is there
going in thine own Family? Have thou not by thy negligence, let all run to
decay there? What Life of Religion is there maintained in thine own Heart?
Friends, feel you every man his own Pulse, lay your hand every Man upon his own
Heart, and feel how faintly it beats Heaven-wards. Sure Friends, if we should
examine our own Cases, we should find enough to set us all a Weeping over our
own decays, and she should hear that voice within us, Weep not for others, but
weep for thy self and thine own Children. O take heed, lest such of you as are
fallen back among the Sick, do not also return among the Dead, and make your
recovery again more hopeless at last than 'twas at first. You that stand, be
warned by those that are fallen; stand with your Loins girded, and your Lights
burning; and you that are fallen, fallen to decay, fallen to a dead and flat
and lifeless State, you that are fallen, remember whence you are fallen;
remember and repent, remember and recover, strengthen the things that remain;
if there be any sparks left, blow off your Ashes, blow up the Coals. Let the
Life of God, and the love of Christ, and a Zeal for Holiness, be again kindled
in you; and if ever the Lord should recover you again, (there is great hazard
whether he may, thou may die of the Cold thou have taken, the Consumption
that has Eaten up so much of thy Vitals, may be unto Death, Eternal Death) but
if ever God should recover thee again, and revive his work, and enliven that
almost Dead Carcass; then at last learn from thine own miserable experience, to
take heed of taking Cold again, as long as thou live.

Thus much for the recovering the Heart, which is pre-supposed to the keeping
of the Heart.

The Heart thus recovered out of its lost State, must be kept and well looked
to, that it fall not back again; and here,

2. Now I shall show you, what it is to keep the heart, or how it must be kept;
and so, 1. It must be kept under Government. 2. It must be kept under Guard.


1. It must be kept under Government; here I shall show, 1. The necessity of
keeping the Heart under Government. 2. How the Heart must be Governed.


1. The necessity of keeping the Heart under Government; that will appear by
considering what an Heart it is; and because the Heart is recovered in part,
and there is much of its Old and Original pravity remaining in it, which will
be apt to boil up, and break forth again, I shall a little open the wretched
temper and disposition of it, which will evidence how great a necessity there
is to keep it under Government.

1. It is a wicked mischievous heart, Jer. 17.9. Desperately wicked, Psalm 5.9.
Very wickedness, Romans 8.7. Enmity against God. It is the Fountain, whence all
the filthy streams, that pollute and defile our lives, do flow and are cast
forth. It is the Furnace, whence all the stinking fumes and smoaks, that annoy
the World, are sent forth. It is the Nest, where all the Cockatrices Eggs are
Hatched. It is the Sink that gathers in all manner of filth into it, and then
sends it abroad, to do mischief, Psalm. 41.6. His Heart gathers iniquity to
it self, as the Sinks gather in all the filth of the Town, and when he goes
abroad he tells it; only there is this difference between this and other
Sinks; other Sinks gather in the filth, but it is in order to the conveying it
and carrying it away: Into this evil evil Sink of the Heart, all the filth is
gathered, and there it stops, and stinks, and casts it self back in its
annoying streams; Out of the Heart comes evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries,
etc. Mat. 15.19. All this Filth and Mudd, all this Wickedness and Malignity, as
it Naturally dwells in every Heart, so there is much of it remaining even in
renewed Hearts, and will, if there be not constant care to keep down, and by
degrees to cast it out, will rise and swell and work up again in them.
Christians, you may thank God, that there is Salt cast into these filthy
Fountains, for the healing these muddy waters; that there is a Spring of Living
Waters broken in your Hearts, by degrees to drain out your Dirt, that there is
Grace begotten in you, to resist and repel the contagion of Lust; but this
little Grace will be choked up again, if Lust be not kept under.

And as it is a Wicked, so it is a Mischievous Heart, it is set upon mischief;
Wickedness will be doing wickedly; as it is said of the Workers of Iniquity, so
it is true of all as far forth as they are unrenewed; Mischief is in their
Hearts, Psalm. 28.3. There Is the same Reason of keeping our Hearts under
restraint, as of keeping Madmen in; they will be doing mischief if they have
their liberty. Besides the mischief that our evil Hearts will be doing to
others, they will be mischiefing themselves; Mad Men will tear their own Flesh,
will cut and wound themselves, if they be let alone; and there is no such
danger of evil Hearts, as in regard of that mischief they do themselves.

1. Our evil Hearts will hinder us from doing good to our Selves, or of
receiving or laying up good for our Selves, Romans 7.19. The good that I would, I
do not; why what hinders? See Verse. 21. I find a Law, the Law of Sin in the
Heart, When I would do good, evil is present with me, Gal. 5.17. The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit -- so that we cannot do the things that we would.
Sometimes good Counsel is given us from the Lord, but we do not take it. How
many good Counsels have you heard from the Ministry of the Word, that are lost
and forgotten and come to nothing. Sometimes a good motion comes into the
Heart, to repent and amend our ways; to pray or to Meditate, or to search out
Hearts; to cease from this Earth and Flesh, from serving our Sense, and minding
only the present, and to lay up Treasure in Heaven, and provide for the time to
come; have you never such motions? Do you never hear such a voice within you,
Get you Baggs that wax not Old, a Treasure in Heaven that fails not? Choose
the good part, lay hold on Eternal Life, give your self to Praying, keep a good
Conscience, take heed and beware of Covetousness, use more diligence, live with
more heedfulness, have your Conversation in Heaven, and keep your self
unspotted of the World, keep your self in the love of God, set the Lord always
before your Eyes, behold his Face in Righteousness, study to show thy self
approved of God, and to walk so in all things, that thou may be accepted of
God; are there not such motions as these, come into your hearts? You that are
Christians, sure you have many such good motions; But how do they take? What do
they bring forth? If you had obeyed all the good motions that you have
sometimes felt within you, O what manner of Christians would you have been!
What mortified, what circumspect, what raised and Heavenly minded Christians
had you been? But how do your good motions take; What success are they attended
with? Do not you see, that they are often strangled in the Birth, and die away
and come to just nothing? Or at least do you not merely halt and trifle in the
pursuace of them? If you Pray, or hear, or set your Hearts to humble your
selves before the Lord; how are you Distracted, and Diverted, and Deadned and
all your duties spoiled in the doing; so that you can have little comfort, or
real advantage by what yo do. Do you not often mourn over your Prayers, and
Sermons, and Sabbaths, as merely lost to you? When you would work up your
Hearts Heaven ward, and fix above, when you would love and del ght your selves
in the Lord, and Solace your selves in the contemplation of the Divine Love and
Goodness, when you would fain set your Hearts to live such a Godly,
Conscientious, Circumspect, Self-denying Life, and comfort your selves with
such thoughts; I hope I shall never live such a Careless, Carnal, Useless,
Unsavory, Earthly Life again; I hope you have many such Thoughts, Desires,
Hopes, and Aims, you are lamentable Christians if you have not, but how do they
succed? What do they bring forth? Do they not often prove Abortive and bring
forth nothing? May it not be said of you as of those, Job 15.35. They conceive
mischief, and bring forth vanity, or a lie. May it not be said of you, I have
conceived Truth, conceived good, I have had many hopeful conceptions, and yet
at last I bring forth a lie, I am utterly frustrated and d^sappointed of all my
good Hopes, Desires, and Aims? But how comes this to pass, that you are thus
disappointed, that your desires succeed not, that your labors prosper not,
that you are brought to no better a pass? O this is your evil hearts that
hinder you; when you would do good, evil is present with you, so that you
cannot do the good that you would; it is that evil Law in your Membets, that
evil heart that does you all this mischief, that spoils all your Prayers, that
distracts all your holy Meditations, that breaks all your holy Purposes, that
defeats and frustrates all your good designs for a more holy and fru^tful life;
this heart is that which hinders you, that you cannot do as you would, you
cannot pray as you would, nor hear as you would, nor live as you would; and
thus it will serve you as long as you live, if you do not get those evil hearts
into, and keep them in better order.

2. It tempts and turns us aside after that which is Evil. As our hearts hinder
us in that which is good, so they betray us, and entice and tempt us to that
which is naught. Jam. 1.14. Every man when he is tempted, is drawn aside by his
own lust, (his hearts lust) and enticed. You that have given up your Names to
Christ, and count your selves the People of God, sometimes turn aside after the
Lusts and ways of the World; and instead of having your Conversation in Heaven,
live as men that are written in the Earth, mind earthly things, live a worldly
greedy life, and like those 2 Pet. 2.20. who after they seem to have escaped
the pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, are again entangled therein and overcome. Are there none of you
Professors, with whom it is thus? has not the world returned upon you? the love
of the World, and the cares of the World, and the inordinate minding and
following of the World? are you none of you again entangled by the World,
encumbred by the world, and even overcome of those encumbrances? 'Twould make a
tender heart to shake and bleed, to consider how sadly this worldly mind and
Life has grown upon Professors, and has eaten out the very heart and life of
their Religion. O how many Demas's are there amongst the followers of Christ,
that have forsaken him, and embraced this present World! Christians, in the
name of the Lord I warn you, I charge you before God, and his holy Angels, to
consider if it be thus with none of you. Is it thus with thee? How comes this
to pass? this is a mischief that thine own heart has done thee, Ezekiel. 33.31,
32. Their hearts go after their Covetousness. They hear the Word, thou art to
them as a lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant voice; they will hear a good
Minister, they seem to love a good Sermon, the Doctrines of God, and his
Gospel, the Doctrines of Christ, and his Redemption, and the most enlivening
and affectionate discourses of the Righteousness, Holiness, Kindness,
Compassion of God in Christ, and of the hopes and joys of his Saints, these
have a pleasant sound to them, they are taken and pleased at the hearing of
them; but for all this, they are gone; they have embraced this present World;
their hearts are gone after their Covetousness. And as some men's hearts carry
them after their Covetousness, so others hearts carry them after their vain
company, others after their slothfulness, others after their carnal Pleasures;
their hearts have tempted them, and by their hearts lusts they are thus drawn
aside, and enticed. Consider these two sorts of mischiefs men's hearts do them,
their heart hinders them from what is good, and tempts and carries them away
after that which is evil, and then you will understand what a necessity there
is, that such mischievous hearts should be carefully kept under government.

2. It is an unruly heart. It Is said concerning the Tongue, Jam. 3.8. It is an
unruly evil; but whence is the unruliness of the Tongue, but from the
unruliness of the heart? It Is the heart that is the Lord of misrule, Prove.
16.32. He that rules his own Spirit is better than he that takes a City.
There Is need of more Wisdom, of more Watchfulness, of more care and skill, to
rule the heart, than to rule a whole City or Country. Governors of Kingdoms
do not find it so hard to rule their numerous People, as to govern their own
hearts. To show the unruliness of the heart, I shall instance,

1. In the Thoughts of the heart. Who can rule his own Thoughts? Who is there
that has such command of his Thoughts, that can think of nothing but what he
should think of? What rovings, and stragglings, and wanderings are there of the
Thoughts? Prove. 17.24. The eyes of fools, or his Thoughts, are in the ends of
the Earth; running about every where, to sin, to vanity, to impertinencies.
Consider your selves in your praying, or hearing, or any of the most serious
and important Exercises of Religion; your thoughts then, most especially should
be composed and fixed; should be fixed upon God, should be all giving their
attendance upon the work of God. Those most weighty things, the eternal things
that you are dealing about, should take up all your thoughts. But how do we
find it at such times? what distractions, and wanderings, and runnings off of
our thoughts do we then find? We cannot hold our selves in, to think what we
pray for, to attend on what we hear; and this is the great reason of the
deadness of heart in Prayer, of the inefficacy and unfruitfulness of our
hearing; we that preach to you, should have more hope of Success upon you, if
we could but fix your hearts, and get you to think more intently on what we
speak, but when the thoughts are gadding, we may to as good purpose speak to
Stones, as to Souls.

How is it with you now? and how does it use to be with you, when you come to
the Worship of God? where have your thoughts been, since you came here? how
many things have you been thinking of, that you should not? It may be thy
thoughts have been at home all this while, or abroad in the Fields, upon thy
Business, or upon thy Pleasures, or thou know not where. Who are there of us
that do use to gird up the loins of our minds, and to keep them close to the
work we are upon? and whether do your thoughts run at other times? how little
room is there left for the thoughts of God, or of our Souls, or of the things
Eternal, amongst those crowds and swarms of worldly thoughts, of wicked and
vile thoughts, of vain and impertinent thoughts, which are still thronging in
upon us? These evil thoughts are not only from the suggestion of the Devil, or
from that variety of Objects that we have before us, from what we see, or hear,
but are also the streamings up of a corrupt heart; as out of a boiling Pot of
filthy Liquor, or out of a reeking Dunghill, there arise stinking and noysom
steams, and smells, so naturally does a corrupt heart steam up into the head,
and fill it with vile thoughts and imaginations; and therefore the cure that is
prescribed for these evil thoughts is, the cleansing of the heart from
wickedness. Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, how long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Get thine heart washed from its
wickedness, and that is the best way to free thy self of wicked thoughts. We
have many complaints of vain thoughts, of disturbing and distracting
Imaginations, and we hear People asking often, How shall I be rid of these evil
thoughts? Woe is me, what wandering, roving, distracted Thoughts have I, so that
I can never have comfort in any thing I do! but man, consider thou art under a
worse Disease, the unmortified Lusts of thine Heart, from whence these Thoughts
arise.

Can thou bear the Lusts of thine Heart? the Pride and frowardness and
worldliness of thy Heart? can thou complain of thy Thoughts, and not complain
of thy Lusts? One unmortified Lust has more mischief in it than an hundred
evil Thoughts. Thy Duty is to complain more of thy naughty Heart, thy naughty
disposition and inclination, and to get these to be changed, and that is the
best way to cure thee of evil Thoughts. I say, this is the best cure, get you
better Hearts, wash your Hearts from those evil Lusts that dwell in them; If
you would get rid of worldly Thoughts, purge out worldly Lusts; if you would be
rid of Proud Thoughts, get the Pride of your Hearts slain, get you an humble
Heart, and that is the best cure of proud imaginations; if you would be free
from vain Thoughts, light and impertinent and useless Thoughts, get you cured
of the Vanity of your Spirits, get you to be serious, get an Heart more intent
upon serious things, and that will discharge you of such runagate and vagabond
Thoughts. It is seldom that People complain of distracting or vain Thoughts,
but there is a worse Disease whence they arise, that they take no notice of:
Thou have a vain trifling Heart, thou art not in good earnest in thy Religion,
thou art not sensible of the weight and importance of thine everlasting
concerns; thou have an unmortified Heart, unmortified Lusts in thine Heart,
thou love the World, and love thy pleasures, and lustest after thine ease
or thy carnal delights, thine Heart sits too loose from God and the things of
God; thou art not powerfully and resolvedly bent for the Blessedness to come;
thine Heart is not yet fixed upon Christ and Christianity; this is a worse
Disease than evil Thoughts, though that be bad enough and the very root from
whence they arise. Do not therefore enquire barely, how shall I be freed from
evil Thoughts? but chiefly, how may I get my Lusts subdued? how may I purge out
those evil Dispositions and Desires, how may I get my Heart more intently fixed
on God, and things above? Get that done once, and thy evil Thoughts will
quickly fall.

2. In the Passions of our Hearts; we have unruly Thoughts and unruly passions;
there is an unruliness in all our Affections; who can love, and fear, and
desire, and grieve for nothing but what he should, what he should fear and
desire. What we should not fear, we fear, and what we should fear, we cannot:
What we should love, we cannot, and what we should not love we set our Hearts
upon. We cannot raise up good desires in our Hearts, nor keep down evil; there
is an unruliness in all our affections, but especially the passion of Anger and
Wrath, when this breaks forth, what Rude and brutish and wild Creatures do men
become? like a roaring Lion, or a ranging Bear, like a Bear robbed of her
Whelps, such is a man in his rage to those that stand in his way: The breaking
forth of rage, is as the breaking forth of fire in an House, how much water
must there be to quench it? this unruliness of Spirit the whole World abounds
with proofs of; every Country, every City, nay, but few Families are there,
whom their experiences do not teach them, what an unruly thing the rage of the
Heart of man is.

And is there not a necessity of keeping such an Heart under Government? of
governing the Thoughts, and governing the Passions and unruly Affections? the
necessity of Government upon the account of the unruliness of our Thoughts and
Passions, will appear if we consider; that our Eternal State is highly
concerned in our Thoughts and Passions. For, 1. These are the Instruments, by
which men work out their own Salvation or Damnation. 2. These are Evidences of
what we are in respect of our Eternal State.


1. These are instruments by which men work out their own Salvation or
Damnation. Holy Thoughts, holy Affections, set us a working out our Salvation;
the exercising of our Thoughts upon God, upon Eternity, upon the Blessedness to
come, and upon the Wrath to come; the exercising of our Affections, the keeping
our Selves in hope of the Salvation of God, the keeping our selves in fear of
the Reprobation of God, the maintaining desires after God and his Salvation,
these all, will be as so many Cords to hold us in, as so many Springs to put us
on in the way of Salvation: Thinking Christians, and Hoping Christians, and
Fearing Christians, and Desiring Christians, will be Working Christians. I
thought on my ways, and turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. He
that has this Hope, purifieth himself, as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. Work out
your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Fear a Miscarriage, fear falling short,
fear to be Damned, and this will set you a working out your Salvation. Men will
not work because they do not desire, because they do not Fear; men do not
desire or fear, because they will not think; think more of God, think oftener,
what it is to be Saved, what it is to be Damned, think much thus, and this will
stir up your desires and fears; desire more the Salvation of God, fear more his
indignation and Wrath, and this will set you to work out your Salvation, and to
secure your selves from falling into Condemnation.

And as good Thoughts and well ordered Affections, will set us a working out
our Salvation, so by evil Thoughts, and unruly Affections men work out their
Damnation. Unruly Thoughts, disorderly affections in the Soul, are as cross
Winds, or as Storms or Tempests upon the Sea. How can the Mariner ever get to
the Haven, when the wind is contrary? and what kindness do Tempests do him, but
to dash him against the Rocks, and drown him in the Deep? ungoverned Thoughts
and Passions in the Heart are like Mutineers in an Army; what would an Enemy
desire more than to have the Army he was to fight against, to be in a Mutiny
amongst themselves? the Devil will not doubt his Conquest, whilst he can but
keep all within you in disorder. Men's Damnation does frequently begin in
Thoughts; evil Thoughts corrupt the Affections, evil Affections corrupt the
Manners and practice, and evil works have their end in Destruction. Never again
make a light thing of Thoughts; how many men are there, who by giving
themselves leave to be thinking of their Pleasures, and thinking of their
Gains, and thinking of their Lascivious, lustful Objects, do think themselves
into very Beasts first, and then into Devils? Job 31.1. I made a Covenant with
mine eyes, why then should I think upon a Maid? The next to looking is
thinking, the eyes let in Fuel for the Thoughts; the next to thinking is
lusting, the Thoughts provide Fuel for Lust; the next to Lusting is Whoring,
and the next to Whoring is Death; and the like in other Cases: For the World,
the next to thinking is loving, the next to loving is lusting, and inordinate
desiring; the next to lusting is seeking and progging; the next to seeking is
getting and heaping up, and loading our selves with thick Clay; and the next to
this is sinking and drowning our selves in Perdition and Destruction.

2. These are the Evidences of what we are, in respect to our Eternal State.
Men may judge themselves, and come to know themselves, by the Thoughts and
Affections, Romans 8.7. To be carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually
minded is Life and Peace. Those that are after the Flesh do mind the things of
the Flesh, and those that are after the Spirit do mind the things of the
Spirit. Where art thou Friend? art thou in the way of Life, or the way of
Death? why how may I tell that? why where are your minds? what are they running
upon? where are your Thoughts, your most serious and delightful Thoughts? are
they in Heaven or on Earth, on things Spiritual or on things Carnal? where are
your Affections? working upwards or downwards? Such as thy Thoughts and
Affections are, such is the State of thy Soul: To be Carnally minded is Death,
but to be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace. It Is true, many serious
Christians have too many Carnal Thoughts; Vain and Wandering Thoughts, but it is
their Affliction, and it is their care and endeavor to give check to such
Thoughts; but when the allowed Stream runs toward Earth and sin, it is a sign
thou art an Earthly Fleshly Man, and in the State of the Dead.

3. There are Idols set up in the Heart, after which, if it be not well looked
to, it is apt to go a Whoring. It is true, more or less of all men, what is said
of the Elders of Israel, Ezekiel. 14.3. These men have set up their Idols in their
Heart. Whatsoever the Heart loves more than God, whatever the Heart serves or
seeks more than God, yea, whatever the Heart loves or serves or seeks
ultimately for it self, without respect to any higher end, this is an Idol set
up in the Heart; those very men that abhor those Idols that are set up in the
House or the Church, that detest Saint-Worship or Image Worship, the
Worshipping of Stocks, or Stones, or Pictures, the work of men's hands, yea that
call that an Idol or Idolatry, which God never called so, that cry out
Idolatry, Idolatry, against every thing that is not according to their own
Minds, even these very men, may have set up their Idols in their Hearts. The
Heart has multitudes of Idols set up in it; there are in the Heart as the
Apostle said, 1 Cor. 5.8. there are in the world, Gods many, and Lords many.
The World is an Idol; some men make their Lands and their Money their Gods;
though Job would not, chap. 31.24. yet some men's Hearts will say to their Gold,
Thou art my God. Others there are who make their Belly their God, Whose God is
their Belly, Phil. 3.19. Others make their Honors and their Pleasures their
God, and these may be said to be as those, 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of Pleasures more
than Lovers of God. The Heart has many Idols set up in it, but the great
Heart-Idol to which all the rest must stoop and serve is Self; the World is
served, Honors are sought, Pleasures are loved, but all for the sake of Self:
Whatever Idol there be, the great Idol is Self, which is set up in the room of
God.

Man's original Apostasy was his falling from God to Self; and man's recovery to
Christ, is his bringing back from Self to God. Therefore he tells the World,
that whosoever will come along with him, and be his disciple, must deny himself,
Mat. 16.24. If any man -- Christ suffered that he might bring us to God, 1 Pet.
3.18. And that he cannot do unless he come back from Self; he departed from God
when he declined to himself, and he must deny himself, that will return to the
Lord. God and Self divide the whole world: The most are for Self, and there is
not a man of all these for God; some few are for God, and every one of these
have denied and departed from Self.

Men's recovery by Christ, is their returning from Self unto God; but this
Recovery is but imperfect, this Self, (carnal Self I mean) has a Seat, higher
or lower in the best hearts. There is a sinful Selfishness, wherewith we still
remain infected, and there is still a danger, even after our recovery, of
Apostasy to this Self again. The great Idol set up in the heart is self, and
the great Idolatry or going a whoring after this Idol, the great heart Idolatry
stands in these three things.

1. Self-conceit, 2. Self-will, 3. Self-love.
1. Self-conceit. The magnifying our own Opinions, the Idolizing our own
apprehensions, the growing wise in our own eyes, and the resigning up our
selves to the conduct and government of our own carnal Reasons or
Understandings. This Solomon intimates, is an encroaching upon God, yea denying
of God; he sets these two as Opposites one to another; the acknowledging of
God, and the leaning to our own understandings, Prove. 3.5, 6. Lean not to thine
own understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge him. Intimating, that whilst
we lean to our own understandings, we deny and do not acknowledge God.

It belongs to God as God, to be the Supreme Guide and Dictator to us; but when
men take upon them to be so wise, as that their own Opinions and Conceits must
be their Guide, they therein deny the God that is above.

Take heed of being self-conceited. The worst of Sinners, as blind as they are,
yet they are wise in their own eyes; they think their Way is good, and their
State is good; they have a conceit that their own way is best; they have taken
up conceits against the ways of God; this strictness of Religion, this
Preciseness of Holiness, they have a conceit it is all but Nicety, and
Hypocrisy, and that they are the wisest men who meddle least with it; at
least, they have a strong conceit they shall to Heaven without so much
troubling themselves about it. Let the Lord God speak never so clearly, and
never so closely, of the danger of the way they are in, of the damnableness of
their state, of the necessity of a Change of their State and Life, of their
becoming new men, and giving themselves to a new Life; yet their self-conceit
carries it against all the Convictions and Demonstrations of the Lord; They
will not be beaten out of their own Conceits; they will believe their own blind
and sottish mind, before they will believe God. Sinners, is not this true? how
many times has the Lord God preached to you, of the necessity of Regeneration,
and your being born again, of the necessity of Sanctification, your being made
his holy ones, pure and undefiled ones? How much has he spoken, to convince
you, that you are the Sons of death, and that your ways are the ways of death;
that you can never see the Kingdom of God, but must undoubtedly perish, and be
destroyed for ever, without such a great and effectual change as may bring you
in amongst his holy ones? How often has this been preached? how plainly has
this been proved? and yet after all, how is it with you? why behold you have a
conceit you shall do well enough, and get to Heaven at last; and upon this
conceit you will adventure your Souls: What do you herein but Idolize your own
Understandings, and deny the God that is above? Thus says the Lord, is nothing
with you, nor will persuade you to any thing, if your own hearts do but tell
you, it is well enough already.

Sinners, if you will not be beaten out of this conceit, if we cannot break
down your carnal Confidence, if we cannot deliver your Souls out of the hands
of these Lies and Delusions; if you will not be brought to see, that these your
self-conceits are your self-deceivings, (I have thought foolishly, I have
thought falsely, in thinking well of my case) if we cannot save you from your
vain Conceits and Confidence, we shall never set up the Authority of God in
you, nor ever bring you to God or to Heaven.

O to hear such words as these from you, I have been deceived, mine Heart has
deceived me, the Devil has deceived me, I could never have had a good Thought
of my ^sent state, I could never have good hope of my future state, if I had
not been deceived into it; I have been merely gulled and cheated into this good
Opinion; I am lost, I perish, I die for ever, if I escape not suddenly out of
this case; I can be confident no more, I can have a good conceit of my self no
longer, I am an undone Wretch; God tells me so, the Word tells me so, and if
ever mine Heart tell me yet again, It Is well enough, I Will never believe it
again: might we see such a sense upon you, might we hear such words from you,
then there were hope that you were coming back from Self to God.

For you that are Professors, have not you also something of this
self-conceitedness upon you? some are conceited of their own Opinions; whatever
Opinion they take up in the matters of God, it must be right, because it is
right in their own eyes; and many of their Brethren that are contrary minded,
they are in the wrong and in the dark, and so become the objects of their
censure and reproach. Lean not to your own understandings; be so humble, and so
modest, as to think that others may see more than you see; suspect your selves
when you differ from other Christians, that you may be in the mistake. Others
are conceited of their Gifts and Seize, though they yet be but among the
young ones, and the weak ones of the Flock, yet through that pernicious Pride
of their Hearts, they are apt to be puffed up with high Conceits of any little
that they have. Christians must be lowly like their Master, Learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in Heart; They must think soberly of themselves. Others are
Conceited of their Conditions, and the State of their Souls, who though they
have little acquaintance with their own Hearts, little understanding and
experience of Religion, and have spent as little time in the examining their
States, yet are grown to a confidence, that their Hearts are right in the sight
of God; when this Confidence may be nothing else but Conceit; they do but
conceit themselves to be Converts, conceit themselves to be Believers, and and
this conceit must carry it against all Convictions to the contrary. Examine the
grounds upon which your good Opinion of your self is built; Search the
Scriptures, where are certain Evidences of Conversion; search your Hearts,
whether the marks of real Believers be found in you; suspect your selves,
whether you be not in a mistake; a mistake here, to have a strong conceit that
you are Believers, when you are but Hypocrites, that you are come to Christ,
when it may be, not come half way, such mistakes may be your damnation, your
Everlasting loss and undoing. Let the fear of Self-deceiving, be the cure of
Self-conceitedness.

2. Self-will. That Brand which is put upon false Teachers and their followers,
2 Pet. 2.10. is upon the Heart of every Sinner, they are Self-willed; and this
brand is more or less remaining upon the Heart of every Saint: There Is too much
of Self-willedness in the best Hearts. Here I shall show you, 1. That the great
Controversy betwixt God and Self is, whose Will shall stand. 2. That in the
Conversion of a Sinner, the Power of Self-will is broken. 3. But yet the Will
is not so broken, but Self has still a root remaining, which will be putting
forth again. 4. That therefore there is a necessity of keeping the Heart under
constant Government.


1. The great controversy betwixt God and Self is, whose Will shall stand: God
will have his Will, Isa. 45.23. I have Sworn by my Self, the Word is gone forth
of my Mouth, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow; In one
way or other, first or last, I Will make them all to stoop. God will have his
Will, but Self also will have its Will; what is said concerning the Wisdom of
the Flesh, Romans 8.7. is true of the Will of the Flesh; The Wisdom of the Flesh
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; the Will of the Flesh
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed will be. What is the Will of
God? This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. He has
said, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. This is the
Will of God to sinners, their Salvation. 1 Timothy 2.4. He will have all men to be
saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth. The reason why so many are
damned, is not because God will have them damned, but because they will not be
saved. Though they will the end, their Salvation, yet they will not the means,
their Sanctification. This is the Will of God, in order to the Salvation of
Sinners, their Humiliation, their Repentance, their Obedience to the Gospel;
but these Self-willed Sinners will not be humbled, will not repent, though
their lives lie upon it, they will not; though their Salvation lies upon their
Humiliation and Repentance, yet they will not be humbled, they will not repent.
The Will of God is, that men set their affections on things above, not on
Earth, Col. 3.2. The will of Sinners is, to set their affections on the earth,
and not on things above. The Will of God to Sinners is, their submission to his
Government, to his disposal; but the Will of the Flesh is, to be their own
Lords, to be at their own disposal. Sinners are for living as they will, for
having what they will; they would be let alone to take their own course, to
walk in the way of their own Hearts, and the sight of their own eyes. Now this
is the great controversy between God and sinners, whose Will shall carry it.
But you will say, How can man have a controversy with God? how can the Will of
man stand it out against the Will of God? So the Apostle, Romans 9.19. Who has
resisted his Will? Answ. There is the Will of God concerning events or matters
of Fact, and there is the Will of God concerning matters of Duty. As to the
Will of God concerning Events, what God has Decreed and determined to be done,
shall be done, thus there is no resisting his Will: But then there is the Will
of God concerning matters of Duty; God wills that it shall be every man's Duty
to Repent and be Sanctified, and be obedient to the Gospel, and accordingly
commands them. And though there can be no such resistance here, but what God
Wills to be men's Duty, shall be their Duty, yet such resistance there is, that
what God Wills to be men's Duty to do, they will not do.

God governs the world, and orders every thing to come to pass in the World,
according to his Will; but then there is his natural and physical Government,
which he carries on by his absolute Power, and there is his moral Government,
by Laws, his Governing men as rational Creatures, by Laws and by Rewards and
Punishments. This is Gods governing Will, that men make use of their reasons,
that they consider what it is that he requires, and what it is that he forbids;
that to the drawing them to obedience, and the deterring them from
disobedience, they consider and improve Gods arguments, the great and Eternal
rewards of obedience, and the dreadful and eternal penalties of disobedience;
and so to order their course, that they may attain those blessed rewards, and
escape those eternal punishments: And here he does not impose an invincible
necessity upon men's Wills, but leaves men to their choice; he commands them to
obey, that is his governing Will, but if they will disobey, let them at their
own peril; and this commanding Will of God is that which Self does resist; God
wills and requires men to repent, but they will not repent; God requires men to
be holy, but they will not be holy; God requires men to seek, and to work out
their own Salvation, but they will not, but set to Damning their own Souls; God
requires men to submit, not only to his Precepts, but to his disposal, whether
to be rich or poor, whether to be in Honor or Contempt, whether to be in
health or in sickness, but they will do neither; they will be, as far as they
are able, their own Lords and their own Carvers; they will obey themselves, and
will shift for themselves; they will not be content it be with them as God will
have it; God would have them in all Estates to be content, this they will not
be, but would have every thing, and to their own minds, whatever the Will of
God be.

There is in this Self-will, Wickedness and Mischief. Stiffness.


1. Wickedness. The things willed, and the willing of them, are either
materially or circumstantially wicked, and eventually they are pernicious and
mischievous. What is it Sinner that thou would have? why, I would have mine
Ease, I would have my Pleasure, I would have my Liberty, I would have mine own
way. Why man, all this is naught for thee; thy Ease, and thy Pleasure, and thy
carnal liberty, they are all naught for thee; but who shall be judge whether
they be naught or no? If Self and Sense may be judge, these will say, it is all
very good that I would have. Is not ease good? Is not Pleasure and Liberty
good? is Pain and Bondage good? it is good that I have my liberty and my way.
But if God may be Judge, if Reason and Conscience may be Judge, these will tell
thee, thy ease, and thy carnal liberty, and carnal Pleasures are all naught for
thee; they are like to be thy bane, and thy ruin, and everlasting undoing; but
yet these are the things that their Wills are for.

2. Stiffness or stubbornness; that is counted a self-willed man, that is stiff
and stubborn, and will not be persuaded out of his own way; his heart is set in
him to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. His will is set upon evil, and he is set upon his
own will. You say it is naught to live in ease and idleness; you say, this
Carnal Liberty, these earnal Pleasures, these sinful Gains, are all naught for
me; well however, says the self-will'd-heart, be it good or evil, be it right
or wrong, it is that which I like and is grateful to me, and therefore come what
will, I must have it; I am for my Pleasures, and Carnal contentments, however;
I am for my Liberty, however; I am for growing Rich in this World, for a
Thriving prosperous State, however; Be content to be poor and in disgrace who
will for me, be content to come under the restraint and severe government of
Conscience who will for me, I am for my Freedom to do and live as I list.

This now is the great Controversy betwixt God and Self; whose will shall
stand. God will have his will, and Self would have it is will, and the Heart is
ever apt to side with Self against God. Sinners, learn to understand your
selves, by what has been spoken. Art not thou this self-willed Creature? What
is it that carries the great stroke in thy Life? What is it that thou
contendest for, but to have thine own will? What is the Law or the Rule thou
would live by, but thine own unruly Will? This would please the sinful World,
if every one might be left to live as he will; to do what he will, and to have
what he will. What is the Rule that Sinners do actually live by, but their own
wills? What is it that has kept you from Christ, so many of you all this
while? that has kept you from Repentance? This is your own wilfulness; you
have been persuaded to Christ, but you will not come, you have been persuaded
back from your sins, but ye will not come back; you have been instructed in the
way of Life, but you will not learn; you have been taught and called upon to
become New Men, to become serious Christians, but you will not hearken; you
have been pressed to give your selves to Prayer, to studying the Scriptures, to
studying your own Hearts, to the ordering your Conversations according to the
Gospel, but you will not yield unto it; you will walk after the flesh, you will
be proud, you will be covetous and Carnal livers, and thus you spend out your
days.

Sinners consider, who is it fit should have the Government of you? The will of
God, or your own wills? What would be best for you in the end, to be subject to
the Law of God or this Law of sin? What is it that God would have with you?
This is the will of God, your Salvation; he would have you to Heaven, he would
that these poor Souls of yours, whom the Devil has made Drudges to your Flesh,
and Slaves to his Lust, and Sacrifices to his Malice; God would have you to be
Vessels of Honor, to bear his Image, to shine forth in his Glory, to live in
his likeness, and to rejoice in his everlasting Joy. Man, this is that which
God would have, that thou may live in everlasting Blessedness, he would have
thee to Heaven, and he would have thee by an Holy Life to be fitted for that
Blessed Life, to be made meet to be a partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light. Therefore it is that he commands you to Repent, therefore it is that he
with so much importunity persuades you to Christ, that he might wash you with
his Blood, and guide you by his Word, and sanctify you by his Spirit, and
present you blameless and faultless before the presence of his Glory with
exceeding Joy, as Jude 24. This is the will of God, that you should be thus
Governed and thus Ordered; that these Earthen Vessels, these dirty Souls might
be made Vessels of Honor, and of his everlasting praise.

And what is it that your own wills are for; but to live so, that you may be
fit for nothing, but to be Vessels of contempt, to be Fuel for the everlasting
Fire? The Devil and your own Hearts are conspired, so to sully, and to black
you with your ways, that you may be fit for no other place, but to live in the
Smoke and the Fire of the everlasting Furnace.

Gods will is to bring you to that Inheritance which is reserved in Heaven; he
would have you to have all the Hell you shall have on this side the Grave, and
your Heaven in that Eternity which comes after: Your sorrows all here, and your
troubles here, and hereafter your rest from them all; but your will is, to have
your Heaven here, your good things here, your Mirth and your Pleasure here, and
so leave nothing but your Hell for hereafter.

Now which of these two wills, God's will, or your own will, is it the best for
you to be Governed by? If you say, God's will is better for me to follow, than
mine own will; 'twill end best, whatever it seems to be at present; then one
would think you should see so much Reason against this self-will'dness, against
this wilfulness, and hardness, and obstinacy in your own ways, as to tremble to
think of being left any longer under the Government of your own wills.

Sinners, let me do you a kindness this day; let me break the Yoke of Bondage,
the will of your Flesh from off your Necks, and unhorse your Riders; the Devil
Rides your wills, and your will rides your Souls, come off from this drudgery.
Let me do the Lord this Honor this day, to persuade you under the Government
of his will; what God would have me to do, that will I do, as God would have me
to live, so will I live; will you say the word once? God would have me be a
Penitent, and through his grace a Penitent I will be. God would have me to be a
Christian, a sincere Christian, and through his help a Christian I will be. God
would have me to walk humbly, to live honestly, to live a blameless
Conscientious Heavenly Life, and O this is the Life that I will give my self
to. What if you should say this word, and say it heartily? What if this word
should prevail to fetch you off from your Wilfulness, and the hardness of your
hearts, and lay your Souls at the Feet, and under the Government of the
Almighty? What if such a change should now be wrought upon you, that your
hearts should now be brought about from Will toward God; from Lust to
Conscience, from this thy Carnal and Sensual and vain Life, to a Spiritual and
Heavenly Life? Would you not bless God for such a change? Would you not say,
This is an happy Day for me, a Blessed change the Lord has wrought upon me?
Then hearken to the word you have heard, and say the word once, I will be the
Lords, and from henceforth he alone shall have the Government of me. You that
will not, but will be self-willed still, will be hardened in your way still, go
home and chew upon this thought, Whether will this wilful hardened Heart lead me
at last?

2. In the conversion of a Sinner, the power of self-will is broken, the
Controversy betwixt God and the Sinner is determined. The Controversy is,
whose will shall stand, the will of God, or the will of the Flesh; in
Conversion, the Sinner yields that God's will shall be thenceforth his Law. It
was foretold of Christ, Genesis 3. That he should break the Serpents Head; the
Serpents Head is his Power over Man, and his Headquarters is the will of Man,
this is his Strong-hold, and in the Conversion of a Sinner, the Devil is beaten
out of, and has lost his Strong-hold, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our Warfare
are mighty through God, to the pulling down the Strongholds; the will of Man,
which is the great Fort or Strong-hold, is so broken and pulled down, that

1. He is heartily willing to resign up to God, to his Will and Government; he
that before said, Not God's will, but mine own, can now say, Not my will, but
the will of the Lord be done. He that before said, I will not that this Man,
that Christ should Reign over me, now says, I will not that this Flesh shall
Rule over me, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power;
the Day of Conversion, is the Day of Gods Power, wherein the Power of God's
Grace is revealed upon Sinners Hearts; in the Day of this Power, Sinners shall
be willing. When the Power of Grace has conquered the Power of Nature, the
Sinner shall yield and resign up to God, and be heartily contented to be
thenceforth under his Rule and Government. This is the Voice of Converts, which
was the Voice of the Church, Isa. 26.13. Other Lords have had Dominion over us,
but now by thee only will we make mentiom of thy Name; they are Dead, they
shall not live; they are Deceased they shall not rise; the old Lord is dead, it
is Deceased, and shall never rise; sin shall no longer have Dominion over us,
the Devil shall no longer, Will shall no longer have the Dominion over us; to
thee, Lord, to thee only do we resign up our selves. I resign to the Lord, I
subscribe to the Lord, I give the Hand to the Almighty, and put my Neck under
his Yoke for ever; his I am, and him alone will I serve. This is Conversion,
this breaking off from under the Dominion of your own wills, and resigning up
to the will of the Lord.

2. He does actually submit to, and obey the will of God.

A Convert does not only say, I will submit, I will obey, but he does submit,
he does obey. The old Will, will be contending still for the Government, but
the Heart now answers, as the Men of Sodom to Lot, Genesis 19.9. Stand back, this
Fellow came in to sojourn, and now he will be Lord. Stand back O my Carnal
Will, stand back, this Stranger shall no longer be Lord over me; I have
resigned up my self to the Lord, and him will I obey. Yea, and his will it does
obey; this is the will of God that he repent, and the Convert does repent, this
is the will of God that he be Holy, and harmless, that he walk in all the
Commands of God blameless, and this he sets his Heart to do, Psalm. 119.3. They
do no iniquity, they walk in his ways.

3. Yet the will is not so broken, but that this Self and Flesh has a Root
remaining in it; and this Root will be Springing and growing up again; like
that Root of Bitterness mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 12.15. That Root of
Malice, that Root bearing Gall and Wormwood; the Apostle warns them to look to
it, that it spring not up again to trouble and defile them: this Root, that
Self has even in the will of Converts, how often does it actually spring up,
and trouble and defile them? There Is scarcely any business, but self will have
a stroke in doing of it; there is scarcely any Duty but Self strikes in, and
spoils it in the performance. O how much of this self-will'dness is there to be
found even amongst Christians? How often is it, that their wills are set upon
vanity? and how strongly are they often set upon their own wills? How heady and
wilful are they in their way? What stiffness and tenaciousness is there of
their own purposes? They will not be advised, nor persuaded out of their
course: though as to the main, they have resigned themselves up to the will of
God; yet in many particular Cases, either upon mistakes in their Opinions, or
being overswayed by corruption, they are headstrong in their way, and will not
be turned back. When they come to themselves, it is their shame and affliction
it should be so, yet too often so it is, that this self-will'dness carries them
on, even against Counsel and Conscience.

It Is true, where this self-will does carry the main stroke in the Life, where
the ordinary course and way of the Life is Governed by will, there is no
Conversion, but there is no Convert but more or less does groan under the
Usurpation and Tyranny of this Self and Flesh. You that are Christians would
never have lived as sometimes you have done, would never have carried it as
sometimes you have, so much against Judgment and Counsel, and the most serious
advices, if Will had not had too much power over you. We should be even all of
us more considerate and deliberate in our goings, we should be more easily
entreated, and persuaded back from running headlong on in some of those ways
which cost us sorrow afterward, if this self-will'dness had not prevailed in
us.

4. Therefore there is a necessity, that the Heart be kept under Government.
The Government of the Heart, is to the same end and of the same necessity, as
the Government of a Kingdom. The Government of a Kingdom, is to be for the
encourageing of the good, and for the terror and suppression of the evil, Romans
13.3. And to the same end is the Government of the Heart; to foster, and
cherish, and maintain, and keep alive the good that is in it; and to crush, and
keep under the evil that is in it. If self-will has an evil Root in the Heart,
if this evil Root be apt to spring up, then is there necessity of governing the
Heart, to keep it under.

To the governing the Heart, is necessary a double instrument, a Spur and a
Curb; a Spur to the good that is in us, to quicken Grace, and keep it in
action; a Curb to that which is evil in us, to curb and hold under corruption;
these two instruments of Government, are the reward and punishment; the blessed
reward will be a Spur to Grace, the punishment to come will be a Curb to Lust
and Flesh; the eying these two great recompenses of reward, Glory and Wrath,
the holding the sense of that Life and Death upon the Heart, is a great part of
our excercising this Government upon us: thy self-will is such an obstinate
Enemy, as nothing but Fire and Sword, the Fire of Divine Indignation, and the
Sword of Divine vengeance, will conquer and subdue it. There must be
Government, and there must be severe penalties kept in sight, or there is no
good to be done.

Friends, If ever you would Conquer this self-will'dness, show it the Fire, the
Racks, the Gridirons, the Gibbets, the everlasting Prison, that it is rushing
and hurrying you upon.

Self-will'dness is not only a kicking against the Pricks, but a running upon
the Pikes of Divine Vengeance; thou art heady, and wilful in thy way, thou art
set upon thine own will; whatever thou likest, and art pleased with, thou art
so set upon it, that there is no persuading thee back; but be advised, take
heed: if thou will be wilful, at thy Peril be it; look before thee, to the
precipice, by which this self-will'dness is tumbling thee headlong down into
the Everlasting Pit; whenever you feel Will begin to rise, and work, work
against Reason, work against Conscience, work toward iniquity and vanity, when
you feel this self-will getting up, lay hold on the Bridle, put on the Curb,
give check to it with all your might; look toward the land of Darkness,
whither it is carrying thee; when the fit is up, the wilful fit (for though
there be an abiding habit of wilfulness in the Heart, yet it comes forth but by
fits) when the wilful fit is up, think, Lord what now? Whither is this wilful
will driving me? What will be its Fruits and Wages? What end am I like to come
to, if this be my way? Stop, Oh my wretched Heart, strike sail, Oh my obstinate
will, take Counsel, be well advised, and run not thus headlong upon thine own
ruin.

O hold up such Government in your Spirits, that your Hearts may be tractable,
and flexible, pliable Hearts; let them be stiff, and fast to the concernments
of God, but loose and easily withdrawn from the interest of Self. Stiff against
sin, stiff against Temptation, resolute for Holiness. Is thy will brought about
for God, for Religion, for Conscience? Stand to it to the Death; never be
persuaded out of your Religion, never be persuaded out of your Consciences, or
Conscientious walking; let your Hearts be resolved for the greatest strictness
of Religion, and be strict and stiff in such Holy resolutions; but never again
be so set upon your own wills, your Carnal wills; here get a pliable Heart,
never to be persuaded off from God, easily to be persuaded back from Self and
Flesh. It Is Prophesied, Isa. 11.6. There shall be such a change wrought upon
the rough and furious and ravenous Spirits of Sinners, by the power of Christ,
that the Wolf and the Leopard and the Lion shall be so tamed, that a little
Child may lead them. They shall be so flexible and pliable, that they may be
easily lead; that the least Items or Intimations from God, or from Conscience,
may bring them to any thing; that when Lust puts hardest upon them for sin,
when Self presses most impetuously upon them for minding or pursuing it is
Interest, or will, a Word from God, an Item from Conscience, may bring them
about after the Lord, that Self may never be able to fortify them against
Conscience, but that Conscience may with ease break the Bands, and loose the
Cords of Self, and command them after their God. It was said of Caesar's
Soldiers, that where his Interest was concerned, they were more than Men, in
their own concernments they were less than Women. Let the Servants of Christ
learn so much of the Soldiers of Caesar; let them be so true, so fast to the
Interest of Christ, and Religion, of Holiness, that they may be above the
Spirit of a Man; and so the Spirit of a Christian is, above the Spirit of a
Man; but let them sit so loose from the Interest or the Commands of Self, that
a Woman, or a little Child may bring them back from the pursuance of it; that
such a word from whatever Mouth it comes, what is this Self or this Flesh to
thee, that thou so hearkenest to it, or insistest so upon it? Will thou obey
thine adversary? Will thou cleave to thy Mortal Enemy? Self is no better; it is
the worst Enemy thou have, and will thou feed thine Enemy, Strengthen thine
Enemy, Fight for thy Enemy? That such a word may be enough to countermand the
will of the Flesh, and to bring the Heart back from obeying it is strongest
motions and Lusts. This will be the blessed Fruit of a due Heart-government the
defeating and subduing of Self-will, and the sweet and easy compliance of the
Heart with, and it is complacency in the will of God; and it will be no hard
thing for such a Soul to say, Not my will, but the will of the Lord be done.

3. Self-love.

1. There is a Self-love which is our Duty; there is an innate Principle of
Love, planted by God himself in the Nature of Man, in his State of Innocence.
God has made all Men living lovers of themselves, and he would have them so.
That word, Thou shall love thy Neighour as thy Self, evidenceth that we must
love our selves. The fruits of this Self-love are, 1. Self-preservation. 2.
Self-blessing.


1. Self-preservation, the securing our selves from Mischief, the saving our
selves from danger, Acts 2.40. Save your selves this generation. He that said,
Save your selves from this evil generation, has therein said much more; save
your selves from Condemnation: To save our selves from sin, to save our selves
from Wrath, to save our Souls, this is a great Duty lying on every man in this
World; and this Self-saving, or Self-preservation, our Self-love will prompt
and press us to. He that loves himself will save himself, he that duly loves
his Soul, will do what he can to save his Soul. That men destroy and Damn
themselves, that men neglect Christ the Author of Salvation, that men neglect
Religion and Godliness, the way of Salvation, is for want of a true love to
themselves. Sinners, Christ is Preached unto you, and tendered to you, and if
you loved your selves better, you would love Christ and accept of him. You are
exhorted to Repentance, to Godliness, and if you loved your own Souls, you
would repent and be holy. Thou art an hater of thy Self, an Enemy, a Murderer
of thine own Soul, who art not a lover of Christ, and of Religion and
godliness. What a Brute art thou, O sinner? yea, worse than a Brute; thou can
love thy Friends, thou can love thy Wife and thy Child, thou can love thy
Companions, yea thou can love thy sins and thy lusts, only thou have no love
to thy Soul. It Is laid down as a mark of wicked Persons, among many others, 2 Timothy 3.3. Without natural Affection: For a Child to be without natural
Affection to the Parents, for Parents to be without natural affection to the
Child, for men to be strangers to their own flesh, without natural Affection to
their Friends or Relations, this is a mark of a wicked man. What is it then for
men to be without natural affection to their own Souls? will thou say thou
love thy Soul, when thou so sadly neglectest thy Soul? when thou take no
care for thy Soul, when for the love of thy Lusts, and thy Pleasures, and thy
Companions, thou will Damn thy Soul?

Sinners, what have you done for your Souls ever since you were born? You have
done something for your Flesh; you have fed it, and clothed it, and wrought
hard for it, to get a provision and maintenance for it; but what have you done
for your Souls? what pains did thou ever take that it might be well with thy
Soul? what knowledge have thou gotten? what Grace have thou gotten? what Peace
for thy Soul? have thou gotten Peace with God? have thou done any thing toward
the reconciling thy Soul to God? thou know how little thou have done; thou
have laden sin upon thy Soul, thou have loaded guilt upon thy Soul, thou have
left it like the Soul of a Laodicean, Rev. 3.17. Poor, and miserable, and
Blind, and Naked; that Soul within thee is a miserable Soul, a guilty Soul, a
blinded hardened Soul, a polluted naked Soul; it would make your hearts ache if
you considered it, in what woeful wretched case you have left your Souls to this
day. If you have so much sense in you, think of it, and lay it sadly to Heart,
what a miserable case you have left your Souls in; the reason of this is,
because you are without love to your Souls, hence is it that you have had so
little care of your Self-preservation.

2. Self-blessing, Isa. 65.16. There is a Self-blessing, that is our Duty; Let
him that Blesses himself in the Earth, bless himself in the God of Truth: He
that loves himself will bless himself. There Is a double Self-blessing. 1. A
seeking our own blessedness. Self-love will prompt us to seek an happiness for
our selves; not only to save our selves from Misery, but to bring our selves to
Blessedness. The blessedness which true Self-love wishes and seeks for Self,
is in God, in the God of Truth. He that truly loves his own Soul, can be
content with nothing less than God, for the blessedness of of it. No State, no
Inheritance, no Treasure can satisfy him below Heaven and everlasting glory.
There Is not a man of you that loves his Soul, but he is seeking Glory, and
Honor, and Immortality for it; he is taking care, and taking pains, to get a
place in Heaven for his Soul, to lay up Treasure in Heaven for it. Do thou
love thy self, who do not bless thy Self, or seek a Blessing in God for thy
Self? Do thou bless thy Self in God, who slightest God, who carest not for
God, and who refusest the blessing of God, and this for the sake of thy Lusts
and Pleasures? Sinner, love thou thy Self? love thou thine own Soul? O seek
a Blessing for it, a blessing in God, a blessing in Heaven for it.

2. An enjoying and rejoicing in your own Blessedness: Loving our selves
aright, is part of the fruition and enjoying our selves, as loving God is of
the fruition of God. No man that loves himself, but he would enjoy himself, and
bless himself in the reflection on his own Happiness. And this is the
self-blessing mentioned, let him bless himself in the God of Truth; that is,
let him satisfy himself, let him comfort himself, let him enjoy and rejoice
over himself upon this account, that the God of Truth is his God, and his
Happness: Let him not bless himself in the Earth, that Riches are his, that
Pleasures and Honors are his, that he has the World at will, but that the
Lord God is his; let him not cheer himself with the Rich Man's Song, Luke 12.
Soul take thine ease, thou may enjoy thy Self, for thou have goods laid up
for many Years; but let him take up the Psalmist's Song, Psalm. 116.7. Return
unto thy rest O my Soul; herein thou may bless thy Self, herein thou may
comfort thy Self, the Lord has dealt graciously with thee.

Friends, you whose God is the Lord, you are the Men that may bless your
Selves, you are the Men that may enjoy your Selves; you may look into your
Hearts with comfort, you may look upon your States with Joy; you may bless your
Selves that God has given you such an Heart; you may bless your Selves that
God has given you such a Portion. You that have an Interest in God, and this
witnessed by the Image of God upon your Hearts, you may enjoy your Selves and
take comfort, as often as you look inward, and see the Marks and the Prints of
Divine Grace stamped upon you; your very love to your Selves will make you to
rejoice over your Selves, as often as you view the blessed Frame into which the
Goodness and Grace of God has brought you: Well this Self-love with it is
Fruits, Self-preservation, and Self-blessing, is our Duty; and the Lord has
planted it in our Hearts, on purpose to bring us on upon all our other Duties.

God makes great use of this innocent Self-love, in his Government of the
World. God Governs by Laws, and Laws Govern by their Rewards and Punishments,
and Rewards and Punishments have their Efficacy by virtue of this love of our
selves; what would Laws signify, were there no Rewards to the Obedient, nor
Penalties to the Disobedient? These are the Sinews and Strength of Laws; and
what would Rewards and Penalties signify to us, were we not lovers of our
Selves? Our Self-love prompts us to seek our good, and to prevent our misery.
As far as we love our Selves, we desire our own Happiness. 'Twas Self-love,
that made those many, Psalm. 4.6. to say, Who will show us any good? 'Twas the
Psalmist's Love to the Church, Psalm. 122.9. that made him say, I will seek thy
good; and hence it is that we endeavor the prevention of our ruin;
Self-preservation is the Fruit of Self-love. Self-love is the first spring and
motive to Religion; it is true, when we come to be Religious indeed, there are
higher motives; the love of God, the Love of Christ is the great Argument to
carry us on in sound Religion, when we come to be Christians, then the main
Motive to Christianity is, that which Christ used to Peter, John, 21.15. to
faithfulness in his Ministry, Love thou [me?] Feed my Sheep. Love thou me?
Feed my Lambs. If ye love me, keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. But the first
Motive to bring us to be Christians, is this Self-love. Love thou thy Self?
Then give thy Self to Christ. Love thou thy Soul? Then be a Christian. Christ
is the only way to blessedness; He that has the Son, has Life, 1 John 5.12.
And he that not the Son, has not Life. Christ is the only way to blessedness,
and the only security against misery, against Everlasting misery. There is no
Condemnation to those that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. There is no Name under
Heaven, by which we must be saved; saved from Death, from Eternal Death, but by
the Name of Jesus, Acts 4.12. Now when Christ says, Come unto me, and ye shall
have rest, Mat. 11. Follow, me and ye shall have Treasure in Heaven, Mark. 10.
He that is ashamed of me, of him will I be ashamed before my Father that is in
Heaven; the intent and meaning of all this is, if you love your Selves, come to
me; if you love your Souls, keep my Commandments; if ever you would, that those
Souls of yours should be happy Souls, if you would not that they should be
Lost, and Burned and Drowned in everlasting Destruction, if you love your
Souls, and wish their good and happiness, if you would not be your Destroyers
and Murderers, if you have so much love to your Souls, that you would they
should be Saved, and would not that they be Damned, then come unto Christ, then
be followers of Christ; then believe, then repent, and obey the Gospel. If you
love your Selves be Holy, if you love your Selves be Heavenly minded, if you
love your Selves be humble, be painful, be circumspect, and walk in all things
as becomes the Gospel. By the way, I exhort you to improve and maintain your
true Self-love: I say not to you only, Husbands love your Wives, Parents love
your Children, Christians love one another; but every one of you, love your
Selves. If you love your Selves, you will love God, if you love your Selves,
you will love Christ; if you love your Selves, you will love Godliness; if you
love your Selves, you will be the followers of God, the Disciples of Christ,
and will give your selves to live godly in Christ Jesus. See therefore that you
love your Selves, that your poor Souls may grow more dear to you. Be more
Zealous for the Salvation of your own Souls, be more fearful of their
Damnation, be more tender of wounding and wronging your Souls. Take heed of
sin, Prove. 8.36. He that sins wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me,
love Death. You that sin against God, ye wrong your own Souls. Love your Souls
better, and you will never be such proud Livers, or such Worldlings, or such
Drunkards, or Rioters; you would be sober, and serious, and circumspect: If you
loved your Selves better, you would take heed of this Lying, and these Oaths,
and this unrighteous Dealing, of this hardness of Heart in your sins; you would
fall upon your Knees, you would fall upon your Faces, and be ashamed, and
bewail and repent of your sins, and return to the Lord from them all, had you
more of this true Self-love within you.

Sinners, why come you not in to Christ? Why will you not yet be persuaded to
repent? Why Man, have thou no love to thy Self? The Apostle tells us, Ephesians.
5.29. No Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. He
uses that word, to press Husbands to love their Wives, who, says he, are their
own Flesh. Do thou not love thy Self? What would thou say of a Man, that
does not love his Wife, but would play the Tyrant and Tygre, brawling and
snarling, yea fighting and beating her? You would say, This were a Monster
among Men, rather than a Christian; worse than the very Brutes, amongst whom
it is seldom seen, that the Male snarleth, or biteth, or pusheth at the Female.
What then is he that loves not his own Soul? Love thou thy Self? Love thou
thine own Soul? Then take heed of going on in thy Sins; then take heed of
standing it out against Christ. You hear what a reward there is for the
Righteous, you hear what an Inheritance Christ has laid up for his Saints; an
Inheritance in Light, Life, Love, Joy, everlasting Pleasure, and everlasting
Glory; Christ would make those poor Souls, blessed Souls, joyful Souls,
glorious Souls, partakers of the everlasting Riches of his Glory and Joy: But
what, will thou say, My Soul shall have no part in it? My Soul shall never come
there; my Lot shall never be with the Saints, but shall be without, amongst
Unbelievers, Impenitents, amongst Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters? In
refusing to come to Christ, to Repent, and be made Holy, thou say in effect,
my Soul shall never come to Heaven? Let it to Hell, amongst Dogs, and Devils,
and that vile and wicked Generation of the Damned. But Sinner, have thou forgot
that thou art a Man? Art thou a Monster of Men? Have thou lost all love to thy
Self, to thine own Soul? Do thou neither love nor pity thine own Soul?
Would thou that Christ should ever love thee, when thou whilt not love thy
Self? Would thou that Christ should ever pity thee, when thou will not pity
thy self?

O Sinners, love your own Souls, pity your own Souls, be not so cruel and
hard-hearted to your selves. Will you for the love of your Lusts, for the love
of the World, sell your Souls to the Devil, sell them to Hell, to make Faggots
for the everlasting Burnings? Where are your Bowels? O pity, pity that poor
blind and miserable Soul of thine, and bring it to Christ for pity's sake; go
on in thy evil ways no longer, be a Drunkard no longer, a Worldling no longer,
a Liar, a Scoffer no longer, be no longer hardened in your sins, but come away
to Christ, and escape for your Lives; if you love your Selves, come, if you
have any pity for your Selves, come; let the dread of the Cruelties of the
Devil, bring you back from following him, and come you in, and cast your Selves
upon the Blood, upon the Bowels, and Compassions of Christ, who is such an High
Priest, as can have compassion upon the Ignorant, and those that are out of the
way, and even on the worst of Sinners, that will return to him. What shall I
say more to you? I will speak but the same words, let every one of you see that
he so love [himself] as Christ loved the Church, washing it and saving it by
his Blood. Love your Selves, and save your Selves; love your Selves, and bless
your Selves in the God of Truth. Don't bless your selves in the Earth, in your
Money, in your Lands, in your carnal Pleasures, in your carnal Friends; these
things are not, nor ever think they will be, your Blessedness; but bless your
Selves in the God of Truth; bless your Selves in Jesus, whom God has sent to
bless you, in turning you from your Iniquities, Act. 3.26. Turn to Christ, and
you shall be blessed; be Believers and you shall be Blessed; come in this day,
and let your Names be written among the blessed of the Lord; come every one of
you, and put in your Names among the Disciples of Christ; Let me be one, Lord,
let me be another, write down my Name for one among thy Disciples; I am willing
to be thine, and do solemnly covenant, and this very day give my Self to Thee.
Who of you are there that will thus come in? Will you be persuaded to it, or
must I lose my labor? Are there any of you? Is there any one of all the
Sinners in this Company, that will thus come in? Come then in the Name of the
Lord; come get your Names to be thus written in the Lamb's Book, and and he
will write it in Heaven, there it will be found in the last Day, written in the
Book of Life; this do, and then you that have been hitherto the Haters, and
Wrongers, and Cruel, will henceforth appear to be Lovers of your own Souls.

2. There is a sinful Self-love; this is the great Heart Idolatry, and the Root
of all Rebellion and Disobedience to God.

Here I shall show you, 1. What this sinful Self-love is;


1. It is a Love of mistaken Self; of Carnal-self, a love of the Flesh, and
it is Affections and Lusts; a love of that Flesh which Christ would have us to
hate and deny, Mat. 16.24. [Himself] that is his Flesh, or Carnal-self; Men are
mistaken in themselves, and count that their Self which is not their Self; as
Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4. concerning her Husband, He that
thou have for an Husband, is not thine Husband; so may it be said to Sinners,
That which thou take for thy Self, is not thy Self; this Flesh which thou
take for thy Self, and love as thy Self, is not thy Self. You that love
your Flesh, you love your Enemy; you that please your Flesh, you are pleasing
your Enemy; you that are working for your Flesh, and providing for your Flesh,
and pampering your Flesh, you are working for, and feeding your Enemy; you
count you are seeking of, and working for your Self; no, it is for your Enemy;
this Flesh is your Mortal Enemy. Now this is one sort of sinful Self-love,
when we love our Flesh, or our corruptions; when we love our Selves, as
Fleshly-minded Men; when we love to please, and provide for, and satisfy our
fleshly minds, when we foster and cherish this Flesh.

2. An inordinate love of our Selves Natural; when we love that which is our
Selves, more or otherwise than we ought to love it. Our Natural Selves, our
Bodies and our Souls are to be loved, ut supra. We ought to love our selves,
not our Souls only, but our Bodies also, and so to love them as to seek the
good and well-being of our selves; not only our Eternal but our Temporal
well-being; we may love our ease, and our freedom from Pain; we may love our
Credit, and our freedom from Reproach and Disgrace; we may love our maintenance
and freedom from want; yea, we may love our beauty and comeliness, and freedom
from Deformity; and we may so love as to maintain and provide for our selves in
all these respects; to maintain our selves in Health, to preserve our selves
from temporal misery, to provide for our temporal necessities; but now our
sinful Self-love is, when we love our Selves more or otherwise than we should.

1. When we love our selves more than God: When we love our selves to the
neglect of God; as Christ said, Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother
more than me, he that loves Son or Daughter more than me, so may it be said,
he that loves himself, his own flesh, his own life, more than me, is not
worthy of me. Much more, when our Self-love makes an abatement of our love to
God, when Self is loved so much, that God is loved the less, when the more Self
is minded or cared for, by so much the less God is regarded.

2. When we love Self as separated from God, or otherwise than in subordination
to God, when our love determines in Self, and rises no higher; every man should
love himself, but it must be for the sake of God, whose servant he is, and
whose Image he bears.

3. When we love our selves to the prejudice of the love of our Neighbor: The
word is, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; thou shall love thy self,
but so, as it may not hinder thee from loving thy Neighbor. When self
Monopolizes our love, when our Love which should be a Common, is an Enclosure,
and is impropriated and confined to our selves; when we so intensely love our
selves, that we love no body else, or care for no body else, or at least love
not others so much as we should; when we care not whom we displease, so we may
but please our selves; when we care not whom we neglect, so we may provide for
our selves; when we care not how it be with others, let them be in sickness,
let them be in want, let them starve, let them die, we care not how it be with
them, so it be but well with our selves, when our Self-love is only for the
advancing of Self-Interest, and will invade and encroach upon, and wrong the
Interest of others, when we can thereby advance our own. Lay these things
together, and therein you may see, what sinful Self-love is, a love of mistaken
Self, or an inordinate love of our natural Self.

2. That sinful Self-love is the great Heart-Idolatry, and the root of all
Rebellion and Disobedience to God.

1. It is the great Heart-Idolatry. Whatever we love more than God, we make it
a God; yea, when we love any thing equal with God, or in separation from God,
and not in subordination to God. If we love our Selves only for our Selves, we
therein deny the God which is above: As he that loves Riches only for Riches
sake, as he that loves his meat and drink, only for the Pleasure he has in
eating and drinking, so he that loves himself, only for selfs sake, is an
Idolater. Whatever we make our last end, we make our God: Therefore as the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, so whatever
ye love, or regard, or desire, let it be all, let it be only for the glory of
God. Romans 11.36. To him are all things; by him they were made, and to him they
must be directed. O Beloved, what an Idolatrous piece is the Heart of man
become! O what an Idolatrous Heart is there then in every one of us! Is
Self-love Idolatry? then who of us can be free from this charge of Idolatry? we
have every one of us more or less set up this Idol Self in our Hearts. Do we
not love mistaken Self, our sinful flesh? do not our Hearts go after our
Covetousness, our carnal Ease, our carnal Pleasures? do we not love that carnal
Self which should be denied, which should be Mortified and Crucified? do none
of us so love, as to cherish our flesh, and make provision for the flesh? thou
have a Proud Heart, and do thou not maintain and keep up that Self-esteem?
thou have a covetous Heart, and do not thou nourish and feed thy
covetousness? thou have a Lust after thy carnal Pleasure and Liberty, and thou
Indulgest it all thou can; thou love to be high, thou love to be Rich,
thou love thy Pleasure and thy Liberty; these things thou love, and do
thou not love them more than God? the more thou lustest after these things, and
the more thou have of them, is not God so much less loved and regarded? Do
thou not know, that if thou had checked and crossed that proud mind, if thou
had denyd that covetous Heart, the Lord God should have had more of thy
regard, more of thy Love than now he has had? do you not think you should have
loved God better if you had loved the World less, or your Ease, or your
Appetites less? behold these things have broken in and encroacht upon Gods
right, have carried away Gods due; this Self, for whose sake all these are
loved, this Self has stolen into the Heart, and carried it away after it.

O what a woeful thing is it, that it should be said of any Professor of
Religion, that this should be said of them, it were well for these men, or at
least better than it is with them, if they loved God but as well as they love
their flesh, if they served God as heartily as they serve their Covetousness,
if they were set upon the Pleasing of God but as much as they are set upon
pleasing their Appetites, if they were delighted in God as much as they are
delighted in the World, if they could find as much Pleasure in the meditation
of God and Exercises of Religion, as in the businesses of this life! Thou
know it is not thus with thee, thou do not Love and Delight thy Self in
God, as thou love and delightest thy Self in this earth and flesh. Is
Communion with God, is communing with thy own Heart about the things of God, is
conversing with God in Prayer, in holy Contemplation and Meditation; is the
exercising thy Faith on God, thy Hope on God, and thy looking into the Gospel
of God, and searching out and feeding upon the Blood and Bowels and
unsearchable Treasures laid up in Christ; is the exercising thy self in these
things as great a Pleasure to thee, and do thou find as great a delight in
them, as thou find in eating and drinking, in buying and selling and getting
gain? do thou love to be Praying or to be Praising the Lord, as thou love
to be getting Money? do thou love to be sending thine Heart to Heaven, and
there to solace it in the thoughts and joys of the Lord, as thou love to be
thinking of thy Corn, or thy Cattle, or thy Income by thy Trade? Thou know
thou do not. Can thou say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 84.1, 2. How amiable are
thy Tabernacles, Oh Lord, my Soul longs, yea, even faints for thy Courts,
mine Heart and my flesh cries out for the live^ng God: A day in thy Courts is
better than a thousand; a door in thine House, is better than all the dwellings
of the World; Lord, lift up thy Countenance upon me, and that shall put more
gladness into mine Heart than when their Corn and Wine increased? Let the Corn
and the Wine be whose it will, so that the Lord God will be mine, let this
World go cross and frown upon me as it will, so that the Face and Countenance
of God do but shine upon me; let me be poor rather than a Stranger from God;
let me want an House, or want Money, or want bread, rather than want the
presence of God: can thou say so, heartily say so? thou know that thou
can not; the good things of the earth, the Riches and the Pleasures of the
Earth are the Riches thou love, and the Pleasures thou love, and thou
could be content to be straightened in the Lord, so that thou might abound in
these carnal things: Is it so with thee? O what a Heart have thou? what do
thou think of thy Self? art not thou an Idolater, a lover of Money more than a
Lover of God, a lover of Pleasures more than a lover of God, a lover of thy
Self and flesh more than a lover of God? and yet, art thou not an Idolater?
does thine Heart go a Whoring after thine Idols, run away from God after thy
Money, run away from God after thy Pleasures, run away from God after thy Self
and flesh, and yet not an Idolater? art thou an Idolater then, an Idolatrous
Christian, an Idolatrous Professor? O! how is it that such a thought does not
fill thy Face with shame, and set thy Soul a weeping, and cause trembling and
astonishment to take hold upon thee? what Friends, is it nothing with you to be
Idolaters, to have Idolatrous Hearts, whoring Hearts, whoring from God, and
whoring after your flesh and the Lusts thereof? sure Friends it would make the
best of our Hearts to ache, if we were sensible, what degrees of this Idolatry
there were to be found in every one of us; and many of us I fear, it would
convince that they are Idolaters to so high degree, that there is nothing of
true and real love to God in them.

2. It Is the root of all Rebellion and Disobedience. Self-love, 2 Timothy 3.2. is
put in the Head of a black-troop of Lusts and Wickednesses; Men shall be lovers
of themselves; there is the ringleader, and what follows? behold a troop
comes; covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents,
unthankful, unholy, without Natural affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, Heady,
High-minded, lovers of Pleasure more then lovers of God; what a Regiment of
sins is here, led on by Self-love! And observe it, lovers of themselves lead on
the Van, and lovers of Pleasures bring up the Rear.

Heart-sins, are Root-sins, and Self-love is the Root of these Roots; Pride is
the Root of Contention, Malice is the Root of Revenge, Covetousness is the Root
of Oppression, and self-love is the Root of them all The Apostle says, 1 Timothy
6.10. The love of Money is the Root of all Evil; and Self-love is the Root of
the love of Money; particularly, that you may know what a mischievous evil this
Heart-sin of Self-love is, and how pregnant of all other wickedness, consider
that it is 1. The Rot of all Religion. 2. The Root of all Unrighteousness and
Unmercifulness. 3. The Root of all sinful Brawls and Quarrels. 4. The Root of
sinful Self-seeking.


1. It is the Rot of all Religion; that is, where it is predominant, and
carries the main stroke in our Religion. It is the rottenness of the Heart,
under all its most specious Religious pretenses or performances. All sincere
Religion is animated by the love of God; the love of God is the Soul of
Religion. If there be no love to God in our profession of Religion, if no love
to God in our practices of Piety, if no love to God in our Prayers, no love to
God in our Fastings and Alms, all our Religion is rotten at Heart; Self-love,
which is it is only Root, is it is rotteness; Self-love will

1. Limit our Religion. 'Twill limit it by self-Interest; no more, nor, no
other Religion will it allow, than will serve our Carnal turns; no farther may
we go in it than will consist with this love of our selves; whatever part or
exercise of Religion will pinch upon the Flesh, the self-denying part, the
self-abasing part, the Flesh-mortifying part of Religion, unless it be to some
further Ends, Self-love will never bear it. So much professing, so much Praying
and Hearing, as will consist with our Ease and our safety, as will not put us
to too much pains, or expose us to too much danger and reproach; so much
Religion, as will not hold us in too strictly and severely, and closely,
Self-love will bear it; but where the Yoke of Christ wrings and galls, there it
must be thrown off.

2. It will corrupt our Religion, and turn it into Hypocrisy. Selfish
Professors are Hypocrites, and all their Religion is Hypocrisy, and Hypocrisy
is the rottenness of the Heart. You that are Professors, see to it, that ye be
not self-loving Professors; if ye be, whatever there be in your Tongues, or
your Looks, or your Religious performances, you are rotten at the Core, rotten
in your Hearts. It is love to God, wherein our sincerity lies; Self-love is our
Hypocrisy; and where this rotten Self-love has tainted your Hearts, your
Hearts will taint and corrupt all your Duties, it will pervert and corrupt all
that ever you do, and turn it into quite another thing; your Religion is no
Religion, your Christianity is no Christianity, your Praying is no Praying,
your Spirituality is but fleshliness, your Heavenly-mindedness is but
Earthiness, your seeming fruitfulness is but Emptiness and barrenness: Israel
is an empty Vine, he brings forth his Fruits to himself, Hos. 10.1. Israel
seemed to be a fruitful Vine, that had her Clusters upon it; there were
Clusters of Prayers, and Clusters of Sacrifices, and Clusters of Alms; Israel
had their Fruits, and yet they were but a Barren and empty Vine; how so? Why
whatever Fruits they had, they were all brought forth to Self; Self brought
them forth, and Self eat them up; there was nothing for God, Israel was an
empty Vine to him, her Fruits were to themselves.

Friends, would you not be rejected for Barren empty Vines; for false-hearted
and rotten Professors? Would you not be found rotten at the Core? See that it
be the Love of God, and not this Self-love, lying at the Bottom, at the Root of
your Religion.

2. It is the Root of all Unrighteousness and Unmercifulness to Men. Self-love
will never learn that Lesson, to do to others as it would be done by; it will
catch all it can; and keep all it has; Self must be advanced, Self must be
enriched, whoever be ruined by it; all manner of Frauds and Deceits, all manner
of Oppressions and Wrongs, all Men's underminings, all Men's over-reachings of
their Neighbors, all Men's falsehoods in their Words, their Promise-breakings,
their Lyings, all their falsehood in their Dealings, in their Tradings, in their
deceitful Words, in their deceitful Weights and Measures, all this
Unrighteousness, it is their Self-love that puts them upon it; so they may get
for themselves, and enrich themselves, how wicked soever the means or ways be
to it, they care not who be impoverished or ruined. And where Self will not
suffer Men to be Righteous, it will less suffer them to be Merciful; what they
are so much for getting, they will be but little for giving: the Hunger and
Nakedness, the pinching and Pining, and even Starving of so many poor amongst
us, the short Alms they can get, and that little, that it is so hardly come by,
the failing of Compassions, the shutting up of Bowels against those that are in
need, this is all from Self-love. I shall need it for my self, I need it for
mine own, I cannot spare it, that is often the Word, that must go in stead of an
Alms.

3. It is the Root of all Brawls and Quarrels, and Contentions in the World.
Whence are there such Multitudes of troublesome Lawsuits? What are they, but
the contendings of Self with Self; one says it is mine own, and I will have it,
whatever it cost me; another says, it is not thine, but mine, and I will have
it; this Meum and Tuum, how has it set the World together by the Ears? Not
that there is Unrighteousness in all Suits at Law, the Love of God may
sometimes put Men to make use of the Law of Man; but those unjust or
unreasonable contendings about trifles, or for that which is none of their own,
in hope by their Might or their Money, to Rob the Poor of their Right, these
are pernicious Quarrels, and it is Self that sets them on.

4. It Is the Root of Self-seeking. Holy Self-love is the Root of Holy
Self-seeking; as the love of God is the Root of seeking God, so sinful
Self-love, is the Root of all sinful self-seeking; and sinful self-seeking, is
contrary to the seeking of God. The love of God is the Root of our seeking God.
These two, Love of God, and seeking God, are put both together in one Promise,
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me Early shall find
me. Isa. 26.9. With my Soul have I desired thee, there is the love, and what
follows? With my Spirit within me will I seek thee Early; the love of God will
set us a seeking God; ('it is in vain that thou say, I love God, if thou can
not say also, I seek God;) and the love of Self will put us on self-seeking;
and this sinful self-seeking is ever contrary to the seeking of God, Phill.
2.31. All seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's; all seek
their own things, that is, their own Carnal things; and those that thus seek
their own, seek not the things of Christ; there is this difference betwixt
Self-love and the Love of God; Self-love divides Interests, Self stands single,
and has a separated and divided Interest; that is the Interest of Self, which
is the Interest of none else; and Self-love in seeking it is own Interest, seeks
the Interest of none else, neither of Christ nor of Men; the love of God unites
Interests; he that loves God, the things of God and his own things are the
same; he counts nothing his own things, but those that are also the things of
God; and when he is seeking God, he is then most seeking his own; God is his
own, and he counts nothing his own, but what is also the Lords; when he seeks
God, he therein seeks his own, and where he seeks his own, he therein seeks
God; his Soul is his own, and the Interest and Prosperity of Soul, these are
the things of God; it is the Love of the Brethen* unites our Interest with the
Interest of the Saints; it is the Interest of the whole Body, that is the
Interest of every Member, all the Saints have the same common Interest; so the
Love of Christ unites the Interest of every Member with the Interest of the
Head, the love of God makes the things of God our own things, and the love of
the Saints makes the things of the Church to be all our own. It is betwixt
Christ and Christians, and betwixt Christians one toward another, as 'twas
betwixt the Primitive Christians, they have all things common, Acts 4.32. None
said of ought that he possessed, that it was his own, but they had all things
common. Not but that Christians have a real Propriety in their own Estates, by
virtue of which civil Right their Estates are so their own as that they are not
another; but yet by virtue of the community of Interests, what one Man has,
should be as there is occas on, to the benefit of the Community. And whence was
this? The love of God had united their Interests; and the Multitude of them
that believed, were knit together by that love as one Man; they were of one
Heart and of one Soul; there is no Meum and Tuum, Thine and Mine, betwixt Christ
and his Saints, but all is Mine; I am my Beloved's, and my Beloved is mine,
Cant. 2.17. We are not our own, say Believers, we are thine; and I am not mine
own says Christ, I am yours, and that which I have is yours, John 20.17. Tell
my Brethen, I go to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; my
Father is yours, my God is your God, all I have is yours; I am yours, and and
my Blood and my Bowels are yours; my stripes, my wounds, and my Righteousness,
and my Inheritance is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23, Whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come,
all are yours, for ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; my Ministers are yours,
mine Ordinances are yours, my Possessions are yours, things present and things
to come; if I have any right in this World, (the Earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof;) if I have any thing in the World to come, the everlasting
Crown, the everlasting Mansions, all are yours, and ye are mine, and I am Gods.
Thus Christ's love to Christians, causes him to say to them, I am yours and all
that I have, so Christians love to Christ, helps them to say, Lord we are
thine, and all we have are thine; not only our sins are thine, our infirmities
are thine, but our Parts, and our Possessions, our Graces and our Duties, yea
our Houses and our Lands, and our Possessions, all are thine.

Christians, we have been called together this day to a Communion of Loves, and
thereby to an Espousal of Interests, betwixt Christ and us; we have received
the Pledges of his love, his Bread and his Wine; he has given us to Eat and to
Drink, as the tokens he has sent us down from Heaven of his Love. I have
brought you tokens every one of you, from the Lord this day; tokens of his
love; we have received the Pledges of his love, and we have returned the
Pledges of our love to him; our very accepting of Christ's Tokens, has been
our returning of our tokens. Your communion together to Eat of Christ's Bread,
and Drink of his Cup, (provided it has been in sincerity, a Spiritual Eating,
and a Spiritual Drinking) your Eating and Drinking his Body and Blood, Christ
has accepted, as a token of your loves; and this communion of love, has been
an Espousal of Interests; Christ has hereby told you, Because I love you, I
will be yours, and all that I have in Heaven and Earth, you may henceforth call
your own. I am your own Jesus, my Father is your own Father, and my God is your
own God, and mine Inheritance is your own Inheritance, and you have said (if
you have sincerely accepted of Christ) we are thine own, thine own Flock, thine
own Inheritance, thy Ransomed ones, thy Redeemed ones, and thy peculiar People;
this has been the up-shot of the Transaction betwixt Christ and you this day:
the Sealing to this word, I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine.

And as there has been an interchangeable communion of loves, and Espousal of
Interest, betwixt Christ and Christians, so also betwixt Christians and
Christians; as we have said to our Lord, I am thine, so we have therein said
one to another, I am yours, and must therefore walk in that tenderness of love,
in that dearness of affection one to another, in that mutual care of each
others good, in that mutual Sense of each others afflictions, in that mutual
delight in each others Societies, in that mutual helping and counselling and
comforting one another, and hearty seeking and rejoicing in each others good,
studying to please each other for his good to Edification, fearing to grieve,
or offend, or wrong, or fall out with, or quarrel one with another; counting
the Interest of every Christian to be the common Interest of the whole Body;
that we hereby may prove, that we love one another, not in Word and in Tongue;
but Indeed and in Truth.

This now is the Nature, and these are the Fruits of Divine Love; it will unite
Hearts, and unite Interests; this will be the Interest of Christians, which
will flow from the love of Christ, that Christ's Interest prosper in the World;
that the Name of Christ be exalted, and be honorable, both in themselves and
in the World; that Christ be loved, that Christ be praised; that the Word of
Christ, the Worship of Christ, his Sabbaths, his Ordinances, be exalted in the
World; that the Glory and Holy Image of Christ, his Humility, Meekness,
Lowliness, Heavenliness, Righteousness, Mercy, may shine forth in our Faces,
and in the Faces and Ways of all his Saints; that we may in our particulars,
and jointly, show forth the Spirit and Life of serious and poweful Religion and
Godliness, in all manner of Holy Conversation; this we should account our
Interest with respect to Christ, that he may be thus Honored and Obeyed; and
this will be the Interest of Christians with respect to Christians, that we may
see one another, the whole Vineyard flourishing in the Power of Holiness, as
living and lively Instances of the Grace of God; and (as far as the Lord see it
good) may see one another prospering in this World, even as our Souls do
prosper.

O Christians, espouse this common Interest, and do what you can to promote
this Interest in the World; Love Christ, and lift up the Name of Christ; love
Christ and show forth the Image of Christ; love Christ and Consecrate your Life
to Christ; determine to know nothing, to value nothing, to rejoice in nothing,
but Jesus Christ and him Crucified. And then love one another, and study to
please one another, to profit one another, for their good to Edification; to
cast in your Lot together, to rejoice together with them that rejoice, to
grieve with them that suffer, to live together in love, forbearing one another,
forgiving one another, comforting one another, even as you your selves would be
Loved, forgiven, and comforted of God.

This now is the nature and the fruit of Divine Love, it unites Interests; but
Self-love, sinful Self-love divides Interests, and so those that seek the
things of Self, their carual things, seek not the things of Christ.

3. Sinful Self-love has a root remaining in the best Hearts, even of the
regenerate; though in Conversion Self has lost the Domlnion, and be cast down
from the Throne, yet is there a secret Tabernacle, a corner in the Heart, where
it fortifies it Self, and is still aspiring to recover the Throne it has lost;
the Dominion yet it retains, in some degree; an Interest in the affection, and
by this affection it has the advantage of us, and often recovers too great a
Command again.

How great a Power sinful Self-love has still in us, the experience of
Chistians sadly proves; for the clearing whereof, consider yet again more
distinctly, that there is, as has been already hinted, a threefold Self-love,
and accordingly a threefold Self-seeking.

1. There is a loving or seeking our selves, in conjunction with God, and in
subordination to him. This is a loving or seeking Self spiritually, a loving or
seeking of Self as Christians, as the Servants of God and Members of Christ, as
clothed with the Image, and devoted to the service, and aspiring to the
Salvation of God. This Self-loving and Self-seeking is our duty and our
excellency; the Interest of Self spiritual and the Interest of God, are a
conjunct Interest, only the Interest of Self is lower, and subordinate to the
Interest of God. When we thus seek our selves, our Spiritual and Eternal good,
we are therein most effectually seeking God, we cannot more effectually seek
God than in seeking our own Salvation. Those that seek Glory, Honor and
Immortality, for themselves, do therein seek the Glory and Honor of the
Immortal God; thereby declaring that they prize and value the Lord, as their
chief, nay, the only good. He that neglecting these lower things, does seeek
God as his only happiness, does therein take the Crown off the head of all his
Idols, and set it where it ought to be, on the Head of the most High. By our
seeking of God above all, we thereby evidently declare, that we Prize him and
Honor him above all; our thus seeking of God, is trampling into dirt all those
Idols, the Vanities of the World, which stood in Competition with God.

2. There is a Loving and Seeking our selves in separation from God. This is
our loving and seeking Self natural, the good of our Persons, our Bodies and
Souls, without considering them as bearing a respect to God. Our seeking our
well-being as mere men; our bodily well-being, our Health, and Strength, and
natural Activity; the well-being or perfecting our Souls; our seeking Wisdom,
and Knowledge, and Learning, etc. these things are all good, and worth our
seeking in their place; our bodily health and strength are good; Wisdom, and
Knowledge, and Learning are good; Health is better than Sickness, Strength than
weakness; Wisdom is better than Folly, and Knowledge than Ignorance; he has
more of the excellency of a man, who is a Learned man, than he that is but an
Idiot; but now the seeking these good things, as separate from God, the seeking
Health and not for God, the seeking Strength and not for God, the seeking
Wisdom and Learning and not for God, this is a sinful Self-seeking: As the Lord
spoke, Jer. 9.23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his Wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his Might, let not the Rich man glory in his Riches, but
let him that glories Glory in this, that he understands and knows me. So
may it be said, Let not this Might be sought, this Wisdom be sought, but in
order to the understanding, knowing and serving of me. Those that seek only
Lawful things for themselves, and in Lawful and Honest ways, that seek Health,
and Strength, that seek Estates, that seek Wisdom and Knowledge, and all these
in Lawful and Honest ways, yet if they seek these good things, these Lawful
things, only for themselves, and not with respect to God; if they seek not God
in seeking their Health and Estates, if they do not seek God in their seeking
Wisdom and Understanding, this is a Sinful and Idolatrous Self-seeking. It may
be, thou may not be an Epicure, or a Drunkard, or a Glutton, in thy Eating
and Drinking thou art sober and temperate, and eatest only for thy Health; It
may be, thou may not be Unjust, or an Oppressor in seeking an Estate for thy
self, yet for all this, thou may be an Idolater, and an Idolater thou art if
thou seek any of these things for thy self, and not God.

3. There is a loving or seeking of our selves, in opposition to God; a seeking
Self-carnal. It Is true, seeking our selves in Separation, is seeking our selves
in Opposition to God, but this seeking Self-carnal is in an higher and more
direct Opposition to God. Self-carnal is an Enemy to God, and seeking Self
thus, is the maintaining and cherishing that Enmity; he that inordinately seeks
his Ease, or the satisfaction of his Appetite and Senses, does therein do what
he can to feed and pamper that Enemy, his flesh, that it may wax wanton, and
headstrong, and kick against God.

Now however every Convert has decreed, and determined to seek himself, only
in conjunction and subordination to God, to seek himself in the Lord and for
the Lord; yet this sinful Self-love has a Root remaining in him, which will be
putting forth in sinful self-seeking. That word, Phil. 2.21. All seek their
own, was spoken of Christians; there were such declinings and such corruptions
gotten into the Churches, into the very Hearts of Professors, as unhappily
engaged them in this Self-seeking. [All] that is the most, 'twas a too general
Disease, there were many Sick of it. And not the things of Christ; (that is,)
not so heartily, not so zealously, not so Naturally, as 'twas said of Timothy,
Phil. 2.20. He did Naturally care for the things and state of the Church, and
of God; but says the Apostle, However it was with him, I have no Man like
minded; I find few Timothies among you; whilst he is seeking the things of
Christ, most of you are seeking your own things, and not the things of Christ.

How much of this self-love, and self-seeking, is to be found amongst
Christians, we have sad experiences enough to prove; we need not go to
Scripture for proof, we find too evident Proofs in our own Hearts and Lives; if
we have not totally gone back from Christ to Self, yet have we not suffered
this Idol to divide with Christ? O let us enquire a little.

1. Do we seek our selves and our own Interests, only in conconjunction with
Christ, and in subordination to Christ? Do we count nothing our own things, but
what are the things of Christ? Have we heatily espoused the Interest of Christ,
as our own Interest? Do we seek nothing in this World so, but that we can truly
call it, seeking of Christ? Do we seek our Healths, and our Estates, and our
safety, as the Servants of Christ? Can we call our laboring in our Callings,
our aiming at Thriving and Prosperity in our Affairs, can we call this, and
call it truly so, our Serving of Christ? If we would have Health and Strength,
is it for Christ we would have it? If we would have Estates in the World and be
Rich, is it for the sake of Christ that we would be Rich? That we may as Prove.
3.9. Honor the Lord with our Substance? Do we mark up all we can get, and all
we have, do we mark it up for Christ? Is there Holiness to the Lord written
upon all our Houses and Possessions? This House is the Lords, and these Lands
are the Lords; it is for him I have gotten them, and for him I will use them.

2. Do we not rather Seek these things in separation from God? Seek them for
themselves, for the love we have to them, for the sake of Self, to whose
service we devote them? do we not seek these things, with the neglect of
Christ? Is not Christ sought the less, and the more grieved for that the World
is sought so much? Is not Christ the less minded, the less loved, the more
seldom thought on by this means? Does not our Thriftiness and good Husbandry
for the World, our Eating and Feeding upon, our taking the Pleasure of what we
have here, does not this make an abatement upon our Christianity? Do we not
lose much of the Life and Spirit and Soul of Christianity in our Carnal things
and delights? Do we not so bless our selves in this Earth, that we so much the
less bless our selves in Christ, or in the God of Truth? Christians, pray
consider it; how do ye find it? Has not this Selfishness and Earthliness
spoiled you for Christians? Of how many Men's Prospering in the World, of how
many Men's laboring for the World, may it be said, This is the Fruit of these
Labors, this is the Fruit of this Prosperity, it has even spoiled a good
Christian, he has lost his Love, and lost his Life, and lost his Zeal for God,
in his loving and caring and good husbandry for himself? Pray consider, if this
be none of your cases; and if this be not a sad case, and whether you can take
any comfort in it or no? Had not those Hearts need to be looked to, that have
thus gone a Whoring, ('it is no better) that have gone a whoring from Christ,
after the World? Have thou governed that Heart of thine well, which thou have
suffered thus to play the Harlot? Have thou not need of looking better to it?
Christians, do you not see you had need to be more watchful over your Hearts,
and to hold them in under a closer and severer restraint, than you have
hitherto done?

Again, if you do not see how far sinful Self-love has prevailed in you above
the Love of God, consider further for conviction: 1. Do you love them that love
God, as you love them that love your Selves? There Is scarce any Man that is so
ill natured, but will love those that love himself; Do not even the Publicans
the same? Mat. 5. They love those that love them, and are beneficial to them;
But do you love those that love God, as you love those that love your selves?
Those that are loving and kind and friendly to you, you will love them, whether
they love God or no; and do you find that those that love God, you can love
them, whether they love you or no? If they should any of them be unkind, and
unfriendly to you, yet can you love them, because they love God? If not, if you
can love them that love you, though they do not love God, and cannot love them
who love God, in case they do not love you, what think you? Is not this an
evidence, that this Self-love has greater power in you, than the love of God?

2. Are you angry with those that offend God, as you are with those that offend
your Selves? The Psalmist could say, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them that
hate thee? am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? Yea I hate
them with a perfect hatred; I count them mine Enemies: Can you say so? I am
angry with them that are angry with thee: I am grieved at them, that sin
against God, those that are his Enemies, I count them mine own Enemies. Those
that wrong our selves, and offend our selves, that wrong us in our Names, by
traducing, backbiting or slandering of us, that wrong us of our Right, by Fraud
or Oppression, that do but speak an angry or unkind word to us, how quickly
does the Fire kindle? We are too hot and touchy, when Self is concerned; but
are we grieved, are we offended at those that sin against God? yea, even though
they be never so kind to our selves? Can we not wink at sin in our Friends, can
we not palliate and excuse it, and hide our eyes from the sins of them whom we
love, and upon whose kindness and friendship self has some dependence? How
then can thou say, thou love God as thou love thy self? Touch
self-Interest who dare, he shall not escape thy wrath; let him kick against
God, sin against Christ, and thou art never moved; Do thou love God as thou
love thy self? It was said of Holy Calvin, that when he heard that Luther
called him Devil, that he answered, But he is the Servant of the most High God;
it is said of Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8. That Righteous Man living among the Sodomites,
vexed his Righteous Soul with the filthy Conversation of those wicked Ones. Lot
had none of the best Neighbors in those wicked Sodomites; doubtless he
suffered many Personal wrongs and unkindnesses from them, that Righteous Man
could never be Neighbor to such wicked ones, without suffering from them
himself; but yet we read not, that he ever fretted or vexed at any thing they
did against himself; their wickedness against God, their filthy Conversation,
this was it which vexed his Righteous Soul. There was a Man that loved God
indeed; silent at wrongs done to himself, only vexed at what is done against
God. Is it so with thee? Is it so with us? O how quite contrary are we? Vexing,
and fretting, and chafing at whatever is against our selves, and silent and
quiet, and not moved in the concerns of God? Is this our love to God? Are we
lovers of God more than lovers of Self? Sure, beloved, this very thing, our
being so impatient of Self-offences, and so patient of offenses against God,
this very thing, if well considered, might make the most of our Hearts to ache,
and draw Tears from our Eyes, might set us all a Weeping, to think what daily
Arguments we have of this kind, to prove how powerful this Self-love, and how
weak the love of God is in us. Sure the more dear the Lord grows to us, the
more will it go to our Hearts, that he should be offended by any, and the more
Self-love were mortified, the easier should we bear Self-wrongs and Offenses.

And what can we say with respect to our Brethren Neighbors? Do we not so love
our selves, but that we are heartily concerned for our Neighbors? Have we
compassions toward them in their afflictions? Do we rejoice at their
Prosperity? Can we grieve with those that grieve, suffer with them that suffer,
and rejoice with them that rejoice and prosper? We can be glad when God
prospers our Selves, and can we be glad when he prospers others? O how do
Men rake and catch what they can, one from another? how do Men envy the
prosperity of their Neighbors? O how do some Men gape after the Possessions of
their Brethren, wishing even for their Death, when they are like to get any
thing by it? How many Landlords are glad of the death of their Tenants? How
many younger Brothers are glad at the death of the Heir? Yea, how do some
Children wait for the death of their Parents, that the Inheritance may fall to
themselves? And whence is all this wickedness? Is not this from Self-love? O
what Murtherous desires and hopes does it sometimes bring forth? Though it dare
not put upon Murtherous Practices, though it does not make Murtherous hands,
yet it often makes the Heart a Murtherous heart, and fills it with Murtherous
desires and practices, Mat. 15.19. Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts,
Murders, Adulteries. It Is this Self in the Heart, that is the Original
Murderer and Adulterer. You that are Professors of Religion, see diligently
whether there be no degree of this wickedness to be found in any of your
Hearts; to hope for, to wish for, or at least to be well pleased at the death
of others, when Self does get by their Death: Therefore

4. There is a necessity of keeping the Heart under Government. Is Self such an
Idol in the Heart? Is Self-love Idolatry, and the Root of so much wickedness?
The Rot of Religion? The Root of Unrighteousness, Unmercifulness? Yea and of
such Murtherous desires and wishes? And is there something of this Root
remaining even in Christians? And is it apt to put forth into such
Self-exaltings, and wicked Self-seeking, and will it certainly do so, where it
is not carefully looked to, and held under severe restraint; then certainly
there is no Government more necessary than Heart-Government.

2. Wherein the Government of the Heart stands; and it stands in these Five
things: 1. In subjecting the lower Faculties, the Affections, Appetite and
Senses, to Reason and Conscience. 2. In holding the Thoughts upon profitable
and pertinent Objects. 3. In exercising the Passions or Affections upon their
proper Objects, and within their due Limits and Bounds and Measures. 4. In
suppressing and keeping under the Evil, and cherishing and encouraging the Good
that is in the Heart. 5. In strengthening the Sinews of Government.


1. In subjecting the lower Faculties, the Affections, Appetite and Senses, to
Reason and Conscience. Reason must be Dictator in the Heart, and must not be
controlled or overborn by the inferior Faculties. Conscience is invested with
the Authority of God: Subjection to Reason and Conscience, is subjection to
God, and Rebellion against these, is Rebellion against God. The Reason of all
the disorders in the Heart is the Usurpation of Sense and Appetite, and their
rising up against Reason; when the People take Head against their Prince, what
disorders follow? God that said, Prove. 3.5. Lean not to thine own
understanding; that is, as corrupted and biassed by the Flesh, yet requires us
to lean to our Understandings, when they are contradicted and opposed by the
Flesh. The Prophet complains, Isa. 59.8. There is no Judgment in their goings,
they have made them crooked Paths; no Judgment, that is, no Understanding, no
Conscience in their goings; and where there is no Understanding nor Conscience,
there is nothing but crookedness.

Sinners Hearts do set up Sense and Appetite to be the Ruler; as 'twas said of
Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.31. He made the vilest of the People to be Priests; So
sinners make the vilest and lowest of their Faculties to be Rulers; they will
not be Ruled by Reason, they will not be governed by Conscience, but Affection
and Appetite must bear the sway. How comes it to pass, that thou art such a
Carnal sensual Liver? Does thy Reason tell thee, that a Carnal Worldly Life is
the best Life? Does thy Conscience command thee to be Covetous, or to be a
Libertine, to live at thine Ease and thy Pleasure? Does thy Conscience tell
thee, that this is the Life that God would have thee to live? That God would
have thee to live in the Alehouse; to follow thy Companions, or thy
Covetousness? It is not against thy Conscience, to be sober and serious and
circumspect in thy goings; it is not against thy Conscience to forbear thy
Lying, or thy Fraud, or thy Falsehood; no, it is thine Appetite, and thine
Affections, to whom thou have resigned thy Self to be governed, that lead thee
on thus.

Would you have good Government to be kept within you? Set up right Government;
let reason Govern, let Conscience govern; make your Senses and your Appetites
to know their place, and to keep under, and to be in subjection to your
Understandings and Conscience; embrace not any thing merely because it pleases
your Senses, seek not any thing because you have an Appetite to it, let not
your Affections lead you, but your Judgments and Understandings. It would be
well, if we were come thus far, to live according to the best of our
Understandings; and so far forth as we do so, so far forth we live under
Government; the Anarchy of domineering Appetites and Senses is no Government.
Do not your Understandings tell you, it is better to live in the love and fear
of God, than in the Lusts of the Flesh? Do not your Judgments tell you, that
an holy, sober, serious, heavenly Life, is better than Viciousness or Vanity.
Do not your Consciences call upon you, Love not the World, nor the Wine, and
strong Drink; follow not thy Sports and thy Pleasures, Fly youthful Lusts? have
thou not a Conscience within thee, that calls thus upon thee? When thy Lusts
call thee after thy Pleasure, when thy Covetousness calls thee after the World,
when thy Sense calls upon thee, Take thine Ease, take thy Liberty, have thou
not a Conscience within thee calling thee back, and charging thee to take heed,
and beware of Living thus? When thy Carnal will and thy Lusts call thee from
minding Christ, and Holiness, and Righteousness, let it all alone, meddle not
with such a severe Life, yet have thou not a Conscience within thee, telling
thee, it is best for thee to be a serious Christian? It would be better for
thee if thou would give thy self to an Holy, Humble godly Life, than to live
such a Libertine? It would be better for thee to be a sincere, strict,
diligent, active Christian, than to be such a trifling lazy Hypocrite and loose
Professor? Does not thy Conscience tell thee thus, and charge thee to be such
an one? Why let Conscience carry it, resign up thy self to the Government of it.

2. In keeping the Thoughts exercised upon profitable and pertinent Objects. I
told you before, that the unruliness of the Heart lies much in the unruliness
of the Thoughts; and how much of the Heart government stands in the Government
of the Thoughts; the best way to keep the Thoughts well governed, is to keep
them well exercised. Those Legions of Thoughts that are in the Heart, are like
the Soldiers of an Army; if Soldiers be not kept to Action, they will hardly
be kept under Command; when they lie idly and lazily in their Quarters, and
have nothing to do, then they use to Mutiny, and to break out into disorders;
sound an Alarm, and bring them to their Arms, and that is the best way to bring
them to Order.

Keep your disorderly mutinous Thoughts to exercise, and exercise them upon
what they ought to be exercised upon; be thinking profitable Thoughts; be
thinking upon Christ, upon the State of your Souls, upon the work of your
Souls; be thinking pertinent Thoughts, such as are proper to your present
cases, such as are proper to the present Season; when you are Hearing, fix your
Thoughts intently upon what you hear; when you are Reading, think on what you
Read; when you are Praying, think on what you Pray for; when at the Table of
the Lord, think on what is before you, upon your Crucified Lord, upon the love,
and kindness, and compassion of Christ to you; upon the Covenant you are
Sealing, etc. Afterward, think of what you have Heard, and Read, and prayed
for, and received, and covenanted, etc. Do not divert to other good Thoughts
that are not pertinent. Impertinent Thoughts though the matter of them be good,
are unprofitable Thoughts. Psalm. 139.18. When I awake, I am still with thee; my
Thoughts are with God; as verse. 17. How precious also are thy Thoughts to me?
How great is the Number of them? If I should count them, they are more in
Number than the Sands of the Sea. [Thy Thoughts] that is, either Gods Thoughts
toward him, or his Thoughts of God, and these Observe, 1. The gratefulness or
acceptableness of such Thoughts; how precious, how dear are they to me? It was
a pleasant thing to him to think of God. 2. The Multitude of his Thoughts of
God; how great is the Sum of them? God has many Thoughts of his Saints, and
Saints have many Thoughts of God. 3. A special Season of his thinking of God,
[when I awake] these are my Morning Thoughts, no sooner am I awake, but my
Heart is in Heaven, and Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation
all the day; where see, 1. The matter of his Thoughts, the Law of God, or those
blessed matters, those wonderful things contained in this Law, to be thinking
of the Word of God, is to be thinking of God, of Christ, of Holiness, of
Heaven, of the way to Heaven, and the like things that are written in the Word,
these are the matter of his Thoughts. 2. The Seasons of his Meditations, and
these are, every Season; he is constantly thus exercised, all the day; his
Morning thoughts are his continual Thoughts. 3. The Motive or Spring of his
Meditations, O how I love thy Law! What we love, we shall easily be thinking
of; if we love God, we shall be thinking of God, if we love our Souls, love
Holiness, love the Word, and ways of God, our Thoughts will be upon them. Do
thou not think on God, and the Law of God? It Is a sign thou love them not;
well, this is the right governing our Thoughts, and which will prevent the
wanderings and straglings and unruliness of them, the holding them thus well
exercised.

3. In holding our Affections and Passions to their proper Objects, and within
their due Bounds; so as that we love only what we should love, and as much and
no more than we should love it; to fear what we should fear, and as much and no
more than we should fear it; to desire what we should desire, and as much and
no more than we should desire it; to be angry with what we should be angry, and
no more than we should. I shall instance only in these Six Passions: Our Love.
Our Desire. Our Joy. Our Grief. Our Fear. Our Anger.


1. For our Love; this is then well Ordered, when we love only what we should
love, and as much and no more than we should love it.

The Object of Love is good, and only good; nothing can be loved but that which
is good, or apprehended so to be; and nothing ought to be loved, but that which
[is] good. God is good, the chief and Supreme good, the Fountain of all
goodness, infinitely good: Good is the Lord, Exodus 34.6. Abundant in goodness
and truth. Our danger here, is not of overloving, but of under-loving: God is
to be loved, with all the Heart, and with all the Might; there is no danger
here of erring in the excess; our beings are good, our Souls and Bodies; we are
Gods Workmanship, and of all Gods works, it is said Genesis 1. he saw that they
were good. Our well-being and prosperity and happiness is good; not only the
Prosperity of our Souls, our prospering in Grace and Holiness, our growing rich
unto God, but the Prosperity of our Bodies and outward man; our Health and our
Estates, is good, Joh. 3. I wish that thou may prosper and be in Health,
even as thy Soul prospers. The Creatures are good; our Bread, and our
Clothes, and our Houses, which are for the comfort of our Bodies; every
Creature of God is good, being sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4.
The Prosperity of our Neighbors, especially those of the household of Faith,
this also is a good that we should love. Touching our Souls, our danger is,
that we do not love these according to the price and worth of a Soul, which is
more than all the World, Mat. 16. or else, that we do not love them aright, so
as to seek their good. Touching our Bodies, and the Creatures that are for the
Health and prosperity of our Bodies, the great danger is of over-loving them;
of loving them more than we should, and more than they are worth. This is the
order that should be in well-governed Hearts, we should love the Creatures for
our Bodies, we should love our Bodies for our Souls, we should love them all,
and our Neighbors good also for God, and we should love love God for himself
And this ought to be the Measure of our Love, we should love God with all our
might; we should love our Souls as far forth as serves to the Honor of God; we
should love our Bodies, our Health and bodily Prosperity, as far as they are
serviceable to our Souls; and we should love the Creatures, our Houses, our
Money, our Estates, as far forth as they may be useful to our Bodies, in the
Service of our Souls, and to our Bodies and Souls in the Service of God; and we
should love our Neighbor as our selves.

An Heart that is set right in its love, is a well governed Heart; this is the
orginal of the disorder that is in our lives, the disorder of our love. Why is
it that these Bodies, and our Bodily Prosperity, is sought more than our Souls?
why do we seek Riches, and Pleasure, and Ease, and Money, more than we seek
Grace and Holiness? O we love the Creature too much, and we love God and our
Souls too little.

O, it were well with the sinful World, better than it is, if they loved God
and their Souls, as well as they love their Bodies and Estates; but Sinner, for
thy part, thou do not so; thou say thou love God, thou say thou
love thy Soul, thou say these are the gteat things thine Heart is upon;
no, thou do not love God as thou love that Carcass of thine, thou do not
love God as well as thou love thy Money, or thy Pleasures, or thy Health; thy
very Lusts, thy Carnal Sports and Merriments, thy vile Companions, and thy
Sins, thou art such a vile Brute, that thou love these more than thou love
God or thy Soul; thou art better pleased, thou art better satisfied, when the
Corn and the Wine increases, when thou Prosperest in this World, than with any
hopes thou have toward God for thy Soul. What is the Pleasure of thine Heart?
When art thou most merry, and best contented? When is it with thee as thou
would have it, but when thou art in Health, and Prosperest in these outward
things? God is dishonored, and neglected by thee, God is angry with thee, and
yet thou art well enough contented; thy Soul languisheth, it is a blind and
ignorant Soul, it is a sinful and guilty Soul, it is a stupid and hardened Soul,
it is a perishing and dying Soul; thy Soul is in the hands of the Devil, thy
Soul is a dead Soul, even dropping into Hell; and yet for all this, thou
sit there at thine Ease, and art nothing troubled at it; thou art Rich, and
have Money enough, at least thou have an House, and have Bread enough; thou art
in thy Health and thy Strength, and so long thou carest not, thou art not
troubled about, thou will not so much as think, How is it with my Soul? Is not
my poor Soul ready to perish, and like to be Damned for my Sins? And will thou
yet say, thou love thy Soul? 'Twere well for thee, better than it is, if thou
love thy Soul, as thou love thy Flesh, nay, as thou love thy dirty
Pleasures, and vile Companions, thy Horses in thy Stable, thy Pigs at the
Trough, thy very Dogs, thou love better than thou love thy Soul; this is
the wickedness of every Sinner among you; and where the Soul is less loved, God
himself is less loved than these vile things; yet thou will say, Thou love
God; no, thou do not love him as thou love the Dirt of thy Heels, the Lusts
of thy Flesh.

O wonder, wonder, Sinners, and be astonished at your Selves, that ever there
should be such a vile and wretched Heart within you, and yet you should sit
here, or go up and down the World, as well pleased with your selves, as well
satisfied with your selves, as you are. Who would think, that behold Sinners
Faces, how merry they look; who would think these merry ones, should have such
a vile and wicked Heart within them?

How is it with thee Sinner? What aileth thee? I am well, I thank God: Well art
thou? What, and have such a Devil in thy Bosom, such a wicked Heart, as
despises the Lord, and makes a God of thy Belly, or thy Money, or thy
Pleasure? The Lord make you deeply sensible of this wickedness, for it is
certainly your cases; 'twere better with you than it is, if you had loved God
as well as you do the Beasts that perish, if you loved your Souls as well as
you do those rotting and perishing Carkases.

And for you that are Christians, who do love your Souls more than your Bodies,
and God more than all, yet it is so little that God has the Pre-eminence in
your Love, that you are hard put to it in your Examination, to prove whether
the love of God has the Pre-eminence in you or no; whether there be not
something that you love more than God. It is a shame for us, Friends, that the
love of God is no more perfected in us; that there is no more sensible strength
of our Love to God, that we should be so often put to it, to Question which we
love best, God or our selves, God or this present World. Well, this should be
the Order and Measure of your Love, as I said before, that God be first loved,
next our Souls, then our Bodies, and after that the Creatures which are for the
Bodily Prosperity; that the Creature be loved no farther than it is serviceable
to the Health of our Bodies, and our Bodies loved in order to the service of
our Souls, and all so much, and no more, than conduces to the Honor and
Service of God; this should be the Order and Measure of our Love, and this
would be one Fruit of the due Government of our Hearts.

That I may the more effectually persuade you to set up and keep up this
Government in your Hearts, let me ask you,

Quest. 1. Can you except against this Order and Measure of your Love? Order in
the Heart, is as necessary as Order in a Kingdom, Army, or Family; and a due
Order in our Love, is necessary to the keeping up Order in the Heart.

1. Consider, Order in the Heart is as necessary as Order in a Kingdom, etc.
What is a Kingdom, if there be no Order in it? What is an Army, what is a
Family, where there is no order in it? What is there but Confusion and Ruin?
All runs into confusion, all runs to ruin where no Order is, Jam. 3.16. Where
envy and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work; where envy and
strife is, there is disorder; good Order would prevent strife and envying; and
where no good Order is, there is confusion and every evil work; O what Tumults
and Mutinies are there in our disorderly Hearts! there is no good doing, and
there is every evil work.

2. Order in our Love is necessary to the keeping our whole Hearts in Order:
upon the right Order and Measure of our Love, will follow the right Ordering of
all our Affections; there is no one of all our Affections but will be in good
Order, if our Love be in Order; if we love what we should love, we shall hate
what we should hate, and fear what we should fear, and desire what we should
desire, and grieve for what we should grieve, and be angry only at what we
should be angry; and when there is a due Measure in our Love, where we love as
much as we should, we shall hate as much as we should, and fear, and grieve,
and rejoice as much as we should, and no more; the motions and workings of all
our Affections do follow and flow from the working of our Love; as when we love
God, we shall hate and fear and grieve for all that is contrary to God, so when
we love God as much as we should, that is above all, and with all our Hearts,
we shall desire him above all, and hate and grieve for sin which is contrary to
God, with all our Hearts.

The Reason why we hate not sin as we should, why we fear not sin, and grieve
not for sin; the Reason why we desire no more after God, why we desire Grace no
more, and Holiness no more, it is because we have no more love to God and his
Holiness. The Reason why we love that we should not love, and desire and fear
what we should not, the Reason of our Carnal griefs and Worldly Sorrows, those
Sorrows that bring Death, 2 Cor. 7. is because we duly love not God; more love
to God would help and heal those inordinate Passions; you would never be lovers
of this Self, of this Flesh, of this World, of these Pleasures, did you duly
love God and the things of God, you complain of the unruliness of your
Passions, of your frettings, and vexings and the unquietness of your Hearts;
you complain of the hardness of your Hearts, you cannot hate sin as you should,
nor mourn for sin, nor fear it as you should; this you say is your Affliction,
and you know not how to help it; why, do but get more love to God, more intense
and ardent love to Him and his Holiness, and you will find all these Distempers
to fall, then you will hate and fear and mourn for sin as you ought to do;
there will be an end of your complainings of hardness of Heart, that you cannot
fear, nor grieve, nor mourn for sin; there will be an end of your complainings
of your over-loving the World, of your unreasonable passions, and frettings,
and anger, at what you should not, when once you have gotten duly to love the
Lord.

Well, by this you see the Order in the Heart, and in special the due Order and
Measure of your love that is necessary, and how necessary it is.

Can you therefore except against this Order and Measure of your Love? What
should be first and chiefly loved? Will thou not say, That God should be he?
Which should be most in our Love, our Bodies, or our Souls? Will you not every
one say, O my Soul, my Soul is of more worth than my Body, and more worthy of
my Love? Which should be more loved, your Bodies, or your Estates, and the
Creatures you enjoy? Surely you would all say in this, as Christ said, Mat.
6.25. The Life is more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment; what would you
think of such a Man, that loves his Money more than his own Body; that would
suffer his Body to Starve, and Pine, rather than spend his Money upon it? you
would say, This Man is a Monster; and is not he as much a Monster who loves his
Body more than his Soul, or himself more than God, as he who loves his Money
more than his Body? Christians, would you not count it well with you, if your
Love were thus regulated? What if you could now feel that which you have so
often questioned and doubted, whether it be so or no, that you can now love God
above all, that the whole stream of your Love, did run into the Ocean? If you
could feel such strong, and such lively, and such passionate workings of your
Hearts toward God, such dearness and such tenderness, and such strength and
ardency of Affection to the Lord; if you could feel your Hearts burning within
you, with the Divine Love; if these Hearts were all flameing Hearts, and
flaming upwards, and that so sensibly and so strongly, that there might be a
resolving of that doubt; and you sa^ it true beyond question, and you could
say, Now I feel who has mine Heart; none but God, none but Christ; Whom have I
in Heaven but thee? there is nothing in the Earth that I love, in comparison of
thee. God is the love of my Heart, and my Portion for ever; what if you could
now feel it thus within you? What if from your own sense and experience, you
could heartily speak out such words? Take this Heart to thee, O Lord; thine it
is, thou art mine only Love, and nothing will I love or regard but in Order to
thee; would you not bless your selves in such an experience? Would it not be
Marrow and Fatness to your Souls? Would you not rejoice in the Lord, and
triumph in Christ, and praise his Holy Name, that had wrought you to that pass?
That God should have thus gotten to be the chief in your love, and Self, and
Flesh, and the whole World, were brought to stoop and stand aside, yea, and to
be trampled on, in comparison of him? Sure you that are Christians, would count
it happy with you if it were thus, and I dare say concerning you, this is it
you pray for, and hope for, and wait, and thirst, and long after, and would
count it an infinitely greater matter of joy and praise, than if the Corn, and
the Wine, and the Oil, if all the Pomps, and Pleasures, and Grandeur of the
World were increasing unto you, and were rolling in upon you; and therefore you
for your parts have nothing to except against this Order and Measure of your
love.

Qu. 2. But how is it with you? If it be an excellent thing, if it be a blessed
thing to have our Hearts brought into such a Frame and Order, what do ye find?
Are you made partakers of this blessedness? O the Lord help me, I am far short
of it; I can feel that I love this World, I need no trial whether I love this
Flesh or no, whether I love my Credit or no, whether I love my Money, or my
Lands, or mine Ease, or my Pleasures; I feel I love these things, but whether I
love my Soul as I ought, whether I love God as I ought, there is my great doubt;
and I fear I do not. Do thou fear? Do thou doubt whether thou love thy
Soul, as thou love the World? Whether thou love thy God as thou love thy
Flesh? And is there any thing but need then, that thou should be brought to a
better pass? Can thou be quiet? can thou be comforted in any thing, whilst
it is thus with thee? Christians, would you ever be clearly satisfied
concerning your eternal State, that you shall hereafter dwell in the eternal
Love? Would you be comforted touching your present Case, that God is your God;
That Christ is your Jesus; That the Covenant, and the Promises, and the Mercies
of God are yours, that you are passed from Death to Life, that your Names are
written in Heaven, and that you are Enrolled amongst the Saints, and shall have
an Inheritance with the Saints in Light? Then put hard on for this blessed
Frame of Heart; let it henceforth be the great thing in your Eye, look for it,
pray for it, reach forth toward it; down with this World, tread upon this
Earth, and Flesh, love nothing but what God would have you love, love nothing
but in subordination to God. Dread the encroachments of the Creatures upon the
Right of God; despise these carnal Pleasures, despise this Money, and these
Lands, or this Credit, so far forth as they stand in competition with God; set
your Foot upon the Necks of them all; give your Hearts unto the Lord, and let
him be your Love and your Delight, and your Portion for ever.

2. For our Desires, in this as in the former, we must desire what we should
desire, and as much as, and no more than we should desire it; the Object of our
desires is the same with the Object of our Love; that which is Good.

Now of all the Good which may or ought to be desired,

1. Something is to be desired Absolutely and Vltimately, and thus God only is
to be desired,

2. Other good things are to be desired Absolutely but Subordinately; and thus
the first Grace is to be desired, and the evelasting Happiness of our Souls,
absolutely, but subordinately; we are to desire our own blessedness, but
chiefly that therein God may be glorified.

3. Other good things are to be desired in subordination and with submission.
And thus the higher Degrees of Grace, the best and most advantageous Means of
Grace, Gifts, the gift of Prayer, gifts for Edification, etc. these all are to
be desired with submission to the will of God; the first Grace, or saving Grace
we are not to desire with submission (so as to be content to be denied it) no
not to the will of God; for there is no such will of God for us to submit to:
God would not have any Man to submit to it, to be for ever left an Enemy, or a
Reprobate from God. God would not have any Man content to be Damned. Indeed,
the worst of Sinners must be silent to God, though he Damn them for their sins,
and not charge God foolishly, but acknowledge that he is Righteous in Damning
them; but they are not required to submit or be contented to be Damned. The
first grace, sincerity in Grace is to be desired absolutely, but as to higher
Degrees in Grace, the gifts of Grace, the means of Grace, etc. these are to be
desired but only with submission.

4. Other good things must be desired with submission and Moderation; thus all
Temporal good things are to be desired;

1. With submission; We may and ought to desire our Bodily Health, our Life,
and our Prospering in the World, but this must be put in (if it be the will of
God, and for the honor of God;) And if it be the will of God to deny us,
therein we must submit.

2. With Moderation; We should not desire great things for our selves, nor any
thing too earnestly; we may seek outward good things, but with a great
indifferency; we must not be greedy seekers. Greediness notes, 1. A desire
after much, it is not a little that will satisfy the greedy mind. 2. An eager
Desire, a greedy Appetite is a ravenous Appetite, which scarce any thing will
satisfy or quench; and such an Appetite we must not allow in our selves after
these Temporal things.

We must desire an increase of Grace, yea, and of the gifts of Grace,
Earnestly, 1 Cor. 14.31. Covet earnestly the best gifts; we must not be content
with a little Grace; though we must submit to Gods dispensation, we must not so
submit to be of little Faith, as not to seek, and seek earnestly for an
increase; yet so far we must submit, as to be without murmuring, yea and to be
thankful for that little we have. Reach forth to the things that are before,
press hard on toward the Mark; be zealous in contending for the highest pitch
of Grace and Holiness; yea and as to the gifts of Grace, the Apostle exhorts, 1
Cor. 14.12. Seek that ye may excel, to the Edifying of the Church. Those that
do not press on after an increase in Grace, it is a sign they have no Grace in
them that is True; here, he that is content with a little, it is an Evidence that
he has nothing. Let your eye be upon getting up to the highest form of
Christians, so as to excel and shine forth most gloriously in the Grace of
God; but if notwithstanding all your endeavors, you still fall short, and it
continue to be low with you, murmur not at God: Blame your selves that you have
no more, there is the fault, you are not straightened in the Lord but in your own
Bowels, in your own narrow Hearts; yet still, as little as you have, be
thankful that there is something of the Grace of God in you; if ye be some of
the lowest of the Servants of the Lord, yet bless him that you are his
Servants, still contending and that earnestly to rise and increase more and
more.

This increase of Grace, and of the gifts of Grace, is to be desired with
submission, but yet earnestly; but in seeking after Temporal good things, there
must be not only submission, but great Moderation; we must neither seek much of
them, nor be over eager in our desiring of them.

From what has been said, will follow these Three Directions for governing
your desires.

1. Quicken and enlarge your desires after God and the good things above, and
desire them as much as you should. 2. Curb and limit your desires after the
good things below, and desire them no more than you should. 3. Crush and
crucify your desires after the Evil and hurtful things below, and desire them
not at all.
1. Quicken and enlarge your desires after God and the good things above, and
desire them as much as you should. Fear not transgressing in the excess; you
cannot desire God or his Grace too much; enlarge your desires.

1. Desire to have as much as you can. Desire as much of God, as much Grace as
possible; seek great things for your selves here; the more of God you can get,
the more blessed are you; and the more Grace you have, the more of God you
have. Desire to abound and excel in the Grace of God; get as much Likeness to
God, as much Love to God, as much Faith in God, as much sense of the Love, and
Goodness and Kindness of God, as your Hearts can hold. The Apostle prays for
the Colossians, Chap. 1.9. That they might be filled with the Knowledge of God,
in all Wisdom and Spiritual understanding, and Verse. 11. Strengthened with all
Might, according to his glorious Power. What is his desire for them, let be
your desires for your selves; that you may be filled with the Knowledge and
Grace of God, that you may be as full of God, as Sinners are full of the Devil;
that you may be as full of Love, as Sinners are of Lust; that you may be as
full of Holiness, as they are of Wickedness. Sinners are full of sin, Acts
13.10. O thou full of all subtilty and guile: The Devil fills their Hearts,
Acts 5. Why has Satan filled your Hearts? Get your Hearts to be emptied of
the Devils fullness, and to be filled with all the fullness of God. Let this be
your desire, Christians, not to have something of God, something of the grace
of God; let not a little content you; seek to have all grace to abound in you;
let this be your Ambition, to get up to be the best of Christians, the chiefest
of Saints, the least and lowest in your own esteems, but the highest in the
grace of God; seek as much grace as possible.

2. Desire God and his Grace with as much earnestness and intention of Soul as
possible. Let your desires be large desires, and let them be ardent desires;
let your Hearts burn in Love, and burn in Holy desires after God; let this be
the one thing you desire, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord, and behold the beauty of the Lord;
here Note, 1. God and all the things of God are but one thing, and our desire
after all these, is our desiring but one thing; In desiring God, we desire the
grace of God, and the means of grace, and the delights and comforts of God; and
our desiring of grace and the things of God, is our desiring God; to desire God
and to desire grace is one and the same thing. 2. The Saints desiring after God
and his grace, are strong desires; the fixing of the desires upon one thing,
notes the intention of our desires; when the whole Stream runs in one Channnel,
and toward one point, it runs more strongly; when the Heart is divided betwixt
many things, God has something of the desire, and the World also has its part
and share with God, its Motions are the more weakly toward him.

O stir up and quicken your desires after God, and that they may be quickened
into the more strong desires, unite them, let all your desires be after this
one thing, the grace and good will of the Lord.

Christians, let me ask you, What would you have? What is it you desire? O let
the Lord be my God; let me have grace from the Lord; but what of God, how much
of the grace of God would content you? It may be some of you would answer, O!
if it were never so little; if I could have Faith, though it were but as a
grain of Mustard Seed; if I could get any thing of God in my Heart, if by the
grace of God in me, this Heart of mine might be but as a bruised Reed, and
smoking Flax, if I might get any thing that God would not despise, this should
satisfy me; It Is true, the least degree of saving grace, the least Beam of the
Divine Light, the first springing of the Life of God in us, the least Spark of
his Holy Image, our desires should be so far fixed on this, that nothing short
of this, nothing short of the truth of Grace, should in the least suffice us;
and we should be thankful for the very first grace, if we should never have any
more, or rise no higher. But are there not some that would have this, and care
for no more; that bound and limit their desires to the first and lowest degrees
of grace? This desire is not the desire of the Children of God; thou may go
to Hell with such desires after God: he that desires not to be perfectly Holy,
is not sincerely Holy.

Do you desire God? do you desire grace? Stir up and enlarge your desires; let
those narrow Hearts open their Mouths wide; be covetous Christians, covet much,
and covet earnestly these best of gi^ts; say with the Psalmist, This one thing
I desire; nothing but God, nothing but grace, take Corn and Wine who will, take
the Gold and the Silver who will, let the Lord God be mine, and that shall
suffice me. Desire God only, and follow after God fully, as Psalm 63.8. My Soul
follows hard after thee. Friends, you have some Wishes, and some weaker
desires after the Lord, O quicken up these fainty Hearts; look oftener before
you, how worthy the Lord is of all your desires; what a Jewel, what a Treasure
the grace of God is; look oftener Heavenward, get a sight of God and his
glorious Treasures, live more in the Contemplation of his glory and goodness;
it is the sight of the Object that must kindle and quicken desires; you that
have cold Hearts Heavenward, it is a sign your Eye is little in Heaven. Believe
it, some clearer views of the Love, and Goodness, and Holiness, and Kindness,
and Glory of the Lord, would whet your Appetites, would put Life into those
dull Desires, would make you hungry Souls, and thirsty Souls, and longing
Souls; O look oftener upward; dwell in the Mountain of Spices; get some Taste
and Relish of the goodness of God, by being more constantly conversant with
him, and this will set abroach all your Vessels, your Souls would stream forth
in the Words and Sighs of the Psalmist, Psalm. 42.1. As the Heart pants after
the Water Brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for
God, for the living God.

2. Curb and limit your desires after the good things below, and desire them no
more than you should: particularly

1. Desire not over much of them. The best Food, the best Physic, if we take
too much of it, becomes hurtful and pernicious; when the Stomach is
overcharged, and so when the Heart is overcharged, it surfets, and suffers
prejudice by what it has received. That Prayer of Agur, Prove. 30.8. should be
the desire of Christians, Feed me with Food convenient; a convenient
Habitation, a competent Portion of these Earthly things should be the
Proportion of our desires. O, if Men knew what were enough, and when they had
enough, it would prevent the extravagancy of our desires, Jer. 45.5. Seek
thou great things to thy self? Seek them not. Thou can not bear great things;
great Possessions are great Temptations. Seek no greater things than thou can
bear; a Ship that has more than its Load, will sink and drown. The Journey or
Voyage of the Heart is upwards, you are Traveling Heaven-wards; this Earth,
the more you have of it, presses you down-ward, and hinders your ascending. O
how much nearer Heaven might some of our Hearts have ascended, how much nearer
to God and Glory might we have gotten, had we not been clogged with the things
of this Earth? Some Men are too Rich, and too Prosperous in this World, to be
Spiritually-minded. Great Estates bring great Cares, and encumbring Business,
so that they cannot be at liberty, nor at leisure to think on God, or their
Souls. Desire only so much of the World, as is best for you; and that
proportion is best for you, which will help you Heavenward, and least hinder
you; know what is a competency, and desire no more. That Is not a competency
which is enough to satisfy your Appetite; you will never say you have enough,
if you will stay till your Appetite say, It is enough; this is like those two
Daughters of the Horse-Leach, Prove. 30.15. that still cry, Give, give; Get,
get, and never say, It is enough. That is not a competency which will satisfy
your Appetite, but that which will comfortably serve your necessities; know
what is a competency, and desire no more.

2. Desire them not over earnestly; be not over hungry and greedy Souls; desire
but a competency, and desire it but moderately; that you may not over-desire
these Earthly good things, do not over-prize them. Carry it toward the good
things below, as Sinners carry it toward Christ, and the good things above;
how do Sinners carry it toward Christ? They make light of him, Isa. 53.2. They
see no beauty in him, that they should desire him. See as little beauty in the
World, as Sinners see in Christ; make as light of the good things of the Earth
as they do of the good things of Heaven, and then your desires will be as cold
after these things as theirs are after Christ; O if Christians did desire this
Earth no more than Sinners desire Heaven, how mortified would all their Earthly
desires be.

Mortify your inordinate desires after the World; quench your thirst after the
good things thereof, or else these desires will mortify and quench your thirst
after God.

Christians, you would fain love God more; it is your Affliction that your
Affections to things above are so dull and so flat, that you have no more
strong and working desires Heavenward; abate your desires to things below, and
then they will rise more to the things above; never look to love God more than
you do, till you love the World less than you do. Do ye mean to hold up at this
height, in your Carnal desires? Will you not set Bounds to your Earthly
Appetites? Then count upon it, God is like to have little of your Hearts; of so
great consequence is the bounding and abating of your Worldly desires, that if
ever you would love, or desire, or seeek God more than you do, you [must]
strike Sail, and drive on more moderately, and more mortifiedly toward the
World.

Love this World less, and you will desire it less; desire it less, and you
will seek it less; seek the World less, and you are like to be in good earnest
Seekers of God.

Quench your thirst, Friends, quench your thirst after these stolen Waters:
drink deep Draughts of the Water of Life, and you will no longer thirst so
after these puddle Waters, Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the Water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst; that is, after these Carnal Things. You who
have such thirsty Souls after the Waters of your own Cisterns, it is a sign that
you are little at the Fountain of Living Waters. Thou have not drank of the
Rock of the Wilderness, who so lustest after the Rivers of Egypt. Christians,
dwell more at the Springhead, drink of the Fountain, let out your desires more
after God; Taste more of the sweetness of Christ; let down your Pitchers into
the Wells of Salvation, fetch in more of that Living-Water; lie more at the
Breasts, desire more the sincere Milk of the Word, and suck in that Milk. Drink
more of the Wine that is prepared in the Kingdom of God; my meaning is, live
more with God, feed upon Christ, delight your selves more in God, solace and
satisfy your selves more in Communion with God, acquaint your selves more
inwardly and experimentally with the sweetness of Religion, and this will be
the best way to quench your thirst, and abate your desires after these Carnal
Things. Desire them still you may, and you will, as far forth as they are good
for you, and as far as your Heavenly Father sees them needful for you; but
there will be an end of your greedy, and ravenous, and insatiable desires; if
you desire God as much as you should, you will desire the World no more than
you should.

3. Crush your desires after the evil and hurtful things below, so as not to
desire them at all. The Pleasures of Sin, and the Pomps and Pride of this Life,
and the Gains of Unrighteousness, desire them not at all. These can never be
good for you, and therefore are not to be desired. It cannot be good to grow
Rich by Fraud or Oppression, they are cursed Gains that come in that way; the
Pompous Pride of the World, and the sinful Sports and Pleasures of the World,
these are the Bane and Poison of Souls; a Cup of Poison is not more Mortal to
the Body than these Cups of Fornication or sinful Pleasures are to the Soul;
and therefore desires after these must not be limited or moderated, but be
crushed and crucified. I told you before, of two Instruments of Government, a
Spur, and a Curb: and the needfulness and use of these in the Government of
your Desires, you have seen in the two former Directions; the need of a Spur to
quicken our desires after God and his Grace; of a Curb, to restrain and limit
our Desires after the good things of the World; and now I shall tell you of a
Third Instrument of Government, and that is a Cross or a Gibbet, to Execute and
Crucify our Desires after the Evils of the World: what Government can be
without Laws? And what are Laws without Penalties? And what are Penalties if
there be no Execution? There must be Gallows and Gibbets set up to cut off
Malefactors, or there is like to be but poor Government. The desires after these
Evil things of the World, are Malefactors that must be cut off and Crucified,
Gal. 6.14 I am Crucified to the World by the Cross of Christ; that is, my
sinful Love of the World, my lusting after the World; those three Worldly Lusts
in special, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, these are all Crucified by the Cross of Christ. Moderate your Desires
after these good things of the World, but kill your desires after these Evil
things. Do thou desire the sinful Pleasures of the World? Art thou for a
wanton or voluptuous Life? Do thou desire the Gain of Unrighteousness that
comes in by Fraud or Oppression, by shortning or detaining the Hire of thy poor
Laborers? Art thou for growing Rich, by straitening, or starving, or ruining
thy poor Workmen? Do thou affect a Proud, or a Pompous Life? O Kill and
Crucify all such Desires; Nail them to the Cross; hang up these Malefactors;
let there not be a Lust left in thee after these wickednesses, but bring it
forth to Execution; let there be no such Desires found alive in your Hearts.
Leave it to the Epicures and Fornicators of the World to be Sons of Pleasure;
leave it to the Horse-leaches of the Earth, to be Blood-Suckers, to thirst
after such Gain as is wrung out of the Bowels of the Poor; leave it to the
Butterflies, and Wantons of the World, to affect Mimical and Pompous Gaudry;
let Christians know no such Desires, much less allow them, and foster them,
where they feel them working and rising.

And as I hinted to you but now, know that the two last Directions, Curb and
Crush, will be easiest to be Observed, if the first, quicken Desires after God
and Grace, be diligently prosecuted. And therefore here I in special exhort you
to give all diligence, enlarge and whet your Appetites after God and the things
above. Remember what I told you but now; acquaint your selves with God, live
more in the Contemplation of God, live more in Communion with God, get you into
the inside of Religion; keep you close by God, keep you near to Christ, let
your desire be to your Father, let your desire be to your Husband; be able to
say with the Church, Isa. 26.8, 9. The desire of my Soul is to thy Name, and to
the remembrance of thee, with my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea,
with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early; desire the Lord, till you can
delight in the Lord; delight your selves in the Lord, and then you will despise
those desires of small things that take up the Hearts of Worldlings. Shall I
forsake my Fatness, says the Olive Tree? Shall I forsake my sweetness, says
the Fig Tree, and become King over the Trees? Judges 9.9, 11. Shall I forsake
the Fatness of the Olive, the sweetness of the Fig Tree, and feed my Soul on
these Brambles and wild Vines, which are the Lusts of Foolish Worldlings? He
that has drank Old Wine, will not desire the New, for he says the Old is
better. God has better things for you to desire; better Wine, better
Pleasures, better Inheritances for you; O live so with God, live so upon
Christ, that you may get you a Taste of his better Wine, a Taste of his sweeter
Pleasures, a Taste of the Fatness of Heaven, and then you will the more despise
this Earth and the Fullness thereof.

You now that are for Government in your Hearts, for the Government of your
desires, take this course for thus Governing of them; desire God and the things
above as much as you should, desire the good things below no more than you
should, desire the evil things below not at all; get your desires after Lawful
things to be moderated, your desires after sinful things to be Crucified; put
Wings to your Holy desires, put Clogs and Fetters upon your Natural desires,
and up to the Cross, to the Gibbet, with these sinful desires; and herein have
you set up the Lord to be the King in your Hearts, and brought your very
Appetites to be subject to him.

3. For our Joys; for the due raising and limiting of these, I shall show,

1. The Object of Joy, is the same with the Object of Love and Desire. He that
Loves, whatever it be, if he has it not, he desires it, if he has it he
rejoiceth; he that loves God, if he can hear such a Word from God, I am Thine,
that is a joyful Word, then he can rejoice in God; he that loves Money, or the
gains of this World, if he has it not, he desires it, if he has it he
rejoiceth; his Money is his Joy, his Estate is his Joy, such a joy as it is, a
poor flashy Joy, yet Joy there is to him. The Woman in the Parable, Luke 15.9.
that had lost her piece of Silver, when She had found it, She calls her
Neighbors together to rejoice with her; sure such a Woman loved Money well.
Joy arises,

1. Originally from its Object, or the Thing loved. It is God that is the
Fountain of Divine Joy; thence it springs and comes in; therefore the Apostle
prays, Romans 15.13. The God of Hope fill you with all Joy. There are Three ways
by which our Joy in God is raised. 1. By Contemplation: by Contempla^ing of
God, we come to see and find out what matter of Joy there is in God; it brings
the goodness and kindness, the satisfying and ravishing Excellencies of God to
our sight; those to whom the glorious Lord is as a barren Wilderness, or Land
of Darkness, as the expression is Jer. 2.31. it is either from their Ignorance,
or their want of Contemplating of God. It is a sign thou art a blind Soul, and
know not God, or that thou art a Sranger to Divine Meditation: Thou look
little Heavenward, thou do not send up thy Thoughts in search for God, who
yet say, Where is that Joy? Where is that Blessedness? Where is that Joy?
Look more diligently in the Face of God, let thy Soul dwell in the Study and
Contemplation of his infinite goodness; thou have a glass before thee, the
glass of the Word, wherein his glory shines, look more into that glass, and
Meditate much upon what that Word reveals of the Excellencies of God, and
then thou shall see his Glory, and Taste his Joy. 2. Expectation and Hope;
therefore we Read of Rejoicing in Hope, Romans 5.2. When Contemplation has
discovered the Blessedness that is in God, then Hope lays hold on it: this
Blessedness may be mine, says the Soul, and I have good Hope it may be mine,
and in that Hope I joy. What Malefactor, that is in fear of Death for his
Offenses, that should be told there is yet hope of thy Pardon, hope that thou
may live, but would rejoice in that Hope? What poor Man, that is in want,
that should have Tidings of a Rich Inheritance that was falling to him, but his
Hope would make him to Sing for Joy? Do thou hear of the unsearchable Riches
of Christ, of the Treasures of everlasting Joy, that that are in the Lord God,
and have thou Hope that these will be thy Riches, and thy Treasures? how can
thou but rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God? 3. Fruition, or the enjoying of
the Object loved; and this is it which brings the fullest Joy; Fruition stands,
1. In our Actual Possession of the Object; when we have what we hoped for and
there is a double Possession of God, that the Saints have in this Life: 1. A
Possession by Faith, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has Life; that is, he
that believes in Christ, has Christ; his Faith puts him into Possession, and
from this, the Possession of Faith, Joy follows, Romans 15.13. The God of Hope
fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing. 2. A Possession by Sense; when we
Taste that the Lord is gracious, when we feel the comfortable refreshings of
his loving kindness; when the beams of his Light, and the Streamings of his
Love, shine upon and warm our Hearts; when his Light Shines into our Darkness,
and gives us the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.8. And when his Love is shed abroad into our Hearts by the Holy Ghost
which he has given us, Romans 5.5. When we see how lovely the Lord is, and feel
that he loves us.

2. In the satisfaction of our Hearts with this Possession; when we are
pleased, and delighted, and satisfied with his goodness. A full satisfaction of
the Heart will not be, till hereafter, Psalm. 17.15. When I awake I shall be
satisfied; and therefore our fullness of Joy is reserved till then; but
satisfaction to such a Degree there is upon our present Possession, as gives us
a kind of present Fruition.

2. This Joy arises, as from the Object, so immediately from the very Act of
Loving. Joy arises from love, 1. By way of immediate resultancy; there is a
great Pleasure in Love; as there is bitterness in grief and sorrow, so there is
sweetness in Love; this very Blossom of Love casts forth such a fragrancy, as
no Man knows but he that has it. It is a Sweet and a Pleasant thing to live ln
the love of God. He that loves God, and feels that he loves him, and he has
him whom he loves, cannot but rejoice in him, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen
ye love, and believing ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of glory: There
we have, 1. A Christians love to God, whom having not seen ye love. 2. His
Possession of what he loves, believing; Believing, is as I said before, getting
Possession; and then 3. The Joy that follows, ye rejoice, etc.

2. By way of Reflection; when a Christian upon his review of this his love to
Christ, perceives that he loves him in sincerity, this is to him a Token of
Christ's love to him. Do thou see, do thou feel that thou love Christ?
This thy love to Christ is a Token that he has sent thee into thy Heart, to
tell thee that he loves thee. And when thine Heart can say, I am my Beloveds,
and my Beloved is mine; the Lord is [my] God, [my] Savior, [my] Portion and
Inheritance, can thou say so? Then thou will add with the Psalmist, Psalm.
16.6.9. The Lines are fallen to me in a Pleasant Place, and I have a goodly
Heritage, therefore mine Heart is glad, and my Glory rejoiceth. Thou will show
me the path of Life; in thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy Right hand
there are Pleasures for evermore.

And as it is with Divine Joy, the Object whereof is God, so is it, in a poor
and pitiful manner, with Earthly Joy, the Object whereof is the good things
below: This Joy is raised from our Contemplating of Worldly things, and those
Carnal Delights they will yield, and thereby sucking out such Juice as they
have, for our Carnal hearts to feed upon; by expectation and hope, that these
things that we may get, get Money, get us Estates, and the comforts of them,
and also by our Fruition of them, when we get them; our loving and taking the
delight and contentment of them, and according to what we have of these things,
and the Degree of our Love to them, such is the joy that arises to us from
them.

2. I shall give you some Directions for the right raising and due limiting of
your Joy.

1. Rejoice in the Lord, and let your joy in the Lord, 1. Bear some Proportion,
as much as those narrow Hearts can reach to, to that fullness, and those
Everlasting Treasures of infinite Love and Goodness which are in God for you. I
could tell you something of that satisfaction and rest which your Souls shall
one day enjoy in God, from the Word of God; and the Experiences of some of his
Saints, will tell you much more; but when your Eyes shall come to see God, then
you will say, That one half was not told me. If some drops of this Joy, let
fall upon the Saints here on Earth, have sweetened all the Waters of Marah,
turned their Prisons into Palaces, yea, their very Stakes and Gibbets into
Triumphal Chariots; if a few drops of that Joy have been so sweet, and so
powerful, what will the Rivers of his Pleasures be? As the Apostle, 1 John 1.4.
These things I write, so these things I speak, that your Joy may be full.
Rejoice in the Lord, and let the Joy of the Lord be your Strength; let this Joy
be the Strength of your Hearts, and the Strength or Top of all your Joys.

2. Let your Joy in God be raised, 1. From the Evidence of your Interest in God
at present, from your sincerity in the grace of God, and your Union with
Christ. You must be in Christ 'ere ever you can rejoice in Christ Jesus; what
will it be to Joy in God, if God be none of yours? Satisfy not your selves
with mistaken Joys. There is the Joy of the Hypocrite; some there are, who
upon some light touches of the Word of God upon them, and some little change it
makes, are all on a sudden wrapped up into Ecstasies of Joy; though still they
remain short of the grace of God, yet they seem to be transported with the Joy
of God; such Joy often proves to be but as a Flash of Lightning, which comes in
on a sudden, and then vanishes into greater Darkness, Job 20.5. The Joy of the
Hypocrite is but for a Moment; it comes on a sudden, and in a great Flash, and
on a sudden it is gone again. The Joy of the Saints is not so sudden, but it is
lasting; it is not such a glorious Flash, but is solid and substantial; like a
deep River, that makes no great Noise, when the shallow Brooks make a greater
Bubling.

See that the Foundation of your Joy be laid in Peace, and the Foundation of
your Peace be laid in Grace. Get an Interest in Christ, soundness of Heart
toward God, and sincerity of Love to Christ, see to it that you be his own,
that you be not Hypocrites and Hangby's upon Christ, but his real Members and
Hearty Disciples. Thou rejoicest in God, thou rejoicest in Christ Jesus, but
art thou of the Circumcision? Of a Circumcised and Sanctified Heart. Do thou
worship God in the Spirit, as the Apostles expressions are, Phil. 3.3. Is thine
Heart with the Lord? Do thou love him with thine Heart, and cleave to him
with thine Heart, and serve him in thy Spirit, in thine Inwards, and all the
Powers of thy Soul? If thou art of the Circumcision, and thus worshippest God
in the Spirit, which are the Properties of sincere Disciples, then thou may
rejoice: Beware of trusting to the most Elevated Joys, that you seem any of
you to have felt in Religion, and the Exercises thereof; you may seem to have
much of the Joy of God, who have nothing of the Grace of God. Thou may carry
such Joys with thee to the Grave, and they may drop down with thee into Hell,
and be swallowed up of everlasting Sorrow; judge not of your Religion by your
Joys, but judge of your Joys by your soundness in Religion. See then that
thou art gotten beyond an Hypocrite, before thou meddle with the Joy of the
Saints.

2. From your Hope of the Glory of God. Rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God,
Romans 5.2. Thou that art a real Christian, it may be thou have little sense of
the sweetness of Religion; thou go heavily under thy Burdens, the Burden
of thy Corruption and Infirmities; thou live much in the Dark, the Light of
the Lord is within the vail, and thou can perceive but very small glimmerings
of it; thou go heavily on thy way, hungring and thirsting, and fearing and
fainting, and mourning over thine uncomfortable condition; yet lift up the
Hands that hang down; yea lift up your Heads, you disconsolate ones; though the
Light, and the Love, and the Comforts, and the Kindnesses of God be veiled from
thine Eye, yet let thine Hope enter into that within the vail, Psalm 42.11. Why
art thou cast down, O my Soul? Why art thou disquieted within me? Why, how can
it be otherwise? wherewithal may I be cheared and comforted? Why, Hope in God;
Hope in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the Light --

Let these two Directions go both together. 1. Let the Foundation of Joy be
laid in sincerity of Grace; I can never bid thee rejoice, till thou be
persuaded to be an Hearty Christian. 2. Let your supply of the want of Joy in
Sense, be made up from the Joy of Hope: If thou art a Stranger to all present
Joy, yet if thou art not a Stranger from Love, thou have this Hope to cheer
thee, that thou shall verily see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
Living.

3. From your Increases in the Grace of God. They are ordinarily the Stronger
and more grown Christians, who can sincerely rejoice in God. Younger Christians
are often Mourners, and do but go on lamenting after God. It Is true, there are
some Young Converts, or that seem to be such, whose Joys meet them at the very
entry of Christianity; who at the very first being wrought upon, seem to be all
in a Flame of Love and Joy, Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy Youth, and
the Love of thine Epousals; who have a bright Morning of it, and a beautiful
and fair Sunrising; 'twere well if it would hold; but after a while, Clouds
gather, and it is darker with them at Noon, than it was in the Morning; their
Joy sinks, and their Love sinks; Clouds of Corruption overspread both their
Joys and their Hopes. However it may be with some Beginners, (and it is never
so well, as they think, if it do not hold) however it may be with some
Beginners, yet ordinarily, they are only the grown Christians, who are
Partakers of solid substantial Joy; for a great part of their time it is as
Zech. 14.7. It is neither Light nor Dark with them, neither Night nor perfect
Day, but in the Evening there shall be Light. In our first time, it must be
said only, as Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the Righteous, and joyful gladness
for the upright in Heart; this Joy is sown in Sorrows, and sown in Tears, but
as we grow up, what was sown in our Infancy, breaks forth and shines in our Age.

Friends, dote not too much on your Morning Infant Joys, they may vanish into
Darkness. It is the solid Joy of the grown Christian, that is usually the
abiding Joy; therefore if you would not be put off with some short fits of Joy,
if you would have that standing Joy which no Man can take from you, set your
Hearts to it, to increase in the grace of God; be thriving Christians, grow in
Grace, and grow in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and then your Joy
shall abound and abide: Friends, you now go on drooping, and doubting, and
fearing; you have many a sad day of it, but would you see good days? would you
have your Cloudy to become clearer Days? Would you have more Sunshine upon
your Hearts? Then get the Sun of Righteousness to rise higher in you. Misty
Mornings, as the Sun rises higher, the Mists are dispelled, and the Day
grows clear at Noon, which was so Dark in the Morning.

Christians, how many Arguments have I used with you, to persuade you to press
on after an Increase in Grace, after a more Spiritual and Heavenly Frame of
Heart and Life? What success have former persuasions had? Are you grown? Are
you improved? Or do you set your Hearts upon it? Are you reaching forward? or
do you not contentedly keep at a stand, and seem to grow backward, and lose
your former Life and Vigor? What shall I say to you? What may I do for you, to
Nurse you up to higher Statures? We live in a declining Age; every where there
are sad complaints, that Rel gion is at a stand, and growing to decay: How is
it with you? Are there any lively Souls among you? Do you get ground, does your
Light break forth? Do your ways, as the Path of the Just, Prove. 4.18. Shine
more and more toward the perfect Day? Friends, pray inquire, one by one, Is it
thus with me? It it thus with me? If I might, but prevail with you, to set your
Hearts to it, O what a Goshen might we be, in comparison of the Dark places of
the Earth? Whilst there is such sad Darkness in most places of the Land, yet,
in this Goshen there would be Light. O might we see more of the Light of Grace
in you, we should surely see much of the Light of Joy. If the Soul of Hearty
Christianity might gather more strength within you, and bring forth more Fruit
without; if you would tread upon this Earth, blow off these Ashes, blow up the
Coals, shake off this sluggish sleepiness of Heart; if we could get these cold
Hearts to be warmed once, would it not be a Joy and rejoicing to us? Be
persuaded, Friends, to set to sowing more joy for your Selves. Whilst Sinners
are Sowing Tears for themselves, and Sorrows and Lamentations, (this they do in
their Carnal Merriments:) Carnal Mirth is but the Seed of Sorrow and Misery; as
Light is Sown for the Righteous Mourners, so Darkness is Sown for rejoicing
Sinners, and their rejoicing is the Seed of that Darkness; and when they come
to suffer everlasting Misery, they do then but Reap the Fruit of their sinful
Jollity: whilst Sinners are Sowing Tears, let Christians set to Sowing Joy to
themselves. Do what you can to make your last Days your best Days, and every
Day brighter than other. Do not barely wish it were better, and hope for
better, but work for better Days; desire more earnestly, pray more heartily,
look more wishtly, and labor more painfully for a visible and sensible
improving and advancing in the Power and Spirit of Religion and Godliness, and
then your Hearts shall rejoice, and your Joy shall no Man take from you.

Beloved, I have but two Works to do among you all, whereunto I labor, and
strive with you in the Gospel; but these two works I have to do; to fetch in
those that are without, and to fetch up those that are within. Sinners, you
that are yet without, without Christ, without the Covenant of God, that are yet
in your Sins, in your Ignorance, in your Impenitence and hardness of Heart,
Strangers from Christ, and Aliens from the Life of God, my work with you is, to
Preach you into Christ; to Preach you in by Repentance; I travail in Birth with
you, that Christ may be formed in you; might I prevail in this Work, might any
more among this Company of poor Sinners of you, be brought to Repentance, and
be Converted, O what Joy would there be in this, Luke 15. There Is Joy in Heaven
over one Sinner that repents, and there would be the Foundation of Joy laid
in your own Hearts. Come Sinners, come to Christ, the Fountain of your Joy, and
your Hopes; come and be humbled with Christ, and you shall be exalted with him;
come and mourn with Christ, and you shall be comforted; come and Repent, and
you shall also rejoice.

But if I should not prosper in this work, if Sinners should continue to be
hardened, and refuse any more of them to come in; if I should not fetch more in,
yet let me fetch up those that are within; you that are come in, come up
higher. Stand not always at the Threshold, content not your selves with the
lowest place; Friends, sit up higher, ascend, ascend; ascend in your Aims,
ascend in your Desires, get to be better Christians daily, more experienced
Christians, more mortified Christians, more lively and Active and fruitful
Christians, and then look for it, you shall be more joyful Christians; get you
to be more strong in the Lord, and the Joy of the Lord shall be your Strength.

2. Rejoice not in Iniquity. Charity does not, and therefore Christians must
not rejoice in Iniquity, 1 Cor. 13.6. Let not your sin make you Merry; if it
does, that which now makes you merry, will shortly make you mad, with anguish
and indignation at your own folly. Merry Sinners are all Fools, and some of
these Fools will be always laughing, but we must say with Solomon, Eccles. 2.2.
I said of such laughter, thou art madness.

3. Rejoice not over much in any of the good things below; we may rejoice in
our outward good things, James 1.9. Let the Brother of low degree, rejoice in
that he is exalted; that is, let the Poor rejoice, when he is made Rich;
Poverty is an Affliction, and Riches are a Mercy, and such a Mercy as we may
rejoice in. But though we may rejoice in every outward Mercy, yet we may not
rejoice overmuch in them; particularly for the limits of this Joy, they must be
such as these:

1. Joy not in any of these good things as if they were your happiness; they
may be Means to our happiness, but must not be made the Matter of our
happiness; to make our Estates our happiness, is to make them our God, and the
way to make us miserable; he is a miserable Rich Man, who makes his Riches his
Happiness.

2. Joy not so much in them, as to rejoice ever the less in God. You have so
much need of God, in the greatest Plenty and Prosperity, as you have when you
have nothing; and you should so much thirst after the Joy of God in your
greatest Worldly Joy, as in your Sorrow. Take not your Worldly Joy in stead of
Joy in God; think not to supply your want of Joy in God, by the abounding of
Worldly Joy. You may as well feed your Souls with Meat and Drink, you may as
well provide for your Souls by your Money or Estates, as comfort them by that
Joy that arises out of these Earthly things. Souls must have a God, the
Comfort of God, the Joy of God to refresh them, and support them; that Soul is
a Carnal Soul, that can feed upon Carnal Joys; you nevertheless need the Joy of
God, for any Worldly Joy, and you must look to it, that your Worldly Joys be
never to that height, as to lessen your esteem of the Joy of the Lord. The Joy
of God will quench your thirst after the World; and then the Joy of the World
exceeds it is Bounds, when it quenches your thirst after God, and the light
of his Countenance. Thou art Rich, thou art full, and prosperest in the World,
thy Bull gendreth and fails not, thy Cow calveth, etc. thy Oxen are strong to
labor, thy Sheep bring forth Thousands, and ten Thousands in the Streets; and
now thou have Hearts Ease, and rejoycest in thy Portion; but how stand thou
now in respect to God? Is God ever the less needed? Is God ever the less loved?
Is the Joy of God still thy chief Joy? Or do thou not even forget that thou
have a God, or a Soul, and leave it to them that have nothing below to rejoice
in God that is above. What think thou of thy self? Has this Earth eaten up
Heaven? Has the Joy of this Earth swallowed up the Joy of the Lord? Sure it
has transgressed its Bounds. It may be thou will say as the Prophet, Hab.
3.17, 18. and it is well if thou can say so, Although the Fig Tree does not
Blossom; etc -- Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, and Joy in the God of my
Salvation. When thou art Poor and in Want, and have nothing left thee in the
World to comfort thine Heart in, then thou will look to the Lord, and he shall
be thy Joy and thy Comfort; but how is it with thee when the Fig Tree does
Blossom, when thou live in the abundance of all things? Do thou then feel
thou have as much need of a God? do thou then take as much Joy in God? can
thou say of all here below, These are miserable Comforters, if God be not my
Comfort; these are miserable Pleasures, if God be not my Joy? This is
something, and thus it should be.

3. Rejoice with Trembling. That Is the Psalmist's Counsel, Psalm. 2.11. Serve
the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling; in allusion to that, let me
say, Seek the World with Fear, and rejoice in the World with Trembling; let
fear be a Bridle to prevent the excess of your Worldly Joy. Fear, what should
we fear? Why fear, lest you should forget God; lest that which is your Joy
become your Snare, and turn you aside from God; lest your Joy in the World,
should prove Worldly Joy, and serve for nothing but to feed and heighten your
Worldly Lusts; fear lest this Joy of the World should do the same by you, as
sometimes the Sorrows of the World do, which the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 7.
Works Death; fear lest it kill your Souls; there is nothing that does more
corrupt and endanger the Soul, than Carnal Mirth, Eccle. 11.9. Rejoice O young
Man in thy Youth, etc. but what follows? Know that for all these things, God
will bring thee to Judgment; that is, to Condemnation. These Joys drag the Soul
to the Bar of Justice, and thence to Execution in the Fire. There is scarce any
thing that does Ripen Men faster for Ruin, than the Mirth of the World, Job
21.10, 11. Their Bull gendreth, and fails not, there is the matter of their
Joy; their Children Dance, they take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at
the sound of the Organ; there is the Measure and Expression of their Joy; they
are so lifted up, that they must have the Music, and their Dancing, to
heighten their Mirth; but what is the end? In a Moment they go down to the
Grave, and thence into the Bottomless Pit.

O the Madness of this Merry World! That can see nothing in God to Joy them in,
and yet can rejoice in a thing of naught; that undo themselves by their own
Felicity, their Joy and Mirth: Joy is the sweetest Flower that grows in that
Garden, the Heart of Man; and this Flower must be the Poison to kill them, and
is never sweet to them but when it grows up out of a Dunghill, out of their
Fleshly Lusts. What Multitudes have surfeited, and Died of their Carnal Mirth;
and yet foolish Souls will never fear it, but this must be their only Heaven,
which leads to Hell; what do these Carnal Joys serve for, but to corrupt Men
first, and then to confound Men? Worldly sorrow it is said, works Death, but
it may be said of Worldly Sorrow, and Mirth, as of David and Saul; Saul has
slain his Thousands, and David his ten Thousands: Worldly Sorrow has slain
many, but nothing so many as Carnal Mirth; whilst that Saints wade through
their Temporal Sorrows to everlasting Joy, Sinners pass through their Worldly
Joy to everlasting Sorrows, Isa. 50.11. Behold ye that kindle your Fires, etc.
Here, 1. Sinners have their Fires; that is, to comfort and cheer and warm their
Hearts; these their comforting Fires are their Joy and Jollities. 2. Sinners
Fires are of their own kindling; their comforts come not from God, but they
raise them up to themselves; they comfort themselves, and cheer themselves, but
are not comforted of God. 3. Sinners Fires are all but Sparks; a Spark will not
warm, and will not last; the Triumphing of the Wicked is short, and the Joy of
the Hypocrite is but for a Moment. 4. Sinners live in their own Light; in the
Light of their own Fires and Sparks. Walk in the Light of your Fire -- that is
all the Light you have, it is all Dark to them from above, the Sun shines not,
the Candle of the Lord gives them no light; God speaks Terror and Trouble to
them, but they speak Peace to themselves; their own Joy and Mirth is all they
have to comfort and cheer them. 5. Sinners Light serves for nothing, but to
Light them down to Darkness. Walk in your Light, this shall ye have of mine
Hand, ye shall lie down in Sorrow. Sinners, how Light soever your Walk be, how
Merry soever your Lives be, yet what is your lying down like to be? He is a
Wise Man, that takes care, that how uncomfortable or weary soever his Way and
his Walk be, yet he may have a comfortable lying down. Psalm. 37.37. Mark the
Just Man, and behold the Perfect Man, the End of that Man is Peace. But O ye
Jolly and Merry Souls, what is your End like to be? Remember your lying down;
when your Hearts are Merry within you, when you live such Laughing and Sporting
Lives; in the midst of your Cups of Pleasure, your Music and Dancing, your
Feasting and Sporting, and the Jollity of your Revelling and Rioting, think
with your selves, What does all this lead to? When these Merry days are over,
what a Night am I like to have of it? When the Candles of your Worldly
Prosperity are Burnt down, in what a stinking Snuff will they go out? What a
stink will they be in your Nostrils? When your Fires and your Sparks will Light
you no longer, then they will burn you; your Mirth will burn you, your
Pleasures will burn you, your abused Prosperity, your Riches, your Money, your
Plenty, and the Joy that you now take in them, will burn you, and they will
burn to the bottom of Hell. Will you yet rejoice in these Carnal things?
Rejoice with Trembling; Tremble to think what the End of these things will be.
Prove. 14.13. In the midst of Laughter the Heart is Sorrowful, and the End of
this Mirth is heaviness; if the former of these [in the midst of Laughter the
Heart is sorrowful, etc.] should not be true, if you should Laugh and rejoice,
and know no Sorrow, if it should be with you as with those Merry ones, Job
21.9. Their Houses are far from Fear; and your Hearts should be as far from
Sorrow, as your Houses from Fear; if you should have all Sweet, and no Bitter;
all Sunshine, and no Clouds; if the first Part should not be true upon you, if
in the midst of Laughter your Hearts should not be sorrowful; yet, the latter
shall certainly be true, there shall be no avoiding of that; the End of your
Mirth shall be heaviness; Hold up while you will, maintain the Mirth and the
Jollity of your Hearts while you can, the End of this Mirth will be heaviness;
you shall lie down in Sorrow.

Sinners, what will ye choose? What would a Wise Man choose? A Merry Life, or a
Joyful Death? Which do ye think in your Judgments and Consciences is the best
choice, to Die in Peace, to Die in Joy, or to Die in Sorrow? How would you have
it with you when you come to Die? Would you then find, that all your Sorrow is
gone, and now your Joy is come? Or would you be forced then to say, Now farewell
all my Mirth, I have seen my last of it, and henceforth nothing but Sorrow and
Anguish for ever? Do thou not tremble to think, What if this should be my
Case? Know it for a Truth, there is no avoiding it; if you go on to live this
Merry Jolly Life, this shall be thy End, thou must lie down in Sorrow.

Christians, envy not the World's Mirth, nor let your Hearts lust after it; you
have other Joys than their crackling Thorns will yield; you have your Sorrows
while they have their Mirth, but you have this advantage of the World: 1. You
have Joy in your Sorrows; as in the midst of Laughter the Heart is sad, so in
the midst of your Sorrows your Hearts may be Joyful. 2. Your Sorrows shall End
in Joy; this shall you have of the Hand of your God, you shall lie down in
Peace; You that Sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy, Psalm. 126.6. Whilst those
that Sow in Mirth, shall Reap in Tears; you that go on your Way weeping,
whilst they go on their Way Laughing: yet mark the End of both; Isa. 65.13,
14. Behold, however it be now, behold how it shall be hereafter; How shall it
be? My Servants shall Eat, but ye shall be Hungry; my Servants shall Drink, but
ye shall be Thirsty; my Servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; my
Servants shall sing for Joy of Heart, but ye shall cry for Sorrow of Heart, and
shall howl for vexation of Spirit, and ye shall leave your Name for a Curse to
my chosen, for the Lord God shall slay thee. Now your Enemies Eat, and some of
you are an Hungry, etc. But think how it will be in the Day when the Scales be
turned; when the Sinners Eating Days, and Drinking Days, and Jolly merry Days
are over; and their Hungring Days, and howling Days overtake them; and you
that now Hunger and are Sorrowful, shall Eat and Drink and be satisfied with
the Joy of the Lord.

O envy not, and meddle not with the sinful Joys of the World; these Strangers
shall not meddle with your Joy, Prove. 14.10. Meddle you as little with theirs;
let your God be your Joy; and if he give you any matters of rejoicing in this
World, and allow you some Measures of Joy, even in these outward things, yet
rejoice with trembling; and let your Fear so moderate your Joy in these lower
things, that you do not lash out into that Carnal Mirth, the End whereof is
Heaviness. Especially, when the Matters of Worldly Joy increase upon you; you
that grow Rich and Prosper in the World, that find the World smiling, and come
crowding in upon you, that have even what your Hearts could wish, and then feel
your Hearts to be tickled, and pleased and delighted in your Prosperity; then
take heed, then fear lest you forget God and your Soul, and neglect and lose
the Joy of the Lord, and your care of pleasing the Lord, in your abounding
Worldly Joys; and never count any such Joys lawful or safe for you, but such
as make you to love the Lord the more, and serve the Lord with more
cheerfulness and care. If you do not serve the Lord better and walk with God
closer, and bring forth more of the Fruits of Holiness and Righteousness, in
more Spirituality and Heavenliness of mind; if you be not some way the better
God-wards, and Heaven-wards, in the abundance of all things, than you could be,
or than others are, in the want of all things, count that Prosperity greater
cause of trembling, than of rejoicing to you.

4. Rejoice not so as to forget your own Sins, or your Brethrens Afflictions.

1. So as not to forget your Sins. 1. Rejoice not so [in the Lord,] as to
forget your Sins against God: Your Joy must arise from this, that God has
forgotten them; but though God has forgotten, you must remember them; they
must still stand written in your own Book, though God has blotted them out of
his.

1. Forget not in your Joy the Sins that you are guilty of, that so you may
rejoice with Mourning; we are apt in our rejoicing to forget our sins; if we do
not remember our sins when we are lifted up in Joy, we are too apt to be puffed
up with Pride; Godly sorrow will be of the same use to us in our rejoicing, as
Paul's Thorn in the Flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7. to prevent our being exalted above
Measure. That Joy which kills Godly Sorrow, whilst we are here, what a
Divine Tincture soever it seems to have, it is suspicious that it is not the
right Joy; the more solid Joy of the Saints, has it is Foundation in Godly
Sorrow.

When we consider what great things the Lord has done for our Souls, how he
has Regenerated, reconciled and called us by his Grace, pulled us as Brands
out of the Burning, and raised us as Worms out of the Dunghill, and made us sit
together with Christ in Heavenly Places, clothed with Garments of Salvation,
and made us to shine forth in his Image; when we remember what the Lord is to
us, our Rock, our Refuge, our Father, our Allsufficient Portion, all Love and
Life, all Bowels, Compassions and everlasting Consolation; when we remember
this, and therein do rejoice, we must then consider, But what have I been to
him? What have I done against him, who has done so great things for me? What
an unworthy Wretch, what a sinful, Polluted and unthankful Creature am I? God
has loved me, God has saved me, the Lord God is become my God, and herein I
do and I will rejoice; but woe is me, I have sinned against the God of my
Mercy, and therefore I will rejoice with Mourning; whilst I Joy in the Lord, I
will weep over my sinful unworthy and guilty Soul: Whilst you say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 66.16. Come unto me all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell
you, tell you with Joy, tell you with Praise, what he has done for my Soul;
what a gracious God, what a Compassionate Merciful God I have found him to be
to me; whilst you say thus, Come, and I will tell you what God has done for
me, you must say also, Come, and I will tell you, tell you with shame, tell you
with sorrow, what my Soul has done against God; O how vile have I been? How
Proud, and how false to God? How many ways guilty before him, of neglecting,
of abusing, of walking unworthy of his wonderful Love? The Lord is my God,
therein I will rejoice; I have sinned against God, and for these things I weep
and lament.

2. Not so as to forget the sins that have been Conquered by us, that we may
rejoice in Triumph; the Victories that we have gotten over sin, will be both an
advance to our Joy in God, and the Evidence of the sincerity of that Joy. Those
that are still in the Chains and Fetters of Lust, in whom their Pride or their
Covetousness, or their Frowardness, does still Lord it over them, and can yet
rejoice in God, it is to be doubted, that their Joy is false and foolish Joy; a
Light of their own Sparks, and no Divine Sunbeam: fear that Joy and trample
upon it, which will consist with a Slavery to Lust; as the Apostle says
concerning Death, 1 Cor. 15.57. so should we concerning Sin, Thanks be to God
that has given us the Victory; this is Matter of Praise, this is Matter of
Joy. When the Israelites saw the Egyptians Dead upon the Seashore, Exodus
14.30. then they Sang a Song of Joy and Praise. Luke 10.20. Rejoice not that
the Devils are subject to you; that is, that you have Power to cast the Devils
out of Possessed Bodies; Rejoice not, that is, not so much in this, but rather
rejoice that your Names are written in Heaven; and that is the same with this,
Rejoice not that the Devils are cast out by you, but that your sins are
Conquered by you. Victory over sin is an Evidence of our Title to Glory; next
to the Blood of the Lamb, the Blood of our mortified sins is the best Ink to
write our Names in the Book of Life.

Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the House of my God,
and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my
God, etc.

Christians, what have you done in your War against Sin? What work have you
made with those Lusts which War in your Members? Can you tell of any Conquest
you have gotten? Where be the Persons among you that can say, This Heart was
once a Proud Heart, but now through the Grace of God, it is more humble; this
Heart was once a froward Heart, but now through Mercy, it is become meek, the
Lion is become a Lamb; this Heart was once a Covetous Heart, an Hungry greedy
Heart, all Earth and Earthy, clogged and chained to this World by its Worldly
Lusts; but now through Grace the Cloggs are knocked off, the Chain is broken,
and my Soul is gotten loose from this Earth, and can now despise it, in
comparison of God and the things above. Friends, have you any of you
experiences of any such Victories? Forget them not, keep them by you; and in
the day of your rejoicing in God, let your Eye be upon these your Conquests of
Sin, and this will be a means that your joy will be the more full; then will
you Triumph in Christ Jesus, when with your Conquering Captain you have your
Enemies in Chains.

3. Not so as to forget the Sins that we are in danger of, but to rejoice with
trembling; we are still in our Warfare, and how far forth soever we have
Prospered in it, we have Enemies still before us, that we are in perpetual
danger of; therefore as it is said, let not him boast, so let not him rejoice
that is putting on his Armor, as if he were putting it off. The Canaanite is
still in the Land; sin lies at the Door, and will be upon you, if you stand not
upon your guard. Christians must build up themselves in their Holy joy, as the
Jews built the Wall of Jerusalem, Nehem. 4.17. They must have a Trowel in one
Hand, and a Sword in the other; they must Build and Watch, Build and Fight;
there is an evil Worm that is apt to grow out of our Joy, which will overthrow
and devour it, and that is, Security, or secure Confidence. It was this that
spoiled the Psalmist's Joy, who was a better Man and a Wiser than any of us;
Psalm. 30.6, 7. I said in my Prosperity, I should never be moved; thou Lord by
thy favor have made my Mountain so strong; but what follows? The very next
Word is, Thou did hide thy Face, and I was troubled. Security opens the Door
to Iniquity, and Iniquity will hide us from our Joy.

It is Matter of Joy that we are at War with Sin, and have gotten any little
Conquest, and have such a Captain to lead us on; woe to them that are at Peace,
or in a Truce with Sin, and have nothing to comfort them but only this, that
there is a present Cessation of Arms, and they feel not the buffeting of Satan
against them; they will quickly feel the miserable fruits of that Truce: Stand
to your Arms, stand upon your Guard; whilst you are Drinking most deeply of
your Waters of Joy, fear that Wormwood that Sin will cast in, to imbitter your
Pleasant Waters.

That Joy which will consist with a sinful Life, is no Joy of God; the Joy of
God is Holy Joy; and that Joy of God that leaves us secure and careless, is not
like to be long lived. Do you rejoice in God? As ever you would that Joy should
continue, take heed of Iniquity; you go in danger while you live; it is not so
clear and bright with you now, but it may be all Cloudy and Stormy to morrow;
if the Devil can but lead you out to Iniquity, he will quickly raise such
Storms, as will make you forget your joy: forget not this danger; if you do
once but forget your danger two to one, but it presently overtakes you and
swallows you up.

Christians, if ever you would live in settled solid Joy, you must always have
a tender Heart, and a tender Eye, that will quickly espy, and quickly be
startled at the Invasion of sin. Be Watchful, be tender Hearted, and then your
Hearts shall rejoice; and if you would abide in Peace, never live out of Fear.
Never live out of Fear, till you are gotten out of Danger, and out of Danger
you cannot be, till you are got to Heaven:

2. Much less not so to rejoice in the good things of [the Earth,] as to forget
our Sins. Thou art a Rich Man, thou have a Confluence of all the kindnesses
that this Earth can do thee; the Sun shines on thy Tabernacle, it is all fair
Weather with thee; thou Prosperest in the World, and herein thou do rejoice.
But Man, thou art a Sinner all this while; Have thou not great guilt lying upon
thee? Have thou not unconquered Lusts remaining in thee? Or do thou not go in
daily danger of being turned aside from God, and led out into Iniquity? If
thine outward Prosperity make thee glad, yet let the Sin that lies upon thy
back, or at least lies at the Door, make thee tremble, and so to tremble, as
to be an allay to thy rejoicing; when with the Peacock, you spread abroad your
Plumes, and lift up your Crests, look down on your Black Feet; when you glitter
in your Worldly Glory, behold the stain that is upon all your Glory; whatever
fair Outside you have, what an Inside have you? Is there not Poverty within,
whilst there is such Plenty without? What a Poor and Wretched and Blind and
Naked Soul have thou, whilst as to thine Outward Man thou art Rich and have
need of nothing? Can thou in the midst of thy Prosperity, forget thy sinking
and sinful Soul? Can thou remember thy Soul, and will not this take thee a
Button lower as to thy Carnal Joy? The Prosperity of the Soul, and the joy that
grows up out of it, need not be abated in the least by the Poverty of the
Outward Man; if thou be never so Poor, and afflicted without, yet an Holy Soul,
an upright Heart, and the Joy of a good Conscience, will make amends for all
that; but will thine Outward Prosperity make amends for thine Inward Poverty?
You with whom all things go well in this World, yet still think on that Rust
that is Eating out your Treasure, think on that Moth that is fretting out your
Garments, behold the stain that appears upon all your Beauty; the stain of
Pride, the stain of Covetousness and Carnality, the Moth of Envy and
Contention, that is eating out your Hearts. Why should thou be sad, would
Carnal Comforts say? What have thou wanting to thee? What have thou to trouble
thee? Thou have Houses and Lands, and Money, and Health, and Friends; What
would thou have? Why do thou not rejoice and make Merry? Why? why, it is
true all things go well with me without, I have a good Estate, and a good
Trade, and a good House, and am in good Health, but O what a Soul have I? O
what a Wretched Heart have I? Do you ask, What I have to trouble me? O I have
Sin to trouble me, this Pride, and this Covetousness, and this Guilt that is
upon me; God knows, I find enough to trouble me, and to trouble me more than I
am or can be troubled. Do you ask me, What I want to make me merry? O I want
God! I want Grace; I want more Faith, and more love to Christ; I want a better
Heart; matters go not right between God and me; whatever I have for this World,
O how little have I for the Eternal World! Can I be Merry and Jocund, whilst
sin has made such wastes upon my Inward Man? Christians, do but thus remember
your Sins, and this will allay your Carnal Joys. Art thou so Merry, that thou
forgettest thy Sins? Take heed, the time comes, when thy Sins shall appear and
stare thee so in the Face, as to make thee forget all thy days of Mirth and
Laughter.

2. Not so to rejoice, as to forget our Brethrens Afflictions and Miseries.
It Is well with thee, but how is it with thy poor Neighbors and Friends? How
many are there that are in Penury, whilst thou art in Plenty? How many are
clothed in Rags, whilst thou shinest in thy gorgeous Apparel? How many are
ready to Starve, and Die for Hunger, whilst thou have thy fullness of Bread and
abundance of all things? Thou have enough, and thereupon rejoycest; but is it
nothing to thee, that there are so many that would be glad of thy Crumbs, of
thy Leavings, and cannot have them? Thy very Dogs, it may be, have many a
better Bit, and Warmer Lodging, than some of thy poor Neighbors; is this
nothing to thee? When thou blessest thy self in thy Plenty, then remember those
for whom nothing is provided.

Forget not in thy Joy how it is with thy poor Neighbors, much less how it is
with the poor Church of God. Psol. 137.5, 6. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let
my Right Hand forget her cunning; let me never touch the Harp more, or rejoice
at the sound of the Organ, if I forget poor Jerusalem; if I don't remember
thee, Let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth; let me never sing Song
more, no nor never speak Word more, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my
chiefest Joy. Friends, you that can be Merry and Jolly in these Days, remember
how is it with poor Jerusalem; Is our Jerusalem in Prosperity? Does the Church
of Christ flourish? Is Religion and sincere Christianity countenanced and
encouraged? Are not the Tents of Jacob smitten and fallen? and do they not look
Black, and all torn and Weather-beaten? It was said once, though by an evil
Tongue, Numb. 24.5. How goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Jerusalem: But where is their Goodness? where is their Beauty? Are not the
Daughters of Zion all Sunburned with Affliction? 'Twas said once by the Church,
I am Black but Comely, Cant. 1.5. Sunburned with Affliction, but Beautiful
through Grace; but may it not now be said, We are Black and Deformed; not only
Sunburned, but Collied, Black as a Coal by Iniquity? Is there not only a
Marring of our outward Beauty, but a failing of the very Spirit and inward
Beauty of Christianity? Though it were once said, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within, and her Clothing of wrought Gold; must it now
be said, Our clothing is in Sackcloth, and we are become Black and Pale, and
all Withering within? Is not Christianity in most Places dead at the Heart? May
there not an Ichabod be Named among us, The Glory, the inward Glory is departed
from Jerusalem. It Is well for us, if it be not thus with us, if the Pale Horse
has not ridden into our very Inner-man, if there be not Death in our Hearts,
if our Faith, and our Love, and our Holiness, and our Zeal be not dead; if we
be not grown stark Cold many of us, or at least our highest pitch be not
Lukewarmness. Consider how it is with your selves; but if it be better with us,
O that it were so, O that the Lord had not a Controversy with us, even with
us, for the loss that we are at, and the fall that is to be seen among us; but
if it were better with us in our Particulars than it is, yet forget not how it
is abroad, with the generality of Professors amongst us. It is in every Bodies
Mouth, what a general and lamentable Decay there is every where of the Soul of
serious Christianity. And is all this nothing with you? Is this a Season to
rejoice and make Merry in? Ezekiel. 21.9, 10. A Sword, a Sword is sharpened and is
also furbished, it is sharpened that it may make a sore Slaughter, it is
furbished that it may glitter, should we than make Mirth? Beloved, we may Read
in our Decays and Hypocrisies, that the Lord may be sharpning and furbishing
an outward Sword against us, to avenge and to punish an Hypocritical Nation:
But the Spiritual Sword of the Lord is sharpened already, and what a sore
Slaughter has it made? What a Slaughter of the Faith, and the Hopes, and of
the Graces, and the Comforts, of the Love, of the Humility, of the Meekness, of
the Self-denial; what a Slaughter has been made of all these already? How
little of them is there left alive? Is there such a Spiritual Sword, such a
Javelin smitten through the Heart, such a sore Slaughter made of the very
Spirit of Religion, and should we yet make Mirth? Is this a Season to be so
Merry or so Jolly in? What a Woe is there denounced, Amos 6.1. and 6. against
those Merry ones, and Jolly ones, upon this Account, that they are not grieved
for the Afflictions of Joseph! and what should we be Merry, and so Merry, as to
be without Sense of the Afflictions, and also of the Sins of Joseph? The inward
Languishings and Consumptions of the People of God?

Christians, I doubt we have too much forgotten all this; we do not consider,
we do not remember or lay it to Heart, how sadly it goes with the Interest of
Christianity among us; sure it would change many of our Countenances, and abate
us our Pleasant Hours, were this duly Weighed.

It is our Fault and our Sin, that it is thus with us, and it is a sign that
thou art of the Number of those sick Souls, thou art one of them; there is a
sad Slaughter made in thine own Soul, [thine] Heart languisheth, and thy Grace
is whithered; it is a Sign it is so, if thou can be so Merry, and not to be
Afflicted with the Whitherings of others. O Friends, remember these things, and
whatever Rejoycings you have in outward things, let these things be an allay to
them; Rejoice as if ye Rejoiced not, Weep as if you Wept not; says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.30. I cannot say the latter word to you in such a time, Weep
as if you Wept not, but Weep as if you wept, Weep in good earnest; Weep
heartily, Weep abundandly; let your Eyes run down with Tears; I cannot say,
Weep as if you Wept not, but yet rejoice as if you rejoiced not; abate and
moderate all your Joy and Mirth.

4. For our Fear; this is well governed, when we fear nothing but what ^e
should fear; and this we fear, as much, and no more than we should. For the
Regulating our fears,

First, We are to keep our Hearts in a due fear of what we should fear.

1. God is to be feared. The Glory of his Excellent Majesty, of his Holiness,
of his Righteousness, of his Omnipotence, and all his Glorious Attributes. The
Attributes are his Glorious and Fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. That thou may
Fear that Glorious and Fearful Name, the Lord thy God; this fear of God, is a
Fear of Reverence; to Fear God, is to stand in aw of his Glorious Majesty; but
in special there must be a fear of the Indignation of God, and the Power of his
Wrath. Luke 12.5. I will tell you what you should fear, fear him who is able to
destroy both Soul and Body; the fear of God, is the Ground and Reason of all
other Fears.

2. Sin is to be Feared, 2 Samuel 1.14. How wast thou not afraid, to stretch
forth thine Hand and destroy the Lords Anointed? It was thy Wickedness, thy
great Sin to do that Act; How is it that thou were not afraid to do it? Sin is
the most formidable of Evils; if Men knew what it were to Sin against God,
'twould make them tremble; not only great sins, but little sins, not only open,
but the most secret sins: there is enough in every sin to make Men afraid; that
Men are so vile, and so wicked as they are, it is because they fear not sin;
fear sin and you will fly from it.

3. Temptations to sin are to be feared. Therefore we are to pray, Lead us not
into Temptation. It is our fear that must bring us on our Knees, to make this
Hearty Prayer. If sin be to be feared, then whatever enticeth or leads to sin
is to be feared. Some of our Temptations are to be feared and shunned; evil
Companions are a Temptation, these must be shunned; the liberty of unnecessary
Sports and Recreations, of sumptuous Feastings, of curious and costly Apparel,
etc. are Temptations, and therefore must be shunned; others of our Temptations
are to be feared and warily used: Riches and outward Prosperity is a
Temptation; our Money, and our Lands, and our businesses in the World are
Temptations. He that will be Rich, falls into Temptation, etc. and therefore
must so be feared, as to make us the more wary and circumspect in the seeking
and using of them: follow your Trades with fear, go into your Fields and
Markets with fear, Eat and Drink with fear; fear your fine Houses, fear you
Plentiful and Prosperous Estates, lest by these you be led away to sin, and to
forget God. You are every day among Temptations, throughout the whole time of
your lives, and therefore is the Exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.17. Pass
the time of your Sojourning here in fear.

4. The punishments of sin are to be feared. The wrath and the curse of God,
that Everlasting death which is the wages of sin, as I told you before, fear
him who is able to destroy both body and soul in Hell. He is able and he will
do it, if thou continue in thy sin. This fear is planted in the heart, as the
Sword of the Angel was placed in the way of Balaam, to keep him back from his
wicked designs. This world is a wicked world; notwithstanding that God has
placed such a flaming sword in sinners ways, notwithstanding all their fears,
how wilfully wicked are they? but what world would this world be, if there were
no fear upon men's hearts, to bridle or restrain them.

Secondly, We are to keep the heart out of fear of what it should not fear, to
suppress and keep down all unreasonable and sinful fears. There are two things
especially which men fear but should not fear.

1. The Yoke of Christ; the difficulties and severities of Religion; some men
continue to be sinners, because they are afraid to be Saints; they continue
under the power of the Devil, because they are afraid of Christ. They look on
Christ as an hard Master, his service as hard service, his Yoke as an hard
Yoke; some desires they have after Religion, they could wish themselves
Christians, but they are afraid to venture. The difficulties and the severities
of a Godly life keep them off; they are afraid of them, that they shall never
bear them. As God placed a flaming sword in Eden, Genesis 3. so these fears, are a
flaming sword of the devils placing, to keep the way of the tree of Life, to
keep sinners back from Christ; they dare not come to Christ, for fear of him,
and the heavy yoke that he would put upon their Necks.

2. The Cross of Christ; that is,

1. The sufferings of this Life. These are not to be feared. Rev. 2.10. Fear
none of those things which you shall suffer. And this very charge, not to fear
them, is an Evidence that even Christians are too apt to fear Sufferings.

2. Death for Christ's sake, Luke 12.4. Fear not them that kill the body. Fear
not the worst that men can do; You may not only be persecuted by evil men,
imprisoned, spoiled of your Goods, but you may be slain, put to death by them;
yet fear them not; and as a violent death, a being put to death for Christ, so
neither is a natural death to be feared; death is the King of terrors. The
Apostle tells us, Heb. 2.15. That for fear of death, men are all their life
time subject to bondage. There is a natural fear of death, implanted in every
man, even in Christ himself, and there is a sinful fear of death; and then it is
sinful, when it is excessive; when there is so great a fear of death, as to
distress, and distract us in the duties of our lives. When there is so great a
fear of death, that we cannot quietly and patiently submit to its stroke; when
we cannot comfort and support our selves against the fear of death, by the hope
we have in our death; the righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32. As the
Apostle speaks concerning sorrow for the dead, 1 These. 4.13. Sorrow not as men
without hope, the same may be said concerning the fear of death, fear not as
men without hope. The righteous has hope in his death, he lies down in hope,
goes to his grave in hope, and this hope fortifieth his heart under all its
fears.

Now friends would you keep your hearts under Government, learn these two
Lessons.

1. Keep your hearts in fear, and particularly 1. keep you in the fear of God,
keep up the Aw and Reverence of God in your hearts, get you trembling hearts
before the Lord; behold the severe and jealous eye that is upon you, live under
such a deep sense of the Greatness, Glory and Majesty of the great God, as may
constantly awe you. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts and let him be your
fear and your dread. Those that live not under an awe of God, lie open to the
Devil and all his Temptations. It is this, the fear of God, that is the bridle,
to keep us in due order.

2, Keep you in fear of sinning against God. Psalm. 4.4. Tremble and sin not.
Art thou a professor of faith in God, and do thou not yet fear to sin against
God? do thou believe that God is the observer of all ungodliness? that thine
iniquities are all marked before him? do thou believe that God is the avenger
of all ungodliness, and that all thine iniquities shall be recompensed and
returned upon thine own head? how is it then that thou art no more afraid of
iniquity? Art thou an hypocritical professor, and does not thine hypocrisy
make thee afraid? art thou a proud Professor, or a worldly Professor, or a
lukewarm, or froward, or carnal, or slothful Professor, how is it that thy
pride, thy covetousness, that thy coldness, or frowardness, or carnality, or
slothfulness does not make thee afraid? are these Evils, this Pride, and this
Hypocrisy, this Coveteousness, this frowardness rooted and reigning in thy
heart? where are thy fears all this while? call up fear, put on fear, and let
this suppress these lusts, which will else be breaking forth into practical
iniquity. If you would fear a life of Covetousness, a life of Pride, fear this
heart of Pride, this worldly carnal heart; if you would fear a froward look, a
froward tongue, fear a froward heart; crush this Cockatrice Egg, before it
hatch into practical wickedness.

3. Fear Temptation to Sin. What does use to foment or heighten the lusts of
thine heart? What does use to draw them forth into practice? Whatever it be:
fear it as you would fear the Devil. Particularly,

1. Fear whatever you over love in the World;

1. When you have your pleasant dishes before you, and varieties of them; when
you have your pleasant cups before you, fear your being tempted to excess; feed
not your selves without fear, especially feast not without fear; put a knife to
thy throat if thou be given to appetite, when thou see dainties before thee.
Prove. 23.2. Look not on the wine when it is red in the cup and sparkles, and
moves it self aright. Look besides it, be afraid to look upon it, lest it tempt
thine appetite beyond its bounds.

2. Fear your fine Clothes; your Fashions and Ornaments that you delight in;
have thou not pride in thine heart, and is not thy pride even as tinder, that
will catch fire of every spark; do thou love to be fine and gallant, do
thou love thy fine Fashions and Ornaments? let thy love make thee afraid.

3. Fear that Money that thou love, and thy Lands and thy Fields and the
increase of thy Substance; when riches increase set not your hearts upon them,
Psalm. 62.10. Do you prosper, do you grow rich in this world, do ye feel the
world coming in, and your substance increasing upon you? fear this prosperity;
I do not say, fear prosperity and shun it or flee from it, but fear it and look
the better to your selves, be jealous of your selves in such a time, lest when
you prosper and be full, you then forget God. Have an eye to your hearts in
your prosperous estate; take heed that your Souls grow not poorer, as your
outward Man grows richer; It was the joy of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.16. That
though his outward man grew to decay, yet his inward man was renewed day by
day; but friends let it be your fear, lest as your outward man flourishes,
your inward man grow to decay; lest your Riches eat up your Religion; lest you
loose your love to God, lest you abate in your care for the things of Christ,
lest those poor souls wither and suffer loss, lest the work of God be at a
stand with you; lest praying and praising and communing with your hearts, and
looking into the other World, and caring and laboring for those poor immortal
Souls, be laid aside or but slightly shuffled over. Know any of you that are in
a prosperous estate, that have set your hearts upon getting and find the world
increasing upon you, know that you are in danger; your Souls are in danger,
your Religion is in danger of sinking and withering; your Prosperity is a
temptation that will endanger your neglect of God and your Souls. Look upon
prosperity as a temptation, and fear it as a temptation; be jealous of your
hearts in such a time.

4. Fear your vain Company, your Societies, and correspondencies with your
carnal Friends and acquaintance. Do thou love vain company? I do not speak of
vile company, of Drunkards, and Rioters, of Swearers, and Scoffers at
Godliness, those Sons of Debauchery that are the filth and garbage of the
World, but even vain company, that are nothing but froth and folly, complement
and merriment; the unsavory salt of the earth, that are good for nothing; to
whom a serious and savoury word put in, is as vinegar to the teeth, and as
smoke to the eyes; and who will thereby tempt you, to turn out all religion out
of doors, for the time at least; because it is so unsavory to the Company. Fear
to come among them, go not out after them, thrust not your selves unnecessarily
in among them; but when God brings you in among such, when necessary business
brings you in, be with them in fear; think with your selves, now I must look to
mine heart, here be they that are like else to steal it away from God. Friends,
settle this upon your hearts, and really believe it, and carry the sense of it
upon you, that vain acquaintance and companions are a temptation. Though they
do not tempt you to drunkenness, or swearing or lying or riot, yet they may
tempt you to lukewarmness and indifferency in Religion; they will chill and
cool your good affections, and dull and blunt the edge of your spirits
heavenward. As holy and lively society, will quicken and whet our hearts,
toward what is good, even as iron sharpneth iron. Prove. 27.17. So are we like
to be dulled, and blunted by vain company. Friends, would you keep your hearts
in good plight? would you keep you clear of the vanities and follies of the
world? would you keep your selves unspotted from the world? would you shine as
lights in the world and be a rebuke to their sins, do you in good earnest
design to maintain the life of God within you? then beware of these sons of
Vanity and let them henceforth be your fear, and not your desire or delight.

To this, let me farther add by the way, are vain company Temptations, and to
be feared? then you that are Christians, look to it that you be not of such a
vain, earthly, frothy Conversation, that we must warn others that are better,
to take heed of you, and be afraid of coming into your company. If vain company
be a Temptation, then take heed that you be not such, that even your society
should be feared. Such a fault there is among professors, and it is a grievous
thing to consider what a vain, and unsavory, and unprofitable conversation
there usually is of Chistians with Christians, of Professors with Professors.
What is your discourse? how do you use to spend your time when you come
together? how little of God, of Christ, of the state of your Souls, is to be
heard among you? you can talk of your Trades, of your Business, of News; and
sometimes that which is worse, tell evil stories of others behind their backs;
You can laugh and be merry with carnal Mirth, even as others; but what do you
more than others? whose hearts do use to be warned or refreshed by your lips?
Its said, Prove. 10.11. The mouth of the righteous is a well of life, And ver.
21. The lips of the righteous feed many. Is it so with us? what of the water of
life is there, proceeding out of those Wells of life? If there be a Fountain in
you, is it not a Fountain enclosed, a Well shut up? who are there whose Souls
are fed from your lips? If Christians did meet with no better feeding, then
they have from some Professors lips, they might starve and perish; So jejune
and unsipid our discourses usually are, and withal so carnal and vain, that we
rather pull down then build up, we rather chill and damp, then quicken and
enliven those that are conversant with us. We have too often, like the Quakers,
our silent meetings, as to any thing of God that is going among us. Friends
consider, look back and observe how it has been; have your mouths been wells of
Life? does there not sometimes come forth mudd, instead of water? have your
lips fed many? May be your hands have fed poor hungry bodies; may be they have
had of your bread and of your money, but what have they had from your lips? Not
a word. Their Souls may perish, for all the feeding that they have had from
your lips. It is said, Mal. 3. Those that feared God spoke often one to
another; that is, of the things of God; but is it so with us? what shall we say
to sinners, who when we charge others to take heed of their company, who will
reply, why, they were even as good come amongst us as amongst some of your
selves, and as much they are like to get, and as little harm by us as by you?

Friends, I have more than once provoked you to be more Spiritual, and more
Heavenly in your Converses; but what has been the fruit? Is it better then it
has been? O that you could tell me it was! I thank God it is a little better;
I have set mine heart upon it, I have put my self to it, to bring forth
something of what I have learned for others benefit. I must tell you, this
unprofitableness is an ill sign as to your selves, as well as it may be a snare
to others; barren lips are a sign of barren hearts; it is to be feared there is
not so much of Christ within you, when there is so little coming forth, that
there is but little truth in your hearts, when there is so little Grace in your
lips. O Friends, that you would yet check your selves for this neglect, that
you would yet charge it upon your hearts, to be more fruitful this way. To what
purpose are you preached unto, to what purpose do I warn you, if you will not
amend? I Will tell you one way to help it, Let your own hearts be more set upon
God, get more spiritual savor, more life and power of holiness in your own
spirits, and it will find an easier vent; More divine Communion, will be the
best help to more holy Communication. But this by the way.

5. For our Grief or Sorrow. I shall show here,

1. That the Object of our Sorrow is evil. The Evils we are to greive for are,
1. Sin. 2. Misery or Affliction.


2. What are the due degrees, and just limits of our Grief,

1. Sin; This is the great and special object of Sorrow, and sorrow for Sin is
the best and most necessary of sorrows. Sin is a grievous evil, and it most
calls for grief of heart. He loves neither God nor himself, that grieves not
for sin; Sin is the abuse of God, and the wrong of our own Souls. How can
thou say thou love God, if thou can abuse him, or see him abused without
sorrow? how can thou say, thou love thy self, when thou can wrong thy
self, and not be grieved? what will thou grieve for, if not for that, which is
so provoking to God, and so distructive to thy self?

Sin seems good in the eyes of sinners, and therefore it seldom troubles them;
it is that which pleases them, and suits with their tempers; it is that which
profits them, and brings them in all their gains; Sinners, that must hereafter
die for their sins, do at present live by their sins; they are beholding to
their sins for their livelihood. Some men live by lying, and stealing, and
defrauding; by Coveteousness and oppression; it is that which brings them in
their Estates; they had been, some of them, but poor men, if their sin had not
gotten them Estates. Others live by their Pleasures, and carnal merriments;
it is their mirth and their pleasure that keeps them alive, Sorrow and
Melancholy they think, would kill their hearts. Sinners live upon their sins,
and therefore will not be grieved at them.

But though thou think thou live by thy sins, thou must die for thy sins;
thy sins are making a grave for thee, and carrying thee to it; thy sins are
preparing an Hell for thee, and leading thee down to the chambers of Death. Thy
sin spoils thee at present of all that is good, and makes thee good for
nothing, but to be fuel for the fire. Holiness prepares the Saints, and makes
them meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light; Col. 1.12. and sin
prepares sinners, and makes them meet for the inheritance of everlasting
darkness; fit to serve none but the Devil, fit to dwell with none but the
Devil. Sinners, you that go on in your sins, you are herein, but fitting and
preparing you for the Devil. This Pride that you live in, these Pleasures that
you live in, this Covetousness that you live in, by all these, the Devil is
preparing you for Hell. There is a fire prepared for you, Mat. 25.41.
Everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; there is an Hell
prepared for you, and your sin is as fast as it can, preparing you for that
place of Torment. Your going on in your sin is your ripening for wrath; thou
art almost ripe already, and art ripening every day; and as soon as thy sin
has but made thee fully ripe, thou droppest as ripe fruit uses to do, down
thou droppest to rottenness, into the grave, and into the darkness of the pit.
Thou art grown to that height in sin, that thou may be ripe before to morrow,
and as soon as thou art ripe, thou will be rotting; thy Body in the dirt, thy
Soul in Hell. This is the fruit that sinners get, and shall get at last by
their sins. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. But yet, because at present
they live by their sins; their sins make them merry, their sins make them Rich,
they get money by them, they get Estates by them, therefore they are not
troubled; though they sin they will not sorrow. Thou have smitten them but they
have not grieved, Jer. 5.3. It Is said, with respect to the punishment of
sinners, and it might be said concerning them, they have smitten themselves,
and yet have not grieved.

Sin seems good in the eyes of sinners, and therefore it does not trouble them;
but sin seems to be sin to Saints. Romans 7. that is, the greatest and worst of
Evils; for so sin, when it appears to be sin, does appear to be the worst of
Evils; and therefore to them, its matter of Sorrow. When sin appears to be
exceeding sinful, as the Apostles Expression is before, then the heart will be
exceeding sorrowful; the degrees which by the right Government of the heart,
this sorrow for sin is held up to, and the bounds and limits it is held within,
are these,

1. This sorrow must be so great, as to answer the ends, and bring forth the
proper fruits of it. The end of this sorrow, and the fruits it must bring
forth, the Apostle tells us 2 Cor. 7.9. is Repentance. I rejoiced that ye
sorrowed unto Repentance. And ver. 11. This self-same thing, that ye sorrowed
after a godly manner, what carefulness it wrought in you! yea, what clearing of
your selves, etc. What ever trouble for Sin, what ever sorrow any of you have
in your hearts, if it does not bring forth Repentance, a forsaking and turning
from sin; if this sorrow does not work a fear of falling back into sin, if it
does not work a care of preventing your fall, if it do not work to Indignation,
and Zeal against Sin; if it leave you the Friends of sin still, the followers
of sin still; if this be all you can say, I am troubled at it, but I cannot
help it; it is my trouble that I am a Drunkard, it is my grief that I am a
Worldling, or proud, or froward, but God be merciful to me, I cannot get rid of
these evils; if your sorrow, whatever it be, does not bring forth Fruit unto
Repentance, it is not wrought up high enough; there must be more load laid on,
there must be more of its Thorns, and Spears, and Stings thrust into that hard
Heart of thine; thou must feel more of its Gripes, it must fetch out more
Groans, and Sighs, and Tears out of thee, thou must be brought to another
manner of trouble for sin, then yet thou art, e're it reach the due degree of
Godly sorrow.

2. This sorrow must not be so great, as to hinder the exercise of any other
Grace or Duty: it is seldom there is an error in the excess; we don't use to
sorrow over much, no, no, we are apt to err in the defect; we do not usually
come up to sufficient sorrow; our hearts have but a light hurt upon them, our
wounds, ordinarily are not deep enough; it is this which mostly undoes us, we
find our sin to be too light a burden, 'twere well if our hearts were more
sick, that we could find them bleeding inwardly, and bleeding more abundantly,
as 'twas said of false Teachers, Jer. 6.14. They heal the hurt of the Daughters
of my People slightly. It is seldom that we can now a days, hear of such a
thing as a troubled Soul, and a wounded Spirit: We are, even Professors of too
whole and unbroken hearts; The Sacrifice of God is a broken heart, Psalm. 51.17.
but how few such Sacrifices are there any where found for the Lord? The work of
the Ministry, God helps us, is seldom that more acceptable work, an healing
work, to heal the wounded Soul, to bind up the broken heart, to comfort them
that are cast down; but the main of our work lies, in making wounds, in
pricking to the heart, in casting down the high and hardened hearts; Is not
there much of this work lying upon our hands, to be hammering, and humbling,
and piercing your hearts through with Godly sorrow? How few are there of you,
who can truly say, I thank God, this work is done upon me; the breaking work,
the afflicting work, the affrighting work is done upon me, my heart through
Grace is brought low, and made soft, and made sick of my sins, so that I am
prepared for the healing and comforting work? That sharp two edged Sword of the
word, has pierced so deep, and made such work, such wounds in my heart, that
now the Oil is more needed, and the Balm to heal my wounds. O it is matter of
trouble and sadness of heart, to find no more such sad Souls, and sorrow bitten
hearts, then we can either see or hear of in the World. It Is seldom therefore I
say, that there is too much of this sorrow, that trouble for sin rises too
high; but yet sometimes, and in some cases it may be so; there may be an excess
of sorrow for sin; Christians may be pressed down over measure, they may be
swallowed up of overmuch sorrow; as the Apostle intimates, and would have
prevented, 2 Cor. 2.7. Comfort such an one, lest perhaps he should be swollowed
up of overmuch sorrow. Therefore in this case, there must be Limits set to our
sorrow; and it must be held within these Limits. It must be so much only, as
may not hinder the exercise of other Graces and Duties; it must neither hinder
our Hopes, nor hinder our Faith, nor our Love, no, nor our Joy in the Lord; It
should be with Christians in this case, as with the Apostle in another case. 2
Cor. 6.10. As sorrowing, yet always rejoicing. Sorrowing, yet believing,
sorrowing yet hopeing, cast down, yet comforted. It must not hinder our Duties.
Some Christians have been so overwhelmed with trouble, that they have not been
able to hear, nor pray, nor think with any Comfort upon God, or the things of
God. this is an excess of sorrow, and must be restrained. Sorrow for sin, no
more then will help you to believe, and Hope and Love and praise and serve the
Lord.

2. Affliction. This is another object of sorrow. The Degrees and Limits of
this are.

1. That we sorrow not so little, but that we have a due and a deep sense of
the hand of the Lord upon us. Otherwise we despise the chastning of the Lord,
which the Apostle forbids, Heb. 12.5. Despise not thou the chastning of the
Lord. By afflictions I mean here, the sufferings of this Life; Crosses and
Losses of Estates, of Friends, Husband, Wife, Children, or near Relations.
Sufferings in our persons, by Sicknesses, Pains, Languishing and the like,
these must be grieved for. God complains, Jer. 3.5. I have smitten them, but
they have not grieved: 'Twas their sin that they did not sorrow.

2. That we sorrow not so much as to sink under our sorrows. That we be not
swallowed up of overmuch sorrow. As we may not slight or despise the chastnings
of the Lord, so we may not faint when we are chastned. The Apostle tells us, 2
Cor. 7.10. That worldly sorrow, the sorrows of worldly-men for their worldly
crosses, works Death. It sometimes kills their Bodies, some men die of their
griefs, but it often kills their Hearts, sinks them in their Spirits, stupifies
them, and makes them fit for nothing. We may not be so depressed with sorrows,
but that we still keep our Hearts alive, and to be of good courage.

3. Not as men without hope. We must sorrow for all our afflictions, but as the
Apostle would have Christians sorrow for the dead. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Sorrow not,
says he, as others, which have no hope. The Righteous has hope in his Heart,
and his hope must moderate his sorrow. This sad state will not last always;
there is hope of an end of his afflictions, and that should moderate his sorrow;
The Righteous has hope in his Death. Prove. 14.32. and has this double hope.

1. That Death will put an end to his sorrows.

2. That the end of his Sorrows shall be the beginning of Everlasting Joys,
and in this hope he must comfort himself under his sufferings, and moderate his
sorrows for them.

4. Always as men that have worse matters to sorrow for. The least sin is a
worse evil then the greatest affliction, and calls for more of our sorrow.
Christians must take heed that they do not loose the sense of sin, in their
excessive sorrowing for affliction. When affliction lies too heavy, sin usually
lies too light; Jer. 30.15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction -- because thy
sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee. Why art thou impatient
under thy sufferings? Whatsoever thou suffer, how hard soever it goes with
thee in the World, there is a worse thing then all this, that should set thee a
crying; thy sin, thy sin which is the root of all that which thou suffer.

5. Let your sorrow for Affliction never be so great, as to hinder your sorrow
for sin. Sorrow more for Iniquity, and that will limit and moderate your sorrow
for your affliction. Why do thou take on so for losses in thine Estate, for
thy lost Friends and Relations? Thou have greater matters then these to trouble
thy self about; thy sins are the losses of thy Soul. Think when thou art
mourning over thy worldly crosses, as sad as it is without, how is it with my
Soul? Is there not sin upon my Soul? Is there not Guilt upon my Soul? and let
out thy sorrows so much upon the sin of thy Soul, that thou may have none to
wast upon the sufferings of thy Body. Restrain thy Tears for thy afflictions,
thou will need them all to be spent upon thine Iniquity. O Friends, if you were
concerned for your Souls, as much as you should, if you were sensible of the
mischiefs and miseries that sin is bringing upon your Souls, this would make
all the sufferings of this life, to be as light and little things.

6. For our anger. The Government of our anger is, that which especially is
meant, by ruling our Spirits, in those two Scriptures, Prove. 16.32. He that is
slow to anger, is better then the mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, then
he that takes a City. Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule over his own Spirit,
is like a City that is broken down, and without walls.

The Objects of Anger is Evil; the Limits of Anger are these,

1. Be never angry with God. Some persons are so fretful, that none can please
them, are apt to be angry with every one that has to deal with them. There Is
no scaping their anger, but by shunning their Company, and having nothing to do
with them. Men cannot please them, and God cannot please them; they will be
angry with their Maker; when his Providence toward them are any thing cross
to their Humors, or their Interest, they are angry at God, angry at his
Providence. So it was with Jonah, when God smote his Goard that he had given
him for a shade. Jonah was in a pett, angry with God, and justified himself in
his anger; I do well to be angry. Jon. 4.9. Some Foolish Persons, if it be dry
Weather when they would have it Rain, if foul Weather, when they would have it
fair, they are angry; they frett, their Hearts rise and murmur and repine
against the Providence of God. And so when the wicked are exalted and flourish,
and themselves are oppressed and brought low; Men are apt to frett and murmur
at Divine Providence, that thus orders it. Thence is that Caution, Psalm. 37.7.
Fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way; that is, fret not
against God, because of him, that he lets such wicked ones to prosper. Let God
alone in his way, whatever he does in the world, keep silence to the Lord, and
fret not, murmur not against him. To be angry with the Wind, or the Rain, or
the Floods, or the Sun, when we suffer prejudice by them; yea or to be angry
with the irrational Creatures, that serve us; with our horses, or oxen, or
dogs, when they do amiss, this is often anger against God. Some are such Fools,
that if their horse stumbleth, or their Ox sluggeth, or their dog barks, or
takes what he should not, they are such fools as to be angry with them,
irrational Creatures are not the Objects of your anger; you may strike your
Horse, or goad your Ox, or beat your Dog, but he is a fool that will be angry
with them. Some are such fretful fools that they will fret and chafe at senseless
and inanimate creatures, which they use; how do Gamesters fret and chafe at
their Cards, at their Dice, when they run not for them? how do some Tradesmen
fret at their work, when it fadges not aright; when their yarn breaks, when
their cloth shrinks, when their Sithe or Knife will not cut, or cut their
fingers, or their legs, or hit upon a stone, or the like; some such there are,
that will be angry with their work, will fret at their Sithe, or their Knife,
or their Yarn, etc. These you may reckon amongst the firstborn of Fools; and
the folly of such anger is not the worst that is in it, there is Profaneness in
it too, anger against these creatures is anger against God.

2. Be not soon angry with men. He that is slow to anger, is better then the
mighty, Prove. 16.32. Some persons are so touchy, that it is hard to keep them
quiet, like tinder or Gunpowder, that will catch fire of every spark; a wry
word or look, nay their own jealous thoughts will set them on fire; every
little thing will provoke them; this is an evil and sore disease, that is
hardly cured. You whose temper this is, know that it is your misery; it is a
miserable temper, to be of such a froppish touchy Spirit, you that are such,
you had need to pity the cases of those that dwell with you. Look upon thy
self as a Briar or a Thorn hedge; and know that the fault lies not in them thou
art angry with, but in thine own angry heart,

3. Be not angry without a cause. Mat. 5.22. He that is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment. The only just cause of
Anger is sin. Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not; and that you may do so, be only
angry against sin. We may be angry against wrongs, or abuses against our
selves, but it must be upon this account, that these wrongs against our selves
are sins against God. Be not angry without a cause, and be not angry for every
little cause. Christians must be patient, and bear much; it must be a great
thing that must provoke them to anger. Do not pick quarrels one against
another, and make anger where there is no cause of anger; and do not quarrel for
trifles, that any wise man would rather despise, then be provoked with.

4. Be not long angry. Ephesians. 4.26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath.
Eccl. 7.9. Anger rests in the bosom of fools. Of the several sorts of tempers
that are among men, some are soon angry and soon pacified. This, though it be
an evil, yet its a more tolerable evil; let it not justify you in your
touchyness that your anger is quickly gone; to be soon angry is your sin,
though not so great, because you are soon pleased. Do not allow your selves in
this temper; little sins must be carefully avoided.

Others are slow to anger and swift to pacification. Hard to be provoked, easy
to be pacified. This is the best of Tempers; this is that meek and quiet
Spirit, which is of great price in the sight of God. This man is a Moses; Moses
could be angry and was angry to a great height, when he saw Israel become
Idolaters; but yet this Moses was the meekest man upon earth. This meek temper
is the most desirable of all tempers, even for our own sakes; every man that is
a wiseman, would if it be possible be a meek man; none would be a fury but a
Fool.

Meekness of Spirit is the way to get every man's love and good opinion, and the
way to our own ease and serenity of heart. Frowardness and fretfulness is its
own punishment; what vexations and galls are such Persons to their own hearts,
and what a reproach, and a byword and an odium are they to others?

Others are easily provoked and hardly pacified; a little spark will kindle a
fire, but many waters will not quench it. A soft answer, says Solomon, Prove.
15.1. turns away wrath. In some 'twill, but in others, neither soft nor hard
words will do it; no contending, no stooping, no yielding, no loving obliging
words or carriage will stop the current, till time has a little allayed and
worn it out. This is a wretched temper, and next to the worst; soon angry and
long angry.

Others are soon angry and never pacified. The grudge of their hearts is a
cancer in their breasts; there it corrodes and frets, but will not be cured.
These are Devils incarnate; it is the malice of the Devil that is implacable
malice. That Is the 4th. limit, not long Angry.

5. Restrain the sinful effects of Anger. Such as are,

1. Angry looks, we read Prove. 25.23. of an angry countenance, an angry look is
either a furious look, the fire of the heart sparkling out at the eye, or a
sour, and sullen, a dogged or discontented look.

2. Angry words, as reproachful words, Mat. 5.22. Racha, or thou fool, calling
names, Liar, Thief, Varlet, Knave; or railing and bitter words, words dipped in
Vinegar or Gall, spoken on purpose to irritate and provoke.

3. Distances and Estrangements. Keeping aloof, refusing society with those we
are angry with; I Will do him no hurt, but I Will never have to do with him more,
there is an angry resolve. Never talk you are not angry, whilst this fruit of
it, distance and estrangement continues.

4. Revenge. When the grudge lies burning within, and watching to do him an ill
turn, or to be even with him, as they usually express it. Revenge is the
intending, endeavoring or doing hurt, to such as offend us, to satisfy our
malice and wrath. We may right our selves upon those that abuse and wrong us;
either in our Estates, or our Names, in just and honest ways, and in such cases
where God, or Conscience; or the honor of Religion does not call upon us to
suffer wrong, and pass by or put up abuses; we may right our selves in case of
wrongs, but never out of Malice, to satisfy our wrathful hearts. Some wretched
spirits there are, that in some trifling offenses that are offered them, could
pass them by, but only for the satisfying their malice; their wrath must be
satisfied. This if it be a righting of thy self, yet if that which puts thee
upon it, be the malice of thy heart, this is a revengful righting of thy self,
how often do some men speak at such a rate, not so much that I do regard the
thing, but I scorn to be abused.

Well, these are the limits to bound your Anger. Be not angry with God, nor any
of his Providence; be not sinfully angry with men; not soon angry, not angry
without a cause; not over angry where you have a cause; not long, not
implacably angry; lay aside an angry look, restrain an angry tongue, and beware
of meditating revenge, let not there be a secret grudge remaining which will
make revenge sweet to thee.

Now because this is a great piece of the Government of the heart, and of great
difficulty, I shall direct you to some means for the bringing it about.

1. Prize, seek and maintain your peace with God.

1. This will find you other work to do, then to mind every little offense that
comes athwart you. The wrath of God is as the roaring of a Lion. Whilst you are
in fear of that, or caring how to escape it, you will not mind the barking of a
Dog, or the hissing of a Goose. What have thou nothing else to take up thy
thoughts, then these trivial things? its an ill sign; it is a sign thou mindest
not God as thou should, nor thy soul as thou should, when thou art so apt
to be in a pett at every little thing.

2. Your breaking peace with men is your breaking peace with God. Art thou
sinfully angry with thy brother, or with thy husband or thy Wife? take heed,
God is angry with thee: Psalm. 18.26. With the froward thou will show thy self
froward. You that are given to frowardness, study that Scripture and tremble.
Can thou stand before an angry God? would thou that God should carry it as
frowardly toward thee, as thou catriest it toward others? would thou see
such a frowning face, would thou hear such words of fury from the Lord,
against thy Soul? thou must look for no other from him, if thou carriest it
thus frowardly to thy Friends. Mind your peace with God more, be more
solicitous about the taking up that deadly Controversy, that has been betwixt
him and thee; and prevent the raising of new quarrels with God, and then we
should have fewer quarrels one with another. Is it peace betwixt God and thy
Soul? is all fair and friendly betwixt him and thee? methinks thou should
bear any thing then from men; Is it not peace betwixt God and thee? Is that
great work yet to do? Is there such a weighty concern lying upon thee? Is thy
Peace with God yet to make? What a foolish wretch art thou, to disturb thy self
with these little matters?

2. Totally espouse the interest of God, and renounce the interest of this Self
and Flesh. It is this self, that is the makebate, and the rise of all our
quarrels. If you would know no other interest but the interest of God, you
would never be angry, but where you should be angry, you would only be angry
with sin against God. If you had renounced your felfish and fleshly interest,
you would never take its part, nor take up the Cudgels on its side; all our
carnal anger it is but our taking part with carnal self; any thing that is
spoken or done against thy self, anger must be called up, to revenge this
quarrel. Be more zealous for the interest of God, and these quarrels of self
would cease.

3. Know that a pettish angry disposition (whilst it remains unconquered) will
make thee a briar and a thorn, to whatever company thou art in. Yea and 'twill
make every one else, seem to be a briar and thorn to thee. What would thou
have people say, there dwells a wasp or an hornet? there goes a briar or thorn?
take heed how you come near him, least you be scratched or stung? If you would
not make every one else, to seem a briar and thorn or wasp to you, then kill
this wasp in your own bosom. If people would but study more their own ease, and
the calm of their own hearts, and to be freed from those troublesome boylings
and burnings of their own Spirits they would prize and pursue a more meek and
quiet spirit. Never expect freedom from vexations and perturbations, till you
have conquered that vexatious Spirit.

4. Know that implacable anger marks thee out, for one whom God has excluded
from pardon. If there be any one person in the world, that has so angered thee,
that thou will not be pacified, that anger of thine, will certainly carry thee
to hell. If you will not forgive you shall never be forgiven. Mat. 6.15. that is
the word, your forgiveness of others, is made the condition of Gods forgiving
of you; your peace with others is made the condition of your peace with God.
Thou that art an implacable creature, how dare thou ever take the Lords
Prayer into thy mouth? how dare thou say, forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us? there is this included in it, If I do
not forgive all the World, let not God forgive me. Perhaps you will say, oh but
I do forgive; I thank God I can say it with a clear Conscience, I forgive all
the World; and any Person or Persons that I have had a particular quarrel
against, I forgive them with all my heart. I shall never forget, but I do
forgive. Oh what a folly and mere self delusion is this! I will forgive but I
cannot forget; that is, I will forgive but I cannot forgive. It is the plain
English of, I cannot forget, I cannot heartily forgive. I will do them no hurt,
I will chide no more with them, but you must excuse me if I carry a secret
grudge in mine heart against them. Is this thy forgiveness, thou can satisfy
thy self with? would thou that God should say so to thee, I forgive thy
wickedness but I will never forget it? Angry Soul, art thou resolved to venture
it, to go unpardoned to thy grave? would it not be a terrible word to thee, if
God should say to thee, I will never forget thine iniquities, nor blot them out
of my book? would thou have thy name blotted out of Gods book? thy sins must
be blotted out or thy name blotted out. Would thou have thy sins stand upon
Record against thee at the great Day? then at thy peril look to it, that thou
quench this fire of implacable, anger.

5. Know that whilst the effects of anger remain; the passion of anger will
sinfully remain. Whilst there are the fruits still continuing, there the root
is not cut up. Nay if there be but some of the fruit remaining; If thou forbear
thy sour looks, and put off an angry countenance, yet if thy distance and
strangeness continues; If thou say I will do them no hurt, but I will never
have any more to do with them; if thou forbearest to give them provoking words
to their faces, yet if thou continuest to bite them on the back; take thy
liberty to censure them, to rip up the old sores to others behind their backs,
deceive not thy self, thine anger is not turned away, but thy wrath is
stretched out still.

6. Spend more of your anger against your selves, for your own sins, and then
you will have the less to waste upon others. That Counsel of Christ, Mat. 7.5.
is of use here; thou hypocrite first cast out the beam out of thine own eye.
Cast thy first stone at thy self; yea it may be thou may see reason, to
spend all the stones thou have to throw, here upon thy self and thine own sins,
and have none left to spare, to cast at thy brother. How have I carried it
toward the Lord? O how have I provoked, and do provoke the most high? O this
proud heart of mine, O this peevish heart, O this envious hypocritical heart!
Lord, what can I say for it? Lord, how can I bear such a wretched deceitful
provoking heart? can I bear nothing from others? Lord, how shall I bear it,
that thou have been so often provoked and dishonored by me? O my foolish Soul,
thou have other quarrels that are fitter for thee to be engaged in; quarrel
with thy self, be angry with thy self, thou have sinned, thou have sinned
against God, and there let thine anger shoot all its darts. This would sow up
thy lips and put a bridle in thy mouth, as it did in David's. Psalm. 39.2. I was
dumb with silence, I held my peace. I had not a word to say, when I looked up
to God. What if Michal mock, if Shimei curse, God had a quarrel with me, and
'twas he opened their mouths against me, thou Lord did it, and therefore I
was dumb and had no more to say.

Christians remember all these things, and apply them every one of you, as far
forth as your cases need it. Do not say (as sometimes some do) here such or
such a one was struck at, this word was directed to such a man, or such a
woman; do not put it off so, but take it to thee, its a word sent from God to
thy self, as far forth as thy case is concerned in it. Let every one of you
reflect and cast an eye upon your selves, and consider how far forth you are
guilty of sinful anger; and then enquire as the Disciples did in another case,
Lord is it I? Lord am not I one of them thou have been preaching this word
unto? See every one of you, how far forth it may be your own Cases, and
accordingly accept of the warning, as sent from God, on purpose to you; and so
use the several means prescribed, that if it be possible, you may hereby be
enabled to get the Rule and the Government of your own Souls. Remembering what I
told you but now, from Solomon, He that rules his own Spirit, is better then
he that takes a City. If you can but get the rule of your own Spirits, its
unspeakably better to you, then if you had conquered all your adversaries; if
you can restrain your own anger, it will be more comfortable, and more tend to
the enjoying your selves in peace, and sweetness, then if you could so charm
the whole world, that there should never any one do any thing, that might
offend or provoke you.

And thus I have dispatched what I have to say, touching the Government of some
of the Passions of the heart; to order and regulate them so, that we may love
nothing but what we should love, etc. O what a blessed frame should we be in,
were we brought to this! it is true, it is not to be expected, that we should be
brought fully up to this frame, in this imperfect state; but so much might be
done toward it, as might make our whole way of Religion much more even and
easy than it is. All our difficulties and failings do arise, from the inward
disorders and distempers of our hearts. The better order and the better temper
our hearts are brought into, the more easy will our work be and the more
sweet^y carried on.

Now therefore, after these many words I have spoken, after these many days
work that have been spent upon this subject, let me in the name of God ask you,
what is there that has been yet done upon you? what is there that has been
added to your holy love, to your holy desires and joys, fears and griefs? are
there any little sparks added to you? do you love God a little more then you
did? do you desire after him a little more strongly? are your fears of sin,
your fears of temptations to sin, your grief and sorrow for sin, a little
increased? Is there any abatement of your love to the World, of your worldly
desires and joys? Is there any allay of your fretful angry passion? Who of you
can say, I thank God, these words have not been spoken to me in vain. I thank
God, I find this World taken down a little lower; I do not love it so well, nor
desire it so much, nor I hope shall ever again seek it so earnestly, as I have
done? are you any thing the more in fear of sin, or greiv'd for sin? are you in
hope that your anger shall henceforth not be without a cause, nor above or
higher then its cause, nor ever last as it has used to do?

Friends, consider, in the name of God consider; What, is there nothing done?
are you as cold in your love to God, as hot in your love to the World, as much
without fear and grief for sin, as if none of all this had been spoken? The
Lord be merciful to us, what shall become of such hearing? What serves this
Preaching for? what serves this hearing for? Does God take pleasure, or can you
take comfort in your coming together to hear, and being a little affected with
the word whilst it is preaching, or speaking some words after of your
approbation and liking what you have heard, when yet the Word does not work,
nor leave any standing and abiding impressions upon you? Its vain to commend a
Sermon in words, if the fruit it brings forth commend it not. The best
commendation of your food is by your eating it, and maintaining your health,
and gathering strength by it. O Friends, that is the commendation we would have
of our preaching, and the only commendation that we can take comfort in, that
our word reaches its end; that there is some sign of our ministry upon your
hearts, and in your lives; that we may say concerning you, as the Apostle
concerning the Corinthians; 2 Cor. 3.2.8. Ye are our Epistle, and are declared
to be the Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the
living God. Those are the best Sermon Notes, that are written not with ink and
paper, but by the Spirit of the living God, in the fleshly tables of our
hearts. These are the best Sermon Notes and these are the best commendation of
our preaching. Now pray friends consider, I do not ask you what there is
written of these Sermons in your note books, but what is there written of them
in your hearts? Is there any thing more of the love of God, of desires after
God, of fear of sin, etc. written or begotten within you?

Had I ability and opportunity of personal converse with you, I should be
willing to deal with you in private, hand to hand, and to ask you these
questions man by man; but to supply that defect of speaking personally, and in
private to each one of you, take what I speak in my public Ministry, as if it
were spoken to thee in particular, and I were dealing with thee hand to hand.
Though thou can not give (me) thine answer, yet fail not to give answer in
thine own heart; when I ask thee whither thou have gotten any more love to God,
any more desires after God, any abatement of thy love to the World, any more
fear of Sin, etc. Answer thine own Conscience in this particular. I must
substitute thy Conscience in my room, and let Conscience take thine Answer.
Speak every man of you i^ your Consciences, how do you find it? is there any
thing done upon you by these words, or is there nothing (...); what do you
think of all your hearing these words, if th^re be nothing done; if there be as
much love to the World, as little love to God, or fear of Sin; if there be the
same touchiness, the same pettishness, the some angry distemper, as if you had
kept you at home all this while, and never heard any of all that has been said;
Are not you ashamed, are not you afraid that these words of the Lord should
have no effect upon you? Beloved, I have preached to you in hope, I have hoped
for fruit; I have hoped for some change for the better upon you, in all these
respects. O set your hearts unto all these words; remember what you can, and
recover what you have forgotten; look up to God, look up to God, and pray this
prayer to him, Lord let the things that have been spoken be written. Let them
be written, not with ink and pen, but by the Spirit of the living God; not in a
book or paper, but in the fleshly table of mine heart. Look up to God for his
help, and determine in your selves, to set your hearts to it, to follow after
this blessed Order and Government of your hearts. Study within your selves, how
to get up your affections to things above; to get loose your hearts from the
World; and things below; be not content to be thus dead in your hearts toward
God, thus alive toward the World; nor be content to wish for more of the
divine love, to wish you could abate toward this world, but in good earnest,
make it your business and study so to do. Might we once bring you to this, that
while we are laboring with you in the Word and Doctrine, you would labor with
us in the Lord, to work your hearts to an affectionate compliance with our
words; if you would be steadfast and unmovable, and abounding in this work,
then there would be hope, that neither our labor nor yours should be in vain
in the Lord; then should we look to see the death of these Worldly loves and
lusts, and a spring of the divine love and life and joy and glory; this earth
and flesh under foot, and the Spirit of Glory and of God resting upon you.

Put on therefore in the fear of the Lord, set you close to this
Heart-governing-work, quicken, strengthen, encourage your hearts herein with
these words. Yet further, the Government of the heart stands,

4. In suppressing all manner of evil, and exciting and maintaining the good
that is in your hearts. There are in the heart, as there are in a Kingdom, two
parties; the evil party and the good party: The evil party are the Rebellious
Lusts of our hearts, the good party are the Graces of God. The Government of
the Heart is to be as the Government of a Kingdom, for the suppressing the
evil, and the encouraging and upholding the good.

The evil Party are the lusts of the Heart; Pride, Envy, Malice, Covetousness,
etc. there is no Government of these, but by keeping under and suppressing them,
they cannot be kept in order, they are not subject to the Law of God, nor can
be, Romans 8.7. but must be rooted out and Crucified. Those that are Christ's,
must crucify the flesh with the Affections and Lusts. Gal. 5.24. Our business
is, not barely to moderate them, but to kill them. Moderate Pride, or moderate
Envy, or moderate malice, or moderate Covetousness, is not that which should be
intended, in the Government of the heart, nor is there any such thing possible,
the least degree of lust is immoderate. As Christ determines the case about
swearing, whether it be little or greater Oaths, Mat. 5.34. It Is not, swear but
a little, or but seldom, but swear not at all; such must be the determination
here, be not Proud at all, be not Envious or Malicious or Covetous at all; to
allow our selves to be moderately Proud, or Covetous, is all one, as to allow
men to be moderate Drunkards, or moderate Adulterers; this may be as well
allowed, as moderate lusts. Moderate Lusts will cast into intolerable fire.
Possibly thy Hell may not be altogether as hot and scorching, whose Lusts are
more tame, but yet it will be intolerable; It is poor comfort for any one to
think, I shall have the easiest place in Hell; He that is least in the Kingdom
of God, shall have his load of Everlasting Glory; shall have as much joy and
blessedness as his heart can hold, shall be full of the goodness and Glory of
the Lord; and he that is least in the Kingdom of darkness, shall have more then
his load of the wrath of God; his heart shall be brim full, and running over;
the fury of the Lord shall break the Backs and the Bones, and tear the Bowels;
inexpressible Torment shall be given to the least of the Damned Sinners.
Moderate lust, if it be not mortified lust, will cast into intolerable Wrath
and Vengeance; therefore these must not be suffered in the least degree, but
must be crucified and mortified.

But how may I suppress these Lusts?

1. Never make your Flesh your Favorite. If a Prince take a Rebel for a
Friend, and take him into his Bosom, not only his Government, but his Life is
in danger. How was it with Sampson, when he took in Delilah into his Bosom? She
betrayed his strength from him, She betrayed him into the hands of the
Philistines. If you befriend this Flesh, it will betray you, it will betray you
into the hands of the Devil; little do you think what mischief you are working
to your selves, whilst you favor your Flesh. In nourishing your corrupt Flesh,
you nourish a Viper, that will sting you to the Heart. Know it for your Enemy,
and keep it off from you as your Enemy. Do not gratify and please and pamper
your Flesh, but starve it rather, and crucify it. If we would be so wise, as
to count our lusts our Enemies, and deal with them as our Enemies, deal more
hardly, and more severely with them, we should rid our selves of much of our
danger, and of our disturbance in the ordering our hearts.

2. Never make the Flesh your Counselor. Gal. 1.16. When it pleased the
Father, to reveal his Son in me immediate^y I conferred n t, that is, consulted
not with flesh and blood. Let Flesh and Blood be none of your Favorites, nor
none of your Counselors. What Government is there like to be, when the King
is compassed about with wicked Counselors? Prove. 25.5. Take away the wicked
from about the King, and his Throne shall be Established by Righteousness. Then
there is like to be an Holy Government within you, when you have none but Holy
Counselors. Your Flesh will be just such a Counselor to you, as Rehoboams
young men were to him, 1 Kings 12. their Counsel cost him the loss of the
Kingdom.

Do not ask Counsel of your Flesh, nor take its Counsel. If you would know what
you should eat or drink, or to what measure, do not ask your Appetites counsel;
that would say, eat to the full, spare not for cost; eat what thou have a mind
to, drink whilst thou listest. Do not ask your Pride, how shall I be clothed?
what Garments shall I wear, what Fashion shall I use? If you ask your Pride,
what counsel do you think 'twould give you? Do not ask your Covetousness, what
alms shall I give, what good shall I do with my Estate, where shall I bestow
what I have? keep it to thy self, keep it for thine own, make thee great with
what thou have gotten; build thee an House, and build thee a Name in the Earth,
for a Rich and Wealthy man; get what thou can, and then leave thy substance
for thy Babes, thy Children after thee; that is the Counsel that Covetousness
would give. Do not ask thy sloth, what pains is needful to be taken for God or
thy Soul; whether industry and diligence in working out thy salvation be so
necessary; Sloth will counsel thee, take thine ease, do not make the way to
Heaven harder or straighter then God has made it, favor thy self, and do not
expose thy self to too much hardness.

Christians, you have Multitudes of Lusts, that will be ready to give you
counsel in every case, but take heed, take counsel of none of them. Take
counsel of God, take counsel of the Scriptures, take counsel of Conscience; how
would God have me to use my Estate? What Alms would he have me to give? What
Bounty, what Liberality does he call me to? How would God and Conscience have
me to feed my self, and cloth my self? Does God say as this Pride says? On
with thy Ornaments, follow the Fashions, deck thy self with that attire that
will best please thee; does God say as thine Appetite says? Eat whatever thine
heart lusts after, drink as much, and fit at it as long as thou have a mind
to? Does Conscience say, as this sloth says? Favor thy self, take thine
ease, be not too painful and industrious for thy Soul, be not too strict or too
precise, nor expose thy self to the contempt and scorn of the World, by thy
zeal in Religion? Take counsel of God Christians, take counsel of Scripture and
Conscience, but do not make Flesh and Blood your Counselors: To make your
Flesh your Counselor, is to take the Malefactor from the Bar to the Bench,
and there set it in Judgment in its own case; your Lusts are the Malefactors,
that are to be consulted against, to be condemned and crucified; to the Bar
with them, let them have sentence against them, but let them not be called up
to the Bench to be consulted withal.

3. Never look for any Government or safety, till you have gotten this Flesh
under Foot. It will be in the Throne if it can; while it lives, it will be
aspiring to the Government. Deal with your Flesh as Herod and Pilate did with
Christ, when they feared he would take away the Kingdom: Let it be Crucified,
or as Saul endeavored to do by David, who he feared would be King in his
room. He did all he could to rid the Country of him. He persecuted him from
City to City, from hold to hold, and raised Forces against him to slay David.
Look with the same evil Eye at Lust, as Saul did on him; prosecute it from hold
to hold, seek the Life of this Flesh, which is every day undermining your
Souls, and taking the Government out of your hands.

O Friends, that you were deeply sensible what a mischievous and mortal Enemy
this carnal mind, this carnal heart, these Fleshly Lusts are to you; say of
these, not only as Rebekah of the Daughters of Heth, I am weary of my life, but
I am in danger of my life, because of the Daughters of Heth. O it were a
comfort, might one hear Christians more heartily groaning under their Tyranny;
Woe is me because of this proud heart, woe is me because of this froward pettish
angry impatient Spirit; O this envy, O this Earthliness, O this sluggishness;
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? It would be comfortable to hear
you groaning; I do not say complaining; complaints often come not deep, but
sighing and groaning and mourning in secret, before him who sees in secret,
this hearty mourning and affliction under your Lusts, is a degree of striving
against them; and hearty striving is a degree of victory over them. When you
are once come heartily to say, I can never have ease, and I will never have
peace with this pride, or Covetousness, or any of my Lusts; and if they abide
in me, they shall never abide in peace in me; if I cannot utterly conquer them,
through the help of God, I will never give over fighting against them; if they
remain in me, I hope they shall never again reign in me; I will resist them, I
will pray against them, I will watch against them, I hope I shall never again
resign up to this Pride, or this Covetousness, but will withstand them, in the
Name of the Lord will I withstand them; to him I resign up the Government of my
Soul, in hope that he will make my Foes my Footstool. Friends, such a
resolved and effectual striving against Lust, is a fair degree of conquest, and
when your Enemies are thus put under your Feet, you may then with the more
ease, have the Government of your selves upon your Shoulders. But O beware of a
Flesh favoring Heart, beware of a Lust excusing heart.

The good party. Grace must be excited and upheld. Christians must hold an hard
hand, and a straight hand upon Lust, upon every Lust; there is no good to be
done whilst these are suffered; and they must quicken and cherish and encourage
every little spark of the Grace of God. These are the good Subjects in the
Kingdom, which must be countenanced and upheld. 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing
which is committed to thee keep by the Holy Ghost. Whatever that good thing was
that is there meant, it is certain, that the Grace of God is the great good
thing that must be kept; keep it safe that it be not lost; keep it alive, that
it grow not to decay; keep it in good likeing, nourish and cherish the Grace of
God. Kings must be nursing Fathers, Queens nursing Mothers to their good
Subjects; So must Christians be to the good in their hearts; keep Grace in good
plight, and keep it in good order, keep it in action Let your Faith be working
Faith, let your Love and your Holy desires be working Love, and working
desires. There Is no way to keep Grace in Life, without you keep it in action;
Holy action is both the end of keeping Grace in Life, and the means to maintain
its life.

O Christians, keep your Graces in constant exercise; be busily working for God
and Glory; do not let these precious Talents rust for want of use; whilst Grace
lies idle or asleep, then Lust Lords it in the Soul. If you keep it not in
constant action, to the crucifying of Lust, Lust will be busy a crucifying of
Grace.

What Government will there be, when Governors side with, and take the part
of evil ones, and curb and discountenance, or take part against them that are
good? If you would govern your hearts aright, take part with the Grace that is
in you, and take up Arms against Lust. Thou have Pride in thy heart, thou have
frowardness, thou have Covetousness, but will thou take part with these? VVilt
thou be on the side of thy lusts? Tread upon them; be glad, be thankful for
every word, for every Friend that will speak against the Pride and Covetousness
of thy Heart. Be not angry when thou art checked or reproved, be thankful for
any thing that speaks against them. But take part with the good that is in you;
when the Spirit lusts against the flesh, when Grace rises and resists
Corruption, when the interest of Christ within thee, crosses and contradicts
the interest of the Flesh, take part with Christ and his Grace. We are too apt
to take part with our Flesh, when we do not think we do. When the Flesh
enticeth us to what we would have, this liberty, or that gain, or pleasure, we
sometimes to do our Flesh a kindness, will study arguments to prove it good and
right, which Flesh would have. Though it be naught or pernicious, yet because
its pleasing to our Flesh, we do what we can to prove it lawful and good. This
is a taking part with the flesh, a siding with and strengthening this Rebel.

On the other side, when Grace calls us to Duties that are contrary to the
Flesh, to hard and self-denying Duties; to more strictness, to more Severity
then our flesh can bear, then we often study Objections against it; Christ is
not so austere --, but while we thus take part with the flesh, the evil that is
in us, and thereby take part against the good that is in us, what Government is
there like to be, all the while in those hearts, where the Rebels are sided
with, and the good Subjects discountenanced and opposed?

5. In strengthening the sinews of Government, Rewards and Punishments. What are
laws? what Government can there be if there were no Rewards and Punishments?
Who would obey, if there were no reward to obedience? who would fear to rebel,
if men should suffer nothing for their rebellion? Rewards and Punishments, are
the Sanction and strength of Laws. Now for the strengthening of these sinews of
Government, consider,

1. That there is an eternal World. After we have made an end in this World,
there is another where we must have a being. Man dies not as a beast dies, as
a Dog or a Swine; as a Wiseman dies not as a Fool dies, so neither do Wise
men or Fools, die as a Beast dies; there is not an end of us when we die, as
there is of the Beasts that perish; we pass away out of this, into another
World. Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, and the spirit to
God that gave it. Man, though he has a mortal body, yet he has an immortal
Soul. The Spirit of a man, is the Candle of the Lord; and when this Candle is
once lighted, it shall never go out. Its carried away hence, but its carried to
God that gave it. The Souls of all men, good and bad, when they die, do all go
to God; even those that go to the Devil, are first carried to God, by him to
receive their Sentence to their everlasting state. Sinners when they die, go
not to God as their Reward, or Blessedness, but to God as their Judge. Sinners
will say as Christ did, Luke 23.46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit,
but God will say to them, who are ye? away from me ye workers of iniquity, I
know you not, Mat. 7.23. I am none of your Father, ye are of your Father the
Devil; get you down to him. Commend your Spirits to me? what have you given up
your Souls to the Devil, and all your life long have they been serving of him,
and he been corrupting and depraving of them, blinding them, hardening them,
made them such a filthy and unclean thing, and now do ye think to come off so,
to commend these filthy and unclean Souls to me? away with them, I Will none of
them. If those that are sanctified by my Spirit, and serve me with their
Spirit, come to me when they die, I Will take them to me; I will acknowledge my
self their Father, they shall dwell with me; but those that have served sin,
and the Devil while they lived, let not them think to commend their Spirits to
me when they die, I Will none of them. Well but whether we must dwell with God or
the Devil, into the other World all Souls, good and bad must pass when they go
hence.

2. There is an eternal Judgment. So the Apostle tells us. Heb. 6.2. of the
Doctrine of eternal Judgment. It is called an Eternal Judgment, not as if the
day of Judgment should last for ever; in how long or how short a time, that
judgment shall be dispatched, no man certainly knows; the glorious God can make
short work, and will do so, in that great and dreadful day. Its called Eternal
Judgment because it sentenceth men to their everlasting state, and its the last
judgment, there shall never be another to all Eternity, but the sentence of
this Judgment shall stand for ever. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all stand before the
Judgment -- Romans 2.6. Who will render to every man according to his works -- to
them that by patient continuance in well-doing, do seek for glory honor and
immortality, eternal Life; but to them that are contentious, and obey not the
truth, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, to every Soul of them
that do evil.

3. In the Judgment to come, the secrets of the heart shall be opened and
judged: Men shall be judged for their words, men shall be judged for their
deeds, but not for these only, but for the secrets of their hearts. Eccl.
12.14. God shall bring every work to Judgment, with every secret thing, whether
it be good or evil. The Judgments of men are only over our Bodies, and outward
Acts; they know not our hearts, and therefore cannot be our hearts Judges. But,

1. God sees the heart. I the Lord search the heart and try the reins. Jer.
17.10. He sees in secret, and he that sees in secret, will reward openly;
Mat. 6.4.

1. He sees the good that is in secret, the love and fear of his Name, our
inward desires and thirstings and breathings after him; every holy thought,
every holy purpose, the inward mournings of the heart, under sin and
temptation, the inward strivings and wrestlings of the heart, against
temptation and corruption, our self-loathings and self abasings, the integrity
and uprightness of our hearts; whilst men are censuring or reproaching or
punishing us as hypocrites, God sees the integrity that is in our Souls. O
Friends, get an honest upright heart in the sight of God, you shall never loose
the benefit and blessedness of it, God sees the sincerity of the upright, and
will certainly reward it.

2. He sees the evil that is in secret; the proud heart, the false and
guileful heart are open before him. Beware of playing the Hypocrite, of
satisfying your selves with Hypocritical Duties, hypocritical Praying,
hypocritical Hearing, or Professing, God sees what that heart of thine is a
doing, while thy tongue is a praying, or thine ear hearing, thou may deceive
men and thine own self, but God cannot be deceived.

2. The secrets of the heart shall be opened and judged in that Judgment of
God. 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will
both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
Counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have praise of God.

1. The things of the heart are hidden and dark things. The thoughts of the
heart dark thoughts, the Counsels of the Lord dark Counsels, even the good
things that are in the heart, are to all others but dark things.

2. In the day of Judgment, these things of darkness shall be all brought to
light; the secrets shall be all made manifest. What a sight will there be in
that day, when the hearts of all the World, shall be seen as it were at one
view; What a blessed sight will there be, when all the Beauty and inward Glory
of the Saints, all their Graces, shall be seen! What a black sight also will
there be, when all the filth and garbage that is in sinners hearts, all the
venomous brood, all the Cockatrices eggs, that ever have been hatched in those
unclean hearts; when all the wicked Counsels and Devices of their hearts, all
the Curses and Blasphemies, all the Couzenage and Fraud of the heart, all the
wicked Plots and Contrivances of the heart against God or his Saints, all the
Adulteries and Filthiness of the heart, all the Madness and Follies of the
heart, all the Malice, and Spite, and Rage of the heart: when all these shall
be presented at one view, O what an odious sight will there be! Sinners, do not
cheat your selves in your sinful ways, with hopes of Secrecy; for all must be
brought to light. If all that wickedness and hypocrisy, if those filthy lusts
and unclean thoughts, that are in your hearts should be now seen, by all this
Congregation, how would you be ashamed, and how would you blush to look any
body in the Face! but because thy naughty heart and its naughty thoughts, and
desires cannot be seen, thou may be a proud fellow, of a froward heart, of a
dissembling lying heart, and no body the wiser, therefore thou let thy self
alone to be as thou art; as long as thou have a secret covering for all thy
ugly Conditions, it is well enough; but do not cheat thy self thus, all these
hidden things of darkness must be brought to light, thou must be turned inside
outward, and all the shame of thy Nakedness, and thy Naughtiness be made
appear, and be laid open before God Angels and Men.

4. There are eternal Rewards and Punishments, that in this Judgment of God,
shall be awarded to every soul. What ever the state of your Souls shall then be
found to be, they shall receive a due recompense of reward, and eternal
recompense. Therefore this Judgment, as I told you before, Heb. 6.2. is called
an eternal Judgment, because it appoints to every man an eternal reward. To the
repenting and renewed and upright hearts, it appoints Eternal Blessedness for
their Reward; to the impenitent wicked and unrenewed Hearts, it appoints
Eternal Torment for their Reward. Mat. 25.48. These, the wicked, shall go away
into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. O what a
weight is there in the Crown of Glory, that shall be the reward of the
righteous. The Apostle calls it an exceeding eternal weight of Glory 2 Cor.
4.17. And O what a weight is there in that Curse, and that wrath that shall be
the reward of the Wicked! how will it break the backs and crush the bones, and
tear the bowels, and burn the Souls, of every wicked one! Sinners, a fire, a
fire is prepared for you. What Torment is like the Torment of fire, and what
fire is like the fire of Hell! But O that word, Eternity, Eternity, that is the
scalding and scorching Word; Everlasting Fire that shall never be quenched. How
weary are the days, how long are the nights to a sick man, that is tormented in
his bed? but what will an eternal night be, that shall never know morning! Who
can dwell with the devouring fire, who can dwell with everlasting burnings,
Isa. 33.14. It is fire that you must have your dwelling in; It is devouring
fire that will devour all your former g^ins and pleasures of sin; as the lean
kine in Pharaohs dream, did eat up the fat ones, This fire shall eat up all
your pleasant days and merry nights. Ye will devour your selves; these Bodies
and Souls it will devour; it will devour by burning, a tormenting burning. O
dreadful! sinners, do not your hearts yet tremble? what not to think of
burning? devouring burning? how do ye think that ye shall look upon sin, when
these Bodies and these Souls of yours shall be all on a light fire? when those
Eyes, and that Tongue, and those Hands, and every Limb, shall be all glowing
fire, as red hot iron in a Furnace? how do ye think ye shall endure it? but yet
you have not all, the worst is yet behind; it is Everlasting burnings, fire that
shall never be quenched. O that word, Never, never, never an end, what a
burning Dagger will it be, in the Souls of those damned ones? think what it
has already been to Judas, who has been burning in this fire, above 1600
years; think what it has been to Cain, that has been burning there almost
ever since the World began, above 5000 years, and yet are burning still at this
day; what a long and dismal time have they had of it already? but all this is
not so much as a minute, or a moment to those Everlasting Ages of Torment, that
are still to run out, and will never be expired. Such are the Rewards of the
Wicked, Torment, Torment in extremity, and Torment to Eternity; and the upright
heart shall be rewarded with a weight of Glory and Joy, and this shall be an
exceeding and eternal Glory.

5. A sense of these eternal Rewards, is the very strength and sinews of
Government, Where I shall show,

1. What I mean by a sense of these eternal things. There are three things in
it.

1. A believing these things. That there is such an Eternal Judgment, and
Eternal Reward. These things are certain, Psalm. 58.11. Verity there is a reward
for the righteous, verily he is a God that Judges in the earth. And as verily
as there is a reward for the righteous, so verily there is a reward for the
Sinner. These things are certain, and these things must be believed. Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is the rewarder of
them that diligently seek him. And as he must be believed a Rewarder of them
that seek him, so a Revenger of them that slight him, and disobey him. He that
comes to God, and will obtain this Reward, and escape this vengeance, must
believe this, or he will never come. The reason of the Rebellion of men's hearts
against God, is their unbelief; believe the Judgment of God, and that will
bring you under his Government. When you come to say, verily it is so, this is
no sable or delusion, it is certainly so, it is undoubtedly so, such a Judgment
there shall be, such rewards there shall be given, as verily as if I saw it
done, then your hearts will be governed, and never till then

2. An understanding what these rewards shall be. What great and wonderful
Rewards they are. Things to come must be known ere they will affect. Heady
sinners, However they say, they believe, yet they little know what it is to
believe. They know not what it is to be saved, they know not what it is to be
damned. Psalm. 92.6, 7. A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool
understand this. When the wicked spring up, as the grass, and all the workers
of iniquity do flourish, it is that they should be destroyed for ever. A
brutish man understands not this neither, that sinners shall be destroyed,
nor what a dreadful destruction their destruction shall be. Its true these
things to come cannot be perfectly known here; we know but in part, we
understand but imperfectly; 1 Cor. 13.9. 1 John 3 2. It does not yet appear
what we shall be. Now are we Sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we
shall be. And so of sinners, now are they the children of the Devil, but it
does not yet appear what they shall be. Sinners that are brands prepared for
the burning, do little think what that burning is, that is prepared for them;
and they shall never know it perfectly, till they come there. But yet such a
knowledge of these great and astonishing things may be had here, as may work
mightily toward the governing of the heart; and a knowledge there must be of
them, or they will never work. There is a foreknowledge, that is gotten by
believing, and meditating of these things. Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise will
ponder these things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord;
and as his loving kindness, so his Wrath and indignation; and there is an
after-knowledge or an experimental knowledge. Some sinners will never know what
hell is, till they know it by experience; till they fail into the pit, and the
sense of that wrath, when they come to be preyed upon and wrapped up in the
devouring Flames, teach them what a dreadful wrath it is. Beware sinners of
such an experimental knowledge of Hell; wherein your flesh and your bones, and
the Torments of them, shall make you know, what now you will not understand.
It Is a foreknowledge, by observing and pondering what is written, and preached
of these great things, that is necessary to your present Government.

3. A feeling of these things. I mean now, a feeling beforehand; a feeling
that is gotten by your foreknowledge. What we believe and understand if they be
great things, will make impressions upon our senses. By the knowledge of God,
and of the blessedness of Heaven, the Saints get some ^or^^^^es of that Glory
and Blessedness. 1 Pet. 2.2. If we have ta^^d that the Lord is gracious. And by
the knowledge of the Wrath and Judgments of God, some sinners get a taste of
that wrath; it makes their hearts to begin to burn above ground. There Is an
heaven begun in the hearts of Saints, and an hell begun in the hearts of some
Sinners.

And this now is that, which I mean by a sense of the things to come; the
getting such a belief of the certainty of these things, such an understanding
of the greatness of these things, that may deeply affect the Heart; that may
leave powerful impressions on the Senses; that the heart may be powerfully
moved and deeply affected with them. Sinners hearts are as stones and senseless
stocks, when we have spoken to them of the deep things of God, we may say of
these eternal things, as the Apostle of his temporal Sufferings, Acts 20.24.
None of these things move them, or will in the least work upon them; but if we
could let in a little more light into their Minds, if we could show them some
glimpses of the Glory to some, some flashes of the Eternal fire, this would
make those stocks to feel.

2. This sense of the eternal things is the sinews of Government. There can be
no Government without Rewards and Punishments, and if these Rewards and
Punishments be not believed, known and perceived, its all one as to Government,
as if there were none at all. It Is the understanding and sense of these
Rewards, that is the strength of Government.

Now there is according to the two different Rewards, a different sense of them.

1. an alluring encouraging and obliging sense: A sense of the Magnificence, of
the Kindness and Mercies of the Lord will encourage to Subjection and obedience
to him. It will draw forth our love, and stir up all our Powers, to active
Obedience. O how would the lively sense of God and the blessedness of Heaven
kindle Affection enlarge our desires, raise our hopes, and fill us with joy?
What would be loved as God is loved? what would be desired as God is desired?
what would be hoped for, as heaven is hoped for? what would our love or desires
or hopes find too much to be done or suffered, where there is a deep sense of
these great things, that shall be the reward of all.

And how would such a lively sense of God and of heaven, abate our love, and
cool our desires after earth and the things thereof? Who would regard dust and
stones and trash, that had Gold and Pearls before him? what would this money
be, these Sheep and Oxen be, these carnal pleasures and sports be, how easily
could they be wanted, how little would they be loved or desired, were that
Glory, Honor, Immortality that is above, more before our Eye and upon our
Hearts? you complain you cannot get your hearts loosned and disintangled from
these earthly things; O it is because heaven is so much out of sight: you have
so little sense of the good things to come, that hence it is you fall a lusting
so after the good things present. Get more sense of God into your hearts, and
you will feel your Affections to fall, and abate toward these earthly things.
Look on the things not seen, as the Apostle did, 2 Cor. 4.18. Upon the things
that are eternal, and you will disdain and contemn, the things that are seen
which are but Temporal.

2. The sense of the punishments to come will be an awing sense. The severities
of the Lord, and his dreadful wrath and vengeance would awe the heart into
subjection to him. O what an influence would this have upon the Governing our
fears, and our griefs and our anger? whom should we then fear but God? what
would the wrath of man be, what would temporal sufferings be, how little would
they be feared, were there a due awe of God upon our hearts? your awe of God
would say the same to you as the Prophet. Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from man, trust
not in him, and fear him not; and as Christ said, Rev. 2.10. Fear none of those
things you shall suffer. And Luke 12.5. Fear not them that kill the body --
fear God who is able to cast into Hell. Whom should we then fear but God? and
what should we then fear but sin against God, which makes so obnoxious to his
wrath? you that now make light of Sin, can lie, and defraud, and be covetous,
and do any thing else your hearts lead you to, and make nothing of it, or but a
small matter, Get an awe of God on your hearts, and your sins would make you
tremble, and what an influence would it have upon the suppressing your sinful
Anger? it would take up all our quarrels; a sense of Heaven and Hell would make
us all friends, those great things would swallow up the lesser. What do I stand
vexing and fretting mv self at every one that crosses me? how stands it with
my Soul to God ward? how may I escape the wrath to come? Is it peace betwixt
the Almighty and my Soul? Friends, it is a sign that you have little sense of
your eternal conceraments, where every little thing so excessively moves, and
disturbs your Spirits.

3. How to get and maintain upon our hearts, this sense of the eternal things.

There are two things, I have told you, are supposed to this sense, a
believing, and an understanding these great things; and to the improving of
what we believe, and understand of them, there is a third thing necessary,
Meditation and frequent thinking upon them. Exercise your thoughts more upon
the Eternal World; spend more thoughts, think oftener upon it, and spend more
deep thoughts of heart upon them. Our thinking and meditating, is the same with
that looking on the things not seen, mentioned before, 2 Cor. 4. Look more
Heavenward, and look more toward hell, and this will affect your hearts;
particularly think these three thoughts.

1. Think this thought, In this eternal world I must shortly be, one of these
two Rewards must be my Reward; one of these two States, Eternal Blessedness or
Eternal Misery, must be my State. That Heaven which I now hear Preached of,
that Hell which I now am warned of, I shall be [in] one of them, in a little
while. As sure as I am alive, and here this day, so sure shall I be in Heaven
or Hell a few days hence, What Is become of those many that were alive a few
years since, that I knew and was acquainted with, and did eat and drink with,
and buy and sell with, that now are no more seen? Where are they all? they are
all passed over, and gone into the other World, They are gone, and I am
following after, I must shortly be with them. The Saints that are dead and
gone, they are entered into their Reward, they are gone to Christ, they are
entered into the joy of their Lord; and if I be one of them, partaker of the
same Faith, walking in the same holy steps, I also shall have the same reward.
The sinners that are dead and gone, they are entered into their Reward; shut out
from the Presence and Joy of the Lord, and shut up under Chains of darkness,
and burning in the Furnace of Fire; and if I follow them in their sins, and be
impenitent therein, a little while hence I shall I shall overtake them; I shall
have [my] chain with them, my furnace with them.

Well let this be one thought of your hearts, how nearly you are all concerned
in the other World, and how certainly you shall be there. As sure as you have a
being for a time in this World, so sure shall you every one of you have an
Eternal being in the other World; either in the everlasting pleasures above, or
the everlasting pangs and plagues below.

2. Think much this thought, Which of these two states in Eternity must be my
state, is determining every day. It is thy present life, thine every days
course here, that must determine the Case, whither thou must, when thou go
hence, Romans 2.7, 8. Thy reward must be according to thy work, thy reaping must
be according to thy sowing. Gal. 6.7, 8. Think with your selves, I am every day
working for Eternity, sowing for Everlasting; what would you reap? what would
you, should be your reward in the other world? I know what you would answer
here, I would reap in Mercy, I would be rewarded in Joy and Glory. But what
[must] you reap, where must your reward be? why that you are every day
determining. Look what your ways and your works are, such your reward must be,
Sow in Righteousness and you shall reap in mercy, Hos. 10.12. Sow in tears, and
you shall reap in j y. Psalm. 126.6. But if you sow in Tares, sow to your flesh,
sow Sin and Vanity, I leave it to your selves to judge, what your reaping must
be.

Were such thoughts abiding upon our hearts, what manner of Persons should we
then be? Is this the business of my life? Is this the great debate of every
day, where mine everlasting dwelling must be, whether in the Paradi^e of God,
or in the dungeon with Devils, whether in everlasting Blessedness, or Burnings?
Is this the great question to be resolved and determined, what I shall be
hereafter, by what I am every day? O no more sinning against God; O no more
neglecting of Christ; O no more hardness and impenitency of heart; O no more of
this worldliness, or wantonness, or drunkenness; mine heart shakes to think,
whither these are carrying me, and where they will lay me. Arise O my Soul,
shake off these Lusts, shake thy self out of sleep; it is high time to awaken;
stop, stop this evil course; cast off the works of darkness, least thou be
suddenly swallowed up of Everlasting darkness.

3. Think this thought, The state and the way of mine [heart] is the great
thing that must determine what mine eternal state must be. My works must
determine what my reward must be, and the state of mine heart will determine
what my works will be.

Well now, exercise your selves to such thoughts; dwell in such Meditations;
and think not that you have done any thing to purpose, till your thoughts have
begotten strong impressions upon your hearts, and you are wrought to a sense of
those great things, and let your sense of them be an abiding sense.

O what even and steady lives should we then live; the evenness of our lives
will be both the beauty of our Conversations, when there is a due proportion of
our days one to another, this will make our lives beautiful; and 'twill be,
the evidence of our integrity. Fits of Devotion, fits of holy Affections, will
prove little to us of our uprightness; our deadness and dumps, when those fits
are overs will weaken all our hopes and confidences, and call all into
question. It is our standing holy Affections, that will be our standing Comfort.

O friends, how uneven and unsteady are we? what unstable Souls? what wandering
stars are we? how sadly different are we from our selves? sometimes in our
secret duties, or at public Ordinances, our hearts seem full of God, full of
heavenly Affections. What movings, what meltings, what enlargements of heart do
we feel? all spirit, and love, and joy, and then shortly after, behold all is
lost; our Sun dips into a Cloud, the stars fall to the Earth, our Spirits sink
and flag, and the flesh gets up again. O if we could but hold in the serene
temper we sometimes are in, what a life should we have of it! but it does not
hold; we are given to Changes, the temper of our hearts often change with our
business and employments; when we are busying our selves about the things of
God, then we are spiritual and heavenly, ('twere well if it were so always)
when we are called forth about our earthly employments, we become as earthly as
other men. Do you none of you find it so? do you not complain it is so? Lord
help me, it is even too true, I even find it so with me; sometimes our tempers
change with our company, when we are conversant with those that fear God, there
is some Spirit, and some savor in our Converses, O it were well if it were
always so; sometimes and too often, we are barren, and carnal and dead, in the
best Society, our conversing with Christians, is too often an useless, and
carnal, and unsavory Converse. But if it be better with us, when in good
company, how does it use to be, when we fall into carnal company, or vain
company? we seem to have even quite lost our God, and our Religion, our eternal
concernments are laid by, and our care about them is intermitted, our God and
our Souls are thrust behind the door, or trodden under foot.

Whence is all this? O our sense of eternal things, is for the time worn off.
Brethren, God is the same God, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. There Is
the same eye of God upon you, wherever you be, he that looks how you carry it
in your Duties, looks upon you in your businesses, looks upon you in every
company. Wherever you are; and as God is the same God, so your everlasting
concernments are still the same; Heaven is as much to be desired, Hell as much
to be feared, your Salvation is to be as carefully wrought out; you have as
important business lying upon you every where, as you have any where, and this
work will never prosper, if it has not your constant care. It Is true, we are
not to speak the same words, in all Companies, and our behavior is not to be
alike, in its particular Circumstances, in all Companies; but in the general, a
serious and holy behavior, the carrying our selves so as men that are in a
journey heavenwards, the owning and propagating serious Religion, the behaving
our selves so, that others may evidently see the spirit of Glory, and of God
resting upon us, and may be both convinced that God is in us of a truth, and if
it be possible, be gained to God; or at least made ashamed of their own sinful
and carnal ways. Such a temper should we be in, and such a carriage should we
be of, in what Company soever we be; we are always in the sight of God, and we
should be no where but upon business for God, and we should carry our selves as
such; What the Apostle speaks of his Ministry, should be exemplified in the
practice of Christians, 2 Cor. 2.17. As of sincerity, as of God, in the sight
of God, so speak we in Christ. Wherever you are, behave your selves in
sincerity, in simplicity; whatever you speak, speak it as in the sight of God;
be faithful, approve your selves to God in all that you do.

O friends, this, even this steady, this sincere course of life, this universal
approving your selves to God in all you do, will be the fruit of such an
abiding sense of God upon your hearts. This will be the poise that will make
you move swiftly, this will be the Ballast, that will make you sail steadily.
And this swift and steady motion heavenward, will both make you appear to be
Christians indeed, and mightily improve and advance your souls, in that grace
of God that brings Salvation. O beloved that this now might be the fruit of
these many words, that I have spoken to you; that you would, every one of you,
set your hearts to it, to get and to hold, such a deep sense of the eternal
things upon your spirits, as might have influence to the carrying you on in
this even and steady course. Do not every one of you need some establishment?
more settledness, more fixedness in an heavenly frame? do not you feel your
selves so up and down, so off and on, that you can hardly fix? Would it not be
more comfortable for you, if you could get to be more like the unchangeable
God, that as he is the same God, so you might be the same Christians, of the
same Spirit, of the same way, so fixed and composed in your Spirits, that you
might not be moved from the hope, nor from the holiness of the Gospel? would it
not be comfortable to you, were it thus with you? would it not be much to the
honor of the Gospel, and to the joy of your own Souls? then once again, I
exhort you by the Lord Jesus, get this sight of God in your eye, keep this
sense of God upon your hearts, which will have its fruit unto this settled and
even course of holiness, the end whereof will be everlasting life. This is that
which I strive for, and am reaching toward in mine own Soul, and I must say
with the Apostle, Phil. 3.12. I press these things upon you, not as though I
had already obtained, but I follow after if I may obtain through Christ Jesus.
And what I seek, and wait, and hope for in mine own Soul, my hearts desire is,
that you also may follow after, and be partakers of the same Grace, that my
Soul is in pursuit of, that you and I may rejoice together in the day of the
Lord. Thus much for the keeping the heart under Government.

2. Keep the Heart under Guard. Keep it, and all the good that is in it in
safety, that it be not lost. Christians must keep their Hearts, as Worldlings
keep their Money, and their Jewels, and their writings, by which they hold
their Estates. If they have any stronger or safer place than other, there they
lay them up, and whatever else they have to look to, their special eye and
their strictest Watch, is upon their treasure. And here I shall show you, 1.
Why Christians must especially guard their hearts. 2. How Christians must guard
their hearts.


1. Why Christians must especially guard their hearts. They must set a guard
upon their tongues, they must watch their words, and all their carriages, but
above all keeping, they must keep their hearts. So the word in the Text is
rendered, and interpreted by some, keep the heart with diligence, above all
keepings. Keep the heart, but why so? because the heart is, 1. The fountain of
Life. 2. The spring of all vital actions. 3. The record of all our sacred
Transactions. 4. The cabinet of our Jewels. 5. Our box of evidences. 6. The ark
of our strength. 7. A sacrifice for God. 8. The temple of the Lord.


1. Because the heart is the fountain of Life. It is the reason urged in the
Text, for out of it are the issues of Life. The issues, that is, the streams,
or rivu^ets of life. The heart is the fountain from whence all our living
streams do flow. Christ is our life, and the seat or habitation of Christ is in
the heart; therefore that expression, Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of
Glory. The hope of the Saints is a living and lively hope, the life of our hope
is from Christ, and from Christ within us, Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells in the
heart by Faith. The heart Natural, is the fountain of Natural Life, it is the
primum vivens; and the heart Spiritual is the fountain of Spiritual Life; we
begin to live from within; as death begins in the heart, so life. Death Natural
ends in the heart, the heart is the last that dies, but death spiritual begins
in the heart, the heart is the first that dies. Sinners dead works do all arise
from their dead hearts; the root dies first, and then the branches, and fruit
wither and fall off; the Devils great design is, firstly upon the heart, when
he has slain the good that is within, he can with ease destroy whatever good
is without, the fruit will fall off of it self, when the root is dead. The
heart is the first that dies, in a spiritual sense, and it is the first that
lives. It is there the seed of God, his immortal Seed, is first received, and
takes its root; so that there is the same reason to set a guard upon our
hearts, as to preserve our life, if you would keep your selves alive, if you
would not fall down among the dead, then look well to your hearts which are the
fountain of life.

2. It is the spring of all our vital actions and operations. This is included
in the former; the heart is the fountain of life, and life is the fountain of
action. A dead man cannot see, nor hear, nor speak, nor move, he must live
before he can speak or move. And what can the spiritually dead do? The dead
praise not the Lord, Psalm. 115.17. The living, the living, he shall praise
thee, Is. 38.19. That is spoken, of the naturally dead, and living; and must we
not say the same, of the spiritually dead, and the living Souls? dead Souls
cannot praise the Lord; they cannot pray, nor believe, nor hope, nor serve the
Lord; the living, the living Soul, it shall praise thee, it shall pray unto
thee, and serve thee. Hypocrites are all dead at heart, and therefore all their
services are but dead services; they make a show, and keep a stir in the
outward parts of Religion; they can talk as Christians, and walk and move; but
it is with these dead Souls, as with those dead bodies, which we call walking
Ghosts; they look like men, and speak like men, and go up and down like men,
but still they have no Soul in them; It is the Devil that acts in them, and
speaks in them, and carries them up and down; none of all their actions or
motions are vital actions; the devil can make them speak, and walk, and look
like living men, but he cannot make them live; such is the Hypocrites Religion,
he can pray, and hear, and sing, and speak as Christians do, but he is dead at
heart, and thereupon all his duties are but dead duties.

Friends, you are as much concerned to keep your hearts, as you are to be able
to do any thing that will please God, or save your Souls. What is the intent of
your Religion? why do ye come together to pray, and hear, and partake of the
Table of the Lord? You will say, I come to perform these duties, to please the
Lord, I come in order to the saving of my Soul. Do you so? then look to your
hearts better, see that there be the root of Religion within you: see that your
praying be the praying with the heart, that your hearing be not the opening
your ear, but the opening of your heart to the Word; see that whatever you do,
that has any show of Religion in it, you do it heartily; watch your hearts
when you come into the house of the Lord, watch your hearts, when you set upon
any work for God, lest they give you the slip, and so make all your Services to
be but bodily exercises, which as 1 Timothy 4.8. profit little. Bodily exercises,
that is, the outward part of our Religion; Ear Religion, Tongue Religion, Knee
Religion; these bodily Exercises, where there is not an heart at the bottom of
them, profit nothing at all; they will do nothing to the pleasing of God, or
the saving our Souls.

Friends, beware of Hypocrisy; take heed lest any of you be found hypocrites;
that your faith you seem to have, be not the faith of hypocrites, that your
hope be not the Hypocrites hope, that your praying, and fasting, and alms, be
not all the Sacrifices of hypocrites; and such sacrifices they are, if they be
Sacrifices without an heart. Come not before the Lord with hollow Vessels,
which will make a sound, but have nothing in them. We that look upon you, cannot
tell what there is within you; we see your faces, and hear your voices, but
what is under, God knows; look you to it, that it be not all hollow, and empty
within; he that sees the heart, sees what there is within; and will accept or
reject according to what he finds of the heart in all you do.

Friends, What do ye here this day? have you brought with you ever a Sacrifice
for God, ever a living Sacrifice? the living God will regard none of you, if
you bring not a living Sacrifice. He does not require of you, as he did of old,
a Bullock, or a Ram for a Sacrifice; No, nor a Dove, nor a Lamb for a
Sacrifice, it is a Soul for a Sacrifice, a living Soul, that is quickened and
sanctified by the Blood and Spirit of Christ. And upon this account farther are
you concerned to look to, and to keep your hearts; as ever you would do any
thing in Religion, that is acceptable with God, or of any avail to your own
Salvation. The heart is the spring of all vital Actions, and they are only our
vital Actions, our living and lively duties, that will be accepted of the
living God. Would you not be rejected for hypocrites? would you not compass the
Lord about with lies, as Ephraim did, Hos. 11.12. would you not come before the
Lord with lies, and comfort your selves with lies? then see that you bring your
hearts with you before him. Is there any life begotten in your hearts? is
Christ formed upon you? is the Spirit of Christ poured forth into you? is there
the life of God in your hearts? and is this the spring of all your acceptable
services? then as you love your lives, as you fear to serve the living God with
dead service, set a careful guard upon your hearts, that neither these be
stolen away from God, nor that life which is within you be stolen out of your
hearts.

Brethren, I would not that any of you be found hypocrites; therefore do I
labor with you, therefore do I preach to you, and warn every one of you, that
you may be presented perfect and upright in the day of the Lord. I would not
that you be found hypocrites in that day, nor would I that your Religious
actions be found hypocritical actions, in your present day. It Is said of the
limbs of Antichrist, 1 Timothy 4.2. That they speak lies in hypocrisies. I would
have Christians, not only none such, as speak lies in hypocrisy, no nor to
speak truth in hypocrisy, to do good in hypocrisy; and therefore it is, that I
have spent so much time among you, upon this Subject of looking to your hearts,
that these may be right with God, in all that you do. I fear there are
hypocrites among you, I fear that much of the Religion of some of you, may be
but hypocritical Religion; but look to your selves, and as you would be loath to
have no better acceptance than hypocrites, as you would dread to have your
portion with hypocrites, so dread it to satisfy your selves with hypocritical
duties; serve the God of your hearts with an hearty service; serve the true
God, with an heart, and with a true heart; serve the living God with living
hearts; see that there be the life of God in your hearts, and let the life
within you, be the Spring of all your Performances; that all that ever you do
in Religion be the issues of life.

3. It is the record of all the transactions, which have been betwixt Christ
and your Souls. If ye be Christ's, there have been great dealings betwixt
Christ and your Souls; Christ has been dealing with you; dealing with you by
his word, dealing with you by his Spirit; instructing and enlightening your
Souls, convincing and awakening your Hearts, persuading and alluring your
hearts after him; Christ has been dealing with you, about your repenting and
turning to the Lord, about your Reconciliation and making peace with God; God
has been in Christ reconciling you to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. You have not had
us dealing with you, in the name of Christ, who are the Ministers of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. but he who is the great Reconciler, Christ himself
has been dealing with you, and has reconciled you to God. So sure as the
Devil has been dealing with sinners, he has drawn them away from God, drawn
them to sin and wickedness against God, has been hardening them against God;
you could never have been so wicked, you could never have been so hardened,
against God, as you are; hardened against conversion, hardened against
repentance, if the Devil had not been dealing with you. You see what hard
hearts you have; we cannot humble you, we cannot persuade you to repent and
turn, our words do nothing with you; you will not be persuaded to return, but
you go on your way, and remain stupid, and senseless of your sin and misery; you
will not be persuaded it is so bad with you. We cannot for our hearts, make you
sensible of your wretched cases, nor put a stop to you in your sins; You may
see well enough who has been dealing with you, that you continue so sinful
still, and so hardened in your sins; It is the Devil that has had to do with
you, thus to deprave you, and to harden you; as sure as the Devil has been
dealing with sinners, so sure has Christ been dealing with his Saints. It Is
not Ministers that have awakened you, that have convinced and humbled you, and
brought you about to the Lord, it is Christ that has done these things for you.
We could never have humbled you, we could never have persuaded, nor turned, nor
reconciled you to God, if Christ himself had not done it. You were once foolish
and disobedient, led about with diverse lusts; you were once Drunkards, Liars,
Covetous and Profane, and you had been amongst this uncircumcised Crew to this
day, if Christ had not fetched you off; it is with him you have had to do, as
it is said, Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open before his eyes (with whom
we have to do). You have to do with Christ, Christ has been dealing with you
that are Christians, or you had never come to this, you had never been these
living Souls; you had never known what you do of God, nor known what you do of
Sin, nor been washed from your sins; your had never been here praying, and
hearing, and praising the Lord, and become followers of the Lamb, if Christ had
not had to do with you. Particularly you that are Christians, there have been
great transactions betwixt God and your Souls.

1. In point of Covenant. Behold, you that are Christians, you are in Covenant
with the Lord; by reason whereof, I may say concerning you, as Moses concerning
Israel, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord to be thy God, to walk in
his ways and keep his statutes. And the Lord has avouched thee to be his
peculiar People. You have avouched the Lord to be yours, and the Lord has
avouched you to be his; a solemn and mutual Covenant has there passed, between
the Lord and you; he is become your Covenant God, you are become his Covenant
People; How came this to pass? how is it, that you are not still as poor
sinners are, in Covenant with Death, and Agreement with Hell? how comes it to
pass, that when poor sinners are in Covenant with the Devil, you are in
Covenant with God? O you may thank Christ for this, he has been effectually
dealing with you in this thing. He has not only procured such a gracious
Covenant, a Covenant of Mercy, a Covenant of Pardons, a Covenant of Peace, but
he has also,

1. Made offer of this Covenant of God to you; inviting you to come and join
your selves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall never be forgotten.

2. He has made void your Covenant with Death, and disanull'd your Agreement
with Hell. He has given you an heart to break and make void that wicked
Covenant; to break with the Devil, to break with Sin and the World, and to come
out from among them.

3. He has effectually persuaded you into this Covenant of God. He has
brought you into the bond of the Covenant. Ezekiel. 20.37. He has sprinkled you
with the Blood of the Covenant, and has gained your hearty acceptance of all
this. You have opened your Mouth to the Lord, you have vowed your selves, you
have sworn your selves his Covenant Servants; not with your Mouths only, not in
profession only, but you have engaged your hearts to the Lord. Jer. 30.21. Your
Hearts are no longer your own, you have given them to the Lord, to be his for
ever. So that you can now say, through Grace to the Lord, what he said to
Israel. Is. 54.20. The Mountains shall depart, and the Hills shall be removed,
but through the help of God, my faithfulness shall not depart, nor shall the
Covenant of my peace ever be removed. His I am, and through his Grace I am
determined to be the Lords for ever.

Friends, such a solemn and sacred Covenant transaction, has there been in
those very Hearts of yours, betwixt the Lord and you. He has avouched himself
to be yours, and you have avouched your selves to be his own; and those Hearts
of yours, are the Records wherein this Transaction is registered, and kept.
Remember, and look back and consider, if there have not been such mutual
engagements passed betwixt the Lord and you. Look into your Closets, and
remember what of this kind has passed between him and you in secret, look back
to your Sacraments, and remember what Covenanting have been between the Lord
and you at his Table; and what solemn sealing there has been, God sealing to
you, and you sealing back to him. Your Hearts are the Records, wherein these
Sacred Transactions have been Registered; look into thine Heart, does not this
testify for thee, how thou have bound thy self to be the Lords for ever, and
have accepted of his Bond to thee? The remembrance of this Covenant
Transaction, will be of use to you as long as you live; will be of use to
comfort you in the day of your doubts and fears, to confirm you in the day of
Temptations, to hold you close to the Lord, according to the Vows that are upon
you, to quicken you and hold you on in that way of holy and lively Obedience,
which you have covenanted for. When you grow cold and careless and remiss in
your way of Religion, then remember, Is this the Life I covenanted with God to
live? When you are tempted to decline to a worldly life, or a fleshly life,
then remember, I have promised to the Lord, that I will never return to such a
life again. When you are out of heart, and complain of weaknesses and want of
strength, and so are discouraged and disheartened, I shall never be able to hold
to such an industrious life, then remember the Covenant of the Lord with you;
who has sealed to you, that he will help you and never fail you, nor forsake
you; when your flesh and your heart fail you, he will be the strength of your
heart. When you are in doubts and fears, that you are none of the Lords, nor
can lay any claim to him, then remember the Covenant which has been made
between him and you, and how you own it, and stand to it to this day, and that
may satisfy you. Of such great use will this Covenant of God be to you, and
therefore your hearts, which are the Records where it is kept, must be
carefully looked to.

2. In point of Communion. There have been great dealings between Christ and
you, in a way of Friendly Communion. What Correspondencies have there been held
betwixt Christ and you? what friendly interviews have there been between you?
Christ has been often looking down upon you, and rejoicing in his portion, and
you have been often looking up to him, and solacing your selves in his love;
Christ has been supporting and sustaining your hearts, and you have been
staying and leaning upon your beloved. What mutual entercourses have there
been? Christ has been often sending down Messages of love to you; telling you,
Soul I am thine; Has he never sent thee some tokens of his love? sent thee thy
pardon, sent thee his peace? has he never sent thee down some tastes of the
hidden Manna, and the white stone, and the new name? Rev. 2.17. and such a
comfortable word with it, Soul be of good comfort, thy sins be forgiven thee,
thy name is written in heaven. And do you never send up to your beloved? If you
have nothing but a sigh to send, or a tear to send, yet up it must be sent to
your beloved, to tell him, I am sick of love, or at least, I am sick for love.

How often has thine heart ascended in Prayers, and his heart descended in
gracious returns? what mutual embraces have there been, of thy Faith with him,
and his love with thee? There has been a Jacobs Ladder set up betwixt Christ
and thee.

Christians, Such experiences I hope some of you have had, of such comfortable
Communion with Christ. But what becomes of all these blessed Experiences? have
thou forgotten them? are they lost? O how have thou kept thine heart? sure such
Mercies should be carefully recorded, and the record should be warily kept.

4. It is the Cabinet of all our Jewels. Christ and all his Graces are kept in
the heart.

1. Christ and his Graces are jewels. Christ is a precious Jewel, he is the
pearl of great Price, which the wise Merchant, Mat. 13.46. traded for; and is
there said to be a Pearl of great price; of so great a price, that this one
Pearl bought the whole World. Its intimated Mat. 16.26. that one Soul is more
worth than all the World; this Pearl is more north than a whole World of Souls.
It has bought not only this world below, but the World above; this one pearl
has bought the whole Kingdom of heaven, all the everlasting treasures, the
everlasting joy and pleasures above, that exceeding eternal weight of glory,
all has been bought by this Pearl. Christ is reckoned by foolish sinners, at a
very low rate; Judas sold this Pearl for thirty pieces of silver; Sinners, many
of them sell Christ at a lower rate than this, for their foolish and fleshly
Lusts. They tread this Pearl in the dust and take very dung in its stead. The
very dung of their filthy Pleasures is that which sinners take in Exchange for
Christ. Whilst the Apostle counted all things dung in comparison of Christ,
sinners make very dung of Christ, for the sake of their sins; but whatever
sinners count him, Christ is a Pearl, more worth then all the world; and all
the Glory and Bravery and Beauty of the World, are but Dunghill things, in
comparison of Christ.

As Christ, so all the Graces of Christ are jewels. Faith is a jewel called 2
Pet. 1.1. Precious Faith. Meekness and Humility are jewels, of great price in
the sight of God. Love is a jewel, and of so great price, that it is not to be
bought for Money. Cant. 8.7. If a man would give all the Substance of his house
for love, it would be contemned. As little reckoning as sinners make of the
love of God now; though this Grace be offered them, and they may have it for
the taking; an heart to love the Lord, is one of the branches of the Covenant,
which the Lord freely offers to sinners, yet now they so slight it that they
will not accept it; a lust is taken up in stead of this love; yet hereafter
these very sinners, would give all that ever they have for the least grain of
the saving love of God. As little as you regard the love of God now, we cannot
persuade you to accept it, yet when you come to die, there is none of you, but
would give all that ever you are worth, for a little sincere love to Christ. O
now for a little Faith! O now that I could love the Lord Jesus in sincerity! I
would be content to be a beggar, and not to have a Mite left me in all the
World; all my Farms, all my Oxen, all my Houses and Lands, all my Money, all
the substance of mine House, they shall all go, so that I might now find the
saving love of God in me. No, they will not be bought so; If a man would give
his house full of Gold for it, it would be contemned, as a poor and low price
to buy love. The like may be said of every Grace, they are all Jewels, and they
make those who have them to be Jewels. Mal. 3.17. in the day that I make up my
jewels. Every gracious Soul is a Jewel in the sight of God. Sinners tread the
Saints under feet, make very dirt of them, but God will take them into his
bosom as his precious Jewels.

2. These Jewels, Christ and his Graces, are all kept in the heart. As the
Heart is the Seat of Grace, Faith dwells in the heart, and Love dwells in the
heart, and Hope dwells in the heart, so is it also the seat of Christ; Christ
dwells in the heart by Faith, intimated in that Prayer of the Apostle. Ephesians.
3.17. If Christ has any dwelling in sinners, it is only in their Mouths and
upon their Lips; these will talk of Christ, and talk of Grace, but they have no
dwelling in them, but upon their Tongues; but it is in the heart of the Saints,
that Christ and his Graces dwell; Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory.
The heart of Saints is as the Heavens, all bespangled with these beautiful
Stars. Christ is the Sun in those heavens, his Graces are as so many Stars,
that have their brightness and luster from his light. The hearts of sinners are
mere Dungeons, and dark holes, in which neither Sun nor Star appears; if there
be any glimmering light, they are but Commets, or Torches, or stinking Snuffs,
that they take for Starlight. Sinners, whatever brightness or beauty there be
in any of your Faces, whatever Gaudy or merry Outsides you have, yet what an
inside have you, your hearts are all dark holes, where dwells every abominable
thing; Toads and Serpents, Zim and Jim, Owls and Satyrs, and every unclean
thing dwells within you. Thou that have the fairest outside, there are Toads
and Serpents and Worms crawling and breeding in thine heart. You would every
one of you be afraid of your selves, you would loath your selves, and you would
tremble at your selves, you would (if you knew how) run away from your selves
in a fright, if you knew what were in your hearts. Sinners care not to look
into their hearts, and some of them are afraid to look inwards; and well enough
you may, you would see such ugly and monstrous Sights, as might even scare you
out of your Wits. Saints have all their Riches within them, they have a
treasure in their hearts. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, Mat
12.35. There may be, and often is, poverty without, but there is a treasure
within; the richest of sinners they have all their Treasures without them; in
their houses, in their Purses, in their shops, in their Chests, but all the
while, there is poverty and beggary in their hearts. Thou art a very beggar,
Sinner, with all thy load of Wealth; it is a poor beggarly Soul thou have, how
richly soever thy Carcass be provided for. It Is the heart of the Saints, where
God bestows all his Riches.

Christians, Look to your hearts; you carry more riches in you then the whole
World is worth; you loose all that ever you are worth if you loose your hearts.
He that has a Treasure in his house, will look more carefully, to the locking
of his doors; especially the room where his Riches lie must be most fortified
with Bolts and Bars. You have more to loose than the Princes of the Earth, and
therefore have the more reason to keep those hearts wherein all your riches
lie. Not only your graces, but your good works, are all kept in your hearts. If
ever you have done any good in all your lives, whereof you hope for a reward in
the other World; all your Duties, the holiness and fruitfulness of your
Conversation, your works of Righteousness, your works of Mercy, these are all
kept in your hearts. Conscience is the keeper of them, the Conscience of an
honest holy gracious heavenly life, is a precious Treasure kept within you. 2
Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of a good Conscience --. All
your Duties arise from your hearts, all your Holiness and Fruitfulness and
activity for God, are so many holy streams, flowing from an holy heart; and all
these streams return into the heart, there they must be kept against the day of
Accounts.

5. It is the Ark of your strength. Some men's strength lies in their heads, in
their Wisdom and Counsel, and Policy; a wise man is a strong man. Other men's
strength lies in their hands, a Princes strength lies in his Armies, in his
Forts and Castles and strong Towers; but a Christians strength is in his heart.
The Lord is in his heart, and Psalm. 73.26. Thou art the strength of mine heart.
Ephesians. 6.10. Be ye strong in the Lord; and in the power of his might, The weakest
Christians have a strong God, and hence it is they are strong and of good
courage.

Christians have need of strength;

1. Of Strength for their Work, there are great things they have to do; they
have much work, hard service; the life of a Christian is not a toying but a
toyling life. You shall never get to Heaven by play, or by Idleness, you have
much business lying upon you, and great business. The working out your
Salvation is hard work. The Souls of Sinners lie idle, as if they had nothing
to do. What pains do thou use to take for thy Soul? What have thou done all
thy life long, toward the working out thy Salvation? Sinners, you live as if
God should throw in Heaven upon you, and cloth you with Glory and immortality,
whilst your Souls are fast asleep; no you must work if you will live; you must
labor for the meat that endures to eternal life, Joh. 6.27. if ever you will
have the eating of it. You must pray, and watch and strive to enter in at the
strait gate, if ever you will get in. This should be your work, and it is the
work of Christians; and for this their great work, they have great strength
given them, and all their strength is in their hearts.

2. Christians have need of strength for their burdens, Christians have hard
work, and heavy burdens lying upon them. Besides the Care that is upon them
for their Souls, which is a great and weighty burden, and their fear of
miscarrying in the matters of their Souls, which is another burden; they have
burdens of Sufferings, and Afflictions, ordinarily upon their backs. All the
hatred and malice, all the scorns and reproaches of this Evil World, light and
lie upon the backs of poor Christians, and how shall they bear their burdens
if they have no strength.

3. They have need of Strength against their Enemies. Christians live in the
midst of Enemies; Enemies without, the Devil and his Instruments; Enemies
within, their own Lusts and Corruptions; and they must be in continual fight
against these Enemies; and their Enemies being so many, and so strong, they
have need of strength to resist them.

Christians have need of strength, and strength they have, and all their
strength is in their hearts. There their Armor lies; The shield of Faith, the
breast plate of Righteousness, the helmet the hope of Salvation; and there
their Captain dwells; the Captain of their Salvation lodges in their hearts.

Lose your hearts, and lose your strength, and what will you do at your Work?
how will you bear your burdens? how will you stand against your Enemies, when
your strength is lost? What became of Sampson, when he was deprived of that,
wherein his strength lay? what weakly Souls are careless Christians? every
little duty is too hard them; how quickly are they weary? weary of Praying,
weary of Hearing, weary of Meditation, weary of a watchful Life; a little work
will make them weary. How little can they do, and how little can they bear?
every little cross sinks their spirits; and what resistance can they make
against Enemies? every lust is apt to carry them away, every Temptation
overcomes them. O Christians, by how slow a pace do we keep on our way? how
little sign do we make at our work? we have been Christians some of us, of
twenty years standing or more; how little good have we done, how little
treasure have we gotten in, how little execution have we done upon our sins and
lusts, what poor weakly, lifeless, half-starv'd Souls have we to this day? sure
we have been ill keepers of our hearts; the ark of our strength has been laid
waste, strangers have gotten in and devoured our strength, whilst we have
loytered and slept. Friends, do not lie down and idly complain, I am weak, I am
a poor feeble soul^ I cannot do the things that I would, I cannot pray, I
cannot hear, I cannot live but at a sad, and halting, and broken rate, God help
me, it is a barren, and unsavory, and unprofitable life, that I live; it is a
weariness to me that I can live to no better purpose, fain I would be more
heavenly, and more lively, and more fruitful in my Life, but woe is me, I
cannot, I cannot obtain; thus you complain of your weakness, of your
unprofitableness; but why do ye stand complaining? look to your hearts better,
where your strength lies. Have thou Christ in thine heart? have thou Grace in
thine heart? and yet complainest thou have no strength? look better to thine
heart; keep Christ closer to thee, get thy Faith increased, stir up and kindle
that spark of love, call up all the Grace thou have, and keep it in action Let
not the rust eat up thy strength, a little more care and labor about your
hearts, to get and keep those in better plight, will recover and renew your
strength, and silence those unprofitable complainings.

6. In your hearts are preserved all your evidences for heaven. This follows
from the former. What are our Evidences for Heaven but the being of Christ, and
the Graces of Christ in us? your sincerity in the Covenant, your having your
Conversations in all good Conscience, prove that Christ is in you, and you
thereby prove that you shall hereafter be with him. Prove that you have Grace
and you thereby prove that you shall have Glory. Prove that you are in Covenant
with God, and walk before him, in all good Conscience, and that will prove that
your names are written in heaven. And whether must you look for all this, but
into your hearts? there as I told you, is a record kept of your Covenant and
your Conscientious Life, and these are the Rooms where you must look to find
Christ and his Grace.

The Devil will tell sinners, that they shall all to heaven; and to make them
believe it, will provide them evidences, such as they are; but they are false
and deceitful evidences. Thou art a Christian, thou have been baptized into the
name of Christ, thou attendest on the Ordinances of Christ, thou go to hear
and to pray, etc. therefore thou need not fear, but thou shall to heaven.
But let sinners look but into their hearts, where all good evidences are kept,
and there they can find nothing; there is no Christ within them, no love to
Christ, none of the holiness of Christ; their heart is a mere Hell, full of
Darkness, Ignorance, Unbelief, Enmity against Christ, and his holy ways. As
Christians Evidences for Heaven, so Sinners Evidences for Hell are mostly in
their hearts. Whatever your hopes are, if you would look into, if you could see
what hear^ you have, these would quickly tell you, whether you must. There you
should find your Covenant with Sin, and with ^ea h not disanull'd; no Christ,
no Grace, no Conscience, but an evil one, a guileful one, a guilty one, and
nothing else but that which is vile and abominable.

Sinners Evidences for Hell are in their hearts; and such evidences they might
find, as would kill all their hopes of Heaven. But Christians Evidences for
Heaven are in their hearts, the Devil ^ill be telling them, that they are none
of Christ's; he will say to the Saints as God says to Sinners, Psalm. 50.16. What
has thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth. What have thou to do with
Christ? thou art mine, thou art none of his.

Let thine heart be carefully kept, and thou may answer the Devil; None of
his? whose is this name that is written in my heart? whose image are these
Graces of my heart? I find the Faith of Christ in me, the love of Christ in me,
the very life of Christ in me; Christ has sent me many a token of his love,
which I still keep by me; I remember what has passed between Christ and me; I
have given my self to Christ, I have laid hold on his Covenant, and have bound
my self in Covenant to him, and I stand to that Covenant to this day. And
there is my Conscience also within me, bearing me witness, that my care and
endeavor has been to walk before him according to the Covenant of my God; and
therefore go on to lie thus unto me while thou will, Satan, I will not believe
thee; I believe God, who has said, there is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ, and walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit; and I will not
bel^e mine own sense, and experience of my self; this is the Testimony of my
Conscience, that I have walked not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. And
therefore Christ is mine, and I trust I shall one day be with him where he is.

Friends, if you look well to your hearts, and keep the records clear, this
will be your benefit; whatever fears the Devil raises, it is but looking
inwards, and there you will see that which will turn all your Fears into lively
Hopes. But if you look not to your hearts, and keep them clean, you will be at
a perpetual loss; you will never long know what to make of your selves, nor
what is like to become of you. Assurance necessarily depends on watchfulness,
never look for a grounded peace without it; and never trust to that confidence,
or assurance you seem to have, whilst you are of a careless heart. Whatever
progress you have hitherto made in Religion, whatever experiences you have
formerly had, of the workings of the Spirit of Grace in you, a carelss heedless
Spirit will so darken all your Experiences, and blot your Evidences, and leave
you under such uncertainties, that for ought you know, you may be damned at
last. As ever therefore you would maintain an abiding Assurance, that its well
with you at present, and shall be well with you hereafter, be watchful over
your hearts, that Record of all your Evidences. The reason why we are at such
uncertainties, and so full of our doubts and fears, it lies all here; in our
carelessness of our hearts. And yet who will take warning? O friends, steadfastly
resolve, through the Grace of God, I will look better to it. Since my heart can
never comfort me, unless I watch it more narrowly, mine eye shall be upon mine
heart Night and Day. I will commit my self to the keeper of Israel, and I will
set my self to keep whatever good thing he has committed unto me.

7. It is a sacrifice for God. Psalm. 51.17, The Sacrifices of God are a broken
heart.

1. It is the heart that is a Sacrifice for God, therefore Prove. 23.26. Give me
thine heart. It is the Sacrifices, all the Sacrifices of God is the Sacrifice
of the heart. There are other Sacrifices, but whatever they be, it is the heart
that makes them such. Prayer is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2. Let my prayer come
before thee as incense and the lifting up of mine hands, as an evening
sacrifice. Praise is a Sacrifice; Psalm. 50.14. Offer up to God thanksgiving.
Alms are a Sacrifice; Heb. 13.16. With such sacrifices God is well pleased.
But what maimed Sacrifices are all these, if offered up without an heart. What
is Prayer without an heart? what is Praise; what are Alms, when the heart is
not offered up with them? they are heart Prayers, and heart Praises, and heart
Alms, that are such Sacrifices, with which God is well pleased.

2. What kind of heart it is, that is a Sacrifice to God. A broken or a wounded
heart. The broken heart is the only sound heart. The wounding of the heart is
as the lancing of the Impostume, it lets out the corruption, and leaves it a
sound heart. The hard heart is a Sacrifice for the Devil; with such Sacrifices,
with hard and unbroken hearts, the Devil is well pleased. Is thy heart an hard
heart, and will thou thus give it up to God? Get it to be broken, or thou
may as well carry it to the Devil for a Sacrifice. The Devil loves an hard
heart, but it is an abomination to the Lord. An hard heart is an unclean beast,
which is not for Sacrifice. All the filthiness and rottenness of the heart lies
baked up together, in an hard heart; 'twill never be gotten out, 'till the
heart be broken. In the Law, the Sacrifices were to be without blemish, Lev.
22.20, 21, 22. Whatsoever has a blemish, that shall ye not offer. It shall be
perfect and without blemish. Whatsoever is blind, or maimed, or having a Wenn,
or Scurvy, or Scabed, ye shall not offer. The unbroken heart, is an heart full
of Blemishes, Wens and Ulcers; a Scurvy and a Scabed heart; it is the wounded or
broken heart, that is the perfect heart, or an heart without blemish.

Now herein you see, both the necessity of looking to your hearts, and what it
is that you must secure your hearts against; from all things, that may be a
blemish to the heart; from all those Malladies and Diseases, that will be a
blemish to the heart; that so you do not Sacrifice to God a corrupt thing. Mal.
1.14. He that sacrifices to God a corrupt thing, cursed be that deceiver. A
sacrifice without an heart is a lame and maimed thing, a sacrifice from a
polluted heart is the sacrifice of a corrupt thing.

Beloved, you come with your offerings to the Lord, but what have you to offer?
O you have prayers and praises to offer up, but is there an heart in your
prayers, an heart in your Praises, and is it a perfect and upright heart, an
heart without blemish? A perfect heart, an heart without blemish? who can bring
such an heart? who can ^y, mine heart is perfect? who can say, mine heart is
clean? Lord be merciful to me, mine heart is the worst thing within me; all
sores and all blemishes and corruption.

Obj. My mouth must be stopped for ever, my tongue must be silent for ever, If
I must never pray, nor praise God, till mine heart is a clean and a perfect
heart.

Sol. There is a double perfection, a double cleanness of heart.

1. Legal, and so that only is a perfect heart, that fully answers the
Righteousness of the Law, or first Covenant; that only, in this sense, is a
perfect heart, which has nothing of Evil or Hypocrisy; no spot or blemish at
all in it, that the strictest Justice could be offended at; thus there is not a
man in the World can say, mine heart is perfect, mine heart is a clean heart.

2. Evangelical, Such a perfection, which the new Covenant accepts,
uprightness; a sincere heart is in a Gospel Sense, a perfect heart. An heart
that has been broken by the Word of Christ, and been purged by the blood of
Christ; an heart that is a purging and cleansing daily, that has its great
spots and blemishes of unbelief and impenitence purged away, and has no spots,
but are begun to be purged, and are cleansing daily.

Now an heart that has been thus initially purged and cleansed, will unless it
be carefully looked to, contract new spots; the imposthume will gather and
fester again, the Leprosy will fret and eat deeper and deeper into it; longer
than the purging work is carried on, the corrupting work will be carrying on.
If the wounds of the heart be not carefully kept open, the Devil will quickly
heal it up; his hardening is his healing the heart. He will be searing the heart
so, as that though there be never so much wickedness in it, it shall not be
felt and perceived; and when we cease to feel our sores, when the heart grows
senseless of its sins, then is a time, when iniquity is like to abound. And
there is no way in the World to prevent this increase of our corruptions, and
hardening our hearts under it, but by keeping a constant Guard upon them, the
Devil will be doing, sin will be working and growing upon us, if there be not a
constant watch kept.

And what will ye do then for a Sacrifice for God? wherewithal will you come
before the Lord, and bow your selves before the most high God, if you have not
an heart, a clean heart, a perfect and upright heart, that he will accept? As
you would be loath that God should meet you in all your Duties; your praying and
hearing and praising his Name, and say unto you, as to Israel: Isa. 1.11. To
what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices? when you come to appear
before me, who has required this at your hands, to tread my Courts? Bring no
more vain Oblations, your incense is an abomination to me. Your Sabbaths, your
coming to the Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even your solemn
meeting. Your meetings my Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to
bear them; and when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you. Yea when you make many prayers, I will not hear. Friends, would you have
the Lord thus to speak to you? Is this all the entertainment and acceptance you
would have? when you come together to pray, and to hear, would you have the
Lord to say, I am weary of this People, I am weary of these meetings, my Soul
hates this praying, and this hearing? Doubtless this will be all the
entertainment you will have, whilst you come hither and bring not your hearts
for a Sacrifice, yea, and that broken hearts, hearts without guile, sincere and
perfect in the sight of God; and such hearts you will never bring, unless you
will take more care and pains about them; and therefore I exhort you, as the
Prophet goes on, ver. 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings; so also, watch ye, keep ye clean, prevent the return of your evils upon
you. And then I should be bold to add as ver. 18. to call upon you, and
encourage you in the Name and the Words of the Lord, Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord. Let your hearts be thus kept, and then come; come
with your prayers, come with your praises and I will hear and accept you.

8. It is the Temple of the Lord. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the temple of the living
God. it is the heart especially, that is this Temple.

There are four things in the Temple of God, which are so many reasons, why our
hearts should be carefully kept, and guarded.

1. The law of God is in his Temple. The law was read in the Temple, and kept
in the Temple; and as in that Temple made with hands, so in that living Temple,
made without hands, the Law of God is placed and preserved. Christians have the
Law of God within them, their Bibles in their hearts; in the heart of a
Christian is the Copy of the Bible. God has not only preached it to their
hearts, but they have laid it up in their hearts. Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy
word within mine heart that I might not sin against thee. Mary kept the sayings
of Christ and laid them up in her heart: Luke 2.51. God promised, Jer. 31.33. I
will write my Law in their hearts: and he has done what he promised; he that
once wrote his Law in Tables of Stone, has also written it in fleshly Tables
of Hearts. Therefore Psalm. 40.8. Thy Law is within mine heart.

The Law written in the heart Notes.

1. All those holy Notions of God, of Christ, of Glory, Honor, Immortality, of
the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, and of the Mystery of Christ, which are
written in the Scriptures are revealed in the heart.

2. All those holy Principles or divine Axioms, concerning Truth,
Righteousness, Holiness, Mercy, Temperance, Sobriety, etc. the nature and
necessity of them, to true Godliness and Blessedness.

3. That Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, the new Law, or
Covenant of Grace, by which we are freed from the Law of sin and death, Romans
8.2. the Tenor and the Terms of the Covenant, the Promises and the Conditions
of the Covenant; the great Charter of the Saints, which gives them Title to,
and will give them an entrance into the Everlasting Kingdom. The writing that
Law is the writing the new Covenant in the heart.

4. That inward living Law, the holy bent, inclinations, dispositions begotten
in the heart, by the Word, and Spirit of the Lord; that renewed Conscience,
inwardly obliging and holding the heart, to the Obedience of the Word. A
Christian has not only something without him, but something within him,
binding him to obedience; whereby it may be said, much more of him, then of
those Gentiles, Romans 2.14. He is a law to himself. His own heart holds him in
to Christ, his own heart holds him on in Obedience to the Gospel. If all our
Bibles should be lost, or burnt, if all our Preachers, that urge and press our
Obedience, were laid aside and trodden under foot, a Christian has that within
him, that would hold him on in his Christianity. That knowledge of God, and
those Principles of Christianity, that love of Christ, and that renewed
Conscience within him, will keep him a Christian still.

Now all this treasure, those holy Notions, holy Principles, this Law of Grace,
and this living law of the new Covenant being all kept in the heart; the heart
being the Temple of God, wherein all this is preserved, had need be carefully
kept. Would you not have all the Notions of God, and the knowledge of Christ
dimmed, and darkened, and razed out? would you not loose all your holy
Principles of Righteousness and Honesty of Temperance and Sobriety? would you
not have the book of the Covenant stolen away, on which all your Hopes and
Expectations, all your title to Everlasting blessedness depends? would you not
loose that holy bent, and those holy inclinations, and that renewed
Consciences, by all which you are disposed, and inwardly bound, bound in Spirit
to the life of Christianity, would you not that all these should be lost? would
you not return to be dim sighted, and dark Souls? would you not exchange your
holy Principles, for carnal Principles, your renewed purged Consciences, for
corrupt Consciences? would you not that the Temple of the Lord be robbed? would
you not that your heart be robbed of all these Treasures? then set a Guard upon
your hearts.

2. The name of God is in his Temple. Jer. 7.10, 12. it is said often, he places
his name there. And of these living Temples, the hearts of Saints, it is said,
Rev. 3.12. I will write the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God
upon them. And Chap. 2.17. in this heart, there is a precious stone put, and
upon this stone a new name written, which no man knows but he that has it. A
Christian has not only the names of Christ called upon him, he is called a
Christian, after the name of his Lord; but he has this name written upon him,
written upon his heart. Sure that Table should be kept clean in which is
written such a precious name. What shall the name of God be written on a
dunghill? will thou suffer Sin and the Devil to make a very dunghill of thy
heart, and in that dunghill write the name of thy God? If the heart be not well
guarded, the Devil will be not only carrying out, but carrying in all the
precious Treasures that are in your hearts, let Satan alone a while, and he will
carry them all away; Whatever thou have now, thou shall have nothing of God
left in thee, nothing of Christ lest in thee; none of all thy Graces, none of
all thy comforts. Have thou love for Christ, have thou hope in Christ, have
thou peace or joy in God, have thou either the image or the comforts of God in
thee? Satan stands ready, if thou look not to him, to carry all away; thou will
quickly be left a very miserable Soul, poor and blind and naked, if thou take
not heed. And as the Devil will be carrying out, so he will be also, carrying
in, to that heart of thine. Thy Gold and thy Jewels he will carry away, and he
will bring in dirt, and filth, and trash. As he unloads thee, he will load
thee; unload thee of the treasures of light, and load thee with the treasures
of darkness. He will fill those hearts with every unclean thing, he will make
those Temples to be very Stables, or Sties; he will make that heart a very
Dunghill; and Christ must either have no name within thee, or that precious name
written on a dunghill; and will you suffer such an affront and abuse to be put
upon your Lord? If you do not keep your hearts, so it will be.

3. The Worship of God is in his Temple. Mine house shall be called an house of
Prayer. Mat. 21.13. In this inward Temple, the heart, is the inward and
spiritual Worship of God. The people of God, are said to be the People that
worship God in spirit, Phil. 3.3. There are great thoughts of heart, and many
Scruples, arising about the outward Worship of God; about the keeping that
pure, about the clearing and securing of that, against the Superstitious
Inventions, and corrupt mixtures of humane Impositions. And 'twere happy if the
Houses of God in the Land, were swept cleaner, and kept cleaner from these than
they are. But the main of our care lies not here; these are not the great
things we are concerned to take care about. If outward Ordinances were never so
purely administered, and kept never so free from adulterating mixtures, there is
a greater thing then this, that lies upon us; that the inner Temple be kept
pure, that the heart Worship be kept pure and entire. The heart also is to be
an house of Prayer, and shall we make this house of Prayer, a den of Thieves,
or an house of Merchandise? O what droves of unclean beasts are let in to these
hearts of ours! what houses of Merchandise are these houses of prayer become!
these Sanctuaries of the Lord are become mere shops of buyers and sellers.
Whilst they should be employed in those spiritual excercises, of loving and
fearing, of praying and praising God, offering up living and spiritual
Sacrifices to the Lord, behold how our money is brought into our hearts; our
sheep and Oxen, buying and selling and trading and getting gain, these are the
inhabitants and these are the exercises of our hearts. It is a very grievous
thing to consider, how much the [hearts] of Christians are taken up with these
things; we cannot love the Lord as we should, we cannot mind Glory and
Immortality as we should, It is miserable praying, lamentable praising, or
meditating on God that is to be found in us; we are so disordered, distracted
and confused in these spiritual exercises, there is such a mixture of Carnal
thoughts; such carnal Affections, worldly Projects and Cares are thrusting in,
that corrupt and spoil and enervate all our spiritual Duties, that we can find
nothing but blind and broken and maimed Sacrifices, to offer up unto the Lord.

Friends, How do you find it, when you set your selves to pray, or meditate on
God? Is not the World presently thrusting in? are not your carnal Friends, or
your businesses or pleasures thrusting in? and do not your thoughts and
affections fall a g^^^^ing, and a wandering after these? and do you not hereby
loose many a Prayer, and loose many a Sermon, and sadly complain of your
selves, that whatever duty you perform, its all spoiled in the doing, so that
you can take no comfort in them? What help is there for it, but setting a
better guard upon your hearts? Sure friends we had every one of us need to be
mo e vigilant and watchful, to prevent these sad matters of our complaints. It
is not complaining how b^d it is, that will make amends or make up the matter;
po ^ibly your complaints of your selves, may seem to give you ^ome ease, but
consider, the same complaints that you make of your selves God also makes of
you; The Lord God has complaints against you for the same things. Think (...)
that more than you do; God complains of you; do you say I am weary of such a
distracted divided worldly heart? and I am weary too, says the Lord, Ah I will
ease me of them, Isa. 1. I am weary of these halting, trifling, distracted
hearts; these cold Prayers, these hypocritical Praises, these maimed, broken,
confused Services, I am weary of them, says the Lord. If you go on thus to
Worship God, come hither as often as you will, God will be weary to meet you
here; he has been waiting from week to week, from Sabbath to Sabbath, to see
if it may be better, if he could meet with such Sacrifices here, such hearts
here as might be pleasing to him; he has waited thus so long, and still finds
so little of what he likes, so few living Sacrifices; he has waited so long
and found so little, that it is to be doubted, if we continue thus, we may come
hither to meet one another, but our God will be weary to give us a meeting.
Friends, if you would not that the things that offend in your hearts, should
drive God away, then take more heed how you suffer these offenses, or things,
to come in, or to lodge any longer in you.

4. God himself is in his Temple; 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the living
God. God has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them. The hearts of the
Saints are the house of God, and the house of God is his Habitation. The holy
God will have none but an holy habitation. Will you let sin in, and the Devil
in, to Gods habitation. These will darken and defile your hearts. Those hearts
are but blind houses, and dirty holes, where Sin and the Devil dwells, and is
this the best habitation you can afford to the Almighty? what place do you
think God will prepare for you, if you prepare no better a place for him; How
long will the Lord stay with you, how certainly will he withdraw and forsake
you, if you let lust in with him?

Sure Friends, if you had a due and a deep sense upon your hearts, of the
Holiness, of the Glory, of the Majesty, of the Jealousy of the holy God, If
you did verily believe, that of a very truth this Holy and Glorious God, had a
mind to come and take up those very hearts of yours, for his own habitation,
that he would come and dwell in you, and walk in you, and make those hearts his
Chambers of Presence, and the Thrones of his Glory, If you had such respect for
God, and such affection that you would have him pleased with his habitation,
and not meet with that, which is an offense and a loathing to him in you; were
you sensible, did you verily believe all this, you could not but take more care
to keep these hearts cleaner and more free for him.

If you had a great Friend, a Lord or a Knight that would come but to lodge a
Night in your house, what would you do? How would you prepare your house, for
the entertaining of such a friend? what sweeping and washing, and rubbing, and
scouring, and adorning, would there be; every Vessel would be brighted, every
room would be beautified. Would you let it lie all dirty, and dusty, hanged
with Cobwebs and Spiders? would you let it lie nasty and filthy, and every
thing out of its place and order? Sure you would not, and when he were come in,
would you set open your doors, to let in a rabble of sordid Beggars, or common
Rogues or Drunkards, to come and drink and roar and spue in the very room where
your friend were entertained? no you would sweep all within, and set a Porter
at your doors, to keep the unclean rabble out. O what is the greatest friend in
the World, to the great and holy God? Prepare him an holy habitation; open the
doors and let the King of Glory come in, and then shut the door, and let no
unclean thing enter, to offend and displease him; that so the Lord may take
pleasure in you, and delight in you, and may say concerning you, this is my
rest, here will I dwell for ever.

2. How the heart is to be kept under Guard.

1. What it is to be guarded against, that is, against Thieves. Blots.
Distempers.


1. Against Thieves. The great Thief is the World, and all that is of the
World; and all that in the World, which is purloyning from the heart. Its
profits or worldly gains, its Pleasures and carnal Mirth, its Favor and
Friendship and Fawnings. These all lie in wait for entrance into the heart, to
the end they may rifle and spoil it of all that it has. The World steals in
upon the heart, and it never comes there, but to steals away its Treasure; and
therefore it is to be observed, that the hearts of such Christians, as are most
possessed of the World, are ever the most poor and beggarly. Never look to find
much of Christ or his Grace, if any thing at all, where the World has gotten
Possession. Christ comes into the heart on purpose, to carry away the heart
from the World; his Word is, where he comes, give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26.
Love not the world nor the things of the world, 1 John 2.15. And the world
comes into the heart on purpose, to steal it away from Christ again. There is
never any one that embraces this present World, but it is to his loss; whatever
the World brings, it takes away better than it brings. 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has
forsaken us and embraced this present world. He embraced the World, and what
got he by it? the same day he embraced the World, he forsook Christ.

Christian, art thou fallen in with the World? Are its gains and its pleasures
gotten into thy heart? does it fawn and smile upon thee, and is thine heart
taken and pleased with its fawnings? Look to thy self; what have thou within
thee? have thou Grace? have thou Peace? does thy Soul flourish? for ought I
know thou have seen the last of thy good days, what time this World is thus
embraced by thee.

O friends, set a watch against this Thief, set a guard against it; Take heed
and beware of Covetousness, Luke 12.15. That Is the same Counsel, as guard your
hearts against this World. Covetousness is the opening the door to let the
world in, nay the world is gotten in already where Covetousness is. Thou which
have a Covetous heart, thine heart is already possessed of the world. May be
thou have yet but a little of it in thine hand, but thine heart is already full
of it, the whole world is gotten in, where Covetousness is gotten in.

Worldly Professors, methinks you should be startled at it, if you considered,
what a Theif you have within you. Whatever thou seem to have of Christ, or
the Treasures of heaven, thou art like to be but a poor wretch, in a little
time.

And how is it like to be with thee, whose heart has entertained the Pleasures
and the merriments of the world? or the favors and fawnings of the Men of the
world? who love to be some body with evil men, to have their respect and
esteem? he that would fain be some body with the world, is like to be no body
with Christ. Make the world to know its distance, and whatever you have to do
in it, keep it at a distance from your hearts. Never look to thrive in
Christianity, whilst you venture to be too busy with this world, or to dote on
its favors or friendship.

O it were well with us, were we yet but sensible what a snare this world is to
us; what a bane it is to all that is good in us. Never a flower in all our
Garden will flourish, where these thorns stand so thick about it; that little
Grace you have will be less daily, it will be choked up and devoured, if you
keep you not more clear of this world. It were happy for us, were we deeply
sensible of the danger we are in; but there is the Misery of it, people will not
be sensible, nor be warned to take heed of it; this Theif steals away men's
Reason and Consciences; makes them such children and fools, that they will not
understand what an enemy it is to them. How many Sermons have been preached and
published, to warn you, to take heed of a worldly heart; and yet how very few
hearts are there, that do escape it! it is who can be richest, and who can be
greatest in the world, that the most of our hearts are set upon; it is not who
can be the holiest, or most heavenly, it is not who can improve in the Faith and
Hope of the Gospel; in the love and fear of the Lord; who can get most of
Christ and Heaven into his heart, and grow rich unto God; but who can grow
greatest in this present world. Is not this too common a Case? though the Lord
has been knocking off our fingers from it, pulling off our Chariot wheels, and
making us to drive heavily; letting loose the spoilers upon us, to catch from
some of us, what we have gotten, fed the Husbandman with short harvests, filled
the Tradsman with complaints of bad Markets; yet all is one, how little soever
many men can catch of this world, yet they will catch after it still; and what
wonder is it then, while this world does so generally carry our hearts, that
Christ has so much lost them. You that would save any thing of what you have
left in you, you that would ever get any more while you live, you that would
not go down to your graves stripped and naked of all that should then comfort
you, get again I say to you, take heed of this world, take heed of this
worldliness.

2. Against blots, that is, against wilful allowed sins: Every wilful sin, will
be a blot upon your hearts. Our sins are blots and blemishes upon our lives,
but every blot upon the life is also a blot upon the heart.

Blots will Darken and Obscure. Defile.


1. Blots will darken and obscure the Heart. I told you, that in the heart is
kept, all our evidences for heaven; our sins that we give way to, will be blots
upon our evidences; will so obscure and blur them, that they will not be
legible. Our sins will do the direct contrary to what the blood of Christ will
do; the blood of Christ will blot out the hand writing that was against us,
Col. 2.14. Our sins will blot out, whatever handwriting there is for us. Thou
that art a Christian, there is an handwriting upon that heart, there is the
Covenant of God, which is thy Charter for glory, written upon thy heart. There
is the token of the Covenant, and thine interest in it, the Circumcision of the
heart; there are the Articles of the Covenant, which have been consented to,
between the Lord and thee, recorded in thine heart; whilst thou keep thine
heart clean, there thou may read thy Title to Glory; thou will find that
within thee, which will comfort thee concerning thine everlasting state. There
are the very Prints and Marks of the Lord Jesus, his image formed upon thy
soul; which mark thee out for an heir of life; but what will thou do for
comfort, when these writings and this holy image, are all blotted? when thy
Circumcision is become as uncircumcision? will blotted evidences Satisfy thee?
will a defaced image prove thy Title to Christ go^d? Set a guard against Sin;
allow not your selves in any iniquity, fear what sad work it will make upon
your inner man. Has the blood of Christ blotted out the handwriting that was
against you? has the Spirit of Christ, engraven a new handwriting for you? O
watch against iniquity, which will renew the old handwriting, and blot out the
new. Have you any comfortable Title to Glory? any comfortable evidences for
heaven? O sin them not away. Whatever comfortable evidences you have, never
look that they should speak comfortably to you, longer then you keep your watch
against sin; nor never trust to that comfort, which will hold up the head,
whilst thou allowest thy self in sin. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my
heart God will not hear my prayer. And what comfort can thou have, when thou
art become such a one as God will not hear, when thou prayest? Thou art a
Professor of Religion, and thou have comfort in Christ, and confidence thou
shall be saved through him; and yet for all this, thou can lie for thy
advantage, or to cover a fault; thou can drink, if not to down right
drunkenness, yet to intemperate excess, and make thy self a fool if not a
downright beast; or at least be a companion of Drunkards in their drunkenness:
Thou can defraud or do wrong, put off false wares, use deceitful balances;
thou can defame or backbite, thou can be peevish and give rope to thy
fretful passions, and let thine anger rest upon thee; thou can profane the
Sabbath, by Working, or Travailing or Loytering; thou can live in an ordinary
neglect of thy Family, and the Souls of them, without instructing them or
praying with them, and the like, and thou can let thy self alone in these
evils, or some of them, or some other such like. But how do thou hold up
thine head under these things? when thou look into thine heart, how do
thou find it there? do thou not find thy sins to be blots within thee? do
thou not find the writing blotted, thine evidences blurred, the image of Christ
defaced, thy comforts vanished? If thou do not, if thou can be of good
comfort still, if thou art of good cheer, and confident still; this comfort,
this confidence is not the comfort of God, but false and deceitful. Thou may
comfort thy self, and speak peace to thy self still, but mistake not thy self,
God speaks not a word of comfort to thee in such a case: if thou had any real
comfort before, that thou will find all blotted, and the true sense of it
utterly lost. If thou have peace in thine heart it is none of the peace of God,
that is broken by thy returning to have peace with sin; Psalm. 85.8. God will
speak peace, but let them not turn again to folly.

2. Blots will defile. They are stains upon all our Glory. The coming in of Sin
upon the heart, is as the breaking in of the Heathen upon Gods inheritance.
Psalm. 79.1. O God the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thine holy
temple have they defiled. The heart of a Christian, is (as is said) the Temple
of the Lord; the Temple of the Lord is holy. Holiness becomes thine house,
Psalm. 93.5. it is only a clean heart that is a fit habitation for God. God has
been at great cost, to make the hearts of his people clear, that they may be a
fit habitation for him. He has washed them with blood, with the blood of his
Son; has washed out those original blots and stains, that were upon them. 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses -- He has washed them with
water. The Sanctifying work of his Spirit. God has made him a clean
habitation, and he looks that we should keep it clean. 1 Cor. 3.17. If any man
defile the Temple of the Lord, him shall God destroy. God will depart from, God
will pull down that house, and make a dunghill of it, which sin is suffered to
defile, we had need take heed of such blots and stains upon our hearts, lest
they drive out the holy One of Israel from us. Whilst we keep our selves pure,
the Lord God will delight to take his abode with us; Who is it Christians, you
would have to dwell in you? O let me be an habitation for the Lord; let the
holy Jesus, let the holy Spirit dwell in me; none but God, none but Christ,
thou Lord art mine inhabitant, let me be thy habitation. Where God dwells,
there light dwells, there peace dwells, there hope and joy dwells; I count upon
nothing, I have no joy, no hope, no peace, all that I have is lost, all that I
have to comfort me, all that I have to stay or support me, all that I have to
delight and refresh me, all is lost, yea I have lost my self, when God is
departed from me. Do you indeed look upon it, as so miserable a case, when the
Lord has forsaken you? then take heed how you defile his habitation. Let
wilful sin in, and that will certainly drive the Lord out; and if you would
keep sin out of the heart, keep it out of your lives. Life sins are heart
blots. Jer 2.22. Their iniquity is marked before me. And it is the heart that
bears its black marks upon it.

O friends, what sad marks have we upon us! what speckled and spotted souls
have we! how miserably are our insides defiled! Minds defiled, Affections
defiled, Consciences defiled? it is a sign what Lives we have lived, it is a sign
how well we keep our Garments, how well we keep us from practical iniquity; our
heart stains, our heart defilements show sufficiently, how much iniquity has
abounded in us.

Friends, look inward; see what work sin has made within you, what a
Conscience has it left you, what affections has it left you? how has it
dimmed and defaced the Image of God in you? Do you complain that God is
withdrawn from you! that you have lost his quickening presence, his comforting
presence? that you have lost your Acquaintance, lost your Communion with God?
that your only friend and portion and hope is become a stranger to you? learn
to keep you cleaner if you would have it better; count upon it, there is no
hope that God should take pleasure in you, or give you any pleasure in him;
that God should be a comfort to you, longer then you keep you more pure. Oh get
your hearts washed anew; we have need of many washing days, who have so many
sinning days. Every day should be a washing day to us. Take that counsel of
the Prophet; Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings. Make you clean, and keep you clean. Wash ye and watch ye, put away the
evil of your doings, if you would that your hearts should long be kept clean.
Wash your hands and wash your face, and wash your feet, or these will defile
your hearts. Put away the Garment spotted with the flesh, keep your outward man
clean, keep you unspotted from the World, that so you may be blameless and
unreprovable in the sight of God. O Christians, let us study every one of us,
to get to such a blameless and unrebukable Conversation, that not only the
world may have nothing to spot us with, but that our Consciences may have
nothing to spot us with, that our hearts may not have wherewith to reprove us?
as little as may be, of the common and unavoidable infirmities of our flesh;
but however we may be overtaken as to these, yet be unreproveable, as to any
tolerated or allowed iniquities; these are the great blots wherewith the heart
is defiled.

Brethren beloved, whoever among you that fear the Lord, I would fain do what I
can, to prepare you an holy habitation for the holy one; that whereas he has
said 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell with them and walk in them, you may be such in
whom his Soul may delight to dwell, that he may say of you all, as Psalm.
132.14. This is my rest for ever here will I dwell for I have desired it. It is
a strange expression; the holy God speaks this to all his holy ones; to thee in
particular, to thine heart if it be but a clean heart; the Almighty God says to
thee, there is my rest, in that heart of thine will I dwell, for I have desired
it; the Lord God has a desire to be thy Guest, has a desire to that poor Soul
of thine, to take it up for his own dwelling. I would that you may be presented
at last unspotted and unreproveable in his sight, and to this end that you may
be presented holy at last, I would that you may be preserved holy and without
blame at present; O look to those hearts, keep you pure, let there be written
upon you, holiness to the Lord; they should be a little heaven into which
nothing that defiles should enter. O purge your selves of whatever may offend
and then guard your selves against it. This is my warning to you; and this is
my prayer for you, that the very God of Peace, will sanctify you wholly, and I
pray God that your whole Spirit, Soul and Body may be preserved blameless
against the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And to him I commend you, who is
able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence
of his Glory, with exceeding joy, to him be Gloro for ever, Amen.

3. Against Distempers. A good temper of heart, will be an advantage to us, in
any thing we have to do. An heart out of temper is like a bone out of joint, or
like a Tempestuous Sea, there is no good sailing in it. We cannot keep our way,
but shall be driven about, this way and that way, with every wind and wave. An
heart out of temper, is like a door off the hinges, or a Chariot off the
Wheels; it draggs and goes untowardly and heavily on.

O how often are our Souls unhinged, our Chariots off the wheels, or our wheels
without oil, and then what pitiful work do we make, at any thing we have to do!
when we have been in a crowd of worldly business, or been foolishly merry and
vain, what a discomposure do we find upon our Souls, and how unfit are we then
for duty? when we come to pray or to hear, what labor does it cost us, to
reconcile our hearts to our Duties, or to get us into a praying or hearing
frame. We come to pray, as a Musician comes to play, when his Instrument is out
of Tune; he must spend a good deal of his time in tuneing, before one stroke
can be struck. How much work have we, to tune our hearts at such times, and it
may be at last, it is more then we can do; and so we must either let the duty
alone, or make such sad melody in the Ears of the Lord, as a Musician would do
in ours, who should play on his Instrument, when every string is out of tune.

Get your hearts in temper, and keep them so. Be able to say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 57.7. O God mine heart is fixed mine heart is fixed; The good temper of
the heart notes, freedom and towardliness and disposedness, for any thing God
calls to, and firmness and stability in that towardliness. Let your hearts be
established in Good. Let there be an abiding holy temper upon your Spirits,
some of the distempers that we should guard our hearts against, are

1. Slightness and vanity of Spirit. A well tempered heart is a serious heart.
Seriousness of heart, is as ballast to a Ship, we shall go steadily whilst our
hearts are serious. 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of your minds, and be sober.
Soberness here, is the same with seriousness. Christians are always engaged
about serious and weighty things, their Eternity is concerned in every day they
live, and in every thing they do. Every action of our Lives, is a stroke at
that work, which must have an influence upon our Eternal State. We have weighty
work lying upon our hands every day, and hour, and how unsuitable is a slight
and trifling Spirit, to important affairs? a slight heart is an empty and
shallow heart, and a shallow heart is unfit to meddle in the deep things of God.

Watch against slightness of Spirit. Frothiness and Vanity becomes not a
Christian at any time; we may say of the frolicks and light and jovial lives,
of the carnal world, as Solomon says of laughter, Eccl. 2.2. I said of laughter
it it is mad. A Christian is besides himself, when he indulgeth to a vain and
frothy Spirit. Friends, it is not for us to live in jest; Eternal Life and Death
are no jesting matters; learn to live in good earnest; those that are light and
vain, that are little else but froth and vapor, in their ordinary Course, do
use to be but little better in their most serious Duties. O what slight praying
is there amonst us, what shallow and empty Duties do our slight and trifling
hearts satisfy themselves withal? it may be, some of us, when we have spent a
whole Sabbath with the Lord, if we do reflect upon the temper we have been in,
may sometimes find, that we have hardly had a serious hour, in a whole day If
they should be asked, as Christ asked his Disciples, Mat. 26.40. What could ye
not watch with me one hour? what could ye not be serious with me, one hour?
what could we answer? what returns do you think, slight and triflling duties
are like to have? Look to it, God will give you but a slight answer, if you be
but slight in seeking. O be sober, be serious; and if you would be serious in
your most solemn duties, get this holy seriousness to be your temper. Beware of
a vain and frothy habit, habituate your selves to Godly seriousness; not but
that there must be at times, some little Relaxation, the bow would grow weak,
if it should stand always bent. But then,

1. Relaxation or remitting the intention of our Spirits, must be but short,
and no more than necessary.

2. Never such as to be an hindrance to seriousness afterward, though I must
sometimes unbend, yet I would never unhinge my Soul, or disjoint or discompose
it, for its return to its work. We must not be of those, whose lives be in
jest, and only now and then a fit of seriousness; it is thy life, thine ordinary
course, thine ordinary frame, and only some little intervals for Recreation.

To seecure your selves against the distemper of a slight and vain Spirit, get
a deep and standing sense upon your hearts, of the weight and importance of
those great concerns, that are daily upon you: look more into Eternity.
Remember, you have an immortal God, whose eye is always upon you. You have an
immortal Soul, that must live or die for ever. Your business in this World, is
not to please your humors, and gratify your flesh, and your fancies, but to
serve the living God; to secure this God to your selves, to be [your] God; to
seek your peace and reconciliation with God; and to that end, to make Christ
the reconciler, sure to you; to serve the Lord Christ and hereby to secure the
Salvation of your Soul.

Remember that you have this great work lying upon you, and this is not the
work of some short inches of your time, of an hour in a day, or one day in a
week; but that this must be your every days work, and your all days work. Think
often, what if I should miscarry in this great work, if I should loyter out, or
laugh out, or trifle out so much of my time, that when I shall come to die, and
away for the other world, I should find that work I lived for here, were not
done or but half done, or but slightly done? if I should then find, that I had
been light and vain in my Conversation, and but slight and shallow in my
Religion? and whilst I was allowing my flesh, what it would have, I cut my Soul
short of what it should have had. Death will make every one of you serious, the
Grave, when you are stepping into it, will make you all in good earnest. And
how would your living in jest, or in pleasant idleness, then look upon you?
remember these things daily; let deep thoughts of them, come daily upon you;
and this would put you out of your slight and merry tune; the sense of these
serious things would hold you in a serious temper.

2. Looseness. There Is a double looseness.

1. Such as is opposite to fixedness, that is the same, with lightness and
vanity of heart; a whiffling in and out unstable Soul, a slippery heart, that
we never know where to have it.

2. Such as is opposite to strictness; that is the same with licentiousness,
and that is it, which I am now to speak to. A Licentious heart is a distempered
heart. The contrary to this Distemper, is the compliance or closing of the
heart with the Rule, and keeping to it The new heart is made after the pattern
of Christ its new Lord; there is the same Spirit in a Christian, which was in
Christ; as he was, so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17. His very Spirit and
Image is formed upon our hearts. And it is conformed to the new Law or Rule,
which Christ has prescribed to it, and it stands determined for strictness or
exactness of walking, according to this rule; whereof the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be unto them. That is
a strict heart, which is determined and disposed to live by Rule.
Licentiousness of heart is the hearts allowing and indulging its Liberty, and
Latitude in its Course. Christianity in general, is that which it takes up, but
it will not be held within the limits of it. The strait Gate and the narrow
way, is too strait and too narrow for it. That way it pretends to have chosen,
but it will be breaking over the hedge, as the Inclinations and Interest of the
Flesh lead it. In some things a Christian, in other things a Libertine.

O how much of this Licentiousness of heart, is to be found amonst Christians!
amonst all the Christians amongst us, how few exact and strict Christians are
there? whose hearts determine for exactness and strictness of life, who impose
and charge upon themselves, the whole Rule and the diligent observing of every
point and tittle of it? such exactness in point of Practice, we cannot in this
imperfect state reach unto; in many things we offend all. Jam. 3.2. Our feet
slip, and our steps are turning aside every day; but it is the indulging our
selves a liberty for this turning aside, or the hearts not charging strictness
upon it, that is this Licentiousness of heart.

There is a gradual Licentiousness of heart, and there is a total
Licentiousness. A total Licentiousness is of such, who utterly reject the Yoke
of Christ, and will not come under his Government, but will resign up
themselves to Lust and carnal Inclinations, to command in Chief over them. As
those Ephesians. 2.3. Who walked in the lusts of their flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind. Such Licentious ones are no Christians;
if they have the name, yet the heart of a Christian is not found in them.
Gradual Licentiousness is, when the heart, though it has put it self under the
Yoke of Christ, and resigned up its self to be governed by him, in opposition
to the lusts of the flesh and the World, yet often falls a lusting after that
liberty, from the exactness and severities of Christianity, which in the
general it has professed to consent and yield its self unto. And though the
decree of the Soul, for following Christ in every thing, be not made void, and
utterly broken, yet it is so remiss and weak, that it will not hold it closely
in; but there is a frequent breaking loose from the rule, and the heart too
often indulgeth its self that liberty: How far forth a Christian may break
loose from the Rule, and how far forth he may indulge and allow himself at
times, and yet be a Christian still, is not easy to determine; but this is
certain that every degree of this heart looseness, is a pernicious distemper,
that must be watched against; especially if it rise so high, as that there be a
dislike of strictness, and such a groaning under the severities of Religion, as
makes it seem a bondage to it, to be tied up so short. The more of this, the
higher the Disease is, and the more to be doubted whether such men's
Christianity be sound. The strictest Christian is the most healthful, and the
most evidently a Christian indeed; and the greater latitude the heart indulges
its self to, the more sickly the Soul is; if it be not quite dead, and no
Christian at all.

Friends, You that are Christians indeed, if you know what you have done, you
have vowed the greatness strictness possible. That is, to press on toward it,
and to reach out after it* You did not Covenant to follow Christ to such a
degree, and no higher; to advance in Religion to such a pitch, and no more; you
did not Covenant for thus much Obedience; thus much duty, thus much diligence,
thus much Zeal, and no more; if ye be Christians indeed, you have covenanted to
follow the Lord fully; to watch to every Duty, to watch against every sin; to
press on to the highest pitch of holiness, to do to the utmost to please the
Lord. If there were any reserve, in your vow to Christ, of any little liberty
to the Flesh, of any limit of your zeal and care; if there were any such
reserve, you are false in your Covenant, and but false Christians.

O friends, have you vowed the greatest strictness? then watch against the
least degrees of looseness. Get a settled Judgment, of the excellency and
necessity of strictness; get an hearty love and good liking of it; let your
Souls be bent upon it, let it be your desire, and your aim, and your hope, and
your labor, to hold you close by Christ; and if you would not have licentious
practices abound in your life, let no licentious Principles, no licentious
affections nest themselves in your hearts; see that there be no lust after any
other liberty, then Christ has allowed you. Get to be heartily well pleased
with all the Laws of Christ; with his narrowest ways; let that latitude of
Religion, which is the measure of carnal disciples, be your fear and not your
desire. And if you feel any itch after it, look upon it as a disease, and
distemper of your heart. Count thy self but a weakly and sickly Christian,
whilst is is thus with thee.

Know that it is your greatest Excellency; if Holiness be an Excellency, then
the more strictly holy the more Excellent. Yea and you will find it your
greatest Liberty; the more holiness the more enlargement of your hearts, to all
the holy ways of God. Psalm. 119.44, 45. I will keep thy law continually, etc.
And I will walk at liberty; his meaning was not, I will walk licentiously, at
liberty from thy Laws, at liberty from Rule; but I will walk freely in thy
ways, when thou shall knock off my fetters that hinder me. The more we can hold
in, and inure our selves, to be punctual in our Religion, the more freedom
shall we find, and with the more ease and delight shall we run the way of Gods
Commands.

And know this, that by how much the more loose you are from the ways of God,
by so much the more loose from God; and what will you have to comfort you, what
will you have to sweeten Religion to you, whilst God is at a distance from you?
Keep you fast to him, and you shall live the more under his reviving, and
refreshing influences. Religion has its troubles and its harshness, and you
will have little else then the harshness of it, longer then you keep you close
to the Lord. The Waters of the Sanctuary will taste but brackish to you, longer
then the Sun shines upon them; a little Sunshine from above, a smile from the
Face of God, this is the sweetness, this is the Blessedness. Keep close to God,
and you shall keep the passage clear between Heaven and your Hearts. Religion
will be like Ephraims Idolatry. Hos. 8.7. It will be but a dry stalk, the Bud
will yield no Meat. There will be the Labors of it, and the Troubles of it,
but no Meat for your Souls to feed upon, longer then you meet with God in your
Duties. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, Jam. 4.8. Keep close by
God, and he will keep close to you: May be, some of you have never yet tasted
how Gracious the Lord is, nor will you ever be like to do, if you set not in
closer in his ways. Loose Religion will keep you still in the dark, and in a
weary and uncomfortable State. There Is no such way to make Christ's ways
pleasant, as by keeping constantly in them; no such way to make Christ's Yoke
easy, as by holding it close to your Necks; it never so galls and wrings, as
when it hangs loosely on; resolve upon strictness, and you shall taste the
sweetness. Hold you in from running out after the Pleasures of the Flesh, and
the Face of God will be a pleasure to you, which the Distemper of a loose and
carnal Heart will certainly deprive you of; and hinder you from the relish, or
finding delight therein.

3. Listlesness. A dull untoward, sluggish, unactive, lifeless temper, where
the Edge of our Spirits is blunted, insomuch that whatever opportunities we
have, or whatever calls we have to be doing for God, or our Souls, we have no
list to them, but through the way-wardness and and untowardness of our hearts,
we let them slip, and either do nothing, or nothing to purpose. Opportunities
are a price put into our hands, but by reason of this sluggish, listless,
untoward temper, we have no heart to them; but became like the Fool, Prove.
17.16. In vain is there a price put into the hands of a Fool, which has no
heart to it. This is a wretched and pernicious Distemper.

2. It proceeds from an evil cause, From the carnality of our hearts, and our
unsuitableness to the work of God. It is ungrateful and unpleasing work to us;
our hearts are so contrary to it, we had rather be any where then with God, we
had rather be about any work, then the work of our Souls. We can be brisk and
sprightful about our carnal and earthly employments, but for any thing of
Religion, there we dragg and go heavily on; we are all Soul and Life, in what
we have to do for our Flesh, but our hearts hang backward, and come but heavily
and untowardly on, to do any thing for God. This is from the little interest
that God has in our Souls, and the little affection we bear to him. We are yet
carnal, and that is the reason we have so little Edge or so little list to
spiritual things.

2. It is an ill sign. What ill sign is it? It Is a sign of want of Grace;
either that we have no Grace at all, or at least are but very low in the Grace
of God; that our day is yet but a day of small things. Where is our Faith in
Christ, when we are so backward in the work of Faith; As Christ said, Mat.
14.31. Wherefore do thou doubt so, wherefore do thou drag so, O thou of
little Faith? Where Is our Love to Christ, when our work for Christ goes so
slowly on? 2 Cor. 5.14. The Love of Christ constrains us. The Love of Christ
will quicken us, the Love of Christ will put Life into us; we should find our
Tongues, and find our Hands, and find time to be more abundant in service,
could we feel more of the Love of Christ in us. Thou make nothing of it, that
thou art such a dull, untoward, unactive Souls; but is it nothing to want
Faith? Is it nothing to want love to Christ? Is it nothing to be without Grace
in thy heart? Or if thou have any to have so very little, as thou can not
tell, whither it is any or no? It is an ill sign, that thy Soul is in a very
doubtful case, at least it is to be doubted; Whether thou have any Grace in
thee, Where in ordinary thou art so untoward and listless to the matters of
God, and the businesses of Religion.

3. It Is of ill consequence. It Is a sign our case is bad, and it is an
hindrance from our growing better. It is the vivacious active stirring soul,
that is like to be the thriving Soul. Sluggards and Sleepers are never like to
come to any thing. We may preach to you while our hearts ache, we may instruct
you, and tell you what is your duty, while we will, and you may hear us while
you will, but in vain shall we preach, and in vain will you hear, till we can
fire you out of this deadness, and whet and set an edge upon those blunted
Souls what will it be, to be told of your Duty, whilst you remain to have so
little heart to it? what becomes of all the Sermons you hear, of all the
teaching you, what you should do, and how you should live? what becomes of all
the convincing, awakening, quickening words, that are in your ears from day to
day? what does all our Preaching, and all your hearing bring forth upon you?
truly friends, the little success that is to be perceived, of our Preaching
among you, either to the converting of sinners, or improving of professors; the
small success that does appear, (what there is within God knows) does even make
us out of heart. But as little success as we have, we are never like to have it
much better, unless we may stir your hearts, and awaken you to more diligence
and activity. When we have done all we can, we are, I doubt, like at last, to
leave the most of you, either quite dead in sin, or but very Dwarfes in
Religion. Sinners, is it nothing to you, that the enlivening word should leave
you still among the dead? Christians, is it nothing to you, that the nourishing
and quickening Word should leave you but babes and infants? Is it not a trouble
to you, and a discomfort to you, that you get no more, that you grow no faster,
much more that any of you should consume and languish, under the hands of your
Physicians? I must tell you, it is a discomfort to us, but is it not more a
discomfort to you? can you continue at this pass, and not be troubled at it. O
what a comfort is it to be a thriving lively Christian? Methinks, when you see
any such before your eyes, you should at least sigh out such a wish, O that it
were so with me; and breath out such a groan, woe is me that it is not so;
methinks it should be an heaviness of heart to you, to feel your own soul in
Cloggs, when you see others upon the wing; O that I could make you sensible of
your diseases! that I could preach you heart sick, that I could but make your
hearts ache, under your distempers; that you might no longer be able to go up
and down, without trouble in this unthriving case. Sure friends, you whose case
this is, had need to be troubled; and 'twould be well for you, if your Souls
were in pain, and refused to be comforted till you be cured.

To make you yet more sensible, of the perniciousness of this untoward dull and
listless temper, look a little more upon the excellency of the contrary; a
cheerful lively temper. It Is called 2 Cor. 8.17. A forward mind. 1 Pet. 5.2. A
ready mind that need not be spurred, and whipped, but goes cheerfully and freely
on its way. What is a sprightful horse, to a dull and heavy jade? what is a
blunted rusty knife, to that which is bright, and keen? what is a consumptive
languishing body, to one that is lively, and healthful? what is a dark and
lowering to a Sunshine day? what is Winter to Summer? yea what are the living to
the dead? what a pitiful thing is that dead and spiritless heart of thine, when
thou look on them in whom is the life of God.

Hear O ye sleepy and listless Souls, awaken, stir up your selves, shake off
this sloth and sleep, work out this untoward spirit. What, do you mean to hang
thus betwixt alive and dead? will you hold you at this pass, till you come to
your Graves? Is this all the care and the pains, you ever mean to bestow on
God, and your Souls? must the Lord ever find you so unready and untoward, to
what he calls you to? shall the world find a forward mind in you? shall your
flesh find such a ready mind, to whatever it has for you to do, and will you
only be unready and unactive for God? Wherefore have you Reason and
Understandings? wherefore have you the Scriptures before you? what are Sabbaths
and Ordinances and Ministers for? must we come hither only to sing you asleep,
or to rock von in your Cradles? Where is that Grace that is in you? where is
your Faith? where is your love to Christ? where is your hope? if you have any
Grace, where is it? what must all these precious talents be eaten up with rust*
or laid up in a napkin? Remember the slothful Servants doom. Mat. 25.30. What
are your immortal Souls? what is the holy God? what is Jesus Christ? what are
the glorious treasures of Eternity? are all these worth no more of your care
and industry? will none of these things move you? will not these great things
quicken you? Hear them all calling upon you, God calls upon you, oh my
children, if you have any respect for me, come along, come faster after me.
Christ calls, oh my Disciples, if you have any love to me, if all that I have
done for you, if all that I will do for you, will move you, arise and mend your
pace. Heaven calls upon you, if ever you mean to come here, gird up your loins
and come on. Yea Hell calls, look ye down hither, what a place is here prepared
for Sleepers and Loyterers? Your poor Souls call, have ye any pity for me? must
I perish and die for the pleasing this lazy flesh? Your poor Families call,
your poor Children call, your poor Neighbors call (which all need the utmost
you can do for them). Where are your Bowels to usward? for our sakes awaken,
for our sakes arise and be doing; we die if you will not give us a better
example, we die if you sleep on, who should awaken and save us. The whole
Interest of God in the World, calls upon you; for his names sake, for the
Gospels sake, for the Churches sake, for Religions sake, which sinks, which
decays, for the sake of all these, recover your Souls, and your Life.

O friends, what shall all these loud cries do upon you? shall all leave you
such lumps and loyterers?

Christians be yet awakened, call up all the Grace you have, whet those dull
and blunted Spirits, get you a better edge upon them. Why may not this word
give a whet to you? If you come hither sleepy Souls, what a Mercy would it be,
if you might return home awakened? if you came hither dead, and dull, and
listless Souls, what a comfort would it be, if you might return home quickened
and enlivened? what if you should feel, that this word had kindled a fire in
you, had made your hearts burn within you, burn with holy Love, and Life; what
a mercy would this be to you! what if you might be sent hence, with ready
minds, forward minds, bent upon a more active and useful, and heavenly life?
And what if after all this, you should go away just as you came hither? though
the Bellows have been blowing, yet your ashes are not purged away; though the
fire has been kindled, yet it will not burn? would you like it, if all this
should be lost, and do nothing upon you? if this untoward and dull temper of
Soul should be too hard for the Word, and you should return from the Physician
of Souls, with your diseases uncured? Do what you can friends, every one of you
to help to your own recovery, to get up to this lively active frame; and if you
can obtain it, then look to your hearts as long as you live, that if it be
possible, this wretched distemper of a leaden, unuseful, lifeless, listless,
unactive heart, may never return upon you.

2. How the heart must be guarded. This I shall answer in these 5 particulars.

1. Set a constant watch upon it. 2. Keep all your Powers up in Arms. 3. Keep
close by your Captain and Physician. 4. Carry up your Hearts where your Enemies
cannot come. 5. Commit the keeping of them to the keeper of Israel.
1. Set a constant Watch upon it. That Is a word, that is given to every
Christian; Mark. 13.37. What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. And of all
things we have to watch, the heart is it, that must chiefly be watched. Our
eyes must be chiefly there; whether ever else we have to look, we must
especially look upwards, and look inwards. We must look upwards; our eye must
be upon Gods eye; that all seeing eye that sees in secret. Whether our eye be
or no, Gods eye is ever upon our hearts. I the Lord search the heart, and try
the reins, Jer. 10 18. The eye of the Lord is a searching eye; there is no
secret of the heart, but he espieth and searches it out; and it is a jealous
eye, that will not wink at, nor allow, nor indulge to the least heart evils.
The sense of that jealous eye, would awe us into more watchfulness over our
selves. The reason of our neglect of self inspection is, that we forget that
the Lord looks upon us. We cannot look upwards, but we shall behold the very
eye of God upon us. If an hundred men stand looking upon us, and we do not look
upon them, we cannot tell whether they look upon us or no; but if we look
steadfastly upon them, we may see in their very eye, that they are looking upon
us. Look up to God, and you will plainly see that his eye is upon you. And the
observing of Gods eye upon you, will turn your own eyes upon your selves. What
is it that the Lord looks thus upon me for? what is it that he sees in me? Is
it any thing he likes, that he looks upon? Is it his approving eye that is upon
me? Is it a look of love or of kindness? or is it that which he is offended at,
or disliketh? Is there Jealousy, is there Displeasure, or Anger in that holy
eye, that is upon me? is it a smiling look, or a frowning and angry look that
he casts upon me? Look on me, I see he does, His Eye is never off me; let me
look upwards when I will, I see that God looks downwards; and his Eye is
directly upon me; and his Eye is a piercing Eye, it pierces to my very
entrails, he beholds the very bottom of my heart; I had need look carefully to
mine own Soul, when there is such an Eye upon it Night and Day. Thus look
upwards, and set the Lord before your sight, as the Psalmist did, Psa. 16.8.

And then look inwards, and set your hearts before your selves. There is an
Expression, 2 Kings 8.47. If they shall bethink themselves, which may be
interpreted, if they shall return into themselves, the Eye of the Body cannot
see it self, but the eye of the Soul may, and must be chiefly upon its self.
You that are looking about, this way and that way, you had more need look
homewards. There are men that are of great acquaintance in the world, but yet
have no acquaintance with their own hearts. VVhither their Souls be in safety,
or among Thieves; VVhither their Hearts be clean, or all bespotted and defiled;
whether they be healthful or sickly Souls; whether they be alive or dead; it is
more then they can tell where they be, or in what case they are. How is it with
your Souls Friends? How fares it with you, in your inner Man? Who is there
within with you? Are there none but Friends? Is Christ there? Is the Spirit of
Grace there? Is there a good Conscience? or are there not Robbers within? Is
not thine heart an houseful of Thieves? Is not the world gotten in? are not the
pleasures of the Flesh within? Is not the Devil within? that unclean Spirit,
has he not defiled and defaced the Image of God? Is he not sowing his Tares in
thee? Is not thine heart a defiled, diseased, distempered heart? Is it not a
slight, and frothy, and vain heart? Is it not a loose and licentious heart? Is
it not an untoward, wayward, listless heart? Look inward Christians, and look
often inward, and see what hearts you have, and how it is with them, Psalm. 4.4.
Commune with your own hearts. Look into them, and talk with them, and take an
Account how it fares with them. If I should ask you, how is it with your
hearts, are they alive or dead? Are they clean Hearts, holy Hearts, tender
Hearts, heavenly Hearts, lively and strong and working upwards? Or are they
hard Hearts, polluted defiled hearts, dull and slow, and listless Hearts. If I
should ask you thus, what account could you give? I doubt this is the account
the most of you would give, I cannot tell. God knows how it is with me; for my
part I know not how it is. That Heart has been well looked to mean while; have
thou carried it like a wise man the while? Thou have great acquaintance in the
world; thou take upon thee to know other men's hearts, and wilt judge, and
censure them as thou listest; what man? and yet have so little acquaintance
with thy self? Be thou thine own judge; have thou been a wise man the while, to
be such a stranger to thy self, that thou do not know thine own heart? Thou will say, the word tells me, Jer. 17.9. The Heart is deceitful, and who can
know it? how then should I know it? I answer,

1. The more deceitful the Heart is, and the harder it is to know it, the more
it had need be looked into.

2. Though it cannot be perfectly known, yet there may be much of it known; the
heart of man is a great deep, it is true, and though thou can not easily see
to the bottom of it, yet if thou will but look down into the deep, thou must
see a great way.

3. If thou can not see through thine heart with thine own Eyes, yet with Gods
eyes thou may. Take the help of the Eyes of the Lord, and thou may
understand, even all that is in thine heart. God that sees the Heart, reveals
the heart; and he has given thee such discoveries of thy very heart in his
word, he has made the Scriptures such a Looking-glass for thee, that if thou
would look into that more, there thou might see thy self, and all that is
in thee, Heb. 4.12. The word of God is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents
of the Heart.

Christians, if you would secure your hearts from danger, know them, and be
acquainted more thoroughly with them, if you would know your hearts better, look
oftener inward commune with your hearts; go down daily into your own Bosoms,
take an account of your selves, question with your selves, how fares it with my
Soul? is there any real saving Grace in me? If there be, how fares it with that
Grace I have? Does it thrive, does it flourish, is it kept up in Life and
Activity? Does my light shine, does my Love flame, do my thoughts and my
affections climb, and are they working upwards? how is it with my Conscience?
Is it kept pure? Does it speak peace? Does it deal faithfully? Does it check
me, does it smite me for the least Evils? Does it comfort me when it is better?
Have I a good Conscience? Have I the Testimony of a good Conscience? Does my
Conscience witness for me, that I have been faithful? that my Desire, and my
care, and endeavor is, and has been in all things to approve my self to the
Eye of God, and to be sincere, and upright before him!

O Beloved, What a Mercy to us would it be, if we would be persuaded to be much
in such heart inspection, and much in such heart communing? The Devil would
find the harder work to get in; there is no Disease, or Distemper would then
grow upon your hearts, but it would be espied in the beginning; and so the more
easily removed. Friends, let me prevail with you in this thing, I beseech you
in the name of the Lord, set more upon this Heart-study. Of all the business
you have to do in the world; there is nothing more necessary, nothing more
advantageous; and yet I doubt nothing more neglected. Friends if you have been
strangers at home, be no longer strangers; never say again, I cannot tell how
it is with my Soul, study it til you can tell; and study it diligently, and you
shall be able to tell. The Lord will help you to understand your selves, if you
will but more diligently commune with your own Hearts; will you be persuaded to
it? will you resolve upon it, to make this a great piece of your every days
work? Never look for Soul prosperity, never look for Soul security, without a
serious and frequent discharge of this great Duty. You may hear all your days,
and pray for a better heart as long as you live, and all in vain, if you will
not Watch as well as Pray. O that the Lord would so strike home this word upon
your hearts, that you might feel this charge of the Lord, sensibly abiding upon
you, to keep your Hearts by Heart-Acquaintance, and Heart-watchfulness.

My Soul is exceedingly concerned about the bringing you upon this Duty; and I
am in great doubt, that the most of us are very deficient herein, either
neglecting it, or but slightly or seldom being conversant in it. Sure Friends
our Tongues would be better employed, our Speech would be with Grace, seasoned
with Salt, we should have more savoury words coming from us, we should commune
one with another more about the concerns of our souls; were there more faithful
communing with our Hearts, our whole conversations would savor more of it. We
should be more Spiritual and Heavenly, more active for God, more fruitful, and
abounding in every good work; our work for our Souls would be carried on with
more Life, and with more Power; we should live a more self-denying, a more
circumspect, a more heedful, and a more watchful Life, were there a due
watchfulness over our Hearts. What shall I say more in this thing? Be diligent,
be careful; be diligent to know the state of your hearts. If I should say with
Solomon, Prove. 27.23. Be diligent to know the state of thy Flocks, and look
well to thine Herds, would you not hearken to me? If I should say, be diligent
to look well to your Trades, and to your Money, would you not hearken to me in
this? if I should say, be diligent to take care for your Healths; and look well
to your Bodies, would not this Counsel be accepted by you? How much more then
should you hearken to me in this. Be diligent to know the state of your Souls.
O Friends, be diligent to know, and be diligent to get your Souls into a good
state, and to secure them in it; be diligent to know what it is that hurts you,
and what it is that hinders you, and what it is that endangers your Souls, and
take heed of it; and then be diligent to know what it is that will help you, and
further you, and advance you, and stablish your Souls in peace, and build them
up in holiness, that you may take those advantages, and improve those helps
that are before you? Such watchfulness as this, what an heart reviving, what an
heart flourishing, what an heart rejoicing would follow upon it to your selves?
And what abundant Praise, Glory and Honor would grow up to the Name of God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ? Then should those Hearts of yours, which are now too
much Dens of Thieves, Shops of Vanity, Fountains of folly, Nests of Lusts, and
Houses of Merchandise become the sacrifices of the Lord, and the Temples of the
Living God, and he would dwell in them, and walk in them, and say of them,
these are my rest, here will I abide for ever.

2. Keep all your powers up in arms. Our Enemies will fight for our Hea^ts.
Sin, the World and the Devil are like Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.6. at first he used
fair and flattering Speeches, and complemented, and kissed them that came nigh
him, saying, O that I were made Judge in the Land, his meaning was, O that I
were King, what a King would I be to you! So he stole the hearts of the Men of
Israel. Afterward he takes up Arms, and fights against those, whose hearts he
could not steal from David. Our Spiritual Enemies deal a like by us; at first
they attempt to steal away our Hearts from God; Sin smiles upon us, and fawns
upon us, and promises what it will do for us; O that you would hearken to me,
how happy should ye be if you will follow me? It does not pretend to be King,
but to be our Servant; if you will love this world, all that is in the world,
will be your Servants; but if this will not do, our Enemies will fight for us;
our Fleshly Lusts will war against our Souls, to take them Captives, 1 Pet.
2.11. and the World and the Devil will side with Lust. The Devil will buffet,
the world will rage and bluster against those that will still continue the
Servants of Christ. Hereupon Christians are said to be Soldiers; 2 Timothy 2.3.
their state here is a warring and warfaring state; they are to fight, 1 Timothy
6.12. fight the good fight of Faith, they are to wrestle, Ephesians. 6.12. against
flesh and blood, against principalities and powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses, or wicked Spirits in
high places. Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts, that is, fights against the
Spirit; and the Spirit must lust or fight against the Flesh, and all this
fighting, what is it for? it is for our hearts. The Devil and the World are
fighting, and our Souls lie at stake. He that overcomes, there is a Soul
gained, a Soul saved; he that is overcome, there is a Soul lost. When Men fight
for their lives, when this must be the issue, kill or be killed, how
desperately do they fight? we manage our warfare against sin and the Devil, as
if there were no great matter lying upon it; Men count not themselves any great
loosers if they be overcome; and hereupon it is that we leave our selves so open
to Temptations, and stand as so many naked men against our Adversaries, and
entertain such Truces and Treaties with them, and make such weak resistance
against them; as if our contention were about a Flea, or a dead Dog; Men do not
consider, that it is for their precious life, the Devil and the World is
fighting, but that is it that sin and this world would have of you, they would
have your hearts, they fight for your Souls.

Now hereupon Christians must be always up in Arms, and stand to their Arms.
As the Devil rallies up Armies against us, so the Lord provides us of Armor,
and requires us, Ephesians. 6.13. to put on our Armor, and to stand to our Arms.
Take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the
evil day, and having done all to stand. We may neither stand unarmed, nor put
on our Armor to sleep in, put on your Armor and stand in your Armor;
especially we must keep close about us these 6 pieces of Armor.

1. The Shield of Faith. v. 16. wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the
fiery Darts of the Devil. The Devil is shooting his Darts at us, and every Dart
is levelled at the heart; The Devils Darts are fiery Darts, burn when they hit,
that will burn up all the good in the Soul. Darts will stick, and fiery Darts
will burn. When you see one Man burn in Lust, there is a Dart of the Devil that
burns in his Heart; when you see others flame in anger and fury, there is a
fiery Dart of the Devils in his Heart; his Tongue is set on fire of Hell. Jam.
3.6. Think on this, you that are apt to be thus set on fire; the next time you
are in such an heat, that your hearts burn with fury, and your Tongue spits
fire, in venting furious Language, then think with your selves, I feel my Soul
in a flame, the fire comes out at my Mouth, Lord whence comes all this? O I had
need look to my self, sure there is a fiery Dart from the Devil in mine Heart;
these angry, hot, and hasty words are no other but the smoke of that Fire,
which the Devil has kindled within me. Such a Thought as this might be as
water to quench that Fire. But if such a thought will not do it, then take the
Shield of Faith, by which you may quench these Fires. We are therefore exhorted
1. Pet. 5.9. to resist the Devil, steadfast in the Faith. Trust upon Christ for
your help, stand against the Devil, as David against the Philistine, 1 Samuel
17.45. thou come against me with sword and Spear, says David, but I come to
thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts; that is, I come trusting in the Lord of
Hosts; This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand. There Is his Faith,
and that is his best Weapon. Resist the Devil, and trust in God; fight against
sin, and trust in Christ for the victory. Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord
Jehovah, for in him is Everlasting strength.

2. The helmet of hope, which is called, the helmet of Salvation, ver. 17. Romans
8.24. Ye are saved by hope. Hope will strengthen the heart, and hold up the
head. Christians should withstand Temptations and assaults, as men of hope;
whatever your Tempations are, whatever buffetings of Satan you may be
encountered with, how furiously soever the world falls on, threatening you,
thundering against you, persecuting you for your faithfulness to Christ; or
fawning upon you, or flattering you away from your integrity; how thick soever
the suggestions of your hearts lusts come upon you, enticing you, urging and
pressing you. Do not undo thy self by thy Religion, do not ruin thy self by
thy Conscience, come about after this World, save thy self from its rage, and
accept of its kindnesses; how hard soever you may be thus tempted and set upon,
and how apt soever thy faint heart may be, to fear and doubt, thou shall never
be able to stand; hold fast thine helmet; hope in God, who will be thy helper
and deliverer. Psalm. 43. ult. Why art thou cast down O my Soul --, Hope in God.
Strive against sin, but strive in hope; resist Temptations, but resist in hope;
withstand this evil world, withstand its flatteries, withstand its furies, and
withstand in hope. Do not say, as once David did, 1 Samuel 27.1. I shall one day
or other perish by the hand of Saul. I shall one day or other fall by
Temptation, I shall never hold out, and so shift for thy self; hope for the
Victory, hope in God for his help, hope in Christ for his strength, and in that
hope, stand against Temptations.

3. The girdle of Truth, ver. 14. Having your loins girt about with truth. Look
especially to this, that you be armed with truth and uprightness of heart.
Whatever other Armor you seem to have, what ever faith you have, whatever hope
you have, whatever word you have to support you, whatever Prayer you make to
help you, there is no armor will hide an hypocritical heart, from God or the
Devil. God strikes his dart into the false heart, through the joints of thine
armor. And for the Devil, he is gotten in already; the Devil is already in
thine heart, if it be a false and hypocritical heart; O get sincerity, and
uprightness before the Lord; see that there be truth in your inward parts. A
sound heart will be the best shelter, both against the Accusations and
Temptations of all your adversaries; whereas if there were no enemies from
without, a rotten heart will be its own ruin. That rust and that moth which is
bred within, will eat thee out, though there should be no Theif to assault thee
from abroad.

4. The breastplate of Righteousness. Put them both together, Truth and
Uprightness of heart, and righteousness of Life, will be a mighty security
against the Devil and all his whole Party. The Psalmist would trust to no other
Armor, without that; Psalm. 25.21. and that he will trust to. Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me, for I wait on thee. Faith without Truth, Hope without
Righteousness, or Uprightness, will never secure us. Sincerity and Uprightness
of heart, is our best heart Armor; the Hypocrites Faith will not save him, the
Hypocrites hope will perish with him, it is sincerity that will carry the day.
Be honest and plain hearted toward God. Let there not be Guile and
Unrighteousness found in you. Prove. 10.4. He that walks uprightly, walks
surely. Hic murus ahaeneus esto. A good Conscience is a wall of brass, against
all the darts that are cast against us.

5. The Sword of the Spirit. Ver. 17. which is the word of God. This was the
weapon, by which Christ conquered the Devil, when he fought him hand to hand,
Mat. 4.3. It is written, man shall not live by bread only --. It is written,
thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. It is written, thou shall Worship the
Lord thy God --. Be well versed in the Scripture, and you have a sword by you,
to resist every Temptation. Art thou tempted to Pride? Remember, it is written,
God resists the proud. Art thou tempted to a Covetous worldly Life? it is
written, take heed and beware of Covetousness. Art thou tempted to Anger, and
the bitter expressions of it? it is written, if ye bite, and devour one
another, ye shall be consumed one of another. Art thou tempted to a carnal vain
sensual Life? it is written, if ye live after the flesh ye shall die. Art thou
tempted to a cold Lukewarm indifferent temper or way? it is written, because
thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spue thee out of my mouth; And so
whatever the Temptation be, have a particular word ready at hand, which may be
a sword to strike through it

6. The spirit of prayer. Ver. 18. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit: Meet every Temptation with the Sword in your mouth,
and with a Prayer in your heart. Believe and Pray; Hope and Pray; be True, be
Upright and pray; the Lord rebuke thee, The Lord strengthen and uphold me; pray
to him, be true to him, hope in him, who was tempted himself, and is able to
succor them that are tempted.

Put on all this Armor, and stand to your Arms; be always up in Arms, be
always ready to receive the Alarm. Let that word be for an alarm to you, and
be ever in your ears, Rise Sampson the Philistines are upon thee; Rise Soul,
Sin is upon thee; the World is upon thee, thy Company are upon thee; or that
Word of Christ, Mat. 26.46. Arise, he is at hand that betrays me; that ease
that thou love, those Pleasures that thou love, that Money thou love,
that carnal Acquaintance that thou love, whom thou never suspectest to be
Enemies, they have a design to betray thee of thy life, to take away thine
heart from God; and they are ever at hand to betray thee; however thou think
thou art armed, take heed of being secure; of what use is Armor to him that is
asleep? Remember Saul and his whole Army, when they were asleep, David came
upon them, and had them at his mercy, for all their Arms; and if he had
hearkened to Abishai, had smitten him dead in the place: be never secure, stand
upon your Watch, or you never stand to your Arms. Never think you are out of
danger, you are in jeopardy every hour; your Enemy the Devil, is ever walking
up and down, and watches to devour you. Therefore that Counsel is needful, 1
Pet. 5.8. Be vigilant, be sober, for your adversary etc. Be always as the
besieged in a Town, that have their Enemy close at the Gates and the Walls;
they are upon their Guard night and day; especially let the main fort the heart
be still well watched and guarded. Set fear for your Sentinel; live in constant
fear of a surprise; fear will keep the Soul waking; be conversant in the World
in fear; be amongst your carnal friends and acquaintance, in fear; eat and
drink in fear; pass the time of your whole warfare here in fear. O this
fearless secure heart, how often has it betrayed us into Mischief. How often
have our hearts been even choked up of the World, and surfeited of carnal
Pleasures, and robbed of its peace, and spoiled of its Treasuries, and we have
exchanged a sprightful, lively, cheerful, healthful Soul, for a flat, leaden,
earthly, senseless frame, before we were aware; and all because we were secure
and without fear? Live in fear daily, and in constant jealousy; be jealous of
your friends, be jealous of your enemies, be jealous of this world, be jealous
of every sin, be jealous of your selves. Let an holy jealousy dwell in your
eye, and let it keep you waking and watching. After all your professing, and
praying, and believing, and hoping, would you not loose your hearts at last?
and loose all you have hoped and labored for? then beware of Security; if you
would be in safety, then be never secure; but always stand, with your loins
girded, and your lights burning. Stand upon your watch Tower; keep your doors
shut but your windows open. Let your eye observe the approaches, and be ready
and prepared for the assaults, that your enemies are making daily upon you. I
never look you should be flourishing or conquering Christians, till you will be
persuaded to be jealous Christians, fearing and watchful Christians, and
therefore what I said to you before, I say to you again and again, stand upon
your guard and watch.

3. Keep close by your Captain and Physician.

1. Keep by the side of Christ. You know what a stream there once ran down from
that precious side; a stream of Blood and Water; this stream (as to the virtue
and influence of it) is running down daily; and it is for the healing of
diseased, and for the washing of spotted Souls. There Is no balm will heal our
diseases, this Blood is it, Christ must do it. There Is no Soap will scowre off
our spots, this water must cleanse us; this Physic will heal every disease,
this water will cleanse us from every spot, and will present us at last,
without spot or wrinkle; Ephesians. 5.27. but what will diseased polluted Souls do,
when their Physician is out of the way? Many sick persons die of those
diseases, which had they been near the Physician, might have been cured. Keep
you ever near to Christ, his Presence will be either preventing Physic, and
keep off your Soul Diseases, that they sieze not upon you, or else 'twill be
curing Physic, that no disease shall be mortal to you. We never wander from
Christ, but we catch that, which we cannot easily claw off; if the Devil can
but catch a Christian wandering, what sad work does he make with him? we may all
say of our wanderings, from Christ, as Naomi; Ruth 1.21. I went out full but I
return empty, I went out whole but I return wounded, I went out fat and full,
but I return lean and naked. What a sad plight do we see loose and wandering
Souls to be in? keep you home: When Dinah, Jacobs Daughter, would be gadding
abroad, what a blot got she; Genesis 34.1. She went out a Virgin, and came home a
Whore. Our very departings from Christ, are our playing the Harlots against
him; our other lovers, to whom we turn aside, do deflour us. What harlots do
many of our hearts often become? We cannot stay by our Lord; out we must be
running after other lovers, and so we are defiled. O prevent your Soul
Pollutions, by keeping home. Art thou gotten near to Christ? know when thou art
well, and keep thee there. As Naomi said to Ruth, Ruth 2.22. Let not the man
find thee in another field. Gleaning after other Reapers, gadding after other
Lovers; he will take that unkindly if he do, and thou may smart for it. Has
Christ done by thee, as Boaz by Ruth, spread his Skirt over thee, and charged
thee, keep fast by me and by my Servants, dare not to be gadding after others?
you will smart for it if you do, and if ever you return, it will be by weeping
Cross. Whatever wounds you receive, you will not say as Zach. 13.6. These are
the wounds which I received in the house of my friend, but these wounds I have
gotten in my absence from my Friend. If I had kept me in, I had saved all this
hurt. O prevent your miseries, that you sustain by departing from Christ, by
keeping you by him. And if you have been wandering and caught any hurt, O
return to your Physician; and when thou art made whole, then say to thine
heart, as Christ to the Man, Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, wander no more lest a
worse thing come unte thee.

Christians, In our first coming to Christ, and our union with him, our deadly
disease is cured; we that were dead are made alive, we that were sick are made
sound. But the same Jesus that gave us this Life and Health, is he that must
maintain our Souls in Life; and that life and spiritual health which we
received from Christ by our Union, must be preserved by our Communion with him.
See that you be in Union with Christ, that you be by Faith joined to the Lord,
and then live in constant Communion with him; take heed of Ruptures, and
breaches, take heed of distances, and estrangements from Christ. Have you
gotten Christ within you? O keep him within you. Let your beloved lodge between
your breasts, and keep his dwelling in your Souls; and let there not be in you,
an heart of unbelief, let there not be in you, an heart of vanity or iniquity,
an heart of Pride or Guile, a Carnal, or Worldly heart to depart from the
living God. Keep your hearts true to Christ, keep your hearts chaste, keep you
pure in his sight. In your Union or Espousals to Christ you Covenanted against
forsaking him; Hos. 2.19. I will betroth you unto me for ever. So you have said
the same to him, Lord I betroth [thee] unto me for ever. Betrothing, or
espousing is both the nearest Union, and the firmest Union.

1. It Is the nearest Union. Our becoming Christians is our Union of hearts with
the Lord. Christ has therein given you his heart, and you have therein given
him your hearts, and your heart and his become as one heart. You that are
Christians are near unto Christ, as his own Soul; 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is
joined to Christ is one spirit. He loves you, he cares for you, he tendereth
you as his own Soul.

2. It is the firmest union. I will betroth thee forever. It is written
concerning Christ and his Saints, as concerning Husband and Wife; whom God has
joined together let no man, no nor Devil neither put asunder.

Now when there is such a nearness of Relation, and such a dearness of
Affection, there must be also Cohabitation. You must live together, and dwell
together with Christ. This is not only your duty as Christians, but your safety
depends upon it. He who is your Husband is your refuge, where you may dwell
safely; your only rock in whom you may hide your selves from danger; if you
forsake your Rock, take heed you be not forsaken of your Rock. Take heed you
neither prove runaways from Christ, and forsake him utterly; no nor slink away,
and skulk out, or turn aside from him. Keep constant to Christ and keep close
to him. Let there be intimacy and dearness maintained betwixt Christ and your
Souls; keep you in the memory of Christ, let your beloved be ever before your
eye, b^ looking daily toward him; keep you ever in the (...) of Ch^i^^ (...)
much in solacing your selves in the Contemplation of his love, and keep your
hearts in a flame of love to him. Be render how you provoke him to jealousy
against you. Keep you close to Christ, by making all your carnal things, keep
their distance from your hearts. Keep you in the diligent exercise of all the
acts of Christianity, whereby your Communion with Christ is maintained; let
there be nearness to Christ in point of Conversation, walk with Christ, yea
walk in Christ, as the Expression is, Col. 2.6. as ye have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. Whilst others walk in the Flesh, let Christians
walk in the Spirit. Walk in Christ, both in Union with Christ, living in the
strength of Christ; and in Conformity to Christ, in all wel-pleasing before
him. Let no place be a place for you, let no way be a way for you, let no
company be company for you, where Christ would not be pleased to find you. Let
no temper or frame of Spirit grow upon you, but what Christ would be pleased to
find you in. Would Christ be pleased to find you among the vain company or vile
ones of the Earth? would Christ be pleased to find you in a careless,
senseless, untoward, jolly, frothy, or in a sower, angry, envious, impatient
temper? keep you from such ways, keep you from such company, keep you out of
such temptations, have as little to do as possible with them. Keep you out of
vain and evil ways, company, and temptations, and keep you on with life and
vigor and power, in the ways of Christ. Let not your ways only please Christ,
but your walking in them; do not be sluggs and drones and triflers in
Christianity; follow the Lord, and follow him fully; follow the Lord, and let
your Soul follow hard after him. Be doing the Will of Christ, and let your
hearts stand complete in all the Wills of Christ. The most watchful, diligent,
painful, lively Christians, these are they, that keep nearest to the Lord.

Friends, be warned to keep you thus near to the Lord. The Lord calls you such,
Psalm. 148.14 A people near unto him. Approve your selves to be such, since the
Lord has made you near, keep you near to him. Live in Union and Communion with
Christ, in intimacy of Acquaintance with Christ, and with all possible care
that your whole course may be such, as may be a walking worthy his great name,
and be well pleasing to him. This is the way to keep you out of danger; and
whatever befalls you, whilst you are thus walking in Christ, you will be still
near your remedy; whilst you are near Christ, he will not be far from you, but
will be ready to help, and ready to comfort you. You complain, it may be, every
one of you, that your hearts are out of order. One cries, O my heart, what a
proud heart it is? another complains, O mine heart, it is a fretful, peevish
heart. Another cries out, O mine heart is an earthly worldly heart, another, O
my heart is a sluggish, slothful heart; another, O what shall I do? mine heart
is a dead and an hard heart? why bring them all to the Physician. Where be the
diseased or distressed Souls among you? what, be you all well? Is there no Soul
disease upon you? O there is never a one of you but have your Soul Distempers,
and sad ones too, why come to your Physician for your cure. If you were any of
you sick of the Palsy, or Dropsy, Fever, or Consumption, and Christ stood
here, as of old, every such diseased body would be thronging upon him: come ye
poor blind, hardened Souls, come lay your selves before the Lord, and cry unto
him, Lord that mine eyes might be opened: Lord that mine hard heart might be
broken, that my dead heart might be quickened. Who ever of you has a complaint
to make, has a wound, has a disease, or has a weakness, or discomfort, come
every one of you, whatever ailes you; come bring in all the lame, and the
blind, and the diseased, defiled, and distressed hearts, bring them in to the
Physician, come and lay them all at the feet of Christ. Lord help me, Lord heal
me, Lord wash me. But be sure you come with a purpose to keep you by him; when
you come to him, come unto Christ and he will heal you, and then keep you by
him and he will preserve you from Relapses into the same, or a worse disease;
which if you wander from him again, is like to come upon you.

2. Keep under Christ's Banner. Keep to your Colors. The Banner of Christ, has
engraven upon it, or his Colors bears upon it, as his Coat of Arms, the
Covenant, the Cross, and the Crown; with this Motto, Pugnanti victoria,
vincenti Corona. Victory to him that fights, the Crown to the Conqueror. The
Covenant is for our union with Christ, the Cross for our Trial, the Crown for
our Encouragement. And here I shall give you three Directions,

1. Let the Covenant be upon your hearts. The Covenant is,

1. For the strength of our hearts; it notes our listing our selves under
Christ as his Servants, and Christ's undertaking the conduct of us. When we
understand what we are engaged in, what hard service we have bound our selves
to, what a painful active life as Christians, we must count upon; our hearts
will be apt to fail us, and cry out of the life of a Christian, as the Apostle
of the work of the Ministry, 2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things? I
shall never be able to bear through such a life? but then remember your
Covenant; your Baptismal Covenant I mean, which does not only engage you to the
Lord, but engages the Lord to you. Look to the Captain of your Salvation, who
has bound himself to help you through, who has said, Heb. 13.5. I will never
fail you nor forsake you. And then you shall be able to say with the Apostle;
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Venture not
on any thing in your own strength, fear not nor be dismayed at any thing whilst
you have the Lord Jesus to be your strength. Christians, be not disheartened,
fear not to engage in the strictest, and severest course of Christianity; lean
upon the Lord and he will help you through. Set your hearts to the work, and
leave the care of Success to him, that cares for you. Remember this, let your
trust in Christ, your hold on the Covenant be your strength on which you lean,
for the carrying you through the whole of your Christian course.

2. This Covenant will be the guide of your hearts. What is it that I have to
do? how is it that I must live? why look into your Covenant; what is it that
you have engaged to do? how is it that you have covenanted to live? you have
covenanted Holiness and Righteousness; you have covenanted against an idle
Life, or doing nothing; against a trifling life, or doing your work by halfes;
against a worldly, or fleshly, or wicked life; the World, Flesh, and Devil,
these you have all covenanted against. You have covenanted the crucifying the
Flesh, and the World, the resisting the Devil, and to follow Christ against
them all. You have covenanted to fight against the Flesh, and the World, and to
fight to the Victory; not to be less fleshly than oath r men, to be less worldly
than other men, but you have covenanted against a fleshly and worldly life.
Think not of carrying it fair with both; of cutting out a middle way betwixt
Christ and the World, betwixt a fleshly and an heavenly life; it is a total
victory over this flesh, and this world, over a fleshly, and a worldly life,
which you have covenanted to pursue. When ever you are at a stand and are in
doubt, as to any particular actions, or way of life, that you have before you;
and are questioning whether you should go on, or forbear, why then examine,
would this be a serving my flesh, or a serving the Lord? determine that well,
and then your covenant would guide you, whether to do or forbear. Once let your
hearts stand resolved to pursue the ends of your covenant, to live such an
holy, such an heavenly, such a mortified, such a self-denying, such a diligent
life, as you have covenanted to live; and then your very hearts, which are the
records of your covenant, your very hearts will teach you what you should do.

When your flesh at any time pleads with you, for any abatement of the
strictness of Christianity; for any Liberty of compliance with the more remiss,
and loose amongst Christians; and suggests to you, not too far, not too fast
not too high in Religion, drive on softly, deal gently with thy flesh, be not
over rigid or severe to it; be not over busy, do not tire thy self at thy
work; take time, take thine ease, drive on as thy carnal interest, and thy
carnal inclinations can bear; then read over your covenant, and consider. Is
such a life according to the writeing that has been agreed upon betwixt my
Lord and me? Is this cold, and indifferent, and easy way of Religion, all that
I have covenanted for? well, this is one thing, if you would keep to your
Colors, keep to your Covenant.

2. Take up your Cross upon your back. This is your Lords word, Mat. 16.24.
Whosoever will come after me, let him take up his Cross. This will be the proof
of what there is of Christ or Christianity in your hearts; a sound heart will
make a strong back. He that loves much, will bear any thing; he whose heart is
not cross-proof is an unsound Christian. Your sinful shunning the Cross is your
running from your Colors.

Christians, some little Trials we have had, some crosses we have met with; but
for ought I know, the Lord may be preparing heavier crosses, greater sufferings
for you, then ever you have been proved withal. O be so busy a fortifying your
hearts, that you may never baulk your Christian course, whatever cross may
stand in the way. I would not that we should needlessly run upon the cross, when
we may avoid it. Sufferings may come fast enough, without our pulling them upon
our selves. But this I would, we might every one stand to, resolve in the
strength of the Lord, to be never the less hearty Christians, never the less
holy, never the less precise, never the less zealous in the pursuit and
practice of a sincere and exemplary Godly Life, for any thing you may suffer
for it from Men or Devils. I do not barely say, take up your cross rather then
lay down your Christianity; but take up your cross rather than lay down your
bold Profession of Christianity; take up your cross rather than lay down your
zeal for Christ, or turn aside from the closest, and most resolved following of
Christ. Let the Cross neither make us of Christians to become no Christians, no
nor to be less Christians than we have seemed to be. It has been so in former
ages, that Christianity has never improved, nor thrived so much, as under the
sharpest, and severest persecutions, and why should it not be so still? Look to
your selves friends, there is hazard that your Souls may suffer, that you may
be inward loosers by your over solicitousness to escape outward losses; the
Souls of many Professors may be losers, and the Souls of some may be quite
lost, by the fears of the cross. Look to your selves, that this be none of your
Cases, that you be not loosers by persecutions, especially take heed that you
be not lost, your Souls lost by them. Be not persecuted from Christ, be not
persecuted to Hell; let not the cross drive you ba k under the curse, from
which you hoped that you had escaped.

And that you may not be loosers, do what you can to be gainers, as other
Christians have been before you. If it grow to be winter without, get you to be
warmer within; if the winds rise, keep your garments the Closer about you;
Think not to make your peace with evil men, by striking sail and following
Christ more aloof; but make your Peace with God more sure, that you may be the
more able to bear the reproaches of the World. Be as the Stars, that are never
so bright, as when the night is darkest. Love one another, help one another,
quicken and comfort, and encourage one another, so much the more, for that the
world hates, and goes about to hinder you; and never think, after all that
has been said, about the governing and guarding, the sanctifying and keeping
your hearts, that yet your hearts are right, till you can hold fast your
integrity, and hold on your way in all changes of weather.

3. Keep the Crown in your eye, and let that word be ever in your ear. Rev.
3.11. Hold fast what thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Run from your
Colors and you loose the Crown. He that has heaven in his eyes, will not fear
to have holiness in his life. The hope of the victory will encourage in the
fight; the hope of the Crown will make the cross to be easy, and make us
faithful in the covenant. Therefore Remember that word, Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Christians, if you
would not loose the Crown, then be faithful; be faithful to the death in the
covenant of your Lord. Whatever difficulties or discouragements you may meet
with in your way, what ever hardships or tribulations may befall you, if you can
yet say with the Church, Psalm. 44.17, 18. Though all this be come upon us, yet
have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, our
heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. If you
can but say this, your Lord will say also to you, whatever I have done, or
brought upon you, yet I have not forgotten thee; the Covenant of my peace shall
never be removed. Fight the good fight, keep the faith, till you have fini^hed
your course, and then know, there is laid up for thee a Crown of Righteousness,
which I will surely give thee at that day.

4. Carry up your hearts thither, where your enemies cannot come. Carry them up
to heaven; whatever treasure you lay up there, neither moth nor rust can
corrupt, nor theives break through and steal. There Is no safety below, the Theif
will be every where upon you; whilst you are conversant in the world, walking
after the flesh, these are your enemies quarters; your hearts are in the midst
of them, in the midst of those Thieves, that seek your life, whilst they are
conversant about these fleshly things. Yea, whilst you are where God is; in
your Duties, in Ordinances, if your hearts be not above at such times, if you
feed only on what comes down, if you ascend not in your Duties, if you ascend
not by Ordinances, if you get not up to have Communion with God in them, this
flesh, and this world will be thrusting in upon you, and steal your hearts
away. Christ has been riding down to you this day, as the chariots and horses
of fire, once were sent down for Elijah; 2 Kin. 2.11. The Chariots came down to
fetch up the Prophet in them; the Ordinances of God, that you have been at this
day, was the Chariot of God, that was sent down on purpose, that those hearts
of yours might ride up in it into Glory. I hope some of your hearts got up into
the Chariot, and are ascended with your Lord, who came down to fetch them up.
What, Christian, is thine heart yet below? where was it, when the Chariot came
down? what are your Souls yet among the Sheep and the Oxen? among the grass of
the Field, and the dust of the Earth? what yet among the worms? what yet
creeping upon this Earth, and feeding upon Ashes? do your Souls still dwell in
these Tombs and Sepulchers? I hope there may be some among you can say, I thank
the Lord, mine heart is no longer here, it is risen, it is ascended, with my
Lord, who came down for it, and has carried it up with him. But man, how is it
with thee, whose heart is left behind? Christ has been here, and those that
were wise took the Season, and got up with him into the Chariot. But is [thine]
heart still upon this Earth? and must it away again, to its old trading, to its
old feeding on this dirt, and trash? have thou been tasting of that Angels
Food, that hidden Manna, the bread of God that came down from heaven, and can
thou now return to thy Quails, or thy Husks? sure thou had not a taste of
that heavenly food, if thou do not yet disgust and disrelish thine old carnal
Delights.

But are your hearts, any of you, yet left below? behold yet a Chariot from God
is before you; this Ordinance of Preaching; behold the same Jesus in this
Chariot is come down again for those hearts, that are not yet gotten up. Thy
Lord is loath to leave thee here; will thou yet ascend with him? Why is there
not a cry among you, Lord help me up into thy Chariot, Lord take my Soul up
with thee, Lord let not me be left behind? Let Christ hear that voice from you,
Lord take me up with thee; here this poor wretched heart of mine lies at thy
feet, I cannot lift it up; it is too heavy for me, it has weights but no wings;
yet it groans after thee it would not that thou should go up without it. Lord
lift me up, Lord carry up this poor and wretched heart from Earth to Heaven.
What must I yet dwell in Mese^^ (...) mine heart amongst the tents of Kedar? M^
(...) amongst these Theives and Robbers? O where (...) that has brought thee
down again for me (...) thou me O Lord? and will thou yet leave me at (...)
^^stance from thee? O take pity, O take me up, that I may from henceforth be
with thee where thou art. Christians O that I could set you, even every one of
you, a crying thus after the Lord, and a bemoaning these earthly and too carnal
hearts, that they are not yet ascended! Let Christ yet hear that voice, and let
it come deep even from the bottom of thy Soul; Let Christ hear, not that mouth
crying, nor those eyes crying, but that Soul crying, Lord take me up also with
thee, and he will take thee up. O get you into the Psalmists Posture and
Spirit. Psalm. 42.1. Psalm. 84.2. As the heart pants after the water brooks, so
pants my soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God? My Soul longs, yea even
faints for thee; my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God When
Lord? O let this be the day, take me this very hour, and carry me up to the
mountains of spices. Christians, be but unfeignedly willing, that Christ should
carry away those hearts from this Earth, be but in good earnest with him, when
you say, Lord take me up, and he will not leave you behind.

Get these hearts to heaven, and keep them there. Get you up from Earth to
Heaven, and come not down again from Heaven to Earth. Let that blessedness be
antedated, which is promised to be after the Resurrection. 1 These. 4.17. Then
shall we ever be with the Lord. Say to the Lord, even from henceforth, as he
says to his Church. Psalm. 132.14. Thou shall be my rest, here will I dwell for
ever. Let it not be a Visit to Heaven, that will satisfy you, but a
Conversation in heaven. Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in heaven. Let it not
be a few heavenly hours, or a short heavenly repast, but an heavenly life, that
you design and follow after. When you get you once thus near unto the Lord,
live as much as possible, in the constant viewes of his Glory; so continually
beholding and feeding upon the foretastes and forethoughts of his Goodness and
Grace, that you may be [changed] daily, from Glory to Glory, into the same
image.

Know friends, that if there be any security in the world, from the Robbers and
the Spoilers; from your Lusts, and Temptations, from suffering such losses
again in your peace, the only security you have is to keep your hearts still
above. Have thou gotten thine heart to heaven? keep thee where thou art; keep
you out of harms way. If the Devil can but catch those hearts again below,
catch you a roving, catch you a wandering after your carnal things; if he can
but meet you declining from an heavenly to an earthly Conversation, from a
spiritual to a carnal Conversation, O what sad spoils of whatever good days
you have had, of whatever delights, and satisfactions, and joys, and comforts
you have had; what spoils will he make of them all? Christians, when ever you
can get, or do feel your hearts in a better frame, most full of the love, and
life, and joy of the Lord, O think, what pity it is, what a sad fall it will be,
to make an exchange of this blessed state, for the barren and brackish
Pleasures of this world? think with your selves, shall I forsake the sweetness
of the Fig Tree, and the fullness of the Olive, and go and browze upon brambles?

The design friends of all this is, to persuade and invite you to live in
constant Communion with God. You have been received and entertained this day,
into special communion with God, and the intent and meaning of this solemn
communion is, that by the sweetness and refreshing you find in it, you may be
set into a way of ordinary communion with him. That your life may be a life of
Communion with God; a life of faith, a life of love, a life of Holiness and
Joy, that so you might prophecy to your selves with the Psalmist, Psalm. 23.6.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Brethren, do you in good earnest desire, to get you up to such a life as this?
do you heartily wish it might be thus with you? have you any hope that you
shall obtain, and will you follow after it? will you go hence, as men and women
designing any such thing? shall we that have been with the Lord together this
day, now agree together, in the Name of the Lord, to be reaching forward, with
one heart and with one soul, toward such an heavenly life? shall we help one
another, and quicken one another, and set examples one to another, of such
spirituality and heavenliness? what do ye think, would be the fruit of our
appearance before the Lord this day, might we return to our houses, with our
hearts full of such holy Resolutions, with our hearts flaming in such holy
desires? Oh be impatient of thinking to return again to your old carnal, and
sensual and worldly frames; to your cold, and indifferent, and lukewarm, and
lifeless way of Religion. Let not the Devil catch you again wandering, or
carelessly jogging on at your wonted rate; if he do, look for it, that
whatsoever of the Divine Life or Love, of the Divine Hope or joy, has been
kindled in you this day, you will be quickly spoiled and robbed of it all; and
those poor and weakly hearts, will fall into a worse condition then before. If
you would keep any thing about you that might comfort you, if you would secure
your Souls, from being rifled of all that you have received, if you would not
return to be dark and dead and barren Souls, then remember this Counsel you
have received from the Lord, to whom my Prayer is for you; which was David's for
Israel, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel our fathers,
keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of this
people and prepare their heart unto thee. Keep these thoughts fresh upon your
hearts, and you shall thereby keep your hearts, after the Lord has spoken
Grace unto you, from returning again to folly.

Lastly, Commit the keeping of your hearts to the keeper of Israel. Commit them
to God, Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchmen waketh but in
vain. The keeping of the heart is a greater trust, than the keeping of a City,
and therefore had need be put into safe hands. G d is able to keep it, 2 Timothy
1.12. I know whom I have believed, that he is able to keep, that which I have
committed to him, unto that day. God is able, and God is faithful; faithful is
he that has called you, and will do it. But it may be you will say,

O I shall never be able to keep mine heart in heaven; keep up the love and
life and joy of God in my Soul! keep my self pure, keep me close to God, that
the Devil never catch me wandering abroad? Why I see he may catch me every hour;
mine heart is given to wandering, and I cannot hold it in. It would be an ease,
and a joy, and a great delight to me, could I get to be raised to such a pitch,
to be all spiritual and heavenly; and there to fix, and be ever with the Lord.
O what a joy it would be to me, had I but hope I might get to such a pitch! but
woe is me, I shall never be able. Why, do your duty, and for such a comfortable
success, let that care lie on the Lord. Commit it to him, both to help you into
such a frame, and to keep you in it; he has said, he will not fail you, He
has sealed to you this day, that he will help you, that he will keep you;
trust upon him and he will do it.

But what is it to commit the keeping of our hearts to the Lord?

1. To give them to the Lord. God will keep nothing, but what is his own. Will thou give thine heart to the Devil, and then commit it to God to keep it for
him? give your hearts to the Lord, give them to him for his Servants, and then
commit them to his Custody.

2. To trust him with the keeping of them, Psalm. 143.9. Deliver me O God from
mine enemies, for I flee unto thee to hide me. I have many enemies, that lie in
wait for my Soul, I dare not trust to my self for security. God is my trust and
my refuge; I flee unto thee to hide me; I will trust under the shadow of thy
wings: Psalm. 36.7.

Therefore brethren, my Exhortation to you shall be the same with Peter's
Exhortation, to suffering Christians; 1 Pet. 4.19. Commit the keeping of your
Souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Observe it, commit,
but in well doing. Do not neglect your duty, and think to make it up with this,
I have committed the care of my self to God; I say, do not neglect your hearts,
be not idle and careless of your own duty, do not leave your selves open to the
Usurpation of lust or the invasion of the Devil, do not suffer your hearts to
lead you on in your carnal ways; leave not that heart of thine to be a blind
house, a dark hole, and filthy Dungeon, full of Abominations, and then think to
make up the matter, with this to say, I have committed it to the Lord to wash
it, and cleanse it, and keep it; I trust God with my Soul, he I hope will
preserve it; commit the keeping of your Souls, in well doing; do your duty,
keep your hearts under Government, keep them under Guard, be washing your
hearts daily, be watching your hearts daily; though God be also, yet you are
every one, your own keepers; do your part, to keep that which God has
committed to you and then fear not, but God will do his part, he will keep
whatever you have committed to him.

And thus I have at length run through this great duty of keeping the heart.
The Lord knows how great need there is of every word that has been spoken: O
that none of it might be lost. Our poor hearts, God knows, have hitherto found
us but poor heart-keepers. The case they are in, is Evidence sufficient to
prove, how sadly they have been looked to. Some of them continuing in a lost
state to this day, others of them, but half recovered others relapsed, and
fallen back from what they were once hopefully recovered to; none of our
hearts, but have often been among Thieves, where we have suffered great loss;
and how many have been the heart distempers and diseases we have fallen into? O
what slight, what licentious, what listless, dull, and lazy Souls have we been?
sure these hearts have found us but bad keepers. O what shall be the success of
these many words that have been spoken? what say you Christians? is there any
hope that your hearts shall be better looked to for the future? what say you?
will you now be faithful? will you keep this charge of the Lord? keep this
heart with all diligence? who is there among you, that will say, I confess my
faults, and my great neglects this day? I confess I have been careless, the sad
frame mine heart is in, is a witness against me; but through the Grace of God,
I will look better to my self, and hope I shall not forget this word, as long
as I live; I hope I shall leave meddling with other men's matters, and leave
censuring of other men's ways, and from henceforth keep mine eye more close and
constant upon mine own Soul. This do, be more faithful in keeping your selves,
and then you may be bold, to commit your selves to the Lord, as unto a faithful
Creator.

What has been my design and desire in this whole work? But, 1. To prepare
your hearts for the Lord, that he may accept them. 2. To bring them over to the
Lord, that they may become his own. 3. To keep them for the Lord, to keep them
pure, that he may take pleasure in them. O let this be done, and then you may
commit them to the Lord to keep them safe.

Will you be persuaded, will you be prevailed upon, thus to prepare and bring
over your hearts to the Lord? thus to preserve and keep them pure and faithful
to him? and so trust to his faithfulness? Might I prevail with you in this, I
had done my work; and having put you thus into safe custody, should there be
bold to leave you, in this Confidence, that you should be thenceforth all kept,
by the mighty power of God, through faith unto Salvation.

FINIS.

