A COMPANION FOR PRAYER OR, Directions for Improvement in Grace, and Practical
Godliness in time of Extraordinary Danger.

By RICHARD ALLEIN, Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for T. G. MDCLXXXIV.

Reverend Sir,
THE motion made in yours concerning Prayer, has much affected me, and has
occasioned some workings of my thoughts, which though (in a conscience of mine
own weakness I more than once laid aside, yet they still returned upon me; and
I do now here offer the result of them to your Consideration.

We all know and teach, that they are only returning and reforming Prayers that
will prevail with God; and it is to be doubted, that in this dead and decayed
age there are too many professors who will join in the design of Prayer, whom
this must serve instead of Reformation, it is to such especially that the
Directions in the enclosed Papers are intended. I send them to you, desiring
you to read them, and then to do what you please with them; beseeching you, and
trusting upon your friendly faithfulness herein, thar you will take your full
freedom, either to keep them in silence to your self, or else to communicate
and make them public. I should thankfully accent of any expungings,
alterations or additions that you shall think needful. The Lord pardon the
failings, and accent the sincere aims of my soul herein. To his Grace I commend
you, and in him I rest,

Dear Sir, Your unworthy Friend and Servant, RICHARD ALLEIN.

A COMPANION FOR PRAYER OR, Directions for Improvement in Grace and Practical
Godliness, etc.
TO make way for, and to press to the diligent observing the following
Directions, let these things be premised.

1. That the Power of Religion is much fallen, at least is at a stand, amongst
multitudes of Professors in England. Sure this needs no proof, when we have so
many sad ocular Demonstrations hereof before us.

2. That for this, the Lord has a controversy with us at this day, Rev. 2.4.
Whatever controversy the Lord has with the Belials amongst us, whose horrible
wickedness has even repined them for vengeance, his special quarrel seems to
be with his own people. We may guess against whom the special anger is, by
observing at whose faces chiefly his arrows are levelled. Against whom do our
enemies (the rod of his anger) make a wide mouth, and draw forth the tongue,
and lift up their fiercest hands?

3. No Prayers will avail, nor have the least help in them, but the Prayers of
such, with whom the Lords controversy is taken up and composed; those with
whom he has a particular quarrel, are like to be unhappy Mediators for others.
We choose the savourites of Princes to be our Intercessors with them.

4. There can he no taking up Gods controversy, unless the matter of it be
removed by repentance and reformation, Rev. 2.5. Isa. 1.15, 16, 18. When ye
make many prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full of blood; wash ye, make
you clean, etc Come now, and let us reason together. Josh. 7.10. Get thee up;
wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned -- they have taken
the accursed thing; and v. 12. I will not be with you any more, except the
accursed thing be destroyed from amongst you. Is there no accursed thing
amongst, even the Professors of Religion! Behold! the wedg of Gold, and the
Babylonish garment, their pride and their covetousness, hid in their hearts for
a tent. Go search out these, and every other accursed thing within you, let
them be destroyed if ye would have the Lord to be at peace.

5. If there may be such a spirit of Prayer stirred up amongst us, as may have
his fruit unto Holiness, and real reformation of the evils of our ways; this
would comfort us, and give us great hopes in the hardest cases.

6. Therefore in all our crying to God for his help, in case of public fears,
dangers or distresses, our eye should be firstly upon, and we should wrestle
with the Lord for the pardoning, purging, and sanctification of our own hearts
and lives; wherein if we prevail not, we shall be as a rotten tooth, or a bone
out of joint, for any help there is in us, or in any thing we do; unless we can
pray up a spirit of Holiness in our selves, a spirit of Love, and of Power, and
of a sound mind, we are not like to do any thing to purpose, in praying down
Mercy for the people; the Devil will give us leave to vifit the Throne of
Grace, so we will but carry our hard and uncircumcised hearts with us; if we
cannot get to be of the Lords holy Ones, though we make many Prayers, he will
not hear, here the interest and the hopes of the people of God lie, in the
shedding abroad of the sanctifying and quickening spirit upon them; for this
therefore should we firstly pray.

7. It Is not praying alone that will do: to the bringing on our Reformation,
there must be also a constant and sedulous use of all Gods other means, in our
whole course of Life.

8. Some of these means are presented in the following Directions.

1. General Directions.
Direct. 1. Take up a deep and serious design of making an advance in serious
Religion. Sit not down by, take not up with what you have already attained, but
resolve for reaching forward, and following after toward that which you have
not attained; content not your selves to drive gently on, as your flesh will
bear, but stir up your selves to follow hard after the Lord; and let this be
the deliberate decree and intent of your hearts. Say to thine heart, How is it
with me? Does my Soul prosper? Are my ways such as please the Lord? What is
mine expectation and mine hope? What is the aim and business of my life? Is it
that Christ may be magnified by me, and that I may be made partaker of his
Holiness, and show forth his Virtues in my generation? Can I say with the
Apostle, To me to live is Christ? Ah wretch that I am! how deeply has this
self, and this world gone shares with my Lord! O! how little of my time, my
parts, my strength, yea, and of my very heart also have been enclosed and
consecrated as Holiness to the Lord! how much of me has been left out in
common for the world? Well, but what meanest thou for the future? Will thou
henceforth change the purpose and intent of thine heart? Come man, wilt take up
a design for, and henceforth determine and set thine heart upon a more
watchful, fruitful, and heavenly life? If thou will not be brought to decree,
and resolve upon a better life, much less will thou be persuaded actually to
it. What Is begun well, is half done; and an holy design deeply laid, is a good
beginning.

Direct. 2. Let Gods Calls to extraordinary prayer, and a sense of the
necessity of your recovery and reformation, to your prevailing in prayer,
quicken you on in the vigorous pursuance of your holy design. Now is a time
wherein you have your hearts at the advantage, having such weighty arguments
before you, and the opportunity of doing two such great things more, as the
saving of your selves, and also of the people, both from iniquity and calamity.

Direct 2. Do all you do, in pursuance hereof, in the name of the Lord Jesus.
He not discouraged at any prospect: of difficulty, trust in him for his help.
Encourage your hearts with the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4.13. I shall be
able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Direct. 4. Keep your e^e and your heart much upon God and the other world; Be
able to say with the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven; that
is, there the business of our life lies; and that not only above spiritual and
heavenly things, but with God himself. Live at the fountain and springhead;
thence all your light, and life, and holiness, and strength must flow down. Be
much in looking upwards; and beholding in a glass the glory of the Lord, you
will be changed from Glory to glory, into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Look
much and often upon the things that are not seen, if ye would be delivered from
the power and malign influence of the things that are seen; let your eye be
upon the Sun, and you will see a dimness and darkness upon the Earth; get you
clothed with the Sun, and you will get the Moon under your feet.

Direct. 5. See that there be no allowed sin in your hearts or practice, Psalm.
66.18. If I regard Iniquity in mine heart, God will not hear my prayer, nor
help me. An allowed sin is as the dead flesh in the wound; whatever methods or
medicines be taken, there will be no healing till the dead flesh be eaten off;
you may profess, and pray, and hear all your life long, and yet will never
prosper whilst you are privy to any one indulged sin.

Direct. 6. Be constant and instant in daily, secret, and family prayer. Let
not extraordinary Prayer excuse your ordinary; and let not your neglect of
ordinary Prayer unfit you for extraordinary; Let not your way to your Closet be
untrod. He that holds his acquaintance in Heaven by being often with God, will
be the most like to prevail with God in the most pressing and difficult cases;
those that are much in Prayer, those are the men that use to be mighty in
Prayer.

Direct. 7. In all your praying, both ordinary and extraordinary, let your eye
be, (I say not chiefly, but) firstly upon the case of your own Souls: What
improvement you obtain here will be of this double advantage; 1. There will be
the more hope of your being heard for the public. 2. If the Lord be not
prevailed with for public mercies and deliverances, yet you will be the better
prepared for sufferings. If God should show mercy as to the public, should
scatter our clouds, and blow over our storms, should cause our light to break
forth as the morning, and our righteousness also as the noonday; yet what
would all this be to thee, who art unrighteous? What would it be to thee, if in
all the Land of Goshen there should be light, and thou in the midst thereof
should be covered over with the darkness of Egypt; if there should be dew on
all the grass of the field, and thy fleece only should be dry? if thou
should live to see thy people a saved people, and an holy and fruitful
Nation, and thou should stand as a withered and dry Tree amongst all the
flourishing Cedars? Get up thine own heart into good proof; or whatever
spiritual plenty thou may see in Israel, yet thou will not eat thereof. Talk
no more of thine hopes of seeing good days, how little would that be to thee,
unless thou get thee a better heart?

Direct. 8. Let you prayers be followed with a constant care of your ways. Let
not your praying serve you instead of repenting and reforming, but let it
quicken you to your whole duty; let your entering into your Closet be your
ascending heavenwards; and let not your returns thence be the falling down of
your Souls from Heaven to Earth. Let your duties and ways he all of a piece;
live like praying Christians. Let not the spirituality of your mornings and
evenings, countenance or encourage you in your all-day carnality. Be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long, Prove. 23.17.

Direct. 9. Whatever incomes you receive from God into your own Souls, be free
in dispersing to others: I mean in away of holy discourse and conference.
Dispersing and communicating is the best way to thriving, Prove. 11.24. There is
that scatters, and yet increases; there is that withholdeth, and it tends
to poverty. It Is true with respect to spirituals as well as to temporals. There
are none that grow more rich toward God, than those, who by bringing forth
what they have received, labor to make others rich also. Give the holy fire
within you a vent, and it will burn the clearer. Keep not your Religion to your
selves; let your full cup run over, let your lips drop as the honeycomb, let
your mouth be a well of life, and your lips feed many, Prove. 10.11. Build up
one another in the most Holy Faith; provoke one another to love and to good
works; let your Families, your Wives and Children, your Neighbors and
Acquaintance, have light from your Candle, and be warmed by your Fire.
Doubtless its one special part of Gods quarrel with Christians, That they are
so very many of them, of such carnal and unsavory converses. Is it [thy] case?
have thou this to charge upon thy self? O! amend, amend, and see that thou
continue not such a barren Soul; as low as it is with thee in grace, think not
to rise high, unless thou will make better use of what thou have.

2. Particular Directions.
Direct. 1. Consider what it is whereto you have already attained, and be
thankful; and thence be encouraged to press on, and hope for more. Have thou
obtained Grace from the Lord? and has he caused his Grace to abound toward
thee, and in thee? and have thou a witness within thee that thou have not
received the Grace of God in vain? But do thou study to walk worthy of that
Grace wherein thou stand? O rejoice in the Lord, and let all within thee
bless his Holy Name; and take what thou have thus received as an earnest of
more. Set thy foot upon the neck of every mortified lust, take the more heart
to thee to go on in the fight, and rejoice in hope of a total and final
victory, The Soldier, when one Wing of his Enemies Army is routed, or they do
but give ground, and begin to fall, this raises his courage, and he falls more
smartly on. Go thou and do likewise; and let thy beginning, much more thy
growth in Grace, and thy experiences hereof, be the oiling of thy wheels, for
thy more vigorous following on after, yet a greater increase.

Direct. 2. Consider what your special corruptions, infirmities, wants,
neglects, temptations, or your most ordinary falls are. 1. What your special
corruptions are, how far forth you have conquered them, and where you stick. In
some professors, Pride; in others Covetousness; in others, Sensuality; in
others, Sloathfulness; in others, Peevishness, or Frowardness, or the like; may
have gotten such head in them, that these weeds overtop, and even choke up all
their flowers. 2. What your special wants or weaknesses are in point of Grace;
what Graces they are, whether Faith, or Love, or Peacefulness, or Meekness, or
Humility, or Patience, etc. wherein you are most deficient or weak. 3. What
Duties they are, as either Prayer, Meditation, Communing with your own hearts,
etc. which you are most apt to neglect, or find most difficult to go
comfortably through. 4. What Temptations they are, by which you are most
commonly assaulted or foiled. 5. What your most ordinary Falls are in point of
practice. And here let Professors of Religion be warned to confider, if they be
not overtaken (besides many others) by some of these fout evils. 1. An
over-eager and greedy following after the World: The zeal of some men's spirits
after riches, has eaten up all their zeal of God. O! into what poverty has
thy Soul fallen, whilst thou have been so busy in the world, and have felt the
prosperities thereof come crouding in upon thee! Some rich Professors may
remember the days of old, and be troubled. This thought, When I was but a
little one in this world, then was it better with me than now; this thought may
be an Arrow in their hearts, and kill the joy, and let out the juice and
sweetness of their greatest abundance. I remember the kindness of my youth, and
the love of mine espousals; but O where am I now! my very rising has given me
the fall. 2. A liberty for carnal jollity, a jovial and vainly merry life, such
there are, who have lest off to walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, and
have given themselves to live merrily with the World; who have given over to
weep with them that weep, and are fallen in to laugh with them that laugh; to
jest and sport, and be vain with the vain ones, yea and it may be to drink and
to sit by it with those that drink. It Is now grown too creditable to frequent
drinking Houses: Tradesmen that are Professors, especially in Cities or great
Towns, how ordinarily do they, upon pretense of dispatch of business, sit many
hours over a dish of Coffee, or a Cup of Ale, or a glass of Sack; and carry it
so, that they can hardly be distinguished from the good Fellows of the world,
but perhaps by this only, That they are not downright drunken into Beasts. If
there be a liberty of such Houses, and meetings in them sometimes necessary (as
perhaps it may) yer let not this liberty be used as an occasion to the flesh.
3. Gaudiness or over-costliness in Apparel, wherein some of them glitter and
shine amongst the greatest Gallants of the Earth. Some amongst professors do
not only shun, but disdain and despise the old self-denial that was wont to be
among Christians in these and the like particulars, as if they were set at
liberty by the Gospel from the Laws of Christ, as well as from the Law of
Moses. To these three let me add one evil more: 4. A neglect of your Families;
of the Instructing, Catechizing, and due disciplining them; the consequents of
which neglect are very sadly to be seen in the ignorance, errors, rudeness and
disorderliness abounding amongst many of them: there are not a few who take
some care of themselves, but leave the bridle on the necks of theirs, and reap
many heartbreaking crops in them, as the fruits of their own negligence. O let
holy Joshua's resolution be yours: As for me and mine house, we will serve the
Lord. Josh. 2^.15.

Now diligently search and consider thy self in all these things; and when thou
have faithfully studied thy self and thy ways, and have found what it is that
thou art most peccant or wanting in, and most prejudiced and hindered by; then
conclude, here my great difficulty lies, and therefore here my great work lies,
if ever I would prosper, to get this or that corruption to be mortified, this
or that grace strengthened, such and such temptations to be shunned or provided
against, and such and such faults to be amended, now I have found what hinders
me; and that which does hinder, will hinder, till it be taken out of the way.

Direct. 3. Bend the main force of all your Religion upon those very points
wherein yon are most failing or faulty. The Devil will allow us to be busy in
other matters of Religion, so he can but keep us off from those things where
our great stresses lies: And the deceitful heart will take up with that which
is most easy and pleasant, that thereby it may the better shift it self of
that which is more hard, and would go to the quick with it. We never purge or
bleed to purpose, till we hit upon the right humor, and strike the right vein.

This is to act rationally, and in judgment; to bend our great strength there,
where our great difficulty or weakness bes. When you have by searching found
out what you mostly stick at: let it be your first grand errand in every
Prayer, whether ordinary or extraordinary, to beg special help in this
particular case: your weakness in any particular grace or duty, the power of
any particular lust, corruption, or temptation, your most ordinary and common
falls in point of conversation; let these have a special place in every prayer
you make: And also let them be most needfully watched and labored against in
your lives. Turn in the strength of Prayer, and watchfulness upon the strength
of Sin; let your main batteries be against the strong holds; and where your
walls are weakened, there set the strongest guard and watch.

Direct. 4. Measure your proficiency in Religion, by the power you get in those
particulars, wherein you have been most deficient or faulty, Judge not your
selves by those things which are most easy in Religion, but by your coming off
in your most difficult case.

Some professors may at times seem to be full of good affections, strangely
elevated and enlarged in their prayers, yea, and to live in so great peace, as
to take themselves to have attained to the riches of full assurance, and yet
for all this may be but very poor Christians all the while. Let them be asked,
How is it with your Soul? O! I bless the Lord, I find it very comfortable: I
have sweet communion with God in Prayer, and I live in the sweet and refreshing
light of his countenance; he washes my steps with Butter, and his Sun shines
upon my paths; I thank the Lord I go comfortably on. But stay man, How is it
with thine old corruptions? Thou were once intolerably proud, or froward, or
earthly, or a jolly and vainly merry soul; what ground have thou gotten of
those very corruptions under which thou most groanedst? How is it with thee
with respect to temptation? Do thou fear and fly from temptation, and do what
thou can to keep thy self out of harms way? and when thou fallest into
temptation, when thou art actually tempted to Pride or Covetousness, when thou
art provoked to passion or impatience, how goes it with thee then? how stand
thou in the day of temptation? How is it with thee in regard of thy wonted
evils in thy conversation? Have thou sounded a retreat from thy eager chase
after the great things of the world? Thou have been a zealot for increasing
thine earthly Substance, art thou now become more moderate: Thou were once a
sloathful, lazy foul in the matters of God, art thou now more diligent and
industrious? art thou fervent in spirit, serving the Lord? Thou once livedst a
jolly, frothy and merry life, do thou now carry it with more seriousness?
Have thou left thy lying and deceitful dealing? Thou have been a self-seeker,
and a flesh-pleaser, but can say, through the Grace of God, I have now
betaken my self to a self-denying-life; and do thou deny thy self in those
very things wherein thou were used most to seek thy self? Put thy self upon a
close and severe trial here; and know that if the strong hold be not battered
and broken, if thine old lusts do still hold their power in thee, if the old
sore be still issuing out, the old stream be still running its course; if thou
can not say, I have kept me from [mine] iniquity, or at least am sighting
more resolvedly against it; if thou still stickest where thou were wont to
stick (whatsoever flush thou seem to have of good affections, (whatsoever
confidence thou have, of thy good condition) it is a sure sign it is not so well
with thee. Look to what degree of success thou have attained in those things
wherein thy great difficulty lay; to such a degree of soul-prosperity thou have
attained, and no more.

Direct. 5. Measure your hopes of the Answer of your Prayers for the public,
by your experience of their speeding in your own particular cases. If thy sin
can stand before all thy prayers, thy Enemies, fears, and dangers are not like
to fall ever the sooner for such praying; what God may do upon the prayers of
others, thou know not; but nothing is like to go the better for thee. If
thou have run with the foot men (within thee) and these have been too hard for
thee, how will thou contend with them that ride upon horses? If thou can not
stop the muddy streams of thine own cistern, how will thou stand before the
swelling of Jordan? If thy prayers prevail so little to the setting thine own
heart, or thine own house in order, how can think they will do any thing
against the hosts of the uncircumcised; God hears not sinners; not only such
sinners as are in a state of sin, and totally alienated from the life of God,
but even such also, who though for the main, they have been once washed in the
blood of Christ, are again fallen into, and wallowing in the mud and mire of
anyone allowed sin; they are all like to be but miserable comforters in the day
of distress. Remember that Scripture mentioned before, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer.

But on the other side, if thou do obtain, if thou do prevail in thine own
personal case, this has good hope in it. It Is an argument that thy Prayers are
accepted with God; and if the Lord accept thee when thou prayest for thy self,
or for thine house, thence the greater hope will spring that he will accept
thee when thou prayest for his own house and people. And if he does accept thee
for them, he will either deliver them out of their distress, and thou shall
have the honor to be one of those for whose sake deliverance comes; or if he
should not grant thy request as to the public, yet he will not fail to give
thee thine own soul for a prey, though he do not give thee the lives of them
that sail with thee in the Ship.

And now you see the best way that is open to you, to help at a pinch, to save
the poor distressed Churches of God in this time of their need, such praying as
may have its fruit unto holiness in your selves; by this you may do much to
promote the holiness and happiness of the people; if any thing, this will do it.

Wherefore gird up your loins, and set in good earnest upon this seasonable and
mighty duty. Go into your closets, list up your hearts, draw forth your souls;
pour out your tears, weep in your prayer, weep over your own and the peoples
sins and fears, and bow your selves with your might before the Lord; this once
try what you can do, try the strength of Prayer. Pray all to rights within you,
and at home, and then seek and cry, and wrestle, and trust, and wait for the
Salvation of God to be revealed in due time upon his people.

Let us at length hear the conclusion of the whole matter, what shall be the
fruit of all this: What will you now do? If I should only ask, Who among you
will join in, and pray, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, the Church of the
living God? every one would readily answer, I will be for one, I for another,
God forbid I should hold my peace, I will pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Let
them prosper that love thee: Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within
thy Palaces. For my Brethren and companions sake I will pray, Peace be within
thee, because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

If it be asked further, and who will pray for the destruction of Babylon? O,
every one of us that have an heart for the peace of Jerusalem. Down with it,
down with it even to the Ground. Remember, O Lord, the Children of Edom, in the
day of Jerusalem, who said, Raze it, raze it even to the very soundation. O
Daughter of Babylon that art to be destroyed, happy let him be that rewards
thee as thou have served us.

But would you that your Prayers should be heard? Then arise out of your
places, and fall every man upon a personal Reformation. Down with your sin, and
out with the world; lift up Christ in your own hearts, if you would have
Antichrist fall in the Earth; let Christ have a name within you above every
name, and let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity,
from his own iniquity; seek not for Corn, and for wine, or for freedom to sit
down every man under his own Vine, and under his own fig tree, where none shall
make them afraid; but seek the Lord, that the Lord God may dwell among you, may
delight in you and be exalted by you, that you may indeed become the people of
his Holiness, and the people of his Prayer; seek to be made partakers of his
holiness, and follow after holiness, and so follow after that ye may obtain.
Let there be such a heart in you, and such an holy design heartily taken up,
and zealously pursued by you, and the Lord will certainly accept you, and
answer your prayers, and your profane enemies will then learn to take heed how
they again mock or boast themselves against the Prayers of the Saints. It was
reported of a great Churchman, that when several Ministers were turned out of
their places for nonconformity, he said in disdain, We Will turn them out, and
let them see if they can pray them in again. Once lift up [holy] hands to the
Lord, and God will give such Answer, that they will take heed of boasting again
against Prayer. And if yet they should take unto them the hardiness, to say
where is your God? Doubt not but in a little time you shall have this song put
into your mouths, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save
us; this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation.

But if it must suffice you to pray, and you will still go on to traverse your
old ways, suffering your sins and the world to hold the head of you, let not
such men think they shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Wherefore once again be exhorted to come to a point in this matter, and
determine what ye will do; If ye will not heartily come in, in this necessary
design of advancing in holiness, you may even stand aside, and sit out from
that of Prayer, for any good we can expect from you: But if you are resolved on
the former, and that with all imaginable seriousness, you will the more prosper
in the latter; let both go together in one, and thenceforth look for good speed
in either.

Well, shall this Decree immediately go forth? Say the word once, but let it be
with an unalterable resolution; at least, be advised to this (which I pray
forget not) from the day of your next solemn appearing before God in this duty
of Prayer for the public, let your Decree be dated; and if need be, let the
very day be written down, and so go, and let it be heedfully prosecuted; and
upon each return of this solemn service, let it be actually and expressly
renewed. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep this for ever in the
imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people and prepare their heart
unto thee.

FINIS.

