BASILIUS VALENTINUS, A BENEDICTINE MONK, OF NATURAL and SUPERNATURAL THINGS.

ALSO, Of the first Tincture, Root, and Spirit of METALS and MINERALS, how the
same are Conceived, Generated, Brought forth, Changed, and Augmented.

Whereunto is added, Friar Roger Bacon, of the Medicine or Tincture of
Antimony; Mr. John Isaac Holland, his Work of Saturn, and ALEX. Van SUCHTEN, of
the Secrets of Antimony.

Translated out of High Dutch by DANIEL CABLE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1671.

BASILIUS VALENTINUS, A BENEDICTINE MONK, OF NATURAL and SUPERNATURAL THINGS.

ALSO, Of the first Tincture, Root, and Spirit of METALS and MINERALS, how the
same are Conceived, Generated, Brought forth, Changed, and Augmented.

Translated out of High Dutch by DANIEL CABLE.

Whereunto is added ALEX. Van SUCHTEN OF THE SECRETS of ANTIMONY.

Translated out of High Dutch by D. C. a Person of great Skill in Chemistry.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

BASILIUS VALENTINUS, OF Natural and Supernatural Things.
CHAP. I.
BEcause I have at this present undertaken to write of the of the first
Tincture, the Root of Metals and Minerals, and to inform you of the Spiritual
Essence, how the Metals and Minerals are at first spiritually conceived and
born corporally; it will be necessary first of all to utter, and to acquaint
you by a speech, that all things consist of two parts, that is, Natural and
Supernatural; what is visible, tangible, and has form or shape, that is
natural; but what is intactible, without form, and spiritual, that is
supernatural, and must be apprehended and conceived by Faith; such is the
Creation, and especially the Eternity of God without end, immensible and
incomprehensible; for Nature cannot conceive nor apprehend it by its humane
reason: This is supernatural, what Reason cannot apprehend, but must be
conceived by Faith, this is a Divine matter, and belongs to Theology, which
judges Souls. Moreover, there appertains to supernatural things, the Angels of
the Lord, having clarified Bodies, doing that by the permission of their
Creator, which is impossible for any other Creature to do, their Works being
concealed from the Eyes of the World, and so likewise are the Works of the
Infernal Spirits and Devils unknown, which they do by the permission of the
most High God. But above all the great Works of God are found and acknowledged
to be supernatural, not to be scanned and comprehended by Humane Imaginations;
such is in especial the great Grace and Mercy of God which he bestows upon
Mankind out of his great Love, which indeed no man can apprehend or know, and
other great and wonderful works which he has manifested diverse manner of ways
by Christ our Savior and Redeemer, for the confirmation of his Omnipotence and
Glory: As when he raised Lazarus from the dead, Iairus his Daughter, the Ruler
of the Synagogue, and the Widows Son of Naim. He made the Dumb to speak, the
Deaf to hear, and the Blind to see, all which are supernatural, and Magnalia
Dei; so also was his Conception, Resurrection, Descension, and Ascension into
Heaven, too deep and mysterious for Nature; all which is only to be obtained by
Faith.

There belongs likewise to supernatural things, the taking of Enoch and (...)
into Heaven, the divine rapture of St. Paul in the Spirit into the third
Heaven. Moreover, many supernatural things are done by Imagination, Dreams, and
Visions; many wonders are done by the Imagination witness the speckled Sheep by
the speckled Rods laid in their watring places. God warned the wise men of the
East by an especial Dream not to return again to Herod; likewise their three
Persons, their three Gifts, Presents, or Offerings, and the supernatural Star,
have all their peculiar and mystical meaning.

Nor was that Dream which happened to Pilates Wife natural, who unjustly adjudged
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to death. The Vision of the Angels which
appeared to the Shepherds at the Birth of Christ, and to the Women at his
Sepulcher, who sought his Body where they had laid it, cannot be accounted
Natural.

There are many other supernatural things done at several times by the Prophets
and Saints; so was the voice of the Ass speaking to Balaam, contrary to the
common course of Nature; as also Joseph's Interpretation of Dreams. And so God
by his Angels preserves us oftentimes from infinite Evils, and delivers us out
of manifold Dangers, impossible for Nature to do.

All this and many others belong to Theology, and to Heaven, whereunto the Soul
is to have regard. Now follows the supernatural things of the visible Works of
God, as we see them in the Firmament; to wit, the Planets, Stars, and Elements,
which are above our Reason, only their Course and Motion is observed by
speculation and reckoning, which belongs to Astronomy; it is a visible but
incomprehensible Being, performing its operation in a Magnetic way, out of
which likewise diverse admirable things are found and observed, which are
altogether supernatural; understand it thus, that the Heaven operates in the
Earth, and the Earth affords a correspondence with the Heavenly. For the Earth
has also its seven Planets, which are operated and bred by the seven
Celestial, only by a spiritual Impression or Infusion, even as the Stars
operate all Minerals. This is done incomprehensibly and spiritually, and
therefore it is to be accounted supernatural, even as two Lovers, their persons
are visible, but their Love one to the other is invisible: Humane Bodies are
tangible and natural, but Love is invisible, spiritual, intangible and
supernatural, comparable to a Magnetic Attraction only; for the invisible Love
which is attracted unto it spiritually by the Imagination is, accomplished by
the desires and fruition. In like manner when the Heaven has a love to the
Earth, and the Earth has a Love, Inclination, and Affection toward Man, as
the great World to the lesser; for the lesser World is taken out of the
greater, and when the Earth by the desires of its invisible Imagination does
attract unto it self such a Love of the Heaven, there is thereby an Union of
the Superior and Inferior, as Man and Wife are accounted one Body together,
and after this Union the Earth is impregnated by the Infusion of the Heaven,
and begins to conceive and bring forth a Birth suitable to the Infusion, and
this Birth after its Conception is digested by the Elements, and brought to a
perfect Ripeness, and this is reckoned among the supernatural things; how the
supernatural Effence performs its operation in the natural.

Among the supernatural things are like wise reckoned all Magical and
Cabalistical Matters which depend thereon, arising out of the Light of true
knowledge, not those which proceed from Superstition, Conjuration, or unlawful
Exorcisme, such as the Sorcerers use; but I mean in this place such a Magic as
the Wise men had that came out of the East, who by Revelation from God, and by
true allowable Art judged rightly; or such an one, as those of old had before
us, usual among the Egyptians and Arabian, before Writing was found, they
noted, observed, and reserved by Signs, Characters and Hieroglyphics. Such
Blessings may be used, which Christ the Son of God used, as the Scripture
says; He took little Children, laid his hands upon them, and blessed them. But
whatsoever is contrary to God and his Word, ought justly to be rejected, and
not to be tolerated, because they are not Godly, but Diabolical. But those
Supernatural things which oppose not God and his Holy Word, belong unto Magic,
and do the Soul no prejudice.

As concerning Visions which Holy Men of God have often seen, it is reason they
should be reckoned among those things which are not Natural; for whatsoever man
speculates and comprehends by the Mind, is Supernatural; on the contrary,
whatsoever he can take, see, and hold is Natural.

Let us consider the third part of Natural and Supernatural things in Physic,
the Virtues and Powers of each; this Medicine of every thing must first be
driven out of a visible, tangible, natural Body, and be brought into a
spiritual, meliorated, supernatural operation, that the Spirit which at the
first was infused and given to the Body to live, might be released, that it
should operate and penetrate as a Spiritual Essence, and Fire, having its
Vent-holes left that it might burn and have no opposition, which might
suffocate, suppress, or hinder the burning Life; whereas otherwise, if the
separation of the Soul and Spirit from the Body should not first be done, there
could not succeed any operation either effectual, profitable, or necessary; for
whatsoever is visible, to be felt, and inseparably in a Body, that is Natural
and Corporal; but so soon as there is a separation, the living departs from the
dead, gaining its perfect operation, and the natural Body being separated, the
spiritual Essence is free to penetrate, becoming a spiritual and supernatural
Medicine. In brief, all things (none excepted) which we can touch and handle,
are natural, but they must be made supernatural, if you would prepare them for
Physic; for the supernatural only has a living power in it to operate, the
natural has only a dead tangible Form. For when Adam was made, he was dead,
having no life of any virtue, but so soon as the operative quickening Spirit
came to him, then he manifested his living virtue and power by supernatural
admiration, so that in every thing there is the natural and supernatural united
in one, and bound together in their habitation, that every thing might be
perfect; for all created things in the world are some supernatural, only what
concerns the Soul and spiritual matters, and some are natural and supernatural,
with what concerns the Elements and Firmament, as likewise the Minerals,
Vegetables, and Animals, which is known and found, when they are separated one
from the other, that the Soul departs out of the Body, and the Spirit forsakes
its Soul, leaving the Body an empty habitation.

Moreover, you must understand and consider, that the great and little World
are made and formed of one first Matter, by an unsearchable Almighty Essence,
at that time in the beginning, when the Spirit of God moved upon the Water, who
was from Eternity without beginning. The great World, as Heaven and Earth, was
first, then was Man, the Little World, taken out of the greater; the Water was
separated from the Earth, the Water was the Matter whereon the everlasting
Spirit of God moved; the Little World was formed of the noblest Earth, as its
Quintessence, by the Aquosity which yet was in the Earth, and all was only
Natural; but after the breathing in of the Divine heating Breath, immediately
the Supernatural was added; so then the Natural and Supernatural were knit and
united. The great World is perishable, yet there will be a New Earth or World;
the Little World is Eternal, the Great, Created, Dissoluble world will again be
brought to nothing, but the little world will be clarified by the Spirit of
God, because he possesses it, making a Celestial clarified water out of the
aforesaid Earthly water; then it will follow, that the first matter will be
turned into the last, and the last matter will become the first. Now the reason
why the great world is perishable, is this, that the Spirit of God has not his
dwelling or habitation in the great world, but in the little world; for Man is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, if he do not wilfully defile himself, adhering to
the Hellish Fire, which makes a breach and difference. For he remains in the
little world, which he formed after his own similitude, and made him a
consecrated Temple; otherwise there is every thing in the little world which is
to be found in the great, as Heaven and Earth, with the Elements, and what
depends thereon, or appertains thereunto.

We find also that in the first Creation, which was performed of nothing, three
things arose; to wit, a Soulish, Spiritual, Invisible Essence, which
represented a Mercurial Water, a Sulphurous Vapor, and a Terrene Salt; these
three gave a complete and perfect, a tangible and formal Body to all things
wherein especially all the four Elements are contained, as I have already
mentioned in my Writing where I treat of the Microcosme.

But that I may yet give a little more information of Natural and Supernatural
things, as well spiritual as corporal: We find that the Canaanitish Woman was
cured of her Flux of Blood which held her twelve years, only by a bare touch,
when she touched the Garment of the Son of God, her Disease being natural, but
the Medicine or Cure was Supernatural, because by her Faith she gained help
from the Lord Christ.

Likewise we have an excellent, high and supernatural Miracle in the three
Children, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who were cast into the fiery
Furnace, by the Command of King Nebuchadnezzar, yet by God wonderfully
delivered, and not consumed, Dan. 3.

So also the Confusion of Tongues, and Infusion of diverse Speeches at the
foolish structure of the Tower of Babel, which should have reached up to
Heaven, is esteemed for a Supernatural Miracle. And so was that a Supernatural
Sign, when the Children of Israel did lap water as Dogs do, when a small Number
at Gods Command, fought against the Midianites, Judge. 7. 6. So the sending of
the Dove by Noah out of the Ark, when she brought an Olive Branch in her Bill,
a Sign of Mercy, and a Divine Supernatural Message.

When the Holy man of God Moses struck the Rock with his Rod, that the hard
Rock yielded Water, is beyond humane Reason; so was the turning of the salt
water into sweet and drinkable, supernatural. As also the dry passage of the
Children of Israel through the Red Sea; and the Budding of Aarons Rod, are all
supernatural. In brief, the Resurrection of Christ the Eternal Son of God out
of the grave, for all the Tombstone, his appearing to the two men going to
Emas, his revealing himself to his Disciples when the Door was locked, are all
Divine and Supernatural. Diverse Examples more might be recited out of Divine
Writ, which for Brevities sake I omit.

Among Supernatural things are accounted all Mineral Signs, as the Appearance
of Spirits, Representations, Pigmies appearing diversely and numerously, giving
notice of good or bad Luck, Ruin or Riches; so also those Figures, Shapes, or
other works found in the Ores of Metals, as of Men, Fishes, and other
Creatures, so formed and represented by the imagination of the three first
Principles, then ripened and fully digested by the Earth, and other Elements.
Hereunto appertain the Monsters of the Earth, and such things as are found
within the Earth at certain times of a wonderful form and shape, but not at all
to be found when that time is past, yet appear again and are to be found at
some other time.

Hereunto also belong all Visions and Appearances performed by Water, Glasses,
Cristal, or other means, as also those done by Sigils and Characters, which yet
are so various, some being only Natural, yet affording Supernatural appearances
or sights; but the others which are performed by Conjurations, are neither
Natural nor Supernatural, but Diabolical, belonging unto Sorcery, and are
prohibited all good Christians; so likewise all those Means which oppose Holy
Writ, Gods Word and Commandments, are to be rejected and refuted by true
Natural Cabalists; I say this, because a certain distinction and sure order
ought to be found of the Natural, Supernatural, Unnatural things.

In like manner there appertains unto Supernatural things, all the
Water-Spirits, as the Sirens, Succubi, and other Water-Nymphs, with their
Relations, as likewise the Terrestrial Spirits, and those which inhabit the
Air, who sometimes are heard, seen, or perceived, sometimes foretelling Death
or other Disasters, sometimes they discover by their Apparition Riches and good
Fortune in certain places, and the Fiery Spirits appertain here also, which
appear in a fiery shape, or like a burning Light; all these are Spirits having
untangible Bodies, yet are they not such Spirits as the right Hellish Spirits,
who hunt after men's Souls as an Eternal Jewel, even as the Infernal Lucifer,
the Devil and his Dependents do, who were ejected with him; but these are such
Spirits which are above Nature, set before Men for admiration, and are only
maintained by the Elements, whereby they are nourished and fed; but when this
Earthly world shall cease, they also shall decay and vanish with it, because
they have no Souls to be saved. I will say no more hereof at present, but refer
the opening of such Circumstances more at large to another opportunity, where I
shall particularly treat of Visions and spiritual Appearances, which are
esteemed Unnatural by most part of the World, yet truly are Natural, but they
are found to be Supernatural in their Operations and wonderful Qualities.

That I may further confirm my Assertion, I say likewise, that there are many
things to be found in Physic, which yield and manifest their workings
supernaturally in a Magnetical way, operating only by an attractive spiritual
power which is attracted to it by the Air; for the Air is the Medium between
the Physic and the Hurt or Distemper, even as the Magnet ever does direct and
turn it self toward its Polestar, though the star be many thousand Miles
distant from it, yet the spiritual operation and sympathy between them is so
prevalent, that it is attracted together at so vast a distance by the Medium or
middle Band of the Air; but because this attractive power is only known unto
people in general, or as a thing common, it is therefore become customary, and
is so esteemed, there being no notice taken of any further Secret whence this
operative Faculty has its Source or Original: In like manner Hurts and
Distempers may be healed and cured, though the Patient and Physician be very
far distant one from the other; not by Charms, Exorcismes, or other unlawful
prohibited means, which are opposite to God and Nature, but by such means
wherein the attractive Magnetic Virtue lies to accomplish it. As when a
wounded person goes a Journey, leaving the Weapon wherewith he was wounded, or
else of his Blood which issued out of the wound with his Physician, wherewith
he proceeds rightly and by orderly means, as is usual in dressing a wound,
without all doubt he shall be absolutely cured, this is no Witchcraft, but the
cure is performed only by the attractive power of the Medicine, which is
carried to the Sore by the means of the Air, wherewith it is mundified, that it
may perform the Spiritual Operation.

Some will think these hard sayings, and impossible in Nature, and many will
say it is contrary to Nature, whereby many will be excited to dispute it, and
raise Arguments one opposite to the other, whether it be Natural or no, whether
it be possible or no, or whether it be Sorcery: I will thus resolve them, that
this Cure is natural, but as it operates it is supernatural and spiritual,
because it is performed merely by an attractive incomprehensible means, and
that this manner of Cure is no Sorcery: I affirm it hereby, that it is not mixed
or accompanied with any Sorcery, nor with any other unnatural Means, contrary
to God the Creator, or his holy and saving Word. But it is only Natural, out of
its supernatural, invisible, incomprehensible, spiritual, and attractive power,
which received its Original from the Sydereal, and performs its Operation by
the Elements.

Lastly, I likewise approve this Cure to be no Sorcery, because the Devil
rather delights in all Mischief to Mankind, than to assist any manner of way
for their benefit, which yet is impossible for him to do without Gods
permission. Much more might be written of this Magnetic Form, but I choose
rather to be silent; referring it till I come to treat of the Natural Miracles
of the World.

The grosser sort of foolish Wits, who imagine themselves to be wise
Philosophers, and all others who are not in their perfect senses, know no
difference in this case, but the wise and truly discreet well know how to
distinguish betwixt that which is natural and that which is supernatural.

For do but observe this comparison, to be proved by a gross Example, how many
Creatures are there which dye absolutely in the water, so that no life is left
therein, but so soon as the pleasant Summer appears, the natural heat gives a
new life, and the Body quite restored in the same substance as it was before in
its living Motion; even as an Herb, which dies in the Winter, but in the Spring
it manifests it self anew. The death of these things is to be esteemed natural,
but the return of a new life in its knowledge is supernatural; but because we
are accustomed to all these things, the least part of us consider what is
worthy of further Meditation in this case, letting both natural and
supernatural go away together.

Most people overpass, that natural custom which yet is supernatural, as also
monstrous Births, and those that bring signs and marks with them into the
world; which may all be natural, but manifest themselves supernaturally, by the
imagination which caused them: These supernatural forms and customs, the Mother
of the Child caused by intervening thoughts, which unexpectedly happened to
her, as it were by accident: Even as we often see and find, that many Men
naturally are born with some gestures, which he can never leave, though he
endeavor with all his might to do it. The natural gestures of these Men are
natural, but the conception in the Womb which caused the imagination of these
things is supernatural, and subject to what the Heaven imprints.

To conclude: I say, that none can defend the supernatural not to be true by
good grounds and reasons, except he have learned to know the natural, which
has its original, and gained its shape from the supernatural; after he has
learned this, he may evidence it by sure proofs, that he will be conqueror
over those, who will not believe what is supernatural; and he will convince the
opinions of those who dispute of natural things, and yet know not the grounds,
saving only a bare pretense, much talk, tedious and unprofitable Debates.

CHAP. II. Of the first Tincture and Roots of Metals.
BUt now to come to my intent, and by Gods permission to accomplish the same. I
undertake to certify of the first Tincture, Root, and Generation of Metals and
Minerals: Know that the first Tincture and Root of all Metals, is likewise a
supernatural, flying, fiery Spirit; which preserves it self in the Air, seeking
its habitation naturally in the Earth and Water, wherein it can rest and
operate: This Spirit is found in all Metals, more abundant in other Metals than
in Gold, because Gold, by reason of its well digested, ripened, and fixed body,
is tight, close, and compact, and therefore no more can enter into its body
than is just requisite; but the other Metals have not such fixed bodies, for
their pores are open, and far extenuated, therefore the Tincture Spirit can the
more abundantly pass thorough and possess them. But because the bodies of the
other Metals are inconstant, the Tincture cannot remain with those inconstant
bodies, but must depart. And whereas the Tincture of Gold is found in none more
plentiful than in Mars and Venus, as Man and Wife, their bodies therefore are
destroyed, and the tinging Spirit taken out of them, which makes Gold sanguin,
being first opened and prepared, and by their food and drink it becomes
volatile, wherefore this volatile Gold being satisfied with its food and drink,
assumes its own blood to it self, dries it up by its own internal heat, by the
help and assistance of the vaporous fire, and there is a Conquest again, which
is quite fixed, makes the highest Constancy, that the Gold becomes an
over-fix'd Medicine, by reason of abundance of Blood it yields no Body, except
another superfluous Body be again put to it, wherein the abounding fixed blood
may disperse it self; this additional Metallic Body, by reason of the great
heat of the fixed Lions blood, is penetrated as by fire, and purged from all
impurity, and forthwith thoroughly digested to a perfect ripeness and fixedness:
That first of all the Servant brings the Master unto Riches, because the Master
before could not spare any of his Clothes to give away, seeing that Nature had
lent and endowed him with one Noble Suit only; on the other side, the King,
when he has received his Aides and Contributions from his Subjects, can then
distribute possessions, and permanent Liveries, that the Lord and Servant may
remain both together; and do not think it strange, that the King needs to
borrow of his Subjects, because their Bodies are unfix'd and inconstant, for
they receive much, and yet can keep but little Credit: But if the King can
participate thereof, he will the better overcome heat and Frost, than the
Leprous Metals can; and henceforth by this Receipt he becomes particularly a
Dominator and Conqueror of all other, with a great Victory and triumph of
Riches and of Health to long Life. I hope you have from the beginning
sufficiently understood concerning this Natural and Supernatural Advice, and
the first tinging Root of Metals and Minerals, whereon the Cornerstone is
placed, and where the true Rock is grounded in its kind, wherein Nature has
placed and buried her secret and deeply concealed Gifts; to wit, in the fiery
tinged Spirits, which Colors they gained out of the starry Heaven by the
operation of the Elements; and they can moreover tinge and fix that which
before was not tinged and unfix'd, seeing that Luna wants the Robe of the
Golden Crown, together with the fixedness, as likewise Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mercury do; and although Mars and Venu's need not this Raiment, but can
communicate it to the other five, yet I say, that they can perform nothing to
attain any thing with wealth without the Lion, because they are not
sufficiently accomodated with a fixedness of their Mercury, and a gentleness of
their Salt, except it be that the Lion overcome them, that they have triumphed
on both parts, and gained a remarkable Melioration altogether; this Melioration
lies concealed in their Signate star, or Magnet, out of which all Metals have
themselves received their Gifts.

Now I will proceed, and particularly step to the Birth and Generation, how the
Archaeus manifests its power; pouring it forth, and daily reveals it, whereby
all Metallic and Mineral Forms are visibly proposed, and made formal,
tangible, and corporal by the Mineral, intangible, flying, fiery Spirits:
Understand therefore further, and observe with diligence and care, that by
forgetfulness you let not that which is weighty pass away, nor yet neglect or
overlook that which is most profitable, and on the contrary observe the bare
words at length, passing over the Truth; for what I write herein, is
undoubtedly held and esteemed that the highest is undoubtedly by many esteemed
for the lowest, and the lowest for the highest Mystery, and is so to be reputed.

Now you must first know, that all Metals and Minerals of the Earth have one
only Matter and Mother, whereby in general they all received Conception,
gaining a complete and corporal Birth. This Matter which comes out of the
Center, first of all divides it self into three parts, to procure one corporal
or certain form of each Metal. These three parts are only fed in the Earth by
the Elements, out of their Bodies, and nourished till they be perfect. But the
Matter which comes out of the Center is imagined by the Stars, operated by the
Elements, and formed by the Earth: It is a Matter to be known, and the true
Mother of Metals and Minerals: It is such a Matter and Mother, whereof Man
himself is conceived, born, nourished, and made corporal: It may be compared to
the middle World, for what is in the great World is in the little World, and
what is in the little World is also in the greater; and what is jointly in the
great and little World is likewise found in the middle World, which unites and
conjoins the great and little world; it is a Soul which unites and copulates
the Spirit with the Body. This Soul is compared unto water, and it is a right
true water, but not so that it wets as other water does, but it is a Celestial
water, dry, found in a Metallic Liquorish substance; it is a Soulish water,
which loves all Spirits, and unites them with their Bodies, conducting them to
a complete Life; therefore it is reasonably found out, and evidently proved,
that Water is the Mother of all Metals, which are heated by the warm aerial
Fire, or Spirit of Sulphur, which by its digestion makes the Earthly Body
lively, wherein the Salt is evidently found, which preserves from putrefaction,
so that nothing might be consumed by Corruption. At the beginning and birth
Quicksilver is first operated, which stands yet open with a subtle
coagulation, because little Salt is imparted to it, whereby he manifests a more
spiritual than corporal Body; but all the other Metals which follow out of its
Essence, and have more Salt, whereby they become corporal, do all follow this;
so that I now begin first with the Spirit of Mercury.

CHAP. III. Of the Spirit of Mercury.
THough I have a peculiar Style in writing, which will seem strange unto many,
causing strange Thoughts and Fancies in their Brains, yet there is reason
enough for my so doing; I say enough, that I may remain by my own experience,
not esteeming much of others prating, because it is concealed in my knowledge,
Seeing having always the pre-eminence before Hearing, and Reason has the
praise before Folly: Wherefore I now say, that all visible, tangible things are
made of the Spirit of Mercury, which excels all earthly things of the whole
world, all things being made out of it, having their Offspring only from it;
for all is found therein which can perform all whatsoever the Artist desires to
find; It is the beginning to operate Metals, when it is become a spiritual
Essence, which is mere Air flying to and fro without wings; it is a moving
wind, which after it is expelled its dwelling by Vulcan, it is driven into its
Chaos, where it again enters, and resolves it self into the Elements, where it
is elevated and attracted by the Sydereal Stars after a Magnetical manner unto
themselves, out of love, whence he proceeded before, and was operated, because
it affects its like again, and attracts it to it. But if this Spirit of Mercury
can be caught, and made corporal, it resolves into a Body, and becomes a pure,
clear, transparent water, which is the true spiritual water, and the first
Mercurial Root of the Minerals and Metals, spiritual, intangible,
incombustible, without any mixture of earthly aquosity; it is that Celestial
water, whereof very much has been written; for by this Spirit of Mercury all
Metals, may if need require, be broken, opened, and resolved into their first
Matter, without Corrosive; it renews the age of Man or Beast, even as the
Eagles; it consumes all evil, and conducts a long Age to long Life. This Spirit
of Mercury is the Master-Key of my Second Key, whereof I wrote in the
beginning; wherefore I will call; Come ye Blessed of the Lord, be anointed, and
refreshed with water, and embalm your Bodies, that they may not putrefie or
stink; for this Celestial Water is the beginning, the Oil, and the means,
seeing it burns not, because it is made of a spiritual Sulphur; the Salt Balsam
is corporal, which is united with the Water by the Oil, whereof I will
afterward treat more at large, when I shall write of them, and mention them.

And that I may further declare what is the Essence, Matter and Form of the
Spirit of Mercury, I say, that its Essence is blessed, its Matter spiritual,
and its form earthly, which yet must be understood by an incomprehensible way;
these are indeed harsh Expressions, many will think, thy Proposals are all
vain, strange Effusions, raising wonderful Imaginations, and true it is that
they are strange, and require strange people to understand these Sayings; it is
not written for Peasants, how they should grease Cart-wheels, nor is it written
unto those who have no knowledge of the Art, though they be never so learned,
or think themselves so; for I only account them Learned, who next unto Gods
Word, learn to know Earthly things, which must be pondered and judged by the
Understanding, founded upon a true Knwledge, to distinguish Light from
Darkness, who choose that which is good, and reject the evil.

It is needless for you to know what the beginning of this Spirit of Mercury
requires, because it can in no wise help nor advantage you, only take notice of
this, that its beginning is supernatural, out of the Celestial, Sydereal and
Elementary, bestowed on it from the beginning of the first Creation, that it
may enter further into an Earthly Substance. But because this is necessary
which has been declared to you, leave the Celestial to the Soul, apprehend it
by Faith, and let the Sydereal likewise alone, because these Sydereal
Impressions are invisible and intangible, the Elements have already brought
forth the Spirit perfect into the world by the Nutriment, therefore let that
alone likewise; for man cannot make the Elements, but only the Creator, and
remain by thy made Spirit which is already formal and unformal, tangible and
intangible, and yet is presented visibly. So have you enough of the first
Matter, out of which all Metals and Minerals grow, and is one only thing, and
such a matter which unites it self with the Sulphur in the following Chapter,
and enters into a Coagulation with the Salt of the fifth Chapter, that it may
be one Body, and a perfect Medicine of all Metals, not only to bring forth in
the Earth at the beginning, as in the great World, but also by help of the
vaporous Body to transmute and change, together with the augmentation in the
lesser World: Let not this seem strange to you, seeing the Most High has
permitted, and Nature undertaken it.

Many will not believe this, esteeming it impossible, despise and vilify these
Mysteries, which they understand not in the least, they may remain Fools and
Idiots till an illumination follows, which cannot be without Gods Will, but
remains till the time predestinate. But wise and discreet, men who have truly
shed the sweat of their Brows, will be my sufficient witnesses, and confirm the
Truth, and indeed believe and hold for a truth all that which I write in this
case, as true as Heaven and Hell are preordained, and proposed as Rewards of
good and evil to the Elect and Reprobate. Now I write not only with my hands,
but my Mind, Will and heart constrain me to it: Those who are highly conceited,
illuminated, and world-wise, hate, envy, scandalize, defame and persecute this
Mystery to the utmost Rind, or innermost Kernel, which has its beginning out
of the Center; but I know assuredly, there will come a time, when my Marrow is
wasted, and my Bones dried up, that some will take my part heartily, after I am
in the Pit; and if God would permit it, they would willingly raise me from the
dead; but that cannot be; wherefore I have left them my Writings, that their
Faith and Hope may have a Seal of Certainty and Truth, to testify of me what
my last Will and Testament was, which I ordained for the poor, and all the
Lovers of Mysteries, though it did not behove me to have wrote so much, yet I
could not refrain without prejudice to my Soul, but to drive a Light or Flash
through a Cloud, that the Day might be observed, and the dark Night, thick and
gloomy, rainy Weather expelled.

Now how the Archaeus operates further by the Spirit of Mercury in the Earth,
or Veins of the Earth, take this Advice, that after the spiritual Seed is
formed by the impression of the Stars from above, and fed by the Elements, it
is a Seed, and turns it self into a Mercurial Water, as first of all the great
World was made of nothing, for when the Spirit moved upon the Water, the
Celestial Heat must needs raise a Life in the cold watrish and earthly
Creatures; in the great World it was Gods Power, and the Operation of the
Celestial Lights; in the little World it is likewise Gods Power, and the
Operation to work into the Earth by his Divine and Holy Breath. Moreover the
Almighty gave and Ordained means to accomplish it, that one Creature had
obtained power to operate in the other, and the one to help and assist the
other, to perform and fulfill all the Works of the Lord; and so an influence was
permitted the Earth to bring forth by the Lights of Heaven, as also an internal
Heat, to warm and digest that which was too cold for the Earth, by reason of
its humidity, as unto every Creature a peculiar fashion according to its kind;
so that a subtle sulphurous Vapor, is stired up by the Starry Heaven, not the
common, but another more clarified and pure Vapor, distinct from others, which
unites it self with the Mercurial Substance; by whose warm property, in process
of time, the superfluous Moisture is dried up, and then when the soulish
property comes to it, which gives a preservation to the Body and Balsam,
operating first into the Earth by a spiritual and sydereal iufluence, then are
Metals generated of it, as it pleases the Mixture of the three Principles, the
Body being formed according as it assumes unto it the greatest part of those
three. But if the Spirit of Mercury be intended and qualified from above upon
Animals, it becomes an Animal Substance; if it goes upon Vegetables by order,
it becomes a Vegetable Work; but if, by reason of its infused nature, it fall
on Minerals, it becomes Minerals and Metals, yet each one has its distinction
as they are wrought, the Animals for themselves, the Vegetables on another
manner and form by themselves, and so likewise the Minerals, each one a several
way, whereof to write particularly would be too tedious, and yield large and
various Narrations.

Many one may here demand and not without cause, how such a Spirit of Mercury
may be procured, how to be made, and after what manner it is to be prepared to
expel Diseases, and change all the kinds of the meaner and baser Metals, as if
they were born in a little world, by transmutation and augmentation of their
Seed; many expect this with impatience. I answer without concealing any thing,
but will truly discover as much as is permitted me by Gods Command, in manner
and form following.

In the Name of the Lord, Take a Red Quicksilver Ore which is like unto
Sinople (or Vermilion) and the best Gold Ore you can get; grind of each a like
quantity both together, before they partake of any fire, pour an Oil of
Mercury upon it made per se, of common, purified and sublimed Quicksilver, set
it a month to digest, you have an Extract rather Celestial than Terrestrial;
distill this Extract gently, as in Balneum Mariae, the Phlegm ascends over, the
Oil remaining at bottom, being heavy, which in a moment receives all Metals
into it; pour thrice as much Spirit of Wine to it, circulate it in a Pelican,
till it be as red as Blood, and become so sweet that nothing may compare with
it; decant the Spirit of Wine to a Liquidness, pour fresh Spirit of Wine upon
it, this reiterate so often, till the Matter be exceeding sweet, and
transparent red as a a Ruby, then put all together, pour that which ascended
over upon white calcined Tartar, and distill, it strongly in Ashes, the Spirit
of Wine remains behind with the Tartar, but the Spirit of Mercury ascends over.
If this Spirit of Mercury be mixed with the Spirit of Sulphur, together with its
Salt, and so brought over jointly together, that they can never be separated,
you have such a work which if it come over, and it get its ferment with Gold by
solution according to a just measure and time appointed, and be brought to a
perfect ripeness, unto the Plusquam perfection, nothing may compare therewith,
for prevention of Diseases, and poverty, and to a rich excessive recreation of
the Body and Goods. This is the way to obtain the Spirit of Mercury, which I
have revealed as far as it is permitted me to do, by the Supremest Emperor;
the Manual Operations are found in the Work which I have revealed; you must
wisely observe, that you may not endure a Bath in Hell for me, by my true
admonition to thee, forasmuch as a true opening of the Door which leads to the
Royal Palace, is performed but with one Key, which cures all Diseases, be it
Dropsy, Consumption, Gout, Stone, Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Leprosy, or
howsoever called in general: This Medicine likewise cures all kinds of the
French Pox, and all old Sores of long standing, be it Wolf, Noli me tangere,
Letter, Ring-worm, Cancer, Fistula, and corroding hollow Sores; all which I
have declared, and concealed nothing. Last of all, observe, that you do not
discover too much, or no more, because all Art has its Original or Source out
of the Spirit of Mercury, which is refreshed and raised to Life by the
spiritual Sulphur, that it becomes Celestial, and with and by the Salt they are
made corporal and formal; but the beginning of the Soul, of the Spirit, and of
the Body, let it be and remain a Magnet, even as it is, and can be acknowledged
to be nothing else. This is the sum in brief, that without the Spirit of
Mercury, which is the only true Key, you can never make Corporal Gold potable,
nor the Philosophers Stone. Let it remain by this Conclusion, be silent; for I
my self will at present say no more, because Silence is enjoined thee and me by
the orderly Judge, recommending the Execution and further, Search thereof to
another, who has not as yet reduced the Matter into a right Order.

CHAP. IV. Of the Spirit of Copper.
THE Star of Venus is very difficult, and not well to be calculated, as all
Mathematicians and Astronomers will bear me witness; for its course is found to
be otherwise than that of the other six Planets, and therefore its Birth is
otherwise; for the Birth of Venus possesses the First Table, after Mercury, as
for what concerns the Generation of Metals. Mercury makes active, but Venus
provokes, giving Lust and Desire, together with the Beauty which gave
occasionth ereunto; though I am accounted no Astronomer, nor do I give my self
out for one, who knows to calculate the Course of the Heavens; for I should
spend my time in my Cell in Prayer, but that the spare hours after my Devotion
is ended, may not be spent in vain, I have ordered and proposed it as my aim
and intent to exercise my self, and to spend those hours in the knowledge of
Natural things. So likewise it is not well to be reckoned what arises, grows or
proceeds from Venus, or whence she arose, grew, or proceeded; for she is
superfluously clothed more than she needs, and yet must want that which she
needs most of all in her Constancy.

But you must be advertised, that Venus is clothed with a Celestial Sulphur,
which far surpasses the brightness of the Sun; for there is more and more
abundant Sulphur in her than in Gold; but it requires a knowledge what the
Matter of that Gold Sulphur may be, which is, and rules so plentifully in
Copper, and whereof I make so great a Cry: know then that it is likewise a
flying very hot Spirit, which can pass through and penetrate, as also ripen and
digest all things, as the imperfect Metals into perfect, which the inexpert
will not believe. And here a Question presents it self at hand; How the Spirit
of Copper can make other imperfect Metals perfect, and make them ripe, whereas
in its own Body it is imperfect and inconstant? For Answer, I say as I have
often said, that this Spirit cannot possess or inhabit a permanent Body in
Copper; for when the habitation is burnt by Fire, the Spirit goes away with it,
and must with impatience leave its Lodging, for it dwells therein as a
Sojourner; but it has protection in the permanent fixed Body of Gold, whence
no man can expel it, without the Warrant of an especial Judge; for it is put
into the inheritance as an Heir, and taken Root by her permanent Body, that she
cannot easily be expelled. The Tincture which Venus has obtained, is in like
manner found in Mars, more powerful, high and Noble; for Mars is the Man, and
Venus the Woman, which I speak more of, seeing I write of them. This Tincture
is delivered in Verdigreece, and likewise it is found in Vitriol, as in a
Mineral whereof a peculiar Book might be wrote. In all these things a
combustible Sulphur is found, and yet a Sulphur which is incombustible, this is
a strange thing, one is a white Sulphur, the other is red in the operative
generation; but the true Sulphur is incombustible, for it is a pure true
Spirit, whereof an incombustible Oil is prepared, and it is the same Sulphur
which is made out of one Root from the Gold-Sulphur.

I open many Mysteries, which ought not to be; but what should I do? to conceal
all is not answerable, but a measure is good in all things, as you may observe
in my last Advice of protestation; forget not my desire therein.

This Sulphur may well be called the Sulphur of the Wise; for all Wisdom is
found therein, unto the Mercurial Spirit which excels it, which together with
the Salt of Mars must be put together by a spiritual Conjunction, that three
may come into one understanding, and be advanced to equal operations. This
spiritual Sulphur proceeds in the same manner and form out of the upper Region,
as does the Spirit of Mercury, but in another manner and kind, whereby the
Stars manifest a separation in fixed and unfix'd, in colored and uncolour'd
things.

The Tincture consists only in the Spirit of Copper, and most of all in that of
his Bedfellow; it is a mere Vapor, stinking and ill-sented in its beginning;
this Mist must be dissolved in the manner of a Liquor, that the stinking,
incombustible Oil may be prepared thereof; but yet it must have and take its
beginning out of Mars; this Oil unites freely with the Spirit of Mercury,
assuming all Metallic Bodies speedily unto them, if they be first prepared in
all points as I have advised in my Keys.

I observe not the Order of the Planets, and not without just grounds; for I
observe the order of their Birth, by which I am directed; for because Venus
has much Sulphur, she is sooner digested and ripened together with Mars,
before other Metals; but because unconstant Mercury showed them both too little
assistance, therefore no room is left him to work harder, by reason of the
superfluous Sulphur, so that they could obtain no melioration of their unfixt
Bodies. Now I will reveal a Secret unto thee, that Gold, Copper, and Iron have
one Sulphur, one Tincture, and one Matter of their Color; this Matter of the
Tincture is a Spirit, a Mist and Fume, as aforesaid, which can penetrate and
pass through all Bodies, if you can take it, and acuate it by the Spirit which
is in the Salt of Mars, and then conjoin the Spirit of Mercury therewith in a
just weight, purging them from all impurity, that they be pleasant and well
sented, without all Corrosives, you have then such a Medicine, whereunto none
in the world may compare, being fermented with the bright shining Sun, you have
made an entrance penetrating to work, and to transmute all Metals.

O Eternal Wisdom from the beginning! how shall we thank thee for such great
Mysteries, which the Children of Men do no ways regard, but are despised by
the greater number, to know what thou have concealed in Nature, which they see
before their Eyes, and know it not; they have it in their Hands, and comprehend
it not; they deal with it, and know not what they have, nor what they do,
because the Internal is concealed. I will yet reveal this unto thee in truth,
and by the Love of God, that the root of the Philosophical Sulphur, which is a
Celestial Spirit, is found with the root of the spiritual supernatural Mercury,
as also the beginning of the spiritual Salt, are in one, and found in one
Matter, out of which the Stone is made, which was before me, and not in many
things, though all Philosphers speak as if the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt were
each one a part by themselves and distinct, that the Mercury is found in one,
the Sulphur in another, and the Salt in a third; yet I tell you, this is only
to be understood of their superfiuity, which is found to abound most in each,
and may be used and prepared diverse ways particularly with profit, both for
Physic and transmutation of Metals; but the Universal, which is the supreamest
Treasure of Earthly Wisdom, and of all the three Principles, is one only thing,
and is founded and extracted out of one only thing, which can make all Metals
into one, it is the true Spirit of Mercury, and Soul of Sulphur, together with
the spiritual Salt, united together, enclosed under one Heaven, and dwelling in
one Body, it is the Dragon and the Eagle, the King and the Lion, the Spirit and
the Body, which must tinge the Body of Gold ^o a Medtcine, that it may gain
power plentifully to tinge his other Companions.

O thou blessed Medicine given by God thy Creator! O thou Celestial Magnet of
great attractive Love! O thou valid substance of Metals, how great is thy
power, how uninventive is thy virtue, how durable is thy constancy? happy is
that man on Earth who knows thy Light in truth, which all the world takes no
notice of; he shall not see poverty, no Disease shall touch him, nor no
sickness hurt him, till the appointed time of death, and till the last hour
predestined for him by his Heavenly King. It is impossible for all the
tongues of Men to utter the Wisdom which is laid in this Treasure of the
Fountain, all Orators must be silent and ashamed at it, yea terrified and not
able to speak a word, when they shall behold and discern this supernatural
Glory, and I my self am afraid when I consider that I have discovered too much.
But I hope to prevail with God by Prayer, that he will not charge it on me as a
deadly Sin, because I began the Work in his Fear, obtained it by his Grace, and
revealed it for his Glory.

O thou holy everlasting Trinity! I praise, honor, and magnify thee with
Heart and Mouth, that thou have revealed unto me the great wisdom of this
earthly World, next unto thy Divine Word, whereby I have known thy. Almighty
Power, and supernatural Wonders, which Man will not discern; I heartily beseech
thee to give me more understanding and wisdom, that I may bestow the use and
profit thereof with a continual Sacrifice of Praise before thee, unto the
Christian-like Love of my Neighbor, and to my own welfare both spiritual and
corporal, in power and virtue, that thy Name may be made glorious, honored,
and praised, for all thy Works in Heaven and Earth; and that my Enemies may
know, that thou art the Lord full of eternal Wonders, that they may repent and
be converted, and not be drowned in the falsehood of Darkness. God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost help me, and all of us, from his heavenly Throne, exalted
above all Glory, Might, and Majesty, whose Wisdom has neither beginning nor
end, and before whom all Celestial, Earthly, and Hellish Creatures must tremble
with fear, to him be Glory forever, Amen.

O Seraphin! O Cherubin! how great are thy Wonders and Actions, look graciously
upon thy servant, and be entreated to be pacified that he has manifested this.

The Reader must moreover know concerning the Generation of Copper, and
observe, that it is generated of much Sulphur, but its Mercury and Salt are in
an equality, for there is found to be no more or less of the one than of the
other, seeing then that the Sulphur in quantity excels the Mercury and the
Salt, thence arises a great colored redness, which possesses the Metal, that
the Mercury cannot perform its fixation, that a fixed Body should be generated
thereof. Observe and understand it so of Copper, that the form of Venus Body is
so stated as that of a Tree, which abounds in Rosen, as the Larch Tree, the
Firr, the Pine, Deal Tree, and other forts of Trees more, the Rosen of the Tree
is its Sulphur, which it evacuates at sometimes by reason of its superfluity,
for it cannot bear it all; such a Tree which is tinged with abundance of
fatness, by the digestion of Nature and the Elements, burns quickly and freely,
and is not ponderous, nor so durable as is the Oak, or other hard wood which is
close and compact, whose Pores are not so open, as those sorts of light wood,
and wherein the Sulphur does not so predominate, but the Oak has therefore the
more Mercury, and a better Salt than the Pine, Firr, and Deal trees have, and
such wood does not float so well above the water, as the Deal, being bound and
closed up compactly, so that the Air is easily prevented in bearing it up. So
is it to be observed of Metals, and especially of Gold, which by reason of its
abundant, fixed, digested and ripe Mercury, has a very close, fast and compact,
fixed and invincible Body, which neither Fire nor Water, Air, nor any Corruption
of the Earth can prejudice, that the consuming power of the Elements can do
them no harm; this fixedness and close compacted Conjunction gives evidence of
its natural ponderosity, which cannot be evidenced in other Metals, which is to
be observed, not only by weighing it in the scales, but likewise you will find
it thus; if you lay but a scruple of pure Gold upon a hundred weight of
Quicksilver, it immediately sinks to the bottom, whereas all other Metals being
laid upon Quicksilver in like manner, float on the top of it, and sink not to
the bottom, because they are more open, that the Air or Wind can penetrate them
and bear them up.

Now what further concerns the Spirit of Venus or Copper in Physic, you must
last of all take notice and observe, that it is throughout in its virtue and
power discerned to be very wholesome and beneficial, not only that Spirit which
lies in the first Ens, but also that very Spirit which is found in the last
Matter, its virtue, power and operation is, that it is preferred before all
other Medicines in the Rising of the Matrix: It Is like is not yet found
particularly against the Falling Sickness. This Spirit has also received an
especial gift to dry the Dropsy up; it preserves the Blood from put refaction,
digests all which is adverse to the Stomach, breaks the Stone, of what kind
soever it be. Externally in Wounds, this Spirit lays a ground to heal: Noli me
tangere and all other Sores cannot defend themselves, nor their ill Qualities,
but this Spirit does assault them, and prepares a good ground for their Cure;
externally it mundifies and searches out that whereby the Medicine may operate,
fasten, and make a beginning of the Cure. Internally this Spirit penetrates
through and through, searching out all that is evil in the Body; even as does
the noblest Vulnerary potion; No Imposthume can withstand this Spirit, but is
reformed by it. I say briefly, observe the Spirit of Venus very well, it will
manifest it self to admiration both internally and externally, that many will
esteem it to be incredible and supernatural. Last of all, you must understand
that this Spirit of Copper is a fiery Spirit, penetrating, searching and
consuming all evil Humors, and superfluous Phlegm in Man and Metals, and may
in reason be accounted the Crown of Medicines; it is very fiery and sharp,
incombustible, but spiritual and unformal, and therefore as a Spirit it can
particularly help to make unformal things fiery, digest and ripen them; and if
you are a true Naturalist, I recommend this Spirit unto thee; it will not fail
thee in the least, in any necessity of Health or Wealth, in case you observe it
rightly, and execute according to Justice. I hope my Call and Request will at
last take place, and have a hearing with those who regard Nature, and have an
earnest and longing desire to search out, and learn, whereby they may whet
their Wits, open their Eyes, and let their Ears hear, and learn such a thing
out of my Advice, which was never taken notice of, or learned before, and is to
be found in this Spirit of Copper, internal and external. He that does not
observe, or truly understand my Writings; will not fathom many Secrets, nor
search out to purpose and in truth; nor learn to advantage without me,
therefore no Man can direct me, as concerning the Spirit of Copper, except he
has beforehand inverted and turned the Copper inside outward, and truly
learned all the Mysteries of its internal Virtues; as I have done, if he can
find out any thing better, which I know not, I earnestly desire him not to
conceal any thing, so shall his instruction be well rewarded, with a
thousandfold advantage, and recommend you herewith to the Highest Creator.

Vain Reason cannot always apprehend
Each matter which Venus can bring to an end:
No man can find it presently in sense,
Vain Reason banns it far away from thence;
Such a Spirit only can all things speed,
So that Mercury be joined with it indeed.
CHAP. V. Of the Spirit and Tincture of Mars.
MArs and Venus have a Spirit and Tincture as well as Gold and other Metals, be
that Spirit which is in each Metal never so mean and little. It is undeniable
and known to all, that many men have many minds, though all men originally are
of one first Matter, born and produced from one Seed; yet have they diverse
different Minds, because the Stars have so operated them, and not without
cause; for the influences of the great World operates the next to it in the
little World; for all Opinions, Natures and Thoughts, together with the whole
complexion of Man proceed alone from one Influence of the Stars, manifesting
themselves according to the Course of the Planets and Stars, so that nothing
can prevent, nor can such Influences hinder it, when the Birth has attained to
the end of its perfection.

As a man is naturally inclined to study; one delights in Divinity, another in
the study of the Laws, a third in Physic, a fourth will be a Philosopher;
moreover there are many Wits who are naturally inclined to the Mechanics; as
the one is a Painter, another a Goldsmith; the one a Shoemaker, the other a
Tailor, a Carver, and so forth, diverse and innumerable; all this happens by the
Stars influence, whereby the Imagination is supernaturally founded and
fortified, and whereupon it is resolved to rest; as it is found, that what a
man has once conceived in his Mind, and framed a foundation thereof, none can
divert him from a constant resolution and relying thereon, except Death, which
at last concludes all. So is it to be understood of Alchymists, who are set
upon the search of Natures Secrets, they intend not to cease, till they have
discovered Nature, absolved it quite, and brought all to an end, which cannot
well be done.

Even so is it to be understood of Metals, according as the Influence and
Imagination is from above, so is the Form; and although the Metals be called
Metals in general, and are such, yet you have understood by the various minds
of men, which yet proceed from one Matter, that there may be manifold and
diverse Metals, one hot and dry, another cold and moist, a third assuming a mixed
Nature and Complexion to it self. Therefore the Metal of Mars being ordained
in its degree by a gross Salt before others in the greatest quantity, is found
to have the hardest, ungentle, strongest, and grossest Body, which Nature
appropriated and granted to it, it has the least portion of Mercury, but more
of Sulphur, and most of Salt, hence, and from such a mixture or composition is
its corporal essence descended, and born into the world by help of the
Elements. Its Spirit is like to the other Spirits in operation, but if you can
know the right and true Spirit of Mars, I tell you truly, and in true Wisdom,
that one grain of its Spirit or Quintessence drunk with the Spirit of Wine,
strengthens the Heart, Courage, and Senses, so that you shall fear no Foes; it
raises up in him the Courage of a Lion, and provokes a desire to hunt and fight
at Venus sports. When the Conjunction of Mars and Venus are rightly placed in a
certain Constellation, they bring Fortune and Victory in Love and Affection, in
Battle and joy, remaining in unity though the whole World should be against
them: But because I am an Ecclesiastic under Church Government, and dedicated
my Soul to God, without provocation of humane desires, and lusts of the Flesh,
for they lead a direct way to Hell without leave; but Gods Commands, Fear, and
a rejection of Man's Will, which are tolerated by his Commands, prepare a way
to Heaven, if they continue in the true calling upon, and in the true and right
Faith of the only Throne of Grace, Mediator and Patron Jesus Christ our
Savior. All Martial Diseases are expelled, cured, and healed in an admirable
manner by this Spirit; such as are the Bloody Flux, the Disease or Menstruous
Fluxes of Women, both white and red, and all other Fluxes of the Belly, and
open Sores in the Legs, or any part of the Body, together with all those
Diseases, both internal and external, howsoever they are called, which bloody
Mars has caused, which I omit to nominate particularly, being well known unto
the discreet Physician what Diseases are subject to the jurisdiction of Mars.
If the Spirit of Iron be truly known, it has a secret affinity with the Spirit
of Venus, so that both may be conjoined in one, both becoming one only matter,
of a like operation, form, substance and being, healing and expelling the
self-same Diseases, as also to bring the particulars of the Metals into a
change with profit, praise, and excess. But properly Mars must be observed thus
with its virtues, that in his Corporal form he only has an earthly Body, which
may be used in many things, for to stanch Blood, externally in Wounds, to
graduate Luna, internally to stop or bind the Body, which yet is not good at
all times, and may be used both internally and externally in man's Body, as
likewise in Metallic affairs; because without the true known means, which
Nature has in her secret Closet, much profit cannot be gotten per se.

One thing more I must at present propose, that the Magnet and true Iron
perform almost a like benefit in Corporal Distempers, having almost one kind of
Nature in and with them, as it is with it in the Celestial, Spiritual, and
Elementary Intellect, between the Body, Soul, and the Chaos, out of which the
Soul and Spirit went, the Body at last was found out of the Composition.

How shall we now do? the gross dull-witted Lads will not apprehend it, the
middle sort of Wits will take no notice of what I write, and the supernatural
wits will descant too much upon it; I must find out a remedy, and would
willingly preserve all these over-wise-people to be my Friends still. I will
now teach, instruct, and presently inform you, seeing that the Argument it self
declares and pronounces its definitive sentence, therefore the resolution lies
open, and can be declared and resolved, reserved nor directed to any other
sentence of the understanding, further than for it self.

Last of all, reserve this hereupon in this Chapter, that there can be no House
kept to stand in unity between the Married Couple, if the one of them turn his
Coach and drive to the East, and the other toward the West, for they are not
equal, so that they cannot draw the Coach together in an equal weight, whereby
there arises a great dissension and hinderance, in obtaining that which wat
intended: but if true Married People will carry on their Housekeeping with a
right subsistence, they must be of one spirit, mind, judgment and virtue, to
accomplish all whatsoever is in their heart and mind, and that the one operate
into the other, if their Love and Truth shall be permanent; for want of one of
these things, the three principles cannot be truly together; for the Mercury is
banished, and too little by reascn of the firmness and constancy; the Sulphur is
too little, it cannot warm the Body of Love, because it is very much extinct;
the Salt likewise has not its right, convenient, natural kind, but is too hard
and too much, seeing it makes a hard coagulation, is sharp and biting, because
it does not manifest it self in truth and constancy. Even so it goes now in the
World, which goes astray, and is pregnant with such Vices, for the constancy is
but small, the Love little, and Truth as little.

I hope you will take this Philosophical Example in good part, because Syrach
does both praise and dispraise the goodness, truth, and wickedness of a false
Woman, and both after a different manner; and herewith I bid Mars Farewell,
saying, that no man knows how to distinguish the Sentence of one, much less of
all things, but he who has in this point taken notice of them, learned and
experimented their Nature and Properties, and truly known and discovered them.
God our Heavenly Father, the Everlasting Power, proceeding from all beginning,
separate us so in the Form, that the terrestrial corruptible Body may again
attain unto, contain, and receive the Celestial, Spiritual and Incorruptible
Revelation. Amen.

M aist thou not know me alone indeed,
A nd procure a pure help for me in need;
R esolve then, and hear what I do speak or say,
S o shall thou find what I can do for aye.
CHAP. VI. Of the Spirit of Gold.
THE Clearness of Heaven has now commanded me to govern my Pen, to reveal a
matter of valor and of permanency; for the Sun is a burning and consuming
Fire, hot and dry, wherein is concealed the right and true virtue of all
Natural things; this virtue of the Sun works Understanding, Riches, and
Health. My Mind is very much grieved, and my Spirit is terrified within it self
to discover it publicly, which was not published in common before, and to make
it vocal, which was concealed in the deep with great secrecy. But if I
consider in my self, and enter into my Conscience, I could find no alteration,
nor catch at any thing to disturb my mind, or bring it to another resolution,
which might cause many Obstructions: Yet will I speak with discretion, and
write understanding, that no evil with may follow, but rather that I may gain a
grateful profit, which I have pourtrayed after the manner and occasion, as the
Philosophers before me have done.

Mark now, give your Mind perfect Thoughts, refrain all strange matters, which
are not serviceable to your speculation of Philosophy, but rather cause a ruin
of that benefit, which you pursued with so much diligence; and know if you have
a hearty desire and strong affection to gain the Golden Magnet, that in the
first place your prayer be truly directed to God, in true Knowledge, Sorrow,
Repentance, and true Humility, to know and learn the three distinct Worlds
which are subject to Humane Reason; as, there is the Supercelestial World,
wherein the right immortal Soul has its seat and residence, together with its
first coming, and is according to Gods Creation the first moveable Sense, or
the first moving sensible Soul, which has operated the Natural Life from a
Supernatural Essence; this Soul and Spirit is at first the Root and Fountain,
the first Creature which arose to a Life, and the first Mover, whereof there
has been so much Disputing among the Learned.

Now take notice of the second Celestial World, and observe it diligently, for
therein the Planets rule, and all the Stars of Heaven have their course, virtue
and power in this Heaven, performing that Service therein whereunto they are by
God ordained, and in this service they operate the Minerals and Metals by their
Spirit.

Go now out of these 2 distinct Worlds into the third, wherein is contained and
found what the other two have wrought, to wit, the Super-celestial and the
Celestial worlds; out of the Super-celestial arises the Fountain of Life, and
of the Soul; out of the other Celestial world the light of the Spirit; and out
of the third or Elementary world, the invincible Celestial Fire, which yet may
be felt, out of which, that which is tangible is digested; these three Matters
and Substances produce and generate the Form of Metals, among all which Gold
has the pre-eminence, because the Sidereal and Elementary Operation has
digested and ripened the Mercury in this Metal the more perfectly to a
sufficient ripeness.

And even as the Male-Seed is injected into the Womb, and touches the
Menstruum, which is its Earth, but the Seed which goes out of the Male into the
Female, is operated in both by the Sydereal and Elementary, that they be
united, and nourished by the Earth unto the Birth.

Even so understand it likewise, that the Soul of Metals which is formed and
conceived out of the Chaos by an intangible, invisible, incomprehensible,
concealed, and supernatural, Celestial Composition of Water and Air; afterward
it is further concocted by the Celestial Elementary Light and Fire of the Sun;
whereby the Stars move the Powers, when its heat is perceived in the inward
parts of the Earth, as in the Womb, for the Earth is opened by the warm
operating property of the upper Stars, that their infused Spirit yield a
nourishment unto the Earth, that it may bring forth somewhat, as Metals, Herbs,
Trees and Animals; where each one in particular brings its Seed with it for its
farther augment ation and increase: And as has been mentioned, even as Man is
begotten spiritually and heavenly, Soul and Spirit, and by the nourishment of
the Earth in the Body of the Mother is formally brought up to perfection; even
so, and in like manner, is to be observed and understood of the Metals and
Minerals in all points.

But this is the true mystery of Gold, which I will make good to you by an
Example and Parable to certify you, whereby the possibility of Nature, and its
Mystery is to be found after this manner.

It is evident, that the Celestial Light of the Sun is of a fiery Quality and
Essence, given unto it by a Celestial, fixed and permanent sulphurous Spirit, by
the most High God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, to preserve its substance,
form, and body; which creature, by its swift motion and course, is enflamed and
kindled by the Air through that swiftness in a continued manifestation of it;
this inflammation can never be extinct, nor decay in any of its power, so long
as its Course last, or this whole Created visible World shall remain and
continue, because there is no combustible matter at hand which is given unto
it, by whose consumption this great Light of Heaven should fall to decay.

Even so Gold is so digested, ripened, and made into such a fixed invincible
Nature by the Superiors in its Essence, that nothing can hurt it in the least,
because the superior Stars have past through the inferior, that the inferior
fixed Stars by the influence and donation of the superior, cannot in the least
give place to its like, for the inferior have obtained such a fixedness and
permanency from the superior; this you may well retain, observe, and take
notice of as concerning the first Matter of Gold.

I must yet produce one comparison according to the Philosophical custom, of
the great Light of Heaven, and of that little terrestrial fire here daily
kindled, and made to burn before our Eyes; because that great Light has a
magnetic simulation and an attractive living power with the small fire here on
earth, but yet it is unformal and incomprehensible, only it is found to be
spiritual, invisible, insensible and intangible.

It is to be observed and remembered, as experience manifests, and is proved,
that the great Light of heaven bears an especial sympathy, affection and
inclination to the little earthly fire, by means of the spiritual Air, whereby
they are both promoted and preserved from Mortality; for behold, when the Air
receives into it a Coruption, by too great humidity attracted up by it, that
Clouds are generated by Mists, and farther coagulations, which hinder the
Sunbeams that they cannot have a reflection, nor get a right penetrating
power. So likewise the small terrestrial fire does not burn so lively in dusky,
dark, rainy weather, nor manifests it self with joy in its operation, as it
does when there is a fair, pure, serene, unfalsified heavenly Air; the reason
is, because the sympathy is bound and hindered by the obstruction of those
Accidents and the waterish Air, so that the attractive power is grieved, that
it cannot accomplish its complete Love and Operation as it should, for this
hinderance brings the aquosity to the contrary Element.

Now even as the Sun, the great Light of Heaven, has a peculiar community and
sympathy with the small terrestrial fire to attract unto it, after a Magnetical
manner; So also the Sun and Gold have a peculiar understanding, and an
attractive power and sympathy together; for the Sun has wrought the Gold by
the three Principles, which have their Magnets, being nearest related to the
Sun, and has gained the next degree to it, for that the three Principles are
found to be most mighty and powerful therein, Gold immediately succeeds it in
its corporal Form, being composed of the three principles, and has its
beginning and offspring from the Celestial and Golden Magnet.

This is the supremest Wisdom of this world, a wisdom above all wisdom, yea a
wisdom above all Natural Reason and Understanding; for by this wisdom is
comprehended first of all Gods Creation, the heavenly Essence, the Firmamentary
Workings, the spiritual Imagination, and the corporal Essence, it contains all
qualities, and properties, and all whatsoever sustaines and preserves Mankind.
In this Golden Magnet sticks and lies buried the resolution and opening of all
Metals and Minerals, their domination, as also the first Matter of their
generation, their power over health; and again, the coagulation and fixation of
Metals, together with the operation of expelling all Diseases: Take notice of
this Key, for it is Celestial, Sydereal and Elementary, out of which the
terrestrial is generated, it is both Supernatural and Natural, and is generated
Celestially of the Spirit of Mercury, Spiritually of the Spirit of Sulphur, and
Corporally of the Spirit of Salt; this is all the way, the whole Essence, the
beginning and end; for the Spirit and the Body are bound up together in one by
the Soul, that they can never be separated, but produce a very perfect, durable
Body, which nothing can hurt. Out of this spiritual Essence, and out of this
spiritual Matter, out of which first of all Gold was made into a Body, and
became corporal, out of it is made a more true and complete Aurum potabile than
out of Gold it self, which must first of all be made spiritual, before a
potable Gold can be prepared out of it.

This Spirit cures and heales the Leprosy and the French Pox, as being an
over-fix'd Mercurial Essence, dries up and consumes the Dropsy, and all
running and open Sores, which have raged a long season, it strengthens the
Heart and Brain, makes a good Memory, generates good Blood, brings Lust,
Delight and Desires in humane incitation unto Natural Affections. If the
Quintessence of Pearl be mixed with the Tincture of Coral, and be administered
with an addition of an equal quantity of this Spiritual Essence of Gold, the
Dose of two grains taken at once in a just observation, you may be bold and
confident of the truth, that no disaster of any Natural Distemper can harm you,
or happen to you, to the prejudice of your health, because the nature resides
only in the Spirit of Gold, to alter, remove and amend all weaknesses, so that
the Body shall be adjudged perfect and free from any Disease. The Quintessence
of Pearl corroborates the Heart, and make a perfect Memory, of the five senses.
The Tincture of Coral expels all poison, and evil Spirits which fly from the
good. So can the Soul of Gold in a Water turn the spiritual Essence of the
Pearl, and the Sulphur of the Coral united in one, perform such a thing which
otherwise Nature could not be entrusted with, but seeing that Experience has
manifested it, and confirmed the undeniable Truth, therefore this Cordial in
this temporal Life is, and ought in reason to precede all other Cordials with
admiration and admirable Effects, be they called by what name soever. I am an
Ecclesiastical person, obedient to the Ecclesiastical degree, related to the
Benedictine Order by a Spiritual and Divine Oath, by which Order with my
internal Prayer, I obtain comfort and promises of Gods Word, a refreshment to
my Soul, but in a corporal temptation of my weaknesses, and for my Brethren I
have not found and used a better corroboration by Gods Blessing, than these
three Compounds united: God give, bless, and increase this Virtue and Power
unto the End of this temporal World, which Man must change together with Death.
O thou golden power of thy Soul! O thou golden intellect of thy Spirit! O thou
golden operation of thy Body! God the Creator keep thee, and grant unto all
earthly Creatures, who love and honor him, the true understanding of all
Gifts, that thy Will may be done in Heaven and on Earth: This is enough
revealed at present concerning the Spirit of Gold, until the coming again of
Elias.

Hereunto I add a short Process:

Take a Spirit of Salt, therewith extract the Sulphur of Gold, separate the Oil
of Salt from it, rectify the Sulphur of Gold with Spirit of Wine, that it be
pleasant without Corrosive; then take the true Oil of Vitriol, made of the
Vitriol of Verdigreece, therein dissolve Mars, thereof make a Vitriol again,
and again dissolve it into an Oil or Spirit, which rectify in like manner as
before with Spirit of Wine, conjoin them, and abstract the Spirit of Wine from
it, resolve the Matter which remains dry in Spirit of Mercury, according to a
just weight, circulate and coagulate it when it is fixed and permanent without
Ascension, you have then a Medicine to tinge Man and Metals, if it be fermented
with prepared Gold.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spirit of Silvor
THE Tincture and spirit of Silver manifests its Color of a Watchet or
Sky-colour, otherwise it is a waterish Spirit, cold and moist, not so hot in
its degree as that which is found in Gold, Mars, and Venus; for Luna is more
phlegmatic than fiery, though it be brought by the Fire out of its waterish
Substance into a coagulation; and even as the Metals gain their tinging Spirits
and Coagulation, in like manner do stones get their fixedness, and color, as
out of one Influence. A fixed coagulated Mercury is found in the Diamond,
therefore it is fixeder and harder than the other stones, and cannot be so
broken; so the tincture of Mars, or the Sulphur of Iron is found in the Ruby,
the Sulphur of Venus in the Emerald, the Soul of Saturn in the Granate; in Tin
the tincture which is found in the Topaz; and Crystal is appropriated to common
Mercury; in the Saphir is found the Sulphur and Tincture of Luna, but each one
according to a peculiar understanding, and according to its kind, and in Metals
according to their form and gender; for when the blew Color is taken and
extracted out of the Sapphire, its Raiment is gone, and its other Body is white
as a Diamond, wanting only the hardness that is in a Diamond; even so when Gold
has lost its Soul, it yields a fixed white Gold Body, which by searching
Students and young Artists is called fixed Luna.

Wherefore you must now understand and observe, that even as I have declared
unto you concerning the Sapphire, for your apprehension, even so on the other
side, you must learn to what purpose my Speech is intended, for your
Instruction concerning Metals.

For this blew Spirit is the Sulphur and the Soul, whence the Silver receives
its Life, both in and above the Earth, by Art, and the white Tincture of the
Silver upon white stands in the Magnetic form of an everlasting thing, or
Creature, wherein is likewise found the first Ens of Gold.

O ye high qualified Orators! where is your voice in this case to explain this
Mystery? And you conceited Naturalists, where is your Writings and Advice of
Reason? And you Physicians, Whither is your Opinion flown, to fetch somewhat
afar off over the Seas for to cure the Dropsy, and all Lunary Distempers? You
will say, that this my speech is too dark for you; is it so? then kindle the
terrestrial Light, seek, and be not ashamed to make acquaintance with Vulcan;
and let nothing be irksome unto you, so will you find by the assistance of the
Eternal God, that the Spirit of Silver contains in it to cure and expel the
Dropsy quite alone, as the Spirit of Gold, and as that of Mercury can expel
the Consumption radically, or in the root, even so that the Center of those
Diseases cannot be found any more. But that Luna in the veins of the Earth is
not furnished with such a hot substance or quality in its degree, but is
subjected to a Waterish Nature; this fault lies upon that great Light of
Heaven, which by reason of its Waterish influence, has implanted such
qualities in the other Creatures, and Planets of the Earth, than it has in
Silver. And albeit that Silver contains a fixed Mercury, which is generated in
it, yet it wants a hot, fixed Sulphur, truly to dry up and consume its Phlegm,
whereby it has not obtained a compact Body, unless it be done afterward by
the art of the Little World. And seeing that its Body is not compact by reason
of the abounding watery substance, its Pores therefore are not rightly
defended, nor closed to undergo the weight and endure a Battle with the
Enemies; all which Virtues are to be found in Gold, if it shall overcome all
Enemies, and endure all trials without defect.

All things are difficult in the beginning, but wben they are brought to an end
they are easy to be understood and apprehended. If you do truly observe the
Spirit and the Soul of Luna, and learn to know it truly, you may quickly
compass the midst of the Work, how it shall afford the end with profit;
wherefore I will now propose to you an Example, and instruct you by a
Countrey-Rule, that you may apprehend it, and consider of it, as Childrens
Play, in a high and weighty Matter, that you may search it out with advantage;
as follows:

A common Peasant casts forth (or sows) his Seed in a Field well dunged and
prepared, this Seed after putrefaction, sprouts forth of the Earth by the
operation and furtherance of the Elements, and sets before our Eyes the Matter
of Flax together with its Seed which it brings with it augmented; this Flax is
plucked up, and separated from its Seed; but this Flax cannot be used and
prepared for any work profitably, except it be first putrefied and rotted in
water, whereby the Body is opened, and gains an ingress of its doing good;
after this putrefaction and opening, it is again dried in the Air and Sun, and
by this coagulation it is again brought into a Formal Being, that it may do
future service. This prepared Flax is afterward buck'd, beaten, broken,
peeled, and last of all dressed, that the pure may be separated from the
impure, the clean from the filth, and the fine from the course; which otherwise
could not b done at all, or brought to pass without the preceding preparation;
this done, they spin Yarn of it, which they boil in water over the Fire, or
else with Ashes set in a warm place, whereby it is purified afresh, whereby the
filth and superfluities are fully separated from it, and after a due washing
the Yarn is dried again, delivered to the Workmen, and Cloth weaved of it; this
Cloth is purified or whitened by a frequent casting of water upon it, cut in
pieces by Tailors, and other people, so converted to future services in
household affairs; and when this Linen is quite worn out, and torn, the old
Rags are gathered together, and sent to the Paper-Mills, whereof they make
Paper, which is put unto diverse uses.

If you lay Paper upon a Metal or Glass, kindle and burn it, the vegetable
Mercury comes forth and flies away into the Air, the Salt remains in the ashes
and the combustible Sulphur which is not so quickly consumed in the burning,
dissolves to an Oil, which is a good Medicine for dim and defective Eyes. This
Oil has in it a great fatness, which is the Matter of the Paper, contained
originally in the Seed of the Flax; so that the last Matter of the Flax which
is Paper, must again be dissolved into the first Matter, which is the fat
Sulphurous Oyliness of the Flaxseed, together with the separation of its
Mercury and Salt, that so the first may be made of the last, and the
groundwork revealed, so the Virtues and Operations known by the first.

And though this Discourse be gross and not subtle, yet you may learn thereby
to know what is subtle and secret; for that which is subtle must be infused
into the ignorant by course Examples, that thereby they may be taught to reject
the gross, and to embrace that which is subtle.

In like manner understand, that the first Matter of Metals must be observed,
known, and found out by the revelation of their last Matter, which last Matter,
as there are the perfect Metals, must be separated and divided asunder, that it
may plainly appear singly before the Eyes of men. Out of which separation may
be judged and learnt what the first Matter was at the beginning, out of which
the last was made. Accept of this Advice concerning Luna at present. I could
have said more, but I must desist at this time until another opportunity; and
entreat you heartily, admonishing you by your Conscience, that you observe all
that which I have revealed unto you, of all those Letters which are contained
in the middle between Alpha and Omega, and that you keep all the Speeches and
Writings, that you may not undergo a denial of pardon for your Sins, and a
continued perpetual Vengeance for Eternity; which I at last reveal unto you
thus:

Take the Sky-colored Sulphur extracted out of Silver, rectified with Spirit
of Wine, dissolve it according to its Quantity in the White Spirit of Vitriol,
and in the sweet-sented Spirit of Mercury, coagulate them together by the
fixation of the Fire, you have the White Tincture in your Hands with all its
Medicines; but if you can get all their primum Mobile's, it is then needless,
because you can perfect the Work at once.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Soul or Tincture of Tin.
GOod Jupiter possesses almost the mean or middle place between Metals, it
being not too hot, nor too cold, not too warm, nor too moist, it has no excess
of Mercury, nor of Salt, and it has the least of Sulphur in it; it is found to
be white in Color, yet one exceeds the other in the three Principles, as it is
evidently found in its dissection, the right and true discovery of Nature. It
is generated of such a composition and mixture of the three first Principles,
being operated, coagulated into a Metal, and brought to the ripeness of
perfection. Jupiter is a God of Peace, a Lord of Goodness, a Ruler and
Possessor of the middle Region; as concerning its State, Essence, Function,
Virtue, Form and Substance; for it holds the mean; no special Disease can
happen, that Jupiter should cause any remarkable damage, if its Medicine be
used a little at once, not too much in quantity; it is likewise thought
needless, where its Medicines are not required, that they should be administered
in strange cases with a just Call, but we should rather abide by those, where
the Body and its Disease have an equal temper with the superior Stars and
their assistance, in virtue, power, and operation, and so accord together in
their juncture, that there is not found the least contrariety in the Operation,
nor in the Operative Nature.

Jupiters Spirit is found not to be wanting in the least, in the generation of
Metals, as likewise no one Spirit of all the Metals can be set backwards,
because of necessity they accord together from the lowest to the highest
degree, and must agree together, as a Metal is perfect in the great Earth, so
should the transmutation and augmentation succeed in the little world;
understand it after this manner, that all the degrees from the meanest to the
highest Metal must be passed through in all perfection, even as the Metals must
finish their course, from Saturn unto Gold, as concerning the permanency of
Color and Body, not withstanding that Saturn possesses the highest place in
the highest Region, wherein the stars reign and perform their Course.

The generation of Tin in and above the Earth, is brought to light even as Man
is and other Animals, which are originally nourished and fed by the Mothers
Milk; there is no Diet to be found on Earth more fit for the nourishment of all
men than Milk; for its best part is chiefly an Animal Sulphur; which yields the
Nourishment. Even in like manner Tin is nourished by its Metallic Sulphur,
which likewise feeds it with the greatest acceptance, it assumes in and to it
more heat than Saturn, therefore is Jupiter more digested and broiled, whereby
its Body likewise is more fixed and permanent in the degree of Salt.

He causes in his Dominion and Reign, that good Rule be obser- and Justice done
to all men in his Court. The Spirit of Tin is a Preserver from all Distempers
and Accidents whereby the Liver is consumed or put into malady; its Spirit is
naturally to be compared unto Honey in Taste, its Mercury being made volatile,
gains a venomous quality; for it purges violently, and penetrates through by
force, therefore it is not always to be advised, that its opened Mercury
should be used alone and simply, but if a Correction precede, there may an
excellent benefit succeed, being used in those distempers and diseases, which
are immediately subject to its Influence, that is, when its venomous volatility
is taken away, and set in a better and fixeder state, which resists the poison.

The Vulgar Physician cannot understand this Description; for this Art and
knowledge proceeds not from the bare Talking, but from Experience; the common
Physician has the foundation and egress in speaking, but our Preparation has
its Rise from speaking, and then its foundation first of all out of a certain
trial, which manifests it by Experience, and this is firmed upon hard Rocks by
manual Operations, but the other stands upon moving Reeds and Sand; wherefore
in reason that which is strong and immovable, made by Natures hand, ought to
be preferred before bare Speeches, which proceed only from an inconstant
fantastical speculation, because the Work always will praise the Master.

At present I do not indeed speak according to my own Poetical manner, nor
after such a way as I directed my style, when I treated of the wonderful
generation of the seven Planets in my occult Philosophy, nor after a Magical or
Cabalistical manner and custom; much less do I observe the method which
teaches, and diligently marks the Mystical, Secret and Supernatural Arts, to
wit, of Hydromancy, AEromancy, Geomancy, Pyromancy, Nigromancy, and the like:
But my present purpose and intent is directed to reveal Natures Secrets, that
all the Lovers of Art, and the Children which seek and desire wisdom, may by
Gods Grace, Blessing, and Permission, easily understand, observe, mark, and
likewise after diligent observation learn, and retain something that is
beneficial; this concerns the generation of Metals in two pares, in the great
and in the little World, as likewise what is the true Medicine contained in the
inward part of those Metallic and Mineral Forms, which must be apprehended and
made moveable by their dissection, that their first beginning may be made
notoriously visible in three distinct things; Then is Nature stripped, and her
secret parts discovered by laying off her temporal Clothing, and all the
secret Virtues, Powers, and Operations revealed for Man's Health. My
Persecutors, and indiscreet Physicians will now tell me, thou talkest much of
Geese, and know not a Duck; who knows whether all what thou writest be true?
I will stick where I am, and remain by what I have tried, and bears the sway
among all my Associites and Physicians; so shall I not be deceived, and am
assured that I shall not need to take pains to learn any new Matter. He that
is of such a resolution, may remain with the Ducks; for he is not worthy of a
roasted Goose, nor to learn what is concealed in Nature.

But this in truth I acknowledge, and confess it before the Supreme Trinity,
speaking it to the hazard of that most Noble Ecclesiastical Jewel, that all
what I have wrote, and yet shall write in this point, is all true, and shall be
found to be no otherwise in truth: But that every ignorant, or vulgar person,
which are haters and persecutors of this Mystery, do not well, fully, and
clearly understand my Writings at first; alas! that cannot I help; pray unto
God for his Grace, and ye Persecutors for pardon, labor without repining, read
with understanding, then will no Mystery be withheld from you, but will be very
easy for you to find out. I moreover admonish, that the finder of this gift of
God, above all things give thanks unto God day and night without ceasing, with
all reverence and due obedience, from the bottom of his heart; because no
Creature can yield sufficient praise which may recompense so great a henefit;
but Diligence is known by a right and true industry according to our capacity.
I have done my part, which I hope to justify before God and the World; for
what my Eyes have seen, my Hands felt, and apprehended by an undeceived
Judgment, that shall no man take from me in this Life; only Death, which is the
determiner of all things.

This my Speech has indeed had no force to pour forth from it what is written
by me herein; but what I have done is not out of curiosity, nor out of a desire
of vain and transitory Glory; but I have been induced there, unto: by the
Command of Christ the Lord, that his Glory and Goodness in eternal and temporal
Matters, should not be concealed from any man, but to the praise, honor, and
glory of his holy everlasting Name, that it might be exalted, acknowledged, and
revealed in his Majesty by reason of his Highness and Almightiness, through the
confirmation of his wonderful Deeds. And secondly, I have been led thereunto by
Love and Charity toward my Neighbor, for his good as for my own, and to heap
burning Coals on my Enemies heads. And last of all, tha all Opposers may know,
what erroneous ways others have gone against me, and whether I am most of all
to be condemned, or they adjudged most just in what has been written most
truly of the concealments of Nature; and likewise that the supremest Mystery
may not quite be suffocated in darkness, nor be drowned in overflowing waters,
but be delivered out of the deep and filthy mire of the Ideotish Crew by the
right appearance of the true Light, and obtain many witnesses by the spreading
abroad of a sure, true, and right Confession, who may follow me in the Writings
of Truth. In my Nativity of the twelve Signs in the Zodiac, Sagitary and
Pisces were allotted unto me; I was born under. Pisces, for I was in
Waterishness before my Life, but Sagitary set an Arrow to my Heart, whereby I
lost my Waterishness, and by the heat I became worthy of the dry Earth; and
although at the first the Earth was turned by the Water into a soft substance,
yet you must understand that the Water was consumed by the heat of the drying
Air, so that all the soft Matter of the Earth went away, and by this drying up
was dignified with a Hardness; whereby thou Learner, and much Understander
should carefully observe and take good notice, that Tin is subject to all the
four Elements, as also to the other principal Planets; which Elements received
their Center from above, and are generated as others.

To conclude, I let you know, and give you to understand, that if thou extract
out' of Benevolent Jupiter its Salt and Sulphur, and let Saturn flux well
with it, Saturn assumes a fixed body unto it, purges it self, and becomes clear
thereby, there being a full change and real transmutation of Lead into good
Tin, which may be found to the height by a durable infallible proof. And though
you may think this to be false, yet you must take notice, that seeing the Salt
of Jupiter only by its Sulphur is made more corporal, yet likewise it has
obtained an efficacy and power to penetrate Saturn, the basest and most
volatile Metal, and bring it to a melioration of its Equals, as you will find
it in reality.

CHAP. IX. Of the Spirit of Saturn, or Tincture of Lead.
SAturn to generate his Metal Lead, is placed in the upper Heaven above all
Stars, but he possesses the lowest and vilest degree in the under-parts of the
Earth, even as the supreme Light of Saturn is mounted aloft in the highest
supremacy of all the Celestial Planets, so has its Children of the lower
Region succeeded it in Kind; and Nature has permitted that Vulcan should
conduct them to their like, if Saturn be content; for the upper light gives
occasion thereunto, having generated an unfixt Body of Saturn, penetrated with
open pores, that the Air can pass through this Saturnine Body, that the Air can
keep it aloft, but the fire can quickly assault it, because the body is not
compact by reason of its unfixedness, so that it must decay, which must be in
all points observed by him that will attain to the search of it; for there is a
great difference between the fixed and unfix'd bodies, and of the causes of
their Constancy and Inconstancy. And though Saturn has an especial ponderosity
above other Metals, yet observe, when they are poured forth together, after
their union in the Flux, the other Metals always settle at the bottom, even as
it likewise comes to pass in the pouring of Antimony through with other Metals,
whereby it is evident, that the other Metals fall through equally, and are more
compact than Saturn, for it must give place and pre-eminence to the other
Metals, leaving the victory with them; for it must vanish and be quite consumed
with the unfixt inconstant Metals; in it all the three properties of the three
principles are most course; and because its Salt is very fluxible above that of
other Metals and Planets, so is its Body more fluxible, inconstant, unfixt, and
volatile, than any other Metallic Body. As Saturn steps to its regeneration,
so know that in like manner, as common Water is forced by the natural coldness,
by the change of the Heavens, whereby it becomes a coagulated Ice, in like
manner is it to be made evident, that by reason of the great coldness which is
found to be in the Salt of SAturn above other Salts; Saturn is also coagulated
and made corporal; Ice dissolves into water by heat; so likewise the coagulated
Saturn is made fluxable by Fire, it has most of Mercury in it, but it is
inconstant and volatile; it has least of Sulphur, and therefore according to
its small quantity its cold body cannot be made warm; it has little Salt, but
fluxible, otherwise Iron would be more fluxible and malleable than Lead, if the
Salt alone could cause a malleableness and fluxibleness, because Iron contains
more Salt than any other Metal: Seeing then there is a difference to be found
in this point, you must therefore observe and remember the difference, and how
to distinguish between Metals.

All Philosophers have wrote as well as I, that the Salt gives the Coagulation
and Body to every Metal; and it is true; but to prove it by an example, how and
after what manner this Relation is to be understood: Plume Allom is esteemed to
be only a mere Salt, and is approved to be such, which in this particular may
be compared to Iron, that the Salt of the Plume Allom is found to be a thing
unfluxible as Iron is. On the other side, Vitriol likewise is a Salt,
manifesting it self in a small quantity, but fluxible and open, therefore its
Salt cannot yield such a hard congelation unto its appropriated Metal, as the
other can; although all the Salts of Metals grew out of one certain Root, and
out of one Seed, yet nevertheless you must observe a difference in their three
Principles, as also you must observe and remember, that a difference is found
in one Herb from the other, and likewise how man differs from other Creatures
and Animals in Qualities, Original, and the three Principles; for one Herb is
endued with more of this, another with more of that kind, which in like manner
is to be understood concerning Man and other Animals. The Soul of Lead consists
in a sweet quality, as also does the Soul of Tin, and sweeter yet, that nothing
almost may be compared to it, being first of all purified to the highest by
separation, that the pure be well separated from the impure, that a perfect
accomplishment may succeed in the Operation: Otherwise the Spirit of Lead is by
nature cold and dry, wherefore I advise, that it be not much used by Men and
Women, because it over cools Nature, so that the Seed of both cannot perform
their Natural Function; nor does it much good to the Spleen and Bladder, but in
other cases it attracts phlegmatic Humors unto it, which raise up much
Melancholy in Men; for Saturn is a Ruler, and such a Melancholicus, whereby a
Man is confirmed in his Melancholy, wherefore its Spirit is used, for one
Melancholy Spirit attracts another unto it, whereby Man's Body is freed and
delivered from its infused Melancholy. Externally the Soul of Saturn is so
healing, in all Sores old or new, Cuts, Thrusts, or Accidents by Means or
Nature, so that no Metal can do the like; it is cooling in all hot, tumified
Members; but Noble Venus has the pre eminence to mundifie and cauterize all
putrid Sores, and to lay a ground for their Cure, which have their access from
within; for in her essence she is hot to dry up, but Saturn on the contrary is
found to be cold in his Essence.

The Celestial Light of the Sun is much hotter than the Light of the Moon; for
the Moon is much lesser than the Sun, and according to its dimension and
division it contains an eighth part of the greatness in its Circle; if then the
Moon in this her Magnitude of the eighth part could excel the Sun, as the Sun
excels the Moon, all Fruits and Productions of the Earth must perish, and there
would be a perpetual Winter, no Summer to be found at any time: But the Eternal
Creator has in this case well ordained a certain Order and Law for his
Creatures, that the Sun should give light by day, and the Moon by night, and so
all Creatures should be served. Those Children which are subject to the
influence of Saturn, are melancholy, churlish, continually murmuring, as old
covetous people, who do no good to their own Bodies, and yet never have enough;
they put their Bodies to much labor, torment themselves with thoughts and
whimsies, seldom recreate themselves, or are merry with other people, nor do
they greatly regard the natural love of fair Women.

In brief, I tell thee that Saturn is generated of little Sulphur, little Salt,
and much unripe gross Mercury, which Mercury is to be esteemed as a Froth that
floates upon the Water, in comparison of that Mercury which is found in Sol;
and is much more hot in its degree, and therefore the Mercury of Saturn by
reason of its great coldness, has not so quick a running Life as that which is
made of Gold, wherein more heat is to be found, whence that running Life has
its original: Therefore in the inferior world we must take notice of little
Vulcan in the augmentation and transmutation of Metals, as I have described
those three Principles of Saturn, as concering their descent, nature, and
complexion. And every one must know, that no transmutation of any Metal can
follow out of Saturn, by reason of its great coldness, only and except to
coagulate common Mercury; for the cold Sulphur of Lead can qualify and take
away the hot running Spirit of the Quicksilver, if the process be rightly
ordered, wherefore it is not amiss to observe, that Mercury is so detained,
that the Theory should agree with the Practick, and meet together in a certain
measure and concordance. You must not therefore quite reject Saturn, nor in all
points scornfully neglect him, because its Natures and Virtues are known yet
but unto few; for the Stone of the wise has the first beginning of its
Celestial, high-shining Color only out of this Metal, and from the influence
of this Planet, the Key of Constancy is delivered unto him by putrefaction,
because the red cannot be made out of the yellow, except beforehand a white be
made out of the beginning of the black.

I could yet treat variously, and at large of many wonderful works of Natural
and Supernatural things. But because other Labors prevent me therein, of
making a longer Narration, I therefore put a Conclusion to this Treatise at
present, referring the other concerning the concealed Secrets of Minerals until
I have a purpose to write further, in a particular Treatise of Antimony,
Vitriol, Brimstone, Magnet, and which in especial are endowed before others,
and depend upon those, out of which Gold and Silver have their beginning,
middle and end, together with the true transmutation particularly; which
virtues and power they have received out of one thing, wherein all these lie to
be generated invisibly concealed, together with all Metals; which matter is
public before the eyes of all men, but because the virtues and powers are very
deeply buried and unknown to the most part, therefore this matter is likewise
esteemed as nothing, or of no value, and unprofitable, out of ignorance; even
as the Disciples of the Lord going to Emaus, their eyes were opened at the
breaking of Bread, that they knew wonder above wonder, what the rich Creator
has placed in the vile creature, the name is Hermes, who carries a flying
Serpent in his Shield, having a Wife whose Name is Aphrodita, who can know the
Hearts of all men, and yet all is one, and one only thing, one only Essence,
which is common in all Places, and known every where, every one grasps it with
his hands, and uses it in vile matters, and of small value; he values the vile
at a high rate, and that which is high he casts away; it is nothing else but
Water and Fire, out of which the Earth is generated by the help of the Air, and
is yet preserved. Praise be to the most High for his Gifts: At present enough
is revealed what my intent was to show in this Treatise, and so I depart hence;
for in separation all is to be found.

Of the Medicine or Tincture of Antimony, as well to preserve Man's Body in
Health, and to divert all desperate and incurable Diseases, as also to cure the
Leprosy of Metals, to purify and to transmute them into the best Gold.
Written by that Noble and Learned Philosopher, Roger Bacon.
STibium or Antimony, as the Philosophers say, is composed of a Noble Mineral
Sulphur, which they accounted to be the black secret Lead of the Wise.

The Arabians call it Asmat or Azmat; the Alchymists retain the Name Antimony.

Addition. The Moors call it Antimony, others call it Alabaster, or Tarbason.
By the Arabians and Spaniards it is called Alcohol. Avicennae c. 7. calls it
Artemed. Alexius of Piedmont, in his seventh Book of Secrets, calls it Talck,
even as John Jacob Wecker renders it in his Books of Secrets; but Talck is far
different from Antimony. Pliny, Book 33. Chap. 6. of Antimony. Dioscorides
gives a preparation of Antimony, Book 5. Chap. 39. They call it also Stibi,
Stimmi, etc. The Germans call it Spies glass, or as George Fabricius would
rather have it, Spies glantz. Gerlandius calls it Black Alcophil, Altofel, or
Alirnu, others Cosmet, and it is twofold, Masculine and Feminine.

It will lead us to the considera- of higher Mysteries, if we behold and
discern that Nature wherein Gold is exalted, even as the Magi have found that
this Mineral is by God ordained under the Constellation of Aries, which is the
first Celestial Sign, wherein the Sun takes its Exaltation, though this be not
regarded by the Vulgar; yet discreet people will know, and the better observe,
that even in this place also the Mysteries and Perpetuity may in part be
considered with great benefit, and in part discovered.

But some ignorant and indiscreet people think, that when they had Antimony,
they would deal well enough with it by Calcination, others by Sublimation, and
some by Reverberation, thereby to obtain its great Mystery and perfect
Medicine. But I tell you, that here in this place it availes not in the least,
either Calcination, Sublimation, or Reverberation, whereby afterward a perfect
extraction can or might be done or effected with profit, to transmute the
meaner into a better Metallic virtue; for it is impossible for you.

Be not deluded; some of the Philosophers which have wrote of such things, as
Geber, Albertus Magnus, Rasis, Rupecissa, Aristotle, and many others: But
observe this: Some say, that if Antimony be made to a Vitrum or Glass, the bad
volatile Sulphur is gone, and the Oil which may be prepared out of that Glass,
will be a very fixed Oil, and will really give an ingress and Medicine of
perfection to the imperfect Metals.

These words and opinion are good and true, but it will not be nor appear such
indeed; for I tell you truly, without concealed speeches, that if you lose any
of the aforesaid Sulphur in the Preparation or Burning, for a small fire may
easily prejudice it, you then have lost the true penetrating Spirit, which
should make the whole Body of Antimony to a perfect red Oil, which should also
ascend over the helm with a delightful sent, and curious Colors; observe
likewise, that the whole Body of this Mineral, with all its Members, should be
but one Oil, and ascend over the helm without any loss of weight, excepting the
feces.

How should the Body be brought to an Oil, or yield its pleasant Oil, if it be
brought to the last being of its degree, for Glass is in all things the utmost
and last.

You shall likewise know that you shall not obtain that perfect noble Oil in
the least, if it be extracted with corrected Vinegar poured upon the Antimony,
nor yet by Reverberation; and although its various colors may appear, yet is
it not the right way; you may indeed get an Oil, but you must know that it has
no part of the Tincture, or power of transmutation in it.

Now we come to the Manual Operation.
Take in the Name of God, and of the Eternal Trinity, fine and very pure
Mineral Antimony, which is fair, white, massy, and inwardly full of yellow
Streaks or Veins, and likewise of red and blew Colors, and small Veins, this
is the best; pound it to fine Powder, dissolve it by little and little in Aqua
Regis, that the Water may conquer it. After Solution take it out immediately
that the Aqua Regis may do it no prejudice; for it will quickly dissolve the
Tincture of the Antimony; for our Water in its nature is like to the Ostrich,
which by his heat can digest Iron, and consume it to nothing; for the Water
will consume it, and turn it to a Mud, that it shall remain only as a yellow
Earth, and then is it quite spoiled.

Take an Example hereof from Silver, which is dissolved, fair pure and fine in
these our Waters but if it stand a night therein while the Water is strong and
full of Spirits, I tell you, your good Silver will be corroded to nothing in
these our Waters; and though you would reduce it into a Massy Body, you
cannot; for it will remain as a pale yellow Earth, and sometimes it will run
together in the form of Horn, or of a white Horse Hoof, which you can by no Art
reduce into a Body.

Wherefore you must remember to take the Antimony out presently after the
Solution, precipitate and adulterate it according to the custom of Alchymists,
that it may not be corroded with its perfect Oil by the Water, and burnt up to
nothing.

The Water wherein we dissolve is thus made.
R. Vitriol, a pound and a half, Salt-Armoniac one pound, Azinat one pound,
Salt-nitre a pound and a half, Salt-gemme one pound, Allom half a pound; these
are the Ingredients which belong unto the making of the Water for the Solution
of Antimony.

Take and mix them well together; at first distill very slowly, for the Spirits
ascend with greater violence than those of any other common Aqua fortis; beware
of its Spirits; for their Fumes are very subtle and hurtful in their
penetration.

When you have adulterated the Antimony well and purely from the corrosive
Water, then put it into a clean Vial, pour good distilled Vinegar upon it set
it forty days and nights to putrefie in Horse-dung, or in Balneum Mariae, it
will be bloudred. Take it out, and see how much is yet to be dissolved, de cant
off gently the pure and clear, which is red into a Glass-Gourd, pour other
Vinegar upon the Faeces as before, that if any thing should yet remain therein,
it might be dissolved; this must be done four times in forty days and nights;
for if any good be in the Faeces, it will be dissolved in that time, then cast
the Dregs away as unprofitable, being but Dirt, and to be cast to the Dunghill.

Put all the Solutions in a glass-Gourd into Balneum Mariae, distill all the
tart Vinegar from it, pour it on again, or else pour fresh, if this be too
weak, it will quickly dissolve in the Vinegar; distill it again from it, that
the Matter be quite dry; then take common distilled water, wash all tartness
from it with the Vinegar imparted to the Matter, then dry the Matter in the
Sun, which is of a very deep red, or else dry it very well at a gentle fire.

When the Philosophers find our Antimony thus secretly prepared, they say then
that its external nature and virtue is inverted internally, and the internal
cast forth externally, henceforth becoming an Oil, which is concealed in its
innermost and profoundest part, till it be well prepared, and cannot any more
be brought into its first Essence, until the last Judgment; and it is true,
for so soon as it feels the force of the fire, it flies away in a Vapor with
all its parts, because it is volatile.

Some of the common Laborators, having thus prepared Antimony, they take one
part out because of its consumption, that they may the better operate it they
mix with it one part of Sall Ammoniac, one part of the Vitrum (with others
Titrum) one part of the Rebooth (with others Cadoli) wherewith the Bodies are
cleansed; this mixture they cast upon a pure Luna, and if there were eight
Ounces of the Luna, they found ten Drams of good Gold in the separation, and
sometimes more; and by this work they gained wherewithal to bear their Charges,
the better to attend upon, and attain unto the great Work. The ignorant called
this an induction into the Silver, but that is false; for this Gold is not
brought into it by the Spirits, but every kind of Silver has one Ounce of Gold
more or less in the Mark (or 8 Ounces) for Gold is so united with the Nature of
Silver, that it cannot be separated from it, either by Aqua fort, or common
Antimony, as the Goldsmiths know.

But when the aforesaid Composition is cast upon the Luna in the flux, then
happens such a separation, that the Luna does freely let go the Gold implanted
therein into the Aqua fort, and is separated from it, letting it precipitate
and sink to the bottom, which otherwise could not be done at all. Therefore it
is not an induction into the Luna, but a bringing out of it.

But we return again to our proposed Work; for we would have only the Oil,
which was only known to the Wise, and not to the Ignorant.

When you have rubified the Antimony very well according to the former
Directions, you must have in readiness a Spirit of wine well rectified, pour it
over the red Powder of Antimony, set it four days and nights in a gentle
Balneum Mariae, that it may dissolve very well. And if then any of it remain
undissolved, pour fresh Spirit of Wine upon it, set it again into the Bath as
aforesaid, all will be well dissolved; and if perhaps any more Faeces remain,
they will be very few, cast them away, for they are good for nothing. Put the
Solution into a glass-Gourd, with a Head luted upon it, set it into Balneum
Mariae, with its receiver to take the Spirits, distill slowly with a slack heat,
till all the Spirit of Wine be come over, pour it in again upon the dry matter,
draw it off again as before; this pouring in and abstracting continue so often,
till you see the Spirit of Wine ascend over the helm in various colors, then
is it time that you follow it with a strong fire, then will the Spirit of Wine
ascend red into the helm, and drop into the Receiver like a bloody Oil, and the
tender Body ascends like a red Oil, dropping into the Receiver; truly this is
the most secret way of the Wise, the so much applauded Oil of Antimony; it is a
noble, well sented, virtuous, and powerful Oil, as you shall hear afterward.

But here I will teach and instruct you poor. Operators another way, because
you have not the Means to attend the great work, not as the Ancients did, with
the separation of Gold out of Silver.

Wherefore take one part of the Oil, or half an Ounce of Saturn, four Ounces
calcined according to Art, pour the Oil upon the Calx of Saturn, mixing it, set
it ten days and nights in the heat, into the secret Furnace; every two days
augment the fire one degree, according to the capacity of the Furnace; after
four days and nights set it into the third degree of Fire, therein let it rest
three days and nights, then open the Door or Vent of the fourth degree, which
must likewise continue three days and nights; afterward take it out, the
Saturn will be above black, like unto Charcole dust, but under this black dust
you will find other Colors, throughout pure, red, yellow, which flux with
Venetian Borax, you will find it converted into good Gold by the power of our
Oil; so have you means again to set forward the great work.

We return again to our purpose, where we left off before. You have heard, and
have been instructed how to abstract the Spirit of Wine with the Oil over the
helm into the Receiver, and to use it for the work to convert Saturn into Gold.
But we will now hasten to the other work of the Tincture, and give advice
concerning it. It will therefore be necessary to separate the Spirit of Wine
again from the Oil which do as follows;

Take the mixture of the Spirit of Wine, and of the Oil, se(...) it into
Balneum Mariae; distill the Spirit of Wine only from the Oil with a very slack
heat, so that you may be assured that there is no more of the Spirit to be
found in this most precious Oil, which you may easily (...) when you see some
of the drop ascend over with the Spirit of Wine, it is a sign that the Spirit
of Wine is separated from the Oil, then remove all the fire from under the
Bath, how little soever it be, that it may cool the sooner. Take away the
Receiver with the Spirit of Wine, stop it very close, for it is full of Spirits
which it has retained from the Oil, as you will hear afterward: But in
Balneum Mariae you will find that blessed Oil of Antimony red as Blood; take it
out, wash the Lute off by gentle mollification, that nothing impure may fall
into that curious red Oil, when you take the head off; reserve it carefully,
that by no means it may receive prejudice, for you have a Celestial Oil, which
in a dark night shines like a glowing Cole, and this is the reason, because its
internal power and soul is cast forth externally, the hidden Soul being now
revealed, shining through the pure Body as a Candle through a Lanthorn, even so
at the last day, these our invisible internal Souls shall be revealed, and seen
out of the Body, shining as the clear Sun: So keep each apart, as well the
Spirit of wine full of power, and wonderful in curing humane Distempers, as
also the blessed, red, noble, celestial Oil, which transmutes all the Diseases
of the imperfect Metals into the perfection of Gold; and the power of the
spiritual Wine extends very far being rightly used.

I tell you, you have obtained a Celestial Medicine, to cure all the Diseases
and Distempers of Man's Body; its use is, as follows;

In the Gout.
Give three drops in a Cup of Wine fasting to the Party, just at the time when
he feels the beginning of his misery, anguish and pain to come upon him, the
second and third, use it in like manner; it allaies all pain the first day how
great foever it be, and prevents Swelling; the second day it causes Sweat,
which is very nasty, tough and thick, very sour in taste, and of an evil sent,
and most of all in those parts where the Members are united and joined together
by the Joints; and if you should give none in the third day, yet will there be
a purgation of the Veins, and of the Excrements, without any molestation or
pain; is not this a great power of Nature?

In the Leprosy.
At the first time take six drops fasting, and cause the impure party to be
alone, free from sound people, in a place far distants and commodious; for all
his Body will begin to send forth Fumes and Steams, like unto a stinking-Fog,
and Vapors abundantly; the next will Scales and much Uncleanness fall from his
Body; then let him have three drops of this Medicine, and let him take it in on
the fourth day, afterward on the eighth or ninth day by the assistance of Gods
Grace and Blessing, he will be quite clean.

In the Apoplexy.
Let one drop fall upon the tongue of the Patient, it will attract it forth
immediately like unto a Mist or Fume, and restore the party again; but if he
were taken in the Body, or in the Members and Limbs, then give him three drops
at once in good Wine, as you have been taught in the Gout.

In the Dropsy.
Give one drop in baulm water, or Valerian water six days together, the seventh
day give three drops in good wine, and it is sufficient.

In the Falling Sickness, and its kinds, as Epilepsie, Catalepsie, and
Analepsie.
In the beginning of the Fit give the Patient two drops in Sage-water, after
three hours, give him three drops more, and it is sufficient. But if in case
any thing should stir again, give him two drops, as has been said.

In a Hectic.
Give the party two drops the first day in water of Violets, the second day two
drops more in good Wine.

In Agues.
Give the party three drops in the beginning of the Fit, early in a morning, in
good distilled water of St. John's wort, or of Succory, and the next day two
drops more fasting.

In the Plague.
Give the Patient seven drops in good Wine, let the infected party be alone,
and let him sweat well upon it, by the Divine Assistance that poison will not
prejudice him as to his Life.

For a prolongation of a healthful Life.
Take and give two drops at the beginning and entrance of the Spring, and in
the beginning or entrance of Autumn likewise two drops; every one that so takes
it, is freed, and well preserved from unhealthful and infectious Air, except
the Disease were by Almighty God ordained for the death of the party.

We will now step further to the Oil, and its Power, and show how by it the
Diseases of the impure Bodies of the Metals may be cured.

In the Name of God, take very pure, fine, refined Gold, as much as you will,
or think to be sufficient, dissolve it in a rectified Wine, as is usual to make
Aqua vitae; after solution of the Gold, set it a Month in digestion; this
distill in a Bath very slow and gently, distill the Spirit of Wine diverse times
from it, so long till you see your Gold lie at the bottom like a Juice: This is
the true way and meaning of some of the Ancients, to prepare Gold. But I will
show and teach you a way much readier, better, and more beneficial; that in
stead of this prepared Gold, you take one part of the Mercury of Gold, as I
have taught the making of it in another place; abstract from it its water of
Airiness, that it may be a subtle Dust, and take two parts of our blessed Oil,
pour the Oil very slowly upon the Dust of the Mercury of Gold, till all be in
it, set it in a Vial well sealed, in the heat of the first degree of the secret
Furnace; therein let it stand ten days and nights, your Powder and Oil will be
quite dry, of a black gray color. After ten days give it the heat of the
second degree, the gray and black color will by little and little become
white, till at last it will be of a heavenly white, and at the end of the ten
days it will begin to be of a pure red, but let not this trouble you; for all
these Colors proceed only from the Mercury of Gold, which swallowed up our
blessed Oil, and now conceals in the inner most part of its Body; but our Oil
will conquer this Mercury of Gold by the power of the fire, and cast it forth
from within, and the Oil will predominate over it with its hot red Color, and
be continually outward. And therefore it will be time, after the expiration of
twenty days, that you open the window of the third degree, wherein the external
white Color and Power will by little and little enter in into the inward part,
and the internal red Color will turn outward by the force of the fire. Keep
this degree of heat ten days without diminution or augmentation of it, you will
see a Powder which before was white, to be now very red, but let not redness
trouble you, for it is yet unfix'd and volatile. And after these ten days are
ended, thirty days being in all expired, then open the last window of the last
degree of fire, keep it ten days in this degree, this high red powder will then
begin to flux, let it stand so in flux the ten days, then take it out, you will
find at the bottom a very high, red, transparent stone of a Ruby Color, flux'd
according to the form of the Glass, as is taught in the Treatise of Vitriol,
wherewith you may make projection. Praise God for such his high Revelation, and
thank him for ever, Amen.

Its Multiplication.
The Ancient Wise, having found the Stone, and prepared it to a perfect power,
and mutation of the imperfect Metals into Gold, have a long time enquired
whether a thing were not to be found to augment the power of the Stone; and
they found two kinds of Augmentation, one of the power of it, so that the Stone
may be brought much higher; of this multiplication you will find direction in
the Treatise of Gold. The other Augmentation is an augmentation of the quantity
of the Stone, in its former power, so that it receives no more, nor loses any
thing of its power, though it increase in weight, and augment more and more,
that out of one Ounce many Ounces arise and increase.

The Augmentation or Multiplication is done as follows; Take your Stone in
Gods Name, grind it to a subtle powder, add to it as much of the Mercury of
Gold, as is taught before, put them together into a fine round Vial, seal it
hermetically, set it into the fiery Furnace, proceeding as you have been
instructed before, only this time is shorter, for whereas before you had ten
(thirty) days, now you need no more than four (ten) days, otherwise the work is
one and the same.

Praise and give thanks to Almighty God for his high Revelation, continue in
Prayer for his Grace and Divine Blessing in this Art and Operation, as likewise
for continuance of Health and Prosperity; withal let the poor be recommended to
your Help and Charity.

Glory be to Almighty God.
A Work of Saturn, of Mr. John Isaac Holland.

The PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
THE PHILOSOPHERS have written much of their Lead which is prepared out of
Antimony, as Basilius has taught; and I am of the opinion, that this Saturnine
Work of the most excellent Philosopher M. John Isaac Holland is not to be
understood of common Lead, (if the Matter of the Stone be not much more thereby
intended) but of the Philosophers Lead. But whether the Vulgar Saturn, be the
Matter of the Philosophers Stone, thereof you will receive sufficient
satisfaction from the subsequent 17 Considerations or Documents. This is
published for the benefit of all the Lovers of this Art, because it expounds
and declares the Stone of Fire. Vale.

A Work of Saturn
In the Name of the Lord, Amen.
MY Child shall know, that the Stone called the Philasophers Stone, comes out
of Saturn. And therefore when it is perfected, it makes projection, as well in
man's Body from all Diseases, which may assault them either within or without,
be they what they will, or called by what name soever, as also in the imperfect
Metals.

And know, my Child, for a Truth, that in the whole vegetable work there is no
higher nor greater Secret than in Saturn; for we do not find that perfection in
Gold which is in Saturn; for internally it is good Gold, herein all
Philosophers agree, and it wants nothing else, but that first you remove what
is superfluous in it, that is, its impurity, and make it clean, and then that
you turn its inside outward, which is its redness, then will it be good Gold;
for Gold cannot be made so easily, as you can of Saturn, for Saturn is easily
dissolved and congealed, and its Mercury may be easily extracted, and this
Mercury which is extracted from Saturn, being purified, and sublimed, as
Mercury is usually sublimed, I tell thee, my Child, that the same Mercury is as
good as the Mercury which is extracted out of Gold, in all operations; for if
Saturn be Gold internally, as in truth it is, then must its Mercury be as good
as the Mercury of Gold, therefore I tell you, that Saturn is better in our work
than Gold; for if you should extract the Mercury out of Gold, it would require
a years space to open the body of Gold, before you can extract the Mercury out
of the Gold, and you may extract the Mercury out of Saturn in 14 days, both
being alike good.

Would you make a work out of Gold alone, you must labor two whole years upon
it, if it shall be well done: and you may finish a work of Saturn in 30 or 32
weeks at the most. And being both well made, they are both alike good; Saturn
costs nothing or very little, it requires a short time, and small labor; this
I tell you in truth.

My Child, lock this up in thy heart and understanding, this is the Stone which
the Philosophers will not name, whose name is concealed unto this day; for if
its name were known, then many would operate, and the Art would be common,
because this work is short, and without charge, a small and mean work.

Therefore does the name remain concealed, for the evils sake which might
thence proceed. All the strange Parables which the Philosophers have spoken
mystically, of a Stone, a Moon, a Furnace, a Vessel, all this is Saturn; for
you must not put any strange thing unto it, only what comes from it, therefore
there is none so poor in this world, which cannot operate and promote this
work; for Luna may be easily made of Saturn, in a short time, and in a little
longer time Sol may be made out of it. And though a man be poor, yet may be
very well attain unto it, and may be employed to make the Philosophers Stone.

Wherefore my Child, all is concealed in Saturn, which we have need of, for in
it is a perfect Mercury, in it are all the Colors of the world, which may be
discovered in it; in it are the true black, white and red Colors, in it is the
weight, it is our Lattin.

Example.
The eye of a man cannot endure any thing that is imperfect, how little soever
it be, though it be the least Atome of Dust, it would cause much pain, that he
can rest no where. But if you take the quantity of a Bean of Saturn, shave it
smooth and round, put it into the Eye, it will cause no pain at all; the reason
is, because it is internally perfect, even as Gold and Precious Stones. By
these and other Speeches you may observe, that Saturn is our Philosophers
Stone, and our Latten, out of which our Mercury and our Stone is extracted with
small Labor, little Art and Expense, and in a short time.

Wherefore I admonish you, my Child, and all those who know its name, that you
conceal it from people, by reason of the evil which might thence arise; and you
shall call the Stone our Laton, and call the Vinegar Water, wherein our Stone
is to be washed; this is the Stone and the Water whereof the Philosophers have
wrote so many great Volumes.

There are many and different works in the Mineral Stone, and especially in
that Stone which God has given us gratis, whereof many strange Parables are
written in the Mineral Book.

But this is the true Stone, which the Philosophers have sought, because it
makes projection upon all the imperfect Metals, especially upon quick Mercury,
and moreover it makes projection upon all diseases whatsoever, which may come
into man's Body, as likewise upon all Wounds, Cancer, Fistulaes, open Sores,
Buboes, Imposthumes, and all whatsoever can come externally upon man's Body,
therefore this Stone is not under the Mineral work, but under the Vegetable.

It is the beginning of the Vegetable Book, and the principal; this Stone is
called Lapis Philosophorum, the Mineral Stone is called Lapis Mineralis, and
the third Stone is called Lapis Any(...). This Stone is the true Aurum
potabile, the true Quinessence which we seek, and no other thing else in this
world but this Stone. Therefore the Philosophers say, whosoever knows (...)ur
Stone, and can prepare it, needs no more, wherefore they bought this thing and
no other.

My Child shall take 10, 12, or (...)5 pound of Saturn, wherein is (...)o
mixture of any other Metal; (...)minate it thin, have in readiness (...) great
Stone Jugg, half full of Vinegar, stop the Jugg very close, set it in a
Lukewarm Bath every three or four days scrape off the calcined Saturn from the
Plates, and reserve it apart, thus do so long till you have, or 6 l. of the
calcined Saturn, then grind it very well on a Stone with good distilled
Wine-Vinegar, so as you may paint therewith, then take two or three great
Stone-pots, therein put the Calx of Saturn which you ground, pour good
distilled Wine-Vinegar upon it, that two parts of the Pot be full, stir it well
together, stop the Pot close with a polished Glass or Pebble stone, set the
Pots in a Bath, stir it four or five times in a day with a wooden Ladle, lay
the Glass or Stone Stopple again over it, make the Bath no hotter than that you
may well endure your hand therein, that is, lukewarm; so let it stand fourteen
days and nights, then decant that which is clear into another Stone-pot, pour
other distilled Vinegar upon the Calx which is not well dissolved, mix them
well together, set it 14 days in the Bath, again decant it, and pour other
Vinegar upon it as before. This decantation and pouring on continue so long
till all the Calx of Saturn be dissolved, then take all the dissolved Saturn,
set it in a Bath, evaporate the Vinegar by a small fire, the Saturn will become
a powder or lump. Or stir it about until it be dry, you have a mass or powder
of a dark yellow, or honey color, then grind the powder again very finely upon
a Stone with distilled Vinegar; put it into a stone-pot, stir and mix it well
together, set it again into a Bath, which is but lukewarm, so let it stand five
or six days, stir it every day from the top to the bottom with a wooden Ladle,
cover it again with the glass-Stopple, then let it cool, pour off that which
is dissolved into a great stone pot, pour other Vinegar upon it, mix and stir
them well together, set it into the Bath as before, reiterate this decantation
and pouring on so often, till no more will dissolve, which try with your
tongue, is it be sweet, it is not enough dissolved, or put some of it into a
glass-gourd, let it evaporate, if any thing remain, it is not yet all dissolved
which would be Gold, and then what remains in the pot are Faeces, and sweet
upon the Tongue; if you find any thing in the Gourd, it is not yet all
dissolved, then may you pour fresh Vinegar upon it, till all be dissolved,
then coagulate it as before, pour other Vinegar upon it, stir it, set it again
into the Bath, reiterate this operation of solution and coagulation so long
till you find no more Faeces at the bottom, but all be dissolved into a pure
clear water, then is Saturn freed from all its Leprousness, Melancholy, Faeces,
and blackness, being pure and white as Snow, for it is cleansed from all its
uncleanness, because its coldness stands outward as Luna does, and its heat is
internal, fluxible as wax, and sweet as sugar Candy.

Why is it as white as Snow?
Because it is purified from all its impurities, and because its coldness
stands external as Luna does, and its heat is internal.

Why is it sweet?
Because the four Elements in it are pure, and separated from all sulphurous
stink and blackness, which Saturn received in the Mine; it is almost Medicinal,
and like unto Nature: And because it is so pure, it affords some of its
internal virtue outwardly, as that of Sweetness; but the heat is so covered
with the cold, that it cannot put forth its power externally by reason of the
cold which is external (the heat of Saturn lies internal, even as in
Salt-Nitre) as does the Taste, the Spirit of Tasting is the most subtle in all
things, as is taught more at large in the Book of Vegetables, how the Air does
dilate it self from all Herbs and Flowers externally; for the Spirit of the Air
lies in the inward part of all things; for God created nothing in this world
but it has its peculiar Taste or Air, the Air and the Taste are one Spirit,
the Taste goes out of the Air, as Smoke from the Fire.

But how comes it to pass, that a thing which has a sweet Air, is bitter in
Taste? The cause is, because the Faeces of that thing are putrid and stinking
in the Elements, that is the Choler or Heat; for whatsoever is unnaturally hot,
has a bitter Taste; the Air and the Taste are both one Spirit, and as the
Spirit of the Air presses outward through hot thing, so does the Air (...)race
the Taste about, and (...)ends the subtle Taste, that it should not be burnt
by the vehement burning Choler, as in the Herbal is at large expressed.

But the cause why Saturn is sweet in Taste is, that it is almost pure and
clean, having scarce any unnatural heat in it, which can burn the subtle Taste,
therefore it has the Taste externally, and the Taste has the Spirit of the
Air locked up in it.

My Child, know what I said before, that a thing wherein is much burning heat,
the Air locks up the Taste therein, because the Taste shall not be corrupted by
the unnatural heat. So the Taste includes the Air in it, when it issues forth
from a thing which is externally cold; for the subtle Spirits of the Air or
Sent of a thing can endure no Cold, as we see daily in Herbs and Flowers that
they yield no Sent in the Winter, as they do in the Summer; but they hide
themselves in the Winter, and the Spirit has the Sent enclosed in it, and the
Spirit of Sent of Air. Behold a man that has taken Cold, immediately he loses
his Sent, and his Tasting is diminished. Even so it is here with Saturn; it is
quite-cold, so that the Taste manifests it self with the Spirit of Sent; for
the Spirit of the Taste has the Smell in it. Look upon Sugar which is well
clarified from its Faeces, how sweet it is in Taste, yet it yields no Sent, yet
there is an extraordinary sweetness in Sugar. What is the reason of this? Sugar
is very cold externally, therefore is it white as Snow, and of a sweet Taste;
yet Sugar internally is hot and moist, of the temper of Gold, and of such great
virtue that it is called the Philosophers Stone, as it is approved, and very
prevalent to cure all the Distempers of man's Body, as appears by its operation.
The reason why I say this, my Child, is, that you should altogether understand
its internal and external, and the Spirits which are in these things, whereof
we discourse; that thereby you should know Gods wonderful works, and what
wonders he works in these inferior things, which are all made for our use.

What has God in us, for whose sake he has created all these wonders, and all
these things?
Wherefore, my Child, believe in God, love him, and follow him, for he loves
you, as he makes it appear, and manifests himself in all things, as well in
their Internals as in their Externals. O how wonderful is our Lord and God,
from whom all Wonders proceed!

Now, my child, why is Saturn fluxible as Wax?
By reason of its abounding Sulphur, which is therein; for I find no
fluxibleness or fusibleness in any thing saving in Sulphur, Mercury and
Arsenick, and all these three are in Saturn; so that Saturn is quickly
fluxible, but all these three are cleansed with it from their uncleanness. And
do you not know, that the Philosophers call their Sone Arsenick, and a white
thing; and they say their Sulphur is incombustible; they call it likewise a red
thing, all this is Saturn, in it is Arsenick; for Luna is principally generated
of a white Sulphur, as is plainly taught in the Book of Sulphurs, and all
Arsenick is internally red as Blood, if its inward part be brought outward, as
is demonstrated in the Book of Colors, etc. Saturn stands almost in the degree
of fixed Luna. So that in it there is a red Sulphur, as you see, when its
internal is placed outward, it will be red as a Ruby; there are no Colors but
in the Spirits, so that there is in it a red and a yellow Sulphur. In it is
Mercury, as may be seen, for Mercury is extracted out of Saturn in a short
time, and with little labor.

So that all three are in Saturn, but they are not fixed therein, but they are
clean, pure, incombustible, fluxible as Wax; in it are all things which the
Philosophers have mentioned. They say, our Stone is made of a stinking
menstruous thing: What think you, is not Saturn dug out of a stinking Earth?
for diverse are killed with the ill Sents and Vapors where Saturn is dug, or
they live not long who labor in that stinking black Mine, whence Saturn is
dug. And the Philosophers say, our Stone is of little value, being
unprepared; they say, the poor have it as well as the rich, and they say true;
for there are not poorer or more miserable people to be found than those which
dig and work Saturn in the Mine; and they say it is to be found in all Towns
and places, wheresoever you come Saturn is there. They say it is a black thing:
What think you, is it not black? They say, it is a dry water, if Gold or Luna
be to be refined upon the test, must it not be done with Saturn? must be washed
and tried with it, as a foul garment is made clean with Soap. They say, in our
Stone are the four Elements, and they say true; for the four Elements may be
separated out of Saturn. They say, our Stone consists of Soul, Spirit and Body,
and these three become one. They say true; when it is made fixed for the white
Mercury and Sulphur with its Earth, then these three are one.

Whereby is to be observed, that the Philosophers have said true; they
concealed its Name for the ignorants sake, who are not their Children, to keep
them still in their Ignorance. Thus, my Child, the Ancients took care to
conceal the name of the Stone; now let us return to our purpose.

You have now Saturn washed and cleansed from all its impurity, and made as
white as Snow, fusible as Wax, but it is not fixed yet; we will make it fix the
Mercury and Sulphur with its Earth.

Take a Glass-Vial, put half of your purified Saturn into it, reserve the other
half till you have occasion to use it; lay a polished Glass upon the mouth of
the Glass, set it in a Cuple with sifted Ashes upon a Furnace; or set it on the
Tripos of Secrets, or in the Furnace wherein you calcine Spirits; give it Fire
so hot is the heat of the Sun at Midsummer, and no hotter, either a very little
hotter, or a very little cooler, as you can best hit it. But if you give it a
greater heat, such as you may keep Lead in flux, then your Matter would melt as
if it were Oil; and having stood so, ten or twelve days, its Sulphur would fly
away, and your Matter would all be spoiled, for the Sulphur which is in your
Matter is not yet fixed, but is in the external. Wherefore the Matter melts
presently, and though it be clean, yet it is not fixed; wherefore give so
gentle fire to it, that it may not flux so keep it six weeks; then take out a
little of it, lay it on a glowing hot Plate, if it immediately melts and fumes,
it is not yet fixed, but if the Matter remain unmelted, the Sulphur is then
fixed which is therein; then strengthen the Fire notably, till the Matter in
the Glass begins to look yellow, and continually more and more yellow, like to
powdered Saffron, then augment the fire yet stronger, till the Matter begin to
be red, then prosecut your Fire from one degree to another, even as the Powder
becomes redder and redder by degrees, so hold on your Fire, till the Matter be
red as a Ruby, then augment the Fire yet more, that the Matter may be glowing
hot, then is it fixed, and ready to pour the curious Water of Paradise upon it.

My Child must know, that there are two ways of pouring on the Water of
Paradise; I will teach you to make and prepare both, then may you take which
you will; for the one is half as good again as the other.

My Child, you may remember, that I ordered you to reserve the one half of the
purified Saturn, which take and put into a Stone-pot, pour upon it a pottle or
more of distilled Wine-Vinegar, set a head on, distill the Vinegar again from it
in a Bath, the head must have a hole at the top to pour fresh Vinegar upon the
Matter, and abstract the Vinegar again from it, pour fresh Vinegar again on,
and again abstract it; this pouring on, and abstracting or distilling off must
continue so long, till the Vinegar be drawn off as strong as it was when it was
put in, then is it enough, and the Matter has in it as much of the Spirit of
Vinegar as it can contain; then take the Pot out of the Bath, take on the head,
and take the Matter out, and put it into a thick glass which can endure the
Fire, set a head on it, put it in a Cuple with Ashes, which set on a Furnace
first make a small Fire, and so continually a little stronger, till your Matter
come over as red as Blood, thick as Oil, and sweet as Sugar, with a Celestial
Sent then keep it in that heat so long as it distills, and when it begins to
slack, then increase your Fire till the Glass begin to glow; continu this heat
till no more will distill, then let it cool of it self, take the Receiver off,
stop it very close with Wax, take the Matter out of the Glass, beat it to
powder in an Iron Mortar, with a steel Pestle; and then grind it on a Stone
with good distilled Vinegar, put this Matter so ground into a Pot, pour good
distilled Vinegar upon it, that two parts be full, set the Pot into a Bath with
a head upon it, distill the Vinegar off, pour fresh Vinegar again upon it,
distill it off again: thus do so long, that the Vinegar be as strong as it was
when it was first poured upon it, then let it cool, take the Matter out of the
Bath, take the head off, take the Matter out of the Pot, put it into a stronger
round Glass which can endure the Fire, as you did before, set it upon a Furnace
in a Cuple with sifted Ashes, set a head on, and a Receiver luted to it, then
distill it, first with a small fire, which augment by degrees, till a Matter
come over red as Blood, and thick as Oil, as aforesaid; give it fire till no
more will distill, then let it cool of it self, take off the head, break the
glass-pot, and take the Matter out, powder it again, and grind it on a Stone
with distilled Vinegar, put it again into the Stone pot, pour fresh Vinegar
upon it, set it into the Bath, and its head on, distill the Vinegar from it,
pour it on again as has been taught, till the Vinegar remain strong as it was.

Reiterate this distillation in the Bath until the Matter has no more Spirit
of the Vinegar in it, then take it out, set it in a glass-pot, distill all that
will distill forth in ashes, till the Matter become a red Oil, then have you the
most noble water of Paradise, to pour upon all fixed stones, to perfect the
Stone; this is one way. This water of Paradise thus distilled, the Ancients
called their sharp clear Vinegar, for they conceal its name.

My Child, I will now teach you other ways to make the Water of Paradise; this
is an easy way, but not so good, nor does it that high projection in humane
Medicines, yet it cures all Diseases within and without, but the other cures
miraculously in a short time.

The second way of preparing the Water of Paradise.
My Child, if you would make it after this manner, you must take the half of
your prepared Saturn which I ordered you to keep, upon which pour the half of
your fixed and prepared Water of Paradise, take the half, put it into a
Stone-pot, pour weak Wine Vinegar upon it, mix it well together, then take two
pounds of calcined Tartar, which is well clarified by solution and coagulation,
so that it leave no more Faeces behind it, Salt, Ammoniac one pound, which is
likewise so clearly sublimed, that no Faeces remain after its sublimation,
pound both together to a Powder, put them speedily into a pot, and stop it
close immediately, or else it will run out; for so soon as the Tartar and Salt
Ammoniac come to the Vinegar, they lift themselves up, and would immediately
run out of the mouth of the pot, wherefore stop the pot presently, set the pot
in a Vessel of Water, they will cool speedily, otherwise if the cold and hot
Matter should come together suddenly, they would contest together, rise up, and
become so hot, that the pot would break for heat, if it were not set in cold
Water; therefore take heed, when you put the powders in, that you stop it
immediately, and set it in cold Water before you put the other Powder to it,
then will they unite, let them stand a day and a night in that Vessel, then
take them out, set them into a lukewarm Bath two days and nights, let it cool
of it self, take the Stopple off from the pot, and set a head on, set the pot
in sifted Ashes upon a Furnace, distill with a small fire, and continually
greater till all the Vinegar be over, then augment your Fire notably, till you
see quick Mercury drop out of the Pipe, when it ceases to drop, then augment
the Fire by little and little and drive it so long as it drops; you may observe
when it will leave dropping, if in the spaceof one or two Pater-nosters one
drop does fall, then augment the Fire till the pot glow at the bottom, for
twelve hours, and when the Mercury is over, then should the Salt Ammoniac
sublime up into the head, and the Tartar remain with the Body of Saturn at the
bottom of the Pot, which take out, put it into a Linen Bag, hang it in a moist
Cellar, the Tartar will dissolve, receive it in a Glass, the body of Saturn
remains in the Bag, take it out, and calcine it in a reverberating Furnace
three days and nights, with a great heat, as is taught elsewhere, then extract
the Salt out, as is taught in the Mineral Book. You may make projection with
the Salt, and coagulate your Tartar again, it will be as good or better than it
was, likewise take your Salt Ammoniac out of the Head, it is good again, and if
you could have no Salt Ammoniac, then take three pound of calcined Tartar,
likewise so clarified, that it leave no Faeces behind, you then need no Salt
Ammoniac, therewith may you likewise extract the Mercury out of Luna and
Jupiter, wherewith you may do wonders, as is taught in the Miner. Book, where
is spoken of the Quintessence of Metals.

Now my Child must know, that this Mercury or Quintessence of Saturn is as good
in all works as the Mercury of Sol, they are both alike good, and herein all
Philosophers agree. My Child, take this Mercury of Saturn, so drawn out of the
Receiver, put it into a Glass Box.

I have now taught you to make two sorts of the Water of Paradise; and know, my
Child, that the first way is the best; though it be made with some danger,
longer time, and more charge; for the Vinegar is all good, yet the red Oil is
the best; its time is alike unto the end, and though it be more tedious before
you obtain the red Oil, yet it fixes it self in a short time, if it come to the
Matter of fixed Stone, into a simple Essence in greater redness; but when the
Mercury comes to the fixed stone, it holds on a long time in ascending and
descending before it die, and when it is quite dead, it makes the red fixed
Stone again into a fixed color, so covering the red stone with its coldness,
that the red stone becomes white again, then must you boil it again gently with
a small Fire, till it begin to be yellow, prosecuting the Fire from one degree
to another, as the Color is higher and stronger, and that so long till it
attain to a perfect redness, which requires a long time before it be done,
which is not requisite in the red Oil; for the red Oil dies or coagulates
forthwith the stone, the one fixing it self with the other into a simple
Essence, in a short time. Therefore I tell thee, my Child, that the time of the
Oil is alike long in the end, though it appear to be of a shorter time with the
Mercury, but it is equally long at the end of the Work, therefore I tell you
the Art of both Works, that you may the better understand the Art to make the
Oil from the innermost Nature of the Stone, which is found afterward.

The Oil was unknown to the Ancients, for my Grandfather with his Companions
found it with great labor and length of time.

So there are two ways to dissolve the Stone, and to pour upon it the clear
water of Paradise. Our Ancestors called the Oil their sharp Vinegar; therefore,
my Child, keep the Name private, and I will teach you first of all how you
shall join the Mercury to your Stone, which you extracted out of Saturn, to
dissolve it; afterward I will teach you to bring over the helm that red Oil
which you extracted out of your prepared Saturn, into a fixed stone, to dissolve
your stone.

My Child, weight your fixed stone, take half as much of your Mercury, pour it
upon the stone in the Glass, cover the Glass again with a polished Glass which
may just fit it, set it in a Cuple with sifted Ashes, make a small Fire like
the Suns heat at Midsummer, and give no more Fire to it, until the Water of
Paradise or Mercury become all a dead Powder. And know, my Child, that the red
or fixed Stone, which before was darkened, when it has drunk up the Water of
Paradise, or Mercury, or how you will call it, that it be a Powder between
black and gray, then augment the Fire from one degree to another, till the
Matter be perfect white, and when it is white, strengthen the Fire yet more,
from one degree to another, till it be of a dark yellow Color, then make it
yet stronger, till it be of a perfect red then rejoice, for your Stone is
perfect, and fluxible as Wax. Praise God, who gives unto us part of his
Miracles; and do good to the poor; you may see it with your fleshly Eyes, and
use Gods goodness miraculously in this corrupt Life, for I tell you in good
Charity, that if any one principally attain to this Stone, that it is given,
afforded, and lent him from God. Whosoever has this Stone, may live in a
healthful state, to the last term of his Life, appointed him by God, and may
have all whatsoever he desires on Earth.

He shall be loved and esteemed of all people, for he can cure them all
internally and externally of all Diseases which may befall them; but if the
Stone does not so, it is false, and deserves not the name of the Vegetable
Stone, or Philosophers Stone.

Therefore my Child, if God give you this Stone, look diligently to it, that
you keep your self from offending God, that you make not this Stone on earth to
be your Heaven; govern and rule your self to Gods glory and to the comfort of
poor people, that Gods praise may be augmented, to the defense of the Christian
Religion, and to the relief of poor exiled Christians.

I tell you, my Child, if you use it otherwise, God will leave you here a
little while to your own Will, but afterward he will speedily send a
punishment, either you shall be struck dead, or die by a Fall, or die some
other sudden death, and go Body and Soul to Hell, and be damned eternally, for
your Ingratitude to God, who so graciously vouchsafed you so precious and great
a Gift.

Therefore, my Child, look carefully to it, so to govern your self to Gods
Glory, and the Salvation of your Soul, that the eternal Curse may not fall upon
you; and therefore I have left you this Writing as my Testament. Enough has
been said to the wife, therefore look to your self.

The Multiplication of the Stone now perfected.
Now my Child, you may take the half of your Powder, put it into a Glass and
melt it, have in readiness a Mould made hollow, of Box-wood, great or small as
you please, it must be made smooth and even within with an Instrument, anoint
it with Oil Olive, and when your red Powder is flux'd, pour it into the Mould,
it will be a precious Stone, red as a Ruby, clear and transparent, take it out
of the Mould, and make projection upon the imperfect Metals, and in the Body of
Man.

Take ten times as much of prepared Saturn as I taught you before, by
Coagulation and Solution, till it leave no Faeces behind, then take your
precious red Powder out of the Glass, that two parts be full, set it into your
warm Bath, and let it dissolve: when any thing is dissolved, decant off that
which is clear on the top into another Glass, pour other Vinegar upon it, let
it dissolve again as before, decant and pour fresh Vinegar upon it so often,
till all be dissolved into a clear Water, which is done usually in ten or
twelve days, then set all that which is dissolved into a Bath, and a head upon
it, distill the Vinegar from it again, and coagulate the Matter so long till it
be dry and shine, then put it into another Glass, which set upon a Furnace in a
Cuple with sifted Ashes, laying a polished Glass upon the Mouth of the Glass.

My Child, know that your Matter is become fixed with the Stone in the solution,
make an indifferent hot fire in the furnace, so hot as the heat of the Sun at
Midsummer, or somewhat hotter; till the Matter begin to be yellow, then go on
with the Fire from one degree to another, till you have a perfect yellow, then
increase the Fire from one degree to another, till you have a perfect redness,
which is quickly done, in half the time for the color to come, and in the
multiplication, but operate as before in the beginning, and pour Paradise
water upon the Stone, as was taught you before in this Work, boil and mortify
it in every point to a perfect redness as has been taught.

Then may you again take half of it out, and make projection therewith, and
multiply the other half again in all points as abovesaid, so may you always
continue working.

Now I will teach you the other way, and the best that is to water your red
fixed Stone or powder with the red Oil, that it be fusible; you must know how
much your red powder weighs, then take half the weight of your red Oil, to the
full weight of the Stone, and pour it upon the red powder, and when the Oil is
poured into the Glass, you may set a small head on, upon a Furnace in sifted
Ashes, joining a Receiver to the Nose of the head, make a small fire under it,
as the heat of the Sun in March, and no hotter; for there is yet some moisture
of the Vinegar in the Oil, that it may be abstracted, continue it in that heat,
that can perceive no moisture in the Head, then augment the fire a little, as
the heat of the Sun at Midsummer, and if there be yet more moisture in it, you
will perceive it in the head, but if you perceive it not in 6 or 8 days, then
take the head off, and lay the polished Glass again upon the mouth of your
Glass, increase the fire, that you can scarce endure your hand or finger in the
Ashes an Ave-Mary while, continue the fire in that heat till the red Oil be all
fixed with the Powder in the Glass, which you may know thus;

Take a little of the powder out of the Glass, lay it on a glowing Silver
Plate, if the powder melts as wax, and penetrates through the Plate as Oil does
through a dry Leather, and makes it Gold throughout, as far as the powder went,
then is the Stone finished, and if it do not this, you must then let it stand
in that heat till it do so without fuming.

Now, my Child, when the Stone is finished, take half of it out of the Glass,
put it into a Glass melting-pot, and melt the powder gently, which should be
done presently, for it melts as Wax; and being melted, pour it into the Mould
of Box-wood as aforesaid, it will be a red stone, clear and transparent as
Crystal, red as a Ruby, then make projection therewith, and set the other half
again to multiply.

Then take in Gods Name twenty parts of Saturn, which is prepared by Solution
and Coagulation, till it leave no more Faeces behind, as has been said at the
beginning. Dissolve these twenty parts of Saturn, dissolve by it self in a
Glass with distilled Vinegar; likewise dissolve the powder of your Stone alone
by it self in a Glass with distilled Vinegar, and when both are dissolved into
clear water, pour both the Solutions together into a great Glass, set it into
a Bath, a head on, and a Receiver to it, distill the Vinegar from it in the
boiling Bath, till the Matter be dry, then let it cool of it self, put it into
a Glass, lay a polished Glass over the mouth of the Glass, and set it into a
Furnace in a Cuple with sifted Ashes, make a fire under it like to the Suns
heat in March, till the powder be perfect white, which is quickly done.

Then augment your fire from one degree to another, till the Matter become
yellower and yellower, to a perfect yellow; then increase it yet stronger, from
one degree to another, till it be redder and redder, to a perfect redness; then
pour your water upon the red powder with the red Oil, or with the water of
Paradise, or with the clear sharp Vinegar, or call it how you will, doing in
all points as has been taught, till the red powder flux like Wax upon a Silver
Plate, without fuming, penetrating it as Oil does dry Leather, that it become
good Gold within and without; then render thanks unto God, be obedient to him
for his Gifts and Graces.

You may again take one half out of the Glass, and make projection, setting the
other half in again, as has been taught, so may you work all your Lifetime,
for the poor, and perform other duties to Gods Glory, and the Salvation of your
Soul, as I have said before; enough to the wise.

Projection upon Metal.
Know, my Child, how and in what manner you must use this Stone, which makes
projection upon Mercury, and all imperfect Metals and Bodies of Mars, Jupiter
and Venus, whereof make Plates glowing hot, whereon straw the Stone, and lay
Coals on for a season, that the Stoue may penetrate, but the Stones must be
made quick with Gold, and Jupiter also, which is very laborious, as is taught
in the projection. But you must project upon Saturn or Luna, which need not be
made quick, only flux them, and cast one part upon a thousand parts, it will be
a Medicine, cast one part of these thousand parts upon ten parts, it will be
the best Gold that ever was seen on earth.

It Is Use in Physic.
This Stone cures all Leprous people, Plague, and all Diseases which may reign
upon Earth, or befall Mankind; this is the true Aurum potabile, and the true
Quintessence which the Ancients sought; this is that thing whereof the whole
Troop of Philosophers speak so wondrously, using all possible skill to conceal
its Name and Operation, as aforesaid.

Take of this Stone the quantity of a Wheat-corn, lay it in a little good Wine
in a small Glass, half full, or a quarter full, make the Wine warm, the Stone
will melt like Butter, and the Wine will be red as Blood, and very sweet in
your mouth as ever you tasted; for to speak comparatively, it is so sweet in
taste that Honey and Sugar may be compared as Gall to it; give this unto the
Patient to drink, lay him in Bed, but lay not too many clothes upon him, the
Stone hastens forthwith to the heart, expelling thence all ill humors, thence
dilating it self through all the Arteries and Veins of the whole Body, rousing
up all humors, the party will sweat, for the Stone opens all the pores of the
Body, and drives forth all humors thereby, so that the Patient will seem to
have been in the Water, yet will this sweating not make him sicker, for the
Stone expels only what is adverse to Nature, preserving what is consonant unto
it in its being, therefore the Patient is not sicker or weaker; but the more he
sweats the stronger and lustier will he be, the Veins will be lighter, and the
Sweat continues till all evil Humors be driven out of the Body, and then it
ceases.

The next day you shall take of it the quantity of a Wheat-corn, in warm Wine
again, you will go to stool immediately, and that will not cease so long as you
have any thing in your Body which is contrary to Nature, and the more Stools
the Patient has, the stronger and lighter at heart will he be; for the Stone
drives nothing forth but what is adverse and prejudicial to Nature.

The third day give the like quantity in warm Wine, as aforesaid; it will so
fortify the Veins and Heart, that the party will not think himself to be a
Man, but rather a Spirit, all his Members will be so light and lively, and of
the party will take the like quantity of a Wheat-Corn every day for the space
of nine days, I tell you, his Body will be as spiritual as if he had been nine
days in the terrestrial Paradise, eating every day of the Fruit, making him
fair, lusty, and young; therefore use this Stone weekly, the quantity of a
Wheat-Corn with warm Wine, so shall you live in health unto the last hour of
the time appointed for you by God.

What say you, my Child, is not this the true Aurum potabile, and the true
Quintessence, and the thing which we seek? It is a spiritual thing, a Gift
which God bestows upon his Friends, therefore, my Child, do not undertake this
Divine Work, if you find your self in deadly Sins, or that your intent be
otherwise than to Gods Glory, and to perform those things which I taught you
before.

I tell you truly, you may see the Work, or begin it, but I am certain you
shall never accomplish it, nor see the Stone, God will order it so, it will
break, fall, or some one Disaster or other will happen, that you shall never
see the Stone, or accomplish it. Therefore if you find your self otherwise, do
not begin the work, for I know assuredly, you will lose your Labor; wherefore
deceive not your self. Enough to the wise.

Its Use in External Diseases.
My Child, there are some people who have external Distempers on their Bodies,
as Fistulaes, Cancers, Wolf, or evil Biles, or Holes, be they what or how they
will, etc. give him the weight of one Wheat-Corn to drink in warm Wine two
days, as is taught before, the whole body within and without shall be freed
from all which is adverse to Nature, and you shall deal with the open Sores
thus;

Take a Dram of the Stone, sees it in a pottle of Wine in a Glass, the space
of two or three Pater-nosters, that the Stone may melt, the Wine will be as red
as Blood, therewith wash the Sores morning and evening, laying a thin Plate of
Lead over, in a short time, as in ten or twelve days the Sores will be whole;
and give him every day the quantity of a Wheat-Corn, in warm wine till he be
well. If they be Fistulaes or other concave Holes, that you cannot come at
them, to wash them, then take a Silver Syringe, and inject of that wine into
them, it will heal him, as aforesaid.

And if one had a pound of the rankest Poison in the world in his Body, and
immediately drink a Drachme thereof in warm Wine, the poison shall forthwith
evacuate by siege, together with all the evil Humors in his Body.

My Child, here ends the most noble and precious Work which is in the Vegetable
Book; on whomsoever God bestows this Stone, needs no other thing in this World,
therefore keep it as close and well as you can, to Gods Glory, who grant that
we may walk in his obedience, Amen.

God is blessed in all his works.
FINIS.

