Richard Baxters ANSWER TO Dr EDWARD STILLINGFLEET's CHARGE of SEPARATION:
Containing, I. Some Queries necessary for the understanding of his Accusation.
II. A Reply to his Letter which denies a Solution. III. An Answer to his
Printed Sermon.
Humbly tendered, I. To Himself; II. To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and
the Court of Aldermen, III. To the Readers of his Accusation: the Forum where
we are Accused.

Acts 15. 28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no
greater burden then these necessary things. Romans 14. 1, 17, 18. Him that is
weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations. For the Kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost. For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. Phil. 3. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same things. -- 15. If in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. LONDON,
Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Three Cocks at the West End of S. Paul's, and
Thomas Simmons at the Prince's Arms in Ludgate Street, MDCLXXX.

THE PREFACE.
Readers,
1. IF you would be truly informed of the Case of the Nonconformists, and the
meaning of this Defense, you must know 1. That the mere Nonconformists of this
age take not up their Judgment in trust from any party of men, and therefore
take not themselves obliged to be for or against any thing, because men were so
that were called Nonconformist sheretofore: As the Scripture is their Rule and
objective Religion, so they reverence the judgment of the Primitive Church
above the judgment of any party; And indeed are so far against Sects and
Parties as such, as that their judgment is that the Church will never be well
restored to desirable Concord, till our Union be Catholic, upon the terms
that Christ appointed and which all good Christians have agreed in, and may
agree in.

2. That what the mere Nonconformists of this age desired for Concord and
Reformation, as to the old Liturgy and Conformity, is best known by their
common Proposals 1660, all the Ministers of London being by Mr. Calamy, Mr. Ash
and Dr. Reynolds, invited to Sion-Colledg freely to give their judgments: who
offered nothing for Church Government but Bishop Usher's Primitive form, and
nothing for Worship but the Reforming of the Liturgy, and the free use of
additional forms: Their exceptions against passages in the Liturgy being not
thought absolutely necessary to Communion. And it must be remembered that they
offered then, 1. A Defense of those Exceptions, 2. A Reformed Liturgy or
Additions, 3. A Petition for Peace and preventing Schism, to the Bishops, which
they never answered to this day, that we know of.

3. You must know that the Change of the Liturgy on pretense of easing us, and
the Act of Uniformity, have made Conformity now quite another thing than it was
before, and to us far more intolerable; I am past doubt that Ri. Hooker,
Bishop Bilson, By- Usher and such others were they now alive would be
Nonconformists; yea, I can prove it, as well as I can prove that they were
honest men, and would hold to what they wrote.

4. You must know that we had never leave to give our Reasons against the New
Conformity; nor allowed to be once heard speak for our selves, before about two
thousand Ministers were silenced; when our Judicatures will hear a single
Malefactor. We have been silent about eighteen years, while men have called to
us [ What is it that you would have?] while they would not give us leave to
tell them.

5. And when the Press was somewhat open, they spread it abroad that [our
silence now plainly showed that we had nothing to say, but kept up a Schism
against our own Consciences.]

6. At last, though my Friends had long told me that our Lives must be our best
Defense, and that our Accusers would but be inflamed by an Apology, and could
not endure to hear our Reasons, I durst forbear no longer, but yet ventured no
farther than to write a bare Narrative of the Matter of our Nonconformity, lest
arguing should exasperate: But that very naming of the things which we deny,
has much displeased them that differ from us, supposing that it implies an
accusation of them, which I renounced.

7. The Reader then that will understand our Case, must not look to find it
here, but be at the labor to read what is already written of it, which we must
not repeat as often as any will write against us; that is, 1. In the said
unanswered writings of 1661. 2. In the Kings eclaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, for which the London Ministers subscribed and printed a
Thanksgiving. 3. In my first Plea for Peace, describing our Nonconformity. 4.
In the efence of it against Mr. Cheyny's Answer. 5. In my second Plea for
Peace, describing our Judgment of Government and obedience, and what our
Nonconformity is not, and diverse other points. 6. In my True and only way of
Universal Concord, on which the Churches must agree, if ever. 7. In my Moral
Prognostication. 8. In my Abridgment of Church History of Bishops and Councils,
showing what has divided the Churches heretofore.

8. You must know that I write not to justify every man that is called a
Nonconformist, but to give an Answer to the public Accusation of my self, and
a Reason of the Preaching of the mere Nonconformists.

9. But that the fuller Justification of our Preaching is intended in another
Treatise, called Their Apology, or Third Plea for Peace.

II. And as to the prosecution of the debate with this Reverend Doctor, it is
not likely that I shall trouble him with any Rejoinder if he Reply, unless he
will take another course, and first explain our terms, and state the question
to be disputed. Much less shall I contend with any substitute who shall avoid
the way of Love and Reason, which from the Doctor I may expect.

There is one sort of Disputants that are too strong for me, Those that have a
better Cause; Truth will overcome: Light will appear through narrow cranies. Of
these I shall be glad to be overcome: I protest, that to my knowledge, I never
managed a Dispute, in which I trusted not to the Goodness of my Cause, more
than to wit or words or humane advantage.

But there are above twenty sorts of other Disputants, too hard for me to
overcome.

1. Those that will Dispute before they agree of the sense of their terms or
state the question, and then quarrel for not being understood.

2. Those that will not read or answer our fullest Defense already written, but
look I should still begin anew.

3. Vniversallists, that can prove me to be an Ass, because I am an Animal.

4. Equivocaters, that can prove me a Separatist because I sit not at their
feet, or read not in their Book or with their Spectacles.

5. A Pope that takes it for a Heresy or Crime to question his word, or
suppose him fallible.

6. A proud mere Grammarian, who can confute Aristotle and the Schoolmen with
a scorn, and takes it for a disgrace to have any more Logic than simple
terms; or takes Rhetoric for the purest fruit of Reason.

7. A Nominal, who contracteth all his Syllogisms into simple terms of art, and
can confute any Adversary, by calling him a Fool, or a Rogue, or a Heretic, or
a Schismatic.

8. One that stands so high that he thinks men below him to be little things
like walking Crows.

9. A one-eyed man that can see nothing but on his own side.

10. A galled person that smarteth if the wind blow on him: And a melancholy
man that thinks that all that you think and say is against him, and would
kill him.

11. I cannot dispute against Canons and Organs, that speak so loud that none
can be heard but themselves. Nor against ringing Bells, that have loud tongues
and no ears: and go on, on, on, and take no heed to what is answered.

12. Nor against such as Isa. 48. 4. Iron is too stiff for me to bow, and I can
make no impression upon brass.

13. Nor can I deal with such as are described, Hos. 7. 4, 6, 7. Such an Oven
has too wide a mouth and too hot a breath for me to contend with.

14. Nor such as Psalm. 59. 7. and 55. 21. that speak swords, or dispute with
hands and not with tongues: and fetch their arguments from the Prison, or the
Lions, and speak not to the ear, but to the flesh and bones. Nor such as 2 Samuel
23. 6. Isa. 27. 4. Mic. 7. 4. Thorns and Briars speak too feelingly. If I must
dispute with stings, I had rather it were with Bees that will recompense me,
than with Wasps or Hornets.

15. I am too weak for men over valiant, that can venture upon any thing, and
easily prove that the Snow is black.

16. And my voice is too low for the dead and deaf and sleepy and drunken, that
when I have spoken know not what I said.

17. I am loath to enter the Lists with those women that never want time, or
heat, or words, and seldom foul ones, [ Nam si cum stercore certo, vinco seu
vincor, semper ego maculor.]

18. Nor am I able to deal with a Crowd or Multitude, where they follow the
Leader, and cry, Away with him, when few know whom or what they are against.

19. Nor yet with Lads that are too quick for me, and value Mercury above Gold,
that have quick Trade but little stock, and think age and experience to be the
Characters of dull declining Wits.

20. And I am too weak to dispute a man out of Love with his Life, or his
Pleasure, Wealth or Honor. All Church History tells me how rarely any ever
scrupled the Lawfulness of being made Pope or Patriarch, or has been argued
out of a Bishopric or Dominion. I am not strong enough to answer an hundred
pound a year, much less a thousand (though Grace and Conscience is.)

21. But though all this be not the Case of the Reverend Doctor, yet one
advantage (though uncertain) he has: He is liketo over-live me, and so may
have the last word; And that is a certain Victory with the sequacious
multitude. But yet Truth will triumph, and fraud will vanish, and secret things
shall be brought to light, and that which is crookned by the Judgment of men
shall be set strait by the infallible final judgment.

For the Reverend Doctor Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's.
Reverend Sir,
AS you have told the Magistrates and the World what you think of me as guilty
of sinful separation, I have reason to hope that you will not deny me your help
for my own conviction: For it concerns no man so nearly to know my sin as my
self: and being so near my day of Judgment, I were a most inexcusable wretch if
I were unwilling to know it. You knew their capacity it is like, for whom you
Preached and wrote; but I, that best know my own, finding it impossible to
understand you and your accusation without further help, presume to entreat
your speedy Answer to these Questions which are the stop of my Conviction.

I. Q. I entreat you to tell me more plainly, which is the constitutive Regent
part of a National Church? Whether the King, or a Sacerdotal Head? For that you
know, that a Church as well as a Kingdom, is essentiated by a pars regens, and
pars subdita, I long ago found in your Irenicon. I have opened the state of the
Question in my first Plea, Page 251, 252, etc. Of which I crave your Solution:
For to hear of [ One Head,] and not know who it is, is no satisfaction to me.

II. Q. I entreat you to tell me wore plainly what the [ One Rule] meant in
your Text was, which was then extant, and all that had attained to be true
Christians were then and are now to agree in and walk by. For I perceive you
truly judge that it was somewhat then known to them; and yet in your
application one would think you meant some late humane Laws.

Was it a Divine Rule or a Humane? If Humane, how to know it.

III. Q. I beseech you tell me plainly, what is the definition or formal reason
of that sinful separation which you mention as mine. For I cannot perceive it
by your Book: unless you take preaching without the Magistrates Leave, and
Worshipping in a manner different from that appointed by Law, and forbidden, to
be it. But I suppose you take not all Disobedience to be Separation, nor all
different Modes of Worship. I would fain know what you mean.

IV. Q. I entreat you tell me plainly, what you would have the many score
thousands do on the Lords days, who cannot hear in the Parish Churches? For the
matter of fact is past dispute, that in your Parish of St. Andrews, Sepulchers,
Giles Cripplegate, Giles in the Fields, Martins, Clements, and many others,
there are in some 10000, in some 20000, in some 30000, in some the Parishoners
say, 60000 Inhabitants more than can come into the Church and hear the
Ministers Voice; which seldom can be heard by more than 3000 or 4000. How would
you have all these score thousands spend the Lords day?

V. Q. Are you not conscious that the true pastoral Office is not performed in
your own Parish to the third part of the people according to their need, and
Paul's example Act. 20. by reason of the number of them? Prudent peaceable men
of your Parish tell me, that not one of five of their neighbors ever use to go
to any Church: And out of the Church never hear a word from the Pastor, unless
at the Baptizing of a Child; but live like Heathens without any public Worship
of God: And the worst men that most need help least desire it, and therefore
easiliest take the excuse that at the Parish Church there is no room, and if
they go to others they are called Separatists; but not if they play, work or
drink at home.

VI. Q. I am confident you know the need of many Curates in your own Parish;
(for my part, I profess, I am so far from thinking my self capable of a Bishops
work, that I would not take many 1000 l. a Year to take the Pastoral Charge of
your Parish without many assistants) seeing then you and I (as I see by your
Treat of Satisfaction and other Doctrinal Books) do Preach the same Doctrine,
and I perform but the part of a Curate or Assistant to you for nothing. Why
think you that it is worse than that so many be untaught?

VII. Q. Do you not think that culpably to alienate an Ordained Minister, Vowed
to the Sacred Office, is far worse sacrilege than to steal Church-plate or
Moneys? And that it must needs be so culpable, either in our selves for not
Conforming, or for ceasing our works, or else in those that hinder us.

VIII. Q. What then is it that you would have us do, when after our best
endeavors we are no more able to see the Lawfulness of Conforming or forsaking
our Calling, than of many great notorious sins?

IX. Q. Do you think that for qualification and number there are so many better
than the silenced Ministers in the Land, as may so far s^pply the Peoples
wants, as that 2000 such as we may better be spared, than employed, unless we
can Conform?

X. Q. Are none of our Hearers more competent Judges than their Accusers, what
profits their own Souls? And if the (...), what is the great harm that such
as I do, that weighs down the Peoples profit; while all your power is for
edification, and all your Churches that I come in are full?

XI. Q. What is it in us that warranteth a humble (...) to think, that his
Ministerial duty is so much better than ours, that in comparison of his
Ministry, ours is unnecessary and we unsufferable in the Land: Is it our
ignorance or our wickedness that makes the difference so great? I have studied
many years longer than you, though perhaps with less advantage: We know nothing
in the world that we prefer before the pleasing of God, and edifying his
Church? Though you excel us, do all others so? My meaning is, would you have
none tolerated in England that are as ignorant and as bad as I, Consideratis
considerandis. Does bare Conforming make all this difference?

XII. Q. And as I ask all these Questions for my self (and earnestly entreat
your Answer) pardon me while in true love to you, I put this Question to you
for your self; Whether do you think, if you lived in the pain, and as near the
Grave as I do, and by the sentence of death had the lively apprehensions of
your account, should you not tremble to think of becoming a Preacher against
our Preaching, and justifying or owning the silencing and ruining of so many
hundred devoted Ministers of Christ, who are no worse, and for no worse Cause?
Such as truly desire to serve God as faithfully and diligently as your self,
and with as little respect to preferment, riches, applause, or any worldly end?
And whether you will never wish that you had never put your hand to such a
work, as to argue with the Magistrate and harden others, against the enduring
of such men's labors, even on the hard terms that we willingly perform them.

Sir, Many importune me to publish an Answer to your Sermon: 1. As to my self,
I am more concerned to crave your help for my conviction, if I live in sin at
so dear a rate, even to my slesh: 2. And as to you, you have deserved so well
of this Land, especially for so stoutly opposing Popery at such a time, and are
so much loved and valued by us all, that I would take tho-least provoking way;
us knowing what contention and exasperatiou tends to, and how glad the
Papists will be to turn your Pen from themselves, and leave you and such as I,
together in a fruitless conflict: waiting your Answer, I rest

May 29. 1680. Your unworthy fellow servants, Ri. Baxter.

Dr. Stillingfleet's Answer to Mr. Baxter's Letter.
SIR,
I Lately received a Letter from you,. 1.
wherein you complain of my exposing you to the Magistrates and the World, as
one guilty of sinful Separation; whereas I never mentioned your name, when I
Preached, and when I Printed the Sermon, I have quoted it several times against
Separation.. 2.
But if your meaning he, that you think your self concerned in those practices
which I charge with that guilt,. 3.
I should have been very glad to have found in your Letter an Answer to those
Reasons in my Sermon which moved me to judge as I then did, and still do
concerning them, Which in my opinion had been a far more likely way for your
Conviction, which you seem to desire in your Letter, than my Answering those
Queries you propose; many of which do very little relate to the matter in
debate between us. What you mean by knowing their capacity for whom I preached
and wrote, I am not willing to understand; but if I have any, the single
Question between you and me,. 4.
as to this matter, is, Whether the upholding Separate Meetings for Divine
Worship,. 6.
where the Doctrine stablished, and the substantial parts of Worship are
acknowledged to be agreeable to the Word of God, be a sinful separation, or not?

By separate Meetings, I mean such as (...) to a purer way of Worship, and are
kept up in opposition to the legal establishment of Religion among us. And now
Sir, I pray consider,

First,. 7.
To what purpose I should resolve the Queries you make concerning our great
Parishes, since,

1. The separate Meetings (...) kept up in the City, and adjoynen^ places,. 8.
as Hackney, Newingten, etc. without any regard to the greatness of Parishes,
or capacity of Churches.

2. You cannot but know, that the People do not go to them, because they cannot
find room in Churches,. 9.
but because they look upon the Worship of God, as purer there, (...) our
Paroch^^l Churches: and most of those who frequent them, would not come to the
public Worship, were our Churches never so great, or our Parishes nev^^ so
small.

3. The preaching in them is forbidden by Law,. 10.
which the greatness or smallness of our Parishes does not make more or l^ss
(...) unless those who preach in them do Conform to the (...) established, and
so I grant you, the Tabe^^acle in St. Martin's Parish, is ^^wah (...) to the
Parish Church,. 11.
which before was a separate Meeting. And I wonder a Person of your segacity
should think to satisfy your self, or others, by such slight evasions as
these, which scarce any of my Auditors or Readers, how mean soever their
capa^^ies were, but could discern the weakness of them.

. 12.
Secondly, Others of your Queries relate to the Qualifications and number of
the ejected Ministers, and comparing their Gifts with Ours.

But what is all this to the business of Separation? unless you suppose that
the Gospel is not preached by Us; or whether it be or not, that you are bound
to preach it still, and so much seems to be implied in your 7 th Question, viz.
That it is a sacrilege culpably to alienate an Ordained Minister vowed to the
sacred Office. And because this comes nearest to the matter in hand, and seems
very much to stick with you, I shall desire you to resolve these Queries.

1. Whether it be not in the power of those who give Orders in a Christian
Church to limit and suspend the Exercise of the Ministerial Function without
Sacrilege? If not, how could the Christian Church in its best and purest
times, pretend to reduce Bishops and Presbyters to a Lay-Communion? of which
you may read so often in St. Cyprian's Epistles. Nay what Church is there to be
named, that does not assume this power to it self, without the least suspicion
of Sacrilege? And it would be very strange, that this Notion of Sacrilege
should never be understood before.

. 13.
2. Whether Christian Magistrates may not justly restrain those Ministers from
Preaching, who after the experience of former Troubles, do refuse to renounce
those Principles which they judge do naturally tend to involve (...) again in
the like Troubles?

3. To what purpose any such Authority is either in Church or State, if those
who are legally silenced may go on to preach publicly in opposition to the
established Laws; only in supposition that they were wrongfully ejected? This I
am certain is contrary to the Doctrine of all the Non-conformists of former
times,. 14.
as you may see in the Book published in their name by Mr. Rathband, A. D.
1644. p. 41. (besides what you may find in my Sermon, p. 51. only the Testimony
of Dr. Gouge ought to be corrected the, p. 513, 514.) Their words are, if a
guiltless Person put out of his charge by the Churches Authority, may yet
continue in it, what proceedings can there be against guilty persons who in
their own conceit are always guiltless or will at least pretend so to be;
seeing they also will be always ready to object against the Churches judgment,
that they are called of God, and may not therefore give over the execution of
their Ministry at the will of Man.

. 25.
4. Whether there be the same obligation now lying upon Ministers to preach the
Gospel, in a Nation where the Gospel is confessed to be truly preached, when
they are forbidden to do it by the Laws of the Land; as there was upon the
Apostles to preach it first to the World, notwithstanding ^he prohibitions of
men?

The disparity seems so obvious to me, that I could hardly believe men of
understanding would allege the Apostles words to justify their present
practices, had I not so often seen it done. But that the old Non-conformists
did truly understand the disparity of the case, you may see it in 3 instances
in the former Book, which I shall refer you to.. 16.


But you ask one matterial Question in behalf of the People, viz. Are none of
our hearers more competent judges than their Accusers what profits their own
souls? And is this in your judgment, a tolerable Plea for Separation? then
there can be no such thing as an unjustifiable or sinful separation; since the
people are left to be their own judges. For where was any separation made but
upon such a pretense? And upon this ground the people may leave you to morrow,
and go to Doctor O. and leave him next week and go to the Anabaptists, and from
them to the Quakers; and still plead that they are more competent judges than
their Accusers, what profits their own souls.. 17.
No one would think by such Questions as these, that ever you had written so
much against Separation, and spoken so freely of the mischief of it, Thus I
have picked out those Queries, which come nearest to the matter of Separation,
and given a suffieient Answer to them. But as to the other remaining,
concerning the constituent regent part of a National Church; the One Rule
mentioned by the Apostle; and whether you or I have studied longer or to better
purpose, I have in civility passed them over, as no more relating to our
business,. 18.
than determining the Principle of Individuation, is, to the keeping of the
sixth Commandment. And I am resolved in debate of this nature not to be drawn
off by any by-Queries from the main thing in Controversy. I do not press you
to any speedy Answer, but I desire you rather to weigh and consider things
impartially, than to give too hasty a Reply. I am neither fond of Controversy,
nor can I desert so just and clear a Cause as I take this against Separation to
be; from which I shall not be moved by the noise and censures of weak and
injudicious people, who I find (as you formerly observed) can least endure to
be touched in this matter. If you please at your leisure to return an Answer to
this paper, it shall be thankfully received by

SIR, Your faithful Friend and Servant EDWARD STILLINGFLEET.
My sudden removal into the Country upon the receipt of yours, must excuse my
sending this no sooner.



A Reply to Dr. Stillingfleet's Letter; being the sum of our Controversy.
. 1. I Confess I was so well assured of the Divine obligations which lay on me,
to do these things which you judge my sin, that my expectations from your return
were very low: But yet I thought it my duty to try whether you had more than I
knew of to say for my Conviction, before I ventured on a Defense: But your
refusal to convince and satisfy me, increases my confidence. that it is my
great duty which you account my sin.

. 2. Did you not write to be understood? Or must I only not understand you;
must I trouble the Reader by gathering all the passages, where you expressly
speak to me, viz. As One of them; and as going beyond the Independants, and
preaching unlawfully to them that unlawfully hear. and as deeling more
disingeniously and less fairly than the old Separatists, and so almost from end
to end.

. 3. Seeing you should have been very glad to have found an answer to your
Sermon, an Answer you shall have.

. 4. Seeing you will no further explain your great word [ separation] I will
answer it where I find it in your Sermon: And if the Case must be no more
intelligibly stated, I must take it as you will do it.

. 5. To sum up all, as far as I am able to understand you, your Sermon
contains, 1. The grounds supposed on which you build. 2. Your Accusation of
us on those grounds: 3. The penalties which you justify, 4. And the cure which
you desire.

I. As far as you are intelligible to me, your supposed grounds are, that [God
has authorized the Magistrate, 1. To choose what persons every man in his
dominions shall entrust his soul to, as the Pastor, whose Conduct he is bound
in Conscience to obey: 2. And also to choose and command, in what words only
every Pastor shall publicly pray to God; and what Books and words of men he
shall profess assent and consent to; and what dedicating symbols of
Christianity he shall use as engaging in the Christian Covenant, and to command
Ceremonies and Modes, for dissent wherein he shall deny Baptism, and
Church Communion to all dissenters, though the things be taken to be
indifferent by the Magistrate, and great sins by the dissenters. 3. And that
all that obey not in all these, but preach when forbidden, or use other
accidents or modes, and choose other Pastors to ^e their Guides, are
Separatists and sin againg God.

II. On these grounds you judge me and such others sinful Separatists

III. You justify the executing of the Laws upon us, and would have us
silenced, and such dissenters not endured

It is our (Conformity, or our) ceasing to preach which you plead for as the
Cure.

. 6. I. As to your supposed ground, 1. You know, it is like that in my first
plea for peace, I largely confuted it: And could you think that without any
reply your bare saying over the thing confuted, could be any satisfaction, to
one of any sense or conscience.

2. You cannot but know that the judgment and practice of the Uniyersal Church
in East and West has been against you, not only for the first 300 years, but
for many hundred after. Father Paul Sarpi after cited, in his History of Church
Revenues truly testifies it: I have proved it by many Canons and Histories in
my Church History; that he was to be taken as no Bishop that was chosen by
Magistrates, Prelates or any, without the Clergies election, and the Peoples
election or consent: Christians then took not this to be any part of the
Princes trust: but only to countenance the things that furthered Learning and
Godliness, and encourage the Clergy and People to choose the best, and to
protect and encourage and govern them by the sword when they were chosen. This
being past doubt, were the Universal Church Separatists? Is our Concent with
the Universal Church, or your singularity from it, liker to Schism or
Separation?

3. I know that there are inconveniences in the Peoples consenting power, and
so there are in all humane affairs; but not to be cured by pernicious
mischiefs. You will not tell me, because you cannot tell me, how we shall know
what Magistrates they be that have this trust? Whether Heathens, Infidels,
Mahometans, Socinians, Arians, Macedonians, Eutkchians, Monothelites,
Image-worshipers, Papists, Anabaptists, or who? and who must judge of their
qualifications? Yea, were we sure that the Prince were Orthodox, If he were but
wicked, debauched, an enemy to serious practical piety, as all wicked men
naturally are inclined to be, will not all such choose Bishops and Pastors like
themselves? what more natural than to propagate our like? And will not wicked
Bishops make wicked Priests; And you know the Patron has the choice with us
and it is a slender qualification which the Bishop has power to require,
without a quare impedit: An Atheist, a Fornicator, a drunkard, a hater of
holiness, has nevertheless the choice of a Priest for the Parish, to whom all
the People must entrust their Souls. What a sad Case were the Christian World
in, if we may lawfully have no other Pastors than Gentlemen and Princes choose
for us? When Christ tells us how hard it is for the Rich to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven? and how few of the Noble are called, and [ in uno annulo,
etc.] is become a Proverb. What a Case were Hungary, Poland, France, Germany,
and the Greek Churches in, if this were true?

4. Personal power in man is the first: Family power is the next: City and
Kingdom power supposes these and cannot destroy them: Hence subjects that are
not mere slaves, stand up to plead for their Personal and Domestic property,
liberty and power. If my Money, and Limbs and Life be not at the Patrons or the
Princes will, much less my Soul. He is trusted with my Estate and Life; but I
am first and more trusted with them. He may keep out ill Physicians from the
Land, and encourage the good; but he has no power to tie me to an ill
Physician, nor to an ill Diet, nor to ill Servants, etc. The choice of these
belongs to my self. Much less can he on pretense of Parish-order tie me to an
ignorant, drunken, Malignant, or an unexperienced sapless Teacher, that is to
my Soul as a silly Emperick to my health. Scripture and the Worlds experience
tell how much God m^rrally gives his light and grace, according to the
aptitude of means: Habitus infusi se habent ad modum acquisitorum, is common in
the Schools. Twenty sinners are usually sooner brought to repentance under
skilful fit Teachers, than under one unskilful or ungodly men. And no man has
power from God, to damn my Soul; or forbid me the needful means of my
salvation. No man is so much concerned as my self what becomes of me for ever:
and I will not believe that the Patron loves me and all the Parish better than
we love our selves.

England has been blessed with better Rulers than other Lands: But one Rule must
in this be held to by all the Churches. And if you would even here appeal to
experience, I will not here stay to tell you the names of 8 or 9 or 10 ignorant
Readers, most Drunkards, some rarely, half never preaching, that I was bred
under, nor what a stock of such our Country had, and how very thin pious
tolerable preachers were: nor what worthy men Aldermanbury, Blackfriars, the
Inns-of-Courts, and most places have had where the people chose.

But reason signifies little with most, who are on his side that talks to
them with the best advantage: I insist on this, You go against all the ancient
Farthers and Churches for many hundred Years, and are so far a Separatist from
more than one Parish Priest.

II. And therefore your Accusation of us thus grounded is Shismatical and
unjust, and recoileth on your self, who instead of Gods Rule that all should
walk by, accuse them that walk not by your novel crooked Rules, which may make
as many Modish Religions as there are Princes.

III. And your desire of our silencing and not being tolerated, I will only
here lament, and after speak to.

IV. And as your Cure by our Conformity is impossible; so that by silencing
will be none, but increase the disease.

. 7. Is it not a very uncharitable thing of you, that when it is I whom you have
called to account, you flatly deny or shun to give me an Answer to my Case, and
to the Case of all others that preach only in Parishes, where few of the People
can hear in the Church. Why ask you [ To what purpose should you resolve those
Queries?] I Answer, to show me whether my preaching be my Sin, or Duty: And
whether you justly or unjustly accused me, and all such others; was it not to
this purpose that I craved your Answer?

2. And do you not know, that in the Bills of Mortality it appears that the
Parishes within the Walls are but about the seventh part of the whole; and the
outer Parishes, which are thus great, are about six parts: And in these
Parishes it is not the tenth part in some and the sixth in most that can come
within the Church to hear. And it is pity that one half, or two or three parts
of such a City as London should be left like the Indians without any public
Teaching and Worship, and such as you say so much for it.

. 8. You say, The Separate Meetings are kept in the City, Hackney, Newington,
etc.

Ans. 1. What Is that to me, and all such other? 2. I can tell that some City
Churches are yet unbuilt, and the Tabernacles will not hold the People (as
Christ-Church, and others.) 3. And diverse keep Meetings within the Walls, where
they found most peace, for the reception of those without the Walls, that
cannot come into their own Churches. 4. What Is done at Newington I know not;
But at Hackney I know of two Meetings, where the Ministers so preach out of the
time of Public Worship, that none may be hindered from going to it, and deny
not Communion with the Parish-Churches: And they tell me, that as the Incumbent
Officiateth by another, so the Parish is so great, and the Preachers Voice so
low, that a great part cannot hear him.

5. Why do you say they are separate Meetings, when you know that you have cast
them out: The Preachers had rather Preach in your Temples, and they cannot be
suffered: Preachers and People that are professed Nonconformists but in
Opinion, are by the Canon ipso facto Excommunicate.

. 9. As to what you say of the Reason of their Meetings; I Answer, 1. I think
(as far as I can Judge) the most of my Hearers, (I think ten or twenty to one)
do also hear in the Parish Churches: So that your Charge of Separation against
them is but for hearing both: And I believe it is so with many others. 2. Every
one that prefers better, does not separate from all the rest: Your Church
allows any free Man to forsake and change his Bishop and Parish Priest as often
as he will; so he will but (...)

8. I believe, that a Father must be honored, and having care of his Childrens
Life and Soul, he must command them necessary Food and Means for Body and Soul,
and they must obey him, if the Law forbad it.

9. I believe that murdering Souls privatively or positively is a sin, as well
as murdering Bodies, as many undertaking and not performing Pastors will find.

10. I believe that he that obeys not a Law which was made against Gods Law,
or without Authority given by him, sins not against Authority.

11. I think in such cases, he that submits to the Penalty of a Penal Law,
does enough.

12. I conjecture, that the multitude of Casuists, Politic Writers, and
Lawyers, who say that Because the Common Good is the End of Government, and all
Power is for Edification, no Law obliges which is against the Common Good, or
at least that is destructive of it,] are like to be near as knowing in such
matter, as the meanest of the Doctors Hearers and Readers.

13. And I am past doubt, that he that denies these Principles, will shortly
have no cause to glory of his Wisdom.

And O what cause have we that are Teachers, in stead of proving those
intolerable that differ from us in such matters as our Conformity, to consider
that an Error in us, especially so Practical and momentous, is far more
dangerous than in the People. If all my Neighbors mistake my Disease and the
Remedy, it may not hurt me; but if my Physician mistake it, it may be my death.
Bishop Usher and many Protestants do except a Learned Papist much more than the
unlearned from the hopes of Salvation.

. 12. I will readily Answer your Queries, though you refuse to Answer mine.

To your first, Those who rightfully give Orders, must give such Orders as God
has instituted, and may not limit or suspend contrary to his Institution or
Laws. As he that marries Persons may not except the Husbands Power of
Government, nor may unmarry them again, save for Adultery. None may silence
Ministers that forfeit not their Office. On just cause to pull down Churches,
and alienate the Church Goods, (as some Bishops of old did for the Poor) is no
Sacrilege: nor to silence an intolerable Teacher: But to silence Ministers
unjustly, is another matter.

If men will cant over still, Who shall be Judge? We still repeat, 1. Whoever
is Judge, he has no Power to cast out faithful Ministers: and if he mis-judge
them, it justifies not his act. And every man is the discerning Judge of his
own Duty.

. 13. To your second Querie, Christian Magistrates may justly preserve the
public Peace by all just means, and may repress all rebellious Practices and
Principles: but if they should mis judge any principles to be such that are
not, and for not renouncing those should silence Ministers, if they have fitter
means than silencing to correct them, silencing them, when their Ministry is
needful, is a sin.

But seeing these words are significant of your mind for silencing us, and the
Reasons of it, why would you not tell me, what those Principles are which we
refuse to renounce, and so deserve silencing. Either you lay the stress on the
guiltiness of our Principles, or on the Magistrates judging them so. You cannot
think, that if he mis judge, it will justify his silencing men: Else Valens,
Hunnierichus, that cut out the Preachers Tongues, those that silenced the
Preachers in Germany, on one side for not swearing for the Pope, and on the
other for not swearing for the Emperor, etc. all did well. Seeing then you
speak as an Accuser of us, as guilty of refusing to renounce such Principles,
and subscribe your implied consent to our silencing for it; O that you would be
so charitable as to help our Conversion, and tell us what those Principles are.
I have told the World at large my own and many other Principles of Government
and Obedience, in my second Plea for Peace: I crave your discovery of my
errors therein: Yea, I provoke also such as more fiercely accuse us, as
Plotters, or cherishing Principles of Rebellion, to name that Principle which I
have not there renounced. If all that is there be not enough, I know not what
will be enough.

. 14. To your third, I answer, 1. It follows not, That Authority to silence
justly is to no purpose, unless all unjustly silencing must be obeyed: The
Apostles, the old Bishops, the most of the Churches have disobeyed such; as did
the Waldenses, Bohemians, German Protestants, the French, Belgians,
Remonstrants, and Contraremonstrants, etc. You say, Greatness of Parishes makes
no difference: What if the King turned all London into one Parish, and so
fo^bid all Preaching and Public Worship to all save a few thousands? Is
Authority vain, unless all the rest turn like to Atheists? No good Christian
should obey the Popes Interdicts of whole Kingdoms, though he had as much
Authority as the King: A power to damn souls is a frightful word.

2. Either the supposition that it is unjust, is true or false: If false, it
will not justify their Preaching: If true, either his Preaching is necessary
or unnecessary. If it be necessary, we must obey God, and disobey man (as
Grosthead says) by an obedient disobedience: If it be unnecessary, though the
Magistrate sin, I must forbear there, and go to some place where I may preach
without doing more hurt than good: So that all our Controversy ^ieth but in
this, Whether the Preaching of the 2000 silenced Ministers was unnecessary, and
tended to do more hurt than good? And this is all that Mr. Rathband, or any
sober Nonconformist meant: And this is plain truth, though the best of your
Hearers, and Readers, or your self contradict it.

. 15. And whereas you say, This I am certain is contrary to the Doctrine of all
the Nonconformists of former times; your Assertion is so rash and false in
matters of notorious Fact, that it weakneth my reverence of your Judgment.

change his dwelling: And in London, Lodgers may change frequently. If I know
those called Puritans better than you, I must profess that I believe of the two
it is more the Preacher and his Preaching which makes the difference with them
than the Liturgy. For my part I seldom hear any but very good well studied
Sermons in the Parish Churches in London where I have been: But most of them
are more sitted to well bred Scholars, or judicious hearers, than to such as
need more Practical Subjects, and a more plain familiar easy mode: And it is
not your Reasoning that will bring all Appetites to the same Food; nor make the
same Books serve every form. I have always found that such conformable
Preachers, as were Mr. Bolton, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Whately, Bishop Usher, etc. Were
flockt after by those called Puritans, as much as the Non-conformists. But when
they find all together, 1. That the worship and the preaching is more suitable
to their good, 2. And that their Souls have need of much other Pastoral help
than public. 3. And doubt of the calling of obtruded men, no wonder if they
prefer the other.

. 10. But you lay the stress on the Prohibition of the Law, which the greatness
or smallness of the Parish does not make more or less Lawful.

Ans. God has commanded all Christians ordinarily to Learn and Worship him
under the Conduct of his Institution, all Christians grant this. No man has
Power to forbid this: All Law that forbids it is of no Obligation. In a
Parish where 10000, 20000, 40000, cannot come within the Church to hear; if
they have no other place to go to, they must forbear all public Learning and
Worship: So that the English of your Words is, that if the Law forbid the most
of the People all Public Learning and worship of God, it is there as unlawful
for any to Congregate against that Law as where there is no such need. But 1. I
again tell you, Councils, Doctors and the Universal Church thought otherwise,
and abhorred this Doctrine. 2. Why will you not give us one word of proof but
your naked Authority to prove such Authority in the Magistrate, and to satifie
us what Rulers have it, and how far it reaches: Has the King enabled Justices
to depose him, or cast down his Honor or Prerogative? Has God given
Magistrates Authority to damn as many Souls as they will; by keeping them from
the means of knowledge, Faith and Holiness; and to forbid his Subjects to
Worship God? Did Robert Grosthead of Lincoln take this to be the greatest Sin
save Antichrists, and do you take it for an Act Authorized? Is it unlawful to
preach when forbidden, or worship God when forbidden, at Japon, Indostan,
China, Turkey, France, etc. or only in England? and where?

. 11. Yet do you conclude [ I wonder a person of your sagacity should think to
satisfy your self or others, by such slight evasions as these, which scarce
any of my Auditors, or Readers how mean so ever their Capacities were, but
could discern the weakness of them.

Answ. 1. O pity then the frailty of human understanding! I get nothing by it
if I err but my great labor and the hazard of my Salvation by Sin! It must
needs be then against my will; and is none of my size to be endured? How few
Congregations are so happy as yours, if all your Auditors are so much wiser?
but, 1. Be the thousands of your Parish as wise that hear you not? 2. How come
some that I thought the wisest that I know of your Auditors, to say as I say,
and lament your Case?

Reader, you see here that it must be somewhat better than the confidence of
Teachers, that must guide and secure the peoples Faith. This Reverend Man you
see is most confident of the strength of his Reasons and the slightness of
mine: And I am so far past doubt on the other side, as that I think he
overthrows all Religion, and seteth up Man in open Rebellion against God: He
may as well wonder that I take any thing to be of Divine command: If all
Public Worship is sinful, when forbidden, all Private may be so too. Daniel
may go to the Lions: The Martyrs, Fathers, Councils, the Universal Church are
all foolisher than the meanest of his Auditors. It Is strange that he can be
sure Gods Word is true; and yet be so sure that Men's Laws are above it, and may
suspend it; when yet Men's Laws have no more strength than Gods Laws give them.

1. I believe that the spirit of God has said, Forsake not the assembling of
your selves together; know them that labor among you, and are over you in the
Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very highly in Love for their work
sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. 13. That have spoken to you the word of God, that watch
for your Souls, Heb. 13. 17, 24. How shall they hear without a Preacher, etc.
Romans 10.

2. I believe that where the Gospel is hid, it is hid to them that are lost:
And without knowledge the Heart is not good, and without Faith there is no
Salvation; and that it is Life Eternal to know God in Christ.

3. Therefore they that forbid Men to hear and worship God Publicly, forbid
what God commands; and what is ordinarily needful to Salvation.

4. I believe that God is Almighty, the highest Universal King, and we are all
his Subjects; and the Scripture is his Law.

5. I believe that there is no Power but from him, and that he has given none
against him, or his Laws, nor above him; and that Man is not God; and that we
must obey God rather than Man, when they Contradict.

6. I believe that we must Love, Fear, and Serve God above all, and Worship him
according to his Word, and Honor his Name, and keep holy his day, whoever
forbid it: And that we must Love our Neighbor as our selves, and help to save
him as we may.

7. I believe that I must love my self, and seek the saving of my Soul, though
the Law forbad me. in matter of right. I have told you what Bishop Bancroft
says of the old Nonconformists forming Churches and Discipline: The Canon
against Conventicles, thence occasioned, confuteth you: I have heard old
Nonconformists preach constantly publicly and privately against Law: I was
familiar with many of them: I never knew one of the mind you mention. Most of
them did preach themselves that ever I heard of. If Mr. Rathband had denied
this, it had been no Proof. Mr. Ash that is one of them there, and Mr. Slator,
both Preached at Bremicham long, Mr. Pateman at Moseley, etc. Multitudes I
could name. And yet a man that knew them not [ is certain that all the
Nonconformists of former times had contrary Doctrine]. I was in 1638. and 1639.
accounted one of them, though I used the Liturgy, which most of them did not.
I knew them better than you did. I have named many in my first Plea, whose
Practice proves your great Error in that History where you say you are certain.

. 16. To your fourth Question, An Obligation may be called [the same], 1. Quoad
terminum. 2. Quoad gradum. 3. Quoad modum obligandi. 4. Quoad realitatem.

1. The Apostles had an obligation to assert Christ's Resurrection, as
eyewitnesses, and to record his Doctrine and Laws infallibly in Scripture, and
to many things proper to them, which we have not; But we are obliged to the
work of our proper Office.

2. The Apostles had greater obligations then we, by more immediate Call, and
special gift of the Spirit, and special Commission and Command; when ours are
lower, but firmly binding us.

3. The Apostles were obliged by Christ's immediate mission, and Commission, and
we but by his ordinary instituted means. But we are as truly bound to our Duty,
as they to theirs.

2. And our Duty is to preach the Gospel to those without, and those within,
according to our Power and opportunity, and to do the rest of our Office when
we can. And though we are called to this without supernatural Inspiration,
Vision, or Miracle, being called, we are as truly obliged, as Parents,
Husbands, Princes are to their Duties. It is not lawful to look back when we
have put our hands to Christ's Plow, nor perfidiously to break our Ordination
Vow, nor to be negligent or treacherous Non-residents, Pluralists, or slothful,
nor to obey men more than God, though we were not called immediately, or by
Miracle.

3. If the Magistrate appoint 20000 or 1000, or one half a Parish to be
excluded for want of Room and Teachers, it is ill supposed that the Gospel is
truly and sufficiently preached to them, to whom it is not preached at all. And
that it is Preached to others, proves it not unnecessary to them.

4. He that only reads the Gospel truly preaches it: But Souls have need of
more Pastoral help than bare true preaching.

5 Ignorant wicked men in England can no more be saved than Heathens, and have
need of convincing, skilful, serious Preaching, as well as they.

Your wondering at our allegation of the Apostle's words, and great confidence
in so sad a Cause, sets me almost above wondering at any thing that you say.
Timothy was not called immediately by Christ, who had that dreadful Charge to
preach in season and out of season. The Universal Church long judged otherwise
of this case than you do: And not only Bishop Bilson, but I think almost all
Christian Writers, Protestants and Papists, herein follow the ancient Church
against you. The Nonconformists and others easily grant what I said before,
That no one Apostle might be silenced by man; but deserving Ministers, that do
more hurt than good by their Ministry, may be silenced by Christian
Magistrates: But not the Churches Edification oppugned, and 2000 faithful men
silenced for not sinning on pretense of a power to judge or execute.

. 17. My Question implies, 1. That every man is most concerned for his own
Soul, and has a prior obligation to secure it, which the King cannot dispense
with. 2. And, That every man has nearer helps to know what is good or hurtful
to his Soul in doubtful Cases, than the King that never saw him has. 3. And
every man is like to love himself more than the King loves him. 4. And, That
the King can no more bind him to hurt, or famish, or endanger his Soul than his
Health in Diet.

But the King must give men all the helps that he can, and set up and maintain
sufficient public Teachers, and drive the ignorant and profane to hear and
learn, and promote Order and Concord, and hinder Unpeaceableness and Disorder
by just means. But I have so fully declared the Magistrate's Work in my Book of
Concord, that I will not repeat it on this slight occasion. Separations must be
prevented by right means. I had no Separatists in a great Congregation for
fourteen years, though many Sects strongly and often tempted them; no not one
Separate Meeting all that time, and this without force. What harm will it do
me, or them, if my Hearers go from me (as you say) to Dr. O? Our whole Country
where I lived almost kept Concord, and kept out Separation without the
Magistrates constraint: Experience is not easily confuted. Why then do you tell
me of what I have written against Separation? when you may see that I
contradict none of this; and when that writing, with my other Endeavors,
served without the Rulers Sword. I had three Justic^ always at hand that would
have done for me what they could at any time: I never desired one act of force
from them. I allowed Quakers and Anabaptists public Disputes half a day
together: They never won one Man or Woman by it. Mr. Tombs his great Parts,
and Interest with his Flock and Kindred, could get but about twenty four or
less than thirty Anabaptists at Bewdeley: Almost all the rest of the Country
was free, save a few inconsiderable Quakers at Worcester, and a small Village
or two. The like was then done without force in many other Counties.

. 18. I told you how necessary the resolving of the Questions which I sent you
was to my Conviction: And I will not provoke you, by giving that Name to your
denial of an Answer to them, which I think impartial Readers will give it.

I. Will other men believe that he does well to deny me the definition of that
National Church which he writes of, or to tell me whether he speak of a Lay or
a Clergy Government, who writes his wonder that I should say, I know not what
they mean by the National Church? How can I know whom to obey, or when I
separate from the Form of Government, if I know not what it is? Is this nothing
to our Case? I take my self to be more bound to obey the King, than some
Bishops. You knew that you are here divided as for two Church-Forms among your
selves.

II. Would any man that ever knew you have believed that ever you, even you,
should have so preached and written for walking by the same Rule, and accused
the Nonconformists as worthy of silencing, and as intolerable for swarving
from that Rule; and when you have done, will by no entreaty be prevailed with
so much as to tell me what that Rule is, Divine or Humane, the Statutes or the
Canons, or what? yea, and think this impertinent to the business?

III. Was it not almost incredible, that when all this was said and written
against our Separation, that I cannot entreat you to tell me what Separation
is, even what is the formal Reason from whence you so name it, and whether you
make it not to be the same with [Disobedience], contrary to the common sense of
Church-Writers?

IV. Is it not hard to have been believed, that when I and others are so loudly
accused of preaching (though I never gathered a Church) to some of many
thousands that cannot come into the Temples, (many of which never heard a
Sermon of many years) that I cannot entreat you to tell me what all those
thousands should do on the Lords day, and how you would have them spend the
time: And that this should be taken as impertinent? The Canon commands the
spending of the Sunday and Holidays in hearing Gods Word, etc. Does he keep
this better that goes to no Church, or he that hears such as I?

Let the Reader also peruse the rest, and see whether they are impertinent.

. 19. Before you desired me, I have long weighed with my most serious and
impartial thoughts, the matter of this Controversy: And I had great Reason so
to do, when for the labor which you account my sin, I wear my Health and
Flesh, I suffer reproach, and many a thousand Pounds Loss and Damage, in these
nineteen years; and being weary of a burdensome Body, do bear it and live
especially for that work. And if I do and suffer all this for sin, to the wrong
of the Church, and the hazard of my Soul, alas, what a case am I in! when no
Study, no Prayer, no resolved contempt tempt of all Men's censure, and of
worldly Interests, in twenty years time, yea in forty one, (for so long I have
been partly a Nonconformist) can change my Judgment, or make me doubt? Lord,
show me thy Truth, and make me true to it, whatever it cost me; and teach us
all to know what manner of Spirit we are of, and acquaint us with the true way
of Christian Piety, Love, and Peace. June 17. 1680.

To the Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Dean of St. Paul's, etc.
Richard Baxter returns this Account of his Doctrine and Practice, which by
his published Sermon, preached before the Lord Mayor, May 2. 1680. he often
calls me to; and the Lord Mayor's and Court of Aldermen's earnest desire of
his printing it, add to my Obligation.
. 1. SIR, I apprehend much reason for my rendering you this following Account,
and some against it: And it was not easy to me quickly to resolve which did
preponderate. It is easy to foresee, that the Papists will be glad that your
Pen be turned from them, against those whom they are most against, and will
laugh to see you diverted by such a Scuffle. And Satan, knowing our frailty,
will hope to persuade you, that all that is said against the weakness and error
of your Writings, is against your Interest and You, and so to stir up in you
Passions and Thoughts directly contrary to Love and Concord, and your own and
the Public Good: For with some he has unhappily succeeded to carry them from
one Error to another, till he has brought them to the bitter hatred of their
Confuters. And though I am not so considerable as you, the Tempter disdaineth
not so low a Game, as to try whether he can make your erroneous opposition a
snare to me. When I saw that you had begun this contentious way, it was easy to
foresee that Satan's Cause was like to gain by it, and therefore I fear that he
was much the cause.

. 2. And I remembered Prove. 17. 14. The beginning of Strife is as when one
lets out Water; therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with.
And if you could not forbear beginning, you will hardly forbear when a
necessary Confutation seems to dishonor you. Interest, you tell me, is
strong; and it is easier to speak against selfish Partiality than to overcome
it. I never personally provoked you, unless it was by confuting your Opinion,
[That no Form of Church Government is of Divine Institution] in my Christian
Directory: But as I named you not unless with honor, so your own accusing of
that Irenicon of yours, (otherwise a very laudable Book) does seem to justify
what I said.

. 3. And I truly fear, lest the opening of your Misdoings should rejoice the
Papists, and encourage them to say, This is the Champion against the
Catholics. For I speak from my heart in my usual saying to them that mention
you, That this Kingdom is greatly beholden to you, for your seasonable and open
defense of the Protestant Cause, at a time when -- And I am glad that you blame
them that accuse the Conformable Clergy of yeildingness to Popery; which
implies, that no Bribe shall tempt you, directly or indirectly to serve that
Cause, how strongly soever it shall seem supported by the Arm of Flesh.

. 4. But yet in so public a Cause, to be by your Accusations so loudly called
to be accountable for my Doctrine and Practice, and that to the Magistrate, and
to an End easily discernable; and to refuse to tender you or the Magistrate any
just satisfaction, when refusing may make me and thousands more taken for
Guilty, as by our (silent) Confession, and consequently the Magistrate and you
to incur a far greater Guilt, if you should mistake, this seems to me a Crime
not to be ventured on. When you have made Answering necessary, I must answer:
Else I should have imitated Melancthon, who often boasts how much he had
profited in Philosophy, so that he could silently let Illiricus, Osiander, and
such others write and talk against him. If possible, and as much as in us
lies, we should live peaceably with all Men; but when that which Men make
impossible to us is no Duty, nor the want of it a Sin, though an Affliction,
the Aggressor does make Defense a Duty. And indeed I must be guilty of Scandal
against you and others, if I deny you satisfaction. Either I or you live in no
small Sin: Though Mr. Cheney think otherwise, your words, and many such others,
show, that you take our Course to be a Sin intolerable. And if it should prove
that the Sin is yours, it could not be small, not only to do what we fear would
be so bad in us, but also to accuse us so publicly to Magistrates, for not
forbearing to preach the Gospel when we were solemnly devoted to it; and
pleading against the toleration of it, when Non-toleration must be by
Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death, or such Disablement, against such as
believe they are bound to preach while they are able.

. 5. Yet you can tell that they are ill Men that reported you stir up
Magistrates to Persecution. If that much will prove it, it is like they will be
emboldened to call you [an ill Man] too; for such faults are so common, that we
may say as Seneca, [Quid ulcus leviter tangam omnes mali sumus.] Indeed they do
not well that use that word, Persecution; when your words are but against
Toleration, and the Church of England' s endeavor after Uniformity; which are
publicly known.

. 6. And no wonder if they are ill Men; when you are but finding out a certain
Foundation for a lasting Union, which is impossib^e to be attained, till Men
are convinced of the evil and danger of the present Separation, etc. That is,
you are but proving our Union impossible; for I have elsewhere proved, that the
Conviction which you speak of is morally impossible, to become the terms of a
common Union. It is impossible that we should all be convinced that none of the
Particulars imposed are sinful, which I have named in my first Plea. And
secondly, it is as impossible that we should all be convinced, that it is any
more lawful for us to forsake our Ministry, to which we were vowed in our
Ordination, than to break our Oath of Allegiance, and deny our Duty to the
King. So that you do no worse, than for Union, to prove our Union impossible:
and who is it that makes it so?

. 7. And this Impossibility you infer from this Principle, [That it is lawful
to separate on a pretense of greater Purity, where there is an agreement in
Doctrine, and the substantial parts of Worship.]

Answ. 1. Was there not this Agreement in the case of Cyprian and the Council,
who persuaded the People to separate from Martial and Basilides? And is not
Union possible with such as Cyprian and the Carthage Bishops?

2. We that are accused by you do not say that [we differ not from you in
Doctrine absolutely:] viz. in the Doctrine about Diocesan Church-Forms, or
their imposing Power, we never denied this difference. But we say, [in the
Doctrine of the 39 Articles,] as distinct from the Form of Government, and
imposed Abuses, we agree. And suppose that we agreed in such Doctrine and
Worship with a Church, that yet held, only that the Pope is jure divino the
Constitutive Vicarious Head of the Universal Church, and would take none that
confess it not, for Christians, were it a Sin to separate from that Church?

3. Suppose that Usurpers should thrust out the Bishops and you, and make
themselves our Pastors against our wills, is it unlawful to separate from them,
though they agree with us in Doctrine and Worship? And if the Churches and
Councils have been in the right, which for 700 yea 1000 years held that the
calling of a Bishop was null that had not the Clergies Election, and the
Peoples Election or Consent. I need not tell you how far this will reach.

4. What if a Church that you agree with in Doctrine and Worship will not
receive you, unless you will deliberately profess or subscribe an Untruth, or
covenant against some Duty, or commit a known Sin; is it intolerable for you
rather to separate from them than to sin? And must we have no Union till we can
in all things think as you do?

. 8. I think you need not expect the Censures of the chief makers of our
Divisions: And as to the inferior Sectaries, if you are a Sacrifice, it will
be an unbloody one. You well admonish us in the end, not to complain too much
when we are silenced, impoverished, and imprisoned: The counsel is good, But
for the Dean of Paul's, etc. that is deservedly loved and honored by us all
whom you thus deal with, and by those great Men whose esteem he deservedly more
valueth, while he lives in this Plenty and Honor, to call himself [a
Sacrifice] if a few poor Men say, He wrongeth them, when he pleads against
the Magistrates enduring them, or against their Judgment that think they should
be endured, Does not this seem to another greater tendency, than for me only to
say de facto, I was laid in the Common Gaol, and fain to make away my Goods and
Library to save them from Distress?] But so much to your Epistle: The Sermon
follows.

. 9. And what could a Man have desired more to end the main differences among
us, than the serious consideration of your Text in its very plain import and
drift.

1. That the Text speaks for Unity and Concord is past question. 2. And that
it speaks both to the Pastors and the Flocks. 3. And that it speaks to all
Christians, though of various degrees of Attainment: And therefore requires
all to live in Concord that are Christians; notwithstanding other differences.
4. All the doubt is, what is meant by the same Canon or Rule? And there are
these several Expositions pleaded for.

1. That by the same Rule is meant only the General Concord, idem velle and
nolle; to agree, and live in Peace, and to mind the same things.

2. That by the same Rule is meant the Essentials of Christianity received by
all Christians; which they should have concordantly practiced, notwithstanding
other differences.

3. That by the same Rule is meant the Doctrine which the Apostles had
concordantly delivered to all the Churches.

4. That it was the Churches Creed which is supposed then to be in use, as the
Symbol of Christians.

5. That it is the Canonical Scriptures, in the times that they were written
and delivered to the Churches.

6. That it is the Example of S. Paul before described, or the matter of it^
that is, to hold fast what he had attained, and press forwards toward the
heavenly perfection, by desire, hope, diligence, and patience.

7. Some take the [ one Rule] to be [ the end as it is to be attained by the
means;] that is, the common good of the Church, and furtherance of the Gospel
and our Salvation: Let all be done to edification.

8. Some say that it is the great Duty of Love which is made the Rule for our
undetermined actions; or, that the fundamental duties are made a Canon to the
Superstructures, as it seems to be meant, Gal. 6. 15, 16. And by Christ, Go
learn what that means, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. To tell you which
and how many of these I take to be meant in the Text, and why, is none of the
work which you call me to; but to tell you, that which-ever of these it is, or
if all these, we fully consent: All these Canons we must all walk by.

9. But some say, that by the same Rule is meant the Tradition and Custom of
the Universal Church.

10. And some, that it is the Canons of the Bishops in General Councils; and
under them, in National or Provincial Councils.

11. And some tell us, that the Rule of Christian concord is [ Obedience to the
Bishops of all the World (or Universal Church) who are a College Governing (not
only divisim and per parts, in their several Precincts, but) unitedly as One
Regent College, ordinarily per literas formas, and by General Councils when
they sit.

12. And some tell us, that it is the Law or Will of the Civil Christian
Magistrate which is this Rule.

As to these four last Rules we must put in our Exceptions. As to the 9 th, the
Traditions and Customs then in use were Apostolical Institutions, and so are
coincident with some of the former: But other Traditions and Customs we take
not for this Rule.

And as to the tenth, we give Councils, though wrongfully called General, their
due honor; as we do to inferior Councils, and every particular Pastor in his
place: but take not this for the Rule here mentioned.

And as to the 11th, we know of no such Government in being.

And as to the 12th, it was not then existent, and therefore could not be that
meant in the Text: But we take our selves bound to obey Magistrates, as we have
elsewhere at large explained and professed.

In short, either you think it is a Divine or a Humane Rule or Law which is
here meant, or both: If a Divine, we shall not differ from you of any thing,
unless it be of the meaning of it. If a Humane, either it is an act of true
Power received from God, or not: If not, you will grant us that it obliges us
not as this Rule in question: If yea, then we agree that we are to obey it: So
that all that will be useful to our Conviction will be, 1. That you prove the
Persons authorized to their Office (and of our Magistrates there is no doubt)
2. And that they have authority to make all the Canons and Laws, which you call
the Rule. And without this your labor is all lost to us.

. 10. But which of all these it is that you take for the Rule meant in your
Text, we must conjecture: 1. You well say, p. 11. [ It was such a Rule which
they very well knew, which they had given them before.] Therefore it was none
that was not then in being, but to be made by Bishops afterward. And, p. 14.
you seem to include the Canon made Acts 15. whatever the sense of this Text is,
we willingly also stand to that; and to the Holy Ghosts decision, that nothing
be imposed but necessary things: And, p. 15. I find you say [ that the
preserving the Peace of the Church, and preventing Separation, was the great
measure according to which the Apostle gave his directions.] And this is all
that I can find of your determination what is that Rule. And if Peace be the
Rule, we all agree with you in declaiming against the violation of it. But is
there no more in your Application?

. 11. I remember it is said in the Life of Joh. Bugenhagius Pomeranus (the
Pastor of the Church in Wittenberge, and the Presbyter that ordained the
Bishops and Presbyters of Denmark, and many other places) how much John
Frederick the Elector of Saxony was pleased to hear him open the Reasons why
Magistrates have power to make Laws, but not Pastors [ armatum (...) potestatem
politicam authoritate condendi leges, non pugnantes cum Decalogo; and de his
traditam se verissimum praeceptum; necesse est obedire propter conscienti^n:
sed pastoribus express prohiberi condere proprias leges, eum dicatur, Ne^o
(...) arguat in cibo, in potu nec posse hanc libertatem ullius creaturae
authoritate tolli.] But I had rather stretch my Obedience to the utmost
consistent with Conscience and Obedience to God, than speak for any needless
Liberty.

. 12. It is certain, that by [ the same Rule] is not meant, 1. Any Rule that
tied Christians to subscribe or declare that there is nothing in our three
Books, (Liturgy, Ordination, and Articles) contrary to the Word of God^ For
none of them were then extant, nor are they 200 years old. 2. Nor any Rule that
tied them to any one humane Liturgy which all the Churches i^ the Nation must
agree in: For there was none such. 3. Nor was it any Rul^ that imposed on them
any dubious unnecessary Opinions, Covenants, or Practices; nor, in a word, our
Conformity, or any like it.

This is easily proved: 1. Because the Rule which they were all to wall by, was
somewhat then existent. 2. It was a Divine Rule. 3. It was the which all
Christians were to have concord in: But experience tells us that all
Christians (that is, that consent to the Essentials of Christianity) ^^^ver
had, nor can have their Concord in any of the forementioned Conformity, as I
have proved in my Book of Concord.

. 13. We will go therefore no further than your Text for the Terms (...) our
Agreement, and for our Defense against your Accusation: What^^ you will prove
to us, by any such evidence as should convince a Man of reason (...)
impartiality, to have been THE RVLE which the Apostle did here mean, (...) bid
all that are Christians walk by, we earnestly desire to agree thereto: An^ we
will join with you against any that refuse it. It will be a way more co^gruous
to your Function, and cheaper to your Consciences, to condescend (...) these
Terms, and prove to us what this same Rule was, than to tell the Magistrates
that it is no sin not to endure us.

. 14. Page 16, 17, 18, 19. you come to tell us what Separation it is no^ which
you speak of; viz. not of the Separation or distinct Communion of (...)
Churches from each other, etc. Answ. You know it is like your self what (...)
mean by these words; if you would have us know it, I must crave yo^ Answer to
these Questions.

Qu. 1. Do you make Separation and distinct Communion the same thing, (...)
diverse?

Qu. 2. What distinction of Communion is it that you mean? When there are (...)
many things which may distinguish? 1. Communion in distinct places you take
(...) for Separation. 2. Nor Commnion under distinct Presbyters or Bishops. 3.
Therefore I suppose neither under distinct Princes, or Aristocracies in Cities,
as such. 4. Nor under distinct Laws (merely as such) of the same Prince. 5. Nor
distinct in allowed or indifferent accidents. Why any of these should be called
Separation I know not, unless as the word does signify but Diversity or
Distance.

Q. 3. Do you take Separation here in the same sense as before and after; or
Equivocally? If Equivocally, why did you not tell us what you here meant;
besides the difference of Subjects: If univocally, then

Q. 4. Is not the Separation of whole Churches much worse than of single
Persons from one Church, when it is upon unwarrantable cause or reasons? If one
Church unjustly renounce Communion with another whole Church, as no true
Church, or as Heretical; I think that it is done by a whole Church against a
whole Church, makes it worse.

But perhaps you mean, that for two National Churches to have two Kings is not
unlawful. No doubt of that: But to what purpose is it? Or is it that two
National Churches may have different Accidents of Worship or Discipline? And so
may two Diocesan or Parish-Churches in our Nation, if the King please at least.

. 15. You add: Which according to the Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason, have a
just Right and Power to govern and reform themselves. Ans. Have not all
Diocesan Churches power to govern and reform themselves?

Government is of various species: Only the King, or summa Potestas Civilis,
has Power to govern and reform by his Species of Government: But every Bishop
may govern and reform his Church, as a Bishop; as every Master may his Family
as a Master, and every Man himself as a Man. It Is a strange Man, Family, or
Church, that has not power to govern and reform it self, though not Regal
Power. Though Kings have Power, they have not God's Power; and all Power that
is Humane, is not Regal.

. 16. Sermon. [By whole Churches I mean the Churches of such Nations, which upon
the decay of the Roman Empire resumed their Right of Government to themselves,
and upon their owning Christianity, incorporated into one Christian Society,
under the same common Ties and Rules of Order and Government.]

Ans. 1. And had not those as good right that were not under the Roman Empire?
(as Abasia, etc.) 2. Did the Churches under the Roman Power exercise their
great diversity in Liturgies and other accidents of Worship without right? Had
not they a right to govern and reform themselves variously as they did? 3.
Christian Societies are of diverse species: Do you mean Christian Civil
Societies, Kingdoms, free Cities, etc. or Churches? Or do you take a Christian
Kingdom and a Christian Church for the same, as the Erastians do? If so, I
suppose half the Conformists will be against you, as well as I. At least you
must confess, that if de nomine a Christian Kingdom quasi tale may be called a
Church, it is equivocally; and that there is a sort of Christian Churches which
are of another Constitution. Far were the Christian Bishops for 1300 years from
believing that a Prince or Civil Power was essential to a Christian Church, or
that a Church in the common sense was not constituted of another sort of Regent
part, that had the Power of the Keys. Two species of Governors make two
species of the Societies, if they are not subordinate, but prime constitutive
Parts: But the Prince and the Pastor are two species, well opened among many by
Bishop Bilson of Subjection. And verily if you Conformists be divided among
your selves about the very Constitutive Rector of a Christian Church, you
differ more from each other than we do from the generality of you. 4. And what
be the common Ties and Rules of Order which you mean? Are these notifying Terms
for a Definition? 1. There are divine unalterable Rules of Order and
Government, and there are humane Rules about alterable Accidents. 2. There are
Rules made by Contract (such as Grotius thinks Canons are), and Rules made by
Governors, which are binding Commands or Laws. 3. There are Rules made by
Civil Governors to be enforced by the Sword, and Rules made only by
Ecclesiastical Pastors to be executed only by the Power of the Word and Keys.
Do you mean all these? Or which of them?

1. All Christian Churches are tied by the common Divine Rule; and is not
consent to that enough to make a Church? 2. Churches of various Nations may be
under one Humane Rule of Agreement or Contract. 3. The same Princes may give
diverse Rules about Accidents to the Churches of one Kingdom, and also the same
Rule for some Accidents to diverse Churches under them, who differ in other
great things: And does agreement in those Accidents do more to make them O^
Church, than their difference in Integrals to make them many? 4. Princes may do
as the Roman Emperors long did; leave the Bishops in Councils to make their
own Rules by consent, and make no common Imperial Rule for them: Are they ever
the less One Church? 5. The Roman Empire and Councils both left the several
Bishops to make Rules for Liturgies and other Accidents for their several
Churches: Were they therefore the less one National Church?

So that I am no more acquainted by your Words what you mean by a whole Church,
than if you had said nothing. There is a whole Dioces^^ Church, and a whole
Parish Church, as well as a whole National Church: And what the Power is, and
what the Rule of Order must be, whether the Laws of Princes or Prelates, and
whether about Essential, or Integrals, or Accidents, and what Accidents,
whether all; or many, or few, and which, that must make a Church to be One
whole Church, you never tell us. An Infidel Prince or a Heretic Prince may
give the same Rule of Order to his Christian Subjects in a whole Kingdom; Is he
therefore the constitutive Church-Head? Or will you say, as your Mr. Rich.
Hooker does, That if he be the Head of a Christian Church, it is necessary that
he be a Christian? To tell us of [ Common Ties and Rules of Order] and never
tell us what those Ties and Rules are, may serve your Ends, but not my
Edification.

. 17. But I remember your Irenicum learnedly maintains, that God has
instituted no one Form of Church Government as necessary: And if so, then not a
National Church-Form. And is it not a whole Church, if it be without a Form,
which not God but Man is the Author of? Then God made or instituted no such
thing as a whole Church. Then it is a humane Creature. Then why may not Man
make yet more Forms; and multiply, and make and unmake, as he sees cause; and
several Countries have several Forms. And, forma dat nomen and esse: And if God
made not any whole Church, we should be acquainted who they be (that were not a
Church) that had Power to make the first Church-Form? and who has the Power
ever since? and how it is proved? and how it comes to be any great matter to
separate from a Church-Form which God never made? and whether humane
Church-Forms be not essential and constitutive Causes of the Churches; and
whether every commanded Oath, Subscription, Declaration, Office or Ceremony, be
an essential part of this Church-Form? And there be as many Church-Forms and
Species, as there be Orders, Liturgies and Ceremonies. And all these
Differences in the same Kingdom constitute so many Schisms and Separations.

. 18. Do you take all the Christians in the Turkish Empire to be one National
Church, or not? If not, then one Head or Humane Law is not necessary to the
being or Government of a Church, nor is it necessary that it be National. And
do you think that the Greek Churches have not Power to govern and reform
themselves, though they be not a National Church? Why did Paul write to Corinth
(as Clemens also did) and to the Galatians, etc. and John to Ephesus, and the
other six, Rev. 2, and 3. to reform themselves, if they had not Power to do it?
But if all the Christians under the Turk be one National Church; then it is
either because they have one Civil Head, or one Ecclesiastical Head. Not the
latter, for they have none such; though the Bishops of Constantinople have some
Primacy by their old Canons and Customs. Not the former, for an Infidel cannot
be an essential part of a Christian Church (as a constitutive Head is)

. 19. And the Churches in the Roman Empire before Constantine, were true
Churches of Christ's Institution, and they had power to govern and reform
themselves; and yet they had no humane Constitutive Head, Regal or Sacerdotal,
though they had a Civil Heathen Governor, which was an extrinsick accidental
Head.

It is so contrary to all Sense and Religion, that either a Man as a Man, or a
Family, or a Church as such, should have no power to govern and reform it self,
that I must needs judge that while you speak confusedly, you meant only a Regal
or Supreme Civil Power, which yet is tota specie distinct from that which is
properly Ecclesiastical.

. 20. Sermon. p. 17. [And so the several Churches of the Lydian or Proconsular
Asia, if they had been united in one Kingdom, and governed by the same
Authority, under the same Rules, might have been truly called the Lydian
Church.]

Answ. 1. And is the Controversy de nomine, Whether they might be called the
Lydian Church, when we expected a satisfactory explication de re? No doubt but
a Church is so equivocal a word that many sort of Assemblies or Societies may
be so called. I have told you of diverse Senses, in which we are called a Church
National, first Plea, page 251, etc. Either a Christian Kingdom, or else the
Churches of a Heathen or a Christian King, as associated by agreement, may be
called a National Church.

2. What if they be united in one Kingdom, of a Heathen, Mohammedan, or Arrian
King, and governed by his Regal Authority, under the same Rules which he sets
them? Is this it that you mean in your Description? A King as such is not an
Ecclesiastic Person, and therefore is not an essential part of a Church,
unless as it is equivocally so called. And is it his Civil Laws for
Church Government that you mean, or the Clergies Canons, or God's Laws? The
Greeks under the Turk are under one Prince, and governed by the same Civil
Authority and Laws, and also are under one Patriarch, and by the Princes
toleration are governed by the Ecclesiastic Authority and Laws, of another
Species: If you confound these two Species, or tell us not which you mean in
your Definition, it tends not to Edification.

3. And what if they be under diverse Kings (as the Bulgarians and Greeks were,)
and yet ruled by one Ecclesiastic Authority and Law? why may not they also be
called One Church, as the Moscovites are now called part of the Greek Church?

4. And why might it not be called the Lydian Church while it was a part of the
Empire, as the African and other Countries were? But what is all this de nomine
to the Controversy? All grant that the Civil Power must be obeyed in their
place, and the Church Power in theirs.

5. But here you grant that they are several Churches before their Union in one
Kingdom. And I suppose they were Churches, 1. of another species than the
National described by you, 2. and were of Divine Institution; 3. and continue
so after their Union in one Kingdom; 4. and have power to govern and reform
themselves still, though not Regal power.

. 21. Sermon. [Just as several Families united make one Kingdom, which at first
had a distinct and independent power: but it would make strange confusion in
the World to reduce Kingdoms back again to Families, because at first they were
made up of them.]

Answ. And are they not several Families still? and have they not still a
distinct Family-power to govern and reform themselves, tho not a Regal Power?
Does making a City or Kingdom dissolve Families? You cannot mean it. What mean
you then by reducing these Kingdoms back to Families, when they are Families
still? Had you said, that dissolving Kingdoms or Cities, and reducing them to
be only Families is confusion, it is undeniable. But still as Families in a
Kingdom retain Family-power, so particular Churches in a Kingdom retain the
Church Power which God by his Institution gave them. And this is that we desire.

. 22. Sermon. [Thus National Churches are National Societies of Christians under
the same Laws of Government and Rules of Worship.]

Ans. 1. All Christians are under the same Divine Laws and Rules. 2. Some
Princes make no Church-Laws to Christians, but their Civil Laws for the common
Peace. And some make various Laws for various sorts of Christians under them.

. 23. Sermon. [For the true Notion of a Church is no more than a Society of Men,
united together for their Order and Government according to the Rules of the
Christian Religion.

Ans. 1. There be many true Notions of such an equivocal word as a [ Church]
is. 2. The Generical Notion sure is not enough for the definition of each
species. There must be more. The Universal Church is a Society of Men so
united; and so may the Churches of diverse Kingdoms; and so is a Christian
Kingdom as such; and so is a Provincial Church, and a Diocesan Church, and a
particular Parochial Church: yet all these are not of the same species, for
they have different terminos in specie. 3. This is a very defective Definition,
where 1. [ Men] are made the qualified Subject, when it should have been [
Christians]. 2. The two constitutive essential Relations of Pastor and Flock
are not mentioned, as if a Kingdom were defined without the mention of King and
Subjects. 3. They are said to be united in general, without telling us what
uniting is meant, whether only by force, command, or consent; whereas most take
even the Mode of Investiture ( Baptism) as well as Consent to be necessary ad
esse, as to the Visible Church. 4. It is said they are united [ for Order and
Government,] as if these were but the Terminus; and so may those by agreement
de futuro, that yet have no Government: whereas the Government is the
constitutive Form. 5. This Definition leaving out the specific Form and
Terminus, makes an Army, a Navy, a Ship, a company of Christian Merchants, or
Corporation, etc. to be a Church: For all these may be Societies of Men united
together for their Order and Government, according to the Rules of the
Christian Religion: For the Christian Religion gives Rules to all sorts of
Christian Societies. These are not the usual ways of defining, nor give me any
true notice of your sense. 6. And you make it not intelligible, whether by the
Rules of the Christian Religion you mean only the Divine Rule? and whether you
mention it as the uniting Bond, or only as a Rule to some humane Rule? But
though the application look this way, yet your words speak no more than what is
common to the Churches which you accuse, that are [ united for Order and
Government according to the Rules of the Christian Religion]. If this will
serve, those are thus united that take the Bible for their Rule of Order, etc.
But is not this against those Churches, that take not the Bible, but Canons, or
other humane Laws, for the bound of their Church-Vnion, or their Rule. If it be
uniting for Order and Government according to the Rules of the Christian
Religion, which makes a Church, let us then try which Societies are so united,
and let that be the matter of our Dispute.

. 24. Sermon. p. 13. [And it is a great mistake to make the Notion of a Church
barely to relate to Acts of Worship, and consequently that an adequate Notion
of a Church is an Assembly for Divine Worship; by which means they appropriate
the Name of Churches to particular Congregations: whereas if this held true,
the Church must be dissolved as soon as the Congregation is broken up. But if
they retain the nature of a Church when they do not meet together for Worship,
then there is some other Bond that uniteth them; and whatever that is, it
constitutes the Church.

Ans. 1. Did you write this as a Confutation of any body? If so, you should
have told them who are your Adversaries. I never met with one to my remembrance
that says, the Church is no longer a Church than they are congregate, but Mr.
Cheney who writes against my Plea for Peace. And so the two first who now
write against me, write against one another, and I must please them both. When
you so far differ among your selves, you should bear with them that less differ
from you.

2. What mean you by the [ Notion of a Church] which all Men know is an
equivocal word? Do you mean that a [ Church] has but one Notion? I pray you
tell us, whether the Notion be the same as it is used, Matthew. 16. 18. and 18.
17. 1 Corinthians. 11. 18, 22. Acts 19. 32, -- 39, 40. 1 Crrinth. 14. 34. Psalm 26.
5. Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Acts 5. 11. Acts 20. 28. Rev. 2. 12, 18. Romans
16. 5. Phil. 2. 10. Acts 8. 1, 3. Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 18. Ephesians. 1. 22. and 5.
23. Does any Man believe that it is in all these Texts taken in the same Notion
(or sense)? I am sure I need not ask this of you as to the sense of profane
Authors, who use the word for any sort of Concilium, coetus, concio,
congregatio, convivia, as in Lucian, Demosthenes, Aristotle, Thucidides, etc.

3. If you will pardon me for telling Men in Print so often, that a Church is
constituted not only for Communion in Worship, but also in Doctrine, and holy
Living, I will not ask you, why you dissembled this? nor why you would intimate
the contrary to your Readers? Repetition is not the least fault of my Writings,
and all will not prevent the mis-intimations even of such worthy Men as you. Ad
nauseam usque I have repeated, that the Office of the Ministry stands in a
subordination to the three parts of Christ's Office, Prophetical or Teaching,
Priestly or Worshipping, Kingly or Ruling; and that a particular Church is
associated for the use and benefit of all three conjunctly. Were you not
willing to take notice of this? or not willing that others should take notice
of it?

4. How many Writings of ours have told the World, that we appropriate not the
Notion of a Church to a particular Congregation. Do not my Books which you
cite, copiously express the contrary? Do we not over and over tell Men, that
the word [ Church] must be considered as equivocal, generical, and specifical?
Do we take [ the Holy Catholic Church] in the Creed for a particular
Congregation? Worthy Sir, this is unworthy dealing, whether it be by ignorance,
negligence, rashness or wilfulness. We distinguish between Churches of God's
Institution, and of Man's Invention. And of the first sort, what Independent is
there that holds not an Universal Church at least, besides particular
Congregations? And of Man's making, who can number the sorts that are and may
be made?

5. Did you ever know Man, (save such Conformists as he that answered my Plea)
whether Greek, Papist, Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, or Anabaptist; who
denies a Church Bond, that uniteth them when the Congregation is dismissed.
All confess, that the Union of the pars regens and pars subdita for Church-ends
does make it a Church. And who does not distinguish between the Constitution
and Administration, the Status and the Exercitium?

6. How then could you say, [ If this be true, the Church must be dissolved as
soon as the Congregation is broken up]? What show is there of such a
consequence? What if we held that the Church were so called barely in relation
to Public Worship? does it follow that this Relation cease as soon as the
several Acts of Worship cease? Their mutual consent, and the union of the
Worshippers, Priest and People associated for that use, may continue when the
Act of Worship is intermitted. May it not continue a School, when the Boys go
home or play? May it not be a Parliament when the House is risen, tho it be
only for the work of assembled Men that they are related and denominated?

7. But Sir, do you not confess, even in your Iroenicon, where you maintain
that no Form of Church Government is of Divine command: 1. That God has
commanded that there be Assemblies ordinarily used for his Worship. 2dly. And
that Pastors are to be the Guides and chief Managers of this Worship. 3dly,
And that they should be also their Teachers. 4thly, And that they govern them
by their Keys. And if all this be true, then such Assemblies are of Divine
Institution; not such as are associated only for Worship, but for Doctrine,
Worship, and holy Living, under the Teaching and Conduct of their Pastors. If
you deny that such Churches as we call Particular are of Divine Institution, we
have often proved it, though few Christians deny it, or need any proof.

And it is so often repeated in the Books which you cite, that I must suppose you
know it, though you seem to dissemble it, that the Definition which I give of
such a Church does make the Terminus to be (not the whole Church meeting at one
time and place, but) personal, presential Communion in Doctrine, Worship, and
Holy Conversation, as distinct from absent Communion by Delegates or Letters
only. Your Parish is associated for such personal presential Communion, and yet
they meet not all at once, but some one day, and some another, and some not at
all, which is a fault in exercitio, but overthrows not the being of the
Church, while it is personal present Communion which they associate for and
profess, and that states the Church-relation. And they meet not all in one
place, but some in the Bishop of Ely's Chapel, (and it is pity but you had
many more); and yet Chapels of Ease consist with some Obligations on the whole
Parish ordinarily, to have per vices sometime personal Communion in the
Parish Church.

If you would have told us plainly, that Parish-Churches are no Churches, or
that God never ordained such single Churches, as are associated for personal
Communion in Presence, in Doctrine, Worship, and Conversation, which have
their proper Pastors, we should have known what to say to you. But if you deny
not such, (which we undertake fully to prove) plainly confess their
Constitution, VVorth, and Privileges, and we shall readily next debate the Case
with you, how far Men may associate these into larger Churches of another
species. But still we say, that as Families cease not to be Families, when they
are combined into a Village or City; no more do particular Churches lose their
Constitution or Administration by being associated into any lawful larger
Churches.

. 25. Sermon. [And if there be one Catholic Church consisting of multitudes of
particular Churches, consenting in one Faith; then why may there not be one
National Church from Consent in the same Articles? etc.]

Ans. 1. I pray confess first, that your National does consist of a multitude
of such particular Churches of God's Institution, and cannot destroy them or
their Power and Privileges: Secondly; And once tell us what you mean by a
National Church, whether Regal or Sacerdotal. If you mean a Christian Kingdom,
who denies it: If you mean all the Churches of a Kingdom associated for Concord
as Equals, we deny it not. If you mean that the Nation must be one Church as
united in one Sacerdotal Head, personal or collective, Monarchical or
Aristocratical, we must have further satisfaction about this: First, whether it
be of Divine or of Humane Institution? Secondly, whether (if humane) its Power
be from the Prince, or from the Consent of the particular Churches? Thirdly,
what it is empowered to do? 1. Not to make necessary Laws for the Churches of
the same sort with Christ's already made. 2. Not to cross any of his Laws. 3.
Not to destroy any Privilege of the particular Churches instituted by Christ.
4. But if it be only to determine of such Circumstances as the Christian Prince
may determine of, we shall obey them as his Officers.

And now to your [ Why not?] I answer. Man is not God. God made the Form of the
Universal Church, of which the particular are parts; whose Form also is of his
making: And if God has made National Regent Churches as distinct from
Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths, we will obey them; if not, we must know
what Men made them, and by what authority, and whether God authorized them
thereto; if not, your [ Why not] is answered.

. 26. Sermon. p. 18. [Nay, if it be mutual Consent and Agreement which makes a
Church, then why may not National Societies agreeing together in the same
Faith, and under the same Government and Discipline, be as truly and properly a
Church as any particular Congregation?

Ans. 1. Is it only de nomine, or de re that you ask? If de nomine, we grant
you, that a Parliament, an Army may be truly called Ecclesia; if de re, we
grant you that it is truly a Church of another kind. 2. Mutual Consent makes a
Church, but God's Consent or Institution must go first to warrant that Consent,
and make it a Church which he will own: Else mutual Consent may make it but
Jeroboam's Church, or a false and sinful Policy. Prove if you can, that God
has authorized Men to make as many new Church-Species, Policies or Forms as
they please; or any against, or above, or equal to those of his Institution,
besides Magistracy.

. 27. Sermon. p. 19. Why many of these Cities, united under one Civil Government,
and the same Rules of Religion, should not be called one National Church, I
cannot understand: which makes me wonder at those who say they cannot tell what
we mean by the Church of England: Sacrileg. Desert. p. 35.

Answ. 1. Admiratio est ignorantis: I am as ignorant of you, as you are of
(...); therefore may answer wondering with wondering; 1. That such a Man should
not know the reason when I so plainly and distinctly wrote it down, 2. And that
while you wonder, you should not vouchsafe to give me the least means of
Satisfaction. For I suppose few will think that you do so much as attempt it
here. 3. You make it still as if the Controversy were de nomine* what it may
be called; when I only spoke de re, and bid you call it what you will, if you
will but tell us your meaning. 4. Yea in my Plea, sect. 4* 5. and in the
Addition: I fully showed what we grant de re, and de nomine, and what we deny;
and what the state of our Controversy is: and do you think to satisfy us,
after all this with Wondering that we understand not what you mean?

28. Sermon. [In short, we mean, that Society of Christian People, which in this
Nation are united under the same Profession of Faith, the same Laws of
Government, and Rules of Divine Worship.]

Answ. And will not they, that know not your Heart any otherwise than by such
Words, deride us, if we should pretend by these Words, to be ever the nearer
understanding your Resolution of the Controversy?

1. The essential constitutive Parts of a political Society are the Pars rege^s
and pars subdita (as is aforesaid.) And here is no mention of the Regent part
at all; can any Man tell by this whether it be the King, or a Clergy Head, that
you take to be the Constitutive Head?

2. Laws and Rules, are part of the Administration, and our question is of the
Constitution. Is this then any satisfying Definition?

3. The Papists by this Definition are the national Church [ They are a Society
of Christian People, which in this Nation are united under the same Profession
of Faith, the same Laws of Government, and Rules of Divine Worship] viz. Pap^l.
If you say, They are not all the Nation. I answer, 1. nor does your Definition
require it. 2. You are not all.

If you say that they are not the major part. I answer, 1. Whether you are I
know not. 2. In Ireland they are, and so are there the National Church by your
Definition.

If you say that you mean the Laws of Lawful Governors. I answer, 1. The
Papists take the Pope for their lawful Governor: 2. If a Usurper get
Possession (as K. Stephen and many others,) is the National Church then dead or
null? 3. There is no mention of lawful in your Definitions.

4. But though you will not tell us whether you mean Divine or Humane Laws and
Rules, yet I may confidently conjecture that it is Humane you mean: for else,
1. I am of the same National Church that you are; yea if I prove that I am more
conformable to God's Laws than you, and such as you, I shall prove that it will
be a harder question whether you are of the Church of Eng. than whether I am.
2. And you might know that such a Church we no more deny than you do (at least)
3. But then it can be but sincere (not perfect) Obedience to God's Laws and
Rules, which must prove one to be of this Church; or else no Man is of it. And
then you must show us whether a mistake in as small a matter as Meat and Drink,
or a Ceremony, or Liturgick Form, or Diocesan order, do cut one off from that
Church. If yea, than how much more would such Conformity to sin do it? which we
fear.

But supposing that you mean Humane Laws. 5. Why may not Divine Laws make a
Church? If Humane Laws were necessary ad been esse, the Christians that I have
read and converst with, think that they are not necessary to the Being of a
Church in sensu famosiore; why then should they be in the Definition, and only
they?

6. But the difficulty recurreth as to Humane Laws, which of them are necessary
to the Being of the Church: For your Definition distinguished not: The King
has great and excellent Laws which we all conform to: Does not our Conformity
to these seem to prove us of the National Church, though we conform not to your
Formalities and Oaths and Ceremonies? Imperfect Obedience serves to continue
men Subjects to the King: It is not every Drunkeness, or Oath, or Fornication,
much less the miss of a Complement or Ceremony, that makes a Man a Rebel or an
Outlaw: Why then should the refusal of a Prelates Subscription or Formality
unchurch a sound and honest Christian?

7. And if the humane Laws and Rules which you mention (what ever you mean by
them) be subordinate to God's Laws, and so be honest, good and obligatory, why
should they cut off those from the Church which Christ's Laws cut not off; yea,
which Christ receives and commands us to receive? Receive him, for God
receives him: and, receive him as Christ receives us, (notwithstanding our
Infirmities) were good reasonings in St. Paul's Judgment, which I prefer before
any Bishops that I know.

8. And a Man of less Acquaintance or Wit than you, cannot be ignorant, what
abundance of Differences there are among your selves. I have named you no small
number in my ^d. Plea: some of you are hot against that which is called
Arminianism, and some hot for it: some are for Bishops and Presbyters being of
one Order, and some of diverse: all are not of the mind of the Bishop of
Hereford that wrote Naked Truth: some (even Bishops) think that the damnatory
part of Athanasius's Creed is not approved by Conformity: others, think that it
is all to be approved: A multitude such differences there are among your
selves: And why should not this as much unchurch some of you, if it be [ being
under the same Laws] that makes you one Church, as the forbearing of a
Declaration of Assent and Consent, or of a Surplice, etc.

9. Especially tell us, whether the Conformist's difference about the
Constitutive Regent Part of the Church of England, some being for one species,
and some for another, do not plainly make them to be of two distinct Churches
of England, and further different from each other than we are from any part. We
justly say the Papists, who are for two species of Sovereigns, some for the
Pope, and some ^^r a general Council, are plainly of two Churches: for the
regent part is essential. And I am sure that one part of the most Eminent
Disputers for the Church of England and Conformity, say that the King is the
Extraneous Civil Governor, but the Bishops are the Constitutive Essential
Internal Governors of the Church as a Church; and that if the Bishops command
the use of one Translation, Version, Meter, Liturgy, and the King another, we
are to obey the Bishops, and not the King: And that the efficient cause of a
National Church, is the Bishops Agreement among themselves to associate into
such a Church. And others say, that it is the King and his Laws, that are the
efficient of such a Church, and are to be obeyed in matter of the Circumstances
of Worship, etc. before the Bishops. Can you prove that this difference between
the Conformists, about the very Constitutive Regent Power, is not greater than
Men's differences about a Ceremony or Form? and does not more to make them to be
of two Churches?

10. If all this confused stir be but about a Christian Kingdom, be it known to
you that we take such to be of Divine Command: And if you know it not, or
dissemble it, after I have said so much of it, in the first Plea, and
elsewhere, I cannot help that, viz. if you will talk publicly against what you
know, or know not when told, because you will not know. But I have there largly
told you, what the Power of Princes about Church matters is, which if you will
not read, I will not repeat.

11. Your Words [ Laws and Rules] would induce one to think that you joined the
Kings Laws and the Bishop's Canons together in your meaning, as the bond of
U^ity. If so, is it two sorts of Governors, (by the Swo^d, and by the Word,
Magistrates and Pastors) which you take for the constitutive regent parts of
the Church? If so, then either in Coo^dination and Coal^tion, or in
Subordination. The first cannot be, that the two Species in Coalition should
make one Head, unless both were in the Kings as Persona Mixta. both Lay and
Clergy, as some affirm him to be like Melchiz^deck: But this both King and
Clergy disown. Nor can the second be, because a subordinate Power is not
essential to the whole body politic, but only the supreme. And the Magistracy
and Ministry are coordinate Species, both depending immediately on God, and
Subordinate Mutually only Secundum quid: Nor is the Legislative Power in
England any other than one, which is in the King and Parliament conjunct. The
Bishops Canons are not Laws Ejusdem Speciei; till the King and Parliament make
them such. If this be your Judgment, there are I think but few Conformists of
your mind.

12. I must Conjecture therefore by your words, That the Laws and Rules which
you define the Church by, are the Laws of the King and Parliament; and that it
is the Civil Christian Sovereign that you take for the Constitutive Head of
that National Church which you plead for; or else I know not what to
Conjecture. And if this be your Meaning, I add to what is said: 1. Erastians
have hitherto been distasted by the Bishops, and I doubt they will by this take
you for somewhat worse.

2. What does your National Church differ from a Christian Kingdom, which we
deny not?

3. Do you think there is no other Species of a Church, besides that which is
Constituted by the Christian Magistrate as Head?

1. All the Christian World, as far as I can learn by History (no considerable
part excepted) have been in all Ages, and to this Day are of another mind. And
who then is the great Nonconformist and Separatist, You or I; if this be your
mind?

2. The Magistracy, and Pastoral Office are of different Species: Therefore the
Churches Constituted by their Regency are of different Species.

3. Constantines words have hitherto been commonly received, That He (and so
Christian Kings) was Bishop without the Church, and the proper Bishop within:
that is, That he was the Governor of the Church, by the Sword, as the King is
of all Scholars, Physicians, Families, etc. but not the Governor by the Word
and Keys; as the King is not a Schoolmaster, Physician, or the formal
Specifying Governor of School, College, Family, as such. Bishop Bilson, of
Subjection, most clearly opens the difference, and I think Christians
commonly agree to it; between the Office of Governing by the Sword; and by the
Word; even about the Church it self.

4. Christ settled immediately the Pastoral Office, and did not leave it to
Princes to make it: And He settled Churches under the Pastors, when there were
no Christian Princes; And when the Emperors became Christians, they never took
themselves to be the intrinsic Constitutive Rectors of the Churches, but
Accidental Heads, as is aforesaid. And all the Councils, and their Canons fully
show, that the Bishops were still of this mind. And our greatest Defenders of
the Power of Princes, Bilson, Andrews, Buck^ridge, Spalatensis, etc. were of
the same mind, and ascribe to them no more.

5. Else Heathen, and Infidel Princes might be Essential to the Church in the
Gospel-Notion: For they are the Governors of it by the Sword, and may possibly
by the Counsel of Christians, make them as good Laws as many Christian Princes
do. Julian made no great Change of the Church-Laws.

But I Labor in vain, in proving that there is a Sacerdotal or
Clergy-Church-Form or Species; for I suppose you cannot deny it; and if you do,
few others will. I suppose it is only the National Form, which you take to be
Constituted by a Lay-Head. But few Christians will deny, That the Sacerdotal or
Clergy-Form of a particular Church, is of Divine Institution; and that Men have
not power to destroy that Form; or change the Office there, Instituted by the
Holy Ghost. Though the Forms of Ass^ciated Churches, Diocesan, Metropolitan,
Provincial, Patriarchal, are judged by very many, to be of Humane Invention:
And what Man may make, Man on good Reason may unmake or alter. But if you Grant
us the Divine Form before mentioned; I shall Grant you that a National Church
is also of Divine Command; if you mean but a Christian Kingdom. But when one
Form is Denominated from the Pastoral Office related to the Flock, and the
other from the Magistrates Office: What has a Man that can understand the
State of the Controversy, to do here; but to show what is the Pastoral Office
toward the Church, and what is the Magistrates? For sure they are not the
same. And yet because that it is the Pastoral Form, which the word [ Church]
denotes in the strict and usual Christian Sense; Our Sovereignes in England,
to avoid the Papists Exceptions, have forsaken the Title of [ Head of the
Church] lest they should seem to claim a Constitutive Headship of a Church
strictly taken, and use only the Term [ Governor.] Even as Christ is said by
St. Paul, Ephesians. 1. to be Head over all things, To the Church [ Over and To] much
differ.

And I yet see not why on the same Reason that we call a Christian Kingdom, or
Republic a National Church; we may not (...) call London, York, etc. a
City-Church, as Headed by the Mayor, as the Christian Magistrate, and so talk
of Provincial, Consular, and Proconsular Churches, Monarchical, Aristocratical,
Democratical Churches; and make all the Controversies [which Church-Form is
best] as Politics do what Form of a Commonwealth is best.

And thus they that chide the Independents for making the People Governors of
their little Congregations (which I think yet most of them disclaim) do this
way quite exceed them in Popularity, and in Democraties will make the People
Governors of all the Churches, even National including the particulars. For I
suppose they will not say, that Democratical, Civil Government is unlawful.

And whereas Cyprian says: Vbi Episcopus, ibi Ecclesia; you will say, Where
the Mayor or Bayliffe is, there is the Church. But I trow the Bishop of London
believes that there is another sort of London-Church-Form, besides my Lord -
Mayors Relation to them. But what abundance of Church-Forms, Supreme and
Subordinate may diversity of Magistracy make?

. 29. Sermon p. 19. [I do not intend to speak of the Terms upon which Persons
are to be admitted among us to the Exercise of the function of the Ministry;
but of the Terms of Lay-Communion, i. e. those which are necessary for Persons
to join in our Prayers and Sacraments, and other Offices of Divine Worship.]

Answ. 1. But your work would have been done more effectually if you had begun
at the part which you intend not to speak of: I suppose it is not for want of
Charity, nor Concern, that you intend it not; and therefore, suppose that
somebody else will do it at last. I have heard of some above your order, that
could better spare the Nonconforming Ministers than the People, and said
plainly, that they increased the Impositions, because they could do better
without us, than with us: And some have said, If this will not cast them out,
more shall do it. I take it for granted, that this pretermitted part of your
Work, is indeed, the All that you have to do, in the Works of Accusing, and
Afflicting the Nonconformists; and till this be done, the rest of your
Accusations will confute themselves; and I doubt not but it will be attempted;
and if it be truly, and satisfactory, I will give you thanks.

2. Your Term of [ Lay-Communion] remembers me, that if (as you seem) you
Essentiate your Church of England by a Lay-Ruler, and his Laws, viz. the King,
and the Laws made by him for Religious Government; the People that you accuse
are no Separatists, though they Separate from the Diocesanes; because they hold
this Lay-Communion; that is, though they are not perfectly Obedient, they are
Subjects of the Lay-Governour, and so Members of the Kingdom, which is the
National-Church.

3. And as to your Lay-Communion here spoken of, So far as it is Lawful, where
you have Preached or Written for it once, I think, I have done it many times: I
shall be far from Contradicting you in that.

. 30. Sermon p. 20. [I will not say, there has been a great deal of Art used
to confound these two (and it is easy to discern to what purpose it is.)

Answ. 1. I have not Art enough well to reconcile your Negative, and your
Parenthesis, which intimates an Affirmation: If you will not say such Art was
used; how can you intimate [ to what purpose it is used.] Can you tell so easily
why it was done, and not tell that indeed it was done at all? But perhaps you
can tell, though you will not. I would fain know why: No Man that Reads your
Words, can well believe that it is through the redundancy of your kindness.

2. Forgive this Truth: Of all Men that have Written against Nonconformity, I
remember few that may, worse than you speak against CONFOVNDING; as I shall
further prove.

3. If I be one of those that you speak of, Confounding is not the greatest
fault of your words; while it is visible that in my first Plea I distinctly
enumerated the Case of the Nonconformity of the Laity and the Clergy. And I
spoke by consent for many of my acquaintance. And I am likest to be meant by
you, because diverse others, that go farther from you, take Lay-conformity to be
unlawful, and largely give their reasons for it. How then did you expect to be
believed when our Books are in so many hands?

4. None are fitter Judges of Arts, than the most exercised Artificers: If you
are skilled and exercised in such Arts your self, you may the easiler discern
both the, Art and purpose. And yet we are so near our selves that I cannot
easily believe that you know my Arts or purposes so well as I do my self.

31. Sermon. [ I dare say the People' s not understanding the difference of these
two Cases, has been a great occasion of the present separation.]

Ans. No doubt but there is a great difference between the Ministers Case of
Conformity, and the Peoples, which makes some of them think much worse of a
Conforming Minister, than of a Conforming Layman: which shows that the
difference is not wholly unknown to them. But I think I have done more to
acquaint them with the difference, than you or any of your tribe have done.

32. Sermon. [ For in the Judgment of the most impartial men of the Dissenters at
this day, though they think the Case of the Ministers very hard on the account
of Subscriptions and Declarations required of them, yet they confess, very
little is to be said on the behalf of the People, from whom none of those
things are required.]

Ans. 1. This is but such Confusion as constituteth this Sermon. We think that
nothing of truth can be said for any of the People's errors; no more than for
the [ very hard] and sinful case of our selves if we should Conform: If any go
one step too far from you, they are unjustifiable therein: But we have showed
those that will see, that much may be said on the People's behalf for much of
their Nonconformity, and also for such assembling as you call separation.

2. And surely if you had the due sense of your Brethrens Case, of your Own
Case, and of the Kingdoms Case, you would perceive how necessary the forbearing
of the imposition of those very hard things is to the healing of that which
does offend you; and to greater ends than that.

33. Sermon. [So that the People are condemned in their separation by their own
teachers; But how they can preach lawfully to a People who commit a fault in
hearing them, I do not understand.]

Ans. 1. The People that are guilty of any sinful separation are reproved by
us; but not those that separate no further than is their duty. In my first Plea
I described no less than 30 Cases in which separation is a sin; and near 40
Instances in which some separation is a duty or no sin: And of all this you
here take no notice, and toss the bare confounding name of Separation, as if
the Sound ought to affright men from all that you are against; sure you could
never think that we had Brains or Consciences, if such dealing should pass for
satisfactory with us: Can any man tell by this bare Name, or any thing in your
Book, what that Separation is which you condemn. The word Heresy with a
Papist, and the word [ Separation] and [ Schism] with some Conformists, seem to
be terms of Art: But what Art is it? Sure it is not the Cartesian nor the
Epicurean Philosophy, which lays so much on Atoms and Motion: I cannot
Imagine what Contexture of Atoms should cause the Sound of the word [
Separation] or [ Schism] to make such a motion as should drive men out of their
Religion and Wits. I am not so happy as to be an Academical Graduate; but I
have long ago read Lullius and many of his Commentators; and I find no
Philosophy more likely, to lay much on the Power of words; except that which we
call Magic or Charming. For my part, I was born with a disease (if it be such)
that hates Confusion and Deceit, and inclines me to bring things into light,
and to discern between things that differ. And if you Doctors have learned the
Art of Reduceing a Syllogism into a Simple term or Name, it is quite above my
kind of Learning: I suppose it is such a Logical contracted Syllogism that you
intend: But as short writing called Characters, though expeditious, is hard to
be read by others; so your contracted Syllogism, in the name [ Separation] and
[ Schism] will be more useful to you and yours, than to strangers that never
saw your heart. If Usefulness and Vsedness, even by some of the Reverend, may
afford us a Prognostic, I may conjecture that even Lying (and other necessary
arts) are ascending in hope to be placed among the Cardinal virtues, and those
that scruple it, may be numbered with Schismatics, Separatists and Rogues.

34. If I would here again tell you what Separation I take to be lawful, and
what unlawful, and desire you to define that which you accuse me of, I may
expect that in your Reply you will dissemble it; But I will try you with a few
instances of one sort, and desire you to tell me which it is that you mean.

I. Do you think that he is a Separatist that meets not in the same Parish
Church with you? No sure: For then you are one to others, and other Parishes
such to you.

II. Is he a Separatist that lives in your Parish, and ordinarily meets not
in your Temple, but another allowed place? If so, the Bishop of El^ is a
Separatist in your Parish, that keeps a Meeting in his Chapel when you
preach. If not so, when we had the Kings License at least, the place made Us
not Separatists.

III. Is every one a Separatist that differs from you in Doctrine, in public
Preaching? If so, are you not Separatists one from another, when one Preaches
for that which is called, Absolute Election, Reprobation, Universal Redemption,
Free Will, Falling from justification, the morality of the Sabbath, etc. and
others against these? If not; Is not difference in such Doctrines as great a
difference, as using and not useing some of your Liturgick Forms and Ceremonies?

IV. Are all different modes of Worship enough to make our Party Separatists?
Then the French and Dutch Churches are Separatists, and either the Cathedrals
or the Parish-Churches, as to their Vestments, Organs, Chore, mode of Singing,
etc. And the allowed private Baptismes and Communion with the sick, are
Separations.

V. Does every disobedience to the King, and Laws, and Canons in matters of
Religion, Government and Worship, make men Separatists? If so, then when ever a
Conformist disobediently shortneth his Common Prayer, or leaves off his
Surplice, or gives the Sacrament to one that kneeleth not, or receives one of
another Parish to Communion, etc. he is a separatist. Yea no man then is not a
Separatist sometimes.

VI. If the Diocesane be the lowest political Church, and a Parish but a part
of a Church, as they hold that take a Bishop to be a Constitutive part; how is
he said to separate from the Church that owneth his Diocesane and the Diocese,
what ever place in that Diocese he meet in, seeing he separateth not from the
Kingdom that stays in it and owneth the King, though in some acts he disobey?
Nor does every Boy that is faulty separate from the School.

VII. Is he a greater Separatist that confesses you to be a true Church, and
your communion lawful, but prefers another as fitter for him; or he that
denies Communion with true worshipping assemblies as unlawful to be
Communicated with, when it is not so. If the former, then Condemning you as no
Church is a diminution or no aggravation of separation, and the Local presence
of an Infidel or a Scorner would be a less separate state, than the absence of
your friends. If the latter (which is certain) then if I can prove the
Assemblies lawful which you condemn, you are the true Separatists that condemn
them, and deny Communion with them, and declare such Communion to be unlawful.
I Communicate with your Assemblies, and you utterly shun, refuse and condemn
Communion with ours; which then is the Separatist, if I prove ours to be as
good as yours?

VIII. Many English Doctors say, Rome is a true Church, as a Knave or Thief is
a true man, and we separated not from It, but they cast Us out for doing our
duty, and not sinning as they do. I say not as they (for as the Pope claims
the Headship of the Church Universally, that form of Policy is not of God, and
we separate from that essencial form of their pretended Church:) But ad hominem
if the Diocesane also be a true Church, and we cast out of it for not sinning,
are We separatists, or are our Ejectors such?

IX. I have showed you that the Canons Excommunicate ipso facto all that say
the imposed Conformity is unlawful. If this be unjust, is it Separation to be
so Excommunicated? and who is the Schismatic here? And what shall be thought
of such Churchmen as will first ipso facto Excommunicate us for our duty, and
then, as you do, call us Separatists. Would you have Excommunicate Men,
Communicate with you? I (and many) do so, because you shall be the Executioners
of your own sentence, and not I: But with what face can men cast Men out by
Canon ipso facto, and then revile them for not coming in. You can mean no other
in common sense, but that we are Schismatics or separatists because we are not
of the Conformist's judgment: And that is not in our power: And you differ more
in judgment in greater matters from each other; and yet call it not Schism or
Separation. Yea you differ about the very essential form of your National
Church, one part taking it to be the Kings supremacy, and another to be the
Bishops or Clergy's Power: And therefore you cannot be truly of one National
Church, that are not for one essential Form.

X. If men be wrongfully Excommunicate, are they thereby absolved from all
public Worshipping of God? or do they lose their Right to all
Church Communion? I have else where cited you Canons enough that say the
contrary, and that Clave Errante the excommunication hu^teth none but the
Excommunicator: And I have Cited Bishop Tailor's Full Consent. Must we not then
Meet and Worship as we can, when you wrongfully Excommunicate us?

XI. Are not the Laity, by your Canon, forbidden to Receive the Sacrament in
another Parish? or, any other to receive them, if they dare not Receive it from
a Non-Preaching Minister at Home? And if the People judge, that he that is
unable or unwilling to Preach, or that is a Heretic, or that lives in such
heinous Sins, or Preaches Malignantly, as to do more Harm than Good, may not
lawfully be owned by them for Christ's Ministers, nor their Souls be Committed
to their Pastoral Trust; Must they therefore be without a Pastors Care, or all
Public Worship and Communion, and be Condemned for being Wronged?

XII. Were all those Councils Separatists, that Decreed, That none shall hear
Mass from a Fornicating Priest? And, Were the Canons called the Apostles, and
the Greek-Church that used them, for Separation, that said, [ Episcopus
ignorantia aut malo animo opplotus, non est Episcopus, sed falsus Episcopus,
non a Dee, sed ab hominibus promotus?] Was Guildas a Separatist that told the
British Wicked Priests, That they were not Christ's Ministers, but Traitors?
and that he was not Eximius Christianus, that would call them Priests, or
Ministers of Christ? Were Cyprian, and all the Carthage-Council, Separatists,
that wrote the Epistle about Martial and Basilides, which I Translated; and
told the People, It was their Duty to Separate from Peccatore Praeposito, a
Scandalous Prelate? and that the Chief Power was in them, to Choose the Worthy,
or Refuse the Unworthy? and that they were guilty of Sin, if they joined with
such Sinners? Who made You a more Reverend and Credible Judge of Separation,
than Cyprian, and this Council? At least, Who will think, that you may Judge
them Separatists, or guilty of Schism?

XIII. Are not the Laity, by your Canon to be denied the Sacrament, if they be
not willing of your Episcopal Confirmation? And when Imposition of Hands is
made the Sign by which Confirming or Assuring Grace is conveyed, and some
Bishops assign no less to it; they fear, lest it be made a Sacrament. Be their
Doubts just or not, they cannot overcome them. And* Must they therefore Live
without Sacramental Communion? By what Law?

XIV. Are not the Laity, that dare not Receive the Sacrament Kneeling, for the
Reasons elsewhere mentioned, to be denied the Sacrament by your Rule? And
though herein they fear Sin more than they have cause, Must they that cannot
Change their own Judgments, live all their Days without the Sacrament? When as
General Councils Decreed, That none should adore Kneeling on any Lord's Day,
and the Church for a Thousand Years, practiced accordingly; Are all
Separatists, that dare not do that in such an Instant, which they judge to be
flat Sin; nor yet did cast off Sacramental Communion?

XV. When the Laity cannot have their Children Baptized, without such Use of
the Transient Dedicating Image of the Cross, and such Use of Entituling and
Covenanting ^od-Fathers; which, on the Reasons largely given by me, they take
to be no small Sin; Is it Separation to join with Pastors, that will otherwise
Baptize them? Are they bound to Sin against their Consciences, or to leave
their Children Unbaptised? or, Prefer such pastors as Refuse them?

XVI. Is it Separation for men to Refuse* Pastors that are Usurpers, and have
no true Power over them? Sure it is not to Refuse an usurper of the Kingly
Power? and, Why then of the Church Power? Which of the Bishops thought it any
Sin, in the Days of Usurpation, to forsake their Parish-Churches? And in my
Abridgment of Church History, I have cited many Canons, which prove it the
Common Judgment of the Church for One Thousand Years, or near; That he was no
Bishop, that was not Chosen by the Clergy, and the people; or came in* without
the Peoples Consent. And if you will Read a late Treatise of Father Paul
Servita of Venice, (a very Venerable Author) you will see this at large
Confirmed. And, If this be true, Is it Schism to take such for none of our
Pastors? And Patrons choose Pastors for the peoples Souls, who too often care
not for their own: Yea, though they believe not that Man has an Immortal Soul,
their Power of Electing those that Man must take for the Guides of their Souls,
is nevertheless for their Infidelity. What Law of God binds all Men to stand
to their Choice? How many Hundred Congregations have Incumbents, whom the
People never consented to; but take them for their Hinderers and Burden?

XVII Dispositio materiae necessaria est* ad Receptionem formae: non ex quovis
ligno fit Mercurius. If a Person be incapable of the Ministerial Office, it is
no Sin to Judge him no Minister. Those are Incapable, 1. Who have not tolerable
Ministerial Knowledge and Utterance. 2. Who are Heretics. 3. Who malignantly
Oppose serious Religion as Hypocrisy, or a needless Thing. 4. Who, by their
wicked lives, do more Hurt than they do Good. From such, St. Paul bids Men Turn
away; that have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power. Is it Schism, to Obey
such Commands? And how great a Number of such Cases there are, I need not tell
the People.

XVIII. I am loath to displease you; and I write not to Accuse You, or other
Conformists. But as Paul was constrained by Accusers, to speak sharply of them,
and like a Fool (though not Foolishly) of himself: So you constrein us to say
that in our own Defense, which will exasperate you; and, I doubt, you cannot
easily bear. And God says, Thou shall not Hate thy Brother in thy Heart: Thou
shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. I have
told you only, how many and heinous the Sins are, which we fear we should be
Guilty of, should we Conform. The Thirty Aggravations, named Sect. 16. are
Tremendous. We have yet heard from none of you, any thing which should excuse
us from such Guilt, if we did Conform. And if the People think, (though they
should mistake) that all the Conformists are Guilty of the like, Can ye wonder,
that they Prefer less Guilty* Pastors, to trust the Conduct of their Souls
with; when Heb. 13. they are Commanded to be Followers of their Guides? If they
mistake, [1 Cor. 5. With such not^ to Eat,] and [ From such turn away (...) it
I^tolerable?

But bear with needful Truth, as to your self. You here would dissuade the
Nonconformists from their Public Ministry, and Plead it to be their Sin; By
this you own the Silencing and Alienation of about Two Thousand such Ministers,
till they Conform. I ask't you formerly, is it not Sacrilege, to Alienate
(unjustly) Devoted, Consecrated Persons, and worse than to Alienate Lands or
Moneys? And, is it not a Hindering of God's Word? for which the Liturgy
disswadeth Men from the Sacrament, lest the Devil enter into them. I only say,
If Men be Guilty of this, (which You think, the Nonconformists are, by not
Conforming; and They think, Others are.) If you had Robbed Thousand Churches of
the Communion Plate, or the Glebe-Land, or Consented to the Doing of it: were
it Separation and Schism for your Parish to prefer another Pastor of their own
Choice? And when you Publish your Consent to the Alienating or Silencing about
Two Thousand such Ministers, If Men think that you do much worse than a
Thousand Church-Robbers, though they should mistake, Is not their Trusting
another Pastor with the Conduct of their Souls, a tolerable Thing? Dear
Brother, Try to take off the Bias of your Judgment* and bear with necessary
Truth, though rough. Though your Logical Faculty run lamentably Low in this
your Accusing Sermon, I impute it to the Badness of your Cause. Undoubtedly,
you have Learning enough, to know that ye must Die; and that after Death,
Judgment must be expected; and that the Time is short; and the Fashion of these
deceiving VVorldly Things, does pass away. And, Can you think, that your
Approbation and Endeavors to Silence so many such Ministers while your own
Experience might tell you, That even You do need much Help in such a Charge as
you undertake, will be the Matter of a Comfortable Account? If you think so, I
must say, That a little sober, impartial, believing Consideration, will make a
Man VViser, than the Reading of many Books with an unhumbled, biased Mind. The
Day is coming, when you will see, that ye were in a better, safer way, when
with peaceable Dr. Tillotson, you seemed to Consent to the Platform of an Act
for our Concord and Restoration? which made me tell many Parliament Men, [
Refer our Cause to the Council of Dr. Tillotson and Dr. Stilling-fleet, and we
shall presently be healed.] But, What is Man? And, What need have we to pray,
Lead us not into Temptation?

XIX. If Men know the need of the full Use of the Pastoral-Office for their
Souls, and cannot spare it, and yet live where they cannot Enjoy one Half or
Quarter of it; Is it Schism for them to seek to Enjoy the rest? Dr. Hammond, in
his Annotations, o^t tells us, That the Office of a Bishop, was, To Preach, To
Direct Men's Consciences, To Visit and Pray with the Sick, To take Care of all
the Poor, and the Moneys gathered for them, To be their Guide in Public
Worship, To Exercise Christ's Discipline, Admonishing, Rejecting the Obstinate,
Restoring the Penitent, Strengthening the Weak, Comforting the Afflicted,
Resolving the Doubtful, Convincing Gainsayers, etc. Some of your most
Peaceable Conformable Hearers tell me, [ We have need of a Frequent Help, by
the Company and Council of a Pastor.] But we never see him, but in the Pulpit.
And if we should all go to seek him in another Parish where he dwells, when
ever we need a Pastor's Council, were he at Leisure and willing, he could not
have time to speak to one of an Hundred, that might (at once) wait to speak
with him: So that, we have none of this necessary Pastoral Help, when we
greatly need it. Yea, not the Sixth, or Tenth Part of the Parish can come to
Hear him in the Church. And when We that most desire it get in, it troubles us
to think, that we thereby keep out those that least desire it, but most need
it; who, knowing the Difficulty of getting Room, do stay at Home, and never
seek it: So that, Five Parts of Six of our Neighbors, use not to go to any
Church at all, no more than Infidels. And if in pity we persuade them to go to
any Nonconformist's Meeting, they say the Clergy will Damn them as
Schismatics. The Question now is, Whether Ten Thousand, or Twenty Thousand in
a Parish, are bound to live without all Private Pastoral Help and Council; yea,
and to forbear all Public Worshipping of God, and Hearing of his Word? And, if
they seek Relief of Nonconforming Ministers, Publicly and Privately, Whether
it be Sinful Separation? If Men can spare the Ministry, Why are they
Maintained? If they are needful for the Safety of Men's Souls, Must so many
Thousands hazard their Souls for want of needful Help, lest they be called
Separatists? If the Dean of St. Paul's be called the Parson of the Parish, and
Preach to others that can Hear him, Will that serve the Needs of all the rest?

XX. In Moscovie, where a Christian Prince, and the Laws forbid all Preaching,
and Public Worship, save the Reading of Homilies and Liturgies; Is it
Separation, and Sinful Schism, to Disobey this, and otherwise to Preach and
Worship God?

XXI. Is it Schism in France, and such other Countries, for the Protestants to
Meet to Preach and Worship God, against the Wills of the King and Bishops? It Is
true, that great Sin is necessarily thus avoided by them, which are not Imposed
upon us. But if it prove, that any Sin is made necessary to Communion, the
Degree will not much vary the Case, as to the Point of Separation.

XXII. In diverse Countries, the Prince is of one Religion, or Mode of Religion,
and the Bishops of another: The Question is, Who are the Schismatics, the
People that in their Assemblies, and Mode of Worship, do ^ollow the Prince, or
they that follow the Bishops? Some great Writers for Conformity tell me, That
if the King Command one Liturgy, Translation, Version, Ceremony, etc. and the
Bishop another, I must obey the Bishop before the King: Others say, I must Obey
the King before the Bishop, (of which before.) Bishop Goodman of Gloucester (a
Papist) complains of the King, that would not consent that Clergymen should
be Chancellours: And I speak with no Bishop, that disowneth not
Lay-Chancellours Use of the Keys. The Helvetian Magistrates are Erastians,
against the Clergies Power of Excommunication: Many of the Pastors are of the
Contrary Judgment. The Duke of Brandenburgh is a Calvinist: His Bishops and
Clergy are Lutherans. Which Party are the Schismatic?

XXIII. Were all those Separating Schismatics, who, from the Apostles Days,
did Meet, Preach, and Worship God against the Will and Laws of Princes;
sometimes of Heathen Princes, and sometimes of Christians; (Constantine,
Valens, Theodosius the Second, Anastasius, Zeno, Justinian, etc.) If so, most
Christian Bishops have been such Separatists. I have in my First Plea, and my
Church History* given Instances enough.

XXIV. Is it Schism, or Sinful Separation, to Disobey a Command about Religion,
which no Man has true Authority to Give? Authority is the Objectum Formale of
Obedience; and where there is no Authority, there is no Disobedience, in a
formal Sense, or privative. Most Politics say, That Princes have no Authority
against the Common Good: All Power of Princes and Pastors is of God, and is for
Edification, and not for Destruction. God gives no Power against Himself, or
his Laws, nor the Souls of Men. If the King should Command me to Marry a Wife,
whom I know to be intolerably unmeet for me; or to Feed my self, and Family
with Food, which I find to be against our Health; or to use a Physician, whose
Ignorance or Negligence, or Untrustiness, would endanger my Life: I am not
bound to Obey him, both because it is a Matter that is without the Verge of his
Governing Authority, and because it is against the End of Government. Regal
Power destroys not Family-Power, nor Personal Interest and Self-Government:
No Man has Power to Destroy or Endanger the Souls of Men, nor forbid them
seeking their own Edification and Salvation. I Repeat Bishop Bilson's Words, p.
236. of Subjection: [ Princes have no Right to Call or Confirm Preachers; but
to Receive such as be Sent of God, and give them Liberty for their Preaching,
and Security for their Persons. And if Princes Refuse so to do, God's Laborers
must go forward with that which is Commanded them from Heaven: Not by
Disturbing Princes from their Thrones, nor Invading their Realms, as your
Father does, and defends he may do; but by mildly Submitting themselves to
the Powers on Earth, and meekly Suffering for the Defense of the Truth, what
they shall Inflict. -- Page 399. The Election of Bishops in those Days,
belonged to the People, and not to the Prince: And though by plain Force, he
placed Lucius there; yet might the People lawfully Reject him as no Bishop, and
cleave to Peter, their Right Pastor.] On this, I further ask,

XXV. If the Nonconforming People can prove; That (notwithstanding the times of
Civil Usurpation, and Bishops Removal) their Pastors had a Lawful Call and
title to their Office over them, and they were truly obliged to them, as in
that just Relation, Whether the Magistrates or Bishops Acts, have made those
Relations, and Obligations Null? That the Temples and Tithes are in the
Magistrates Power, we doubt not: But more than Bishop Bilson, even many
Councils deny it of the Office, and Pastoral Relation. Yea, the Universal
Church was of the same mind. And if so, how prove you, e. g. that the Relation
of the Ejected London Ministers, and their Flocks was Dissolved, and that the
Succeeders were true Pastors to the Non-consenting Flocks?

XXVI. That there are (Alas) Multitudes of Young, Raw, Injudicious, besides
Scandalous Priests, no Man can deny that knows England, and has any Modesty.
If then honest People, that are not willing to be Damned, shall say: [ We best
know what is suitable to our Needs, and what Teachers profit us, and what not.
And we find that some are so Ignorant that they are unmeet as Plowmen, to
resolve the most concerning Cases of Conscience; and their Conversation
savoureth not of any serious belief of Christianity, and the World to come, and
they do but Read a few dry words, like School-Boyes saying a Weak Oration,
without Life or Seriousness, and we can but little profit by them.] How prove
you that it is lawful for such to use more suitable helps, though Men forbid
it? A Soul is precious: God Works by Means, and according to the suitableness
of Means: That agrees not to some, which others can make shift with: Two or
Three words from a Conformest, that says: [ God can Bless the weakest Means to
you; or the Fault is in your self] will not serve instead of needful Helps. The
King or Bishop have not Authority to Tie a Sick Man to Eat that which he cannot
Digest, or Hurts him. Every Man is neerliest concerned for his own Soul, and
most Entrusted with it. Parish-Order it self, is but a humane alterable
Circumstance, which I am not bound to observe at the hazard of my Edification
and Salvation.

XXVII. What if the Magistrate grant a Toleration of diverse Modes of Worship,
as the French, and Dutch Churches are here Tolerated, and many in Holland, and
in many other Countries? Are these separating Schismatics, that differ from
each other? If so, it is not because they disobey the Magistrate; for he
Tolerateth them all: If not, then mere diversity of Modes of Worship makes not
Schismatics.

XXVIII. If it be no true Political Church (in the strict sense as an Organized
Society, which has not true Authorized Pastors, and if any Parish have either
Incapable Persons* or such as were never Consented to by the Flocks, and so
have no True Pastor; and if the Bishops hold, That Parishes are not proper
Political Churches, but parts of Churches, having no Pastors that have the
Power of the Keys, or the whole Essence of the Pastoral Office; but only
Half-Pastors, that want an Essential Part of the Power. If on any such Account,
any Parishes are no true Pastoral Churches: Qu. Whether to Separate from such a
Parish, be to Separate from a Church in the sense in question?

XXIX. The mutual Condemnations in the times of the Novations, Donatists,
Nestorians, Evtychians, Monothelites, Phantasiasts, Image-Patrons, etc. tell
the World how needful, mutual forbearance is, to prevent worse Divisions and
Confusions: And the Papists take themselves to be all of one Church, though
they differ even in Doctrines of Morality, as dangerously as the Jansenists,
against the Jesuits have showed; and though many Sects and Orders be permitted
to Live, and Worship God with very great diversity in their several sorts of
Monasteries: Why then should the little differences of our questioned
Assemblies be thought to be so great as makes us not to be of one Church.

XXX. Some good Christians think, That though an undisciplined Church may be
Communicated with, occasionally, yea, and constantly, while there is a hopeful
Trial of its Reformation; yet when there is no hope after Patient T^yal, a
better Course and Communion should be chosen, where it may be had: And they
think, that Multitudes whom they know to be profane Swearers, Cursers,
Drunkards, Fornicators, Haters of serious Piety, Hobbists, Infidels, Atheists,
Sadduces, etc. are continued in the Church of England: And they say, they
scarce ever heard one Man of all these Excommunicated; nor one Man of them all,
ever brought to Public Confession and Repentance. And they think, Lay
Chancellours, having not rightfully the Power of the Keys, there is no ordinary
Means of hopeful Reformation, and Exercise of Discipline; especially, the
Largeness of the Diocesses making it impossible to be used to One of an
Hundred, that (according to the Law of Christ) it should be used on. And they
think, That the Church Discipline is not only None, as to the Right Use, and
made Impossible; but worse than None, while it is used most to Excommunicate
from Christ's Church, the True and Conscionable Members of Christ, that dare
not Conform; and so to lead to their Imprisonment, and utter Ruin. And they
think, That no Man has true Authority, to confine them to such an
Undisciplined, and Illdisciplined Church; and forbid them the Use of better,
where Christ's Discipline may be used. Whether these Men be in the Right, or in
the Wrong, if the Matter of Fact be true, I should desire rather the
Reformation of such a Church, than the Reproach or Afflicting of Men, as
Separatists and Schismatics, that choose another sort of Communion, as to
their more Ordinary Practice; not denying this to be a true Diseased Church.

And so much in these Thirty Instances, about that which I think deserves not
the Reproach of any dangerous Separation. I told you Thirty Instances also of
Unlawful Separation, which I named. And now you may judge, whether you spoke to
Edification, when you said, That the [ People are Condemned by their own
Teachers;] without telling, whom, and for what; and how far they Condemn them,
and how far not.

. 34. And, Did you think the Consequence good, That because we think it Lawful
to Hear you, yea, and to many a Duty; therefore we Condemn them, for Hearing
any one else, that Conformeth not? As if they that have Communion with your
Diocesan-Church, must have Communion with no other? So far am I from your
Opinion, that I take it to be woefully Separating and Schismatical: And will
never be a Member of a Particular Church, which will forbid me Communion with
all others that differ from them; yea, that does not hold its Communion in
Unity with all the True Christian Churches on Earth* Though a Schismatical
Disputer for Prelacy, tells me, That though I Communicate with the Church of
England, I am a Schismatic for Communicating with Nonconformists, who (says
he) are Schismatics. But he that will Communicate with no Church that has any
Guilt of Schism, when the Christian World is broken into so many Sects, I
doubt, will be the greatest Schismatic; and will Communicate with few on
Earth. And as Smith Baptized himself, not liking any other Baptism, this Man
may become a Church to himself.

And indeed, the word [ Condemn them] sounds Harsh; when it signifies no more,
than that we Judge them to be Mistaken and Culpable. If I Condemn every Man, or
every Church, which I judge to be Sinners, I must Condemn all Mankind. I use
not so harsh a Phrase of your Self, as to say, I Condemn You: When yet I Judge
your Book to be more Schismatical, than the Meetings of most that I am
acquainted with; which you Accuse.

. 35. But yet, your Mistake is Greater than I have hitherto mentioned. I know
not many (if any) that use to Hear Me, who Separate from You: Many of them are
Episcopal, and for your Liturgy and Ceremonies. I think, most of them go to the
Parish-Churches; and few (if any) that I know, do deny it to be Lawful. How
then can you prove it True, that we Condemn them? What is it for? Is it because
they neither Separate from the Conformists, or Nonconformists? This is it, that
we Exhort them to. It was an ill Slip, to put our Condemning them, for
Commending them: But a fair Exposition will make it Lawful.

. 36. But you say [How they can preach lawfully to a people that commit a fault
in hearing them, I do not understand.]

Ans. Now you come to your business: But 1. What if you by Calumny call my
ordinary hearers Separatists, and they are not such? 2. What if we prove it to
be their duty to hear both you and us in season, if they need it, or lawful at
least; and so do commend them, and not condemn them? may we then lawfully
Preach to them? What if the fault which we blame some for, be their judging it
unlawful to hear such as you? Will your Logic prove, that we call it their
fault to hear us; as if hearing us, and not hearing you, were words of the same
signification?

And is all necessary which is lawful? Do we condemn men that do not all that
is lawful to do? And because you after infer, that if it be lawful, it is a
Duty; I would you had told us, whether you take this universally, that [ What
ever is lawful is a Duty,] or only in this case for some special reason, and
what that is. I suppose it is, because it is commanded: as if every lawful
thing commanded were a duty: But we think otherwise, unless the Command be an
Act which God Authorizeth the Commander to do. All men's Authority is limited by
God: and they have none but from him. For instance, it is lawful to eat brown
Bread, and drink Water, (or Wine;) But if the King or Bishop forbid me to eat
better, when my health requires it, I am not bound to obey them: It is lawful
to were Sackcloth, but none have power to forbid me fitter Clothing: It is
lawful to set a Son Apprentice to a Chimny-sweeper, or to an Ale-seller or
Vintner; but if the Bishop or any other forbid one to place him better, it
obliges not: It is lawful to marry a Blackmore, or an ugly Scold, or Beggar:
But the Bishop or King cannot oblige men to chose no better, because it is out
of the Verge of their jurisdiction, and belongs to personal and family power.
It is lawful to put my self into the Hospital, and care of an unskilful
Physician, till my health require better: But when my health requires it, I
will use a better if I can, whoever forbids it. For it is usurpation in them,
that shall take the necessary care of my health and life out of my own hands.
It is lawful to give the King our estates: But Lawyers say, we are not bound to
do it, merely because He or the Bishop commands it.

But perhaps you think, that men may do more against our souls than against our
bodies; and have more power in Religion than in civil or bodily things: But we
are not bound to think so if you do. It is lawful for men to hear one that only
reads the Scripture and Liturgy, and never preaches: But when my needs
requires more, I will use it if I can, whoever forbids me* It is lawful to
hear an ignorant raw Lad, that says over a dry Sermon as a Boy says his
lesson, and has neither spiritual Life nor Light, nor is fit to take the
Charge of Souls: And it is lawful to hear such a Sermon as yours, or one that
peacheth against other men's preaching: Yea, we rejoice, and will rejoice, that
Christ is preached, though by such as do it in strife and contention to add
affliction to the afflicted, and not sincerely: But wise men that believe a
life to come, and love their souls, will choose better if they can, whoever
forbids them. Men have no power to hurt our souls, nor to deprive us of the
help which God affords us, nor to make themselves the only Judges, what is
profitable or hurtful to our souls or bodies, or what is best for our
edification.

37. But [ To commit a fault in hearing us] is of doubtful signification. In
the manner of hearing, all commit faults; by some defect of attention, faith or
application: But that is not it that you mean: But that it is their sin to hear
us. And indeed, if this were true, is it above your learning to understand,
that it is lawful to preach to them that commit a fault in hearing them.

1. What if culpably they would hear no other? Is it better let them hear none
at all than that we preach to them? If peevishness or sickness make a Child
refuse the Food or Physic which he should take by his parents command; will
you say, that it is better that he famish or die, than that you give him any
other? Men may be saved that hear not you: But how can they believe, unless
they hear, or hear without a Preacher? The means is for the End: I will have
Mercy and not Sacrifice, is a Lesson which I perceive more than the Pharisees
are to learn. Order is for the thing Ordered: Parish Order is not so needful as
Faith and Salvation. It may be, such a man's Sin, that he will not hear such as
he should hear; and so by Consequence that he hears me, and yet also
Consequently his Duty to hear me, supposing that his fault has blinded him, to
think that he may hear no other, till his Error be Cured: Or at least, it is
my Duty to take him as I find him, and Preach to him in his own mistake.

2. The Canon forbids going out of our own Parishes: suppose twenty or five
Hundred Infidels, or Papists of the next Parish resolved, we will hear no
Protestant but Dr. Stillingfleet; were it unlawful for you to Preach to them?

3. If I should Preach to them all against separation, and for Prelacy, were it
unlawful? One of the Doctors at the Savoy, 1661. motioned, that he and I might
go up and down England to Preach for Conformity: and if any ask us why we do
not, we may tell them, Dr. Stillingfleet takes it for unlawful: If it be a Sin
to preach to them, it is a sin to preach to them against Separation, or for
Conformity.

4. It is ordinary for men of other Parishes to hear you, and Dr. Tillotson,
and others, such as you esteem: And I suppose most weekly Lectures are Preached
most to men of other Parishes, and yet you take it not for sin to preach to
them.

5. It is ordinary for many Protestants to go hear and Communicate wi^h the
French or Dutch Churches which differ from you in the Mode of Worship: And yet
I never heard it proved, that it is a sin for the Preachers thus to preach to
them.

6. What if your Children as Prodigals overrun you, or the Kings Subjects
causelessly fly into another Land: They ought not to be there. Is it herefore
unlawful, for any to teach them there, or receive them to pub^ike Worship?

7. Almost all the Christian World, is so tainted with some degree of Error
and Partiality, that men will hear none but those of their own mind, for their
Error sake. The Armenians, Abassims, Greeks, Papists, Nestorians, Jacobites,
Luth^rans, Arminians, Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. It is unlawful for any of
these, to refuse sounder Teachers than their own, and to Confine themselves to
their own only merely for their singular Opinions: And yet it will be hard for
you to prove, that all the Preachers on Earth, must give over Preaching to any
such as these. What shame, Blood, and odious Schisines, followed this
Schismatical Principle, while in doubtful Disputations, or tolerable
differences, each party Condemned and Cursed the other, I have fully manifested
in my Abridgment of Church History. While by one Emperor and Council all the
Orthodox were Deposed; and by another, all the Nestorians; and by another, all
the Eutichians; and by another, all the Monothelites; and by another, the
Corrupticolae; and by another, the Iconoclasts; and so on; How few were there
un-Cursed, and un-Cordemned in the Roman World? And this keeps the Churches
in Schism to this day.

8. Do not you thus teach the Nonconf^rmists to require you with the like; and
by your own Rule to judge it unlawful for you to Preach. They judge indeed, that
it is lawful to hear you; 1. When better (...), without greater hurt than
benefit. 2. To s^ew their (...) by their Practice, viz. that they separate not
from you as (...) Church, nor ^^ke it for simply unlawful to have (...) you:
But they that think Conformity as great a (...) have told you, they fear it
would be to them, must needs think that it is a fault in those that choose your
Assemblies, when c^teris paribus, and without greater hurt than good, they
might have better. And must we therefore conclude, that it is unlawful for you
to Preach. Suppose it were ^ut, when we had the Kings License. Or, if in the
times of Usurpation, and thought to leave the Parish Churches tended Culpably
to Division: It follows not, that it was unlawful for a Bishop to preach in
private, though when you, under the Usurpers, kept the Parish Church, he had
preached to some of your Flock.

But here you show what your Labor tends to, viz. To prove it Unlawful for
us to Preach, that you may persuade Us to give over. If God will, I shall
elsewhere give you an Account of the Reasons of our Preaching; and Answer what
You, and Others say against it: And therefore, shall say but little of it here.
But I am heartily sorry, that you are come to such a Desire: That you had
rather so many Hundred such Ministers were Silenced, than suffered to Preach
without your Covenants, and Ceremonies! That you no more regard the Needs of
the People, that abound in Ignorance, Carelessness, and Vice; nor observe no
more the Power of Sin, nor the great Want of Help to such Parishes, as your
own, and too many in the Land, that have need on other Accounts.

O! How dreadful and unsearchable are the Judgments of God? That when so many
Hundreds were Forbidden to Preach the Gospel, the Plague must first give them
some Degree of Liberty, and the Flames continue it the next Year, and the Kings
Clemency after, and Horrid Popish Treason next divert their Prosecutors; while
the Laws and Bishops all the while forbad them: Even when the Parish-Preachers
fled from the Plague, and it was dying Men that the Nonconformists Preached to.
And when the Churches were Burnt down, and the People had no Priest, or Place
to go to for their own way of Worship; yet neither Laws nor Bishops consented
to our Preaching: And such Men as Dr. Stillingfleet also, come in to engage
their Wit, Reputation, Industry, and Conscience, in the Silencing Design. O!
What Cause have we all to VVatch and Pray, That We enter not into Temptation?
and to dread the Spiritual Judgments of God? Remember Lot' s Wife, was a
needful Warning. A Solomon, that is Numbered with the Wisest Men, may be se^ up
as a Frightful Monument, to bid us Take heed, lest we Revolt.

And I take it for a greater Injury to us, to persuade us to Silence our
selves; than to persuade the Magistrate only, to Silence, Banish, or Imprison
us: For so to Suffer from another is not our Sin. But Sacrilegiously to break
our Ministerial Vow, and forsake the Calling, which we were Solemnly Vowe^ to,
and this while the Necessity of Souls cry for Help; is a Sin, which few Men are
so bad, as to persuade us to with open Face, without some pious fraudulent
Pretense.

. 38. Sermon. p. 20. [I do not confound bare Suspending Communion, in some
particular Rites, which Persons do modestly Scruple, and using it in what they
judge to be Lawful; with either total, or ordinary Forbearance of Communion, in
what they judge to be Lawful; and proceeding to the Forming of Separate
Congregations, i. e. under other Teachers, and by other Rules, than what the
Established Religion allows. And this is the present Case of Separation,
which I intend to consider, and to make the Sinfulness, and the Mischievousness
appear.

Answ. I am sure, I am one that you expressly Charge, as of this Number; and I
can best speak for my self, and those of my Acquaintance. 1. Is it true, that I
totally or ordinarily forbear?

2. What mean you by [ Forming] a Congregation? If their Presence be my Forming
them, it is but because I speak to them: For, I neither Persuade nor Drive them
to be there. But if you mean, Forming them into a Distinct Church, and becoming
their Pastor, I was never Related as a Pastor, to any Church, but Kiderminster;
nor have these Twenty Years, been a Pastor to any; but borrowed other Men's
Pulpits, to Preach a Lecture ^o such as say they need it.

3. Your word [ Separate,] I have Examined before. You Separate from My
Auditory, and more than Separate; and I Separate not from Yours: Who then is
the Separatist?

4. All the Parishes about you, and the Bishop of Ely in your Parish, that
judge it Lawful to Hear you, yet are Absent from you; and so are some
Nonconformists, that think they must Preach themselves; and cannot be in Two
Places at once. Is that Separating?

5. The French and Dutch Churches do all that, which you here describe, as
Sinful and Mischievous; only they have more Leave, than we.

6. Is all the Matter, that We are Teachers, which the Law allows not? So
were the Orthodox under the Nestorian, Eutychian, Monothelite, etc. Princes.
And so I have proved, That the Christian Religion has been much propagated in
the World.

7. What are the Rules which we go by, which the Established Religion allows
not? Does it not allow the Sacred Scriptures? Or, Have you proved, That I go by
any other Rule? If the Act of Uniformity, or the Canons be your Religion, Do
not they allow God's Word? Or, if they be your Rules, omitting that, Is not
Using another? Yet those that do join in Churches under Chosen Pastors, when I
do not, I shall not Condemn, till I hear their Reasons: They may have more
Cause than I have.

. 39. Sermon. p. 21. [They Unanimously confess they find no fault with the
Doctrine of our Church.]

Answ. 1. And yet are you one that would have them all Silenced? 2. But this is
not true: You name Four or Five, and then say [ Unanimously;] and this because
they offer to Subscribe the Doctrine of the Thirty Nine Articles: And yet I
suppose you know, that they more Unanimously dissent from the Doctrinal Article
in the Liturgy of Baptized Infants, certain undoubted Salvation without
Exception, and some of them to the Doctrinal Damnation of all Condemned in
Athanasius Creed; And some of your selves, as well as Mr. Humphrey could wish
the Article against Free Will, and that which Damneth all the Heathens, and
some others, had been otherwise than they are.

. 40. [They generally yield, that our Parochial Churches are true Churches; and
it is with these that Communion is required]

Say you so? 1. The Diocesans are little beholden to you, if this be all! Do
you require no Communion with them.

2. I think I shall show you anon, that you take your Parishes for no true
Churches your self: At least your chief Brethren do not, who make them but
Parts of a Church, the Diocesan being the lowest proper Church.

3. Are you sure, that the Independents take your Parishes for true Churches? I
cannot tell. But I know John Goodwin and Mr. Brown have Writ to the Contrary.

4. And for my self, how often have I told you, that I distinguish, and take
those for true Churches, that have true Pastors (but that is, because I judge
of their office by Gods Word, and not by the Rule which depriveth them of an
essential part of the Office of a Pastor of a true Church.) But I take those
for no true Churches, that have. 1. Men incapable of the Pastoral office. 2. Or
not truly called to it. 3. Or that deny themselves to have the power essential
to a Pastor. Such Congregations I can join with, as Chapels or Oratories: But
they are not Churches of the political organized from which we speak of, as
wanting an essential part.

. 41. Next you tell men, what I said in print, of our Conclusion, that
communion with you, was lawful.] Ans. This is true: and when said we otherwise?
Dr. Manton, Dr. Bates, Dr. Jacomb, Mr. Poole and others were there! I told you
before, how far lawful.

. 42. Sermon. p. 22. [Who could have Imagined, but they should have all joined
with us, in what themselves judged to be lawful, and in many Cases a duty. But
instead of this, we have rather since that time, found them more inclinable to
courses of separation, etc.]

Ans. If this be not true, I take it not for sinless. Since that time 1. Mr.
Pool, Mr. Humphery, my self and others, that took our selves to be no Pa^^ors
to any particular Church, have usually joined in your assemblies; and I usually
keep to my Parish Church.

2. Since that time, in a Treaty set on foot by the Lord Keeper Bridgman, we
agreed in terminis, with Bishop Wilkins, and Dr. Burton; and Judge Hale drew up
our Agreement into the form of an Act.

3. Since that time, at your own motion, we treated with honest Dr. Tillotson
and you; and the same men and more, consented to the form and words of an
agreeing Act, and you both seemed to consent.

4. Where you read my words, you might have read the Reason, why no more
Communicated with you. And it is not like a lover of Truth to dissemble them;
1. I told you, that even at the present, new heats arising against Dissenters,
we thought it our duty, till they were over, to forbear a lawful thing; which
was like to occasion the sufferings of such as in that were not satisfied as we
were. Marriage is lawful: But if it be not necessary, one may forbear it, if it
would ruin another, though the Bishop command it him. 2. I told you, that the
Oxford Act of confinement, came out when we were intending to come to your
Churches: and then had we been seen there in the City or Corporations, we had
been sent to Jayle: but many in the Countries came to your Churches. This is
your Cathedral Justice; The Law is [ come to Church in London, etc. and you
shall go to Jayle six Months.] And if we do not, such as you tell the World,
that we are Separatists. 3. I told you, men cannot preach to others, and hear
you both at once. Must we repeat these things as often as you accuse us?

43. In the charge are joined Dr. Owen and my self, my error is [p. 24. Sermon.
that to devise new Species of Churches (beyond Parochial or Congregational
without Gods authority* and to impose them on the world yea in his name) and
call all dissenters Schismatics, is a far worse usurpation than to make or
impose new Ceremonies or Liturgies].

Ans. A man would think that this doctrine should justify it self and confute
the Accuser. 1. Will you own your Churches de Specie to be new, and yet appeal
to antiquity? 2. Will you own them to be devised without Gods authority, and
yet to be preferred to those that he instituted? 3. Will you own that yet they
may in his name be imposed on the World? 4. And will you own that for these,
dissenters may be called Schismatics? 5. And is not this a worse usurpation
than to make new Ceremonies? If you will plead for so much presumption,
profanation of Gods Name, usurpation, uncharitableness, and Schism, I will
leave you to fight against the Light, and not labor in vain in a needless
confutation. 2. But, Sir, you should have told your Reader the full truth. 1.
That I never denied but largely asserted the Magistrates power of the Sword
over all persons and causes Ecclesiastical; much less Christian Kingdoms, or
Cities de re. 2. And that I maintained that Magistrates make officers to judge
of the Circa sacra; or undetermined accidents of Religion. 3. And if you will
equivocally call these Churches, I quarrel not de nomine. 4. Nor yet at the
thing or name of the Association of many Churches for Concord. 5. But I say (in
the Page cited by you) that as humane forms should not be pretended falsely to
be Divine, so neither have they authority against those that are Divine, to
change them and destroy their privileges: Unless you will fight for man
against God, you must reverse this Accusation.

44. As to your case, of the extent of the first Churches, I have so much to
say of it elsewhere, if God will, that I shall not here stay on so short a
touch. Only you put me to repeat, If God make families, and men make Cities, do
but confess the different efficients, and usurp not a power to destroy the
power instituted by God, and we shall not much differ.

45. You greatly strengthen my Cause by the testimony of so well Read a man
[Serm. p. 27. [Though when the Churches increased, the occasional meetings were
frequent in several places, yet still there was but one Church, and one Altar,
and one Baptism, and one Bishop, with many Presbyters assisting him: And this
is so very plain in Antiquity, as to the Churches planted by the Apostles
themselves in several parts, that none but a great stranger to the History of
the Church can ever call in question.

Ans. Bishop Gunning will give you no thanks for this, It seems after all the
anger we are much agreed. I never denied Chappel^ to a Church, nor thought they
must all meet at once. If they all meet per vices at one Altar, they are
associated for presential Communion, and not distant only, and this is that I
am for. Make it but such a Church that meet at one Altar, and that can know one
another, and are associated for such personal Communion in presence, and
(though I could wish it neither too small nor too great) it is of the Species
which I plead for as of God. There is certainly a Specifique difference between
a Church that has a Constitutive formal Governor, who has the whole Pastoral
power, and is associated for presential mutual help in faith worship and holy
living, and one that either has but a half Pastor without the power of the
Keys, or that is associated only for distant Communion, and never see each
other; even for another sort of Communion. Conformists hold that Bishops and
Presbyters are distinct orders: Therefore Churches differing in the very Order
or Species of the Constitutive Governors, and in the Triminus or end, and the
nature of the Communions are certainly of distinct Species, and not only of
distinct degrees in the same Species: But such are our Parochial and Diocesan
Churches. Just such a Church as you here describe is it that I would have, and
yet if the Chapels also have Altars, and there be more than one to the Church,
as long as they are under the same Bishop and Presbyters, associate for
Communion in presence, it alters not the Species.

46. I thank you also for adding p. 28. [ And yet this distribution even in
Creet was so uncommon in those Elder times, that Epiphanius takes notice of it
as an extraordinary thing at Alexandria and therefore it is probably supposed
that there was no such thing in all the Cities in his time].

Ans. 1. Its true of Creet, which had an hundred Cities: But your [therefore]
makes me think, you put Creet for Cyprus: For there it was that Epiphanius was
a Bishop. 2. But you grant me the foundation of all my cause. Let the Diocese
or Parish or Church (call it what you will) be no bigger than that the same
Bishop may perform the true Pastoral office to them in present Communion, and
not only by writs, and delegates, rule men that have no personal present
Communion, nor ever intend it as the end of their relation, and I have my
desire as to the Species of the lowest sort of Churches. 1 These. 5. 12. 13.
Know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you. But such are not those whom we never saw nor heard, and never labored
among or admonished the twentieth or fortieth or hundredth Congregation in
their Diocese, and whom the people cannot know.

Heb. 13. 7. Remember then which have rule over you, who have spoken to you the
word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls as those that must give account. But such are not they that the
people never heard the word of God from, nor knew their conversation nor the
men: And Bishop Tailor says, No man can give account of those that he knows
not; that is, Pastors account. Make Parishes true Churches, and restore them
Church discipline, and we are satisfied.

47. Sermon. p. 29. [If we look over the ancient Cannons of the Church, we shall
find two things very plain in them: 1. That the notion of a Church was the same
with that of a Diocese; or such a number of Christians as were under the
inspection of a Bishop.]

Ans. 1. Very true; and the Bishop was their ordinary Preacher, and only
pronounced the blessing etc. Therefore till the Species was altered it was like
a School, whose Scholars lived in City and Country, but were under a Bishop
that Governed them personally in presence. But after they were like many score
or hundred Schools that had Teaching Ushers, and one absent Governor (to the
most). To Govern as a Schoolmaster in presence specifically differs from
Governing as Princes or visitors, by Laws, or extraordinary inspection.

2. I pray you forget not that by this measure (if you hold to it) you unchurch
all our Parish Churches: Every Church then had a Bishop, no Parish now has a
Bishop (proper to it self), or at least not many: Therefore no Parish (by this
rule) is a Church. Ecclesia est plebs Episcopo adunata. You make no Church
below a Diocese.

48. Sermon. [2. That those Presbyters who rejected the authority of their Bishop
or affected Separate meetings, where no fault could be found with the Doctrine
of a Cburch, were condemned of Schism].

Ans. Good still: They were not to set up altar contra altar, but join with
the Bishop in Governing the same Church in present Communion at least per
vices: But if a Bishop than had put down a hundred or a thousand Bishops and
Churches about him, and said, you shall be all but one Church in another sort
of Communion, and I will be your only Bishop, Christians then would have
abhorred him: Now we have hundreds of Altars locally separated from the Bishop.

2. But yet if then the Doctrine of faith had been never so sound, Christians
would have separated. 1. From unlawful worship (specially Idolatry), 2. And
from wicked Bishops; as the forementioned Epistle of Cyprian and the Carthage
Council shows.

49. You Confess Martin and Theognostus separation from the Synods and
Communion of the neighbor Bishops: And if it were not lawful for neighbors to
communicate with them, I shall believe as Cyprian, that the same reason would
at least warrant the people to forsake them, till you show reason to the
contrary. And you confess the Joannites separation, and only say that after
they returned. Its true: But did they do well or ill before? they returned not
till gentleness and honoring Chrysostom reduced them: and though Cyril Alex.
called them Schismatics and said it was fitter the Church Canons should be
kept, than such refractory Nonconformists gratified by restoring the honor of
their ejected Pastor, yet Atticus had more wit and honesty then to follow his
Council or be moved by his threatening; Our case has ten times more to be said
for it, than the Joannites had, who were not cast out, but departed, nor had
any Impositions forced on them, which they took to be many heinous sins. Had
you been impartial, you had easily seen this: But as Cyril and others
accusation of the Joannites, as separatists and schismatics, did not finally
attain his ends against the Joannites, no more shall yours against the more
excusable. In an Alehouse or Crowd of the debauched or ignorant [ They are
Puritans, Presbyterians, Fanatics, Separatists, Schismatics, Heretics,
Rogues] is effectual arguing and convincing, and some preachers it seems take
their hearers for such Judges; But men will be men, and reason will be reason,
and truth will be truth, and innocence will be innocence, and pride, and
slander will shame their Authors more than the slandered, when you and I are
dead and gone.

50. Sermon. p. 30. [But suppose the first Churches were barely Congregational by
reason of the small number of believers at that time, yet what Obligation lies
upon us to disturb the peace, of the Church we live in to reduce Churches to
their infant State] And here is mentioned the community of Goods, washing Feet,
and then [They believe that the first civil Government was appointed by God
himself over families: Do they therefore think themselves bound to overthrow
Kingdoms to bring things back to their first institution, etc.]

Ans. 1. We call them not [ barely Congregational] but [ associated for
personal Communion] If all the Kingdom had but one Bishop, that were another
Species of Government and Communion than Parochial.

2. If one like you should plead for turning all the families in London into
one, and making only one Common Father or Master of a families, who should send
Stewards to every house, of his own making, to give them their victuals, he
only being the proper Governor, and this man should plead as you do, that it
is disturbing the peace of the great family, to reduce them to their Infant
State, by restoring particular families, more wit or reputation than yours
would not keep his cause from shame. Or if he pleaded that all the Schools in a
Diocese, or many 100 or 1000, should have but one Schoolmaster with Ushers that
have no power to take in or put out or use the Rod, and that to retrive this to
the Infant State is seditious, the reason of mankind would shame his reasoning.
And when men know what Pastoral Guidance is, the case here will be as plain.

3. Our Reason for desiring (not the Primitive paucity of Christians, but) the
Primitive form of Christ is. 1. Because Christ by his Apostles instituted it:
(Mr. Thorndike once spoke well to that). 2. Because we can prove that he was
faithful in forming his house and Church, as Moses was in forming that of the
Jews. 3. Because we never heard it proved that man had power to alter what
Christ by his Spirit in the Apostles founded: neither having their
infallibility nor commission. 4. At least we think it is the surest way to hold
to that which we are sure God settled, till we can prove that men have power to
change the very form.

4. Teach us what to say to the Papists, when they shall accordingly say to us
[what though there was no Universal Pastor in the Primitive times? what though
many things in discipline and worship be changed since? why must you disturb
the peace of the Church by reducing things to the infant State? what though
there were no Cardinals, nor General Councils of Prelates to make universal
Laws for the Churches, what though the Sacrament was given in both kinds, and
there were no private Masses, or prayers for the dead? must the Church be still
in infancy? What though the Apostles instituted the Lords day for public
worship and holy Communion, may not the Church put that down, and set up one
day of her making once a month or year instead of it?

But I will not be one of those that will fight for man against God; for I know
who will overcome. If you can prove that Christ gave your Church authority to
pull down the Church Offices and form which he appointed, and set up another,
and call it the Churches growth, or emendation, I will obey them.

But I have elsewhere asked who they were that made your new Church form. If
the first Church (of Gods making) it was only the universal headed by Christ,
and particular Churches for personal Communion, if these made the new forms,
tell us who, when, and by what power, and why they may not unmake them, if
there be cause: and whether the efficient Church be not better then the
effected as the Parent than the Child. If you say that Bishops of Parishes did
(...) by consent in Asia or elsewhere above a thousand years ago, how come we
in England to be bound by them? If you say that Princes were the makers of the
new Church Species. 1. Heathen Princes did it not. 2. The Bishops will give you
little thanks, if you grant not that it was done before there were any
Christian Princes to do it. 3. One Prince cannot make Laws for another
Country. 4. Prove that ever Christ authorized Princes to change the
Constitution of the Churches instituted by him, and make new ones above his
form; except making officers for the Circa Sacra or variable accidents. 5. And
what Princes do, they have power to undo.

And it concerns us to enquire (much more then about ceremonies) how far this
power of man extends. May they make as many new Church Species as they
please. Why then may they not make as many forms as there are Kingdoms, if not
an universal Pope by the consent of most?

5. But that which the Papists take for the Churches growth from Infancy, the
Protestants take for its gradual depravation; And have written many treatises
to show when and how such corruptions were introduced: And the forementioned
book of Paulus Sarpi Servita lately translated, tells us by what degrees much
of that evil did spring up, which some take to be the Churches Manhood, and
the amending of the defects of Christ's institutions.

6. And you that wonder that I know not what you mean by [ the Church of
England] may next wonder that I know not what it is that you call [ the
Protestant Religion] In my [ full satisfaction] I have told you that I mean by
it, simple Christianity expressed in the sacred Scriptures as the Recorded
rule, with the rejection of all humane additions which suppose the Scriptures
imperfect as to their regulating use: But if you suppose that men may, without
any Scripture proof of authority, take down and change the Church Species,
which Christ by his Apostles made, and make new ones instead, and thus add to
Christ's Laws, equal, yea superior and derogating Laws of their own, this is not
that Protestant Religion which I am of, and therefore I entreat you to define
what it is you so call.

7. When you have as well proved the very essential form of the first Churches
to have been instituted but pro tempore as a mutable thing, as we can prove the
like of washing Feet, and community of Goods, we will submit. And so we will
when you have proved that God that made families made not Cities or Republics,
that is, did not institute civil Government of many families; or that men who
diversifie the forms of Republics, may overthrow families or their proper
power: Yea and that God has left men as much power to make new Species of
Churches, as to diversifie the Forms of Commonwealth.

8. And as to our [ disturbing your peace] if you had built your frame on
Christ's foundation, and laid your peace on the unity of the Spirit, and the
seven particulars named Ephesians. 4. 45. 6. and had not built it on
uncharitableness, on imperious usurpation, nor that love of the world, which
Paul Servita says brought in the Church corruptions, you would not have been
so tender, nor your peace like an aspen leaf in the wind, as that your
Brethren, who, you say, agree in Doctrine and the substance of worship with you
cannot quietly join near you in the worship of God, without your imposed words,
and ceremonies, but they become disturbers of your peace. Its a sickly peace
that is so easily disturbed by so small dissent. As Rome thinks that all
wrong her that do not obey her, and pleads for Empire under the name of
Communion, so do some others; and will enter a suite against them as
Schismatiks, that will not let them ride and lash them without complaint. If
you have the humility and Charity of a Christian, without envy etc. What harm
does it do you that I and such others worship God in another room, without your
book, while your Church is as full as it can well hold? Do you not differ much
more among your selves; as I before showed? And the Papists yet more among
themselves; and yet are in one Church, and tolerated. But so their Power and
Wills may be obeyed, some men can bear with much more against God. Who hears
such out cries against ten thousand or twenty thousand in a Parish that come
not to any Church at all, as against a few Christians that pray and preach
without your book? what Informers, what indictments, what prosecutions, what
invectives are equally against all these aforesaid?

51. Sermon. p 31. [It is very uncertain whether the Primitive form were such as
they fancy etc, but its certainly our duty to preserve peace and unity amongst
Christians].

Ans. 1. Then it is certainly a sin to make racks to tear them, and make
concord impossible, and say, none shall have Communion with us, that will not
say and Swear what we bid them, and that think any thing sin which we impose;
and to shut men out by Cannonical Excommunication, and then call them
Schismatics in Press and Pulpit for not coming in.

2. If it be uncertain whether that which we desire be the Primitive form, it
is uncertain then whether you oppose not and fight not against the Primitive
form.

3. What you say is uncertain I shall God willing prove certain elsewhere (and
have done). All is not uncertain to others which is so to you.

4. Mark this, you that are for the Divine right of Episcopacy as the Primitive
form instituted by Christ; As he takes it for uncertain (as beyond
Congregational forms), so were it so, if the Church should cast it out, he
seems to hold your endeavors to reduce it, to be a sinful breaking of the
Churches peace. You are disturbers if in Holland, Geneva, Helvetia, you would
reduce them to that which you suppose to be the Primitive form. It may be it
was but from the circumstances of the times: And so the head of the Church has
made no particular Church Species, but left all to the better wit of men (who
knows to whom).

52 Sermon. [It is impossible so to do, if men break all orders in pieces, for
the fancy they have taken up of a Primitive Platform].

Ans. Anglice, [It is impossible to preserve Peace and unity among Christians
if men will not suppose that Christ never instituted his own Church forms, or
will not forsake his Institutions, but fancy that they must be conformable
thereto, and will not prefer the wills and commands of Bishops to whom they
never consented, and take it to be a breaking of all orders in pieces, not to
do all that they enjoin us, though we take it to be heinous sin, and will not
give over Gods worship and our Ministry when they forbid us. Dan. 6. We shall
find no fault against this Daniel, except it be concerning the Law of his God,
but if he pray openly when forbidden, away with him to the Lions for the Laws
of the Medes and Persians are more inflexible than Gods.

53. As to what you say of preferring Morals and the ends, it is more truly
than prudently mentioned as to your cause: For the very naming of it will make
the Readers think, whether your subscription and declaration and oaths and
imposed practices, which the Nonconformists judge unlawful, be greater matters
than their preaching the Gospel, avoiding great sins, the concord and strength
of the Protestant Churches, and the avoding temptations to wrath, and
persecution and divisions which will be bitter in the latter end. Go learn what
this means I will have mercy and not Sacrifice; (or needless Ceremony)

54. Sermon. p. 32 [Men may please themselves in talking of preserving peace and
Love under separate Communions: But our own sad experience shows the contrary:
For as nothing tends more to unite men's hearrs than joining together in the
same Prayer and Sacraments; so nothing does more alienate men's affections, than
withdrawing from each other into separate Congregations].

Ans. 1. But do all separate from you that are in other Parish Churche^ than
yours; if not, do all separate that differ, as Cathedrals from Parish Churches,
or as conforming Preachers do from one another: If not, do they separate that
omit a form or ceremony of yours?

2. I am sorry, if you have experience of the alienating of your affections
from your neighbors, that quietly worship God by you: but its like you know
what you say: For my part many of them have said and written more against me,
them against you, and, I thank God, I love them heartily; yea and that your own
party from whom I have suffered far more. It is men's diseases that make them
impatient of a cross opinion or word or censure, and then they cry out of men's
unpeaceableness: As Seneca says, They that are sore complainif they but think
their sore is touched.

3. Let the Magistrates keep Peace and punish all that abuse their brethren.

4. But we easily grant to you, that when men do not only differ, but fly from
each others Communion as unlawful, it has a great tendency to the alienations
and evils which you mention. Had we not thought so, we had never stoopt, and
pleaded, and begged of the Bishops to prevent or heal it as we did 1660, and
1661. And woe to the impenitent that are the cause of all, and to this day will
not be persuaded by all the sad experience that they complain of.

Sir, instead of all your accusations and reasonings, it would have better
dispatched all the business, would you but consider, who it is that must cure
the distance which you complain of? I have fully proved to you in my book of
Concord that we are utterly unable to remedy it. If you will not know, who can
make you know. Do you think, that when you say to all the Land [ say and do all
that is imposed, or you shall not be admitted to our Communion] that it is
morally possible to make all good Christians agree in b^lieving that it is all
lawful? or to make them all do that which they think to be unlawful? I must
freely tell you, that he that thinks that his own or any others reasonings will
ever so far change all the truly honest Christians in the Land, knows so
little of matters, men or Conscience, as that he is unmeet to be a Bishop or a
Priest.

But is the remedy impossible to the Imposers? I am ashamed to debate the
question: But some men are so learned and wise, that they will not quench the
fire in a City, nor save the Ship from sinking, no forbear silencing Christ's
Ministers and scattering the Flocks, as long as they can but say, There will
such or such an inconvenience follow. It would cost you nothing to cure all
this, which it is impossible for us to cure. Therefore all your just
aggravations of the mischiefs of schism or separation fall where it concerns
some of you to look to it, if you believe that there is a future Judgment;
rather than to call your selves Schismatics under the name of others, and pu^
God and man to say, Thou art the man.

55. Page 33. You come to me, for denying that I separate causelessly from the
Communion of true Churches, or set up Antichurches, [though ( say you) they
prea^^ when and where it is forbidden by Law, and administer Sacraments by
other Rules and after a different manner than what our Church requires: This
is not dealing with us with that fairness and ingenuity which our former
brethren used -- they deny the fact which is evident to all persons: For do
they not the very same things and in the same manner that the others do. How
comes it to be then separation in some and not in others. They are very
unwilling to confess a separation because they have formerly condemned it with
great s^^erity, and yet they do the same things for which they charged others
as guilty of a sinful separation.] And I am cited.

Ans. 1. This is like H. F^wlis, The Puritans are the worst men on earth: The
Papi^^s, are far preferred before them, Because the Papists differ in
fundamentals, but the Puritans take mass for a Ceremony. So we are the most
disingenious and not fair dealers, that own them to be true Churches and
Ministers and hold Communion with them; and yet deny that we are Schismatics
or separate: We leave you therefore, to treat with the lesser disingenious and
the fair dealers, that say you are no true Ministers, nor is it lawful to have
Communion with men that openly avow such heinous sin, and covenant against ever
endeavoring to reform notorious Church corruptions: because with such we are
forbid even to eat, and commanded from such to turn away; Its well you have
some more ingenious and fair dealers than I am.

But the disingenuity is my denying your accusation: I heard of a Gentleman
that could silence any man: and his way was, he would accuse him (of Murder,
Adultery, The^t or what his cause required) and if he denied it he would say; [
what will you make me a Liar? To give me the Lie deserves a stab.] It is not
only a crime if we do not toto pectore telum recipere, or with Camero unbutton
our selves and say feri miser, or whe^ever we are beaten, confess that we
deserved it: It Is an odd kind of suit for a man that calls an innocent man
traitor, to bring his action against him, for saying, you slander me. But it is
the name or thing that we must not deny. We will gratify you in the first: I
do separate from your Church, by half a miles distance, and by going to my own
parish, and by preaching my self, and so do most of the Parish Preachers, that
will not sit hearing you when they should preach. But it is de re. And what is
it, First I must tell the matter of fact: I never took any pastoral charge
these twenty years; I gathered no Church: I never baptized one person: I never
administered the Lords Supper once, in about eighteen or nineteen years; but of
late seldom to some few, since aged weak persons who were in my house, and
near, who gave me special reason for it; and the Liturgy allows it to the
sick and all their friends that join with them: while I lived at Acton and
Toteridge I went twice each Lords day to the public Church, even to the
beginning: Here I go when I am able usualy once a day to hear the Parson of the
Parish; and I communicate with them in the Sacrament: I preach twice a week in
another man's Pulpit (borrowed) most to strangers that I have no more to do
with: My gain I thank them, the accuser put me not to excuse: I write and
preach against Schism and all unjust separation, and persuade all to go no
further from any than they go from Christ, or than they drive us away, or than
we needs must, to avoid actual sin. Well; now what is the crime of separation?

1. I preach (you say) when and where it is forbidden by Law.] Ans. Is this the
formal reason of separation? Then disobedience and separation are all one. I
suppose you mean the Law of the King and the Parliament, and not the Canons
save as by them made Laws: when I had given you so many Historical instances of
the ancient Bishops and Christians, doing the like, and justified commonly by
the Church: did you think while you silently pass all that over, and all the
rest that I said for my justification, that two lines of your saying was enough
to confute all? Certainly it was not me that you meant to satisfy, nor any
impartial man that had read my books. This dealing beseems, not so weighty a
Cause. You seem to say [ All preaching when and where it is forbidden by Law,
is sinful separation: But, etc. I deny the Major. The Primitive Preachers did
so for three hundred years: The Orthodox did so afterward under Constantius,
Valens, Theodosius junior, Anastasius, Philippicus, Justinian and many more:
The Albigenses, Waldenses and Bohemians did so: The Reformers did so: The
Protestants when the Interim was imposed did so: Episcopius justifies it at
large, and the Arminians in Belgia, did so: The Martyrs in England and
elsewhere did so. The Jesuits in the East Indies did so. But what if the Law
forbad you to preach at a certain hour -- do you separate from the Church, if
you miss your hour? They that Preached Afternoon Sermons when forbidden were
taken for disobedient but not for separatists. And what if when the Churches
here were burnt the Ministers had read the Liturgy and preached in a place
forbidden by the Law: Had that been separation?

And how comes [ when] and [ where] to be in, When we are forbidden every time
and in every place, to preach to more than four. Is any time or place allowed
us to preach in? You mean [ He is a separatist who preaches being forbidden by
Law: But I am ready to give you a fuller proof than is now to be offered on
this occasion, that no man has authority to forbid a faithful Minister of
Christ, who forfeiteth not his Office-power, to perform the office to which he
is ordained. And, Secondly* that we remain under a Divine obligation to it,
which such a Law (...) dissolve, As Bishop Bilson before says [if Princes
forbid us, we must go on with our work: what if the King had turned against
Episcopacy and Liturgy, and forbad all the Episcopal to preach. Would you think
it sinful separation to preach. By this you show how easily you would lay down
the work you are Vowed to, if the Law did but forbid you. How much then are
Papist and Protestant Casuists mistaken, that say the Law is null that is
against the common good, and that all power is only to edification.

And what limits do you set to this. Till you tell us, how can we judge of our
separation: what if an interdict silence all the Ministers in a Kingdom, must
all obey? What if it be most, must most obey? What if it be more then can be
spared without the Churches wrong? And whose Laws be they that so binds us: Is
it Infidel Princes or only Christians. Is it Papists, Arrians, Eutychians, etc.
or only the Orthodox? And do you set the people all to judge whether the King
be Orthodox, as the rule of their obedience to his Laws. If I prove not that
God binds me to preach, call me disobedient, but yet that will not prove me a
separatist.

By this rule you may be a separatist, as often as the Law changes, if you will
not change as fast as it. Yea though you Judge the Laws impositious to be
heinous sins, yet you must do them all or give over your Ministry: And so God
must ask leave of the Rulers to be worshipped as God. If he were a God of their
making, they might put him down.

And, I think, it will prove confusion and worse disobedience than our
preaching is, to lay all the peoples obedience herein on their opinion of the
Rulers Orthodoxness: no doubt, but the heathen and heretical Rulers are
Governors even of the Church, though none has power for destruction or
against God. The Duke of Brandenburghs Subjects judge him not Orthodox: Are
they therefore absolved from obeying him in matters of Religion? Calvenists
Subjects think Lutherane Princes not Orthodox; and Protestants, in France,
Hungary, Poland, judge their Papist Kings not Orthodox: Yea, what if we judge
the Bishops not Orthodox that made the Cannons or Liturgy, are we absolved from
obeying them. And what if any Subjects think that the King is not Orthodox? And
Parliaments, who also make our Laws, contain men of many minds: And the
Parliament of 1640. is said by the Bishops to have been far from Orthodox, even
to have been Presbyterians, and Erastians, and even for Rebellion; and yet they
made diverse Laws which the King consented to and ratified: Were not men obliged
by those Laws: And indeed if the Lawmakers being not Orthodox null his Laws
about Religion, why not all his other Laws.

But it may be you will say, that it is not all the people that must judge
whether the King and Parliament be Orthodox, but the Bishops for them. Ans. But
who shall judge whether the Bishops be Orthodox? And if all be resolved into
the implicit belief of the Bishops, why not of the civil Rulers as well? Or
why not as the Papists on Pope and Councils?

I suppose to avoid all this you will not say, that he is a separatist that
preaches when forbidden by any Prince whatsoever, Turk, Heathen, Arrian,
Eutychian, Idolater, Papist? Where then will you fix the notifying Character?
All men are heterodox in some degree? How shall we know the degree which
absolveth us from our obedience,

And how comes an Orthodox man to be authorized to do mischiefs and forbid the
needful preaching of the Gospel any more than a heretic? or a Christian more
than a heathen? I think he is bound to do more good then they, and not
authorized to do more hurt? God never made him a judge whether the Gospel shall
be preached or not, nor whether the people shall be saved, or left to perish in
their ignorance and sin.

Either then all are separatists that preach against the Laws of Heathens,
Heretics or Papists: And so the Orthodox Churches have in many or most Ages
and places been separatists: or else we are cast upon confounding
impossibilities to know who the separatist is.

Especially in Aristocracies and Domocracies, where the Rulers are of many
minds, and the people can never know them all, nor when the Orthodox, have the
Major Vote.

And I would know, whether it be only Rightful Princes or also Usurpers, whose
Laws are the bond of the Churches Unity. If of Usurpers, then all the Prelates
that conformed not in the times of the late Usurpation were Schismatical
separatists by your definition: But to do them right, few of my acquaintance
that could by conformity slay in, did then refuse conformity: I hear that you
were then no separatist. But Bishop Guning, Dr. Wild, Dr. Hide and a great many
more, took another course; and will not thank you if you stigmatize them with
us. But if it be not the Laws of Usurpers in the Roman Empire by your measure?
How few were the Emperors that came not in by mere conquest, or by killing,
putting out the eyes or ejecting their predecessors, or without any justifiable
right? And what a case Rome, Italy, Spain and Africa were in after the first
conquests of the Goths and Vandals, and all the Western Empire in the days of
the Henry's, Frederick and many others, while men were fighting for the Empire
and Popes claimed the making and unmaking of them all; And even in France ever
since the days of Chilperic for many Ages, especially among the progeny of
Charles the great, it is not to be hid: This way you destroy or confound the
Churches.

I cannot imagine what you will reply to this? unless you say that, [ it is
neither the Title, nor the Orthodoxness of Princes, which is necessary to make
their Laws the bond of Church unity: but it is the goodness of their Laws: at
least that they impose no sin upon us]. Ans. 1. Then if the Usurpers imposed no
sin, they were Schismatics that obeyed them not. ^. Let that be the rule: who
shall be judge whether it be sin or not? If I be a discerner for my self, I
have told you how much and great sin I fear, till you are displeased with the
intimation: And when you have proved all those particulars named, to be no
sins, you have done more than yet is done: And if you think you can or do prove
it, must none have Christian Communion who think your proof invalid, and that
you do it worse than Bishop Tailor that maintained hurtless lying.

56. But the other half of the definition of a separatist is [they administer
Sacraments by other Rules and after a different manner than what the Church
requires.

Ans. 1. Why will you so reproach your Church? we do it by no other rule but
the Scripture; and does not the Church require that the Scripture be a Rule?
You know Polydore Virgil and other Papists, ordinarily make this signal
difference of Protestants and Papists, that the Protestants make the Scripture
the only Rule of their Religion: On which supposition Francis Peron formed his
act of disputing against them. And are not the Church of England Protestants?
If you add another rule, it follows not that we have another than you have,
though you have another besides what we have.

2. You say [ we deny the fact which is evident to all persons] and you speak
of me: Is this true? What Sacraments do you mean? I never ordained any: I never
confirmed any: I have married very few, if those be Sacraments: I have baptized
no one these twenty years: I gave the Lords supper to none for about eighteen
years, and rarely since as I told you. But, others do? Ans. And if they have no
better reason to justify the forsaking of their Ministry than you give, well
may they go on to do it.

3. Do you mean here by [ Rulers] the same as before by [ Laws] or what mean
you? I suppose it is the Canon and Liturgy that you mean. And if by the [
Church] you mean any thing but the King and Parliament you are unintelligible:
For the Church has but two visible essential parts, the Regent and the Subject
parts. And of the Regent only the supreme is essential, the rest being also
subjects, and but Integrals: And it is a [ Requiring] Church which you mention.
And so it seems that it is but a lay Church: And nothing but a Christian
Kingdom.

4. I have told you that the French and Dutch Churches here administer the
Sacraments by another rule than your Liturgy, and yet are no Schismatics.

5. And your rule has many parts: It requires Preaching, praying, reading the
Psalms and two Chapters, and delivering baptism and the Lords Supper in Christ's
words, and repeating the Creed, the Lords Prayer and the Decalogue. And all
that I do when I officiate for any man (for I have no Church,) and others do it
with whom I converse. But if it be omitting any thing else in your rule that
makes a separation, what is it? I often hear Conformists omit diverse prayers. I
have seen Dr. Horton give the Lords Supper, I think, to the greater part that
sat. I doubt most Parishes separate, if every omission make a separatist.

6. But thus far you satisfy me, that you judge all for separatists [that
preach without all your Assent, consent, subscriptions, that the Covenant
binds no man living, no not the Parliament men that took it, to endeavor any
alteration of Church Government, that it is not lawful to resist any
commissioned by the King, (without exception) and much more such: That all are
^^^^ratists that administer not Sacraments according to your rule, which
pronounces baptized Infants saved so dying, without excepting Atheists,
Infidels, or any, and this as undoubted and certain by Gods word; which
requires the Minister to refuse Baptism and Christendom, where the dedicating
Image of the Cross is not submitted to, when the Parent or adult judge it an
unlawful Sacrament: And where Baptism must be denied to all that will not make
Godfathers and Godmothers the Sole Covenanting undertakers for their Children,
without speaking a Covenanting word themselves: And when your rule requires
all Ministers to deny Sacramental Communion to all that scruple kneeling in the
reception, and yet excommunicateth them and ruineth them for not Communicating
when they are rejected: And also ipso facto Excommunicate: To omit much more
such, this is your rule, which he that swerveth from it, is a separist.

7. But I had thought that we had not been like those late cavilling Papists
that will not distinguish fundamentals from any little points, lest it lose
them a paultry advantage of abusing men. Does not every good Law and Rule
distinguish between Essentials, Integrals, and Accidents, and make more
Accidents than are Integrals, and Integrals, than are Essentials? And does your
rule do otherwise? If not, tell us what parts of your rule are necessary to
one, and what to the other, or you say nothing to resolve the case. Is every
line and Ceremony Essential to the Church, and to each member? If not, how
comes our omitting a form of Ceremony to cut us off as a separated Church any
more than every breach of Law cuts off a man from the Commonwealth?

Yea, if your Church be but a Christian Kingdom, do not you cut off all from
that Kingdom too, that refuse your Forms or Ceremonies or Subscriptions?

8. But Sir, to be short with you, I will yet believe that Christ is the
Institutor of the Church; and that he has himself made Laws which are
sufficient to be at least the bond of their unity, yea for more than
Essentials, even the Integrals, and many Accidents; and has given Laws to
regulate all men's Laws that determine of needful undetermined accidents: And
that no man should be cut off from the Church or taken as separated that
breaks no Law of God, yea those that are necessary to Church unity and
Communion: And that the grand Schismatics of the world, are the Engineers that
fabricate needless, impossible dividing terms and conditions of unity and
Communion.

. 57. But you tell me that [we do the same things in the same manner as the
separatists: Ergo we are disingenuous for denying your accusation.]

Ans. 1. Judge of the fact by what is said.

2. We do not say, 1. That you are no true Ministers or Churches. 2. Nor that
it is unlawful to communicate with you: Ergo it is not true that we do the same
things.

3. But it is the External action [the whole same] that makes a separatist. A
Parson in the Alehouse lost his Common prayer book: When he came to Church, he
told them his mishap, and only read what was in the Bible, Query whether his
Flock and he were separatists? An old Parson that I was bread under, could
scarce see, but could say most of the Prayers without book: He said what he
could remember, and got a day Labourer one year, and a Tailor another to read
the Chapters: Query, Whether we were all separatists?

. 58. But you undertake to tell the Reason why I am unwilling to confess a
separation, because we have formerly severely condemned it in others, and yet
do the same things for which we charged others as guilty of a sinful separation.

Ans. If this be not true, it is not well; show me where, and prove, when I
ever condemned any for the same that I do, or else take more heed what you
write hereafter.

. 59. Sermon. p. 33. [ For the Assembly of Divines urged their dissenting
Brethren to comply with the Rules of Government, and charged them with Schism,
if they did not, etc.

Ans. 1. It Is a Foul mistake in matter of Fact, if you think that I was that
Assembly, yea or any one of them; or that what they did, I did: or those of my
acquaintance did it. And it is not much better to pretend that I or they were
in all things of their mind: Does the Assemblies judgment concern me any more
than you? Did not you conform to them as much as I did?

2. But what mean you to wrong your Hearers by such gross confusion, to join in
your Application Dr. Owen, and me, (and Mr. Corbet I think) with the Assembly,
when it is publicly known that in those matters we were of three several
opinions: (And who are they that differ not in as great matters?)

(1.) It Is known that except seven or eight, the Assembly men were all
Conformists when they came thither: And either they were suddenly changed, or
not: if not, they were Conformists still, and then no wonder that they were of
your mind.

And indeed I know that they were not all of one mind: Most of them were
moderate Conformists that thought it lawful, but that were much better be
without it, than make it a snare to silence Ministers, and divide the Church,
and therefore were glad that it was laid by: Such were Mr. Vines, Mr. Burgess,
and, I think, most. Some were for Dr. Stilling fleet's way, that no one form of
Church Government was of Christ's Command, but all left to prudence as civil
Government is: Such was Dr. Edward Reignolds and some others; some were for the
sole Government of the Magistracy, called Erastians: Such was Mr. Thomas
Coleman, and how many more I know not. Many of the Parliament liked these Men
best: And these were also for an indifferency of the Clergy form: And when Mr
Coleman was chosen to give the Covenant to the house of Lords, they took it on
his Exposition, that it meant not the Exclusion of the Primitive Episcopacy:
some were more tenacious of the Primitive Episcopacy, and about to enter a
protestation for it; but that it was declared that only the English form as
described in the Concatenation was excluded: These were Dr. Cornel. Burges, the
excellent Thom. Gataker, and many more; And some few were for the Divine right
of Presbytery (and after more:) And the five dissenters and Mr. Philips were
Independents. But take them as Conformists, as Erastians, and as Indifferents,
and judge whether they were not more of your judgment, then of Dr. Owen's or
Mine, and it is no dishonor to you: for I think I have not read of many
Assemblies of worthier men since the Apostles days. But they were but men.

But if indeed they were all suddenly changed from Conformity to Presbytery,
when they came to Westminster; what a dishonor is such mutability to
Conformists? And how little hold is there of them; if so many of the best of
them will so easily change with the times? What wonder if you shall do so?

2. And as for Dr. Owen, he was known to join with the Independents: And sure
you will not interess him in the Assemblies Judgment.

3. And Mr. Corbet and I are of one mind; And I thought that the truth was
divided beween the three parties, and that all of them wanted necessary skill
and diligence for the healing of those divisions and the concord of the
faithful: And the event excused me in that censure. And now, is the Synods
Judgment more ours or yours?

(2.) But either this Synod were in the right or not: If not, why then will you
follow them, or plead their testimony? If yea, then they did well in being
against the Liberty of the Prelatists also.

(3.) But is it possible that you can expect that men should believe, that
their Case and ours are the same, or that either All must be tolerated or none
that conform not; and that the bare talking for or against Toleration, without
distinguishing the Tolerable from the Intolerable, does tend to men's
Edification? He that will tolerate all, is bad; and he that will tolerate none
that differ, is mad. As it is an ill argument, Vespae habent favos, and apes
habent favos; Ergo vespae sunt apes: So it is not a good one to say, Wasps
Nests should be destroyed: Ergo Bee-hives should be destroyed.

. 60 But wherein lay the different Cases?

Ans. In many things and great, however you untruly make them like.

First the Assembly never endeavored to turn the Independents out of the
Parish Churches, and benefices, nor to silence them, forbidding them public
preaching, as you do us; but only would hinder them from gathering Churches out
of other men's Parishes.

2. The Assembly put on the Independants, no Oath, no Declaration, Profession,
Subscription, or Covenant as necessary to their Ministry, which both sides
confessed not to be lawful; and so would have imposed no positive bond which
they scrupled, but only the said Omission of their promiscuous unlimited
Church-gathering.

3. They imposed no Liturgy, no one Ceremony, no practice on them, contrary to
their Consciences.

4. They urged them to declare but what Limits they would allow to their
Church-gathering Liberty; that it might not extend to Heretics and the
intolerable, and could not prevail; Judge now whether these Cases are of any
kin? Save in the genus of not allowing unlimited Toleration, which we hold to
as well as they. Grant us leave to Preach in the Public Churches, and to be
capable of guiding reformed Parish Churches, yea, or but to Preach or Officiate
Publicly for nothing, though we live on Alms and beg our Bread, and we will
thank you: Yea, though you hold us to all the terms and concessions in the
Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs: And is this like the Case of
the Assembly, that never offered either to silence an Independent, or forbid
him Parsonages, Lectures, College preferments, or impose on him any one
scrupled promise, profession or practice?

And yet I again say, both sides were faultily wanting in the knowledge and use
of the terms of Peace.

. 61. Sermon. p. 35. [So that whatever false colors and pretenses some men make
use of to justify their present practices, if the judgment of their own
Brethren may be taken, it is no better than plain and downright separation.]

Ans. 1. Were they not as much your Brethren as mine, and nearer to your
Judgment?

2. Let the Reader judge, whether it be half so great separation or distance,
as the Conformists have among themselves, while one part say that their Church
is but Lay in the Essential Head, and the other half say, It is Clergy, and so
are really of two Churches: And when one party says, if the King and the
Bishops Command contrary Translations, Versions, Times, Places, Liturgies, and
modes of worship, the Bishops are to be obeyed before the King, and the other
says the King is to be obeyed before the Bishops. To omit abundance of greater
differences than some would persuade men is between us and them.

62. Sermon. [And I must needs say, I never saw any Cause more weakly defended,
no not that of Polygamy and Anabaptisme, than that of those who allow it to be
Lawful to join in Communion with us, and yet go about to vindicate the separate
Meetings among us from the guilt of a sinful Separation.]

Ans. 1. I have long observed, when some men pass a sentence on others, and
call them by reproachful names, it ordinarily more ^ruly shows what the
speaker is, than what the Person or Cause is that he speaks of: For it is so
natural for the streams to be like the Spring, and the fruit like the Tree, and
the mouth to speak from the abundance of the heart, that one may much
conjecture what the Speaker is by his words: But what the Cause and Man is that
he speaks of, you can little know, while the speaker often little knows it
himself or would not have another know it. Neither your confidence nor mine
will determine a wise Reader.

. 63. To page 36. I Answer, 1. Your Text is so clear and full a Confutation of
your Sermon, that it is hard to know how a mind not strongly prejudiced could
have preached such a Sermon, or pleaded for the silencing of so many such
Ministers from such a text; Yea, or can need any more to confute you than to
read your Text: 1. It is supposed that it was All that had attained to the
truth of Christianity that must walk by the same rule. 2. It was a Divine Rule
then known. 3. They were to bear with each other in loving Communion while they
grew up to more. If this condemn not making and imposing new humane unnecessary
Rules, containing that which multitudes of impartial Conscionable men as wise
as their Reproachers cannot excuse from much heinous sin, and silencing and
excommunicating all that obey them not, and when they forbid them Communion,
call them Separatists; I do despair of understanding sense.

And to page 37. We come as near you as we can in Conscience; and we know our
own Conseiences better than you do. But whether you condemn not your selves as
Separatists in denying communion where we preach as if you only were the
Church, and any that want but your Liturgy were none, Yea when we had the
License of the King; unbyassed men will be able to discern.

64. Sermon page 37. [But why then is this kept as such a mighty secret in the
Breasts of their Teachers? Why do they not Preach it to them in their
Congregations? Is it for fear they should have none left to Preach to? That is
not to be imagined of Mortified and Conscientious men: Is it lest they should
seem to condemn themselves while they Preach against Separation in a Separate
Congregation? This, I confess, looks odly; and the tenderness of a man's mind in
such a Case, may out of mere shamefacedness keep him from declaring a truth
which flies in his face while he speaks it.]

Ans. 1. Alas, you show us, that some men perceive not when it flies in their
faces. [Reader, hence take heed of Believing words of Reproach against
Adversaries, when Interest and Sideing has made men partial. Would you think
that all this intimated silence were an untruth against public Testimony?

1. I have many and many times declared in print what he intimates that we
dare not Preach. And is not Printing a far more Public declaration, than
speaking it in one Room?

2. When I began to Preach at St. James's, I read a Profession to the
Congregation openly, that I preached not there as to a separate Church, but as
in concord with all Christ's Church on Earth, for the necessity of the People
that had not many of them heard a Sermon many a year, the Parish having 40000
if not 60000 Souls more than could hear in the Parish Church.

3. I built a Chapel by money partly begged, and partly to my greater loss than
I will mention, that I might but have helped those needy Souls for nothing: For
the second Sermon, one that Preached for me (that had suffered imprisonment for
the Kings Cause) was sent to Gaol, to my great Trouble and Charge. And when I
might not use it (said One in Power, Though you would use the Common Prayer
there) I gave it up to the use of the Parish, and take it thankfully of Dr.
Lloyd that he will there teach his People.

4. I have many and many a time in the Pulpit openly Preached against
Separation, even what he now desires.

5. Not past a Fortnight before his Sermon, I Preached near him (at the Verge of
his Parish in my Lecture) two whole Sermons of it, on Luke 15. the Case of the
two Sons; showing that there are three notable sorts of Separation. 1. The
Persecutors that forcibly scatter the Flock, as the Papists by dividing, sinful
impositions. 2. The Profane Separatist like the Prodigal, who had rather be at
the Tavern, the Playhouse, the Whore-house, etc. than at Church. 3. The
passionate peevish honest Christian, as in the Text, [ He was angry and would
not come in.] Here I showed by many reasons, how faulty and hurtful this
mistaking passionate Separation is: And I took that occasion to give them many
Reasons why I communicate with the Parish Church my self, and Separate not from
them; and I told them my judgment, that they that suffer merely for
not-hearing, or not-communicating thrice a year as the Law requires, cannot
justify their Cause without some extraordinary reason, if they live in a
Parish that has a Minister capable of that Office. But I did not malignantly
equal the Son that had long served his Father, and not transgressed his
Commandment, with his Brother in his Prodigal desertion of his Father: But on
the next words [ His Father went out to him and entreated him to come in;] I
showed that Gods Condescension, and Method in satisfying his mistaken
passionate Children, should direct Ministers and others how they also should
deal with such. And that violence instead of loving Condescension, reasoning
and necessary forbearance of such Infirmities, shows, 1. That such consider
not the corruption of Humane Nature, and how bad all m^n are. 2. They know not
what need of Forbearance they have themselves; nor how liable they are to Error
and to Sin. 3. They imitate not God our Father and Savior, and know not what
manner of Spirit they are of. 4. They have not due acquaintance with the
preciousness of Gods Grace and Image, that cannot perceive it, if there be but
such an Error or Passion to obscure it. 5. They consider not that they also
may be Tempted, and what Temptation may do even with upright Souls. 6. They are
strangers to the Pastoral office; They should excel in Love and Tenderness as
much as in Knowledge, and as mothers quiet crying Children, and not therefore
cast them out of doors. 7. They Cross the ends of the Ministry, if they take
the Converting of Souls to be any of its end: For as Generation so Regeneration
makes Infants and Children before they are grown Men; and Children will be
weak and troublesome: And he that would have no such Children, must not
endeavor men's Conversion. 8. Yea, they greatly increase the Disease which they
would Cure: Men will not love those that hurt them so easily as others: And
when they are displeased with you, they are the hardlier pleased with your
Doctrine. 9. Driving men into the Church, makes it like a Prison and
corrupts it as composed of involuntary Members. 10. Yea, they must destroy
the Church, if they will suffer none in it that have as great weaknesses as
these. Thus I declared both the evil of passionate Separation, and of mistaking
the way of Cure. I would repeat the Sermons, were it not for fear of being
tedious.

6. I have Printed in my second Plea for Peace, what our Nonconformity is not,
containing as much in this point as he can reasonably desire, as it was
approved by many others (named in our Judgment about the Interest of Reason in
Religion) so that he cannot say that I speak but of my self.

7. I suppose he believes that I am acquainted with more Non-conformable
Ministers than he is (or else he will not think that I am any such Antesignam^s
as Bishop Morley calls me:) And I meet with few or none that contradict what
in this case of Separation I have Published; They are commonly for Reformed
Parish Churches (not taking all in the Parish for the Church, but bounding
Churches in Parishes for Order;) and Preach elsewhere but on necessity and as
Assistants and not as Adversaries.

8. Does not our Practice (who go to the Parish Churches) show our Judgments to
the People if we said nothing?

9. I could not have drawn the People so much from too great distance if I had
not preached to them. At Acton I constantly heard Dr. Rieves, and his Curate,
and I preached only in my house between his Sermons, and then led the People to
the Church, which Judge Hales my neighbor thought was good service to the
Church. And the very Sermon that I was sent to the Common Gaol for, was on
Matthew. 5. Blessed are the meek, persuading to submissive peace and patience.

10. When Bishop Morley forbad me to preach in his Diocese, and I could not get
leave at my departure to Preach to my hearers one farewell Sermon in public; I
Preached in a private house to them on David's words [ Bring back the Ark of God
into the City, if I have found favor, etc.] purposely to persuade them as my
last advice, not to depart from the public Parish Assembly, though the Liturgy
be there the public worship. But if the Minister that is there shall be
intolerable. 1. As utterly unable. 2. Or a Heretic. 3. Or so malignant an
Enemy of Godliness as to do more hurt than good; I advised them not to own any
such Minister, nor encourage him in his Usurpation. And it was on that account
that they long forbore, till the Vicar was dead and a better succeeded him.

11. Since then I have written to my old Flock to persuade them to join in the
Parish Assembly, and I hear not of three that do refuse it.

And all this I have said as to that matter of fact, to show you how far to
believe this Reverend Doctor's intimated ironical accusation.

If he say, that Other Preachers do not so.

I Answer First, How knows he the Negative that never hears them, but like
a separatist avoideth it as unlawful?

2. Is it not likely that in season they preach their judgment?

3. But I confess they may find more profitable work than to preach over all
the suspected passages in the Liturgy, and other parts of Conformity, and
answer all the Peoples objections against them. The Builders and Owners of the
houses are the fittest to do such offices to maintain it.

. 65. Is it that they fear the reproaches of the People; which some few of the
most Eminent persons among them, have found they must undergo if they touch
upon thi^ subject?

Ans. 1. So far as your accusation is untrue as to the fact, it is but a
further ill intimation to ask, why they do not that which they do?

2. If they that should better know what their auditors most need, must preach
what you appoint that know them less, you may make their Sermons for them as
well as their prayers.

3. Those few Persons it seems at least touched on what you say they preached
not: And for my part, whom I know you mean for one, I never felt my self much
tempted to grudge at the Dissenters that therefore will not hear me: If they
hear others more suitable to them by whom they can more profit, as more
esteeming them, what hurt is that to me? Would I have none taught the knowledge
of Christ, but by my self? While we have all one Faith, it is some convenience
for men to assemble and hear, where they do it with unprejudiced, undisturbed
minds.

4. If those persons you mention have before and since such censures as you
intimate, done what you would persuade men that they do not, your
self-contradiction is most palpable.

. 66. Sermon. [For I know not how it comes to pass that the most Godly people
among them, can least endure to be told of their faults.]

Ans. 1. Did you not intend [ the Most Godly] for a scorn, you would confess it
false.

2. If you mean those that we esteem most Godly, it is not true neither.

3. If you mean those that think themselves so, it is no wonder if they mistake;
if not, it is not true.

2. I pray you take warning by them, or by your own reproof, and do not now
show that you are one of the most Godly by less enduring to be told of your
faults. If otherwise, you have forecondemned your own impatience.

3. Verily they have dealt much more patiently with me than the Bishops and
Canoneers have done: Though some have spoken their dislike of me, none of them
(even when they were in power) did ever silence or imprison me nor ever forbid
me to Preach (save once at an Assizes.) How can you think that we can feel
their censures, when we have so much worse to feel from the Canoneers? And when
you ask, [ Is it for fear they should have none left to preach to?] If you
separated not from us, you would see that such have some left still.

. 67. Sermon. p. 42. [Whence we see the Church of Englands endeavor after
uniformity, is acquitted from Tyranny over the Consciences of men, by the
Judgment of the most Learned of the Assembly, etc.]

Ans. 1. Of the Assembly I have said enough.

2. If you think the Assemblies Uniformity, or their endeavors for it, were
the same with the Church of Englands, none that know the case will be of your
mind.

3 If you are intelligible we must suppose that you cite them to defend this as
the conclusion which you own. The word [Tyranny] is too harsh to be used
without need: But I suppose you include that the said Endeavors for Uniformity
have no culpable severity in them.

That is, that the Acts for Uniformity, the Canons, the Executing of them in
Declarations, Subscriptions, Oaths, Practices, Punishments Corporal and
Spiritual; are no Sin, but Lawful. In your Epistle you say They are ill men
that say This is stirring up to persecution: All that I will say is, that if
you own these Endeavors for Uniformity, I do not: and the judge is at the door.

. 68. Sermon. p. 44. [If they form their judgments rather by prejudice and
passion and interest, than from the Laws of God, or just Rules of Conscience,
etc.

Ans. 1. This is true and good: If we make not Gods Laws the Rule of
Conscience, no wonder if we err: God preserve us from all corrupting prejudice,
passion, interest and Canons.

2. But when you compare our temptation from interest with yours, I hope you
will not say as Dr. Asheton, that as going to the Bar of God he undertakes to
make good, that it is through Pride and Covetousness that we conform not; that
is, that we choose the contempt of high and low, and to live on Alms, and
multitudes in pinching poverty.

. 69. Sermon. p. 46. [We find Uniformity and Order condemned as Tyrannical, till
men come into power themselves; and then the very same things and arguments are
used and thought very good and substantial, which before were weak and
sophistical.]

Ans. A true and sad confession; when I read your Irenicon and this Sermon, I
the more believe you: Therefore it has been my happiness that I was never in
Power, no nor ever on the uppermost side unless as I am for the King. I
remember Dr. Rieves told us in the Pulpit that the reason why we were against
Diocesan Bishops, was because we could not be Bishops our selves: And many
others have said the like.

. 70. Sermon. [Those that now plead for Toleration, did once think it the Mother
of Confusion, the nurse of Atheism, etc.]

Ans. 1. Sure though you often cite Dr. Owen, you mean not the Independents.

2. If they spoke either for or against Toleration as you do without
distinction, and were for all or against all, and distinguished not the
tolerable from the intolerable, it is no great heed to be taken what they say.
If there were but one false word imposed on you, which you could not assent to,
and on 2000 such as you, should you be no more tolerated than a Mohammedan?

. 71. As to your advice to us p. 47. 48. 1. Did you think that because we must
bear with much that is amiss in the Church, that therefore we must either
consent to it, or practice it, and Covenant against all endeavors of amending
it, or prefer it before better. The man you talk of out of Mr. Ball was near
Bremicham, and was Melancholy to a kind of madness.

To your second I answer, It follows not, that because we must not judge too
hardly of Impositions, therefore we must say, swear and do all that is now
imposed on us. Or that he that dares not do it, is unpeaceable. I would we knew
in what cases only you would deny Obedience and Conformity your self. Doubtful
passages and undoubted evils somewhat differ. A fault-finding disposition, and
the Roman art that Boccaline mentions to swallow a Pimpion, have a mean between
them. Papists, Socinians, or any that are uppermost, may call for Conformity
under the names of Unity and Peace.

To the Third, separation was not the same thing in the mouth of the old
Non-conformists as in yours: They took it first for unchurching the Parish
Churches. 2. Or holding it a sin to communicate with them, if they might be
excused as to kneeling, Crossing, etc. You take it for [ preaching when
forbidden.] I have named to you the old Non-conformists that preached when they
could. And half of them I think got into small privileged places, exempt from
the Bishops power, and there preached most of them without the Liturgy, and all
without the Ceremonies: And was not this against Law. Sure Bishop Bancroft that
describes their attempts to set up new Churches and Discipline was not of your
mind concerning the Non-conformists judgment. We had but two in all Shropshire,
and Dr. Allestree when a boy was the Catechized Auditor of one of them, being
his next Neighbor (in a peculiar Chapel, without the Liturgy, etc.) And yet I
think not that his Father and all that Assembly were separatists for hearing
him. Bradshaw thought we should submit to a silencing Law, where our Ministry
was unnecessary, and so do I. Dr. Gouge was a Conformist when he wrote the Book
which you cite.

To your Fourth; Woe to them that believe our divisions endanger the Land and
let in Popery, and yet will cause them, and no entreaty can procure them to
forbear dividing us, when they may; and then revile them that have no way to
remedy it, unless wilful heinous sinning be the way.

72. That it is diseases (that love not their own names) in men's hearts, that
make the trouble more than our different judgments and Assemblings, experience
tells us: I was never a settled Teacher, but in two places (saving a Lecture
at Coventry in the War,) viz. An Assistant at Budgnorth, and a Pastor at
Kidderminster: And in both places there is an honest Conformable and a
Non-Conformable Minister: And the People go to the public Assembly, and many
hear the Nonconformist privately between the public Meetings: And both
parties (as I hear) live in very much love and peace, and why might it not be
so in other places, if there were the like Ministers and People, without all
this envyous clamor and bugbear words of Anti-christian] on one side, or (
Separatists and Schismatics on the other.

. 73. As to your next advices p. 53. 54. First Qui monet ut facias, etc. We
speak so much against rash ignorant Zeal, that you commend us against your
purpose.

2. We thank you for the admonition [ not to be always complaining of hardships
and persecutions.] Doubtless our mercies are so great as forbid us to be over
querulous; nay leave us unexcusable, if we are not very thankful. For my own
part my sufferings have been very small from man, in comparison of what I
endure in Soul and Body from my self. They are few days in which I am not a
heavier burden to my self, than all my Enemies are. But First, I may not be
senceless of the case of many better men, who have great families and no bread
but what they have by Alms in poor Countries where the people are fitter to
receive than to give. And if they remove to bigger Towns the Clergy tell them
it is for gain, and they that have one, two, three or more perferments,
reproach them as covetous that will rather beg than sin or famish, yet your Mr.
Hickeringil on the contrary proclaims how little they get: Were it my case as
it is very many Non-conformists, to be in other men's debts, and have nothing to
pay house rent, for clothes, for bread, etc. and to have Wife and many Children
to pacify, and to live on bread and water, or little more, and be offered
plenty if I would but do that which I take to be the hazard of my Soul, I
should be sensible of the temptation.

2. And alas all this is nothing to the suffering of thousands of Souls! to
perish for lack of knowledge, whose case it is lawful to compassion and lament.

3. And nature makes it lawful to feel when one is hurt, and to confess that
feeling.

4. And methinks if Julian that abuses the Christians should say, your Master
bid you turn the other Check, his scorn would but aggravate his Sin: Patience
is our duty; But if they call us to it who Preach and Print, and call out for
the Execution of the Laws against us (as many of the most eminent of the Clergy
have long done) as you said in another case, It will look but odly: To preach
to the Parliament, to put Fire to the Faggot, to accuse the King for his
Licenses and Clemency, to tell the Magistrates and the World, that our Schisms
are because they execute not the Laws, even the Laws that fine us forty po^nd a
Sermon, and lay us in the Common Gaol with Malefactors, and banish us from
Cities and Corporations, I say for these men to say [ complain not,] is a smart
accusation of themselves. For from good men good is to be expected; but if I
meet with Gentlemen on the road that take away my Money, clothes and horse, and
wound me, and tell me how much I am beholden to them, because they did not cut
my throat, it is lawful to know what they are, though I must be patient. And I
told you before, when you talk of being made a Sacrifice, if a few despised men
censure you, while you have all your Honor, Reputation, Riches and many
preferments to arm you against their thoughts and breath, methinks shows that
this Counsel is as seasonable to your self as to the suffering Non-conformists.

. 74. Sermon. 54. [Where are the Priscillians that have been put to death by
their instigation? What do such insinuations mean, but that our Bishops are the
followers of Ithacius and Idacius in their cruelty; and they of the good and
meek Bishop St. Martin, who refused communion with them on that account? If men
entertain such kind thoughts of themselves, and such hard thoughts of their
Superiors, whatever they plead for, they have no inclination to Peace.]

Answ. 1. That is, to your Terms of Peace, and you being Judge. 2. Knowledge is
often constrained: It is no sin to know History, much less Public matter of
present fact, and least of all, that which we see and feel. Is it a sin to know
when a man is in prison, or when his goods or books are distrained, etc? I the
rather speak to this, because a Reverend Bishop tells me also of this wrong, as
if those Bishops case were unlike to his; and cites the words of the Historian
that mentions the suffering of the Churches in Spain on that account, as if
Maximus had but taken advantage of the Bishops spleen to Tyrannize, and prey
upon the Churches. I desire not to make any men seem worse then they are, nor
causelessly to open the faults of any. I profess to the world that it is not in
an impatient aggravating of any sufferings of my own (which are small,) that I
write this, but as the true stating of the case between us. If the matter of
fact be not truly stated, the matter of right cannot be well determined. I hate
false History.

1. It is agreed on by many of the best Historians of that Age, beside Beda,
that Maximus wanted nothing but a good Title to make him one of the best of
Emperors: That he was said to be made Emperor by the British Soldiers,
against his will, and being once in, could not go back. His usurpation was
wicked, but a way too common in the Empire. He was of a pious life, and great
zeal for the Bishops and the Orthodox Religion; what he did was to please the
Bishops and to suppress Heresy and Schism: And it is like enough he thought by
their friendship to strengthen himself. He rescued Ambrose at Milan from the
Arrians, and by his threats deterred Valentinian (provoked by his Wife) from
persecuting him, and so preserved the Church of Milan and many others.

2 I read not of any of the Bishops in all his Countries that complied not with
this Usurper, save Martin, Theognostus, and Ambrose, (that was preserved by
him.)

3. It was not Ithacius and Idacius only, but all the Synod of the Bishops,
that were guilty, and that Martin separated from.

4. The Priscillians were downright Gnostics, and so are not the
Nonconformists, who you say agree with you in Doctrine, etc.

5. It is but the death of Priscillian and a very few more that the Bishops
were said to have procured; and they were ashamed of it when they had done, and
denied that it was their doing. You force me for Historical Verity to tell you,
that they did not silence about 2000 Ministers, which is worse than many bodily
afflictions; nor did they desire Maximus to make a Law that all that did not
such things as ours, should be ruined by Fines, Imprisoned, etc. Make them not
worse than they were. Our Quakers are much like the Priscillianists. Had it
been but twice as many of them that had dyed in prison, as were put to death of
the Priscillianists, the cases had not been much unlike. But Mr. Thompson that
dyed in Prison at Bristol, Mr. Field that dyed in Prison here; Mr. Hughes that
in Prison caught his mortal sickness; Mr. Joseph Allen that had the same Lot,
and many more such, were none of them like the Priscillianists; but men of whom
I and such as I come far short.

6. The great mischief that those Bishops did was by suspecting men that Fasted
and Prayed much, to be Priscillians; they brought reproach by unjust suspicions
in all Countries on the most strict Religious men; and Martin was called by
them a Priscillianist for being against the Bishops Persecution of them Let not
me, but public knowledge here make the comparison: How small was this
reproach, for extent and continuance, in comparison of that which by occasion
of Nonconformity has been cast on men in England? My memory serves me from
1623 or 24; Commonly in the Countries, if a man did but pray in his family, and
spend the Lords day in Religious Exercises, reading the Scripture, or repeating
a Sermon, or reading a good book, or singing a Psalm, and was against swearing
and drunkenness, he was made the common scorn, as a Puritan, and the Bishops
Articles, and their reproach of Non-conformists, occasioned all this in the
Rabble against those that were no Non-conformists If you believe not me,
believe a Conformist Rob^rt Bol^on, that says more of the horrid abuse of
Piety by the name of Puritan. And since then the same spirit has used the
Name of Presbyterian, Schismatic, Separatist, Fanatic, to the like reproach
of seriousness and diligence in Religion, though not so universally as the name
Puritan was; Yea if a man had but been for Lectures, and such like helps as
Archbishop Grindall was for (to his cost) or for afternoon Sermons, or would
not read the book for Sunday dancing, etc. he was worse than suspected and
reproached. My neighbors that I once was a Teacher to, did never presume to
preach nor invade the ministerial Office, nor do anything but the work of
private Christians, that is, to pray and repeat the Sermon, and sing a Psalm,
but because many ignorant Families that could not read, could not do any of
this in their houses, they joined with the Neighbors that performed it, and
this not at time of Public worship: yet because that more than four such met,
they were distrained on and laid in Gaoles. Compare all this (and the removal
of many hundred families our of the Land heretofore) with the consequents of
the Bishops zeal against the Priscillians.

But remember that it is not in my thoughts to lay any of this upon the Bishops
that came in since the Impositions and actions aforesaid, and had no hand in
them, and cry not to Magistrates to execute the Laws, much less on men of such
known moderation as diverse of them are, nor on the Peaceable Conformists that
own none of this.

7. And it must be remembered that Martin was but an odd man, and seemed
singular against the Synods of all the Bishops, and a man of little Learning,
like one of our Tradesmen that is Religious. And therefore I have wondered that
Baronius and Binnius, and our Rich. Hooker, did so openly decry the faults of
the Bishops here, and take part with Martin, and not rather turn the reproach
on him, as an unlearned Separatist, and Fanatic: But his Miracles silenced all
reproaches; with the rooted esteem which serious Christians will still have for
serious Piety, when the Reproachers have said and done their worst Else one
unlearned Man that went in sordid attire, and lived in a small thacht Cottage,
and lay on the ground, and eat worse than our beggars do, and pleaded for the
Gnostics persons, was liker to have been born down as a mad Fanatic, than
such men as Dr. Twisse, Thomas Gataker, Richard Vines, Anthony Burges, Mr.
Hughes, Joseph Allen, and about 2000 more.

8. Lastly, Let it be noted that the Cause of St. Martin was his judgment that
Heresy and Schism, even as bad as the Gnostics, was not to be punished by
the sword, but only by Church censures; and therefore that the Bishops did
wickedly, in calling for the Magistrates sword against them for then if the
Heretic can get the Magistrate to be for him, the same sword may be drawn
against the Orthodox: And so the Priscillianists once got a great Courtier to
be for them, and a while turned the sword against their adversaries, which
occasioned sufferings in Spain and other parts. And I wonder how Baronius,
Binnius, or you that plead for the silencing and other afflicting of
Non-conformists, under the name of [ Non-toleration] and the Churches
endeavors for Uniformity, can possibly keep out the light which would tell you
that we may give you twenty to one in weighing your case and ours with Ithacius
and Martins, if any impartial hand do hold the balance. Is not your whole
cause, who cry out for the execution of the Laws, and against our Toleration,
(that is, that we are not to be endured) clean contrary to Martins cause?

. 75. As to your 3 d. Advice, page 55. [Not to Condemn others for that which
themselves have practiced.]

I Answer, 1. Prove that I or any of my Acquaintance ever practiced Ejecting,
Silencing, Ruining men for things unnecessary, yea or for greater things. Whom
did we ever forbid to Preach the truth? Whom did we cast out of all Church
Maintenance? Whom did we imprison?

2. If any in New England had done it, is that our doing? They that are against
Christ's Righteousness impated, I hope will not join with you in imputing to us
the sins of those that were no Kin to us, and we never saw.

3. What a pitiful Case is Mankind in, if such an Harangue of confounding words
can make them believe, that Tolerating or not-Tolerating in Causes vastly
different, are the same? Is it all one to deny men Liberty to seduce men from
the essentials of the Faith, and to forbid many hundreds to preach Christ's
Gospel, unless they will openly profess that they Assent and Consent to three
Books, and Covenant never to endeavor the Reforming of the Government of the
Church, etc? Might not the Papists have said to us just as you do [ it is the
same thing for us to burn Protestants as Heretics, as for you to expel the
Subverters of the Faith.] But you that are for silencing us all, for not
consenting to, You know what, have less excuse for calling it [ the same thing]
unless you think Christ and a Liturgy to be same.

It is therefore fitter to be answered with Compassionate Tears than Words,
when you say page 56. that [ every one of them would practice the same were it
in their Power, and think it very justifiable so to do] Ans. O whither may he
roll that is tumbling down the Hill! I was never in Power: The Independents
once were: They used it not as I would have had them: But did they or the
Presbyterians Eject or Silence one another? Is it a good Consequence [you would
silence a Quaker that denies the Essentials of Christianity: Ergo, every one
of you, were it in your power, would Silence, Imprison, and Ruin them, that
differ from you in Ceremony, Form, or Subscription like ours?] O how incredible
are the words of some applauded men!

I remember that at the Savoy when it was said how some had used the Episcopal,
Bishop Walton excused and reproved me, and said, that [indeed I had then
written against Ejecting or Troubling any honest worthy man for being Episcopal
or against the Parliament, but that the incompetent and vicious of all sorts
equally should be Ejected But ( says he) did not you write that if the Sword
interposed not, but mere liberty to Volunteers were granted to all parties, the
Prclatical Liturgick Church would be like a Tavern or Inn where many sober
Persons come, but so many others also, as would make it a place of no very
great inviting Fame?] I confessed the truth, and still confess it.

. 76. To your 4 th. Advice, [not to make our differences seem greater than they
are.]

I do consent. But 1. Did our 18 or 19 years Silencing them, do that? 2. Do not
you do it, that make men believe that we are Intolerable and to be Silenced,
and that Separate from our Congregations as if it were a sin to join with us?
3. We desire only a true stating of the Case.

The honest dealing which you demand, I and many others constantly perform; and
it is ill to intimate that we do not. But you add,

. 77. [It's hard to understand if occasional Communion be lawful, that constant
Communion should not be a Duty.]

Ans. Some Truths are hard to men of great Wit. It Is lawful to have communion
in our Assemblies (as I am ready to prove) and yet you think not any, much less
constant, Communion to be a Duty. It Is lawful to have Communion with the
French, Dutch, or Greek Church; must constant Communion be therefore a Duty?
It Is lawful to have Communion with an ignorant Reader, or a drunken Priest (at
least in your Judgment;) Is it therefore a duty to seek no better?

. 78. Sermon. [All understanding men will conclude that they p^efer some little
interests of their own, before the Honor of Christ and the Peace of the
Church.]

Ans. 1. The word [ Little] came well in as to your sense: Truly Poverty and
Ruin are little interests: I cannot imagine what you mean, (...) it be
Reputation. But is not your Reputation with the Highest Persons, and the
multitude, a more tempting Interest than our Reputation with such as you much
Contemn. 2. But do you understanding men know our hearts better than we? And
are you sure that none are understanding that be not as partially Censorious as
you? If we prefer our Little interest, why do we not Conform? If you take us
all for Mad men, dispute not with us: if not, can we be ignorant that Carnal
Interest is on your side, and are none of us Capable of it? 3. I should have
taken it as too sharp an intimation to say that Your Greater Interest swayeth
you: No man that is a Christian takes this vain vexatious World for his great
Interest. And to make the Little Interest of Prosecuted, Beggared, Ruined
Non-conformists to be that which bears down, both all the interest of Wealth,
Ease and Worldly honors and the interest of the Churches Peace and the
interest of their own Salvation, and all this by no other proof than a
Supposition that your Sagacity knows their hearts, and that all understanding
men are of your mind] the naughtiness of this is so great that it will not
suffer you to see it. Sir, as wise as you are, I know my own heart better than
you do (and so do my Brethren know theirs.) If you would swear the contrary I
will not believe you. And I tell you, it is no Little Interest that moves me;
it is greater than a Deanery or a Bishopric. I were worse than mad, if 1. I
consumed my small estate. 2. And my Health. 3. And denied my Ease. 4. And all
worldly Wealth and Pleasure. 5. And exposed my self to be called a Schismatic
and a Rogue, by the Conformists. 6. And lay my self under the ruining dangers
of the Law. And 7. to be written against as doing all this by sin. 8. And all
this under the languishings and pains of sickness, expecting when I am called
to my account; I say I were worse than mad, if I chose all this for that which
you call [ Little interest.] 9. And if Reputation with my poor despised party
be that Little interest, you confute your self before, where you say how much I
have undergone of their impatient Censures. Have I flattered them? Have I not
said more against their faults than you have done, though not against their
Duty? 10. Some of my heart-judges say, it is a semel (...), to avoid the
imputation of mutability. But their Companions confute them who charge me with
my retractations; and who see by my writings that I left room for second
thoughts, and have not silenced them to escape the Censure of any whomsoever. I
have left my Reputation to God, and never was so thin Skinned as to be unable to
bear a Choleric breath: I liv^ not upon Air, or the thoughts of men, who will
shortly with me be silent in the d^st. They that know how many Books, perhaps
scores, have been written against me, by Sectaries of many sorts, and some by
good and sober men, Presbyterians, Independents and Prelatical, and how little
they have broke my peace, will not think applause is my Little interest. Had I
been as you I wo^ld have left cut this Charge of Little interest, lest it
should te^pt men to compare your Case and ours.

. 79. Your 5th. Advice is just: I hate Charging you or any with unjust
suspicions of inclinations to Popery. I know some sew men whom I have reason to
say, Defend Grotius as one of their Religion; who thought that the Protestants
can never unite among themselves till they unite with Rome as the Mistress
Church; and that the Councils even that of Trent are sound in the Faith, and
that securing the rights of Kings and Bishops, and disowning the Schoolmens
abuses, and the Clergies evil lives, and reducing the Pope to rule us, not
Arbitrarily but by the Canons, are enough to satisfy and reconcile us. But to
charge this on all, or most, is unjust: We know what Bishop Barlow, Bishop
Crosts, and diverse others have done to signify their Faithfulness to the
Protestant Cause. And if C^ntzen's way prevail not, to drill men they know not
whither by degrees, I hope of the 9000 or 10000 Clergy men in England, one
thousand will not turn to Popery. But I must say, that when some Prelates made
it their great business to Silence, Shame and Ruin us, and drive us far enough
from Persons of Power, undertaking to preserve the Protestant Religion better
without us than with us, and after all, cry out themselves that we are in
danger of Popery by their own Pupils and Disciples, whose instruction they
undertook; men will have leave to think of this awake, and to judge of Causes
by Effects.

. 80. Your Counsel is good, [ Not to run the hazard of all for a show of
greater Liberty to our selves.] Should I tell you three stories of our
hazarding our own Liberties because we would not do what you dissuade us from,
one in 1660, and another 1662, and another about 1667, it would be a pair of
Spectacles to some. 2. But will not all that have eyes see, who does more for
Toleration of Popery, they that say [ Popery and you shall stand and fall
together, except you will say, subscribe and do all that is prescribed you;] or
they that say [ We cannot do that which we take to be heinous sin?] Do you
think the Papists had not rather (with you) that we were Silenced, than that we
Preach, who have been their greatest Adversaries? If you will rather let in
Toleration of Popery, than you will Tolerate Protestants that fear the guilt of
Lying, Perjury, and many other Evils, should they do that which you Confess
indifferent, let God be judge between you and us.

FINIS.

