SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard. M. DC. XC. III.

GULIELMUS BATESIUS, S. S. Theol: Prof: Aetat: ^2. Nov: 1687.
Sold by N. Ranen and I. Robinson. 1688.



Sin the most formidable Evil. SERMON I.
Genesis xxxix. 9. How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God?
THE Text is the Record of Joseph's Innocence and Victory, consecrated in
Scripture for the Honor and Imitation of that excellent Saint in succeeding
Ages. He had been tried by sharp Afflictions, the conspiring Envy of his
Brethren, and the cruel Effects of it, Banishment and Servitude, and possessed
his Soul in Patience: here he was encountered by a more dangerous Temptation in
another kind, and preserved his Integrity. Adversity excites the Spirit to
serious Recollection, arms it with Resolution to endure the Assaults, and stop
the entrance of what is afflicting to Nature: Pleasure by gentle Insinuations
relaxes the Mind to a loose Security, softens and melts the Heart, and makes it
easily receptive of corrupt Impressions.

Now to represent the Grace of God, that preserved Joseph, in its Radiance and
Efficacy, we must consider the several Circumstances that increased the
Difficulty of the double Victory, over the Tempter, and himself.

1. The Tempter, his Mistress, who had divested the native Modesty of the
blushing Sex, and by her Caresses and Blandishments sought to draw him to
compliance with her Desires. Her superior Quality might seem to make her
Request have the force of a Command over him.

2. The Solicitation, Lie with me. There are no Sins to which there is a
stronger Inclination in our corrupted Nature, than to Acts of Sensuality. The
Temptation was heightened by the lure of Profit and Advancement, that he might
obtain by her Favor, and Interest in her Husband, who was an eminent Officer
in the Egyptian Court: and the Regeramus ipsae crimen, atque ultro impiam
Venerem arguamus: scelere velandum est scelus. Senec. Hippolitus.
Denial would be extremely provoking, both in respect it seemed to be a
Contempt injurious to her Dignity, and was a Disappointment of her ardent
Expectation. Hatred and Revenge upon Refusal, are equal to the Lust of an
Imperious Whorish Woman. We read the Effects of it, in this Chapter: for upon
his rejecting her Desires, inflamed with Rage, and to purge her self, she
turned his Accuser, wounded his Reputation, deprived him of his Liberty, and
exposed his Life to extreme Peril. Joseph chose rather to lie in the Dust, than
to rise by Sin.

3. The Opportunity was ready, and the Object present: it is said, there was
none of the Men of the House within. She had the advantage of Secrecy to fasten
the Temptation upon him. When a Sin may be easily committed, and easily
concealed, the Restraints of Fear and Shame are taken off, and every Breath of
a Temptation is strong enough to overthrow the carnallyminded. The purest and
noblest Chastity is from a Principle of Duty within, not constrained by the
apprehension of Discovery and Severity.

4. The Continuance of the Temptation: She spoke to him day by day. Her
Complexion was Lust and Impudence, and his repeated Denials were ineffectual to
quench her incensed Desires, the black Fire that darkened her Mind. She caught
him by the Garment, saying, Lie with me: she was ready to prostitute her self,
and ravish him.

5. The Person tempted, Joseph, in the flower of his Age, the season of
Sensuality, when innumerable, by the Force and Swinge of their vicious
Appetites, are impelled to break the holy Law of God.

6. His Repulse of the Temptation was strong and peremptory: How can I do this
great Wickedness? He felt no Sympathy, no sensual Tenderness, but expressed an
Impossibility of consenting to her guilty Desire. We have in Joseph exemplified
that Property of the Regenerate, He that is born of God, cannot 1 John 3. 9.
sin: by a sacred potent Instinct in his Breast, he is preserved not only from
the consummate Acts, but recoils from the first Offers to it.

7. The Reasons are specified of his rejecting her polluting Motion. Behold, my
Master knows not what is with me in the House, and he has committed all that
he has to my Hands: there is none greater in his House than I; neither has he
kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his Wife: How then can I
do this great Wickedness, and sin against God? 'Twas a complicated Crime of
Injustice and Uncleanness; a most injurious Violation of the strongest Ties of
Duty and Gratitude to his Master, and of the sacred Marriage-Covenant to her
Husband, and the foulest Blot to their Persons: Therefore how can I commit a
Sin so contrary to natural Conscience, and supernatural Grace, and provoke God?
Thus I have briefly considered the Narrative of Joseph's Temptation; and that
Divine Grace preserved him untouched from that contagious Fire, may be
resembled to the miraculous preserving the three Hebrew Martyrs unsinged, in
the midst of the flaming Furnace. The Patience of Job, and the Chastity of
Joseph, are transmitted by the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, to
be in perpetual Remembrance and Admiration.

From this singular Instance of Joseph, who was neither seduced by the
Allurements of his Mistress, nor terrified by the Rage of her despised
Affection, to sin against God, I shall observe two general Points.

I. That Temptations to Sin, how alluring soever, or terrifying, ought to be
rejected with Abhorrence. II. That the Fear of God is a sure Defense and Guard
against the strongest Temptation.
I will explain and prove the first, and only speak a little of the second in a
Branch of the Application.

I. That Temptations to Sin, how alluring soever, or terifying, are to be
rejected with Abhorrence.

There will be convincing Proof of this, by considering two Things.

1. That Sin in its Nature, prescinding from the Train of woeful Effects, is the
greatest Evil. 2. That, relatively to us, it is the most pernicious destructive
Evil.
1. That Sin considered in it self is the greatest Evil. This will be evident
by considering the general Nature of it, as directly opposite to God the
supreme Good. The Definition of Sin expresses its essential Evil; it is the
Transgression of the Divine Law, and consequently opposes the Rights of God's
Throne, and obscures the Glory of his Attributes that are exercised in the
Moral Government of the World. God, as Creator, is our King, our Lawgiver and
Judge. From his Propriety in us arises his just Title to Sovereign Power over
us: Know ye Psalm. 100.
that the Lord he is God; it is he that made us, not we our selves; we are his
People, and the Sheep of his Pasture. The Creatures of a lower Order are
incapable of distinguishing between Moral Good and Evil, and are determined by
the weight of Nature to what is merely sensible, and therefore are incapable of
a Law to regulate their Choice. But Man, who is endowed with the Powers of
Understanding and Election, to conceive and choose what is Good, and reject
what is Evil, is governed by a Law, the declared Will of his Maker: accordingly
a Law, the Rule of his Obedience, was written in his Heart.

Now Sin, the Transgression of this Law, contains many great Evils.

1. Sin is a Rebellion against the Sovereign Majesty of God, that gives the
Life of Authority to the Law. Therefore Divine Precepts are enforced with the
most proper and binding Motive to Obedience, I am the Lord. He that with
purpose and pleasure commits Sin, implicitly renounces his Dependence upon
God, as his Maker and Governor, overrules the Law, and arrogates an
irresponsible License to do his own Will. This is expressed by those Atheistical
Designers, who said, With our Tongue we will prevail, Psalm. 12. 4.
our Lips are our own: who is Lord over us? The Language of Actions, that is
more natural and convincing than of Words, declares that sinful Men despise the
Commands of God, as if they were not his Creatures and Subjects. What a
Dishonor, what a Displeasure is it to the God of Glory, that proud Dust should
fly in his Face, and control his Authority? He has ten thousand times ten Dan.
7. 10. Psalm. 103. 20.
thousand Angels that are high in Dignity, and excel in Strength, waiting in a
Posture of Reverence and Observance about his Throne, ready to do his Will: How
provoking is it for a despicable Worm to contravene his Law, and lift his Hand
against him? It will be no Excuse to plead the Commands of Men for Sin: for as
much as God is more glorious than Men, so much more are his Commands to be
respected and obeyed than Men's. When there is an evident Opposition between the
Laws of Men and of God, we must disobey our Superiors, tho we displease them,
and obey our Supreme Ruler. He that does what is forbidden, or neglects to do
what is commanded by the Divine Law, to please Men, tho invested with the
highest Sovereignty on Earth, is guilty of double Wickedness; of Impiety, in
deposing God; and Idolatry, in deifying Men.

It is an extreme Aggravation of this Evil, in that Sin as it is a disclaiming
our Homage to God, so it is in true account a yielding Subjection to the Devil.
For Sin is in the strictest Propriety his Work. The Original Rebellion in
Paradise was by his Temptation, and all the actual and habitual Sins of Men
since the Fall, are by his efficacious Influence. He darkens the Carnal Mind,
and 2 Cor. 4. 4.
sways the polluted Will; he excites and inflames the vicious Affections, and
imperiously rules in the Children Ephesians. 2. 2.
of Disobedience. He is therefore styled the Prince and God of this World. And
what more contumelious Indignity can there be, than the preferring to the
glorious Creator of Heaven and Earth, a damned Spirit, the most cursed part of
the Creation? It is most reasonable, that the Baseness of the Competitor,
should be a Foil to reinforce the Luster of God's Authority: yet Men reject
God, and comply with the Tempter. O prodigious Perverseness!

2. Sin vilifies the ruling Wisdom of God, that prescribed the Law to Men.
Although the Dominion of God over us be Supreme and Absolute, yet it is exercised
according to the Counsel of his Will, by the best Means, for the best Ends; he
is accordingly styled by the Apostle, The eternal King, and only wise God. It Is
1 Timothy 1.
the glorious Prerogative of his Sovereignty and Deity, that he can do no
Wrong: for he necessarily acts according to the Excellencies of his Nature.
Particularly, his Wisdom is so relucent in his Laws, that the serious
Contemplation of it, will ravish the sincere Minds of Men into a Compliance
with them. They are framed with exact Congruity to the Nature of God, and his
Relation to us, and to the Faculties of Man before he was corrupted. From hence
the Divine Law being the Transcript not only of God's Will, but his Wisdom,
binds the Understanding and Will, our leading Faculties, to esteem and approve,
to consent and choose all his Precepts as best. Now Sin vilifies the Infinite
Understanding of God with respect both to the Precepts of the Law, the Rule of
our Duty, and the Sanction annexed to confirm its Obligation. It does
constructively tax the Precepts as unequal, too rigid and severe a Confinement
to our Wills and Actions. Thus the impious Rebels complain, The Ways of the
Lord are not equal, as injurious to their Liberty, and not worthy of
Observance. What St. James says, to correct the uncharitable, censorious
Humor of some in his time, He that speaks Evil of his Brother, and judges his
James 4. 11.
Brother, speaks Evil of the Law, and judges the Law, as an imperfect and rash
Rule, is applicable to Sinners in any other kind. As an unskilful Hand by
straining too high, breaks the Strings of an Instrument, and spoils the Music;
so the Strictness and the Severity of the Precepts, breaks the harmonious
Agreement between the Wills of Men and the Law, and casts an Imputation of
Imprudence upon the Lawgiver. This is the implicit Blasphemy in Sin.

Besides, the Law has Rewards and Punishments, to secure our Respects and
Obedience to it. The wise God knows the Frame of the reasonable Creature, what
are the inward Springs of our Actions; and has accordingly propounded such
Motives to our Hope and Fear, the most active Passions, as may engage us to
perform our Duty. He promises his Favor that is better than Life, to the
Obedient, and threatens his Wrath, that is worse than Death, to the Rebellious.
Now Sin makes it evident, that these Motives are not effectual in the Minds of
Men: And this reflects upon the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, as if defective in not
binding his Subjects firmly to their Duty; for if the Advantage or Pleasure
that may be gained by Sin, be greater than the Reward that is promised to
Obedience, and the Punishment that is threatened against the Transgression, the
Law is unable to restrain from Sin, and the Ends of Government are not
obtained. Thus Sinners in venturing upon forbidden things, reproach the
Understanding of the Divine Lawgiver.

3. Sin is a Contrariety to the unspotted Holiness of God. Of all the glorious
and benign Constellations of the Divine Attributes that shine in the Law of
God; his Holiness has the brightest Luster. God is holy in all his Works, but
the most venerable and precious Monument of his Holiness is the Law. For the
Holiness of God consists in the Correspondence of his Will and Actions with his
moral Perfections, Wisdom, Goodness and Justice; and the Law is the perfect
Copy of his Nature and Will. The Psalmist who had a purged Eye, saw and admired
its Purity and Perfection. The Commandment of the Psalm. 19. Psalm. 119. 140.
Lord is pure, inlightning the Eyes. The Word is very near, therefore thy
Servant loves it. It Is the perspicuous Rule of our Duty without Blemish or
Imperfection: The Commandment is holy, just and good. It injoins nothing but
what is absolutely Good, without the least Tincture of Evil. The Sum of it is
set down by the Apostle, to live soberly, that is, to abstain from any thing
that may stain the Execellence of an understanding Creature: To live
righteously, which respects the State and Situation wherein God has disposed
Men for his Glory: It comprehends all the respective Duties to others, to whom
we are united by the Bands of Nature, or of Civil Society, or of Spiritual
Communion: And to live godly, which includes all the internal and outward
Duties we owe to God, who is the Sovereign of our Spirits, whose Will must be
the Rule, and his Glory the End of our Actions. In short, The Law is so formed,
that prescinding from the Authority of the Lawgiver, its Holiness and Goodness
lays an eternal Obligation on us to obey it. Now Sin is not only by
Interpretation, a Reproach to the Wisdom and other Perfections of God, but
directly and foimally a Contrariety to his Infinite Sanctity and Purity; for it
consists in a not doing what the Law commands, or doing what it forbids. It Is
therefore said, That the Carnal Romans 11.
Mind is Enmity against God: An active, immediate and irreconcilable
Contrariety to his holy Nature and Will: From hence there is a reciprocal
Hatred between God and Sinners: God is of purer Eyes than to behold Romans 1.
Iniquity, without an infinite Displicence, the Effects of which will fall upon
Sinners; and tho it is an Impiety hardly conceivable, yet the Scripture tells
us, that they are Haters of God. It Is true, God by the transcendent Excellence
of his Nature is incapable of suffering any Evil, and there are few in the
present State arrived to such Malice, as to declare open Enmity and War against
God. In the Damned this Hatred is explicit and direct, the Fever is heightened
to a Frenzy, the blessed God is the Object of their Curses and Eternal
Aversation: If their Rage could extend to him, and their Power were equal to
their Desires, they would dethrone the most High. And the Seeds of this are in
the Breasts of Sinners here. As the fearful Expectation of irresistible and
fiery Vengeance increases, their Aversation increases. They endeavor to raze
out the Inscription of God in their Souls, and to extinguish the Thoughts and
Sense of their Inspector and Judge. They wish he were not All-seeing and
Almighty, but Blind and Impotent, incapable to vindicate the Honor of his
despised Deity. The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God. The Heart is
the Fountain of Desires, and Actions interpret the Thoughts and Affections,
from whence the Inference is direct and conclusive, that habitual Sinners, who
live without God in the World, have secret Desires; there was no Sovereign
Being, to observe and require an Account of all their Actions. The radical
Cause of this Hatred is from the Opposition of the sinful polluted Wills of
Men, to the Holiness of God; for that Attribute excites his Justice, and Power,
and Wrath, to punish Sinners. Therefore the Apostle says, They are Enemies to
God in their Minds through wicked Works. The naked representing of this
Impiety, that a reasonable Creature should hate the blessed Creator for his
most Divine Perfections, cannot but strike with Horror. O the Sinfulness of Sin!

4. Sin is the Contempt and Abuse of his excellent Goodness. This Argument is
as vast as God's innumerable Mercies, whereby he allures and obliges us to
Obedience: I shall restrain my Discourse of it, to three things wherein the
Divine Goodness is very conspicuous, and most ungratefully despised by Sinners.

1st. His creating Goodness. It Is clear, without the least shadow of Doubt,
that nothing can give the first Being to it self; for this were to be before it
was, which is a direct Contradiction: and it is evident that God is the sole
Author of our Beings. Our Parents afforded the gross matter of our compounded
Nature, but the Variety and Union, the Beauty and Usefulness of the several
Parts, which is so wonderful, that the Body is composed of as many Miracles as
Members, was the Design of his Wisdom, and the Work of his Hands. The lively
Idea and perfect Exemplar of that regular Fabric, was modeled in the Divine
Mind. This affected the Psalmist with Admiration: I am fearfully and
wonderfully made: mavelous are thy Works, and Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16.
that my Soul knows right-well. Thine Eyes did see my Substance, yet being
imperfect, and in thy Book all my Members were written, which in continuance
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. And Job observes, Thy Job
10. 8.
Hands have made me and fashioned me round about. The Soul, or principal Part,
is of a Celestial Original, inspired from the Father of Spirits. The Faculties
of Understanding and Election, are the indelible Characters of our Dignity
above the Brutes, and make us capable to please, and glorify, and enjoy him.
This first and fundamental Benefit, upon which all other Favors and Benefits
are the Superstructure, was the Effect from an eternal Cause, his most free
Decree, that ordained our Birth in the spaces of Time. The Fountain was his
pure Goodness; there was no Necessity determining his Will, he did not want
external declarative Glory, being infinitely happy in himself, and there could
be no superior Power to constrain him. And that which renders our Maker's
Goodness more free and obliging, is the Consideration he might have created
Millions of Men, and left us in our native Nothing, and, as I may so speak,
lost and buried in perpetual Darkness. Now, what was God's end in making us?
Certainly it was becoming his Infinite Unerstanding, that is, to communicate of
his own Divine Fullness, and to be actively glorified by intelligent Creatures.
Accordingly it is the solemn Acknowledgment of the Representative Church. Thou
art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: For thou have
created all Rev. 4. 11.
Things, and for thy Pleasure they were created. Who is so void of rational
Sentiments, as not to acknowledge it is our indispensable Dutry, Our reasonable
Service, to offer up our selves an entire living Sacrifice to his Glory? What
is more natural, according to the Laws of incorrupt Nature, (I might say, and
of corrupt Nature, for the Heathens practiced it) than that Love should
correspond with Love; as the one descends in Benefits, the other should ascend
in Thankfulness. As a polished Looking glass of Steel, strongly reverberates
the Beams of the Sun shining upon it, without losing a spark of Light, thus the
understanding Soul should reflect the Affection of Love upon our blessed Maker,
in Reverence, and Praise, and Thankfulness. Now Sin breaks all those sacred
Bands of Grace and Gratitude, that engage us to love and obey God. He is the
just Lord of all our Faculties Intellectual and Sensitive, and the Sinner
employs them as Weapons of Unrighteousness against him. He preserves us by his
powerful gracious Providence, which is a renewed Creation every Moment, and the
Goodness he uses to us, the Sinner abuses against him. This is the most
unworthy, shameful and monstrous Ingratitude. This makes forgetful and
unthankful Men, more brutish than the dull Ox, and the stupid Ass, who serve
those that feed them; nay, sinks them below the insensible part of the
Creation, that invariably observes the Law and Order prescribed by the Creator.
Astonishing Degeneracy! Hear O Heavens, give Ear, O Earth! I have nourished and
brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me, was the Complaint of
God himself. The considerate Review of this, will melt us into Tears of
Confusion.

2dly. 'Twas the unvaluable Goodness of God to give his Law to Man, for his
Rule, both in respect of the matter of the Law, and his end in giving it.

(1.) The matter of the Law, this, as is forecited from the Apostle, is holy,
just, and good. It contains all things that are honest, and just, and pure, and
lovely, and of good Report, whatsoever are virtuous and Praiseworthy. In
Obedience to it the Innocence and Perfection of the reasonable Creature
consists. This I do but glance upon, having been considered before.

(2.) The end of giving the Law. God was pleased upon Man's Creation, by an
illustrious Revelation to show him his Duty, to write his Law in his Heart,
that he might not take one step out of the Circle of its Precepts, and
immediately sin and perish. His gracious Design was to keep Man in his Love;
that from the Obedience of the reasonable Creature, the Divine Goodness might
take its rise to reward him. This unfeigned and excellent Goodness, the Sinner
outragiously despises: for what greater Contempt can be expressed against a
written Law, than the tearing it in pieces, and trampling it under foot? And
this constructively the Sinner does to the Law of God, which Contempt extends
to the gracious Giver of it. Thus the Commandment that was ordained unto Life,
by Sin was Romans 7. 10.
found unto Death.

(3.) Sin is an extreme vilifying of God's Goodness, in preferring Carnal
Pleasures to his Favor, and Communion with him, wherein the Life, the
Felicity, the Heaven of the reasonable Creature consists. God is Infinite in
all possible Perfections, All sufficient to make us completely and eternally
happy: he disdains to have any Competitor, and requires to be supreme in our
Esteem and Affections: the reason of this is so evident by Divine and Natural
Light, that it is needless to spend many words about it. It Is an Observation of
St. Austin Omnes Deos colendos esse sapienti. Cur ergo a numero caeterorum ille
rejectus est? nihil restat ut dicant, hujus Dei sacra recipere noluerint, nisi
quia solum se coli voluerit. Aug. de Consens. Evang. c. 17.
, That it was a Rule amongst the Heathens, that a wise Man should worship all
their Deities. The Romans were so insatiable in Idolatry, that they sent to
Foreign Countries to bring the Gods of several Nations: an unpolished Stone, a
tame Serpent, that were reputed Deities, they received with great Solemnity and
Reverence. But the true God had no Temple, no Worship in Rome, where there was
a Pantheon dedicated to the Honor of all the false Gods. The Reason he gives
of it is, that the true God, who alone has Divine Excellencies, and Divine
Empire, will be worshipped alone, and strictly forbids the Assumption of any
into his Throne. To adore any besides him is infinitely debasing, and provoking
to his dread Majesty. Now Sin in its Nature is a Conversion from God to the
Creature; and whatever the Temptation be, in yielding to it, there is
signified, that we choose something before his Favor. Sin is founded in bono
jucundo, something that is delectable to the Carnal Nature: it is the universal
Character of Carnal Men, They are Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God.
To some, Riches are the most alluring Object. The young Man in the Gospel, when
our Savior commanded him to give his Estate to the Poor, and he should have
Treasure in Heaven, went away sorrowful, as if he had been offered to his loss.
To others, the Pleasures that in strict Propriety are sensual, are most
charming. Love is the Weight of the Soul that turns it, not like a dead Weight
of the Scales, but with Election freely to its Object: in the carnal Balance
the present Things of the World are of conspicuous Moment, and outweigh
Spiritual and Eternal Blessings. Although the Favor of God be eminently all that
can be desired, under the Notion of Riches, or Honor, or Pleasure, and every
Atom of our Affection is due to him; yet Carnal Men think it a cheap Purchase
to obtain the good Things of this World, by sinful means, with the loss of his
Favor. This their Actions declare. Prodigious Folly! as if a few Sparks struck
out of a Flint, that can neither afford Light or Warmth, were more desirable
than the Sun in its Brightness. And how contumelious and provoking it is to
God, he declares in the most moving Expressions: Be astonished, O ye Heavens
Jer. 2. 12, 13.
at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. For my
People have committed two Evils; they have forsaken me the Fountain of living
Waters, and hewed them out broken Cisterns that can hold no Water. This
immediately was charged upon the Jews, who set up Idols of Jealousy, and adored
them, rather than the glorious Jehovah: and in proportion it is true of all
Sinners; for every vicious Affection prefers some vain Object, before his Love,
and the Enjoyment of his glorious Presence, that is the Reward of Obedience.

5. The Sinner disparages the impartial Justice of God. In the Divine Law there
is a Connection between Sin and Punishment; the Evil of doing and the Evil of
suffering. This is not a mere Arbitrary Constitution, but founded on the
inseparable Desert of Sin, and the Rectitude of God's Nature, which
unchangeably loves Holiness, and hates Sin. Although the threatening does not lay a
strict necessity upon the Lawgiver always to inflict, the Punishment; yet God
having declared his equal Laws as the Rule of our Duty, and of his Judgment, if
they should be usually without Effect upon Offenders, the Bands of Government
would be dissolved, and consequently the Honor of his Justice stained both
with respect to his Nature and Office: for as an essential Attribute it is the
Correspondence of his Will and Actions with his Moral Perfections; and as
Sovereign Ruler, he is to preserve Equity and Order in his Kingdom. Now those
who voluntarily break his Law, presume upon Impunity. The first rebellious Sin
was committed upon this Presumption: God threatened, If you eat the forbidden
Fruit, you shall die: the Serpent says, Eat, and you shall not die; and
assenting to the Temptation, Adam fell to Disobedience. And ever since Men are
fearless to sin upon the same Motive. God charge the wicked, Thou thoughtest
Psalm. 50.
that I was altogether such a one as thy self; not concerned to punish the
Violation of his sacred Laws. The Sinner commits the Divine Attributes to fight
against one another, presuming that Mercy will disarm Justice, and stop its
terrible Effects upon impenitent obstinate Sinners: From hence they become bold
and hardened in the continuance of their Sins. There is a Root that bears
Gall and Wormwood: and when Deuteronomy. 29. 17, 19, 20.
the Curse of the Law is declared and denounced against Sin, the Wicked
blesses himself in his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, tho I walk in the
Imagination of my Heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst. This casts such a foul
Blemish upon the Justice of God, that he threatens the severest Vengeance for
it. The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy
shall smoke against that Man, and all the Curses written in this Book shall be
upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven. Consider this
ye that forget Psalm. 50.
God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

6. The Sinner implicitly denies God's Omniscience. There is such a Turpitude
adhering to Sin, that it cannot endure the Light of the Sun, or the Light of
Conscience, but seeks to be concealed under a Mask of Virtue, or a Vail of
Darkness. There are very few on this side Hell, so transformed into the
likeness of the Devil, as to be impenetrable by Shame. What is said of the
Adulterer and Thief, Sinners of greater Guilt, and deeper Dye, is true in
proportion of every Sinner: If a Man's sees them, they are in the Job.
Terrors of the shadow of Death. Now from whence is it that many, who if they
were surpised in the actings of their Sins by a Child or a Stranger, would
blush and tremble, yet although the holy God sees all their Sins in order to judge
them, and will judge in order to punish them, are secure without any fearful or
shameful Apprehensions of his Presence? Did they steadfastly believe that their
foul Villainies were open to his piercing, pure and severe Eye, they must be
struck with Terrors, and covered with Confusion. Will he force the Queen before
my Face? was the Speech of the King inflamed with Wrath, and the Prologue of
Death against the fallen Favorite. Would Men dare to affront God's Authority,
and outragiously break his Laws before his Face, if they duly considered his
Omnipresence and Observance of them? it were impossible. And Infidelity is the
radical Cause of their Inconsideration. It was a false Imputation against Job,
but justly applied to the Wicked, Thou say, How does God know? can he judge
through the Job 22. 13, 14.
dark Cloud? Thick Clouds are a Covering to him, that he sees not. And such are
introduced by the Psalmist declaring their inward Sentiments: The Lord shall
not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.

Lastly; The Sinner slights the Power of God. This Attribute renders God a
dreadful Judge. He has a Right to punish, and Power to revenge every
Transgression of his Law. His Judicial Power is supreme, his Executive is
irresistible. He can with one Stroke dispatch the Body to the Grave, and the
Soul to Hell, and make Men as miserable as they are sinful. Yet Sinners as
boldly provoke him, as if there were no danger. We read of the infatuated
Syrians, that they thought that God, the Protector of Israel, had only Power on
the Hills, and not in the Valleys, and renewed the War to their Destruction.
Thus Sinners enter into the Lists with God, and range an Army of Lusts against
the Armies of Heaven, and blindly bold, run upon their own Destruction. They
neither believe his Allseeing Eye, nor All-mighty Hand. They change the Glory
of the living God into a dead Idol, that has Eyes and sees not, and Hands and
handles not; and accordingly his Threatenings make no Impression upon them.

Thus I have presented a true View of the Evil of Sin considered in it self:
but as Job says of God, How little a Portion of him is known? may be said of
the Evil of Sin, How little of it is known? For in proportion as our
Apprehensions are defective and below the Greatness of God, so are they of the
Evil of Sin, that contradicts his Sovereign, Will and dishonours his excellent
Perfections.

SERMON II.
Genesis xxxix. 9. How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God?
2. I shall proceed to consider the Evil of Sin relatively to us, and prove it
to be most pernicious and destructive. If we compare it with Temporal Evils, it
preponderates all that Men are liable to in the present World. Diseases in our
Bodies, Disasters in our Estates, Disgrace in our Reputation, are in just
Esteem far less Evil than the Evil of Sin: for that corrupts and destroys our
more excellent and immortal Part. The vile Body is of no account in comparison
of the precious Soul. Therefore the Apostle enforces his Exhortation, Dearly
beloved Brethren, abstain from fleshly Lusts, that war against the Soul. The
Issue of this War is infinitely more woeful, than of the most cruel against our
Bodies and Goods, our Liberties and Lives: for our Estates and Freedom, if
lost, may be recovered; if the present Life be lost for the Cause of God, it
shall be restored in greater Luster and Perfection; but if the Soul be lost,
it is lost for ever.

All Temporal Evils are consistent with the Love of God: Job on the Dunghill,
roughcast with Ulcers, was most precious in God's sight: Lazarus in the lowest
Poverty, and wasted with loathsome Sores, was dear to his Affections; a Guard
of Angels was sent to convoy his departing Soul to the Divine Presence. But Sin
separates between God and us, who is the Fountain of Felicity, and the Center
of Rest to the Soul.

Other Evils God, who is our wise and compassionate Father and Physician, makes
use of, as Medicinal Preparations for the Cure of Sin: and certainly the
Disease which would be the Death of the Soul, is worse than the Remedy, tho
never so bitter and afflicting to Sense.

Sin is an Evil of that Malignity, that the least degree of it is fatal. If it
be conceived in the Soul, tho not actually finished, it is deadly. One Sin
corrupted in an instant Angelical Excellencies, and turned the glorious Spirits
of Heaven into Devils. It Is Poison so strong, that the first Taste of it shed a
deadly Taint and Malignity into the Veins of all Mankind.

Sin is such an exceeding Evil, that it is the severest Punishment Divine
Justice inflicts on Sinners on this side Hell. The giving Men over to the Power
of their Lusts, is the most fearful Judgment, not only with respect to the
Cause, God's unrelenting and unquenchable Anger, and the Issue, everlasting
Destruction, but in the quality of the Judgment. Nay, did Sin appear as odious
in our Eyes as it does in God's, we should account it the worst part of Hell it
self, the Pollutions of the Damned to be an Evil exceeding the Torments
superadded to them.

Sin is pregnant with all kinds of Evils, the Seeds of it are big with
Judgments. The Evils that are obvious to Sense, or that are Spiritual and
Inward, Temporal and Eternal Evils, all proceed from Sin, often as the Natural
Cause, and always as the Meritorious. And many times the same Punishment is
produced by the Efficiency of Sin, as well as inflicted for its Guilt. Thus
Uncleanness, without the miraculous Waters of Jealousy, rots the Body, and the
Pleasure of Sin is revenged by a loathsome consuming Disease, the natural
Consequence of it. Thus Intemperance and Luxury shorten the Lives of Men, and
accelerate Damnation. Fierce Desires, and wild Rage are Fuel for the
everlasting Fire in Hell. The same Evils considered Physically, are from the
Efficiency of Sin; considered legally, are from the Guilt of Sin, and the
Justice of God.

This being a Point of great Usefulness, that I may be more instructive, I will
consider the Evils that are consequential to Sin, under these two Heads.

First, Such as proceed immediately from it by Emanation.

Secondly; Those Evils, and all other as the Effects of God's Justice and
Sentence.

First, The Evils that proceed immediately by Emanation from it: and tho some
of them are not resented with feeling Apprehensions by Sinners, yet they are of
a fearful Nature. Sin has deprived Man of the Purity, Nobility, and Peace of
his innocent State.

1. It has stained and tainted him with an universal, intimate and permanent
Pollution. Man in his first Creation was holy and righteous: a Beam of Beauty
derived from Heaven was shed upon his Soul, in comparison of which, sensitive
Beauty is but as the Clearness of Glass, to the Luster of a Diamond. His
Understanding was Light in the Lord, his Will and Affections were regular and
pure, the Divine Image was impressed upon all his Faculties, that attracted the
Love and Complacency of God himself. Sin has blotted out all his amiable
Excellencies, and superinduced the most foul Deformity, the Original of which
was fetched from Hell. Sinners are the natural Children of Satan, of a near
Resemblance to him. The Scripture borrows Comparisons to represent the defiling
Quality of Sin, from Pollutions that are most loathsome to our Senses: from
pestilential Ulcers, putrefying Sores, filthy Vomit, and defiling Mire. This
Pollution is universal through the whole Man, Spirit, Soul and Body. It darkens
the Mind, our supreme Faculty, with a Cloud of Corruption; it depraves the
Will, and vitiates the Affections. It Is a Pollution so deep and permanent, that
the Deluge that swept away a World of Sinners, did not wash away their Sins:
and the Fire at the last Day, that shall devour the Dross of the visible World,
and renew the Heavens and the Earth, shall not purge away the Sins of the
guilty Inhabitants. This Pollution has so defiled and disfigured Man, who was
a fair and lovely Type, wherein the Skill and Perfections of the Creator was
conspicuous, that it repented God that he made Man. As an Artificer having
formed a surprising Piece, either a Statue or Picture, wherein Art almost
equaled the Life and Luster of Nature; if it be torn or broken, throws it from
his sight with sorrow, impatient to see it so rudely defaced: Thus God is said
to hide his Face from Sinners, to express his Displeasure, as unwilling to
behold the Disparagement of his Masterpiece, the excellent Product of his
Wisdom and Power.

2. Sin has degraded Man from his native State and Dignity. Man by his
Extraction and Descent was the Son of God, a little lower than the Angels,
consecrated and crowned, as a Priest for the Service and Communion with his
glorious Maker, and as King over the World. But being in Honor, he understood
not his Dignity, his Duty and Felicity, and became like the Beasts that perish.
By his Rebellion against his Creator, he made a Forfeiture of his Dominion, and
lost the Obedience of sensible Creatures, and the Service of Insensible; which
I only mention, and shall restrain my Consideration, to show how he is become
like the Beasts, as an Effect resulting from his Sin. He is divested of his
white Robe of Innocence, and his noblest Perfections, Reason and Religion.
Sense and Imagination, the leading Faculties in Brutes, are his Rulers: The
rational governing Powers of Man, have lost their superior Sway, and the Carnal
Passions rove without Reins to forbidden Objects. The lower Appetites are
predominant, which is the most ignominious and cruel Servitude wherein Human
Liberty can be entangled and fettered. His Understanding and Will, that were
capable of taking a flight for the Discovery and Fruition of Celestial and
Eternal Things, are debased, and limited to sensual perishing Things, and
derive vilifying Qualities from them. He is Earthly-minded; his Aims,
Contrivances, Desires are fastened to the Earth: the Divine Spark within him is
covered under Ashes. He is carnally minded, always studying and making
Provisions for the Flesh. This is a viler Debasement, than if the Counselors
of State were employed in the sordid Offices of the Kitchen or Stable. Nay,
it is a Diminution below the Rank of Beasts, for by Nature they are incapable of
directing their Eyes and Desires toward Heaven; but Man is Brutish by his
voluntary Sin. To see the Head of a rapacious Wolf, or fierce Tiger, or lustful
Horse joined to the Body of a Man, how monstrous would it appear? But it is more
unnatural and ignominious, for Men, in whom Reason and Religion should govern,
to resemble them in the Brutish Appetites of Lust and Rage; for there is a
nearer Affinity between the Body of a Man and of a Beasts, that agree in the
common sensible Nature, than between the Immortal Spirit of a Man, and the
Beasts that perish. In short, Sin has enslaved Men to Satan an Infernal Fiend:
They are taken Captives by him at his Pleasure: And, which is the lowest
Degradation, they are the Servants of Corruption.

3. Sin has broke the sweet Peace and blessed Concord in the Soul, the Felicity
of our innocent State. Peace is the Tranquillity that results from Order and
Unity. In Man there was a regular Harmony of all his Faculties; the Affections
were consonant with his Will, his Will with his Understanding, and his
Understanding with the Law of God. This was the inward State of his Soul in his
Creation; for having a derived Being, it was natural and necessary, that he
should be appointed to his End, and receive his Rule for the obtaining it, from
the Understanding and Will of his Maker. Now whilst there was a Correspondence
in his Faculties, and their Operations with his Rule and End, the Will of God,
and the Glory of God, the Result of it, as well as the Reward of it, was
Spiritual Peace with God, Internal Peace with himself, External Peace with
others. Now Sin has dissolved this Unity, violated this sacred Order: And from
hence,

(1.) Peace with God, that consisted in his Favor and Friendship to us, and
our Filial Dependence upon him, which is the Spring of full and satisfying Joy,
is broke. God appears a fearful Enemy against the Sinners; the penal Effects of
his Wrath, I shall speak of distinctly under the second General: And that
Divine Calm in the Conscience, that Peace joined with the purest Pleasure, that
was the Reflex of God's Favor on the Soul, is changed into anxious
Apprehensions of his just Power to punish us. Guilt generates Fear, and Fear
Hatred, and both cause a woeful flight from God.

(2.) Internal Peace is broke by Sin. Whilst the Passions were subordinate to
the Empire of Reason, and in Accord among themselves, there was a perfect
Peace; but Sin has raised an intestine War in Man's Breast. The Law of the
Members rebels against the Law of the Mind: for there is no Man so prodigiously
wicked, and spoiled of his Primitive Endowments, but still there remains some
Principles of Morality in the Mind, so that his Conscience discovers and
condemns the Prima haec est ultio, quod se judice nemo nocens absolvit.
Vices he allows and practices, which makes the Sinner uneasy to himself, and
mixes Vinegar with his Wine. Besides, since the Passions are disbanded, into
what Confusion is Man fallen? How various, how violent are they, and often
repugnant to one another? How often do we change their Habits and Scenes in a
day? Sometimes we are vainly merry, and then as vainly sad; sometimes desirous,
and then averse; and with respect to ourselves, sometimes pleased, sometimes
vexed, sometimes amiable, and sometimes odious; we are more mutable than the
Planet that is the Emblem of Inconstancy. How often do Clouds of Melancholy
darken the bright Serenity of the Spirit, and cast a dreadful Gloom over it?
How often do Storms of Passion disturb its Tranquillity? The Breast of Man, that
was the Temple of Peace, is become a Den of Dragons; every exorbitant Affection
tears and torments him. It Is true, this is also a penal Effect from Divine
Justice: There is no Peace says my God to the Wickd: With which that Saying of
St. Austin is consonant, Jussit Domine, and sic est, omnis inordinatus affectus
est sibi poena.

(3.) Sin has broke our Agreement with one another. When there was a regular
Consent between the superior and lower Faculties in all Men, they were in
Unity among themselves, for they were perfectly alike. But the tumultuous and
tyrannical Passions have engaged them in mortal Enmity. It Is the account St.
James gives, From whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your Members? Sin kindles and blows the
Fire of Discord, in Families, Cities, Kingdoms: Sin is the Fury that brings a
smoking Firebrand from Hell, and sets the World into Combustion. Ambition,
Avarice, the greedy Desires of Rule and Revenge, have made the World a Stage of
not feigned, but the most bloody Tragedies. In this Men are not like, but worse
than the Beasts: for the fiercest Beasts of Africa or Hyrcania, have a respect
for their own Likeness: tho they devour others, yet they spare those of their
own kind: but Men are so degenerate as to be most cruel against their Brethren.
These are some of the Evils that proceed from Sin as their natural Cause. And
from hence it is evident, that Sin makes Men miserable, were there no Hell of
Torment to receive them in the next State.

Secondly; I will consider the Evils consequent to Sin, as the Penal Effects of
the Sentence against Sin; of Divine Justice that decrees it, and Divine Power
that inflicts it: and in these the Sinner is often an active Instrument of his
own Misery.

1. The Fall of the Angels is the first and most terrible Punishment of Sin.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, reserved in
Chains of Darkness to Judgment. How are they fallen? from what height of Glory
and Felicity into bottomless Perdition? How are they continually racked and
tormented with the Remembrance of their lost Happiness? If a thousand of the
prime Nobility of a Nation were executed in a day, by the Sentence of a
righteous King, we should conclude their Crimes to be atrocious: innumerable
Angels, dignified with the Titles of Dominions and Principalities, were
expelled from Heaven, their native Seat, and the Sanctuary of Life, and are
dead to all the joyful Operations of the intellectual Nature, and only alive to
Everlasting Pain.

One Sin of Pride or Envy, brought this terrible Vengeance; from whence we may
infer, how provoking Sin is to the holy God. We read of King Uzziah, that upon
his Presumption to offer Incense, he was struck with a Leprosy, and the Priests
thrust him out, and himself hasted to go out of the Temple: a Representation of
the Punishment of the Angels: by Presumption they were struck with a Leprosy,
and justly expelled from the Celestial Temple; and not being able to sustain
the Terrors of the Divine Majesty, they fled from his Presence. It Is said, God
cast them down, and they left their own Habitation.

2. Consider the Penal Effects of Sin with respect to Man. They are
comprehended in the Sentence of Death, the first and second Death, threatened
to deter Adam from transgressing the Law.

In the first Creation Man while innocent was immortal: for although his Body was
compounded of jarring Elements, that had a natural Tendency to Dissolution, yet
the Soul was endowed with such Virtue, as to imbalm the Body alive, and to
preserve it from the least degree of Putrefaction. But when Man by his
voluntary Sin was separated from the Fountain of Life, the Soul lost its
derivative Life from God, and the active Life infused by its Union into the
Body. It cannot preserve the natural Life beyond its limited Term. A righteous
Retaliation. Thus the Apostle tells us, Sin came into the World, and Death by
Sin. Even Infants who never committed Sin, die, having been conceived in Sin.
And Death brought in its Retinue Evils so numerous and various, that their
kinds are more than words to name and distinguish them. Man that is born of a
Woman, is of few days, and full of Trouble: at his Birth he enters into a
Labyrinth of Thorns, this miserable World, and his Life is a continual turning
in it: he cannot escape being sometimes pricked and torn; and at going out of
it, his Soul is rent from the Embraces of the Body. It Is as possible to tell
the number of the Waves in a tempestuous Sea, as to recount all the tormenting
Passions of the Soul, all the Diseases of the Body, which far exceed in number
all the unhappy Parts wherein they are seated. What an afflicting Object would
it be, to hear all the mournful Lamentations, all the piercing Complaints, all
the deep Groans from the miserable in this present State? What a prospect of
Terror, to see Death in its various Shapes, by Famine, by Fire, by Sword, and
by wasting or painful Diseases, triumphant over all Mankind? What a sight of
Woe, to have all the Graves and Charnel-houses opened, and so many loathsome
Carcases, or heaps of dry naked Bones, the Trophies of Death, exposed to view?
Such are the afflicting and the destructive Effects of Sin. For Wickedness
burns as a Fire: it devours the Briars and Thorns.

Besides other Miseries in this Life, sometimes the Terrors of an accusing
Conscience seize upon Men, which of all Evils are most heavy and overwhelming.
Solomon who understood the Frame of Humane Nature, tells us, The Spirit of a
Man can bear his Infirmity: that is, the Mind fortified by Principles of moral
Counsel and Constancy, can endure the Assault of external Evils: but a wounded
Spirit who can bear? This is most insupportable when the Sting and Remorse of
the Mind is from the Sense of Guilt: for then God appears an Enemy righteous
and severe; and who can encounter with offended Omnipotence? Such is the
sharpness of his Sword, and the weight of his Hand, that every Stroke is deadly
inward. Satan the cruel Enemy of Souls, exasperates the Wound. He discovers and
charges Sin upon the Conscience, with all its killing Aggravations, and
conceals the Divine Mercy, the only Lenitive and healing Balm to the wounded
Spirit. What Visions of Horror, what Spectacles of Fear, what Scenes of Sorrow
are presented to the distracted Mind by the Prince of Darkness? And which
heightens the Misery, Man is a worse Enemy to himself than Satan: he falls upon
his own Sword, and destroys himself. Whatever he sees or hears, afflicts him;
whatever he thinks, torments him. The guilty Conscience turns the Sun into
Darkness, and the Moon into Blood: the precious Promises of the Gospel, that
assure Favor and Pardon to returning and relenting Sinners, are turned into
Arguments of Despair, by reflecting upon the abuse and provocation of Mercy,
and that the Advocate in God's Bosom is become the Accuser. Doleful State!
beyond the Conception of all, but those who are plunged into it. How often do
they run to the Grave for Sanctuary, and seek for Death as a Deliverance?

Yet all these Anxieties and Terrors are but the beginning of Sorrows: for the
full and terrible Recompenses of Sin shall follow the Eternal Judgment
pronounced against the Wicked at the last Day. It Is true, the Sentence of the
Law is past against the Sinner in this present State, and Temporal Evils are
the Effects of it; but that Sentence is revokable: at Death the Sentence is
ratified by the Judge upon every impenitent Sinner; it is decisive of his State,
and involves him under Punishment for ever: But the full Execution of Judgment
shall not be till the public general Sentence pronounced by the everlasting
Judge, before the whole World. It exceeds the compass of created Thoughts to
understand fully the direful Effects of Sin in the Eternal State: For who knows
the Power of God's Wrath? The Scripture represents the Punishment in
Expressions, that may instruct the Mind, and terrify the Imagination: that may
work upon the Principles of Reason and Sense, by which Men are naturally and
strongly moved.

1. Sinners shall be excluded from Communion with the blessed God in Heaven, in
whose Presence is Fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for
evermore. In the clear and transforming Vision of his Glory, and the intimate
and indissolvable Union with him by Love, consists the Perfection and
Satisfaction of the immortal Soul. The Felicity resulting from it, is so entire
and eternal, as God is great and true, who has so often promised it to his
Saints. Now Sin separates lost Souls for ever from the reviving Presence of
God. Who can declare the Extent and Degrees of that Evil? for an Evil rises in
proportion to the Good of which it deprives us: it must therefore follow, that
Celestial Blessedness being transcendent, the Exclusion from it is
proportionably evil: And as the Felicity of the Saints results both from the
direct Possession of Heaven, and from comparison with the contrary State: so
the Misery of the Damned arises, both from the Thoughts of lost Happiness, and
from the lasting Pain that torments them.

But it may be replied, If this be the utmost Evil that is consequent to Sin,
the threatening of it is not likely to deter but few from pleasing their corrupt
Appetites: for carnal Men have such gross Apprehensions, and vitiated
Affections, that they are careless of Spiritual Glory and Joy. They cannot
taste and see how good the Lord is: nay, the Divine Presence would be a Torment
to them: For as Light is the most pleasant Quality in the World to the sound
Eye, so it is very afflicting and painful to the Eye when corrupted by a
Suffusion of Humors.

To this a clear Answer may be given: In the next State where the Wicked shall
for ever be without those sensual Objects which here deceive and delight them,
their Apprehensions will be changed; they shall understand what a Happiness the
Fruition of the blessed God is, and what a Misery to be incapable of enjoying
him, and expelled from the Celestial Paradise. Our Savior tells the Infidel
Jews, There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Luke 15. 28.
when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, and you your selves shut out. How will they pine with Envy at
the sight of that Triumphant Felicity of which they shall never be Partakers?
Depart from me, will be as terrible a part of the Judgment, as Eternal Fire.

2. God's Justice is not satisfied in depriving them of Heaven, but inflicts
the most heavy Punishment upon Sense and Conscience in the Damned: for as the
Soul and Body in their State of Union in this Life, were both guilty, the one
as the Guide, the other as the Instrument of Sin; so it is equal, when
reunited, they should feel the Penal Effects of it. The Scripture represents
both to our Capacity, by the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that shall
never be quenched: and by the destroying of Body and Soul in Hellfire. Sinners
shall then be tormented, wherein they were most delighted: they shall be
invested with those Objects, that will cause the most dolorous Perceptions in
their sensitive Faculties. The Lake of Fire and Brimstone, the Blackness of
Darkness, are words of a terrible Signification, and intended to awaken Sinners
to fly from the Wrath to come. But no words can fully reveal the terrible
Ingredients of their Misery: the Punishment will be in proportion to the Glory
of God's Majesty that is dishonored and provoked by Sin, and extent of his
Power. And as the Soul was the Principal, and the Body but an Accessory in the
Works of Sin; so its capacious Faculties will be far more tormented, than the
more limited Faculties of the outward Senses. The fiery Attributes of God shall
be transmitted through the Glass of Conscience, and concentered upon damned
Spirits: the Fire without them is not so tormenting as this Fire within them.
How will the tormenting Passions be inflamed? What Rancor, Reluctance and Rage
against the Power above that sentenced them to Hell? What Impatience and
Indignation against themselves for their wilful Sins, the just Cause of it? How
will they curse their Creation, and wish their utter Extinction, as the final
Remedy of their Misery? But all their ardent Wishes are in vain: for the Guilt
of Sin will never be expiated, nor God so far reconciled as to annihilate them.
As long as there is Justice in Heaven, and Fire in Hell, as long as God and
Eternity shall continue, they must suffer these Torments, which the Strength
and Patience of an Angel cannot bear one hour. From hence we may infer, what an
inconceiveable Evil there is in Sin, and how hateful it is to the most High,
when God who is Love, who is styled the Father of Mercies, has prepared and
does inflict such Plagues for ever for the Transgression of his holy Laws: and
such is the Equity of his Judgment, that he never punishes Offenders above
their Desert.

I shall now apply this Doctrine, by reflecting the Light of it upon our Minds
and Hearts.

1. This discovers how perverse and depraved the Minds and Wills of Men are, to
choose Sin rather than Affliction, and break the Divine Law for the obtaining
Temporal Things. If one with an attentive Eye regards the generality of
Mankind, what Dominion present and sensible Things have over them, how securely
and habitually they sin in prosecution of their Carnal Aims, as if the Soul
should not survive the Body, as if there were no Tribunal above to examine, no
Judge to sentence and punish Sinners; if he has not Marble Bowels, it will
excite his Compassion or Indignation. What Comparison is there between the good
Things of this World, and of the next in Degrees or Duration? Aerie Honor,
Sensual Pleasures, and Worldly Riches, are but the thin Appearances of
Happiness, Shadows in Masquerade, that cannot afford solid Content to an
immortal Spirit: the Blessedness of Heaven replenishes with everlasting
Satisfaction. What Proportion is there between the light and momentary
Afflictions here, and a vast Eternity filled with Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, and desperate Sorrow? What stupid Beast, what Monster
of a Man, would prefer a superficial transient Delight, the Pleasure of a short
Dream, before ever-satisfying Joys? Or to avoid a slight Evil, venture upon
Destruction? Yet this is the true Case of Sinners: if they can obtain the World
with the loss of Heaven, they count it a valuable Purchase; if they can
compound so, as to escape Temporal Troubles, tho involved under Guilt that
brings extreme and eternal Misery, they think it a saving Bargain. Amazing
Folly! Either they believe or do not, the Recompenses in the future State: if
they do not, how unaccountable is their Impiety? If they do, it is more
prodigious they do not feel the Powers of the World to come, so as to regulate
their Lives, and control the strongest Temptations to sin against God. A
wicked Believer is mo^e guilty than a wicked Infidel. How could we conceive it
possible, were it not visible in their Actions, that Men who have judicative
Faculties to compare and distinguish things, and accordingly be moved with
Desires or Fears, should with ardent Affections pursue despicable Vanities, and
neglect substantial Happiness, and be fearful of the Shadows of Dangers, and
intrepid in the midst of the truest Dangers! He is a desperate Gamester that
will venture a Crown at a Throw, against some petty Advantage: yet this is
really done by Sinners who hazard the loss of Heaven for this World: they hang
by slender Strings, a little Breath that expires every moment, over bottomless
Perdition, and are insensible, without any palpitation of Heart, any sign of
Fear.

How strong is the Delusion and Concupiscence of the carnallyminded? The Lusts
of the Flesh bribe and corrupt their Understandings, or divert them from
serious Consideration of their Ways, and the Issues of them. From hence it is
they are presently entangled and vanquished by sensual Temptations; they are
cozened by the Colors of Good and Evil, and Satan easily accomplishes his most
pernicious and envious Design, to make Men miserable as himself. How just is
the Reproach of Wisdom, How long ye simple ones will ye love Simplicity, and
Fools hate Knowledge? The Light of Reason and Revelation shines upon them, they
have not the excuse of Ignorance, but the righteous and heavy Condemnation of
those who love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil. It Is
no mean degree of Guilt to extenuate Sin, and make an Apology for Sinners. The
wisest of Men tells us, Fools make a mock of Sin: they count it a fond
Niceness, a silly Preciseness to be fearful of offending God. They boast of
their deceitful Arts and Insinuations, whereby they represent Sin as a light
matter, to corrupt others. But it is infinitely better to be defective in the
Subtilty of the Serpent, than in the Innocence of the Dove. A mere Natural, who
is only capable of sensitive Actions, and is distinguished from a Brute by his
shape, is not such a forlorn Sot, as the sinful Fool. What the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of one who gets Riches unjustly, that he shall leave them, and in the
end die a Fool, will be verified of the wilful obstinate Sinner: in the end he
shall by the terrible Conviction of his own Mind, be found guilty of the most
woeful Folly: and how many have acknowledged in their last hours, when usually
Men speak with the most feeling and least Affectation, how have they in words
of the Psalmist arraigned themselves, So foolish have we been, and like Beasts
before thee?

2. From hence we may be instructed of the wonderful Patience of God, who bears
with a World of Sinners, that are obnoxious to his Justice, and under his Power
every day. If we consider the number and aggravations of Men's Sins, how many
have out-told the Hairs of their Heads in actual Transgressions; how mighty and
manifest their Sins are, that the Deity and Providence are questioned for the
suspending of Vengeance? And yet that God notwithstanding all their enormous
Injuries, and violent Provocations, is patient toward Sinners, it cannot but
fill us with Admiration. His Mercy, like the cheerful Light of the Sun, visits
us every Morning with its benign Influences; his Justice, like Thunder, rarely
strikes the Wicked. He affords not only the Supports of Life, but many Comforts
and Refreshments to the unthankful and rebellious.

It Is not from any Defect in his Power that they are not consumed, but from the
Abundance of his Mercy. He made the World without any strain of his Power, and
can as easily destroy it: he has an innumerable Company of Angels attending his
Commands; and every Angel is an Army in strength: one of them destroyed an
hundred and fourscore and five thousand in a Night. He can use the most
despicable and weakest Creatures, Frogs, and Lice, and Flies, as Instruments of
Vengeance to subdue the proudest Pharaoh, the most obstinate Rebels. -- He sees
Sin wherever it is, and hates it wherever he sees it; yet his Patience
endures their crying Sins, and his long-Suffeing expects their Repentance. The
Lord is not slack, as some Men count slackness, but he is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. He spares Sinners with such Indulgence, in order to their
Salvation. It Is deservedly one of his Royal Titles, The God of Patience. Our
fierce Spirits are apt to take Fire and Revenge for every Injury real, or
supposed; but the great God, who is infinitely sensible of all the Indignities
offered to his Majesty, defers his Anger, and loads them with his Benefits
every day. What is more astonishing than the Riches of his Goodness, unless it
be the perverse Abuse of it by Sinners, to harden themselves in their
Impieties? But although his Clemency delays the Punishment, the Sacredness and
Constancy of his Justice will not forget it: when Patience has had its perfect
work, Justice shall have a solemn Triumph in the final Destruction of
impenitent unreformed Sinners.

3. The Consideration of the Evil of Sin, so great in it self, and pernicious
to us, heightens our Obligations to the Divine Mercy, in saving us from our
Sins, and an everlasting Hell, the just Punishment of them. Our Loss was
unvaluable, our Misery extreme, and without infinite Mercy, we had been under
an unremediable necessity of sinning and suffering for ever. God saw us in this
wretched and desperate State, and his Eye affected his Heart, in his Pity he
redeemed and restored us. This is the clearest Testimony of pure Goodness: for
God did not want external Glory, who is infinitely happy in his own
Perfections: he could, when Man revolted from his Duty, have created a new
World of innocent Creatures: for infinite Power is not spent nor lessened by
finite Productions, but his undeserved and undesired Mercy appeared in our
Salvation. The way of accomplishing it, renders Mercy more illustrious: for to
glorify his Justice, and preserve the Honor of his Holiness unblemished, he
laid upon his Son the Iniquity of us all. This was Love that passes all
Understanding: Our Savior speaks of it with Admiration; God so loved the
World, and hated Sin, that he gave his only begotten Son to die for it; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

And how dear are our Engagements to Jesus Christ? The Judge would not release
the Guilty without a Ransom, nor the Surety without Satisfaction; and the Son
of God most compassionately and willingly gave his precious Blood to obtain our
Deliverance. If his Perfections were not most amiable and ravishing, yet that
he died for us, should infinitely endear him to us. To those who believe, he is
precious: to those who have felt their undone Condition, and that by his Merits
and Mediation, are restored to the Favor of God, he is eminently precious. Who
can break the Constraints of such Love? If there be a spark of Reason, or a
grain of unfeigned Faith in us, We must judge, that if one died for all, then
all were dead; and those that live, should live to his Glory, who died for
their Salvation.

Add to this, that in the Sufferings of Christ there is the clearest
Demonstration of the Evil of Sin, and how hateful it is to God, if we consider
the Dignity of his Person, the Greatness of his Sufferings, and the innocent
Recoilings of his Human Nature from such fearful Sufferings. He was the Eternal
Son of God, the Heir of his Father's Love and Glory, the Lord of Angels; he
suffered in his Body the most ignominious and painful Death, being nailed to
the Cross in the sight of the World: The Sufferings of his Soul were
incomparably more afflicting: For tho heavenly meek, he endured the Derision
and cruel Violence of his Enemies with a silent Patience; yet in the dark
Eclipse of his Father's Countenance, in the desolate state of his Soul, the
Lamb of God opened his Mouth in that mournful Complaint, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? His innocent Nature did so recoil from those fearful
Sufferings, that with repeated Ardency of Affection, he deprecated that bitter
Cup; Abba, Father, all things are possible to Thee; let this Cup pass me: He
addressed to the Divine Power and Love, the Attributes that relieve the
Miserable, yet he drank off the Dregs of the Cup of God's Wrath. Now we may
from hence conclude, how great an Evil Sin is, that could not be expiated by a
meaner Sacrifice, than the offering up the Soul of Christ to atone incensed
Justice; and no lower a Price, than the Blood of the Son of God, the most
unvaluable Treasure, could ransom Men who were devoted to Destruction.

4. The Consideration of the Evil of Sin in it self and to us, should excite us
with a holy Circumspection to keep our selves from being defiled with it. It Is
our indispensable Duty, our transcendent Interest to obey the Divine Law
entirely and constantly. The Tempter cannot present any Motives, that to a
rectified Mind are sufficient to induce a Consent to Sin, and offend God. Let
the Scales be even, and put into one all the Delights of the Senses, all the
Pleasures and Honors of the World, which are the Elements of Carnal Felicity,
how light are they against the Enjoyment of the blessed God in Glory? Will the
Gain of this perishing World, compensate the loss of the Soul and Salvation for
ever? If there were any possible Comparison between empty deluding Vanities,
and Celestial Happiness, the Choice would be more difficult, and the Mistake
less culpable; but they vanish into nothing in the Comparison: so that to
commit the least Sin that makes us liable to the forfeiture of Heaven, for the
Pleasures of Sin that are but for a season, is Madness in that degree, that no
words can express. Suppose the Tempter inspires his Rage into his Slaves, and
tries to constrain us to Sin by Persecution; how unreasonable is it to be
dismayed at the Threatenings of Men, who must die, and who can only touch the
Body; and to despise the Terrors of the Lord, who lives for ever, and can
punish for ever? Methinks we should look upon the perverted raging World, as a
Swarm of angry Flies, that may disquiet, but cannot hurt us. Socrates, when
unrighteously prosecuted to Death, said of his Enemies, with a Courage becoming
the Breast of a Christian, They may kill me, but cannot hurt me. How should
these Considerations raise in us an invincible Resolution and Reluctance
against the Tempter, in all his Approaches and Addresses to us? And that we may
so resist him, as to cause his flight from us, let us imitate the excellent
Saint, whose Example is set before us.

(1.) By possessing the Soul with a lively and solemn Sense of God's Presence,
who is the Inspector and Judge of all our Actions. Joseph repelled the
Temptation with this powerful Thought, How shall I sin against God? The Fear of
the Lord is clean; it is a watchful Sentinel, that resists Temptations without,
and suppresses Corruptions within: It Is like the Cherubim placed with a flaming
Sword in Paradise, to prevent the Re-entry of Adam when guilty and polluted.
For this end we must, by frequent and serious Considerations, represent the
Divine Being and Glory in our Minds, that there may be a gracious Constitution
of Soul; this will be our Preservative from Sin: for although the habitual
Thoughts of God are not always in act, yet upon a Temptation they are presently
excited, and appear in the view of Conscience, and are effectual to make us
reject the Tempter with Defiance and Indignation.

This holy Fear is not a mere judicial Impression, that restrains from Sin, for
the dreadful Punishment that follows; for that servile Affection, tho it may
stop a Temptation, and hinder the Eruption of a Lust into the gross Act, yet it
does not renew the Nature, and make us Holy and Heavenly. There may be a
respective Dislike of Sin with a direct Affection to it. Besides, a mere
servile Fear is repugnant to Nature, and will be expelled if possible.
Therefore, that we may be in the Fear of the Lord all the day long, we must
regard him in his endearing Attributes, his Love, his Goodness and Compassion,
his rewarding Mercy; and this will produce a filial Fear of Reverence and
Caution, lest we should offend so gracious a God. As the natural Life is
preserved by grateful Food, not by Aloes and Wormwood, which are useful
Medicines; so the Spiritual Life is maintained by the comfortable Apprehensions
of God, as the Rewarder of our Fidelity in all our Trials.

(2.) Strip Sin of its Disguises, wash off its flattering Colors, that you may
see its native Ugliness. Joseph's reply to the Tempter, How shall I do this
great Wickedness? Illusion and Concupiscence are the Inducements to Sin: When a
Lust represents the Temptation as very alluring, and hinders the Reflection of
the Mind, upon the intrinsic and consequential Evil of Sin, it is like the
putting Poison into the Glass: but when it has so far corrupted the Mind, that
Sin is esteemed a small Evil, Poison is thrown into the Fountain. If we
consider the Majesty of the Lawgiver, there is no Law small, nor Sin small,
that is the Transgression of it. Yet the most are secure in an evil course, by
Conceits that their Sins are small. It Is true, there is a vast difference
between Sins in their Nature and Circumstances: there are insensible Omissions
and accusing Acts, but the least is damnable. Besides, the allowance and number
of Sins reputed small, will involve under intolerable Guilt. What is lighter
than a Grain of Sand? you may blow away a hundred with a Breath; And what is
heavier than a heap of Sand condensed together? It Is our Wisdom and Duty to
consider the Evil of Sin in its essential Malignity, which implies no less,
than that God was neither wise nor good in making his Law, and that he is not
just and powerful to vindicate it: And when tempted to any pleasant Sin, to
consider the due Aggravations of it, as Joseph did, which will control the
Efficacy of the Temptation. I shall only add, that when a Man has mortified the
Lusts of the Flesh, he has overcome the main part of the infernal Army that
wars against the Soul. Sensual Objects do powerfully and pleasantly insinuate
into carnal Men, and the Affections are very unwillingly restrained from them.
To undertake the Cure of those, whose Disease is their Pleasure, is almost a
vain Attempt: for they do not judge it an Evil to be regarded, and will not
accept distasteful Remedies.

(3.) Fly all tempting occasions of Sin. Joseph would not be alone with his
Mistress. There is no Virtue so confirmed, and in that degree of Eminence, but
if one be frequently engaged in vicious Society, it is in danger of being
eclipsed and controlled by the opposite Vice. If the Ermins will associate with
the Swine, they must lie in the Mire: if the Sheep with Wolves, they must learn
to bite and devour: if Doves with Vultures, they must learn to live on the
Prey. Our surest Guard is to keep at a distance from all engaging Snares. He
that from Carelessness or Confidence ventures into Temptations, makes himself an
easy Prey to the Tempter.

And let us daily pray for the Divine Assistance to keep us from the Evil of
the World; without which all our Resolutions will be as ineffectual as Ropes of
Sand, to bind us to our Duty.

5. The Consideration of the Evil of Sin is a powerful Motive to our solemn and
speedy Repentance. The remembrance of our Original and Actual Sins, will
convince us, that we are born for Repentance. There are innumerable silent
Sins, that are unobserved, and do not alarm the Conscience: and although a true
Saint will neither hide any Sin, nor suffer Sin to hide it self in his Breast,
yet the most holy Men in the World, have great reason with the Psalmist, to say
with melting Affections, Who can understand his Errors? O cleanse me from my
secret Sins; discover them to me by the Light of the Word, and cover them in
the Blood of the Redeemer. There are Sins of Infirmity and daily Incursion,
from which none can be perfectly freed in this mortal State: these should
excite our Watchfulness, and be lamented with true Tears. There are crying Sins
of a Crimson Guilt, which are to be confessed with heartbreaking Sorrow,
confounding Shame, and implacable Antipathy against them, and to be forsaken
for ever. Of these, some are of a deep die in their Nature, and some from the
Circumstances in committing them; some are of a heinous Nature, and more
directly and expressly renounce our Duty, and more immediately obstruct our
Communion with God: As a Mud-Wall intercepts the Light of the Sun from shining
upon us. 2. Some derive a greater Guilt from the Circumstances in the
commission. Such are,

(1.) Sins against Knowledge: for according to the Ingrediency of the Will in
Sin, the Guilt arises. Now when Conscience interposes between the Carnal Heart
and the Temptation, and represents the Evil of Sin, and deters from Compliance,
and yet Men will venture to break the Divine Law, this exceedingly aggravates
the Offense; for such Sins are committed with a fuller Consent, and are justly
called Rebellion against the Light. And the clearer the Light is, the more it
will increase the disconsolate fearful Darkness in Hell.

(2.) Sins committed against the Love as well as the Law of God, are
exceedingly aggravated. To pervert the Benefits we receive from God to his
Dishonor, to turn them into occasions of Sin, which were designed to endear
Obedience to us; to sin licentiously and securely in hopes of an easy Pardon at
last, is intensive of our Guilt in a high degree. This is to poison the
Antidote, and make it deadly. There is a Sacrifice to reconcile offended
Justice; but if Men obstinately continue in Sin, and abuse the Grace of the
Gospel, there is no Sacrifice to appease exasperated Mercy.

(3.) Sins committed against solemn Promises and Engagements to forsake them,
have a deeper Die: for Perfidiousness is joined with this Disobedience. The
Divine Law strictly binds us to our Duty, antecedently to our Consent; but when
we promise to obey it, we increase our Obligations, and by sinning, break
double Chains. In short, any habitual allowed Sin, induces a heavy Guilt; for
it argues a deeper root and foundation of Sin in the Heart, a stronger
Inclination to it, from whence the repeated Acts proceed, which are new
Provocations to the pure Eyes of God. Accordingly in repenting Reflections, our
Sorrow should be most afflicting, our Humiliation deeper, our Selfcondemnation
most severe for those Sins which have been most dishonorable to God, and
defiling to us. Not that we can make any Satisfaction for our Sins, tho we
should fill the Air with our Sighs, and Heaven with our Tears; but it becomes
us to have our Sorrows enlarged in some proportion to our Unworthiness. And
this mournful Disposition prepares us for the Grace of God. The Law does not
allow Repentance, but exacts entire Obedience: it is the Privilege of the
Gospel, that repenting Sinners are assured of Forgiveness: without this
Qualification it is inconsistent with the Majesty, Purity and Justice of God, to
extend pardoning Mercy to Sinners: for they will never value, nor humbly and
ardently seek for Mercy, till they feel the woeful Effects of Sin in their
Conscience: only the stung Israelite would look to the brazen Serpent. And this
is requisite to prevent our relapsing into Sin: for the Dominion of Sin being
founded in the Love of Pleasure, the proper means to extinguish, it is by a
bitter Repentance: the Heart is first broken for Sin, and then from it.

To conclude; Let us renew our Repentance every day: let not the Wounds of our
Spirits putrify: let not the Sun go down upon God's Wrath: let us always renew
the Application of Christ's Blood that alone can cleanse us from Sin.

SERMON III.
1 JOHN V. 2. By this we know we are the Children of God, if we love God, and
keep his Commandments.


OF all the Marks that are useful in the Trial of our Spiritual State in
reference to Eternity, there is none affords a more clear and comfortable
Assurance of God's special and saving Mercy, than Love to the Saints. This has
often resolved the Doubts, and quieted the Fears of afflicted enquiring Souls,
when other Graces have not been so apprehensible in their Operations. But there
is no Mark which the deceitful Heart does more securely rest upon, through the
mistake of Natural Human Love for that which is Spiritual and Divine: It is
therefore most worthy our serious Thoughts, the Deceit being so easy and
infinitely dangerous, to show what is the unfeigned genuine Love of the
Brethren, to which Salvation is annexed, to confirm the humble sincere
Christian, and undeceive presuming Hypocrites.

The great Design of St. John in this Epistle, is to excite and inflame in
Christians the Love of God, and of their Brethren, the two comprehensive
Duties, and bright Sum of the Law, our principal Perfections in Heaven and
Earth. These he recommends by the most affectionate and obliging, the most
warming, melting Perswasives; the superlative Love of God to us, and our
Communion with the Saints in Nature and Grace.

In the former Verse the Apostle argues from the reality of the Effect, as an
Evidence of the Cause. Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, that is, the
Savior of the World, foretold by the Prophets, and expresses the Truth of that
Faith in a suitable Conversation, is born of God; and every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. Grace is not less powerful
in producing tender reciprocal Affections between the Offspring of the same
Heavenly Father, than the subordinate Endearments of Nature. The Pretense is
vain of Love to God, without loving his regenerate Children. And in the Text he
argues from the knowledge of the Cause, to the discovering of the sincerity of
the Effect: By this we know that we love the Children of God, with a holy
Affection, if we love God, and keep his Commandments.

There is but one Difficulty to be removed, that the Force of the Apostle's
reasoning may appear; it is this, a Medium to prove a thing must be a clearer
Evidence than what is concluded by it: Now tho a Demonstration from the Cause
be more noble and scientifical, yet that which is drawn from the Effect, is
more near to Sense, and more discernable. And this is verified in the Instance
before us; for the Love of God, who is absolutely spiritual in his Being and
Excellencies, does not with that sensible Fervor affect and passionately
transport us, as Love to his Children, with whom we visibly converse, and who
are receptive of the most sensible Testimonies of our Affection. Accordingly
the Apostle argues, He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? As the Motives to love our Brethren, from our
Conjunction in Nature, and familiar Conversation, are more capable to allure
our Affections, and more sensibly strike the Heart than the invisible Deity,
who is infinitely above us; by the same reason we may more easily judge of the
truth of our Love to them, than of our Love to God. To this the Answer is
clear; the Apostle does not speak of the Love of God, as a still, silent,
contemplative Affection, confined to the superior Faculty of the Soul, but as
a burning, shining Affection (like Fire Lumine qui semper proditur ipsi suo.
) active and declarative of it self in those Effects that necessarily flow from
it, that is voluntary Obedience to his Commands; and thus it becomes manifest
to the renewed Conscience, and is a most convincing Proof of the Sincerity of
our Love to the Saints.

The Text being cleared, affords this Doctrine.

Doct. The Sincerity of our Love to the Children of God, is certainly
discovered by our Love to God, and Obedience to his Commands.

For the Illustration and Proof of the Point, I will briefly show,

I. Who are described by this Title, The Children of God.

II. What is included in our Love to them.

III. What the Love of God is, and the Obedience that flows from it.

IV. How from Love to God, and willing Obedience to his Commands, we may
convincingly know the Sincerity of our Love to his Children.

To explain the first, we must consider that this Title, The Children of God,
is given upon several accounts.

First, By Creation the Angels are called the Sons of God, and Men his
Offspring.

The reason of the Title is,

1. The manner of their Production by his immediate Power. Thus he is styled,
The Father of Spirits, in distinction from the Fathers of the Flesh. For tho
the Conception and forming of the Body be the Work of his secret Providence,
yet it is by the hand of Nature, the Parents concurring as the second Causes of
it: but the Production of the Soul is to be entirely ascribed to his Power,
without the Intervention of any Creature.

2. In their spiritual immortal Nature, and the intellectual Operations flowing
from it, there is an Image and Resemblance of God; from whence this Title is
common to all reasonable Creatures, and peculiar to them: for tho Matter may be
ordered and fashioned by the Hand of God into a Figure of admirable Beauty, yet
it is not capable of his Likeness and Image; so that neither the Lights of
Heaven, nor the Beasts and Plants of the Earth are called his Children.

Secondly, By External Calling and Covenant some are denominated his Children;
for by this Evangelical Constitution God is pleased to receive Believers into a
filial Relation. Indeed where there is not a cordial Consent and Subjection to
the Terms of the Covenant, visible Profession, and the receiving the External
Seals of it, will be of no advantage; but the public serious owning of the
Gospel, entitles a Person to be of the Society of Christians; and Filius and
Foederatus are all one.

Thirdly, There is Sonship that arises from supernatural Regeneration; that is
the communicating a new Nature to Man, whereby there is a holy and blessed
Change in the directive and commanding Faculties, the Understanding and Will,
and in the Affections, and consequently in the whole Life. This is wrought by
the Efficacy of the Word and Spirit, and is called by our Savior Regeneration,
because it is not our Original Carnal Birth, but a Second and Celestial. It Is
with the new Man in Grace, as with an Infant in Nature, that has the essential
Parts that compose a Man; a Soul endowed with all its Faculties, a Body with
all its Organs and Parts, but not in the Vigor of mature Age. Thus renewed
Holiness in a Christian, is complete and entire in its Parts, but not in
Perfection of Degrees; there is an universal Inclination to all that is holy,
just and good, and a universal Aversion from Sin, tho the Executive Power be
not equal. And regenerate Christians are truly called the Children of God; for
as in Natural Generation there is communicated a Principle of Life and suitable
Operations, from whence the Title and Relation of a Father arises; so in
Regeneration there are derived such holy and heavenly Qualities to the Soul, as
constitute a Divine Nature in Man, whereby he is Partaker of the Life and
Likeness of God himself: from hence he is a Child of God, and has an Interest
and Propriety in his Favor, Power and Promises, and all the Good that flows
from them, and a Title to the Eternal Inheritance.

II. I will show what is included in our Love to the Children of God.

First, The Principle of this Love is Divine. The Soul is purified through 1
Pet. 1. 22.
the Spirit to unfeigned Love of the Brethren. Naturally the Judgment is
corrupted, and the Will depraved, that carnal Respects either of Profit or
Pleasure are the quick and sensible Incitements of Love; and till the Soul be
cured of the sensual Contagion, the Inclination can never be directed, and the
Desires fastened on the supernatural Image of God in his Saints. As Holiness in
the Creature is a Ray derived from the infinite Beauty of God's Holiness, so
the Love of Holiness is a Spark from the sacred Fire of his Love. St. John
exhorts Christians, Let us love one another, 1 John 4. 7.
for Love is of God. Natural Love among Men is by his general Providence, but a
gracious Love to the Saints is by his special Influence. The natural Affection
must be baptized with the Holy Ghost, as with Fire, to refine it to a Divine
Purity.

Secondly, The Qualifications of this Love are as follow:

1. It is sincere and cordial; it does not appear only in Expressions from the
Tongue and Countenance, but springs from the Integrity of the Heart. It Is
styled unfeigned Love of the Brethren; it is a Love not in Word and Tongue only,
but in Deed and Truth. A counterfeit formal Affection, set off with artificial
Colors, is so far from being pleasing to God, the Searcher and Judge of Hearts,
that it is infinitely provoking to him.

2. It Is pure; the attractive Cause of it is the Image of God appearing in
them. Our Savior assures us, that Love shall be gloriously rewarded, that
respects a Disciple upon that account as a Disciple, and a righteous Man as a
righteous Man. The holy Love commanded in the Gospel, is to Christians for
their Divine Relation, as the Children of God, as the Members of Christ, and
Temples of the Holy Ghost.

3. From hence it is universal, extended to all the Saints. The Church is
composed of Christians that are different in their Gifts and Graces, and in
their external Order; some excel in Knowledge, and Zeal, and Love, in active
Graces; others in Humility, Meekness and Patience, that sustain and adorn them
in Sufferings; some are in a higher Rank, others are in humble Circumstances:
as in the visible World things are placed sutably to their Natures, the Stars
in the Heavens, Flowers in the Earth: and our special Respects are due to those
whom the Favor of God has dignified above others, and in whom the Brightness
and Power of Grace shines more clearly: for according as there are more Reasons
that make a Person deserving Love, the degrees of Love should rise in
proportion. But a dear Affection is due even to the lowest Saints; for all have
Communion in the same holy Nature, and are equally instated in the same blessed
Alliance.

4. It must be fervent, not only in Truth, but in a degree of Eminency. St.
Peter joins the two Qualifications; See that ye love one another with a pure
Heart fervently. Our Savior sets before us his own Pattern, as a Pillar of
Fire to direct and inflame us; This is my Commandment, John 15. 12.
that ye love one another as I have loved you. As I have loved you! Admirable
Example! His Love was singular and superlative; a Love that saves and
astonishes us at once; for he willingly gave his precious Life for our Ransom.
This we should endeavor to resemble, tho our highest Expressions of Love and
Compassion to the Saints, are but a weak and imperfect Imitation of his Divine
Perfection.

I shall add farther; This Love includes all kinds of Love.

1. The Love of Esteem correspondent to the real Worth and special Goodness of
the Saints. It Is one Character of a Citizen of Heaven, that in his Eyes a vile
Person Psalm. 15.
is contemned, however set off by the Glory of the World, and the Ornaments of
the present State, that, as a false Mask, conceal their foul Deformity to
carnal Persons; but he honors them that fear the Lord, tho disfigured by
Calumnies, tho obscured and depressed by Afflictions, and made like their
blessed Head, in whom there was no Form nor Comeliness in the Judgment of
Fools. In our Valuation, Divine Grace should turn the Scales against all the
natural or acquired Perfections of Body or Mind; Beauty, Strength, Wit,
Eloquence, human Wisdom; against all the external Advantages of this Life,
Nobility, Riches, Power, and whatever is admired by a carnal Eye. The Judgment
and Love of God should regulate ours. A Saint is more valued by God, than the
highest Princes; nay, than the Angels themselves, considered only with respect
to their spiritual Nature. He calls them his peculiar Treasure, his Jewels, the
First Fruits of the Creatures, sacred for his Use and Glory, in comparison of
whom, the rest of the World are but Dregs, a corrupt Mass. They are styled his
Sons; being Partakers of that Life of which he is the Author and Pattern: And
what are all the Titles on Earth, compared with so Divine a Dignity?

2. The Love of Desire, of their present and future Happiness. The Perfection
of Love consists more in the Desire than in the Effects; and the continued
fervent Prayers that the Saints present to God for one another, are the
Expressions of their Love.

3. The Love of Delight, in spiritual Communion with them. All the Attractives
of human Conversation, Wit, Mirth, Sweetness of Behavior, and wise Discourse,
cannot make any Society so dear and pleasant to one that is a Lover of
Holiness, as the Communion of Saints. David, whose Breast was very sensible of
the tender Affections of Love and Joy, tells us, That the Saints in the Earth,
the Excellent, Psalm. 16.
were the chief Object of his Delight. And consequent to this, there is a
cordial Sympathy with them in their Joys and Sorrows, being Members of the same
Body, and having an Interest in all their Good or Evil. It Is observable, when
the Holy Spirit describes the sweetest human Comforts that are the present
Reward of the godly Man, the Enjoyment of his Estate in the dear Society of his
Wife and Children, there is a Promise annexed, that sweetens all the rest, That
he shall see the Good of Jerusalem, and Peace Psalm. 128.
upon Israel. Without this all Temporal Comforts are mixed with bitter
Displeasure to him. There is an eminent Instance of this in Nehemiah, whom all
the Pleasures of the Neh. 2.
Persian Court could not satisfy, whilst Jerusalem was desolately miserable.

4. The Love of Service and Beneficence, that declares it self in all outward
Offices and Acts for the Good of the Saints: And these are various; some are of
a sublimer Nature, and concern their Souls; as spiritual Counsel and
Instruction, compassionate Admonition and Consolation, the confirming them in
Good, and the fortifying them against Evil, the doing whatever may preserve and
advance the Life and Vigor of the inward Man; others respect their Bodies and
Temporal Condition; directing them in their Affairs, protecting them from
Injuries, supplying their Wants, universally assisting them for their tolerable
Passage through the World. And all these Acts are to be cheerfully perfomed;
there is more Joy in conferring than receiving a Benefit, because Love is more
exercised in the one than the other. In short, the highest Effect of Love that
comprizes all the rest, is to die for the Brethren; and this we ought to do
when the Honor of God, and Welfare of the Church require it. Hereby perceive
we the Love of God, because he laid down his Life for us; and we ought to lay
down our Lives for the Brethren. If Christians thus loved one another, the
Church on Earth would be a lively Image of the blessed Society above.

III. The Love of God, and Obedience to his Commands, the Product of it are to
be considered.

First, The Love of God has its Rise from the Consideration of his amiable
Excellencies, that render him infinitely worthy of the highest Affection; and
from the blessed Benefits of Creation, Preservation Redemption and
Glorification, that we may expect from his pure Goodness and Mercy. This is the
most clear and essential Character of a Child of God, and most peculiarly
distinguishes him from unrenewed Men, however accomplished by Civil Virtues.

Now the internal Exercise of Love to God, in the Valuation of his Favor, as
that which is better than Life, in earnest Desires of Communion with him, in
ravishing Joy in the Testimonies and Assurance of his Love, in mourning for
what is displeasing to him, is in the secret of the Soul; but with this there
is inseparably joined a true and visible Declaration of our Love in Obedience
to him. This is the Love of God, the most 1 John 3. 16.
real and undeceitful Expression of it, that we keep his Commandments.

The Obedience that springs from Love, is,

1. Uniform and universal; for the two principal and necessary Effects of Love
are an ardent Desire to please God, and an equal Care not to displease him in
any thing. Now the Law of God is the Signification of his Sovereign and Holy
Will, and the doing of it is very pleasing to him, both upon the account of the
Subjection of the Creature to his Authority, and Conformity to his Purity: He
declares that Obedience is better than the most costly Sacrifice. There is an
absolute peremptory Repugnance between Love to him, and despising his Commands:
And from thence it follows, that Love inclines the Soul to obey all God's
Precepts, not only those of easy Observation, but the most difficult and
distasteful to the Carnal Appetites; for the Authority of God runs through all,
and his Holiness shines in all. Servile Fear is a partial Principle, and causes
an unequal Respect to the Divine Law; it restrains from Sins of greater Guilt,
from such disorderly and dissolute Actions at which Conscience takes Fire; but
others are indulged: it excites to good Works of some kind, but neglects others
that are equally necessary. But Love regards the whole Law in all its
Injunctions and Prohibitions; not merely to please our selves, that we may not
feel the stings of an accusing Conscience, but to please the Lawgiver.

2. The Obedience of Love is accurate; and this is a natural Consequence of the
former. The Divine Law is a Rule not only for our outward Conversation, but of
our Thoughts and Affections, of all the interior workings of the Soul, that are
open before God. Thus it requires Religious Service, not only in the external
Performance, but those reverent holy Affections, those pure Aims, wherein the
Life and Beauty, the Spirit and true Value of Divine Worship consists. Thus it
commands the Duties of Equity, Charity and Sobriety, all Civil and Natural
Duties for Divine Ends, to please and glorify God. It forbids Heb. 13. 16.
all kinds and degrees of Sin; not only gross Acts, but the inward Lustings
that have a tendency to them. Now the Love of God is the Principle of spiritual
Perfection. It Is called the fulfilling of the Law, not only as it is a
comprehensive 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Grace, but in that it draws forth all the active Powers of the Soul to obey it
in an exact manner. This causes a tender sense of our Failings, and a severe
Circumspection over our Ways, that nothing be allowed that is displeasing to
the Divine Eyes. Since the most excellent Saints are God's chiefest Favorites,
Love makes the holy Soul to strive to be like him in all possible degrees of
Purity. Thus St. Paul, in whom the Love of Christ was the imperial commanding
Affection, declares, his zealous endeavor to be conformable to the Death of
Christ, in dying to Sin, as Christ died for Phil. 3. 10, 11.
Sin, and that he might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead, that Perfection
of Holiness that is in the immortal State.

3. The Obedience of Love is chosen and pleasant. This is the Love of God, that
we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 3.
and his Commandments are not grievous. Those that are Strangers to this
Heavenly Affection, imagine that a sollicitous diligent Respect to all God's
Precepts, is a melancholy Task; but it is delightful to the Saints: for
Obedience is the continual exercise of Love to God, the Paradise of holy Souls.
The mortification of the Carnal Appetites, and the restraint from such Objects
as powerfully insinuate and engage Carnal Hearts, is with a freer Complacency
to a Saint, than a sensual Fruition of them. The sharpest Sufferings for
Religion are allayed, nay sweetened to a Saint from the Love of God, that is
then most sincerely, strongly, and purely acted. The Apostle more rejoiced in
sharp Tribulation for Christ's sake, than in Divine Revelation.

4. The Love of God produces persevering Obedience. Servile Compliance is
inconstant. A Slave hates the Duties he performs, and loves the Sins he dares
not commit; therefore as soon as he is released from his Chain and his Fear,
his Obedience ceases: but a Son is perfectly pleased with his Father's Will,
and the Tenor of his Life is correspondent to it. He that is pressed by Fear to
serve in an Army, will desert his Colors the first Opportunity; but a
Volunteer, that for the love of Valor, and of his Country, lists himself, will
continue in the Service. The Motion that is caused by outward Poises, will
cease when the Weights are down; but that which proceeds from an inward
Principle of Life, is continual; and such is the Love of God planted in the
Breast of a Christian.

IV. We are to prove that from the Love of God, and willing Obedience to his
Commands, we may convincingly know the sincerity of our Love to his Children.

There is an inseparable Union between these two Graces, and the one arises out
of the other. Godliness and Brotherly Kindness are joined by the Apostle. And
it will be evident that where this Affection of Love to the Saints is sincere
and gracious, there will be an entire and joyful respect to the Law of God, by
considering the Reasons and Motives of it.

First, The Divine Command requires this Love. These things I command you,
says our Savior, that ye love one another. This Precept so often repeated,
and powerfully re-inforc'd by him, made so deep an Impression on the first
Christians, that they had one Heart, and one Soul, and their Estates were
common between them. And in the next succeeding Ages, this fraternal Love was
so conspicuous in the Professors of his sacred Discipline, that their Enemies
observed it as a rare and remarkable thing: See how the Christians love one
another! see how ready they are to die Tert. Apol. c. 33.
for one another! Now the same gracious Principle that inclines us to do one
Command, will make us universally willing to observe all; for sincere Obedience
primarily respects the Authority of the Lawgiver, which binds the whole Law
upon the Conscience. And as he that breaks the Law wilfully in one Point, is
guilty of all, because the Violation James 2.
of a single Precept proceeds from the same Cause that induces Men to
transgress all, that is, Contempt of the Divine Majesty; so he that sincerely
obeys one Command, does with consent of Heart, and serious Endeavors obey all.
And from hence it is clear, that without a religious and unreserved regard of
the Divine Commands, it is impossible there should be in any Person a gracious
Affection to the Saints; that is the product of Obedience to God, and
consequently the observance of his Precepts, is the certain Proof of our Love
to his Children.

Secondly, Spiritual Love to the Saints arises from the sight of the Divine
Image appearing in their Conversation. Now if the Beauty of Holiness be the
attractive of our Love, it will be fastened on the Law of God in the most
intense degree. The most excellent Saints on Earth have some mixtures of
Corruption; their Holiness is like the Morninglight, that is checkered with the
Shadows and Obscurity of the Night; and it is our Wisdom not to love their
Infirmities, but to preserve an unstained Affection to them. But the Law of God
is the fairest Transcript of his Nature, wherein his glorious Holiness is most
resplendent. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; Psalm. 19. 7,
8.
the Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the Eyes. This ravished the
Heart of David with an inexpressible Affection. O how I love thy Law! it is my
Meditation all the Psalm. 119.
day. And he repeats the Declaration of his Love to it with new Fervor, upon
this ground; I love thy Law, because it is pure. Now Love to the Commands of
God will transcribe them in our Hearts and Lives. As affectionate Expressions
to the Children of God, without the real supply of their Wants, are but the
shadows of Love; so words of Esteem and Respect to the Law of God, without
unfeigned and universal Obedience, are but an empty Pretense.

Thirdly, The Divine Relation of the Saints to God as their Father, is the
Motive of Spiritual Love to them. And this is consequent to the former; for by
partaking of his Holiness, they partake of his Life and Likeness. And from
hence they are the dearest Objects of his Love; his Eye and Heart is always
upon them. Now if this Consideration excites Love to the Children of God, it
will be as powerful to incline us to keep his Commands; for the Law of God,
that is the Copy of his Sacred Will, is most near to his Nature, and he is
infinitely tender of it. Our Savior tells us, that it is easier for Heaven and
Earth to pass Luke 16. 17.
away, than for one tittle of the Law to fail. If the entire World, and all the
Inhabitants of it were destroyed, there would be no loss to God; but if the Law
lose its Authority and Obligation, the Divine Holiness would suffer a Blemish.

The Use of the Doctrine is, to try our Love to the Children of God, to which
all pretend, by this infallible Rule, our Obedience to his Commands. This is
absolutely necessary, because the Deceit is so easy and so dangerous: and it
will be most comfortable, if upon this Trial our Love be found to be Spiritual
and Divine. The Deceit is easy, because Acts of Love may be expressed to the
Saints from other Principles than the Love of God: Some for Vainglory are
bountiful; and when their Charity seems so visibly Divine, that Men admire it,
there is the Worm of Vanity at the Root, that corrupts and makes it odious to
God. The Pharisees are charged with this by our Savior; their Alms were not
the Effect Mat. 6. 2.
of Charity, but Ostentation; and whilst they endeavored to make their Vices
virtuous, they made their Virtues vicious. There is a natural Love among
Persons united by Consanguinity, that remains so entire since the Ruin of
Mankind by the Fall, and is rather from the force of Nature, than the virtue of
the Will, and this is in all kind Offices may be expressed to the Saints. There
is a sweetness of Temper in some, that inclines them to wish well to all, and
such tender Affections that are easily moved and melted at the sight of others
Miseries; and such may be beneficent and compassionate to the Saints in their
Afflictions: but the Spring of this Love is Goodnature, not Divine Grace.
There are Human Respects that incline others to Kindness to the Saints, as they
are united by Interest, Fellow-Citizens and Neighbors, and as they receive
Advantage by Commerce with them, or as obliged by their Benefits: But Civil
Amity and Gratitude are not that holy Affection that is an Assurance of our
Spiritual State. There are other Motives of Love to the Saints, that are not so
low nor mercenary; in the thickest Darkness of Paganism, the Light of Reason
discovered the amiable Excellence of Virtue, as becoming the Human Nature, and
useful for the Tranquillity and Welfare of Mankind; and the Moral Goodness that
adorns the Saints, the Innocence, Purity, Meekness, Justice, Clemency,
Benignity, that are visible in their Conversations, may draw Respects from
others who are Strangers to the Love of God, and careless of his Commandments.

And as the Mistake of this Affection is easy, so it is infinitely dangerous;
for he that builds his hope of Heaven upon a sandy Foundation, upon false
Grounds, will fall ruinously from his Hopes and Felicity at last. How fearful
will be the Disappointment of one that has been a Favourer of the Saints, that
has defended their Cause, protected their Persons, relieved their Necessities,
and presumed for this, that his Condition is safe as to Eternity, tho he lives
in the known neglect of other Duties, and the indulgent Practice of some Sin?

But if we find that our Love to the Children of God flows from our Love to
God, that sways the Soul to an entire compliance to his Commands, and makes us
observant of them in the course of our Lives: What a blessed Hope arises from
this Reflection? We need not have the Book of the Divine Decrees opened, and
the Secrets of Election unvailed; for we know that we are past from Death to
Life, if we love the Brethren. 1 John 3. 14.
This is an infallible Effect and Sign of the Spiritual Life, and the Seed and
Evidence of Eternal Life.

How to bear Afflictions. SERMON IV.
HEBREWS xii. 5. My Son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him.
THE words are an excellent Passage from the Book of the Proverbs; wherein the
Supreme Eternal Wisdom is represented, Prove. 3. 12.
giving Instruction to the Afflicted, how to behave themselves under Troubles,
so as they may prove beneficial to them: the Counsel is, that they should
preserve a Temperament of Spirit, between the excess and defect of Patience and
Courage, neither despising the Chastenings of the Lord, by a sinful neglect of
them as a small unconcerning matter, nor fainting under them, as a Burden so
great and oppressing, that no Deliverance was to be expected. To enforce the
Exhortation, Wisdom uses the amiable and endearing Title, My Son, to signify
that God in the quality of a Father, corrects his People; the Consideration
whereof is very proper to conciliate Reverence to his Hand, and to encourage
their Hopes of a blessed Issue.

The Proposition that arises from the Words is this;

It Is the Duty and best Wisdom of afflicted Christians, to preserve themseves
from the vicious Extremes of despising the Chastenings of the Lord, or fainting
under them.

To illustrate this by a clear Method, I shall endeavor to show,

I. What it is to despise the Chastenings of the Lord, and the Causes of it.
II. What fainting under his Rebukes signifies, and what makes us incident to
it. III. Prove that it is the Duty and best Wisdom of the Afflicted to avoid
these Extremes. IV. Apply it.
First, To despise the Chastenings I.
of the Lord, imports the making no account of them, as unworthy (...).
of serious Regard; and includes Inconsiderateness of Mind, and an
Insensibleness of Heart.

1. Inconsiderateness of Mind, with respect to the Author or End of Chastenings.

(1.) With respect to the Author, when the Afflicted looks only downwards, Job
5. 6.
as if the Rod of Affliction sprang out of the Dust, and there were no
superior Cause that sent it.

Thus many apprehend the Evils that befall them, either merely as the
Productions of Natural Causes, or as casual Events, or the Effects of the
Displeasure and Injustice of Men, but never look on the other side of the Vail
of the second Causes, to that invisible Providence that orders all. If a
Disease strikes their Bodies, they attribute it to the extremity of Heat or
Cold, that distempers their Humors: if a Loss comes in their Estates, it is
ascribed to Chance, Carelessness and Falseness of some upon whom they depended;
but God is concealed from their sight by the nearness of the immediate Agent.
Whereas the principal Cause of all Temporal Evils is the overruling Providence
of God. Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Amos 3. 6.
Lord has not done it? They come not only with his Knowledge and Will, but by
his Efficiency. The Locusts that infected Egypt are as Exodus 10. 13, 19.
real an Effect of God's Wrath, as the most miraculous Plague, although an East
Wind brought them, and a West Wind carried them away. The Arrow that was shot
at a venture, and pierced between the Joints of Ahab's Armor, was directed by
1 Kings 22. 34.
the Hand of God for his Destruction. Shimei's cursing of David, tho it was the
overflowing of his Gall, the Effect of his Malignity, yet that holy King looked
higher, and acknowledged the Lord has bidden 1 Samuel 16. 11.
him. As the Lord is a God of Power, and can inflict what Judgments he pleases
immediately; so he is a God of Order, and usually punishes in this World by
subordinate means. Now wherever he strikes, tho his Hand is wrapped up in a
Cloud, yet if it be not observed, especially if by habitual Incogitancy Men
consider not with whom they have to do in their various Troubles, this profane
neglect is no less than a despising the Chastenings of the Lord.

(2.) Inconsiderateness of the End of the Divine Discipline, is a great degree
of Contempt. The Evils that God inflicts are as real a part of his Providence,
as the Blessings he bestows; as in the course of Nature the Darkness of the
Night is by his Order, as well as the Light of the Day: therefore they are
always sent for some wise and holy Design. Sometime, tho more rarely, they are
only for trial, to exercise the Faith, Humility, Patience of eminent Saints;
for otherwise God would lose in a great measure the Honor and Renown, and his
Favorites the Reward of those Graces, Affictions being the Sphere of their
Activity. But for the most part they are castigatory, to bring us to a sight
and sense of our State, to render Sin more evident and odious to us. They are
fitly expressed, by pouring from Vessel to Vessel, that discovers the Dregs and
Sediment, and makes it offensive, that before was concealed. The least
Affliction even to the Godly, is usually an Application of the Physician of
Spirits for some growing Distemper: every Corrosive is for some proud Flesh
that must be taken away. In short, they are deliberate Dispensations to cause
Men to reflect upon their Works and Ways, and break off their Sins by sincere
Obedience. Therefore we are commanded to hear the Voice of Mic. 6. 9.
the Rod, and who has appointed it. It Is a Preacher of Repentance, to lead us
to the Knowledge and Consideration of our selves. The Distress of Joseph's
Brethren was to revive their Memory of his Sorrows caused by their Cruelty. Now
when Men disregard the Embassy of the Rod, are unconvinceable, notwithstanding
its lively Lessons, when they neither look up to him that strikes, nor within
to the Cause that provokes his Displeasure; when they are careless to reform
their Ways, and to comply with his holy Will, as if Afflictions were only
common Accidents of this mutable State, the Effects of rash Fortune or blind
Fate, without Design and Judgment, and not sent for their Amendment, this is a
prodigious despising of God's Hand. For this reason the Scripture Job 11. 12.
Psalm. 58. 4. Hosea 7. 11.
compares Men to the most inobservant Creatures, to the wild Asses Colt, the
deaf Adder, to the silly Dove without Heart: and the Advantage is on the Beasts
side, for their Inconsideration proceeds merely from the Incapacity of Matter,
of which they are wholly composed to perform reflex Acts: but Man's Incogitancy
is the sole fault of his Spirit, that wilfully neglects his Duty. The Prophet
charges this Guilt upon the Jews, Lord, when thy Isa. 26. 11.
Hand is lifted up, they will not see.

2. Insensibility of Heart is an eminent degree of despising the Lord's
Chastenings. A pensive feeling of Judgments is very congruous, whether we
consider them in genere Physico, or Morali; either materially as afflictive to
Nature, or as the signs of Divine Displeasure: for the Affections were planted
in the Human Nature by the Hand of God himself, and are duly exercised in
proportion to the quality of their Objects. And when Grace comes, it softens
the Breast, and gives a quick and tender sense of God's Frown. An eminent
Instance we have in David, tho of Heroical Courage; yet in his sad ascent to
Mount Olivet, he went up 2 Samuel 15. 30.
weeping with his Head covered, and his Feet bare, to testify his humble and
submissive sense of God's Anger against him. Now when Men are insensible of
Judgments, either considered as natural or penal Evils; if when they suffer the
loss of Relations or other Troubles, they presently fly to the Comforts of the
Heathens, that we are all mortal, and what cannot be helped must be endured,
without the Sense Humanity requires; that Calm is like that of the dead Sea, a
real Curse: Or suppose natural Affection works a little, yet there is no
Apprehension and Concernment for God's Displeasure, which should be infinitely
more affecting than any outward Trouble, how sharp soever, no serious deep
Humiliation under his Hand, no yielding up our selves to his Management; this
most justly provokes him: of this Temper were those described by Jeremiah, Thou
have stricken them, but they have not Jer. 5. 3.
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they refused to receive Correction.

Secondly, The Causes of this despising of God's Chastenings are:

1. A contracted Stupidity of Soul, proceeding from a course in Sin. There is a
natural Stubbornness and Contumacy in the Heart against God, a vicious Quality
derived from rebellious Adam; we are all hewn out of the Rock, and dig'd out of
the Quarry: and this is one of the worst Effects of Sin, and a great part of
its Deceitfulness, that by stealth it increases the natural Hardness, by
degrees it creeps on like a Gangreen, and causes an Indolency. Heb. 3. 13.
The Practice of Sin makes the Heart like an Adamant, the hardest of Zech. 7.
12.
Stones, that exceeds that of Rocks. From hence proceeds such Unteachableness
of the Mind, that when God speaks and strikes, yet Sinners will not be
convinced; that Briars and Thorns are only effectual to teach them; and such an
Untractableness in the Will, that when the Sinner is stormed by Affliction, and
some Light breaks into the Understanding, yet it refuses to obey God's Call.

2. Carnal Diversions are another Cause of slighting God's Hand. The Pleasures
and Cares of the World, as they render Men inapprehensive Luke 21. 34.
of Judgments to come, so regardless of those that are present. Some when ever
they feel the Smart of a Cross, use all the Arts of Oblivion to lose the Sense
of it. The Affliction instead of a leading them to Repentance, leads them to
vain Conversations, to Comedies and other sinful Delights, to drive away
Sorrow. Others, although they do not venture upon forbidden things to relieve
their Melancholy, yet when God by sharp and sensible Admonitions calls upon
them, they have presently recourse to Temporal Comforts, which although lawful and
innocent in themselves, yet are as unproper at that time, as the taking of a
Cordial when a Vomit begins to work: for whereas Chastisements are sent to
awaken and affect us, by considering our Sins in their bitter Fruits, this
unseasonable Application of sensual Comforts wholly defeats God's Design. For
nothing so much hinders serious Consideration as a voluptuous indulging the
Senses in things pleasing; like Opiate Medicines, they stupify the Conscience,
and benumn the Heart. It Is Solomon's Expression, I said of Laughter, It is mad:
for as Distraction breaks the Connection of the Thoughts, so Mirth shuffles our
most serious Thoughts into disorder, and causes Men to pass over their Troubles
without Reflection and Remorse. 1 Kings 16.


And as the Pleasures, so the Business of the World cause a supine Security
under Judgments. We have an amazing Instance of it in Hiel the Bethlemite, who
laid the Foundation of his City in the Death of his Firstborn, and set up the
Gates of it in his youngest Son; yet he was so intent upon his Building, that
he disregarded the Divine Nemesis, that was apparent, fulfilling the terrible
Threatening prophesied against the Builder of Jericho. Joshua 6. 26.


3. An obstinate fierceness of Spirit, a Diabolical Fortitude is the Cause that
sometimes Men despise afflicting Providence so far as to resist them. There is
a passive Malignity in all, an Unaptness to be wrought on, and to receive
Spiritual and Heavenly Impressions from God's Hand; but in some of the Sons of
Perdition there is an active Malignity, whereby they furiously repel Judgments
as if they could oppose the Almighty. Their Hearts are of an Anvil-Temper, made
harder by Afflictions, and reverberate the Blow, like that Roman Emperor, who
instead of humbling and reforming at God's Voice in Thunder, thundered back
again. All Judgments that befall them, are as Strokes given to wild Beasts, that
instead of taming them, enrage them to higher degrees of Fierceness.

The Prophet described some of this Rank of Sinners, who said in the Pride and
Stoutness of their Isa. 9. 9, 10.
Hearts, the Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn Stones: the
Sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars.

And many though not Explicitly, yet virtually declare a Resolution
notwithstanding the most visible Discouragements from Heaven, to proceed in
their sinful courses with more greediness, and from a sullen secret Atheism are
more strongly carried to gratify their Lusts again, when they are in
Afflictions.

I shall proceed to consider the II.
other Extreme of fainting under God's Rebukes.

1. The Original Word signifies (...).
the slackening and relaxing of things that were firmly joined together. The
Strength of the Body proceeds from the Union of the Parts, when they are well
compacted together. By their disjointing it is enfeebled, and rendered unfit for
Labor. In this Motion the Apostle in the 12th Verse exhorts them to lift up
the Hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble Knees: That is, to
encourage and strengthen their Souls by a real belief of the Promises made to
afflicted Christians.

2. It may respect the sinking, and falling away of the Soul like Water, being
hopeless of overcoming Troubles. When Water is frozen into hard Ice, it will
bear a great Burden, but when it is dissolved and melted, nothing is weaker. So
the Spirit of a Man confirmed by Prove. 19. 14.
religious Principles, is able to sustain all his Infirmities. Si fractus
illabitur orbis, if the Weight of the heaviest Afflictions fall upon him, yet
his Mind remains erect and unbroken, and bears them all with Courage and
Constancy: But if through Impatience under Tribulation, and Diffidence in the
Divine Promises, we shrink from our Duty, or reject the Comforts of God as if
they were small, and not proportionable to the Evils that oppress us; this is
to faint when we are rebuked by him.

The Causes of this Despondency are usually;

(1.) Either the kind of the Affliction: when there is a Singularity in the
case, it increases the Apprehension of God's Displeasure; because it may
signify an extraordinary Guilt, and singular Unworthiness in the Person that
suffers; and upon that account, that Sorrow swells so high as to overwhelm him.

(2.) The number and degrees of Afflictions; when like those black Clouds which
in Winter-Days join together, and quite intercept the Beams of the Sun: so many
Troubles meet at once, and deprive us of all present Comfort. Job lost his
Children by a sudden unnatural Death; and was tormented in all the Parts of his
Body, and reduced from his rich Abundance to the Dunghill, and a Potsherd to
scrape his Boils. Indeed his Heroical Spirit was supported under those numerous
and grievous Troubles, but such a Weight were enough to sink the most.

(3.) The continuance of Afflictions. When the Clouds return after Rain, and
the Life is a constant Scene of Sorrows, we are apt to be utterly dejected, and
hopeless of Good. The Psalmist tells us, All the Day long I have been plagued,
and Psalm. 73. 14.
chastened every Morning; and from thence was strongly tempted to Despair.

(4.) Comparing their great Sufferings with the Prosperity of those who are
extremely vicious, inclines some to Despair. For not only their present Evils
are heightened, and more sensibly felt by the Comparison, but the prosperous
Impiety of others tempts them to think there is no just and powerful Providence
that distributes things below; and looking no higher than to Second Causes,
that are obvious to Sense, they judge their State past Recovery.

The next thing is to prove, that it is the Duty and Wisdom of the III.
Afflicted not to Despise the Chastenings of the Lord, nor to faint under them.

First, It Is their Duty carefully to avoid those Extremes, because they are
very dishonorable to God.

1. The Contempt of Chastisements is high Profanation of God's Honor, who is
our Father and Sovereign, and in that Quality afflicts us: It Is our Apostle's
Argument, Furthermore, we have had Fathers of our Flesh which corrected us, and
we gave Heb. 12. 9.
them Reverence; shall we not much more be subject to the Father of Spirits,
and live? It Is a Principle deeply planted in the Human Nature, which the most
barbarous Nations have kept inviolable, to express the reallest Respect to our
Parents, from whom we derive our Life, and by whose tender Care we have been
preserved, and educated, although their Discipline be rigorous: but it is
infinitely more just and reasonable, that we should reverently submit to the
Father of Spirits, who has the highest Right in us. As much as the immortal
Spirit excels the infirm corruptible Flesh, proportionably should our Reverence
to God, when he most sharply rebukes us, exceed our Respects to our Earthly
Fathers when they correct us. The manner of the Apostle's Expression is very
significant, Shall we not much rather? If there be any vital spark of
Conscience remaining in our Breasts, if Reason be not wholly declined to
Brutishness, we cannot do otherwise.

2. Fainting under Chastenings reflects dishonourably upon God. It Is true in
some respect, those who are extremely dejected, are not so guilty as the
Despisers; for usually they acknowledge the Order and Justice of his Providence.
But that false Conception of the Father of Mercies, either that he willingly
afflicts the Children of Men, or that he hates them because he afflicts them
here, is so contrary to his holy Nature, and injurious to his Goodness, the
special Character of his Nature, that it is an equal Provocation, 1 John 4. 9.
with the slighting his Sovereignty.

How to bear Afflictions. SERMON V.
HEBREWS xii. 5. My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint
when thou art rebuked of him.
Secondly, I Shall proceed to prove, it is the best Wisdom not to despise God's
Chastenings, nor faint under them. I will not insist upon the Consideration
that it is the Counsel of the supreme Wisdom to us, nor that it is the avoiding
the vicious Extremes, which is the chiefest Point of Moral Prudence: but it is
the only way to prevent the greatest Mischiefs that will otherwise befall us.
It Is said, he that is wise is profitable to himself, that is either in
obtaining Good, or preventing Evils. Now it will appear how pernicious those
Extremes Job 22. 21.
are, by considering:

1. The Contempt of Chastenings, deprives us of all those Benefits which were
intended by them. God's End in them is to imbitter Sin to our Taste, and make
us disrelish that deadly Poison: for as, according to the Rules of Physic,
Contraries are cured by Contraries; so Sin that prevails by Pleasure, by
something delightful to the Carnal Part, is mortified by what is afflictive to
Sense. Repentance is a Duty that best complies with Affliction: for when the
Spirit is made sad, and brought to the Sobriety of Consideration, it will more
readily reflect upon the true Causes of Troubles: When the Springs overflow,
it is but directing the Stream into a right Channel, the changing the Object of
our Grief, viz. mourning for Sin instead of sorrowing for outward Trouble, and
we are in the way to Happiness. Sensible Sorrow leads to Godly Sorrow. The
natural is first, then the spiritual. Now the Despisers of God's Hand, that are
unaffected with Judgments, are incapable of this Benefit. For if they do not
feel the Blow, how shall they take notice of the Hand that strikes? If they are
not softened with Sorrows, how shall they receive the Divine Impression? If
they have no sense of his Displeasure, how shall they fear to offend him for
the future? If the Medicine does not work, how can it expel noxious Humors?

2. The neglect of Chastenings does not only render them unprofitable, but
exposes to greater Evils.

(1.) It provokes God to withdraw his Judgments for a time. This the Sinner
desired, and thinks himself happy that he is at ease: Miserable Delusion! This
Respite is the Presage of his final Ruin. 'Twas the desperate State of Judah,
as God expresses it, Why should ye be stricken Isa. 1. 5.
any more? ye will revolt more and more. The words of an anxious Father that
has tried all Methods, Counsel, Kindness, Corrections to reclaim a rebellious
obstinate Son; and finding no answerable Effect, gives him over to follow the
pernicious swinge of his corrupt Desires. No Severity is like the suffering him
in his licentious Courses. Thus when God has used many gracious ways to reduce
the Sinner, by his Word, Spirit and Judgments, but he is inflexible to the
Calls of the Word, impenetrable to the Motions of the Spirit, and insensible of
afflicting Providence; when after a Combat with the Rod, Sin comes off
unwounded, and the Rod retires; this Calm is more dreadful than the fiercest
Storm; nothing can be more fatal to the Sinner, for by this Divine Desertion he
is given over to a reprobate Mind, and vile Affections; he goes on undisturbed
in his Sins, and every day increases his Enmity against God, and provokes
God's Enmity against him. It Is not conceivable that one who is not made pliable
to the Grace of God by Afflictions, should submit when he is in pleasant
Circumstances, and disposed to enjoy sensual Satisfactions. If the Whip and
Spur cannot break and tame the unruly Beast, certainly the rich Pasture will
never make him manageable. So that God's ceasing to punish the Sinner at
present is so far from being a Favor, that it is the Effect of his deepest
Displeasure; for it contributes to his hardening. 'Twas the Case of Pharaoh,
when any of the Plagues were removed: Indulgence occasioned his Induration. As
Water taken from the Fire, freezes sooner and harder, than if the thinner Parts
had never been evaporated by the former Heat; so when Men are taken off from
the Fire of Affliction, they are more confirmed in their vicious Courses than
if they had never been afflicted.

(2.) The slighting of lighter Strokes, provokes God sometimes to bring more
dreadful Judgments in this Life upon Sinners. No Man can endure that his Love
or Anger should be despised. Nebuchadnezzar commanded the Furnace to be heated
seven times hotter for those who contemned his Threatenings. God tells the
Israelites, If ye Levit. 26. 23, 24.
will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me; Then
will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for
your Sins. He will change the Rods into Scorpions, and will scourge them for
their continued Rebellions. It Is the intent of that Expostulation, Shall one
take up a Snare from the Amos 3. 5.
Earth, and have taken nothing at all? Shall God remove his Judgments while
Sinners are careless and unreformed, as if they might be final Conquerors over
them? no, he will multiply and greaten them. It may be at first God blasts part
of the Estate, and the Sinner is not apprehensive of his Hand; then he comes
nearer and snatches away a dear Relation: if still the Sinner is unaffected, he
strikes his Body with a lingering, or acute Disease: if still he be not
concerned for God's Displeasure, he wounds his Spirit, makes him sick in Sense
and Conscience at the same time, fills him with Terror by the Reflection upon
his wicked Ways, and the foresight of that dreadful Tribunal before which he
must appear; so that although he cannot live, he dare not die; tho his Earthly
Tabernacle be ready to fall upon him, he is afraid to go out and meet the
supreme Judge: and if this does not work a sincere through Change, God casts him
into Hell to the Company of the Giants, those bold Rebels that Prove. 21. 16.
fought against God. Briefly, as under the Law, an incorrigible Son that
neglected his Father's Reproofs, was to die without Mercy; so an unreformed
Sinner who kicks Vid. Mr. Mede in loc.
against the Pricks, and refuses to submit to God's Corrections, shall be cut
off in his Obstinacy; Justice will proceed to Excision, and Acts of Vengeance
against him.

(3.) Fainting under Chastenings is pernicious to Sufferers: for it renders
them utterly indisposed for the Performance of Duty, and incapable of receiving
the Comforts proper for an afflicted State.

1st. It renders them utterly indisposed for the performance of Duty. Hope
draws forth all the active Powers of the Soul; it is the great Motive to
Diligence, and Instrument of Duty. Despair, like extremity of Cold that checks
the Spring, and binds up the Earth that its Fruits cannot appear, hinders the
free Exercise of Reason and Grace, and cuts the Sinews of Obedience. He that is
hopeless of a good Issue out of Troubles, will neither repent, nor pray, nor
reform, but indulges barren Tears instead of real Duties.

Besides, it often falls out, that the same Affliction is sent from God's
Displeasure upon his People for their Sins, and is the Effect of the Rage of
Men against them upon the account of their professing his Name. Such is the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, that by the same fiery Trial he may refine his
Servants from their Dross and Impurities, and render the Glory of the Gospel
more conspicuous. The Hatred of Religion, and a blind Fury may transport Men to
Acts of Cruelty against the Saints; but it is by the permission of the universal
Sovereign, who has the Hearts of all in his Hands, and fuffers their Rage for
holy Ends. The Enemy designs against their Faith, but God's Aim is to make them
reform their Lives.

Now if either through strong Fears, or the stinging sense of Troubles upon the
account of Religion, our Courage fails, we are presently in danger of falling
away, and denying our Master. The fainthearted Person is usually falsehearted,
and for want of Resolution, being frighted out of his Conscience and Duty,
chooses Sin rather than Suffering, and thereby justly deprives himself of the
Crown of Life, that is promised only to those who are faithful unto the Death.
Besides, not only the loss of Heaven, but the Torments of Hell are threatened
against those who withdraw from the Service of God to avoid Temporal Evils. The
fearful Rev. 21. 8.
and unbelieving are in the front of those that shall have part in the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. Now what Folly is it when two
Evils are propounded, to choose the greatest; that is, Eternal Death rather
than Temporal: and of two Goods to prefer the less; a short Life with its
Conveniences on Earth, before that which is eternally glorious in Heaven? By
which it appears how much it concerns us to fortify and fix our Minds by a
steadfast Belief of God's supporting Presence with us in all Troubles, and of
his gracious Promise, that in due time we shall reap if we faint not in
welldoing.

2dly. They are incapable of the Comforts proper to an afflicted State. Those
arise from the Belief, that God loves whom he chastens: Rev. 3.
for the least Sin is a greater Evil than the greatest Trouble; and his design
is to take that away, and from the expectation of a happy Issue. Hope is the
Anchor within the Vail, that in the midst of Storms and roughest Seas,
preserves from Shipwreck. The Character of Christians is, that they are
rejoicing in Hope: But when the Romans 12. 12.
Afflicted are under fearful Impressions that God is an irreconcilable Enemy,
and sadly conclude their Miseries are past Redress, those Divine Comforts that
are able to sweeten the most bitter Sufferings to Believers, are of no
Efficacy. Their deep Sorrows are not like the Pains of a travailing Woman that
end in a joyful Birth, but the killing Tortures of the Stone that are fruitless
to the Patient. An obstinate Grief, and rejecting the Consolations of God, is
the beginning of Sorrows, the first Payment of that sad Arrear of mourning that
shall be exacted in another World.

The Use shall be to excite us to IV.
those Duties that are directly contrary to the Extremes forbidden, viz. To
demean our selves under the Chastenings of the Lord with a deep Reverence and
humble Fear of his Displeasure, and with a firm Hope and Dependence upon him
for a blessed Issue upon our complying with his holy Will.

1. With an humble Reverence of his Hand. This Temper is absolutely necessary
and most congruous with respect to God, upon the account of his Sovereignty,
Justice and Goodness declared in his Chastenings; and with respect to our
Frailty, our Dependence upon him, our Obnoxiousness to his Law, and our
Obligations to him, that he will please to afflict us for our good.

This is the reason of that Expostulation, Will a Lion roar in the Forest, when
he has no Prey? Shall Amos 3. 4.
God's Threatenings and Judgments have no Effect? Who ever hardened himself
against him, and prospored? Do we provoke the Lord to Jealousy, the most
sensible and severe Attribute when it is incensed? Are we stronger than he? Can
we encounter offended Omnipotency? Can we with an Army of Lusts oppose Myriads
of mighty Angels? It Is not Courage, but such a prodigious degree of Folly and
Fury, that one would think 'twere impossible a reasonable Creature were capable
of it. Yet every Sinner unreformed by Afflictions is thus desperate: He
stretches out his Hand Job 15. 25, 26.
against God, and strengthens himself against the Almighty; he runs upon
him, even on his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his Bucklers. Such a furious
Rebel was Ahaz, who in the time of his Distress, did trespass more against the
Lord: This is that King 2 Chronicles. 28.
Ahaz! But God has most solemnly declared, that he will be victorious at last
over the most fierce obdurate Enemies. As I live, says the Lord, every Knee
shall bow to me. His Power is Infinite, and Anger puts an Edg upon his Power,
and makes it more terrible. If our Subjection be not voluntary, it must be
violent. It Is our Wisdom to prevent Acts of Vengeance by humble Submissions.
The Duty of the Afflicted is excellently expressed by Elihu: Surely it is meet to
be said to God, I have born Chastisements, Job 34. 31, 32.
I will not offend any more. That I know not, teach thou me: if I have done
Iniquity, I will do so no more.

Add further, upon another account Reverence is due to God's Chastenings: for
when Love is the Motive that incites one to give us Counsel, tho it be mixed
with Reproofs, and his Prudence is not great, yet a Respect is due to the
Affection. Now God who is only wise, chastises Men from a desire to make them
better and happy; he intends primarily to refine, not to consume them by
Afflictions: so that a serious regard to his Hand is the most just and
necessary Duty of the Creature. Briefly, every Chastisement should leave deep
and permanent Impressions upon us; the Sense of God's Displeasure should make
our Hearts mournful and mollified, broken and contrite, that his Will may be
done by us on Earth as it is in Heaven.

2. Let us always preserve an humble Dependence and firm Hope on God, for a
blessed Issue out of all our Troubles: The Support and Tranquillity of the Soul
arises from hence. Christian Patience suffers all things as well as Charity,
being encouraged by a continual expectation of Good from him. Patience confirms
all other Graces, and is to the whole Armor of God, what the Temper is to
material Weapons, that keeps them from breaking in the Combat. Now to maintain
a constant Hope in Affliction, it is necessary to consider the Reason of the
Exhortation as it is admirably amplified by the Apostle.

(1.) The Relation God sustains when he afflicts Believers. He is a Judge
invested with the Quality of a Father. The Covenant of Grace between God and
Jesus Christ, our true David, contains this observable Clause, If thy Children
Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.
forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments: If they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments; then will I visit their Transgressions with a Rod,
and their Iniquity with Stripes.

The Love that arises from this Relation, tho it cannot hate, yet it may be
displeased, and chastise them for their Follies. Moses tells the Israelites,
Thou shall consider in thy Heart, that as a Man chastens his Son, Deuteronomy. 8. 5.
so the Lord thy God chastens thee. In Children Reason is not fully disclouded,
they are not capable to govern themselves, and are only taught with sensible
Pleasure or Pain: So that a Father is obliged to join Correction with
Instruction, to form them to Virtue. This is so far from being inconsistent
with Paternal Affection, that it is inseparable from it. For a Parent to suffer
a Child to go on pleasantly in Sin without due Punishment, is pure Cruelty
disguised under the Mask of Pity: for by the neglect of Discipline he is
confirmed in his vicious Courses, and exposed to Ruin. The Apostle therefore
adds, Whom the Lord loves, he chastens: As from the severest Wrath he sometimes
forbeareth to strike, so from dearest Love he afflicts. Humble Believers
through a Cloud of Tears may see the Light of God's Countenance: for having
elected them by special Love to a glorious Inheritance above, he dispenses all
things here in order to the preparing them for it; and all Temporal Evils, as
Means, are transformed into the Nature of the End to which they are
subservient. So that the sharpest Sufferings are really from God's Favor,
since they are beneficial for our obtaining real Happiness. The Devil usually
tempts Men in a Paradise of Delights, to precipitate them into Hell: God tries
them in the Furnace of Afflictions, to purify and prepare them for Heaven.

(2.) It Is a strong Cordial against fainting, to consider that by virtue of the
Paternal Relation he scourges every Son whom he receives: for no Troubles are
more afflictive and stinging than those that are unexpected. Now when we are
assured that there is no Son whom the Heavenly Father does not chasten, we are
less surprised when we meet with Crosses. Indeed there is hardly any kind of
Affliction that may befall us, but we have some instance in Scripture of the
Saints suffering the same. Are we poor and mean in the World? we should
consider that Poverty with Holiness is a Divine Complexion: Jesus Christ the
holy and beloved Son of God, had not where to lay his Head. Are we under bodily
Distempers? good Hezekiah was struck with an uncomfortable Disease as to the
Quality of it; and Gaius had a flourishing Soul in a languishing Body. Are our
dear Relations taken away? Aaron and David lost some of their Sons by terrible
Strokes. Are our Spirits wounded with the sense of God's Displeasure? Job and
Heman were under strong Terrors, yet the Favorites of Heaven. Briefly, how
many most dear to God were called forth to extreme and bloody Trials for
Defense of the Truth? How many Deaths did they endure in one Torment? How many
Torments in one Death? yet they were so far from fainting, that the more their
Pains were exasperated, the more their Courage and Joy was shining and
conspicuous; as the Face of the Heavens is never more serene and clear, than
when the sharpest North Wind blows. It Is the Apostle's Inference, Seeing we are
compassed with such a Cloud of Witnesses, let us run with Patience the Race
that is set before us.

This is further enforced by the following words, If ye be without Ver. 8.
Chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons. If
God does not vouchsafe us the Mercy of his Rod, it is evident we are not part of
his Fatherly Care. The Bramble is neglected, while the Vine is cut till it
bleeds. It Is a miserable Privilege to be exempted from Divine Discipline, and
by Ease and Prosperity to be corrupted and made fit for Destruction. St. Austin
represents one expostulating with God: O Deus, ista est Justitia tua, ut mali
floreant, and boni In Psalm. 25.
laborent! O God, it is righteous with Thee, that the Wicked should prosper,
and the Good suffer! Dicis Deo, ista est Justitia tua? and Deus tibi, ista est
Fides tua? haec enim tibi promisi? ad hoc Christianus factus es, ut in seculo
isto floreres, and in inferno postea torquereris? God replies to him, Is this
your Faith? Did I promise you Temporal Prosperity? Were you a Christian for
this, that you might flourish in this World, and be miserably tormented in Hell?

The Apostle represents the special Ver. 9.
Prerogative of God as the Father of Spirits, and so has a nearer Claim to us
than the Fathers of our Flesh, and that he is not liable to those Imperfections
that attend the Earthly Relations. They for a few days chastened us for their
own Pleasure. Human Love is a troubled irregular Passion, mixed with Ignorance,
and prone to Error in the Excess or Defect. Sometimes Parents are indulgent,
and by a cruel Compassion spare their Children when they are faulty: sometimes
they correct without Cause, sometimes when the Reason is just, yet they err in
the manner or measure of the Correction, so that their Children are
discouraged. But in God there is a perfect Union of Wisdom and Love, of
Discretion and Tenderness; his Affection is without the least Imperfection. His
Will is always guided by infinite Wisdom. If his Children offend, he will
chastise 2 Samuel 7. 14.
them with the Rod of Men, that is, moderately: for as in Scripture things are
magnified by the Epithet, Divine or of God, so they are lessened by the
Epithet, Human. Accordingly the Apostle declares to the Corinthians, that no
Temptation had befallen them, but such 1 Cor. 10, 13.
as is common to Man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able; but will with the Temptation also make a way
to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. As a prudent Physician consults the
Strength of the Patient as well as the Quality of the Disease, and proportions
his Medicine; so all the bitter Ingredients, their Mixture and Measure, are
dispensed by the wise Prescription of God, according to the degrees of Strength
that are in his People.

The Apostle specifies the immediate End of God in his Chastenings: But he for
our Profit, that we may be partakers of his Holiness. This is the supreme
Excellency of the Divine Nature, and our Conformity to it is so valuable, that
it renders Afflictions not only tolerable, but so far desirable as they
contribute to it. In the present State our Graces are imperfect, and our
Conformity to the Divine Purity is like the Resemblance of the Sun in a watery
Cloud, very much beneath the Perfection and Radiancy of that great Light. Now
God is pleased to fashion us according to his Image by Afflictions. As a Statue
is cut by the Artificer, to bring it into a beautiful Form.

He is pleased to bring us into diverse Temptations to try our Faith, to work in
us Patience, to inflame our Prayers, to mortify our Carnal Desires, to break
those voluntary Bonds whereby we are fettered to the Earth, that we may live
with those Affections wherewith others die. And certainly if we make a true
Judgment of things, we have not the least cause to suspect the Love of God when
he chastises us, to take away Sin the only abominable Object of his Hatred and
deep Detestation, and to render us Partakers of the Divine Nature. And the
present peaceable Fruit of Righteousness is the Product in those who are duly
exercised by their Troubles. It is an Allusion to the Reward of the Conquerors
in the Olympic Games, who had a Crown of Olives, the Emblem and Shadow of
Peace. But true Peace, a Divine Calm in the Conscience, shall be the Recompense
of all that exercise their Graces suitable to an afflicted State. In short, the
Apostle assures Believers, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
that they are chastened of the Lord, to prevent their Condemnation with the
World. The correcting Rod delivers them from Hell. This Consideration changes
Thorns into Roses, and extracts Honey out of Wormwood: if the way be stony or
showery that leads to Blessedness, a Christian should willingly walk in it. To
conclude; from the Consideration of what the Scripture declares concerning
Temporal Evils, let us lift up the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees;
and make straight Paths for our Feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of
the way; but let it rather be healed: i. e. In our Affliction, let us take
Courage and Resolution from the Promises, and live in a holy Conformity to
God's Will, that the weak or faint may be restored.

The first and last Lesson of Pagan Philosophy was to support Men under the
Storms to which they are liable in this open State, to render the Soul velut
Pelagi rupes immota, as a Rock unshaken by the Waves.

But all their Directions were unsuccessful, and so could not secure them from
Impatience or Despair. But the Gospel that assures us of the Love of God in
sending Afflictions for our Spiritual and Eternal Good, is alone able to
compose the Mind. And whenever we faint in Troubles, it is either from
Infidelity or Inconsideration; it is impossible a Person should be a Christian,
and be incapable of Comfort in the most afflicted State: for we are really so
by the holy Spirit, who is the Comforter. When we speak sometimes to those we
judge infirm, we speak to Infidels, who only receive Remedy from Time which they
ought to receive from Faith; they they have the Name of God only in their
Mouths, but the World is in their Hearts. Their Passions are strong and
obstinate, not subject to sanctified Reason. The Difficulty they have of being
comforted, discovers the necessity of their being afflicted. They need
Conversion more than Consolation; others, who are sincere in Faith, yet are apt
to faint under Troubles, from an Error like that of the Apostles; when their
Lord came upon the Waters in a stormy tempestuous Night to their Assistance,
they thought he was a Spirit. So they look on God as an Enemy, when he comes to
sanctify and save them: the Sovereign Remedy of our Sorrows is to correct the
Judgment of Sense by a serious Belief of God's Promise. Thus we shall reconcile
the roughness of his Hand with the sweetness of his Voice: he calls to us from
Heaven in the darkest Night, It Is I, be not afraid. He corrects us with the
Heart and Hand of a Father.

A due Consideration of these things will produce a glorified Joy in the midst
of our Sufferings. Whatsoever things were written aforetime, Romans 15. 4.
were written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures might have Hope.

SERMON VI.
LUKE xiv. 23. The Lord said to the Servant, Compel them to come in, that my
House may be full.
OUR Blessed Savior in the days of his Humility, among other Instances of his
admirable Condescension, was pleased in his Sermons to stoop to the Capacity of
the Hearers, and instruct them in a familiar easy way. The infirm Eye of Flesh
cannot behold Spiritual Things in their immediate Purity and Glory, but as
shadowed under sensible Comparisons. Therefore his excellent Goodness made use
of Parables, to illustrate and explain by Representations and Patterns borrowed
from things common and known, things of a sublimer Nature, and more distant
from our Apprehensions: and by this engaging lively manner to awaken the Spirit
to consider by what is said, what is signified: and to insinuate into the
Affections Divine Truths so pleasingly conveyed to us.

Now of all the Parables in the Gospel, this of the Marriage Feast, both in
respect of the Excellence of the Matter, and the manner of Expression suitable
to our Capacity, deserves the serious Application of our Minds and Hearts. I
will make some Observations upon it, that may be useful and introductive to the
following Discourse.

Two general Parts are to be considered, in it: viz.

I. The Narrative of the Prepations, and the Persons invited to the Feast. II.
The Success of the Invitation.
In unfolding these Generals, I shall consider the Substance of the Parable,
without straining it by far fetched Parallels beyond the Intention of our
Savior. It Is a curious Folly to turn every Figure in Scripture into an
Allegory. The Parable is the same in Substance with that in the 22d Chapter of
St. Matthew, from the 2d Verse to the 15th: that indeed has more of
Circumstance and Magnificence in the Relation. The certain Man that made the
Feast is there styled a King, that is, the blessed God; and the Feast is for
the Marriage of his Son: Under this Figure of a Royal Marriage is represented
the Mystical Marriage between Christ and his Church, and the Type is infinitely
excelled by the Reality. If we consider the Persons joined in this Divine
Alliance, the Son of God, of the same Nature, of equal and eternal Greatness
with his Father, to unite himself to sinful miserable Creatures in a Conjugal
Relation, the most tender and entire, What an immense distance was to be
overcome? What a seeming Disparagement was it to him? In order to this it was
necessary there should be a Conformity of Nature between us: he therefore was
made Flesh, that we might be one Spirit with him: he assumed our Nature in a
Personal Union to the Diety, that he might marry our Persons in a Spiritual
Union. He was a Savior to redeem us, that he might be a Husband to enrich us.
Astonishing Love! The Lord of Glory, higher than the Heavens, stooped so low as
to espouse poor Dust: he gave his Life for us, and himself to us for ever. What
Honor and Happiness accrues to us by this Alliance! the Lord of Angels is our
Husband. His Gifts are answerable to his Love: he is Heir of all things, and
endows his Church with Heaven and Earth: the Apostle assures Believers all
things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's. Our Communion with
him is so perfect, that he discharges us of all the Evils that we cannot bear,
our Sins and the Curse due to them, by taking them upon himself, and bestows
upon us all the Blessings and Blessedness we are capable to enjoy, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

By the great Supper prepared, we are to understand the Manifestation of the
Messiah, with all the most precious and unvaluable Benefits purchased and
conferred by him upon Believers; the Pardon of Sins, Adoption into God's
Family, the Graces and Comforts of the Spirit, and eternal Glory, the becoming
Testimonies of his Greatness and Love.

The prime Guests invited to this Feast are the Jews, the select People of God,
to whom pertained the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, Romans 9. 4, 5.
and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises: Whose are
the Fathers, and of whom concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever. When other Nations were excluded from the Alliance of God,
his Presence and Worship was their Privilege, and for them this Feast was
principally intended.

The Servants employed in the Invitation were, first, Moses and the Prophets,
inclusively to John the Baptist; all to whom the Oracles of God were committed,
and by whom Romans 3. 2.
the eternal Counsels of his Wisdom were declared concerning the Deuteronomy. 18.
Messiah. All their Prophecies, as so many Lines, meet in this Center. Psalm. 2.
The other Servants were the Apostles, who were commanded Isa. 40.
to preach the Gospel first at Jerusalem Luke 24.
The first order of Servants, and the second, both proposed the same Messiah,
as the Object of our Faith and Love; but the Prophets under Shadows and Figures
in the Promises, the Apostles clearly in the Truth and Accomplishment. The
first invited while the Preparations were making; but the Evangelical Ministers
are more earnest and pressing, Come, for all things are now ready. And in
comparing these two Periods of Time, there is the most shining and sensible
Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion: for the Marks of it are clear
in the Prophecies by their exact References to the Accomplishment in the Person
of Christ; and they are clear in the Accomplishment by the Correspondence to
the Prophecies. Who can suspend Assent that our Redemption by Jesus Christ is
the Work of Divine Providence, when the design of it is so exactly delineated
in the Prophecy?

Thus the unchangeable Firmness and Stability of God's Counsel is the
Foundation of our Faith. The Consummation of the Marriage will be at the second
coming of Christ.

II. The Success of the Invitation is related, They all with one Consent began
to make Excuse. The Luke 14. 18, 19, 20.
first said, I have bought a piece of Ground, and I must needs go to see it:
Another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and go to prove them: And
another said, I have married a Wife, and I cannot come. All the Carnal
Affections are readily and presently conspiring in the refusal. It may seem
that the Allegations of a Purchase and Marriage for not coming to a Feast were
very reasonable: but the Feast represents Celestial Happiness, in comparison of
which all the Profits and Pleasures of this World are but Loss and Dung: It Is
evident then, their Excuses are strong Accusations of their Folly and
Ingratitude: Of Folly in preferring Shadows before substantial Felicity,
Moments before Eternity: Of Ingratitude, in rejecting contumeliously the most
gracious and earnest Offer of such a Happiness. This is spoken of the Jews, who
lived in the time of the Son of God's Descent for the Salvation of Men: The
love of the World caused them to despise his mean Appearance, and neglect the
Call of humble Mercy. Upon their refusal, the Servant came and showed Ver. 21.
his Lord these things; Then the Master of the House being Angry, said to his
Servant, Go out quickly into the Streets and Lanes of the City, and bring in
hither the Poor, and the Maimed, and the Halt, and the Blind. And the Servant
Ver. 22.
said, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is Room. And the
Lord said unto the Servant, Go out Ver. 23.
into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my House may
be filled. For I say unto you, that Ver. 24.
none of those Men that were bidden, shall taste of my Supper.

The Refusers are for ever excluded from the Joy of this Royal Feast, being as
unworthy as unwilling to partake of it. This Judgment is still visible upon the
Nation of the Jews, who consent to their Progenitors rejecting and condemning
the Messiah, and will not be convinced of the obstinate Imposture that was
devised to prevent the Belief of his Resurrection. But it did not become the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, that such costly Preparations should be lost: it
was requisite that some Persons should actually come to the Feast, that is,
obey the Heavenly Call, and receive the Gospel; for otherwise the Redemption
the Son of God so dearly acquired, had been without Fruit, he had died in vain,
which is directly contrary to the Promise of God to him. I will give thee for
Isa. 4. 9, 6.
a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the ends of the
Earth. Accordingly the Servant is ordered to bring in the Poor, the Lame, and
the Blind, and to go into the Highways and Hedges, and compel them to come in,
that the House may be filled. These Expressions declare the extreme Misery of
the Heathens, who were at that time without Christ, Aliens from the
Commonwealth Ephesians. 2. 12.
of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no Hope, and
without God in the World.

Compel them to come in. The Papists allege this Text to give color to their
Cruelty, in their violent ways of making Proselytes to their Idolatry. Their
convincing Arguments are Swords, and Racks, and Gibbets, and Fires. If this be
a proper Method of converting Men to Religion, the greatest Tyrants are the
most infallible Teachers. The Vanity and Impiety of the Pretense will appear by
considering,

1. It Is ridiculous to Reason, to use forcible Means for such an End: for the
Understanding is a reasonable Faculty, and can only be convinced by instructing
Reasons. It cannot judge of things but as they appear, nor assent against its
Judgment. Indeed Threatenings and Tortures may make Men Infidels, but not
sincere Believers: it may make them Hypocrites and Comedians in Religion, but
not unseigned Professors. This is abundantly exemplified in France, where the
vast number of servile Converts have been made by their Dragoons, not their
Doctors.

2. This is most contrary to the Practice of our Savior, and to the Spirit of
the Gospel. The Sword that Christ uses in subduing his Enemies, and making
them willing Subjects to his Scepter, goes Rev. 19. 15.
out of his Mouth. His Kingdom was introduced into the World by Preaching and
Miracles, by doing Good and suffering Evil: he opened the way for the Gospel
not by killing his Enemies, but by dying himself and in his Members: The
establishing and enlarging his Religion are by suitable means, the Illumination
of Men's Minds, the Persuasion of their Wills, the drawing of their Affections
to embrace it. Accordingly the Apostle tells us, The Weapons of our Warfare 2
Cor. 10. 4, 5.
are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong Holds;
Casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience
of Christ. The Weapons are suitable to the Warfare, and the Warfare to the
Kingdom, which is spiritual, not of this World. The using of Force to constrain
Men to embrace the Christian Religion, is contrary to the Love, the Goodness,
Meekness, Clemency and Benignity, the blessed Temper the Gospel plants in the
Breasts of Christians. How severely did our Savior rebuke the fiery Spirit in
James and John? You know not what manner of Spirit you are of; the Son Luke 9.
55.
of Man came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. It Is contrary to the
Golden Rule given to all his Disciples, What you would have others do to you,
do you to them.

But this must be acknowledged, that it is very congruous that the Papists make
use of the material Sword, when the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God,
strikes through the Heart of Popery. The Doctrine of the Mass is a clear
Contradiction to the Scripture, and a notorious derogating from the Value and
Virtue of Christ's Death: they say it is an unbloody Sacrifice of Christ,
propitiatory for the Living and the Dead: Whereas our Savior was offered up
but once, the Mass is ten thousand times in a day repeated. Christ's Sacrifice
was with Blood, and an unbloody Sacrifice is not propitiatory, nor can obtain
Remission. Where can they find in Scripture the Religious Worship of the
Saints? They set up an infinite number of Intercessors, and rob our Savior of
his Glory, as if he were defective either in his Compassionate Love to us, for
whom he mediates, or in his Power with God. They prefer his Mother before him
in dispensing Mercy of which Sinners have the most need: they represent him as
strict and severe, but she is composed of Sweetness, he is the Judge, she the
Advocate and Savior; we will leave them to the jealous God.

I shall only observe farther, that many erring Sects preserve their Allegiance
to the Divine Authority in the Scripture, for they do not assume an
Infallibility to themselves, but mistake the Sense of Scripture: but the
Papists by asserting that the Authority of Scripture depends upon the Testimony
of their Church, that is, the Sun borrows its Beams from her Eyes, and by
arrogating an Infallibility to it, do in effect renounce Homage to the
Authority of God in his Word. And from hence it is that the Adherers to that
Religion are so inconvincible: tho Sense, Reason and Scripture discover their
Doctrines to be plainly impossible. Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation
involves such Contradictions as destroy the Essence and End of Miracles: Their
Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy implies there are two Monarchs of one Kingdom,
two Heads of one Body, two Husbands of one Spouse. No Errors are more strong
and fatal than such as are armed with Authority, especially if that Authority
be esteemed sacred. But to return from this Digression, tho not impertinent.

Compel them to come in. The word signifies the use of all constraining
Motives, and the most earnest Entreaties that are congruous to prevail upon
those who are invited to a Feast. The same word is used Mat. 14. 22. And Jesus
constrained his Disciples to get into a Ship; which certainly was not by
violent driving or drawing them, but by his commanding Authority. So it is
related of the two that were with our Savior in the Journey to Emmaus, that
they constrained him to abide with Luke 24. 29.
them: The Constraint was by earnest Entreaties, far from Force. The same word
is used of Peter's compelling the Gentiles to live after the Gal. 2. 14.
Rites of the Jews: that was by his Example. Thus the Nations were compelled to
receive the Gospel by the Apostles, the Ambassadors for Christ, who did
ardently, in season and out of season, pray them in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God. Their Doctrine was recommended by the Holiness of their
Lives, and confirmed by the Luster of their Miracles. In short, the Expression
signifies how pleasing it is to God, that those who are invited by the Offers
of Grace in the Gospel, should come to Christ to obtain Life: and that the
Invitation shall be effectual in the Hearts of those who belong to the Election
of Grace.

The Proposition that I shall insist on is this:

It Is the great Duty of the Ministers of Christ to use their best Endeavors,
to instruct and persuade Men to embrace the saving Mercies of the Gospel.

The Commission was immediately given to the Apostles, but extends to the end
of the World, till the Ministration of the Gospel shall cease. I will explicate
the Doctrine in this order.

I. Consider what is implied, the Aversness in Men from consenting to the Terms
of Salvation offered in the Gospel.

II. The Means by which they are wrought on, and induced to come to the
Celestial Feast.

III. Prove that it is the great Duty of the Ministers of Christ to apply
themselves with a holy Zeal to bring Men to partake of the saving Mercies
revealed in the Gospel.

I. There is an Averseness implied in the Expression, Compel them to come in.
This will be evident by considering, that the World, the Flesh, and Satan, are
Enemies in Combination against the Souls of Men, and raise an Army of
Objections against their submitting to the Terms of the Gospel.

1. The World is the general Temptation: the natural World, and the corrupt
World, the Things and Men of the World hinder our coming to Christ.

1st. The natural World, comprising all the Creatures in it, was originally
very good, both in respect of the Things themselves, and their designed Use:
for they were beneficial to Man, in order to his serving and enjoying the
blessed God. But since his Fall from the State of unstained Nature, they are
accidentally evil to him. The Creatures are made subject to Vanity, not Romans 8.
willingly: they are perverted from their innocent use, to foment and gratify
Men's vicious Appetites. Therefore the Apostle declares, the whole Creation
groans and travels in Pain, is in a kind of Agony ready to faint, not for the
Labor, but the Indignities they suffer. The Charge that God fastens upon
Idolaters, is true against Worldly Men: Ye have taken my Silver, and my Gold,
and have carried into your Temples my goodly pleasant things. The Riches, the
Pleasures, the Greatness and Glory of the World are the Idols of their Heads
and Hearts. The Interposition of the Earth darkens their Minds, eclipses their
Esteem of the Fruition of God as their only Happiness; the Love of it alienates
and estranges their Affections from him, their Trust in it slackens their due
Dependence upon him. From hence it is, that the World, which, made by God, was
a fair and bright Theater of his Perfections, to raise the Thoughts and
Affections of Men with Delight and Wonder to the blessed Creator, as it is
managed by Satan, and abused by the Lusts of Men, is the Shadow of Death: such
as some Trees cast, that not only intercept the refreshing Light of the Sun,
but shed a malignant contagious Influence. Strange Alteration!

The World is present and sensible, and makes an easy entrance into the Bosoms
of Men. Their Souls are surpised and deceived by the Suggestions of the
Senses, that represent earthly things as great Realities: spiritual and future
things are to them but matters of Fancy and Conceit. The present and succeeding
World are like Counterballances; as the one rises, the other sinks in Men's
Opinions. When the World has got Possession of them, it commands and captivates
all their Powers and Faculties. All the Preaching in the World is in vain, a
Throng of Business or loose Diversions causes the neglect of the great
Salvation. Represent to them the attractive Mercies of God, his melting Bowels
opened in the Gospel to all repenting Sinners; they are unmoved, frozen in
their Dregs. Remember them, that their Bodies are dying every day, and their
Souls are already dead, and that without sincere coming to Christ they cannot
be recovered to the Life of Grace and Glory, it is in vain: tell them, they must
shortly appear before the dread Lord of Spirits, and be accountable for all
things done in this World, and the Consequence will be eternal; all is in vain:
they have other Affairs, other Desires, which they regard and pursue; they are
tossed in the Labyrinth of the World, and have no Time nor Inclination to secure
their main Interest.

It Is further observable, from the Excuses alleged in the Parable of a
Purchase, and a Marriage, and as it is said in Mat. 22. That the Invited made
light of it, one went to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise; that those
Temptations of the World are most persuasive and fatal to Men, that seem to be
very natural and innocent. For what Duty is more clearly natural and reasonable
than to make Provision of Supplies suitable to their Condition and State, to
their Charge and Families? It Is true, Conscience and Prudence require that Men
should be diligent in their Callings, for the Support and Comfort of the
present Life. But the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness that leads to
it, must be sought in the first place. The brightest Valuations, the most
inflamed Affections, the most vigorous and constant Endeavors are due to
Heaven. Now the Minds and Faculties of Men are limited, and cannot with intense
and equal Ardency apply themselves to various Objects. If the World be the main
Object of their Care and Counsel, the Vigor of their leading and instrumental
Faculties will be less free and active for Heaven: And from hence it is, that
the Affairs and Engagements of this World, tho immediately they do not deprive
Men of Heaven, yet mediately they are destructive to them; for they lessen
their Esteem, cool their Affections, slack their Endeavors to obtain it: they
oppress their Spirits, ingross their Time, that they have no leisure to work
out their own Salvation: They make them receptive of many Temptations, which
wound their Souls to Death for ever. The constant Spring of the Sins and Misery
of Men is from hence, they have forgot the regular use of the Creatures, as
Means and Motives of their ascending to God; they understand not the Rule of
Wisdom, to make Temporal Things subordinate to Eternal; they have lost the
happy Temper of not totally declining the World, nor of eager embracing it. In
short, they would enjoy the World, and only use God in their Exigencies. It Is
therefore inculcated in Scripture, That the Friends of the World are the
Enemies of God, and that the Love of the World is inconsistent with the Love of
the Father. It Is a most dangerous Sin, being so hardly discernable, and hardly
cured: for the more appearance there is of Reason and the less of Sensuality in
a Sin, the more it insinuates and prevails. We usually judge of Sins by the
Foulness of the external Act, but the Guilt of it principally arises from its
inward Contrariety to God. The Love of the World dethrones God in the Hearts of
Men: other Sins dishonor him in breaking his Laws, this reproaches him as less
worthy of our Respects. When it has free Dominion, it will as certainly, tho
silently, destroy the Souls of those who are of a fair Reputation in the Eyes
of Men, as the Riots of notorious Sinners will be their Ruin.

2dly. The corrupt World, those who are styled the Children of this World, by
their Example, and by their Opposition, are Obstacles in the way to Heaven.

(1.) By Example: for the broad Way is beaten by the Multitude, and few strive
to enter in at the strait Gate that leads to Eternal Life. Now Men easily
receive the Impression of Example. Of this there is palpable Evidence; for when
Sins are common, the numbers of the Guilty diminish the Sense and Shame of the
Guilt. But if Conscience be sometimes unquiet, they smother the Sparks of
Conviction in their Breasts, and make a resolute Reckoning they shall be in no
worse condition than others. Miserable Comfort! as if one tortured on a Rack
could receive any Mitigation of his Pains, by the sight of many others
suffering the same Torture. So contagious are the Fashions and Manners of the
World, that a principal end of our Savior's Death was to deliver us from this
Gal. 1.
present evil World: that is, not from the Place, but from the depraved State,
and sinful Practices of the Men of the World. The Apostle Peter remembers
Believers, Ye know that ye 1 Pet. 1.
are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation, received by Tradition from your Fathers; but with the precious
Blood of Christ as of a Lamb without Blemish and without Spot. So deep was the
Pollution, it could only be washed out in that precious Fountain. The
Principles and Ways of the World have a mighty Influence to blind and harden
Men in Conformity to them. The Heathen Idolatries and Impurities were continued
so long in the World, being commended and established by public Custom: and
accordingly the Apostle tells the Ephesians, they in time past walked according
to the course of the World.

Now to apply this more closely to the present Subject: it is visible by the
Conversation of Men in the World, that their Aims, their Appetites, their
Endeavors are terminated in the World: their Souls cleave to it, the Train and
Tendency of their Actions leads to it. A superficial Tincture of Religion, a
Complemental Visit to God sometimes in public Worship, contents the most; but
their Thoughts, their Time and Strength are spent to obtain and enjoy the
present World; for it is esteemed their main Interest, and Heaven is only sought
by the by, as an Accession to their Felicity. Now we usually approve and affect
things according to common Opinions and Practice, tho unreasonable and
exorbitant. The Psalmist speaking of the gathering uncertain Riches, observes,
this their way is their Folly, yet their Posterity approve Psalm. 49.
their Sayings: they imitate the Folly of their Progenitors, tho fatal to them.
Men are vain in their Minds, and secure in their Sins, by Conformity to the
numerous Examples that encompass them. Nay, a regenerate Man by conversing with
the unregenerate World, is in danger to be tainted in his Judgment, and to be
irregular in his Affections to Earthly Things: he is apt to conceive so highly,
and to frame such glorious and goodly Ideas of Worldly Excellencies, that his
Desires are inflamed to attain them, and proportionably he is chilled and
controlled in the Alacrity and Vigor of his Endeavors after heavenly things.
Thus as a Fresh Water River by its nearness to the Sea has a brackish Taste; so
even the Citizens of Heaven are prone to be Earthly-minded, by their Society
with the Children of this World. It Is the wise and earnest Advice of the
Apostle, Be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing
of your Minds, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect
Will of God. The Corruption of the World has deeply seized upon us since to
purge it away; a Man must be melted anew and transformed into another Creature.
So difficult it is for a Carnal Man to resist the united Force and potent Sway
of corrupt Nature and Custom.

(2.) By opposing those who sincerely comply with the Heavenly Call, either by
Scorn and Derision, or Violence and Persecution. Human Nature is very sensible
of disparaging Reflections, and it is one of the spiteful Arts of Satan to make
use of his Instruments to deride serious Religion out of the World. It Is
equally profane and pernicious to turn into Raillery and wild Mirth the
Impieties and Impurities of the Wicked, and the Holiness that shines in the
Lives of excellent Saints: for the making a Mock of Sin, takes away the just
Horror and Detestation of it; and the scurrilous vilifying of Holiness, takes
away the Veneration and high Respect that is due to it. Carnal Men who live in
Pleasures, without restraint of their licentious Appetites, upbraided by the
holy and heavenly Conservation of sincere Christians, cannot with Patience
suffer others to practice what they neglect; and to countenance their own
Looseness, and from Revenge, scurrilously abuse whom they will not imitate.
Pure and undefiled Religion is the Game that winged Wits fly at. He that avoids
the appearance and approach of Sin, that strives to be holy as God is holy in
all manner of Conversation, is the Mark wherein their poisoned Arrows are
fastened. The just upright Job 12. 4.
Man is laughed to scorn. Nay, even dull Wretches will set up for Wits, and
attempt by their insipid Jests, and thredbare Fooleries to abuse the Saints.
But all the bitter Sarcasms that are darted upon Religion, are infinitely more
hurtful to the Despisers than the Despised. It argues a prodigious Depravation
of Mind in those who take a perverse delight in scorning Holiness, the glorious
Likeness of God in Man: such in the account of Scripture are the worst Sinners,
the most forlorn Wretches, whose Condition is dreadful, if not desperate.

This scornful exposing Religion to make Men ashamed of it, is most successful
upon the Dispositions of young Persons, and those who are of higher Birth and
Rank in the World. Youth is the blushing Age, and has a Tenderness of Face,
that cannot bear the Prints of Disgrace. If one in his early Age begins to
breath the Life of Holiness, if he abstains from fleshly Lusts that war against
the Soul, he is represented as fondly nice, and ridiculously scrupulous: no
less than the special Grace of of God is necessary to fortify his holy
Resolutions, and make him superior to the Scorns of the Wicked.

The Honorable are fearful of Disgrace, and more tender of their Reputation,
than others, being in a greater Light, and exposed to more Eyes and
Observations. If one of noble Quality renounces the Vanities and Enticements of
the World, makes the Fear of the Lord his Treasure; if he zealously endeavors
to be more distinguished from others by his eminent Virtues, than by the
Splendour of his Condition, he is scornfully traduced as a melancholy Fop, as a
low Spirit: as if Constancy in Devotion, and the Practice of Mortification were
a descent from his Dignity, and cast a dark sad Shade upon his Honor. Thus the
vain perverted World vilifies that Holiness in Men, which the blessed Angels
adore in God. Isa. 6.


But alas, how many that had serious Inclinations to be religious, and were
entered into the way of Life, have been cooled and checked in their first
Fervors: they could not firmly sustain Reproach, and endure Conflicts with the
Passion of Shame, therefore returned to the Course of the World, and with it
have perished to Eternity. We read of the Israelites after their coming Deuteronomy
25. 17, 18, 19.
out of Egypt, they met in the way with Amalec, who feared not God, and smote
the feeble, and faint, and weary of them: Therefore the Lord strictly charged
them to blot out the Memory of Amalec from under Heaven. In this Type, profane
Scorners, that discourage Beginners in Religion, may see their Doom.

To conclude this first General, I shall observe, the Parable represents to us,
that those who were first invited, not only made light of it, but entreated
spitefully the Servants, Mat. 22.
and slew them. Their neglect of the gracious Invitation, was like the Sleep of
one oppressed with the Fumes of Wine, that does not hear a Message sent to him:
their cruel Rage against those who invited them, was like the awaking of a
distracted Person, who hearing the Voice that calls him, and by an Error of
Judgment mistaking what is said, in fury snatches his Sword, and destroys those
about him. Wicked Men are of Satan's Society: he was a Murderer from the
beginning, and hates the Word of Life. As soon as our Savior was born, and
pointed out by a new Star in Heaven, there was a design to destroy him. It Is
true, the subtle Tempter does not at first inspire Men with Rage against the
Gospel: but as in the Art of dying, some Colors are preparatory for others,
the Cloth is first dipped in Blew before it takes a Black; so by several degrees
in sinning he brings them to extreme Wickedness. Thus the Neglect of the Gospel
makes way for the Contempt of those who bring it; and Contempt proceeds to
Hatred, and Hatred sometimes produces mischievous and deadly Effects. Now the
fear of Temporal Evils, especially if extreme, to which Men are open and
obnoxious for the Gospel, will hinder them from embracing it, or cause them to
forsake it, if they are not supernaturally enlightened and confirmed, by the
Spirit of Power and Love, and of a sound Mind. 2 Timothy 1.


SERMON VII.
LUKE xiv. 23. The Lord said to the Servant, Compel them to come in, that my
House may be full.
I Proceed to the second Hinderance of Men's rejecting the Call of the Gospel.
The Flesh, that in the Language of the Scripture signifies the corrupt Nature,
and inbred Inclinations of Men to forbidden things, obstruct their coming to
Christ. The corrupt Nature is called Flesh, not only as that is a term of
vilifying, for the Original and Resolution of Flesh is into the Dust, but
partly with respect to its Propagation, and chiefly in that the usual
attractive and defiling Objects of Men's Thoughts and Desires are carnal, and
are enjoyed by the carnal Faculties. Our Minds and Affections are colored and
qualified, distinguished and denominated from the Objects about which they are
conversant. This Corruption is spread through all the Faculties of the Soul:
the Mind is carnal in its Principles and Acts, in opposition to the Spirit of
the Mind renewed by Grace: the Will and Affections are depraved. Whatever is
born of the Flesh is Flesh. The Apostle fully expresses this Corruption: he
says, the natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; that
implies the stubborn 1 Cor. 2. 14.
Aversness in the Will and Affections from spiritual things: for they are
Foolishness to him: neither can be know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. The natural Mind is indisposed and incapable of knowing supernatural
things in their Reality and Goodness, so as to ravish the Will into a
Compliance, till it is purified and spiritualized by the holy Spirit. The same
Apostle tells us, that the Romans 5.
Carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law, neither
can be. As the Lusts of the Flesh are opposite to the Law of God, so the Wisdom
of the Flesh is to the Gospel.

This corrupt Nature makes the World such a dangerous Snare to Men: for it
blinds their Minds so as not to see the Dros of Earthly Things, and the Glory
of Heavenly. St. John expresses the tempting Objects of the World by the
vicious Affections that are drawn out and fastn'd upon them. All that is in the
World is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life;
for the Lusts of Men put a Gloss upon them, and make them pernicious. The
Poison is not in the Flowers but in the Spider, that turns the Extraction from
them into its own Nourishment. Accordingly St. Peter speaks of the Corruption
in the World through Lust. 2 Pet. 1.
The vain Heart is more deceitful than the vain World: for not only Reason that
instructs the Wise, but Experience that instructs Fools, affords sufficient
Conviction, that all things here below are Vanity and Vexation: there is none
so low, none so exalted in the World, but finds it so. By tasting a sprig of
Wormwood, the Bitterness is perceived as truly as by drinking a strong Infusion
of it. The World with all its Varieties is a multiplied and perpetuated Vanity;
it affords no solid Satisfaction: the setting down a thousand Ciphers makes no
Sum. But the carnal Heart is so enchanted with the false Luster and seeming
Pleasures of the World, that by changing one Vanity for another, it seeks and
expects Satisfaction. This verifies the Observation of the wise Preacher, The
Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Eccles. 9. 3.
Evil, and Madness is in their Hearts while they live, and after that they go
down to the Dead. What a prodigy of Madness is it for Men to catch at a shadow
of Happiness, to seek for that which they are uncertain to find; and if they do
find, they are certain to lose; and to neglect substantial Felicity, which if
they sincerely seek, they shall obtain, and if they obtain, they shall enjoy
for ever!

But that it may be more evident that the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts,
does powerfully interpose to hinder Men from embracing the Gospel, I will
particularly consider its Opposition to the supernatural Doctrines revealed in
the Gospel, the Objects of Faith; to the holy Precepts of it, the Rule of
Obedience; to the spiritual Rewards recommended to our Choice.

1. The great Mystery of Godliness, is the Incarnate Son of God, who by an
ignominious and accursed Death purchased a glorious blessed Life for his
People: this 1 Cor. 1.
Doctrine is accounted Foolishness, and rejected by the proud unrenewed Mind.
The Gospel is styled the Word of Faith: it is conveyed to Romans 10. 8.
the Soul with Authority and Efficacy by Faith. As Faith in Christ was required
of the Sick, and Blind, and Lame, that his healing Virtue might rest on them;
so the belief Mat. 9. 28.
of the Divinity of his Person and Doctrine, is the first vital Qualification
that makes us capable of spiritual healing. Infidelity stops the Fountain of
Grace.

The Apostle says, the Word preached did not profit them that heard it, not
being mixed with Faith. Now although the Light of the Gospel be so clear and
convincing that the sincere considering Mind cannot suspend its Assent to it,
yet the carnal Mind stained with Prejudices and vicious Affections, will not
admit it. An evil Heart is the principal cause of Unbelief.

The Jews from Pride, Vainglory, and the Love of the World, rejected the Son
of God, tho all the Characters of the Messiah were conspicuous in him: he did
not come with visible Glory and Observation, according to their Expectations
and Desires; they saw no Form nor Comeliness in him, and did not believe the
Report concerning him; they were scandalized at his Parentage and mean
Condition: he discovered their beloved Sins, and sharply reproved the reigning
Vices among them, which made his Person and his Preaching so odious to them.

Our Savior tells us, that Light was come into the World; and Men love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil. The Prejudice of
their Passions was so strong, that they rejected the saving Truths of the
Gospel, and believed damnable Delusions.

Now the same Roots of Offense are in the Hearts of Men against the Gospel.
Such a Cloud arises from the Steam of carnal Lusts darkning the Understanding,
that it cannot discover Truths so high as the mysterious Doctrines of Christ.
Love in the Heart is requisite as well as Light in the Mind, to know spiritual
things: Obedience to the Will of God is the best Preparative to believe his
Word. Our Savior justly taxed the Pharisees, they did not repent, that they
might believe. Men are averse from receiving those Doctrines that condemn their
Lusts; and are Infidels that they may be freely wicked, that the Shadow of
Repentance may not disturb them. It Is said of Atheistical Scorners, they are
willingly ignorant: The corrupt 2 Pet. 3. 5.
Will rules imperiously, and turns the Thoughts from those Arguments, which if
duly considered, Reason with a strong hand would constrain them to acknowledge
there is a righteous God who has Authority to command, and Power to punish
those who rebel against his Laws.

It Is true, they pretend to offer something for a more colorable Denial of
supernatural Revelation: but the perverseness of Infidelity appears through all
their Pretenses. Some object against the Sublimity of the Doctrines of the
Gospel. It was the scornful Expression of one, This is like the Peace of God
that passes all Understanding. As if the Reality of things depended upon the
Conception and Capacity of the Human Mind, and Divine Truths were impossible
because incomprehensible. Such foolish Pride obstructs the Reception of Divine
Truths; and from hence humble Christians are despised as led by a blind Belief.
Others are offended at the simplicity of the revealing them. The Doctrines are
so high they cannot reach unto, the manner of conveying them is so low they
will not stoop to. But it is evident these arguings are not from the Reason but
the Lusts of Men. For the rare Accord of the Matter and Manner of the
Gospel-Revelation is a sensible Character of its Descent from God: The Doctrine
is high and bright, of an extraordinary Revelation; the Delivery of it is easy
and familiar, since it is for the Instruction and Salvation of Men; and
accordingly the Divine Wisdom has made an exact Temperament of these things.
Briefly, the corrupt Affections pervert the Will to reject the Gospel, and the
perverted Will influences the Understanding to disapprove it. Nay, carnal Lusts
force Men against their Light, (as the Jews did Pilate to condemn the Person of
Christ) to condemn his Doctrine.

There are many in this degenerate Age, who although they dare not publicly own
the defiled and abhorred Name of Infidels, yet among their Companions employ
their Wit to dispute and deride the most sublime and sacred Truths out of the
World. Their Faces are full of Death, the Tokens of Reprobation are visible
upon them. The Issue will discover them to be the wretched Examples of that
fearful Rule. Those who are destined to final Ruin are infatuated.

Others are Believers in Profession and their own Conceit, but Infidels in
Practice. Their Faith is but a vain Opinion, a loose Assent to the Christian
Doctrine, because it is the Religion of the Country, but with our Radication and
Establishment. This is evident, considering that the Doctrines of the Gospel
are not merely intellectual, the Objects of Theory and Speculation, but moral
and practical, the Objects of our choice and seeking: This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the World
to save Sinners. Accordingly the unfeigned belief of them is seated not only in
the Mind, but in the Heart, and is correspondent to the infallible Truth and
transcendent Goodness of the thing revealed: they make such an Impression on
the Soul, that the value of them is above Life, and whatever comes in
Competition is with despising Disdain rejected. But when Men seldom remember
and little regard eternal Things, how specious soever the Profession is, can
there be a reasonable Belief of their Words against their Works? Therefore in
the Language of the Scripture, all that do not first seek the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, are Unbelievers; it being morally
impossible that Men should sincerely believe, and have a due Apprehension of
it, but it must be the great Design of their Souls, and the main Business of
their Lives to obtain it.

2. Security is the constant Effect of Infidelity, and hardens Men in their
Sins, and the neglect of Salvation so dearly purchased, and graciously offered
to them in the Gospel. Direct Infidels set their Mouth against Heaven, and defy
the Furnace of Hell. They are blindly bold, and fearless of that Judgment that
makes the Devils tremble. Others, tho not open and palpable Infidels, are in a
dead Calm, not sensible of their Sins, and have slight Apprehensions of their
great Danger: Infidelity lies at the bottom of their Security. As the Egyptians
in the thick Darkness that covered the Land, moved not from their Places; so
many in ignorant Darkness, sit down and are at rest, careless of the Savior
that can deliver from the Wrath to come. Only those who have strong
Apprehensions of Evils imminent and destructive, will fly to Christ as a
Sanctuary and Shelter, and submit to his Terms of saving them.

Secondly; The Corrupt Nature will not submit to the Sanctity and Purity of the
Gospel. The forecited Scripture tells us, the Carnal Mind is Enmity against
God: and that Enmity is armed with many strong Lusts-opposing his Law. The
principal Cause of rejecting the Gospel is common to all, We will not have Luke
15. 14.
this Man to reign over us. It Is observable, that as Holiness is that Attribute
wherein God does most excel, and Men are most defective; so the corrupt Will is
most opposite to it. The Justice and Power of God in some cases Men do approve
and apply themselves to: if injuriously accused or oppressed, they desire his
Justice to vindicate their Innocence, and revenge their Wrongs: if in Distress
and Exigencies, they pray that his powerful Providence may regard and relieve
them: but they are extremely averse from his Holiness shining in his Laws,
which excites his Justice and Power to punish those who rebel against it. They
are ready to say to Christ, what the rebellious Israelites said to Rehoboham,
Thy Father made our Yoke grievous: 1 Kings 12. 4.
now therefore make thou the grievous Service of thy Father, and his heavy Yoke
which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee. They will measure out
the scantling of their Obedience, how far he shall rule, and farther they will
not yield. But our Savior declares, I am not come to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it. Mat. 5.
It Is true, the Gospel is a Covenant of Grace, a sovereign Composition of
precious Promises of recovering Grace, and pardoning Mercy; but it is also a
Law, and enjoins Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. As
without Compensation to the Justice, so without Conformity to the Holiness of
God, we can never be restored to his Favor, and enjoy him as our Felicity.

Our Savior prescribes this indispensable Rule to his Disciples, If any Man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow me.
This is a comprehensive Fundamental Duty, and the natural Man has a strong
Reluctance to every part of it.

1. Self-dependance upon our own Virtues and Duties for the obtaining the
Favor of God, and the Eternal Reward, is very natural to Men: it was the
Condition of the first Covenant, to which they cleave. Men of a fair
Conversation, and unblemished in the Eyes of the World, have some Sparks of the
Pharisee in them, who justified himself, that he was no Extortioner, nor
Unjust, nor an Adulterer, nor as the profane Publican; and that he fasted and
paid Tithes. Upon such Reasons many presume of the Goodness and Safety of their
Spiritual State: they take Pride and Content in themselves, in their Moral
Goodness, and do not feel the want of a Savior, nor apply themselves with
humble mournful Affections to him for Reconciliation to God. Others think by
the Worthiness of their Works to compensate for the Unworthiness of their Sins,
to commute one Duty for another, and balance their Accounts with Heaven, not
considering that if their Works were perfectly good, they are but the
Performance of their Duty, if they had never sinned. It was one great
Obstruction that hindered the Jews from receiving the Gospel: They being
ignorant of Romans 10. 3.
God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, did
not submit themselves to the Righteousness of God. One of a high Spirit will
rather wear a mean Garment of his own, than a rich Livery, the Mark of Servile
Dependence. Pride resists Grace, and Grace resists Pride. The Law of Faith
requires us to renounce not only our Unrighteousness, but our Righteousness,
even the most excellent Graces and the Fruits of them, in comparison of Christ,
and as a Foundation of obtaining the Pardon of Sin* and Salvation for ever. Our
Righteousness is defective and defiled, and cannot endure the trial of God's
inlightning Tribunal. All our Doings and Sufferings cannot expiate the least
Sin; we must only rely upon the Lord our Righteousness, to reconcile us to God,
and that we may stand in Judgment. He was made Sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him, not in our selves.

How hard it is to awaken Men out of the Pharisaical Dream of their own
Righteousness, is evident both in Luke 16.
the Doctrine and Practice of those of the Roman Communion. They assert the
formal Cause of our Justification in the sight of God is our inherent Holiness:
they blaspheme the imputed Righteousness of Christ as a fantastic
Apprehension: they declare that good Works have the merit of Con^ and
Condignity to eternal Life: and that by Penance, Satisfaction is paid to God
for their Sins, as if there were a Proportion between the one and the other.
They succeed the Pharisees in their proud and stubborn Resistance of the
Gospel. And among other carnal Motives that fasten Men in that corrupt
Religion, these have a special force, as quieting Conscience, and gratifying
their Lusts, that they can make Compensation for their Offenses against God,
and that the Absolution of a Priest seals their Pardon: thus being clear, they
may begin a new Score, and return to their old Lusts with new Affections.

2. As Self implies the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, so Selfdenial and
Sin-denial are of the same extent. The whole Body of Corruption with all the
parts of it, even the dearest, the most tender and most cherished by carnal
Men, must be mortified. Severe Restraints are laid upon the desiring and the
angry Appetites, the Springs of all the Sins and Miseries in the World. We are
strictly commanded to pluck out the right Eye, Mat. 5.
and to cut off the right Hand, upon the most fearful Penalties, the Mark 9.
suffering Torments insupportable and everlasting. The Gospel has the
Perfections of a Rule, it is clear and complete in the Direction of our Duty. It
teaches us to deny all Tit. 2.
Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this World. Now carnal Men are apt to say with the Capernaites, This is an hard
saying. Every one John 6. 64.
has a peculiar Favorite Lust, the Sin of his Complexion, or of the Country
wherein he lives, which if you pluck out of their Bosoms, they will fly in your
Face. Men willingly enough hear Reproofs against Sins to which they are
disinclin'd; but if directed against their own Sins, whether of Pleasure or
Profit, they will scorn the Reproof, and storm at the Reprover. They will
perform some Duties that are consistent with their Carnal Ease and Interest,
but obstinately stick at others. Herod is a notorious Instance of this: it is
related he heard John Baptist gladly, and observed him; and when he heard Mark
6. 20.
him, he did many things: but his incestuous Affection made him prefer a filthy
Harlot before the pure Law of God.

One indulged Lust captivates the Soul, and keeps it under the Power of Satan.
If one Leg of a Bird be caught in the Net, it is as surely held as if its whole
Body were entangled. One Lust separates from Christ, and is a Bar against our
entrance into Heaven, for Christ is the only way to it. The Word of God is
sharper than a twoedg'd Sword; but carnal Men will interpose their Souls
between their tender Lusts and the Word, and receive its deadly Strokes to
spare them. The Lord Christ tells the Jews, Ye will not come to me that ye John
5.
may have Life: They would readily embrace a Savior that would allow the
Pleasures of Sin, and free them from the Punishment; but their Wills were so
strongly engaged, they would suffer no Divorce from their beloved Lusts: they
chose Hell with Sin, rather than Heaven with Holiness.

3. The denial of Self includes all that in the order of Nature belongs to us:
Life, and all the Supports, the Comforts, the Ornaments and Endearments of it;
the sweetest Relations, Father and Mother, Brother and Sister, Wife and
Children, the richest Possessions, Houses and Land, must be always parted with,
in the Preparations of our Heart, and Resolutions of our Wills, and actually,
rather than desert our Duty. Such a Supremacy of Affection is required by our
Savior, that suspends the Operation of our Love upon all inferior things, when
they are in Competition with his Interest and Glory. This Command binds all
without exemption: therefore he directs his Followers to be armed with
Expectation of hard Entertainment in the World. Now this Precept seems so
severe to carnal Men, that no Motives can reconcile their Affections to it. If
they are spoiled of the Advantages, and deprived of the Pleasures of this
World, they are ready to complain as Micah to them who robbed him of his Image
and Teraphim, You take away my Gods. As if the Son of God were such a poor or
illiberal Rewarder, either defective in Power or Love, that they should be
Losers for his sake.

Thirdly; The promised Rewards of the Gospel have no affective Force upon the
Carnal Mind, and Affections. It Is true, the Gospel has opened Heaven, and
brought Life and Immortality to light; a State of entire endless Joy in the
Presence of God. Is it possible that Men should be indifferent and careless of
their final Happiness? It Is almost equally difficult to induce Men to believe
and choose the Favor and Fruition of God as their only Felicity, as to convince
them they do not believe and choose it. But their Actions declare their Choice,
and their Choice declares their Esteem: for if his Favor were esteemed an
unvaluable Treasure, it would be the chief Object of their Desires; they would
not forfeit it for all the World: it is therefore evident that the choosing the
Pleasures of Sin, and the Profits of the World, is the direct despising the
Favor of God. And the account of it is clear: for tho Heaven be a State of
eternal and inexpressible Blessedness, yet it is future and spiritual: it makes
but a weak Impression upon their Minds, and is unsuitable to their Affections.
Can carnal Men have but an imaginary Representation of the World to come, and
their Assent to it is overshadowed and eclipsed by the present World with its
Advantages and Pleasures; they cannot relish a Happiness purely spiritual. It Is
not the Goodness of the Object, but the Inclination of the Heart that makes it
desirable. The wise Philosopher observes, That such as the radicated
Disposition and Habit of a Man is, such will the End appear of him. Therefore a
supernatural spiritual Good cannot appear to a sensual Man so attractive, as to
be chosen as his Felicity. Only the pure in Heart can see God, and love him,
and enjoy him in his amiable Excellencies: the Unrenewed have no certain nor
satisfying Notions of the Happiness that his Presence diffuses among the
Blessed above. This will be discoursed of more particularly under another Head.

Fourthly; Satan has a great Agency in Men's Opposition to the Gospel, and their
neglect of Salvation. His Title, the Tempter, implies his constant Practice.
It Is true, he cannot hurt us against our Wills; the Enemy without could not
surprise us, if the Traitor within, the corrupt Nature, did not give him
Admittance; he cannot immediately work upon the Will, nor discern the Mind:
without our Consent he cannot obtain a Conquest over us; therefore his
prevailing Temptations do not disculpate Sinners that yield to them: he rules
only in the Children of Disobedience, they are his voluntary Slaves; but he has
a strange Power in the Minds and Hearts of Men by his managing tempting
Objects. The World makes an Impression upon our lower Faculties, and he
improves the Impression, and excites corrupt Desires. As the Operations of the
holy Spirit in Believers are secret but stronger than the Influence of the
Stars: so the Workings of Satan are in the Wicked secret but powerful. I will
first consider the Motives that urge him to be so active and ardent in
hindering the Success of the Gospel for the Salvation of our Souls. 2. His
Methods and Wiles for that end. The Motives are,

1. His eternal Enmity to God: for being under a Doom never to be reverst, his
Malice is always raging and working to dishonor and displease the Righteous
Judge. He sinned from the beginning, it is his unwearied and uninterrupted Work.
Men in complying with his Temptations, are swayed and carried by the Biass of
their Lusts; some are bribed by Profit, others allured by Pleasure: but his
great End is, that the Law of God may be violated, his Majesty despised, and
his Glory obscured. As in a rebellious Insurrection, the Multitude are engaged,
some for Spoil, others for private Respects, but the Design of the Leader is to
dethrone the King, and usurp his Scepter. Satan's Opposition against God is
more fierce and steadfast than of the most resolved Rebels that trample upon the
Divine Law every day: they do more accomplish his Will than their own, which
will be the occasion and matter of his insulting Scorn, and furiously
upbraiding them hereafter. Briefly, he loves Sin for Sin's sake, as it is an
Affront and Provocation of the Divine Majesty, and is more pleased in the Sins
of Men than in their everlasting Damnation, because the holy and righteous
Lawgiver is dishonored by their Sins, and glorified in their Punishment.

2. His old Enmity and Hatred against the Souls of Men. It Is another Hell to
him, to see them restored to the Favor of God, and his glorious Image
re-ingraven on them. He is a jealous Jailor, and if possible will not lose any
of his Captives. Being condemned to everlasting Burnings, he will make them
feel his Fire.

The Scripture represents him as a strong and subtle Adversary: a roaring Lion
that goes about seeking whom he may devour, and the old Serpent. His Enmity is
universal, his Diligence is equal to his Malice, and his Malice whets his
Invention to lay such Trains as may be destructive to them. His Strength does
chiefly lie in his Subtilty. If Men could see him in his Native Shape of
Darkness, an infernal Fiend, the most cursed Creature, or what he is relatively
to them, a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, how would they flee with
Horror from his Temptations? But he does not awake Sinners, and then wound
them; he is not seen till felt, nor discovered till he has fastened his Stings
in their Souls. He spreads his Snares in the Dark; and when their Spiritual
Senses are locked in a Midnight Sleep, he destroys them.

Secondly; His Methods and Wiles for this end are various.

1. He blinds the Minds of Men, and hardens them in Unbelief. This was his
first and successful Temptation, and is the Pattern that he still follows. He
told the Woman she should not die; and the Restraint of Fear being taken away,
the Pleasure of Taste and Curiosity soon prevailed with her to eat the
forbidden Fruit. The Apostle gives this account of Men's rejecting the Truths of
the Gospel: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom the
God of this World has blinded the Minds of them who believe not, lest the
Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine
unto them. His principal Design is to increase the natural Infidelity in the
Minds of Men, who are so governed by Sense, that in Matters of Faith they
require the Evidence of Sense: for he knows the powerful Efficacy of the Divine
Doctrine where it is believed. Faith enters into the Conscience, opens the
Heart, commands and captivates the Will and Affections, and brings the most
stubborn Sinners from the Kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of Christ. He is in
them, possesses all their Faculties, and by that advantage works effectually.
He has the Monarchy of their Minds, and diverts their Thoughts from pondering
the Arguments that would turn their Judgments, and induce the Belief of the
Gospel: he excites those carnal Affections that blind the Mind: he inchants Men
with enticing sensual Objects, that they neither can nor will believe what is
contrary to their Lusts. Reason, Conscience, Faith, whereby Men are primarily
and chiefly distinguished from the Brutes, are sacrificed to the Prince of
Darkness. Then they are securely his own: for the most precious Promises have
no attractive Influence upon those in whom there is reigning Infidelity: the
sharpest Threatenings cannot pierce through the Armor of Obstinacy.

2. The most that refuse the Offer of Grace in the Gospel, are not absolute
Infidels; therefore the Tempter tries other ways to ruin them. He observes the
Dispositions and Circumstances of Men, and presents such Temptations whereby
they are most likely to be taken and held in his Snares. Although Human Nature be
wholly depraved, yet all Men are not cast into the same Mould: they are
distinguished by their various Aspects, Constitutions, Desires, and Conditions
of Life, and are not wrought on by the same Motives. The Tempter by his natural
Sagacity and Experience (he is styled the old Serpent) has exact Knowledge in
the Art of discerning Men. Sometimes sudden Passions are painted in the
Countenance, and he takes particular Advantage to strike in with them. But his
universal Method is to present the fittest Baits to the natural Inclinations,
and habitual Dispositions of Men: he knows the Faction within will readily open
to his Call. The Sanguine are soft and dissolute, and are easily drawn to
exorbitant Pleasures: The Melancholy are inclined to Discontent, Sorrow,
Impatience, Despair: Those who have active restless Spirits, are taken with the
Advantages of the World. The muddy Mind is easily stirred by the Offer of Gain:
the voluptuous Mind is strongly allured by sensual Delights: the aspiring Mind
is incensed by the prospect of Honor. Now tho the Tempter be a Spirit, and not
capable of those Sins which are acted by the sensible Faculties, yet not only
spiritual Sins, Pride, Envy, Malignity, and the like, but Fleshly Lusts, even
the foullest Actions are from his Incitations. He was not only a proud Spirit,
but an unclean Spirit in David. He was a covetous Spirit 2 Chronicles.
in Judas: an hypocritical Spirit in Ananias: Satan put it into his Heart to
detain part of the Price, and lie to the Holy Ghost. He presents the
Temptation, and suggests Motives to embrace it. He brings the Fuel, enticing
Objects, and inspires the Flame, ardent Desires to them. If burning Lusts begin
to cool, and raging Corruptions are controlled by the threatening of the Word,
and the Terrors of Conscience, he will blow them up again. Now any reigning
Lust is a Viceroy of Satan's, and keeps Possession for him, and consequently
excludes the Son of God from Admission into the Heart.

3. He persuades Men that Religion in its Power and Strictness is not
necessary: the abstaining from enormous Crimes, and the performance of some
outward Service will be available for Salvation. Hell is the Portion of the
Devil and his Children, and none are of his Race but incarnate Devils, unclean
Spirits in brutish Bodies. He makes use of carnal Men, under the pretense of
Friendship to persuade those who make a Show of Conscience, to be less tender
and vigilant, by telling them, this Strictness is superfluous, 'twill spoil
you, make you unsociable and odious: the Wise and Learned that think to go to
Heaven with the first, take a greater liberty: they will say Moderation is a
Virtue, and by the pretense of Temper cherish the loathsome Distemper of
Lukewarmness, that is as fatal as a deadly Coldness. The Tempter will permit
Men to make use of Religion as a Medicine, a little in fainting Fits, to
relieve and recover them, but not as our daily Food: not to be their diligent
and constant Practice. The crafty Serpent will abuse the Words of the holy
Spirit, Be not righteous overmuch. As Judas said of the precious Ointment
poured upon our Savior, Why was this waste? so carnal Men are apt to say, Why
these severe Restraints from satisfying the natural Appetites? Why such
Circumspection in our walking? Why keep the Lord's Day so religiously? Is it
not enough to hear the Sermons? May we not afterward unbend, and enjoy free
Society, and recreate our selves with carnal Contentments? They do not believe
that God is so strict in his Commands, nor will be so exact in requiring an
account for them: fond Creatures to entertain such carnal Conceits of God, to
think him like themselves. They are apt to say, the Ministers will fetter them
all by imaginative Rules of Holiness unprescribed in the Scriptures. For Men
would fain have the Light, and the Law that regulates them, to be suitable to
their Appetites and Actions. But are we not commanded to imitate and honor our
Pattern, to be holy as our Heavenly Father is holy, in all manner of
Conversation? Are we not enjoined to work out our own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; to cleanse our selves from all Pollutions of Flesh and Spirit, and
to perfect Holiness in the Fear of God: to follow Holiness with the most
zealous and unsatisfied Desires, that, if it were possible, we might anticipate
Heaven on Earth? Can there be any Excuse for neglecting these holy Duties?

There are none more dangerously deceived than those that think they are holy
enough, and make no question of the Favor of God and their final Happiness.
They condemn profane outrageous Sinners; those who visibly come short of them,
they think will fall short of Salvation; but to excel them, they think is a
needless Preciseness, a Pride of Singularity, a Mask of Hypocrisy. It Is one of
Satan's Arts to conceal the Good that is in the Saints, that they may condemn
themselves, and to conceal the Evil that is in the Unregenerate, that they may
flatter themselves. How many fall as deep as Hell from such high Hopes? for he
that does not seriously desire and endeavor to be renewed into the unspotted
Image of God, was never truly renewed.

SERMON VIII.
LUKE xiv. 23. The Lord said to the Servant, Compel them to come in, that my
House may be full.
3dly. IF Conscience be not seared and senseless, but awakens Sinners to
reflect upon their Condition, and to seek for the pardoning Mercy of God, he
deceives them with false Notions of Faith and Repentance, and hinders their
entire Compliance with the Terms of Mercy offered in the Gospel. Final Unbelief
and Impenitence utterly exclude Men from Salvation: for the Death of Christ was
not appointed to be a Sacrifice for those Sins. There is no Salvation to be
obtained without the Remission of Sin, no Remission without the Blood of
Christ, no Application of that precious Blood without Faith. This is the vital
Qualification required in all justified Persons: for it has a peculiar
Efficiency in receiving Christ and Pardon, and ascribes the Glory of it
entirely to the Mercy of God and Merits of Christ. It Is said, To as many as
received him, he gave Power to become the Sons of God, to John 1. 12.
those who believed on his Name. Receiving is relative to God's Offer of Christ
to the Condemned and Miserable, and implies the taking him in all the
Essentials of his Office; as a Prophet, to instruct us in our Duty and
Happiness by his Word and Spirit; as a Priest, to atone the Divine Displeasure
by his Propitiation and Intercession; as a King, to govern us by his Law, and
to bestow spiritual and eternal Blessings on us. Faith receives whole Christ as
a Kingly Priest, and a saving Prince; he is styled a Priest upon a Throne, a
Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sins. He purchased
the Forgiveness of Sins as a Priest by his Sufferings on the Cross, and pardons
as a King upon the Throne: from hence it necessarily follows, that Faith
receives Pardon from him in that Relation wherein he procured it, and confers
it. The Apostle declares, He died for our Sins, and rose again for our
Justification, and thereby redeemed us, and acquired a Dominion over us: then
it is clear and consequent, that saving Faith receives him for all those Uses
for which God did appoint him; and accordingly purifies the Heart, overcomes
the World, works by Love: and Love is the Spring and Substance of every Duty,
the fulfilling of the Law. Now Carnal Men are deceived in this Imagination,
that the single Act of resting upon Christ is sufficient to entitle them to the
Promise of Salvation to all that believe in him: they desire an Interest in
Christ, to quiet their Consciences; and the World, to satisfy their Affections.
They will rest on him as a Redeemer, but reject him as a Lord: they would enjoy
his Salvation, but will not endure his Dominion: they will come to partake of
the Festival-Entertainment, the Pardon of their Sins, but not for the Honor of
the Bridegroom. As if the Gospel were a free Charter to Sin, and gave an impure
Indulgence to the vicious Affections; which is as inconsistent with it, as the
Darkness of the Night with Noonday in the same Hemisphere: for then it would
foil it self, and frustrate its own End. Our Savior first redeems from Sin,
from the vain Conversation, then from Hell. 1 Pet. 1. 18.
There can be no regular saving Trust on his Death, without an unfeigned
Resolution to live within the Compass of his Laws. He is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all that obey him. It Is a blasphemous Conceit, that he will save
Men with their Sins. If they will die in such a pleasing Dream, who can prevent
it?

2. Men are miserably deceived about Repentance. This is indispensably required
not only by the Command, but as a Disposition that qualifies the Sinner for
pardoning Mercy. For although the Majesty and Supremacy of God be illustriously
visible in pardoning Sinners, and it is most evident that his Authority is above
the Rigor of the Law, and his Mercy is infinitely free; yet they are always
exercised correspondently to his essential and unchangeable Perfections, his
ruling Wisdom, his unspotted Holiness, and governing Justice: From hence it
follows that a Sinner remaining in the Love, and under the Power of his Sins,
is not a capable Object of pardoning Mercy. Who can conceive that a wise Prince
should send forth a Proclamation of Pardon to Rebels, without their Consent to
return to their Allegiance? John the Baptist, the Forerunner of the Rising Sun
of Righteousness, the Morning Star of the Gospel, preached the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins. Even our Savior begins his preaching the
Gospel with this, Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. St. Peter directed those
who were anxious and inquiring about their Salvation, Repent, and be baptized
in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins. He repeats
this Doctrine in Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
Sins may be blotted out, when the Times of refreshing shall come from the
Presence of the Lord. And he gives Testimony of the Resurrection of Christ, Him
has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel,
and Forgiveness of Sins. According to this unalterable Tenor of the Gospel,
Repentance is the Condition that qualifies the Subject, without which no Man is
pardoned. Some are strangely scrupulous of using this word Condition, tho it is
authorized by the full Current of the Reformed Divines, and I know none more
convenient to express the necessity of it in a pardoned Person. Our Savior
tells his Disciples, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: Are
not those words a Conditional Assertion, upon what Terms they possess that
inestimable Privilege of being his Friends? Thus when God invites Men to come
out from the Pollutions of the World, and to touch no unclean thing, and I will
receive you, and I will be your Father, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters,
says the Lord Almighty: Are not these Conditional Promises? And upon the
Performance of the Terms, the Blessing will be bestowed, and not otherwise.

It Is objected, that the asserting Repentance to be the Condition of Pardon,
lessens the Grace of the Gospel: but this is a great Mistake, for Repentance is
an Evangelical Duty and Grace. The Law requires Innocence and perfect
Obedience, or condemns without Mercy: the Gospel commands and accepts
Repentance. This Grace was purchased by our Savior, and is wrought in us by
the holy Spirit; and joined with Faith, are the first Fruits of the returning
Sinner to God. When it is exercised in the most eminent degrees, it has not the
least Merit nor Causality in the obtaining Pardon. If a repenting Sinner could
fill the Air with his Sighs, and Heaven with his Tears; if all his vital
Springs were opened, and Streams of Blood flowed out, they cannot be
satisfactory to God's injured Justice. The unreconcilable Hatred of Sin, the
ardent Love of Holiness, and steadfast Resolution to follow it, which are
Ingredients in sincere Repentance, tho they are pleasing to God, yet are the
Duty of the reasonable Creature before the commission of Sin, and therefore can
deserve nothing of God. But the ordaining an inseparable Connection between
Repentance and Pardon, is honorable to God, and very beneficial to Men: for
there is no State of Misery more miserable than for the Sinner to be hardened in
his Sins. But to return from this Digression.

The Scripture describes Repentance by a sincere Change and Renovation of the
Mind, the leading Faculty; by the entire turning of the Heart from the love of
Sin to the love of Holiness; by the active lively Passions, Sorrow, Fear,
Shame, Indignation, Zeal, that are principal Ingredients in it; and by the
Fruits worthy of Repentance, and Works meet for Repentance. It Is called
Repentance from dead Works, and Repentance unto Life. Now Men are willingly
deceived with an insincere and ineffective Repentance: either with a mere
mental Change, or with broken Resolutions instead of the entire Heart; or with
the leaving some Sins, and retaining others that are suitable to their Humors
and Lusts. They confess their Sins, and condemn themselves for them: sometimes
they have flashing Thoughts, melting Affections, good Purposes to forsake Sin,
this they think to be sincere Repentance: but when a Temptation appears, they
are easily overcome, and live in the habitual Practice of their provoking Sins.
This Conceit of their being true Penitents, is as unreasonable, as if one that
has a returning Ague, should think himself freed from his Disease in the
intervals of his Fits. Now to quiet Conscience, they readily apply to
themselves the words of the Apostle, What I do, I allow not. And since the best
Saints, while they are in sympathy with frail Flesh cannot be perfect, but many
Sins they unwarily and unwillingly commit, which are Infirmities lamented by
them, and graciously forgiven by their Heavenly Father; therefore indulgent
Sinners take shelter under this Pretense, that their Relapses are mere
unavoidable Infirmities. But what Weakness can be pretended for wilful habitual
Sins? Such Excuses do not cover their Guilt, but discover their strong
Affections to their Lusts: They have not the Excuse of Ignorance: to pretend
the Flesh and the World are omnipotent Enemies that cannot be resisted, is to
blaspheme the Grace of the holy Spirit. In short, a new Life is inseparable
from Repentance in its Reality. Sad and serious Thoughts, Sighs and Tears, the
sorrowful Confession of Sins, and good Purposes against them, are the Blossoms
of Repentance, ineffective without the substantial Fruits of it in a reformed
Conversation. It Is one of the Arts of Satan to join things together that are
inconsistent: In Paradise he assured the Woman that she might take of the
forbidden Tree, and of the Tree of Life: and he now deceives many with the hope
that their indulged repeated Sins are consistent with Repentance. But if Men do
not forsake the foul Sins they lament, their Sorrow will go with them to Hell,
and settle in the Worm that shall never die.

Fifthly; The Tempter hinders Men from Compliance with the present Invitations
of Grace, by suggesting there will be time enough for accepting them hereafter,
and a future Repentance will be sufficient to redress all their Miscarriages.
By this Deceit he trains them on to Ruin. By this he eludes the Force of
present Convictions: that without Repentance they must perish for ever, and
puts Men* out of the Compass of Conversion. It Is clear by its own Light, and
needs no other Proof, that present Obedience is due to the Commands of God; To
day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts: Yet against all the
Evidence of the Word without, and of Conscience within, Satan so strongly
deceives Men, that they rebelliously neglect their Duty, till their Time and
Life are expiring. But how unbecoming, how difficult, how hazardous is a late
Repentance? How unbecoming is it to put off God till hereafter? Such is his
glorious Majesty, we should with the most reverent Respect, and humble
Thankfulness obey his first Call. If a Prince should invite a Subject to come
to him for some great Favor, would he so break all the Rules of Decorum, as to
delay his coming, by saying, Hereafter will be time enough? And what is the
greatest Majesty on Earth to the God of Glory? no more than a More to the Sun:
and proportionably the Indignity arises to neglect the Offers of his Grace.

Besides, how incongruous is it to give the Flower of our Time and Strength to
our Lusts, and to reserve the Bran for God? To spend the Age of our vital and
vigorous Actions in the Vanities and Business of the World, and to allow only
our languishing Age for the obtaining of Heaven? That Men should content
themselves with dead Affections in his Service who is their Life, that were so
lively in the Service of Sin that is their Death?

How difficult is a late Repentance? Can you repent and believe at your
pleasure? Men think that in their Age, after the ebbing and retirement of the
carnal Affections, they shall more easily forsake their Sins: but it is a
pernicious Deceit. The native Corruption of Men's Hearts, alienates them from a
dutiful return to God; and contracted Corruption by habitual Practice, fastens
them in Sin as their Center. In Youth, when the Blood and Spirits are high and
fierce, the Body has a corrupting Influence upon the Mind; but by Custom in
Sin, the Mind is so depraved, that it heats the frozen Blood and corrupts the
Body. Suppose the exciting Grace of the Spirit be not totally withdrawn, which
has often been ineffectual; Can it be expected that after Men have been
hardened in the commission and continuance of Sin, they should be more
receptive of Heavenly Impressions? A Disease neglected at first, that
stealingly slips into the Habit of the Body, and gradually weakens Nature,
becomes at last uncontrollable and incurable.

How hazardous is it to neglect present Obedience to the Call of Divine Mercy?
Our Days, in the Language of the Psalmist, are but as an hand-breadth; and can
Men extend their Lives beyond their Span? A vast Eternity follows without
Dimensions, an undivided Duration. It is no more in their Power to continue
Time to come, than to recall Time past. How many are surpised by hasty Death in
their Security, and die in their unrepented Sins, and perish for ever? The wise
Man alarms the Sluggard with approaching Poverty, and his Expressions are very
applicable to the Delayers of Repentance: Death comes like a Traveller,
gradually by silent Steps; and as an armed Man, will irresistably arrest them:
and Damnation follows, which they can neither repel nor discover till they are
seized by it. O that deluded Sinners would consider, that nothing so ripens
them for Death, and accelerates Judgment, as the Presumption that the Season of
Grace will continue notwithstanding their lavish and careless wasting it!

But suppose that Life be extended to the utmost Date, can you expect that the
holy Spirit should visit you that have been so long putrefying in the Grave,
and breath a new Life into you? It Is the most severe threatening, My Spirit
shall not always strive with Man; and then their Case is desperate. There is a
fearful Example recorded in Scripture; the old World was first drowned in
Sensuality, and resisted the holy Spirit till he was withdrawn; and then the
Deluge washed away those Swine in their Mire. Can you expect that at last when
the World and your Sins leave you, God will accept and receive you? You are
commanded to seek him in your early Spring, in the first Dawnings of his Light
and Favor, and is a poor Remnant of your Life sufficient for obtaining his
Meroy? The Harlots respected not the dead, but contended for the living Child:
Satan and the World strive to have the prime and best part of your Lives, and
will God be contented with the dying Remains? Or, do you expect an easy
Composition for all the Abuse of his Benefits, because of his Patience? Do you
presume because he forbears so long, he will readily forgive at last? The
Servant not called to an account till he was run into an irrecoverable
Arrearage of ten thousand Talents, was delivered to the Tormentors till he
should pay all his Debt. How are Men degenerated, and fallen lower than the
Brute Creatures? The Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed Jer. 8. 7.
times; and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of
their coming; but Men know not the Judgment of the Lord. This Consideration
made our compassionate Savior dip his Words in Tears. He beheld the City, and
wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things that belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes.

O wretched deceived Souls! how long will you neglect a Savior and Salvation?
How long shall he wait to be gracious, and expect your lingering Repentance in
vain? Remember the time of Grace is limited: if you refuse Obedience to the
present Call, do you know he will renew the Offers of his Grace? Now is the
accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation: Will this New last for ever? There
is no Now of Favor and Hope in Hell. It Is true, God is merciful; and it is one
of his Royal Titles, The God of Patience: though Threatenings are denounced
against Sinners, and Judgments are ready to seize upon them, he repents and
stops his Wrath: but there is no State more fearful in this World, than when
Men by neglecting Repentance, make God weary of repenting. When Patience has
had its perfect Work toward the Unrelenting and Unreformed, Justice succeeds:
before God cuts off a Sinner, he cuts off all his Excuses. Read with Fear the
first of the Proverbs, Because I have called, and you refused; I will laugh at
your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes. God's Frown, much more his
Scorn, is infinitely terrible and insupportable. Those who delay Repentance
till the Body is diseased all over, and Death is printed in the Countenance,
and the languishing Lights are almost quenched, and the vital Frame is near a
Dissolution, yet presume a few Sighs will transport their Souls to Heaven, How
just and dreadful will their Disappointment be? However they are deceived, God
is not mocked; as a Man sows, he shall reap.

SERMON IX.
LUKE xiv. 23. The Lord said to the Servant, Compel them to come in, that my
House may be full.
II. I Am now to consider the Means by which Men are wrought on to accept of
the Invitations of Grace in the Gospel. The Sum of what has been discoursed of
sinful and miserable Man is this, The Understanding, the directing Faculty, is
in ignorant Darkness, and a dead Slumber, not apprehensive of his Misery. A
dead Eye does not see its want of Sight, nor a dead Heart feel its want of
Life. If the Head be obstructed with clammy Humors, the whole Body is without
Sense: for the Nerves have their Root in the Brain, and are the Channels to
convey powerful Spirits, to give Sense, and Vigor, and Motion to all the Parts.
The Will is a fierce and free Faculty, commanding and active, perverted and
stubborn against the holy Law of God. The Affections are exceedingly
disordered, and strongly inclined to sensual Things that flatter them with
Satisfaction, and very tumultuous and fiery against whatever shall cross their
natural Inclinations. Now how can one so stupid and refractory, be made soft
and flexible to the Call of Mercy? As the Epicurean in Tully objects against
the making of the World, quae machinae qui vectes, What Engines, what Leavers
were used in raising this vast Fabric? What he spoke in Derision, may be said
with Wonder; What Engines, what Instruments are used in craning up a Soul sunk
below the Center, to the highest Heaven! What in making the new Creation, that
is more glorious and lasting than the first! It Is a Work respectively
impossible, not absolutely, it can only be effected by the Power of God.

There is no Principle of Recovery left in fallen Man. The Conversion of him
from Sin to Holiness, and from the Creature to God, is a Miracle of Grace: if
he converted himself, it were supermiraculous. God can by his commanding Power
bring Light out of Darkness; but it is plainly impossible that Darkness should
produce Light.

The external Ministration of the Gospel, without the concomitant Ministry of
the Spirit, is ineffective. The Divinest Preacher cannot soften the Iron Sinew,
nor melt the Heart of Stone, nor make the Rock to tremble. The Prophet Isaiah,
whose sublime Eloquence overcomes all the admired Orators of the World, yet
complains, Who has believed our Isa. 53.
Report? to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? The Angels of Light, if they
were sent from Heaven, and were in this sense ministering Spirits, they could
not by their Seraphick Zeal, and most excellent Eloquence change and reform
Sinners. One evil Angel seduced and corrupted the best Man, Adam, in the State
of Innocence and Happiness: but a Council of good Angels cannot restore one
Man, tho the least tainted, to Holiness and Felicity. No Creature can be a
Creator; the Sanctification of a Sinner is a new Creation. It Is only the Word
of Life spoken by the Lord of Life, that can raise dead Bodies and dead Souls.
Suppose the Word of God be assisted by his Rod, yet that will be ineffectual to
cleanse and change their Hearts without Divine Grace. It Is according to the
wise Order of God, whom the Word does not convert, the Rod is made use of to
cure; and whom the Rod does not cure, the Sword cuts off.

Prosperity furnishes the Carnal Appetites with delightful Objects, and Men are
easily induced to neglect their Duty: like Children that forget their Lesson
when they are at play. Sense that reigns in Beasts, and should serve in Men, is
then predominant. But Affliction imbitters the carnal Sweets, and is a proper
Means to fix the Thoughts, and restore the Mind to its Right and Jurisdiction:
as Blows and hard Usage bind up the ranging Fancy in distracted Persons; tames
and tires them, and thereby reduces them to Sobriety. Thus God is often
pleased, by Afflictions, to show Men their Transgressions, Job 36.
to open their Ears to Discipline, and effectually command them to return from
their Iniquities. But without the Instruction of his Spirit joins with the
Voice of the Rod, the utmost Effect of even sharp and long Afflictions is a
forced and fading Repentance. Constrained Devotion is like Fire struck out of a
Flint, hardly got, and soon gone. Thus it is said of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, When he slew them, they sought him, they returned and sought early
after God; but their Heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast
in his Covenant. How many open Rebels have been awakened by the fear of Death?
and when they have tasted and seen the Terrors of the Lord, what Addresses,
what Submissions, what Promises have they made to God? but after their
Reprieve, how soon have they forgot the past Terrors, and broke all the Bars of
Reason, and of their Resolutions, and been as unreform'd as ever. The wise Man
tells us, Bray a Fool in a Mortar, pound him in pieces, his Folly will remain
in him.

Nay, Miracles without the Application of them by Grace to the Spirits of Men,
are ineffectual to work Faith and Repentance. The End of them is by the
Evidence of Sense to excite the Mind, to consider the Power that works them.
But they may astonish the Sense, and the Mind not be convinced; or if
convinced, yet they leave no permanent Operation upon the Hearts of the
Spectators. Moses charges the Israelites that notwithstanding they had seen all
the miraculous Strokes of God's Power upon Pharaoh and his Servants, yet the
Lord has not given you an Heart Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear to this day. When the Son of
God appeared in his own Likeness, and did such numerous and conspicuous
Miracles that compelled the most stubborn Devils to acknowledge his Deity, yet
the Pharisees remained obstinate and inconvincible. The Soldiers who saw him
rising in Power and Glory, and were almost frightened to Death at the sight,
yet continued obdurate in their Infidelity.

Our Savior assures us, No Man can come to him, except the Father which John
6. 44.
has sent me, draw him. The Words are full of Emphasis, No Man: the Negation
is universal; not only the Act is denied, No Man comes, but the Power, can
come; no less than Omnipotent Grace draws him. A carnal Man will not come to
Christ for Life; and he cannot will to come: for his Mind is so fore-laid with
Prejudice, and his Will is so depraved and entangled with the love of Sin, that
he cannot sincerely Nec te posse carere velim.
desire to be set free. Every delightful Sin is like a charmed Circle out of
which the Sinner cannot move.

We are not to conceive of this Disability, as if Sinners had not deliberative
and elective Faculties to consider and choose what is best: such a Disability
would be an Argument for their Innocence and Justification: Neither as if Men
had a Will to forsake Sin, and wanted Power; like a miserable Slave that sighs
after Liberty, but is fastened by heavy Fetters: but the perverse Will keeps
them in Bondage: They serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, and delight in their
Fetters. It Is a voluntary culpable Impotence joined with a strong Reluctance to
Grace: it is the impudent imperious Weakness of the Whorish Woman charged upon
the Israelites, and admits of no Apology and Defense: Nay, it aggravates the
Sin and Sentence of such depraved Creatures. As there is in Virtue and Holiness
a Divine Degree of Perfection, that makes Persons not capable of departing from
their Duty: so there is a Diabolical Degree in Sin, when the Soul is so
depraved, that it cannot abstain from doing Evil. And as consummate Virtue is
most worthy of Esteem and Praise; so when a vicious Habit contracted by long
Custom in Sin, absolutely possesses the Soul, it is most worthy of Abhorrence.

Now only Divine Grace compels Sinners to come to Christ, and to partake of
saving Mercies: that is, changes the Biass of the Will, and makes it obedient
to the Heavenly Call. God is the supreme Mover, and turns all Occurrences in
the World to his Purpose and Praise: and the Hearts of Men are not exempt from
his Dominion, but he turns them as the Rivers of Waters. The effectual
Operation of Grace does not violate the native Freedom of the Will, but is
congruous to it. God's drawing is by teaching: Every one that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes to me. When the Author of the Gospel is the
Teacher of it, the most stupid and obstinate Sinners shall be convinced and
obedient. To make this more clear, I will briefly consider the Intellectual
Frame of Man, and the natural Subordination of the Faculties in their various
Operations. As the Spring in a Watch, so the Understanding is the first Mover
in the reasonable Creature: the Understanding has a double Faculty; the
Apprehensive, to discover the Good and Evil in Objects presented to it; and the
Judicative, to compare and ponder the Good and Evil discerned in things; and
accordingly to esteem or disvalue, to approve or dislike. The Will chooses what
the Understanding commends, and rejects what the Judgment condemns. The
Affections of Desire and Delight are from the Choice of the Will, the
Affections of Aversation and Flight are from the Rejection of the Will. The
Pursuit or Neglect of Things, the Application or Opposition we make in our
Actions and Practice to them, is from the Delight or Distaste of Things in our
Affections. But when Lust entered into the Soul, it perverted this Order. As
the strong Tide of the Sea pouring into Rivers, turns them back to their
Springs, in a Course contrary to their natural Motion: thus the Heart
overflowing with a strong Tide of Corruption, empties it self into the Head the
Spring of Actions: the unholy Affections work upon the Will to reject the
Offers of Grace in the Gospel; and the corrupt Will works upon the Mind to
vilify them. It Is to be observed, that the Tempter works upon Men's Minds in the
unnatural way; he makes use of the disordered Affections to pervert the Will,
and of the perverted Will to divert the Understanding from due Consideration of
Objects, and to corrupt its Judgment. But God works by the Understanding on the
Will and Affections, according to the regular Dependence of those Faculties.

The first Beam of saving Grace shines into the Mind with so strong a Light,
discovering Spiritual and Eternal Things in their Reality and Glory, that the
Will and Affections are drawn to choose, and embrace, and to follow them with
Zeal and Constancy. In this blessed Work, we are to consider the Revelation of
the Object, and the Irradiation of the Mind. As in the discerning of Corporal
things, there must be Light in the Eye, or there can be no Seeing, and Light in
the Air, or there can be no Sight: So the great Mysteries of Godliness, which
are of impossible discovery without Revelation, are made known in the Gospel;
and the Understanding is illuminated to see them in their Reality and
transcendent Goodness, as the Apostle expresses, This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save
Sinners. He prays for the Ephesians, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 1.
the Father of Glory, may give them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the
Knowledge of him; that the Eyes of their Understanding being enlightened, they
may know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of
his Inheritance in the Saints. Although the Evidence of Faith be not so clear as
that of Sense, yet it is so sure, that the Adherence of Faith is more firm to
its Objects, tho future, than of Sense to things present. With the Irradiation
of the Mind there is such a determining fluence on the Will and the Affections,
that Christ and Heaven are joyfully chosen before all things. In converting
Sinners there is not a bare proposal of the Objects of Faith, with the Motives
to believe and accept them, and Men are left to their own Discretion and
Choice: The Holy Ghost who certainly knows the manner and efficacy of his own
Operations, expresses converting Grace by the exceeding Greatness of his Power
toward Ephesians. 1.
them that believe, according to the working of his mighty Power, which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead, and set him at his own
Right Hand in Heaven. It Is true, the Principle of Resistance in corrupt Nature
is not quite extinguished; but actual Resistance is overcome by the holy
Spirit, who works to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

In the Human Will we are to consider the Faculty of choosing and refusing,
which includes in it Freedom and Liberty, without which it ceases to be a Will.
2. The Depravation of it: and this consists in a necessity of choosing the Evil
of Sin, represented as pleasing to the Carnal Affections, and rejecting the Law
of God, which is holy and good. The sinning Will contracted this necessity. Now
Grace does not destroy the Nature of the Will, but changes its Quality: of
Carnal and Earthly makes it Holy and Heavenly: this is expressed by a new Heart,
and a new Spirit. And when the Spirit of the Mind is renewed by illuminating
Grace, and the Will and Affections of the Heart are renewed by purifying Grace,
the Will does as freely and necessarily choose Spiritual and Eternal Things, as
in the State of Nature it chose Things pleasing to the corrupt Appetites. God
draws Sinners to himself with the Cords of a Man, in a rational way, without
Violence to their Faculties, and fastens them by Bands of Love. He instructs
the Soul, and infuses such a Principle and Disposition as is suitable to the
Doctrine. When the Will is directed and drawn, by the illuminating Guidance of
the Mind, to choose and embrace the most excellent Good, and the other
Faculties to obey, this is Man's true Liberty. In Heaven the unvariable fixing
the Will upon God our Supreme Good, is its Perfection and Felicity.

The outward Means of inducing Men to comply with God's Call, is the preaching
of the Word. If it were the Will of God, he can immediately create Men as Adam,
in complete Stature, and with the Perfection of Reason; but he makes use of
Second Causes, forms them in the Womb, brings them into the World by the
ordinary way of the Earth, and raises them from Infancy to a mature State,
according to the Rules of Nature. Thus God could by one Act sanctify Sinners in
Perfection; but he is pleased by the preaching of the Word to convert Sinners,
and gradually perfect the Saints: The Gospel is the Ministry of Reconciliation,
2 Cor. 5.
and of Regeneration. And James 1.
this is very congruous to the Human Nature: for the Sinner is not converted,
as a Stone ascends by a forced and blind Motion, but is instructed and affected
by proposing Objects to his Mind and Will, and acts according to the Impression
he received from them. Now the Natural Man being a Servant to Corruption, the
external propounding of the most powerful Objects and Motives cannot change
him: the converting Efficacy of the Word is from Jesus Christ. To make this
more evident, let us consider, In every Action where an Instrument is used, the
Action is properly ascribed to the Agent. God is a pure Spirit, without any
Composition of bodily Organs of Speech; yet when he formed a Voice in the Air
for the proclaiming the Law, He spoke; and whether by any Exodus 20. 1.
created Voice, or by the Voice of Men appointed for preaching the Deuteronomy. 5. 4.
Gospel, he speaks. In human speaking, the Voice is from the Tongue, but the
Sense and Meaning is from the Mind that directs it. From hence it is that the
Gospel preached is of admirable Efficacy, and works above the Power of any
Creature. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged
Heb. 4. 12.
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow; and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart.
It subdues open Rebels, and makes their Pride and Confidence fall as low as
Hell; it mollifies the most obdurate, and makes them compliant to the
Invitations of Grace. And although the Minister be never so mean in his Person and
Appearance, yet a weak Instrument in an Almighty Hand does Wonders.

Our blessed Savior in his Person was the first Preacher of the Gospel; and in
his Sermons we are directed how to work upon the Reason, and the Affections of
Sinners, by which alone they are capable to be moved. The Substance of his
several Sermons was, Repent ye, and believe the Mark 1.
Gospel.

1. The Order and Progress of converting Grace is by the Conviction of the
Mind, to turn the Will and Affections. Sin prevails in Men by the love of
Pleasure; and till there be a mixture of what is more bitter than Sin is sweet,
they will not forsake it. The World corrupted by Lust, is an imaginary
Paradise, wherein there is nothing but forbidden Fruit; and the Fruit is so
pleasant to the Eyes and Taste, that only flaming Terrors will expel them out
of it. No Man will cut off his Right Hand till an incurable Gangreen has seized
on it. The light neglected Notions of Heaven are ineffective to reform Sinners;
till the Terrors of the Lord are set in array against them, they are fastened
in their Sins. Of this there is visible and frequent Experience: how many that
have lived in a careless Contempt of God till their last Sickness, and when
they feel themselves sinking to the Grave and Hell, and Conscience is an exact
Remembrancer and terrible Accuser of all their inward Wickedness and notorious
Sins, then what furious Reflections do they make upon themselves? and what
Promises do they make if they might be spared? It Is therefore the first Duty of
Ministers, by clearing Light and convincing Strength to work on Conscience, and
by the Mediation of it to apply Guilt and Wrath to the Sinner, that he may be
restless in his Sins. The Wrath of God is revealed from Romans 1.
Heaven against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men: it is decreed
before the World was, it is denounced in the Word, and shall be fully executed
in the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God:
nothing is more certain than that Day, and nothing so heavy as that Wrath. It Is
a Burden so insupportable, that the Son of God was ready to sink under its
Weight: he meekly and silently endured all the cruel Rage of his Enemies, but
mournfully broke forth, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me! Who can
understand the Consequence of that Complaint? Who can support himself under the
Apprehension of an absent and angry God? When the convinced Person ponders his
Sins, what Indignities he has offered to the glorious God his Maker and
Preserver, his Lawgiver and Judge; that he has abused his Mercies, perverted his
Benefits, and employed them in the Service of Satan; that he has despised his
Justice, and ventured upon his inflamed Anger for transient Pleasure and
trifling Profits; when these killing Aggravations are duly considered and laid
close to the Heart, how are all the sorrowful Affections moved? serious Grief
that springs from the Depth of the Soul, confounding Shame, anxious inquiring
Fear, to stop the Execution of the fatal Sentence past against him? Thus it is
related of those Converts at the first Sermon of St. Peter, that being
convinced of their Crimson Guilt in their crucifying of the Lord Jesus, they
were pricked in their Heart, and said to the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? Then Sinners will humbly sue for Peace by the blessed Peacemaker
Jesus Christ: then Salvation will be so much the sweeter, by how much the
Danger was more threatening. The Recovery from Death to Life is a double Life.

2. The Lord Jesus must be proposed as an all-sufficient and compassionate
Savior, who invites the weary and heavy-laden to come to him for Rest. This is
the order of the Spirit's Operations, first to convince of Sin, then of
Righteousness. It Is true, there are diversities of Workings; the Spirit
instructs and terrifies Sinners by his Office of Bondage, but not always in the
same manner and degrees: but the Soul is so humbled by the sight of Sin, and
impendent Wrath, as it sees and feels the necessity of a Savior, and is
willing to comply with the Terms of Mercy offered in the Gospel. The whole need
not a Physician, but those who are sick. A condemned Man values a Sheet of
Paper wherein his Pardon is written and sealed, more than the Conveyance of a
rich Estate. One near drowning values a Cord thrown out for his Rescue, more
than a Crown. Thus when the Guilty are deeply sensible they have lost the
Favor of God, and cannot fly from his Power, and there is but a step between
them and Eternal Death, then a Savior will be infinitely precious, and they
will entirely close with him. Now the Gospel represents the Son of God
incarnate.

1st. An all-sufficient Savior by his Propitiation, and Intercession. The
Excellency of his Obedience, and the Excellency of his Person were influential
to obtain the Pardon of Sin. His Propriety in the Sacrifice, and the Value of
it, was requisite to atone the just Displeasure of God for our Offenses. It Is
said, he offered his own Body on the Tree: his peculiar Right in it was
requisite to make it a proper and acceptable Sacrifice. It Is true, the Father
and holy Spirit had the same Right in the Human Nature of Christ as the Son
had, with respect to the making it: but the Son by assuming it into a Personal
Union with himself, has a peculiar Right in it, and offered his own in a strict
sense. And in Consequence to this, his Sacrifice was of infinite Value: He did
not compound with God, but paid a Ransom equivalent to what was due for
Sinners. He bled a Fountain from his wounded Side, that cleanses from all Sin.
1 John 2.


2dly. By his Intercession. He is able to save to the uttermost all that come
to God by him, for he ever lives to make Intercession for them. God pardons Sin
as a Sovereign upon the Throne: his Authority is preserved entire without any
Condescension of his Person; therefore the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross,
is pleaded in Heaven to reconcile God to us: he satisfied Justice, and
sollicites Mercy: his Blood speaks still, and its Voice is as powerful as ever.
The Prevalency of his Intercession depends upon the Dignity of his Sacrifice;
the Dearness of his Person to the Father, does also assure us of his favorable
Audience. He declared on Earth, I know thou always hear me.

3dly. The Gospel sets forth his Willingness to save us. Faith has an Aspect
upon Christ as able and willing to save: for Power without a Will to save is
unprofitable, and the Will without Power is fruitless and ineffectual. For the
begetting of Faith we are to consider the Proposal and Offer of Grace in the
Gospel, and the Promise of it.

1. In the Gospel there is a Proposal of Grace to all: the Invitation is
universal; Whoever will, let him come to the Waters of Life freely. Our Savior
gave this Command to the Apostles, Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Neither
the number nor quality of Men's Sins are a Bar against their coming to Christ
for Life. None are excluded but those who exclude themselves. In the Parable
those were earnestly invited by the Command of the Master of the Feast, who
refused to come. This Offer of Grace and Life to all that will humbly receive
it, is the first Foundation of Faith, and induces our Acceptance of it: for
without this, the self-condemned Sinner sinks into Misery bottomless and
helpless. The most miserable Despair is drawn from Impossibility. If Men think
it is impossible to obtain what they desire, they will not endeavor to obtain.
It Is easily cleared by the Scriptures, if Men will believe the Scriptures when
they are clear, that as the Brazen Serpent, the Sign of Salvation, was lifted
up on high, and made obvious to every Eye, to convey healing Virtue to those
who were stung by the fiery Serpents; so our crucified Savior is lifted up in
the Gospel for every Soul-wounded Sinner to regard. The belief of inviting
Mercy opens the Springs of Godly Sorrow: a Natural Sorrow arises from the sense
of oppressing Evils, and is terminated upon our selves: a Spiritual Sorrow
proceeds from the sense of our Unworthiness, and the Divine Goodness, that is
so ready and desirous to save us.

2. There is a Promise of Grace to all that repent and believe. Our Savior
encourages us, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy-laden, and I will
give you Rest. Those who feel Sin as an intolerable Burden, and their fainting
Souls are without Support, let them devolve their Burden upon him, and trust
entirely in him, they shall obtain blessed Rest. The timorous Sinners that
tremble under the Weight of their Guilt, are encouraged; for in this condition
Christ invites them to come to him, and promises Rest. Let them aggravate their
Sins to the highest, yet St. Paul challenges the Precedence as the chief of
Sinners, and obtained Mercy. When the Heart is broken for Sin, and from it, not
to believe the Promise of Mercy, is dishonorable to our Savior's Love, and
the Value of his Blood, as if not sufficient to save poor Souls that would fain
live in him. We have the strongest Testimony of his Love, in dying for us when
we were Enemies. Christ came with this Intention to save Sinners; and when they
come to him, will he reject them? He cannot deny himself, he is Truth, and he
has most expressly declared, Whoever comes to me, I will in no wise cast out:
and this Promise is confirmed by the Will of his Father that sent him. Christ
invites thirsty Souls to partake of the Waters of Life; and when he has
inspired them with ardent Desires, and they come, will he send them away empty?
It Is absolutely impossible for him who is incarnate Love and Mercy, to despise
and reject the Soul that looks to him, that longs and languishes after him, and
will be ever unsatisfied without him.

In short, the precious Promises in the Gospel, of the Pardon of Sin, and
eternal Salvation, are so proposed to us, that the Hope of returning Sinners
may be cherished and confirmed, and the Presumption of secure Sinners may be
dashed and controlled. While we are in this middle State, the fear of Caution,
joined with the lively hope of Mercy, is the most congruous Temper, and
becoming the Breast of a Christian. The Presumer is like a Ship without
Ballast, floating so lightly in his own Folly, that every Gust of Temptation
oversets him. The fearful Spirit is like a Ship over-laden; and if not
lightened, will certainly sink and perish. Fearless Security exposes to all the
Temptations that gratify the Carnal Appetites: desponding Fear causes a neglect
of the Remedy. If there be no fear of Punishment, or no hope of Pardon, the
Consequences are equally fatal.

3. It Is necessary in order to the bringing Men to Christ, to remove their
carnal Prejudices. The first and most feared Difficulties are, That serious
Religion will be a damp to all their Joys, a harsh and unreasonable Restraint
of their Liberties, a Bar against all the Advantages of the World: the sickly
Fancy is frightened at the thoughts of this. If the Way to Heaven were short
and fair, Men would like it; but it is long and deep, and they are discouraged,
as the Israelites with the tedious and troublesome Wilderness, before their
arrival at the Land of Promise. Accordingly Carnal Men cast a slanderous Shade
upon Religion, as a melancholy, severe and joyless Discipline. Now we may
rectify these Mistakes by the Light of Scripture, of Reason, and of Experience.

(1.) The Scrpiture declares that the Ways of Wisdom are Ways of Pleasantness,
Prove. 3. 17.
and all her Paths are Peace. The Entrance, the Progress, and Continuance in
these Ways, is joyful to the renewed Soul. Let us take a right View of the
Divine Commands, the Sum of them is this, That Men would be happy here, and for
ever. We are commanded to know God and Jesus John 17. 3.
Christ, this is our Life: to trust in him, this is our Strength: to love Isa.
30. 15.
him and delight in him: And are not Love and Joy the most pleasant Affections?
and is not God the Psalm. 37.
most amiable and pleasing Object? We are commanded to fear him: and is it not
most reasonable to fear the loss of his Favor, which is Heaven, and the
incurring his Wrath, that is the deepest Hell? We are commanded to obey his
Laws; and our Savior assures us, his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light:
it is an easy and easing Yoke, that frees us from the most cruel Bondage of Sin
and Satan. And will not Men believe the Testimony of Eternal Truth, rather than
their fond Fancies and corrupt Appetites? We are commanded to hear his Word;
and is it not a Happiness to be directed in the way to everlasting Life? We are
commanded to pray continually; Is it not a blessed Privilege that poor Dust may
address their Requests to the Lord Almighty, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth,
with an Assurance, that those Petitions are most pleasing to him, that are for
his most excellent Blessings?

Besides this, nothing is forbid but sinful Pleasures that will end in eternal
Torments: sinful Profits, the gaining of the World, with the loss of the Soul:
the Gain is nothing, and the Loss is infinite. Now where are the Chains and
Fetters that are so hard and heavy as Carnal Men complain of? All his Commands
are Precepts of Happiness.

(2.) This Testimony of Scripture, Carnal Men esteem a notorious Paradox: they
can taste no Pleasures but what are steeped in Sense. Take away the Enticings
and Blandishments of the Carnal Appetites, they understand no other Pleasure:
which is such a Deceit, as if a sick Person who feels no Pleasure but in the
soft and easy Intermissions of his Disease, should conclude if he were entirely
freed from it, he should be deprived of all Pleasure. Whereas the Pleasure of
Health is far more desirable and constant. The Angels are absolutely exempt
from the Desires of our carnal Faculties, and without carnal Fruitions, but are
ever blessed and joyful in the direct Possession of what is good, not in the
relief from Evils either natural or accidental, as Hunger and Thirst, or
Sickness and Pain.

Pleasure results from the sutableness between the perceptive Faculties and the
Objects that affect them: if there be no harmonious Proportion, there will be
no Music, no Delight. Now it is true, while Flesh is the prevailing Ingredient
in a Man, he only relishes the Satisfactions of the Senses: he cannot enjoy
God, he cannot delight in doing his Will, no more than a Swine can in clean
Pasture, whose natural Property strongly inclines it to wallow in the Mire. But
when the Soul is clarified and purged by the great Refiner, how sublime and
satisfying a Pleasure does it feel in the Love of God, and in his Service! As
in natural feeding, when the Palate is in its due Temper, the Taste commends our
proper Food to the Appetite, and the Appetite to the Stomach; but a foul
Stomach disaffects the Appetite, vitiates the Palate, and the most savoury and
wholesome Meat is loathsome when the Disease is the Taster: Thus if the Soul be in
its due Temper, the doing the Will of God would be our Meat and Drink, mixed
with a sweeter Pleasure than those natural Operations are: but the Soul is so
corrupt and carnaliz'd, that it has no Taste of the pure Delights of blessed
Spirits in Communion with God: like the Israelites who despised the Bread of
Angels, and impatiently longed for the Onions and Garlic and Fleshpots of
Egypt. Till Men die to Sin, the Supper of the Lamb will be insipid and nauseous.

The Carnal Mind as grossly mistakes about Liberty. It Is horrible Folly to think
true Freedom consists in doing whatever the vicious Affections require, in
conversing with such Persons as foment and gratify them. Is that Person free
that is fettered with as many Chains of Hell, as he has predominant Lusts? Was
the possessed Person free who lived among the Tombs, among contagious Carcases?
Then a Sinner, that without the fear of Hell obeys his depraved Appetites, and
associates with those who are corrupt, and Corrupters by their wicked Example,
is free. But it is evident that the Mind, the superior leading Faculty, is in
Bondage while the Passions reign, and the sensual Worldly Wretch with his
imaginary Liberty, is the most accursed Slave. Till the Son makes us free from
the tyrannous Power of Sin, we are not free indeed. Till Reason enlightened by
the Word, resumes its Right and Jurisdiction, and leads the Will to choose what
is best for a spiritual immortal Creature, and the other Faculties to obey, we
are the Slaves of Satan. When we are made free from Sin, and Romans 6.
become the Servants of Righteousness, and yield an ingenuous delightful
Subjection to God's Laws, we enjoy a State of Liberty. Nay, the Service of God
is our Glory. He that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his Blood, has
made us Kings and Priests to God. The most eminent Acts of Royal Authority are
to govern the Subjects by equal Laws, and to subdue the Enemies of the Peace
and Prosperity of the Kingdom: and when Divine Grace reigns in the Heart, it
regulates all the Thoughts and Affections, the inward and outward Faculties,
according to the holy, just and good Law of God, and subdues these rebellious
Lusts that disturb the Order and Tranquillity of the Soul.

(3.) Experience proves that a State of Religion is most delightful. Whenever
the captive Soul is rescued from the Bondage of his Lusts, and preferred to the
Service of God, how sweet is the Change? and how bitterly will he complain,
other Lords have had Dominion over me, but thy Service is the truest Freedom?
Did ever any of the Saints complain that God is an austere Master, that his
Service is a melancholy joyless Condition? No, in their Esteem and Affections,
his Law is the most pure, precious, sweet and profitable Good. His Commands are
not grievous: they Psalm. 19.
obey them from Choice and Complacence. They love the Lawgiver, and like the
Laws. Communion with God in his holy Ordinances, is a Heaven upon Earth to
them. One day in thy Courts is Psalm. 84.
better than a thousand in the Vanities and Business of the World. In the
Presence of God is Fullness of Joy; and the more we are admitted into his
Presence here, the more we are admitted into his Joy: all the blessed Means of
our drawing near to God, and his drawing near to us, are the Gate of Heaven,
and Entrance into Glory. David, who was so acquainted with God, declares, There
be many that say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, lift thou up the Light of
thy Countenance upon me. Thou have put more Joy into my Heart, than when their
Corn and Wine increased. A Joy more solid and satisfying, than carnal Men
receive in the Springtide of their Fruitions. As one Spark of God's Wrath
firing the Conscience, is more terrible than the most fearful Evils in the
World: so one Beam of his Favor enlightening the Soul, is more sweet and
ravishing, than all the most valued and desired things in the World.

SERMON X.
LUKE xiv. 23. The Lord said to the Servant, Compel them to come in, that my
House may be full.
III. I Shall now prove it is the great Duty of the Ministers of Christ to apply
themselves with a holy Zeal to bring Men to partake of the saving Mercies of
the Gospel.

This will appear by considering,

1. The Command of God, from whom they are sent, lays the highest Obligation
upon them to perform their Duty. The manner and degrees of Obedience, are
measured by the greatness of the Authority that enjoins it. To Sovereign
Authority, immediate, absolute, and supreme Obedience is due. The Authority of
God is more binding than the highest in Princes, or the dearest in Parents:
What are all Kings of the Earth to him? less than nothing. Temporal Greatness
consists only in Comparison. In the Scale of Magistracy, the Superiors to some
are subordinate to others: But the Majesty of God is absolutely and truly
Infinite. And as the immediate Servants of the King are under special
Obligations to obey his Commands, besides the common Duty of his other
Subjects; so the Ministers of the Gospel by their Consecration and immediate
Relation to God, are bound with all zealous Diligence to do his Will.

2. It Is the principal End of their Commission. God designs in the Contrivance
and Revelation of the Gospel, to glorify his Mercy, and his Son in our
Salvation.

First, Love is the clearest and most adequate Notion of the Deity; God is
Love. Now Mercy is medicinal, healing, and recovering Love. The Object of it is
the Miserable and Unworthy. In God's Moral Government, Mercy and Justice are
the leading Attributes, and Mercy in its Exercise has the Supremacy: Mercy
rejoices against Judgment. When our first Parents were cited to Judgment for
their rebellious Sin, Mercy promised a Savior before the Sentence was
pronounced. God is styled the Father of Mercies; it is his natural Offspring,
the freest and most delightful Emanation from him. Judgment is his strange
Work, that by Constraint he executes. He does not afflict willingly the
Children of Men: God is more pleased to see the Fruits of his Mercy in his
Creatures restored to Happiness, than the Effects of his Justice in the Guilty
and Miserable. To be inclined to do Evil and Hurt, is an Imperfection
infinitely distant and opposite to the Divine Nature. The Lord God is a Sun:
and as it is proper to it to enlighten, revive and refresh the World by its
Operations and Influences; it is accidental to consume and destroy, and proceeds
from the Imperfection of Things upon whom his Beams fall. Thus it is according
to the Nature of God to dispense the liberal Effusions of his Goodness to the
Creatures; if they feel the Effects of his Justice, it is for Sin that deserves
it, and draws it forth into Exercise. Mercy is God's Glory: by Glory we
understand the Luster that results from the Perfection of Things, and is
attractive and worthy of Admiration. There is Light in one Beam of the Sun; but
Glory results from the Union of all its Beams in their full Strength.
Accordingly a double Glory belongs to God.

1st. His Essential Glory, that results from his transcendent Excellencies; the
supreme Beauty and Brightness of that unapproachable Light wherein he is said
to dwell: every Attribute being truly infinite, is most glorious.

2dly. Declarative Glory, that consists in the Operation and Influence of God's
Perfections, and in the humble and thankful Adoration of them by intelligent
Creatures. Some Divine Attributes are more eminently the Glory of God: as they
are more declarative of his Perfections, and more sensibly and powerfully
affect the Minds and Hearts of Men. In this respect Mercy, as it is the most
benign and comfortable, so it is the brightest Light in all the Constellation of
the Divine Attributes; it is our Happiness we are under it Aspects and
Influences. The other essential Excellencies of God are regarded as the
Qualities of our Sovereign infinitely above us, with most humble Fear and
respectful Admiration: But his Mercy represents him as our Father and Friend,
and engages our Affections entirely to him. When Moses desired to see God's
Glory, he told him, his Goodness should pass before him. Now Mercy is the most
excellent Degree of Goodness. It Is Goodness primarily excited and active from
it self, and takes occasion from the Misery of the Creature to be beneficent.
It Is observable, when he was proclaimed in his glorious Titles, The Lord, the
Lord God, Merciful and Gracious; next to the Deity, Mercy is placed as his
dearest Attribute: and of the thirteen Titles of Honor attributed to him, nine
belong to Mercy, to signify the advantage it has above Justice. Mercy is his
peculiar Treasure: it is said he is rich in Mercy, not in Possessions, tho the
Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof: his Riches are not without
himself, but in his own Perfections. Now it is the great Design of God to
glorify this Attribute in the Salvation of the Lost and Miserable. Adam had
sufficient Grace to stand, but was free to fall, and by the Fraud of Satan
joined with his own Folly, was seduced from his Duty, and involved himself and
all his Progeny in utter Ruin. It was very becoming God that his Enemy should
not obtain his End, that Mankind should not be the eternal Trophy of the
Tempter, and so noble a part of the Creation be as it were abolished for ever.
From hence the Mercy of God took its Rise, and most apparently and eminently
declared it self, in sending his Son the Heir of his Love and Glory, to be the
Redeemer and Ransom of the Lost and Miserable.

The Gospel is made up of Arguments and Endearments, of Commands and
compassionate Calls, of encouraging Invitations, and the most constraining
Motives, that sinful Men would apply themselves to our blessed Savior, and not
perish for ever in their Sins. And God has appointed an Order of Men
consecrated to this Service. This is most excellently expressed by the Apostle;
Now we are Ambassadors for Christ, as tho God did beseech you 2 Cor. 5.
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God. From hence the
Duty of Evangelical Ministers is clear and consequent, that with zealous
Affections and persevering Diligence they should endeavor to bring Souls to
partake of the Grace of the Gospel. An Objection may be raised.

If God be pleased with the Salvation of sinful Men, why are not all saved? for
nothing is the Object of his Will, but is within the compass of his Power.

The Objection is specious, and may surprise at first, but duly considered, may
receive a sufficient Answer.

1. It Is a leading Rule, that when Doctrines are clearly revealed in the
Scripture, we must yield our Assent, tho we cannot resolve all the Difficulties
that are raised against them. It Is unreasonable to deny what is evident,
because we cannot unfold what is obscure. There is no Doctrine more frequently
and emphatically asserted in the Divine Writings, than that the Repentance of a
Sinner, and his acceptance of Pardon and Life is very pleasing to God. He
assures us in the most sacred and solemn manner of this: As I live, says the
Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn
from his way, and live: He is willing they should be saved, and they are wilful
to be damned. With what render and melting Compassions does he argue with them,
Why will ye die, O House of Israel? as if they were upon the brink of Hell, and
ready to drop into irrecoverable Misery.

2. We must distinguish between his directing Will, and his approving Will:
whatever God decrees to effect, shall be infallibly accomplished; but many
things that he approves, are left undone. His Commands are his Will, the Rule
of our Duty, but not of his Purpose what he will do. The Scripture mentions the
Word of God's Power, and the Word of his Holiness. The Word of his Power
effects all things according to his Will: but the Word of his Holiness, his
Laws declared to regulate our Lives, are often opposed, and without Efficacy.

3. The Wisdom of God directs all the Operations of his Attributes; that orders
the Dispensations of Mercy, and the Inflictions of Justice. When the Apostle
had considered the astonishing Economy of Providence with respect to the Jews
and Gentiles, he breaks forth, O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom
Romans 11. 33.
and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past
finding out! That so great a part of the World live in Darkness, and die in
Darkness, and go to their Fathers where they shall never see Light, and the
Dayspring from on high visits other Nations, is according to the Counsel of
his Will.

4. God does afford assisting Grace to Sinners, which if they improved, he
would not desert them. The Gospel is the Ministration of the Spirit, to
illuminate, excite and persuade Sinners not to forsake their own Mercy. He
strives with them, he woes and waits to be gracious, till by their obstinate
Resistance they quench his holy Motions. It Is true, he dispenses Grace in
different degrees, for he is the Master of his own Favors: but tho effectual
converting Grace is not bestowed upon all, yet there is common Grace, that has
a tendency to Conversion, which if humbly and thankfully improved, such is the
most free and excellent Goodness of God, Men would receive further Supplies.
But they are careless and opposite to his gracious Operations, therefore the
Spirit is most righteously withdrawn from them. He that in Luxury has wasted
his Estate, it is just he dies in Poverty. Besides this, it is very considerable,
that Men shall be condemned at the last Day not for mere Impotence, but
obstinate Opposition: they loved Darkness rather John 3. 19.
than Light, because their Deeds are evil: not for the want of that Grace they
did not receive, but for the neglect to improve that Grace they had received,
and rejecting what was offered. The slothful Servant was condemned for hiding
his single Mat. 25.
Talent in a Napkin, not because he had not five Talents.

Secondly, It Is the great Design of God to glorify his Son. When he brought his
First-begotten into the World, the Command was, Let all the Angels of God
worship him. God Heb. 1.
has given him a Name above every Name, that at the Name of [Jesus] every Knee
should bow, of things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth; and every
Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the
Father. Those who cross his Supreme Wisdom and Sovereign Will, shall by a
constrained Submission acknowledge the high Dignity of his Son.

The great Command of the Gospel is, that Men should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ: Him 1 John 3. 23.
has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance and Acts
5. 31.
Remission of Sins. The Death of Christ may be considered as an Act of
Obedience to God, and of Love to Men. His Intention was to glorify God, by
bringing lost Souls to him. Now it is promised as a Reward of his Sufferings, he
shall see of the Travail of his Soul, and be satisfied. He is infinitely
pleased with the Salvation of Souls, as the Fruit of all his Anguish and bloody
Agony. The Election of a number of the lost World, that shall believe in him,
and be adopted and saved by him, has a special respect to his Honor, that his
Death might not be in vain: that the Son of God may be magnified in his
unspeakable Love to them, and their sincere Obedience to him: his relative
Glory, as Head of the Body, will shine in them for ever.

It Is also observable, the Decree of Election is of infallible Accomplishment,
both as to the Conversion and Perseverance of the Elect, not only because the
Divine Will is unchangeable and insuperable with respect to the Events
determined by it, but with a peculiar regard to the Glory of Christ. No
Principle of Opposition in the corrupt Heart of Man can frustrate the Operation
of God's Spirit, either in the powerful entrance, or sure continuance of his
Grace. Our Savior tells us, All that the Father gives John 6. 37.
me, shall come to me. And, speaking of his Sheep, he says, My Father John 10.
29.
which gave them me, is greater than all: and none is able to pull them out of
my Father's Hand. The Purpose of God, and Purchase of Christ secure their
Salvation: for these our Savior intercedes, Holy Father, keep through thine
own Name, those whom John 17. 11.
thou have given me, that they may be one, as we are. His Mediation is never
interrupted: when Christ's Prayer and God's Power are ineffectual, then may
they fall away totally and for ever, whom God keeps, and Christ commends to his
keeping. From hence it appears, that the Ministers of the Gospel are
indispensably obliged zealously to endeavor the Salvation of Souls, which the
Father has designed for the Honor of his Mercy, and which the Son of God
esteems his dearest Glory.

The APPLICATION.
1. From hence there is just cause to admire the glorious Grace of God in
converting Sinners, and making them willing to comply with the Terms of the
Gospel. Indeed it is strange to Amazement, that Men involved under the Guilt of
Sins so numerous and so heinous, and liable every hour to the Sentence of the
Law, so sure and severe, Eternal Death for their Sins, should neglect a Pardon
so dearly purchased, and so graciously offered, and not with the deepest
Humility, with ravishing Joy, and the highest Thankfulness receive it. Is there
no Spirit, no Understanding left in them? Nay, is sensible Nature and its
inviolable Inclinations so extinguished, that they are Enemies to themselves?
But if we consider the Depravation of Mankind so inveterate and invincible, we
shall turn the Current of our Wonder another way, that the obstinate
Perverseness of any is subdued, and that with consenting Wills they receive
Christ as their Prince and Savior. Election is the Fountain of distinguishing
Grace: Many are called, but few are chosen. Conversion, Ephesians. 1.
Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, are all the Romans 8.
Fruits of electing Mercy. By the most gracious and free Act of his Ephesians. 1.
own Will, he chose some out of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the corrupt Generality, (and they are but a little diminutive Flock) to make
them Vessels of Honor, Acts 13.
that his Goodness might be the more admirable. Those who are made a willing
People, were by the John 12.
natural and contracted Hardness of their Hearts, as averse and repugnant to
the Heavenly Call as others; if after a thousand Repulses, the Spirit had been
withdrawn, they had died in their Sins: but as it is said of Lot's miraculous
Rescue from the Flames of Sodom, While he lingered, the Angels laid hold upon
his Hand, the Lord being merciful to him, and brought him forth, and set him
without the City; so the free and omnipotent Grace overruled their reluctant
Hearts, and strongly and sweetly inclined them to God their supreme and
satisfying Good, and to come to Christ as the only means to restore them to the
Favor and Enjoyment of God. The natural Man is no more able to believe with a
saving Faith in Christ, than to obey the whole Law: it is the Gift of God. He
provides the Means of Salvation, and applies them; he by victorious Grace leads
Captivity captive, and bestows that most precious Gift upon his People. How
many that enjoyed the same Gospel, and did not reject so many Invitations, nor
so often grieve and vex the holy Spirit, nor so long abuse the Patience of God,
were justly left in their Sins? this will set a Luster upon special and saving
Mercy. O, what a conspicuous Discovery, what a lively and thankful Sense will
there be of this Grace in the next World! Our Savior tells the unbelieving
Jews, There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Luke 13. 28.
when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, and
you your selves turned out. The Comparison of the opposite States will then be
more joyful and transporting to the Saints, and more manifest and tormenting to
the Reprobates. They shall feel a burning Thirst after the Happiness they have
lost, and be tortured between Desire and Despair for ever.

2. Let those who make light of the Invitations of Grace, consider what will be
the Issue of their Obstinacy. Within a little while Conscience will awaken the
Remembrance of their careless Contempt of the Divine Mercy, and that will
awaken Despair. To instruct such Persons, and make them afraid, that they may
fly to the Sanctuary from the Destroyer, let them consider,

(1.) This will render them inexcusable. Their Obduration and final Ruin will
be of themselves. God is pleased to appeal to the Human Understanding, What
could I do more for my Vineyard, that I have not done? His Works and his Words
are declaratory of his Will, how pleasing the Repentance and Life of Sinners is
to him. He has prepared a Savior and Salvation, and offers them to lost Souls.
In the Year of Jubilee, Liberty was proclaimed for all the Israelites who had
been Servants; but if any one would not leave his Master, his Ear was bored,
and he was a Servant for ever. Thus the acceptable Year of the Lord is
proclaimed in the Gospel, a happy Freedom to Sinners by Jesus Christ: but those
who are in love with their reigning Lusts, refuse this Freedom, and are
condemned to the worst Bondage for ever. God by his Authority commands them to
repent and believe the Gospel: He invites them by the most gracious Promises to
accept and receive them: he expresses the most tender Compassions toward
perishing Sinners; Why will ye die? He reproaches their unaccountable Folly,
How long ye simple ones will ye love. Simplicity? He urges them by terrible
Threatenings, not to neglect his offered Grace. But they are deaf to his loudest
Calls: if a Lust whispers from their Earthly Affections, they are presently
moved. No Mercy will soften them, no Reproofs will reform them; the richest
Means of Grace are lost, and they prodigally perish. Now how justly do they
fall under the condemning Sentence of the Law, who slight the Mercy of the
Gospel? God takes no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner, but they take Pleasure
in their Sins: they die in their Sins, because they will die: they are deprived
of Life, because they will not come to Christ that they may have Life. At the
Day of Judgment lost Sinners will entirely clear God, and deeply charge
themselves with their deserved Ruin.

(2.) Such are irrecoverable. The Gospel is the only Dispensation of Grace; if
Men obstinately reject it, their Condition is as desperate as if they were
bound in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day. Mercy alone can
heal us; and if that be wounded, our Sickness is incurable. He that John 3. 36.
believes not the Son, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.
His Doom is sealed and irreversible. God now speaks in a still Voice, but
hereafter he will speak in a Whirlwind to the Despisers of his Grace. It Is
true, we cannot say a Soul is quite lost while there is a delay of Judgment:
but the Scripture declares, that Sinners by their stubborn Refusals of Mercy,
make God inexorable to their Prayers: There is a day of Grace, and the Lapse of
it is fatal to the Luke 19. 42.
Neglecters. Of this there have been very fearful Examples: how many Despisers
of the Grace of the Redeemer in the course of their Lives, yet in the Agony of
their last Departure, when their Sins with a ghastly Aspect appear, and with
frightful Horror they look into the bottomless Pit, Conscience anticipates the
Divine Judgment. Let the most compassionate Ministers offer them the Cordials
of the Gospel, and tell them they despair too soon: the self-condemning
Conscience replies, they repent too late. O that Men were early wise to secure
their eternal Interest!

(3.) The neglect of Salvation, will aggravate Sin and the Judgment of Men.
This is the Condemnation, John 3. 19.
that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light.
The higher the Disobedience, the lower the Damnation will be of Sinners. The
Heathens in their Race of ignorant Rebellion are not so guilty, nor liable to
so heavy a Sentence as those who disobey the Gospel. The Israelites had so
abused the Mercies of God to his Dishonor, there were no such Rebels on Earth;
the Prophet was fain to descend to Hell for a Comparison to equal their
Wickedness: Hear the Word of the Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom; Give Ear unto the
Law Isa. 1. 10.
of our God, ye People of Gomorrah. But those who turn the Grace of God into an
occasion of their sinful Security, are not to be paralleled in Hell. The
Devils rebel against the Creator, against his Authority and Laws, but Men rebel
against their Sovereign and Savior, and it is admirable Grace. The Son of God
interposed as Mediator to make God reconcilable to the World: But he did not
assume the Nature of Heb. 2.
Angels, he took no hold of them, nor can they take hold of him. The Golden
Scepter was never extended to them: Justice was strict and severe; for the
first Sin they were presently expelled from the Habitation of Glory, and their
Doom is irrevocable. But Men are within the Reserves of Mercy; God spares them
in order to Pardon, and renews his compassionate Calls to them to forsake their
Sins, and live: by his Word and wonderful Patience he invites them to
Repentance, and by Repentance to his Favor, and to Happiness. Now what a
violent Provocation is the Contempt of such Mercy? The Furnace of Hell is
heated seven times more for the Despisers of the Gospel. How will the
remembrance of their Folly rack their torn Minds? The fiercest Furies cannot so
torment them as their self-condemning Consciences.

3. Let the Ministers of the Gospel be excited to discharge their Commission
with Fidelity. I shall set down some Directions and Motives in order to it. The
general Direction is this, Salus Populi suprema Lex esto: The Salvation of
Souls is the End of Preaching, and must regulate it. The Qualifications of a
Minister to make him successful are,

First, Excellent Knowledge. An ignorant Minister is a plain Solaecism, as to
say a blind Eye, not capable to perform the Act proper to it. The Office and
Authority without Abilities to exercise it, is in vain. The Apostle declares
the Perfection of the Scripture, that it is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, 2 Timothy 3.
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. He is to instruct the
Ignorant, to remember the Careless, to refute the Erroneous, to resolve the
Doubting, and comfort the Afflicted. Not only Fidelity, but Wisdom is requisite
in the Servant Mat. 24. 45.
whom his Lord made Ruler over his House, to give them Meat in due season.
There must be substantial Learning to convince Gainsayers, and spiritual Skill
to understand the Arts of the Tempter, who will fail with every Wind, and make
use of the various Dispositions of Men to do them Mischief. He feeds the
blazing Presumption of indulgent Sinners: He speaks Peace to them when God is
their Enemy: if there be sometimes a sad Countenance, the shadow of Repentance,
it is sufficient. But he perplexes tender and fearful Spirits, by suggesting
they do not mourn enough, to damp their Endeavors, and make them heartless in
God's Service. Now it is a principal Duty of an Evangelical Minister to unmask
the Malice of Satan, and defeat his Design: to preach the Word in that distinct
manner, that secure Sinners may be afraid of Vengeance, and that the Penitent
may apply the Divine Mercy. He that wins Souls is wise. The Terrors of the Lord
Prove. 11. 30.
must be set in array against the rebellious obstinate Transgressors; but the
indulgent Love of our Heavenly Father, the tender Compassions of our sensible
Head and Savior, and the Consolations of the holy Comforter, are the Portion
of relenting and returning Sinners.

An understanding Minister instructs his People in their Duty and Happiness: he
will not offer them Stone for Bread; intricate controversial Matters that
astonish and cannot edify, but plain Evangelical Truths, the proper Food for
the Soul.

The Manner and Language in Preaching must be answerable to the Majesty of
Divine Truths. There is nothing more odious than a sacred Subject triflingly
handled. The Affectation of Wit and flanting Eloquence frustrates the End of
Preaching, that is, to convince Sinners of their Guilt and Misery, and by the
Conviction of Conscience to make them fly to the Sanctuary, our blessed
Savior, for Protection: partly because those things that flatter the Fancy,
are not proper to affect the Conscience: light trimmings of Language, gaudy
Expressions, glittering Points of Wit please the Imagination; but Conscience is
excited and inflamed by representing eternal Things with powerful Plainness,
and in a solemn manner: and partly because the Human Spirit being limited,
while one Faculty is attentive, another suspends its Activity and Operations;
so that the Exercise of the Fancy hinders the Mind from serious reflecting on
Divine Truths, and applying them to the Soul. Vain Ornaments in a Sermon are
like a painted Complexion; the more it is advanced to the Eye, the more it is
abased to the Judgment.

The Discourse of a Preacher should directly go to the Heart: it should be so
framed as to prove and illustrate the Subject, and work on the Understanding
and Affections. We have the Pattern of this in Scripture, where the Love and
Mercy of God to his Children, and his Justice and Power against his Enemies,
are represented in the most pathetical manner. I will produce an Instance of
both: Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, Isa. 49. 15.
that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her Womb? yea, they may
forget, yet I will not forget thee. What can be more supporting and comforting?
The other Instance is as terrible. God is angry with the Wicked Psalm. 7. 11,
12, 13.
every day. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword; he has bent his Bow and
made it ready. He has also prepared the Instruments of Death. This Description
of God's righteous Displeasure is more powerful to shoot through the Conscience
of hardened Sinners, than the bare threatenings that Justice will surely punish
them.

Secondly, A Minister should be zealous and diligent in the discharge of his
Office. St. Paul adjures Timothy in the most solemn and fearful manner, I
charge thee before God, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the Quick and the Dead at his
appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and Doctrine. Did the
Apostle stir up the Fire in so vigilant a Minister, how much more needful is it
to blow up the Embers in our drowsy Spirits? Certainly if Conscience be not
seared and dead, so sharp a Charge will rouse it to the performance of our Duty.

Zeal for the Glory of our Savior, if it inflames our Hearts, will fire our
Lips, and animate our Sermons. Let Knowledge be the Breath to blow the sacred
Fire, and the most burning Zeal is not excessive. But our Affections at the
highest are very defective: How many preach the Word so coldly, as if they had
no desire to save Souls from eternal Death?

How many Ministers lie down in their Laziness, and wretchedly neglect their
Duty, to better themselves and benefit others in preaching the Gospel? Idleness
enervates and unstrings the Bent of the Spirit: the Mind is benumbed by a
useless and ignoble Dullness.

Some who are deputed Shepherds, may think it a Disparagement to their
Greatness, to be frequently in so mean a Work as Preaching: whereas the Son of
God was a Preacher of the Gospel. Others make a Gain of the Flock, but put off
the Instructing and Care of it to others. They will serve Christ by Proxy, who
died for us in his own Person. How can they commit to others the Charge
immediately entrusted to themselves? What Exemption can they plead, what
Account can they give to the great Shepherd?

Thirdly, Let Ministers, that they may be successful, adorn the holy, and
without Holiness dangerous Office of the Evangelical Ministry, by a suitable
Conversation. Innocence, and Abstinence from foul Sins, is not sufficient to
recommend them; but the Power of Godliness, and the Beauty of Holiness must
shine in their Lives. They can never effectually teach others what they do not
practice themselves: if any Sin reigns in them, their Prayers cannot ascend
with Acceptance to God, and descend with a Blessing on the People. Let a
Minister preach Divine Doctrine, yet if his Conversation be Earthly and
Sensual, he is more likely to harden Sinners than to convert them. How
unbecoming and disgraceful are unholy Ministers to their Profession? What a
Scandal do they give to the Profane, and occasion to blaspheme their high and
holy Calling? Let such prepare themselves for many Stripes: they cannot escape
a double Damnation, for the Neglect of their own Souls and the Souls of others
committed to them. Though a Heavenly Light shines in their Sermons, if in their
Practice they are dark Clouds, the Blackness of Darkness is reserved for them
for ever.

Fourthly, Union among Ministers is a happy Advantage to recommend their
Doctrine to the People. Division and Jealousy will lessen the Authority and
Efficacy of their Preaching. If one Dog opens, the Deer is not alarmed, but the
full Cry rouses him. When Ministers with one Consent declare the Wrath of God
from Heaven against Sin, the Profane and Secure are afraid: and the awful Fear
of Justice makes them seek for Mercy. It Is true, there cannot be expected an
entire Conformity in Opinions among the wisest and best Men: therefore in
Doctrines not so clear nor of that moment as the great Truths, a mutual
Forbearance is our Duty. But to coin Controversies about clear and necessary
Truths, and obscure them by Opposition, is a great hinderance to the Success of
the Gospel. Some worthy Men earnestly deny the Gospel to be a Law: Will they
reform the Scripture? Is not the Gospel called the Law of Faith, the Law of
Liberty, the Law of the Spirit of Life? It Is true, the Gospel is a Covenant of
Grace, but it has all the Essentials of a Law: it is the revealed Will of the
Sovereign Lawgiver, commanding Sinners to repent and believe, upon no less
Reward and Penalty, than Eternal Life to penitent Believers, and Eternal Death
to those who disobey the Gospel. Now the Command and Sanction are the proper
Characters of a Law. If we duly consider it, the Sovereignty of God is such,
that whatever Covenant he offers to the reasonable Creature, has the Force and
Obligation of a Law. I instance in this one Point, that of late has occasioned
an unhappy Difference. O the blessed State above, where Ignorance and Strife
are abolished for ever!

Fifthly, Frequent and earnest Prayer to God is a powerful Means to render our
Ministry successful. Paul plants, and Apollos waters, but God gives the
Increase. Let a Minister be completely furnished with Learning, Judgment,
Eloquence, yet all his Labor will be fruitless without Divine Grace. A Key
that is exactly fit to all the Wards of a Lock, cannot open it without a Hand
to turn it. Let the most proper and powerful Motives to work upon the
reasonable Nature be represented, yet they cannot open the Heart, unless they
are managed by the holy Spirit.

It Is very observable, that in the Narrative of the Miracles by the Prophets,
some Circumstances are related, that declare they were done by the Divine
Power. Sometime the Command of God was before the Performance: thus in all the
astonishing Works done by Moses, the Command of God was the beginning. Take thy
Rod, stretch out thy Exodus 7. 16, 19. and 8. 5. and 16. 9.
Hand, and others Orders that demonstrate the miraculous Actions not to proceed
from an inherent Virtue in his Person, but from a superior and borrowed Power.
Sometimes Prayer was addressed to God before the Miracles were done: Thus Joshua
first speaks to the Lord, Josh. 10. 12.
before he commands the Sun to stand still upon Gibeon, and the Moon in the
Valley of Ajalon. Thus Elias and 1 Kings 17. 20, 21. 2 Kings 4. 33, 34.
Elisha revived the Dead by Prayer to the Lord of Life. This was declaratory,
that the Prophets were but Instruments, and that God was the absolute Author of
them. Accordingly in the Conversion of Souls, which is a Work as miraculous as
any of those illustrious Miracles, there must be the Divine Appointment of the
Means, and ardent Prayer to God for his Blessing. It Is the great Encouragement
of Ministers in their Service, that whatsoever is God's Ordinance shall effect
that for which it is ordained: the Rod of Moses was powerful to subdue Egypt,
to drown Pharaoh* and his Host in the Red Sea. Three hundred Soldiers with
Gideon, only armed with Lamps and Pitchers, destroyed the numberless Army of
the Midianites. Astonishing Victory! And the Gospel is the Power of God to
Salvation. But Prayer is requisite to obtain the holy Spirit, by whose
Influence the Word is effectual to recover lost Souls to Heaven. And it is
evident, that numerous and entire Conversions of Sinners have been by the
Ministry of holy Men, who made it their great and earnest Request that they
might be successful in bringing Souls to Christ. Cold Formalities are
unacceptable to God, and without Efficacy; but Prayer actuated with Life and
holy Heat of Affection, ascends to Heaven and prevails. And what is more worthy
of our constant and most ardent Desires; than the Salvation of precious and
immortal Souls?

II. To excite Ministers to a faithful Discharge of their Duty, let them
consider,

1. The Example of our blessed Savior. It was one principal Part of his Office
to preach the Gospel: this he undertook in wonderful Mercy, and performed with
amazing Diligence. He rises before Day, and retires himself into a solitary
Place to pray, that he may lose no time in Preaching. He preached on the
Mountain, in the Desert, in the Ship, in the Synagogues, in the Highway, in
the House: no Place, no Persons, no Time was unseasonable. It was his Meat and
Drink to do the Will of Mark 8. 35.
his Father. Thus constant and delighted was the Son of God (who Mat. 5. 1.
Mark 6. 36. Mat. 13. Luke 10. 39. John 4. 34.
laid aside his Majesty and Glory, that he might instruct the People without
terrifying them) in his blessed Work. How does his Example reprove and upbraid
our Negligence? How should it inflame us to imitate and honor him?

2. His Love to us should make us ardent and active to save Souls, as a
Testimony of our Love to him. Thus he speaks to Peter, Love thou me? Feed my
Lambs. It Is his Delight and Glory to be the Savior of Sinners. How dearly has
he bought our Love? How willingly did he redeem us when we were Enemies? His
Love condescended to our low State, to become a Servant, that he might exalt us
to his State, to be the Sons of God. How does he out-love us? We do not love
his Glory as he loved our Meanness, not him the blessed God, as he did us
cursed Creatures. O the Miracle of his ardent Love to us! O the Strangeness of
our cold Affection to him!

Love cannot be idle, but will add Fire and Vigor, and cause unfainting
Perseverance in our Lord's Service. Love and Duty will overcome all
Difficulties. If we consider by how many Titles he deserves our Service, and
feel the dear Obligations he has laid upon us, we shall compel them to come in,
that our glorious King's House may be full.

I shall only add, that to save Souls, the Work is glorious, and the Reward is
more glorious. In the Assembly of immortal Spirits above, all united in
Perfection and Felicity, Those who turn many to Righteousness, shall shine with
a brighter Glory, like the Stars for ever and ever. Who would be so unhappy as
to prefer sluggish Ease before a brighter Crown in Heaven?

Lastly; I will finish this Discourse with an earnest Persuasive, that Men
would comply with the Invitations of the Divine Mercy. Who can without some
sparks of Pity and Indignation seriously observe that Men are slight and
foolish in things of eternal Interest, beyond all the degrees of Folly in the
Concerns of this World? Who would that is in danger to lose his Life or Estate,
and has but one day to secure them, waste it in frivolous Matters, when the
Opportunity is so short, and the Omission is irreparable? Yet although the present
Life be certainly short, and uncertainly continued, and Eternity depends upon
our present securing the Favor of God, and our Title in his Kingdom, Men
employ their Time to gain the World, and neglect their Salvation, in comparison
whereof all the Affairs of Time are a busy Folly, and vain Impertinence.
Stupendous Security! Now to persuade Men to come to Christ for Life, let them
consider,

1. It Is God's Call, to which present Obedience is due. Carnal Sense is apt to
object, Is it not a Man I see and hear? It Is true, but the Message is the
King's, not the Embassador's that brings it. A spiritual Eye looks beyond the
Object of Carnal Sight, and sees Christ in the Minister by the Light of Faith.
Were this believed, how would it fasten our Minds and Senses in the most
serious Attention to the preaching of the Gospel!

2. Make judicious Comparisons between this World and the next. As in the Light
of the Sun there is an Influence that cherishes the vital Heat, and a Power
that extinguishes the Kitchen Fire; so the Light of God's Word has a double
Efficacy, it kindles Heavenly, and quenches Earthly Affections. Indeed there
wants neither Glory nor Joy, nothing of complete Happiness in the World to
come, to raise our Affections and fasten them upon it: and in this World all is
Vanity and Vexation to alienate our Affections from it. What infinite Distance
and Disproportion is there between the Objects of our Choice? Who would think
it possible, but that it is visible every day, that they who have Mortal Souls
should be careless of Eternal Things, and spend all their Pains and Passions
about Things that expire with the Flux of Time? That they should neglect solid
Happiness, and pursue shining Bubbles? But the present World fascinates their
Understandings, inspires their Fancy with Dreams of Happiness here: Sensuality
charms them into Stupidity: they are unwilling to be disenchanted; they enjoy
their Error, and are entertained with pleasant Delusions, till awakened by
eternal Flames.

Let the enlightened Mind consider and judge, the Soul is of a Divine Original,
a Spiritual Substance of an everlasting Duration, and can never be happy but in
the Enjoyment of those Objects that are Divine and Spiritual, commensurate to
its Capacity and Duration. Let a Man possess the World with all its Advantages
and Delights, the starved Soul would suffer infinite Want, and can only be
satisfied with the Fullness of God.

Under what Notion soever Happiness is conceived, it is only to be found in God.
What can enrich a Spirit but Spiritual Treasures? Holiness is the richest Jewel
in the Celestial Crown. What can dignify and ennoble a Spirit, but an Alliance
to God as a Father, and the Likeness of him in his Divinest Excellencies? What
can satisfy an Immortal Spirit, and replenish it with Joy, but vital Union with
God, and the immediate Influence of Almighty and Eternal Goodness? Carnal Men
when they obtain their immediate End, Riches, Honors and Pleasures, they fail
in their main End, true Happiness: they seem wise for the present, and are
Fools for ever.

The Scripture tells us, the Less is blessed of the Greater. How can the
present World that is so inferior to Man in the Nobility of his Nature, afford
Perfection and Satisfaction to him? How unsuitable, how insufficient is it; to
fill the largest and strongest Desires of the Soul?

The World may cloy, but cannot satisfy us; but the Favor of God, the more
it is enjoyed, the more it is desired, and delighted in. Carnal Joy seems, but is
not: Fear and Stings of Remorse may be disguised and gloss'd over with a
cheerful Countenance and Carriage, but are not extinguished. Spiritual Joy
seems not, but is: the Apostle tells us, As sorrowful, but always rejoicing: 1
Cor. 6. 10.
there may be a Winter in the Face, and a flourishing Spring in the Heart.
There is a secret Sweetness in the Practice of Religion, that the Unrenewed are
Strangers to: they cannot see a Taste.

Carnal Joy cannot repel its Contrary; it cannot endure the Assaults of the
slight and transient Evils, to which we are exposed here. Sickness,
Disappointments, Apprehensions of Evils that hover over us, may imbitter the
most pleasant Condition. A wounded Spirit, like an ulcerous Palate that is
fretted and pained with the sweetest things, turns all the Pleasures of the
World into Vexation. Fear struck Belshazzar at his Feast into a trembling. But
Peace with God, and the Joy that flows from it, the World can neither give nor
take away: it is as unable to destroy it as to produce it. Believers rejoice in
Tribulations. Romans 5. 2, 3.


All Carnal Joys are of short Continuance. The World passes away, and the Lusts
thereof. Life is 1 John 2. 17.
dying, and the Comforts of it. All Flesh is Grass, and the Glory as the Flower
of the Grass; that by Heat or Cold, by a Blast or a Worm is soon destroyed. All
the Objects of the sensual Passions are very fading. The finest Stamp of Beauty
in the Countenance, how easily is it defaced by Sickness or Sorrow, by many
Accidents or Age? Riches take the Wings of the Morning, and flee away from the
Possessors: Honor is casual and uncertain: the Scepter of David, so great a
King, the Royal Branch of his Family, degenerated into a poor Carpenter.

The greatest in the World, and the most proud of their Greatness, the
Luxurious Voluptuaries, shall their Pomp and Delights continue with them in the
Grave? Can they reign and revel when their Bodies are in the Dust, and their
Souls in Hell? Where is their admired Happiness? Is it not all dead with them?
nothing will then remain but the tormenting Remembrance of their Folly. But the
Word of 1 Pet. 1. 25.
the Lord endures for ever: It Is an immortal Seed, and makes the Ground it is
planted in, to live for ever. We are assured, he that does the Will of God,
abides for ever. The Blessedness of Heaven is everlasting, as God the Object of
it, and the Soul that enjoys it. There is nothing defective in the State above,
where Happiness is surrounded with Eternity. This is worthy of our most
aspiring Ambition, of all our Hopes and Desires. Now is it possible that the
present World, as empty as the Froth of the Sea, as vanishing as a Puff of Air,
should be chosen before Celestial Happiness? It is by the most, so prodigiously
are Carnal Men swayed by Sense, that like Brute Beasts they are violently drawn
by present Things, and little moved by Things spiritual and future. The Devil
brings ready Money in his Hands, and tempts them with this present World: The
Son of God offers in his Word Eternal Happiness, which is despised in the
Comparison. If one should choose a small Sum at present before the sure
Reversion of an Estate that would enrich him all his Life, would he not be
despised by all for want of Understanding? Yet Men allow that Folly in their
own Practice, that they would condemn in others. But such is the Mercy of God,
that to persuade and prevail with us, he uses all the Arguments that can work
upon the Minds of Men. Hope and Fear are the strongest Springs to move us; he
therefore sets before us Heaven and Hell, to attract our Hope, and excite our
Fear. He makes use of Hell to kindle our Zeal in seeking the Kingdom of Heaven.
The most violent Passions are overruled by Fear. Now in the threatening of Hell
all the Motives of Fear are united. Little Evils are despised, not feared:
great Evils that may be easily avoided, or apprehended very remote, are not
feared. But Evils that are imminent and destructive, are the most powerful
Objects of Fear. Now every Man in his sinful State, hangs by slender Strings
over the bottomless Pit: and for his under-prizing and neglect of Heaven, falls
under the Sentence that determines his State in an everlasting Hell. There is
no dawning in that Darkness of Sorrow, no refreshing in those Flames. There is
a restless Remembrance of what is lost, as a Light that comes through a Cranny
in a Dungeon, that the forlorn Caitiff may remember the pleasant reviving Light
of which he is deprived. A thousand Years of Torment cannot expiate the
Offenses of those who disobey the Gospel: they are full of Misery, and fuller
of Guilt, that remains in its Weight upon them for ever.

The fear of this, if duly believed and considered, will bridle the strongest
Desires after this vain World, and make Men wise, that they may not perish in
their Choice.

To conclude; Let those who are invited to this Heavenly Feast, come with the
Wedding Garment: it is an Allusion to the decent Custom of wearing rich Apparel
for Ornament and Luster at Marriage-Solemnities, to express Joy, and to honor
the Persons that are married. Accordingly all that are in the Visible Church,
should adorn the Gospel by a Conversation becoming the Dignity and Purity of
their high and holy Calling. Unfeigned Faith that unites us to Christ, and is
effectual and evident in all good Works, is the Wedding Garment. The Apostle
exhorts the Romans to walk honestly, as in the Day, not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy; and
whereas it might seem congruous to have added, in direct Contrariety to those
foul Sins, Put on Temperance, Chastity, Patience and Charity, he directs them
to put on the Lord Jesus Christ: because he is the only Fountain of
supernatural Grace, by which our Lusts are mortified. Faith covers us with the
Robe of his Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10.
and clothes us with the Garment of Salvation. A counterfeit Livery of
Profession will not make us accepted of God. Is there any real Christianity
without Faith in Christ? and is there a lively Faith without Obedience to him?
Can you be a Subject without Subjection? Christ is the King of Saints; they are
the Citizens of his Kingdom, and only enjoy the Privileges of it. How many are
Christians in Title, and Infidels in Practice? They live in the bold Contempt
of the Divine Law, as if they were afraid the Justice of God should not have
cause enough to condemn them, or they would put it to a vent^^e, whether he
would be true to his Threatening, and punish according to his Law? Others, tho
of a fair Conversation, are but ha^f-Christians: they do not sincerely and
entirely comply with the Terms of the Gospel, to receive Christ for their
Prince and Mat. 22. 11, 12.
Savior. Let such remember, the King came i^ to see the Guests, and saw a Man
without a Wedding Garment: this signifies God's judicial Observation of all
that are in his Church, not one can escape his alldiscerning Eye, ^^e closest
Hypocrite is transparent in his Sight. It follows in the Parable, He says unto
him, Friend, How came thou in hither without a Wedding Garment? Nothing will
be available in Judgment, not the most specious and glittering Profession,
without Faith in Christ, and a renewed Heart and Life: yet may fondly dream
they may be saved, tho not sanctified. He was speechles. reduced to a
defenseless Silenc^ and Confusion. The Heart of Man is deceitful above all
things, and above all things deceitful to it sel^: How often in the trial of
his Spiritual State, by Excuses and fa^se Glosses he deceives and satisfies
himself. But there are no Apologies before the King: all things are entirely
open to his Eyes: the Thoughts of Men will be their Accusers, and their Works
will depose against them. And how fearful is the Judgment that follows! Then
said the King to the Servants, Bind him Hand and Foot, and take him away, and
cast him into outer Darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
Bind him Hand and Foot: the Expression signifies that the revenging Power of
God is inevitable and irresistible. Cast him into outer Darkness, that
signifies the Separation from the reviving Presence and Communion of God: there
is weeping and gnashing of Teeth; the Expression signifies the deepest Sorrow
and higest Fury in the Damned. What a Discord and Tumult of the tormenting
Passions is there? What Misery, when the quickest Sense to feel, and the
greatest Evils to be felt, are there? Hell is an intolerable Climate, where
cold Despair and hot Rage are in Extremity for ever.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 208. line 10. for. tossed, read lost. P. 209. l. 10. f. brightest, r.
highest. P. 225. l. 15. f. rest on, r. restore. P. 232. l. 18. f. Revelation,
r. Eievation. P. 248. l. 7. dele Can. l. 20. f. of, r. to. P. 251. l. 23. f.
furiously, r. furious. P. 259. l. 8. f. make a show, r. feel the Restraints. l.
24. f. our, r. their. P. 274. l. 20. f. take, r. taste. P. 350. l. ult. f. Sin
and the Judgment, r. the Sin. P. 351. l. ult. f. it is, r. his. P. 360. l. 7. f.
frequently, r. frequent. P. 324. l. 1. f. it, r. and. P. 336. l. 13. f.
directing, r. decreeing. P. 341. l. 7. f. is, r. which is. l. 10. del. not
only. l. 13. f. but with, r. has. P. 372. l. 19. f. mortal, r. immortal.

Books writ by William Bates, D. D.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses, wherein is showed,
how the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power and Truth of God are glorified
in that great and blessed Work. In Octavo.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the future State. To which is now added, The Divinity
of the Christian Religion, proved by the Evidence of Reason, and Divine
Revelation, for the Cure of Infidelity, the Hectic Evil of the Times. In
Octavo.

The Sovereign and Final Happiness of Man, with the effectual Means to obtain
it. In Octavo.

Several Sermons upon Death, and Eternal Judgment. In Octavo.

The Four last Things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, practically
considered and applied, in several Discourses. In Octavo.

The Danger of Prosperity discovered, in several Sermons upon Prove. 1. 17. In
Octavo.

The great Duty of Resignation in Times of Affliction, etc. In Octavo.

A Funeral-Sermon preached upon the Death of the Reverend and Excellent Divine,
Dr. Thomas Manton, who deceased October 18, 1677. To which is now added, the
last public Sermon Dr. Manton preached. In Octavo.

The sure Trial of Uprightness, opened in several Sermons upon Psalm. 18. 23. In
Octavo.

A Description of the Blessed Place and State of the Saints Above, in a
Discourse on John 14. 2. Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Clarkson.

The Way to the highest Honor, on John 12. 26. Preached at the Funeral of Dr.
Jacomb.

The speedy Coming of Christ to Judgment, on Rev. 22. 12. Preached at the
Funeral of Mr. Benj. Ashurst.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NEwly printed the Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New: With
Annotations and Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed, The Harmony of the
Gospels: As also, The Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to
our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel
Clark, Minister of the Gospel. Printed in Folio of a very fair Letter; the like
never before, in one Volume.

Likewise his Analysis: Or, A Survey of the whole Bible; containing an
Analytical Account, or Division of all the Holy Scriptures; affording a
pleasant Prospect into the several Rooms of this sacred Edifice, and the
Variety of Furniture contained in them. Now in the Press.

Both sold by J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.


