SERMONS UPON Psalm CXXX. Ver. 4. But there is Forgiveness with thee; that thou
may be feared.

BY WILLIAM BATES, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Brabazon Aylmer at the three Pigeons, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1696.

SERMONS OF THE Forgiveness of Sins.
PSALM. CXXX. 4. But there is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.


THE Psalmist, in the first and second Verses, addresses to God with earnest
Desires for his saving Mercies: Out of the Depths have I cried to thee, O Lord:
Lord, hear my Voice: let thine Ear be attentive to my Supplication. He humbly
deprecates the severe Inquiry of Divine Justice; ver. 3. Ver. 3.
If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand? If God
should with an exact Eye observe our Sins, and call us to an account, who can
stand in Judgment? who can endure that fiery Trial? The best Saints, tho never
so innocent and unblameable in the sight of Men, tho never so vigilant and
watchful over their Hearts and Ways, are not exempted from the Spots of humane
Frailty, which according to the Rigor of the Law, would expose them to a
condemning Sentence. He relieves and supports himself under this fearful
Apprehension with the Hopes of Mercy: But there is Forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared. It Is in thy Power and thy Will, to pardon repenting and
returning Sinners, that thou may be feared. The Fear of God in Scripture
signifies the humble holy Reverence of him, as our heavenly Father and
Sovereign, that makes us cautious lest we should offend him, and careful to
please him. For this Reason the Fear of God is comprehensive of all Religion,
of the whole Duty of Man, to which it is introductive, and is a principal
Ingredient in it. The Clemency and compassionate Mercy of God is the Cause of
an ingenuous filial Fear, mixed with Love and Affiance in the Breasts of Men.
Other Attributes, his Holiness that framed the Law, Justice that ordained the
Punishment of Sin, Power that inflicts it, render his Majesty terrible, and
cause a Flight from him as an Enemy. If all must perish for their Sins, no
Prayers or Praises will ascend to Heaven, all Religious Worship will cease for
ever: But his tender Mercy ready to receive humble Suppliants, and restore them
to his Favor, renders him amiable and admired, and draws us near to him.

There are two Propositions to be considered in the Verse:

1. That Forgiveness belongs to God.

2. That the forgiving Mercy of God is a powerful Motive of Adoration and
Obedience. I propound to discourse of the first, and to touch upon the second
in the Application.

In managing the Point with Light and Order, it is requisite to consider; 1 st.
What is contained in Forgiveness. 2 dly. The Arguments that demonstrate that
Forgiveness belongs to God.

1. What is contained in Forgiveness. This necessarily supposes Sin, and Sin a
Law that is violated by it: The Law implies a Sovereign Lawgiver, to whose
declared Will Subjection is due, and who will exact an Account in Judgment of
Men's Obedience or Disobedience to his Law, and dispense Rewards and Punishments
accordingly. God by the clearest Titles is our King, our Lawgiver and Judge:
for he is our Maker and Preserver, and consequently has a full Propriety in us,
and absolute Authority over us: and by his sovereign and singular Perfections
is qualified to govern us. A derived Being is necessarily in a State of
Dependence and Subjection. All the Ranks of Creatures in the World are ordered
by their Maker: his Kingdom rules over all. Those in the lowest degree of Being
are ordered by Power. Sensitive Creatures are determined by the Impulses of
Nature to their Actions; for having no Light to distinguish between moral Good
and Evil, they have no Choice, and are incapable of receiving a Law.
Intelligent Creatures, endowed with judicious and free Faculties, an
Understanding to discern between moral Good and Evil, and a Will to choose or
reject what is propounded to them, are capable of a Law to direct and regulate
their Liberty.

To Man a Law was given by the Creator, (the Copy of his Wisdom and Will) that
has all the Perfections of a Rule: It Is clear and complete, injoining what is
essentially good, and forbidding what is essentially evil. God governs Man
conveniently to his Nature: and no Service is pleasing to him but the Result of
our Reason and Choice, the Obedience of our supreme leading Powers. Since the
Fall, the Light of the Understanding compared with the bright Discovery it
afforded of our whole Duty in our Original State, is either like the Twilight
of the Evening, the faint and dim Remains of the Light of the Day, when Night
draws a dark Vail over the World, or like the dawning of the Morning, when the
rising Sun begins to scatter the Darkness of the Night. The latter Comparison I
think is more just and regular; for it is said, that the Son of God enlightens
every Man that comes into the World. The innate Light discovers there is a
straight Line of Truth to regulate our Judgment, and a straight Line of Virtue
to regulate our Actions. Natural Conscience is a Principle of Authority,
directing us to choose and practice Virtue, and to avoid Vice; and according to
our Neglect or Compliance with its Dictates reflects upon us. It Is hardly
presumable that any are so prodigiously wicked, as not to be convinced of the
natural Rectitude in things: they can distinguish between what is fair and what
is fraudulent in Dealings, and acknowledge in the general, and in judging of
others, the Equity of things, tho they elude the Force of the Conviction in the
Application to themselves. Now since common Reason discovers there is a common
Rule, there must be a common Judge to whom Men are accountable for the Obliquity
or Conformity of their Actions to that Rule. The Law of God is revealed in its
Purity and Perfection in the Scripture.

The Law binds first to Obedience, and in neglect of it to Punishment. Sin is
defined by St. John to be the Transgression of the Law. The Omission of what is
commanded, or doing what is forbidden, is a Sin. Not only the Lusts that break
forth into Action and Evidence, but inward Inclinations, contrary to the Law,
are Sin. From hence results a Guilt upon every Sinner, which includes the
Imputation of the Fault, and Obligation to Punishment. There is a natural
Connection between the Evil of Doing, and the Evil of Suffering: the Violation
of the Law is justly revenged by the Violation of the Person that breaks it. It
is an impossible Imagination, that God should give a Law not enforced with a
Sanction. This would cast a Blemish upon his Wisdom, for the Law would cancel
it self, and defeat his Ends in giving it: it would reflect a high Dishonor
upon his Holy Majesty, as if he were indifferent with respect to Virtue or
Vice, and disregarded our Reverence or Rebellion against his Authority. The
Apostle declares, that all the World are become guilty before God; that is,
justly chargeable with their Crimes, and liable to his Judgment. The Act of Sin
is transient, and the Pleasure vanishes; but the Guilt, if not pardoned and
purged away, remains for ever in the Records of Conscience. The Sin of Judah is
written with a Pen of Iron, and with the Point of a Diamond; it is graven on
the Tables of the Heart. When the Books of eternal Life and Death shall be
opened at the Last Day, all the unpardoned Sins of Men, with their killing
Aggravations, will be found written in indelible Characters, and shall be set
in order before their Eyes, to their Confusion: The righteous Judge has sworn he
will forget none of their Works. According to the Number and Heinousness of
their Sins, a Sentence shall pass upon them: No Excuses shall suspend the
Judgment, nor mitigate the immediate Execution of it.

The Forgiveness of Sins contains the Abolition of their Guilt, and Freedom
from the deserved Destruction consequent to it. This is expressed by various
Terms in Scripture. Pardon relates to some Damage and Offense which the
offended Party may severely vindicate. Now although the blessed God in strictness
of speaking can receive no Damage by rebellious Creatures, being infinitely
above the Impression of Evil: yet as our Savior speaks of one that looks upon
a Woman with an impure Desire, that he has committed Adultery with her in his
Heart, tho the Innocence of the Woman be unstained; so the Sins of Men, being
Acts of foul Ingratitude against his Goodness, and notorious Unrighteousness
against his Authority, are in a Sense injurious to him, which he might justly
revenge upon them, but his Clemency spares them. The not imputing Sin is
borrowed from the Accounts of Servants with their Masters; and implies the
Account we are obliged to render the supreme Lord for all his Benefits which we
have so wretchedly misimproved: he might righteously exact of us ten thousand
Talents that are due to him, but he is graciously pleased to cross the Book,
and freely to discharge us. The purging from Sin, implies it is very odious and
offensive in God's Eyes, and has a special respect to the expiatory Sacrifices,
of which it is said, that without Blood there was no Remission. This was typical
of the precious Blood of the Son of God that purges the Conscience from dead
Works; from the deadly Guilt of Sin that cleaves to the Conscience of the
Sinner. By the application of his Blood the crimson Guilt is washed away, and
the pardoned Sinner is accepted as one pure and innocent.

2. I shall next demonstrate, that Forgiveness belongs to God. This will be
evident by the following Considerations.

1 st. It Is the high and peculiar Prerogative of God to pardon Sin. His
Authority made the Law, and gives Life and Vigor to it, therefore he can remit
the Punishment of the Offender. This is evident from the Proportion of humane
Laws: For tho subordinate Judges have only a limited Power, and must acquit or
condemn according to the Law, yet the Sovereign may dispense with it. This is
declared in Scripture by God himself: I, even I am he, that blots out thy
Transgressions for my Name sake: Isa. 43.
He repeats it with an Emphasis. He is proclaimed with this Royal Title; The
Lord, gracious and merciful, pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. It Is a
Dispensation of Divine Sovereignty to pardon the Guilty.

It Is true, God pardons as a Father, according to that most gracious Promise,
Mal. 3.
I will spare them, as a Father spares his Son that serves him; but as invested
with the Dignity of a Sovereign. Our Savior directs us, in the perfect Form of
Prayer dictated to his Disciples, to pray to God for the Forgiveness of our
Sins, as our Father sitting in Heaven upon a high Throne, from whence he
pronounces our Pardon. His Majesty is equally glorious with his Mercy in that
blessed Dispensation. His Royal Supremacy is more conspicuous in the Exercise
of Mercy toward repenting Sinners, than in the Acts of Justice upon obstinate
Offenders. As a King is more a King by the pardoning humble Suppliants by the
Operation of his Scepter, than in subduing Rebels by the Power of the Sword:
For in Acts of Grace he is above the Law, and overrules its Rigor, in Acts of
Vengeance he is only superior to his Enemies.

It Is the peculiar Prerogative of God to pardon Sin. The Prophet challenges all
the reputed Deities of the Heathens as defective in this Royal Power: Mic. 7.
Who is a God like unto thee, pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin? The
Pharisees said true, Who can forgive Sins but God only? for it is an Act of
Empire. The judicial Power to pardon is a Flower inseparable from the Crown:
for it is founded in a Superiority to the Law, therefore inconsistent with a
depending Authority. A Creature is as incapable of the Supremacy of God in
pardoning Sin, as of his Omnipotence to create a World: for they are both truly
infinite. Besides, the Power of pardoning Sins, necessarily implies an
universal Knowledge of the Minds and Hearts of Men, which are the Fountains of
their ^ctions: and according to their Ingred^^ncy the moral Good or Evil of
them rises. The more deliberately and wilfully a Sin is committed, the Sinner
incurs a greater Guilt, and is obnoxious to a more heavy Punishment. Now no
Creature can dive into the Hearts of Men: They are naked and open to the
piercing Eye of God alone. Add farther, the authoritative Power to pardon, has
necessarily annexed to it the active Power of dispensing Rewards and
Punishments. Now the Son of God alone has the Keys of Life and Death in his
Hands.

It may be objected, That our Savior declares, that the Son of Man has Power
to forgive Sins. The Answer to this will be clear by considering, there are two
Natures in Christ; the Divine Nature, that originally belongs to him, and is
proper to his Person; and the Humane Nature, which is as it were adoptive, and
was voluntarily assumed. Now the Divine Person is the sole Principle and
Subject of this Royal Dignity, but it is exercised in its Conjunction with the
humane Nature, and attributed to the Son of Man: As in the Humiliation of
Christ, the Principles of his Sufferings* and the actual Sufferings, are solely
in the humane Nature, but upon the Account of the personal Union, they are
attributed to the Divine Person. It Is said, The Lord of Glory was crucified,
and the Blood of God redeemed his Church.

The Church of Rome, with high Presumption, arrogates to their Priests a
judicial Power of forgiving Sins: and by the easy Folly of the People, and
crafty Deceit of their Instructors, exercise a Jurisdiction over Conscience. To
avoid the Imputation of Blasphemy, they pretend there is a double Power of
Forgiving, supreme and subordinate; the first belongs to God, the other is
delegated by Commission to the Ministers of the Gospel. But this is an
irreconcilable Contradiction: for the Power to pardon is an Efflux of
Supremacy, and incommunicable to the Subject. A Prince that invests another
with an absolute Power to pardon, must either relinquish his Sovereignty, or
take an Associate to share in it. This Pretense of the Papists is such a lame
Evasion, as that which they are forced to make use of to clear themselves from
the Charge of Idolatry in their Worship of Angels and Saints: their Excuse is,
that their Worship of Angels and Saints is inferior in degree, and imperfectly
divine; as if there could be different Degrees in Divine Worship, which is
absolutely and necessarily supreme. The Ministers of the Gospel have only a
declarative Power, as Heralds or Ambassadors, to propose the Terms of the
Gospel for the obtaining Pardon, and to apply the Promise of Pardon to those
who appear qualified for it. But to pronounce and dispense Pardon, they have no
judicial Authority: for it is not presumeable that the wise God should invest
Men with that Authority which they are utterly incapable to exercise.

2 dly. God is ready to forgive. The Power to pardon without an Inclination to
it, affords no Relief in the Agonies of an accusing Conscience, and the Terrors
of eternal Judgment. The merciful Will of God declared in his Word, is the
Foundation of our blessed Hope, and encourages us in our Requests before his
Throne: Psalm. 86.
For thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in Mercy unto all
that call upon thee.

The Attribute of which Pardon is an Emanation, is usually expressed by Grace and
Mercy. It Is said, the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto all
Men: We are saved by Grace. Grace implies free Favor. There is in this respect
a Difference between Love and Grace. Love may be set upon an Object worthy of
it. The primary Object of God's Love is himself, whose excellent and amiable
Perfections are worthy of infinite Love. The Love of Parents to Children is a
Duty most clearly natural, and Duty lessens the Desert of performing it; but
Grace is exclusive of all Merit and Dignity in the Subject, and of all
Obligation in the Person that shows it. God's most free preventing Grace is
exercised without any Motive in us that deserves it.

The Grace of God may be considered as exercised in our Creation and our
Redemption. In the Creation it was absolutely free: for Angels and Men were in
the State of nothing, there was only a Possibility of their Being. Now there
could be no attractive Merit before their Existence. It Is true, Goodness is
glorified and crowned by communicating: The World is a bright Efflux of the
Divine Glory; but this does not lessen the free Goodness of the Maker. There
was no Constraint upon God to make the World for his declarative Glory: for his
essential Glory is truly infinite, and wants no external Appearance to make it
complete. The Universal Church pays humble Homage to the Great Creator;
acknowledging, that for his Will and Pleasure all things were created.

The Divine Goodness to Angels and Man in their Original Purity, was Grace: for
although the Image of God shining in them was attractive of his Approbation and
Acceptance, yet they deserved no Benefits from him: there is such an infinite
Distance and Disproportion between God and the Creatures, that they cannot by a
common Right claim any thing as due from his Majesty. Besides, he is the
productive and conservative Cause of all their active Powers, and the Efficacy
of them.

The creating Goodness of God is eclipsed in the Comparison with his saving
Grace. The first supposes us without any Deserts of his Favor, but this
supposes our exceedingly bad Deserts: The first was free, but this is merciful
and healing Grace. Mercy revives and restores us when deservedly miserable.
This Grace and Mercy is of so pure a Nature, that the most tender humane
Inclinations to relieve the Afflicted, are mixed with Self-interest, compared
with the Mercy of God toward us. Our Bowels relent, and Affections are melting
at the sight of Persons in deep Misery. But there is an inward and unvoluntary
Constraint of Nature that excites such feeling Resentments: and our Compassion
is moved by Reflection upon our selves, considering that in this open State we
are liable to many Disasters and wounding Sorrows: but God is infinitely free
from all disturbing Passions, and exempted from all possible Evils. To
represent the immense Love and Mercy of God in its endearing Circumstances, and
to demonstrate his Readiness to forgive, we must consider what he has done in
order to his pardoning Sinners.

1. If we consider God as the supreme Lawgiver and Judge of the World, as the
Protector of Righteousness and Goodness, and the Revenger of all Disorders in
his moral Government, it became him not to pardon Sinners without the punishing
Sin in such a manner as might satisfy his injured Justice, and vindicate the
Honor of his despised Law, and declare most convincingly his Hatred against
Sin. Now for these great Ends he decreed to send his Son from his Bosom, to
assume our Nature, and to suffer the contumelious Calamity of the Death on the
Cross, to make a Propitiation for our Sins. This was the Contrivance of his
high Wisdom, which the most enlightened Angels had no presaging Notions of. Now
can there be a more clear Evidence and convincing Reality, that God is ready to
forgive Sins, than the giving his only begotten Son, a Person so great and so
dear, the Heir of his Love and Glory, to be a Sacrifice, that he might spare
us? In this Dispensation Love was the regent leading Attribute, to which his
Wisdom, Justice and Power were subordinate: they were in exercise for the more
glorious Illustration of his Mercy. We have the strongest Argument of God's
Love in the Death of his Son, for our Pardon was the end of it. From hence it is
evident, that God is more willing to dispense his pardoning Mercy, than Sinners
are to receive it.

2. God's Readiness to forgive appears in the gracious and easy Terms
prescribed in the Gospel for the obtaining Pardon. There are two ways of
Justification before God, and they are like two Ways to a City: One is direct
and short, but deep and unpassable; the other lies in a Circuit, but will bring
a Person safe to the Place. Thus there is a Justification of an innocent Person
by Works, that secures him from the Charge of the Law; and a Justification of a
Sinner by Faith in our all-sufficient Savior. The first was a short way to Man
in the State of Integrity: the second, such is the Distance of the Terms, takes
a Compass. There is a shorter Passage from Life to Action, than from Death to
Life. There is no Hope or Possibility of our legal Justification. The Apostle
says, Romans 8.
That which the Law could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh, God
sending his own Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin
in the Flesh. The Expiation of Sin, and renewing us into the Image of God, are
obtained by the Gospel. The Law is called, the Law of Sin and Death: which must
be understood not as considered in it self, but relatively to our depraved
Nature. The Law supposes Men in a State of uncorrupted Nature, and was given to
be a Preservative of our Holiness and Felicity, not a Remedy to recover us from
Sin and Misery. It was directive of our Duty, but since our Rebellion the Rod
is turned into a Serpent. The Law is hard and imperious, severe and inexorable,
the Tenor of it is, Do, or die for ever. It requires a Righteousness entire and
unblemished, which one born in Sin cannot produce in the Court of Judgment. Man
is utterly unable by his lapsed Powers to recover the Favor of God, and to
fulfill his Obligation by the Law to Obedience. But the Gospel discovers an open
easy way to Life, to all that will accept of Salvation by the Redeemer. The
Apostle expresses the Difference between the Condition of the Law and the
Gospel in a very significant manner. Romans 10.
Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the Man that does
those things shall live in them: but the Righteousness which is of Faith speaks
on this wise, Say not in thine Heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven, that is to
bring down Christ from above; Who shall descend into the Deep, that is to bring
Jesus Christ again from the dead? but what says it? The Word is nigh thee,
that if thou shall confess with thy Mouth, and shall believe in thy Heart, that
God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. The meaning of the
Apostle is, that things in Heaven above, or in the Depths beneath, are of
impossible Discovery and Attainment, so it is equally impossible to be justified
by the Works of the Law. The anxious Sinner seeks in vain for Righteousness in
the Law, which can only be found in the Gospel.

It may be objected, that the Condition of the Law, and the Condition of the
Gospel, compared relatively to our depraved Faculties, are equally impossible.
The carnal Mind and Affections are as averse from Repentance and receiving
Christ as our Lord and Savior, as from obeying the Law. Our Savior tells the
Jews, Ye will not come to me that ye may have Life: and no Man can come to me
unless the Father draw him. Which Words are highly expressive of our utter
Impotence to believe savingly in Christ. But there is a clear Answer to this
Objection: the Difference between the two Dispensations consists principally in
this: The Law requires complete and constant Obedience as the Condition of
Life, without affording the least supernatural Power to perform it. But the
Gospel has the Spirit of Grace a Concomitant with it, by whose Omnipotent
Efficacy Sinners are revived, and enabled to comply with the Terms of
Salvation. The Spirit of the Law is styled the Spirit of Bondage from its
rigorous Effects: it discovered Sin, and terrified the Conscience, without
implanting a Principle of Life that might restore the Sinner to a State of Holy
Liberty. As the Flame in the Bush made the Thorns in it visible, without
consuming them; so the fiery Law discovers Men's Sins, but does not abolish them:
But the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, i. e. the Gospel, has freed
us from the Law of Sin and Death. I will more particularly consider the
gracious Terms prescribed in the Gospel for the obtaining Pardon; Repentance
toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. The requiring of them is not
an arbitrary Constitution, but founded in the unchangeable Nature and Congruity
of things. Repentance signifies a sincere Change of the Mind and Heart from the
Love and Practice of Sin, to the Love and Practice of Holiness, upon
Evangelical and Divine Motives. The principal Ingredients in it are,
Reflections with Grief and Shame upon our past Sins, with steadfast Resolutions
of future Obedience. It Is a vital Principle productive of Fruits suitable to it:
It Is called Repentance from dead Works, Repentance unto Life. It Is the Seed of
new Obedience. Repentance in order of Nature is before Pardon, but they are
inseparably joined in the same Point of Time. David is a blessed Instance of
this: Psalm. 32.
I said I will confess my Transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the
Iniquity of my Sin. The Sum and Tenor of the Apostles Commission recorded by
St. Luke is, Luke 24.
That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in the Name of Christ
to all Nations. That a repentant Sinner only is qualified for Pardon, will be
evident in considering,

1. That an impenitent Sinner is the Object of revenging Justice; and it is
utterly inconsistent that pardoning Mercy and revenging Justice should be
terminated upon the same Person at the same time, in the same respect. It Is
said, The Lord hates all the Workers of Iniquity; and his Soul hates the
Wicked. The Expression implies the intense Degrees of Hatred. In the glorious
Appearance of God to Moses, when proclaimed with the highest Titles of Honor,
The Lord God, gracious and merciful, pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin,
it is added, he will by no means spare the Guilty, i. e. impenitent Sinners. We
must suppose God to be of a changeable flexible Nature, (which is a blasphemous
Imagination, and makes him like to sinful Man) if an impenitent Sinner may be
received to Favor without a Change in his Disposition. God cannot repent of
giving a holy Law, the Rule of our Duty, therefore Man must repent of his
breaking the Law before he can be reconciled to him. The Truth is, Man
considered merely as a Sinner, is not the Object of God's first Mercy, i. e. of
Pity and Compassion: for as such he is the Object of God's Wrath; and it is a
formal Contradiction to assert that he is the Object of Love and Hatred at the
same time, and in the same respect. But Man, considered as God's Creature,
involved in Misery by the Fraud of the Tempter, and his own Folly, was the
Object of God's Compassion; and the Recovery of him from his forlorn wretched
State, was the Effect of that Compassion.

2. Tho Mercy considered as a separate Attribute might pardon an impenitent
Sinner, yet not in Conjunction and Concord with God's essential Perfections.
Many things are possible to Power absolutely considered, which God cannot do:
for his Power is always directed in its Exercise by his Wisdom, and limited by
his Will. It would disparage God's Wisdom, stain his Holiness, violate his
Justice, to pardon an impenitent Sinner. The Gospel by the Promise of Pardon to
such, would foil it self, and frustrate its principal End, which is to purify
us from all Iniquity, and to make us a People zealous of good Works.

3. If an impenitent Sinner may be pardoned as such, he may be glorified: for
that which qualifies a Man for Pardon, qualifies him for Salvation: and the
Divine Decree establishes an inseparable Connection between them; Romans 8.
Whom God justifies he glorifies. If a Sinner dies immediately after his Pardon
is past, nothing can intercept his being received into Heaven. Now this is
utterly impossible; the exclusion of such is peremptory and universal, for
without Holiness no Man shall see God. The Admission of an impenitent Sinner
into Heaven, would pollute that holy Place, and unconsecrate the Temple of God
wherein his Holiness shines in its Glory.

It is objected by some, that the requiring Repentance to qualify the Sinner
for Pardon eclipses the Grace of the Gospel.

I willingly acknowledge, that a religious Jealousy, lest the Freeness and
Honor of Divine Grace in our Pardon should be lessened, is very becoming a
Christian; but it is ill-grounded and ill-guided in this Matter. This will be
evident by considering;

1 st. Repentance is an Evangelical Grace, the Gift of the Redeemer: Him has
God raised to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.
to give Repentance and Forgiveness of Sin. The Law did not allow of
Repentance, nor promise Pardon. The Design of it was to keep us in the Favor
and Communion with God, but afforded no Means of Reconciliation after our
offending him. Repentance was no Degree of Perfection before Man's Fall, but is
a Relief of his Imperfection after it. The Law called the Righteous to
Obedience, the Gospel calls Sinners to Repentance.

2 dly. There is no Causality or Merit in Repentance to procure our Pardon. The
Mercy of God for the most precious Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ is the
only Cause of Pardon. A Flood of repenting Tears, an Effusion of our Blood, are
of too low a Price to make any Satisfaction to God, to deserve a Return of his
Favor. The most sincere Love of Holiness, and steadfast Resolution to forsake
Sin, which is the principal part of Repentance, can be no Satisfaction for our
past Offenses, for it is the natural Duty of Man before the commission of Sin:
Repentance is only a vital Qualification in the Subject that receives the
Pardon.

3 dly. The Grace of God is very conspicuous in dispensing Pardon, according to
the Order of the Gospel to repenting Sinners. For first, Repentance renders the
Divine Mercy most honorable in the Esteem of those who partake of it. Our
Savior tells us, The whole need not a Physician, but those who are sick. He
that feels his Disease, and is strongly apprehensive of its Danger, values the
Counsel and Assistance of a Physician above all Treasures. The repenting Sinner
who is under the strong Conviction of his Guilt, and his being always obnoxious
to the Judgment of God, and eternal Misery the Consequent of it, he values the
Favor of God as the most sovereign Good, and accounts his Displeasure as the
supreme Evil. Repentance inspires flaming Affections in our Prayers and Praises
for Pardon. The repenting Sinner prays for Pardon with as much Fervency as
Daniel prayed in the Den, to be preserved from the devouring Lions; or as Jonah
prayed out of the Belly of Hell for Deliverance. Jonah 2.
He addresses not with faint but fainting Desires for Mercy; Give me Pardon, or
I die. The insensible Sinner that is secure in the Shadow of Death, may offer
some verbal Requests for Pardon, but his Prayer is defective in the Principle:
for he never feels the Want of a Pardon; he prays so coldly as if unconcerned
whether he be accepted or no. And with what a Rapture of Admiration, and Joy,
and thankful Affections, does the pardoned Penitent magnify the Divine Mercy?
The Christian Niobe that was melted into repenting Tears loved much, because
much was forgiven her.

2. This Establishment that Repentance qualifies a Sinner for Pardon, is most
beneficial to Man, and consequently most illustrates pardoning Mercy. We must
observe, that Sin does not only affect us with Guilt, but leaves an inherent
Corruption that defiles and debases the Sinner, and strongly inclines him to
relapse into Rebellion. Now Repentance gives the true Representation of Sin in
its penal Consequences, the Anger of the Almighty, the Terrors of Conscience,
and makes it evident and odious to the Soul. David had a piercing Conviction
what a foul Sin Adultery was, when his Bones were broken. Repenting Sorrow
strikes at the Root of Sin, the Love of Pleasure. This makes us fearful to
offend God, and to fly all the alluring Temptations that will betray us to Sin.
This makes us obedient. The melted Metal is receptive of any Form. Contrition
is joined with Resignation: Lord, what will thou have me to do? was the Voice
of repenting Saul.

It may be objected, that we read, God justifies the Ungodly, but the Answer is
clear. The Apostle does not intend by the Ungodly, an impenitent Sinner, but
makes the Opposition between the Ungodly and one that perfectly obeys the Law,
and is consequently justified by Works: and in this Sense the most excellent
Saints here are ungodly. Besides, the Apostle does not assert that God
absolutely pardons the Ungodly, but qualifies the Persons: To him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. Now justifying Faith and Repentance are like Tamar's Twins:
Repentance is first felt, and then Faith exerts it self in applying the Merits
of Christ's Death for our Pardon.

It is replied by some, that all Grace is communicated from Christ, as our
Head, and supposes our Union with him, of which Faith is the vital Band, and
consequently the first Grace, by which all other Graces are derived to us.

To this I answer, there are two Means of our Union with Christ: The principal
is the quickening Spirit descending from Christ as the Fountain of the
supernatural Life, and a lively Faith wrought in us by his pure and powerful
Operation, that ascends from us and closes with him. It Is said, the second Adam
was made a quickening Spirit: and he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit.
As the Parts of the natural Body are united by the vital Influence of the same
Soul that is present in the whole; so we are united to Christ by the Holy
Spirit that was given to him without measure, and from his Fullness is derived
to us. It Is clear therefore beyond all Contradiction, that Faith is not
antecedently requisite, as the means of conveying all Graces to us from Christ.

2. There are two Acts of Faith: the first respects the General Offer of Pardon
in the Gospel to all repenting believing Sinners: The second is the Application
of the Promise of Pardon to the Soul. The first is antecedent to evangelical
Repentance: The second is clearly consequent in the Order of Nature, for the
Promise assures Pardon only to the weary and heavy laden that come to Christ
for Rest.

In short, there is a perfect Agreement and Sympathy between Reason and Divine
Revelation in this Doctrine, that God pardons only the repenting Sinner. The
contrary Assertion is an Impeachment of the Rectitude of his Nature, and
directly contrary to the Design and Tenor of the Gospel. If a Man be justified
as ungodly, the Evangelical Command of Repentance for the Remission of Sins is
useless and unprofitable. What a pernicious Influence upon Practice this
Doctrine may have, is obvious to any that consider it. I shall only add, if God
pardons Men as ungodly, how shall he judge the World? 'Twas prophesied by Enoch,
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand Saints to judge all that are ungodly for
their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodlily committed. Now as St. James
argues against the Perverseness of Men, Jam. 3.10.
when from the same Mouth proceeds Blessing and Cursing; Does a Fountain send
forth sweet Water and bitter? This Instance is incomparably more strong with
respect to God than to Men. It Is more consistent and conceiveable that a
Fountain should send forth fresh Water and Salt, than that the holy and
righteous God, in whose Nature there is not the least Discord, should justify
some as ungodly, and condemn others as ungodly for ever.

2. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the Evangelical Condition of our
obtaining Pardon. This will appear by considering the Nature of Faith. Saving
Faith is an unfeigned Persuasion of the Power, and Desire of Christ to save
Sinners, that induces the Soul to receive him, and rely on him, as he is
offered in the Gospel. We are assured of his All Sufficiency, and of his
compassionate Willingness to save us; He is able to save to the utmost all that
come to God by him. Our Savior declares, whoever comes to him, he will in no
wise cast out. Faith is seated in the whole Soul, and according to the Truth
and transcendent Goodness of the Object, produces the most precious and sacred
Esteem of it in the Mind, and the most joyful Consent and Choice of it in the
Will. Accordingly a sincere Believer embraces entire Christ as a Prince and a
Savior, and is as willing to be governed by his Scepter, as to depend upon his
Sacrifice. Acceptance and Reliance are the essential Ingredients of justifying
Faith. This is the Doctrine of the Everlasting Gospel. The Angel declared this
to the Shepherds: Behold, Luke 2.
I bring you Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People; for to you is
born this Day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. This
is a faithful Saying, 1 Timothy 1.
and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the World to
save Sinners, of whom I am chief. Faith is indispensably necessary to our
obtaining Forgiveness. Faith is the Channel wherein the precious Issues of his
Blood and Sufferings are conveyed to us. To make more evident how necessary and
gracious a Condition Faith in the Redeemer is, for our Pardon, I will briefly
consider the Foundation of the Covenant of Life in the Gospel. After Man had
plunged himself into Damnation, God having decreed, that without Satisfaction
there should be no Remission of his Sin; and the Sinner being utterly incapable
of enduring such a Punishment in degrees, as might be truly satisfactory, it
necessarily followed, he must suffer a Punishment equivalent in Duration. To
prevent this, there was no possible way but by admitting a Surety, who should
represent the Sinner, and in his stead suffer the Punishment due for Sin. A
threefold Consent was requisite in this Transaction.

(1.) The Consent of the Sovereign, whose Law was violated, and Majesty
despised: For as there is a natural Distinction between Persons, and between
the Actions of Persons, so there must be between the Recompenses of those
Actions: Consequently the Sinner is obliged to suffer the Punishment in his own
Person. From hence it is clear, that the Punishment cannot be transferred to
another without the Allowance of the Sovereign, who is the Patron of the Rights
of Justice.

(2.) The Consent of the Surety is requisite: for Punishment being an Emanation
of Justice cannot be inflicted on an innocent Person, without his voluntary
interposing to save the Guilty. A Surety is legally one Person with the Debtor:
otherwise the Creditor cannot exact, by the Rule of Right, the Payment from
him, which is fixed by the Law upon the Person of the Debtor.

(3.) It Is as clear, that the Consent of the Guilty is requisite, who obtains
Impunity by the vicarious Sufferings of another. For if he resolves to bear his
own Guilt, and wilfully refuses to be freed by the interposing of another
between him and the Punishment, neither the Judge nor the Surety can constrain
him to it. Now all these concur in this great Transaction. As the Creation of
Man was a Work of solemn Counsel, Let us make Man, so his Redemption was the
Product of the Divine Counsel. I may allude to what is represented to us in the
Vision of the Divine Glory to the Prophet Isaiah: Isa. 6.
I heard the Lord saying, Who shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said
I, Here I am, send me. Thus the Rise of our Salvation was from the Father. He
makes the Inquiry, who shall go for us, to recover fallen Man? The Son
interposes, Here I am, send me. The Father from his Sovereignty and Mercy
appointed and accepted the Mediator and Surety for us. It was no part of the
Law given in Paradise, that if Man sinned, he should die, or his Surety; but it
was an Act of God's free Power as superior to the Law, to appoint his Son to
be our Surety, and to die in our stead. And the Aspect of the Law upon a Sinner
being without Passion, it admits of Satisfaction by the Sufferings of another.
It Is said in the Gospel, God so loved the World, so above all Comparison and
Comprehension, that he gave and sent his only begotten Son into the World, that
the World through him might be saved. The Son of God, with the freest Choice,
did interpose between the righteous God and guilty Man for that end. He
willingly left his Sovereign Seat in Heaven, eclipsed his Glory under a dark
Cloud of Flesh, degraded himself into the Form of a Servant, and submitted to
an ignominious and cruel Death for our Redemption. When he came into the World,
he declared his full Content, with a Note of Eminency: Sacrifice and Offering
thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me: Then said I, Lo I come to
do thy Will, O God. Upon this Consent of the Father and the Son, the whole
Fabric of our Redemption is built. It Is the Resultance from it, that the
Execution of Justice on Christ is the Expiation of our Sins, and by his
Sufferings the full Price is paid for our Redemption. There is a judicial
Exchange of Persons between Christ and Believers, their Guilt is transferred to
him, and his Righteousness is imputed to them. He made him to be Sin for us,
who knew no Sin, 2 Cor. 5.
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. His active and passive
Obedience, his Doing and Dying are as truly accounted to Believers for their
Acceptance and Pardon, as if they had meritoriously wrought out their own
Salvation.

The Sinner must give his Consent to be saved by the Death of Christ upon the
Terms of the Gospel. This Constitution is grounded upon the eternal Articles
between the Father and the Son in the Covenant of Redemption. Our Savior
declares, that God gave his Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal Life. Notwithstanding the full Satisfaction made for
our Sins, yet without our Consent, i. e. an applicative Faith, no Benefit could
accrue to us. He dwells in our Hearts by Faith: and by that vital Band of our
Union we have Communion with him in his Death, and as entire an Interest in all
the blessed Benefits purchased by it, as if whatsoever he did and suffered had
been for us alone. He is a Propitiation by Faith in his Blood. Of this full
Consent of the Sinner, there is an excellent Example in the Apostle: He
expresses it with the greatest Ardency of Affection; I count all things but
Dung that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.
and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ. Like as a poor insolvent Debtor,
ready to be cast into a perpetual Prison, longs for a Surety rich and liberal,
to make Payment for him: Thus St. Paul desired to be found in Christ, as an
all-sufficient Surety, that he might obtain a Freedom from the Charge of the
Law.

The Establishment of the Gospel, that Faith be the Condition of our Pardon, so
that none can be justified without it, is from pure Grace. The Apostle assigns
this Reason why all Works are excluded, those performed in the State of Nature,
or by a Principle of Grace, from being the procuring Cause of our Salvation,
that it is to prevent Vainglory in Men that would result from it. You are
saved by Grace, through Faith, Ephesians. 2.
and that not of your selves: it is the Gift of God. The Pardon of Sin is a
principal Part of our Salvation. He positively declares, that Justification is
therefore of Faith, Romans 4.
that it might be by Grace. If Justification were to be obtained by a Condition
of impossible Performance, it were no Favor to offer that blessed Benefit to
us: but it being assured to a Believer that humbly and thankfully accepts of
it, the Grace of God is exceedingly glorified. To make this more clear, Faith
may be considered as a productive Grace, or a receptive: As a productive, it
purifies the Heart, works by Love; and in this Consideration we are not
justified by it. Faith has no Efficiency in our Justification, it is the sole
Act of God: But Faith as a receptive Grace, that embraces Christ with his
precious Merits offered to us in the Promise, entitles us to Pardon. And in
this way Divine Grace is exalted: for he that entirely relies upon the
Righteousness of Christ, absolutely renounces his own Righteousness, and
ascribes in solidum the obtaining of his Pardon to the Clemency and Favor of
God, for the sake of the Mediator.

3. That God is ready to forgive, is fully proved by many gracious Declarations
in his Word, the infallible Expression of his Will. We are commanded to seek
his Face for ever, his Favor and Love: for the Countenance is the Crystal
wherein the Affections appear. Now all the Commands of God assure us of his
approving and Acceptance of our Obedience to them: it follows therefore, that
it is very pleasing to him, that we pray for the Pardon of our Sins, and that he
will dispense it, if we pray in a due manner. When he forbad the Prophet to
pray for Israel, it was an Argument of decreed Ruin against them: Pray not for
this People, Jer. 7.16.
for I will not hear thee. To encourage our Hope, God is pleased to direct us
how to address our Requests for his Mercy: He directs Israel, that had fallen
by Iniquity, to take Words, Hos. 14.
and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all Iniquity, and receive us
graciously; so will we render the Praise of our Lips. To this is added a solemn
renouncing of those Sins that provoked him to Anger. His gracious Answer
follows, I will heal their Backslidings, I will love them freely. If a Prince
draws a Petition for an humble Suppliant to himself, it is a strong Indication
that he will grant it. God joins Entreaties to his Commands, to induce Men to
accept this Mercy. The Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 5.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ: as tho God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled to God. Astonishing Goodness! how
condescending, how compassionate! The Provocation began on Man's part, the
Reconciliation is first on God's. That the King of Heaven, whose Indignation
was incensed by our Rebellions, and might justly send Executioners to destroy
us, should send Ambassadors to offer Peace, and beseech us to be reconciled to
him, as if it were his Interest and not ours, is a Mercy above what we could
ask or think. With Commands and Entreaties he mixes Promises of Pardon to
encourage us to come to the Throne of Grace: Whoever confesses and forsakes his
Sins, shall find Mercy. This Promise is ratified by the strongest Assurance: If
we confess our Sins, 1 John 1.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness. The Pardon of a repenting Sinner is the Effect of most free
Mercy, but it is dispensed to the Honor of God's Faithfulness and Justice, who
is pleased to engage himself by his Promise to do it. And tho the Word of God
be as sacred and certain as his Oath, for it is impossible for him to change his
Will, or to deceive us in the one as well as the other: yet to overcome the
Fears, to allay the Sorrows, and satisfy the Desires of repenting Sinners, he
was pleased to annex his Oath to the Promise, which is the most infallible
Character and Note, Heb. 6.18.
that the Blessing promised is unchangeable.

He adds Threatenings to his Invitations, that Fear which is an active and
strong Passion, may constrain us to seek for his Mercy. Our Savior said to the
Jews who did blind and harden themselves in their Infidelity, If ye believe not
that I am he, Joh. 8.24.
the promised Messiah, and come to me to obtain Life, ye shall die in your
Sins. The Threatening implies a State final and fearful, beyond all Expression;
for they who die in their Sins, shall die for them to Eternity. Hell is the sad
Mansion of lost Souls, filled with extreme Wrath and extreme Despair: and where
Despair is without Remedy, Sorrow is without Mitigation for ever. From hence we
may be convinced, how willing God is to pardon and save us, in that knowing how
we are entangled with pleasant Sins, he reveals to us what will be the eternal
Consequence of Sins unrepented and unforgiven, a Punishment above all the Evils
that are felt or feared here, and above all the Patience and Strength of
Sinners to endure.

If Men yield themselves to the Call of his Word without, and of his Spirit
within, and humbly accept of the Terms of Mercy, it is very pleasing to him. We
are assured by Jesus Christ who is Truth, that there is Joy in Heaven over one
Sinner that repents, more than over ninety nine Persons that need no
Repentance. God himself declares with a solemn Oath, that he delights not in
the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn and live. The Holiness
and Mercy of God are two of his most Divine Perfections, his peculiar Glory and
Delight. Now what can be more pleasing to that most pure and compassionate
Being, than to see a sinful Creature conformed to his Holiness, and saved by
his Mercy? If the internal Joy of God, wherein he is infinitely blessed, were
capable of new Degrees, it would rise higher in the Exercise of his forgiving
Mercy. There is a clear Representation of this in the Parable of the Prodigal:
At his Return his Father received him, with a Robe and a Ring, with Music and
a Feast, the signs of Joy in its Exaltation. But if Sinners are hardened in
Obstinacy, and notwithstanding God is so willing to pardon them, are wilful to
be damned, with what Variety of Passions does he express his Resentment? He
incarnates himself in the Language of Men, to make them understand his
Affection to them. Sometimes he expostulates with a tender Sympathy, Why will
ye die? as if they were immediately falling into the bottomless Pit. He
expresses Pity, mixed with Indignation, at their chosen Folly and Ruin; How
long ye simple ones, will ye love Simplicity, and Fools hate Knowledge? What
Reluctance and Regret does he express against proceeding to exterminating
Judgments? Hos. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall
I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine Heart is turned
within me, my Repentings are kindled together. With what a melting Passion does
the Son of God foretell the decreed Destruction of Jerusalem, for rejecting
their Savior and Salvation! When he came near he beheld the City and wept over
it, saying, If thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes. Like a mild Judge
that pities the Man, when he condemns the Malefactor.

Those who interpret some Expressions of Scripture, Prove. 1.
that God laughs at the Calamity of the Wicked, and mocks when their Fear
comes, and is inexorable to their Prayers, in such a Sense as evacuates most
gracious Declarations of God, to induce Sinners to repent and believe for their
Salvation, they draw Darkness out of Light: for those Threatenings are directed
against obstinate Rebels that frustrate the most powerful Methods of Mercy, and
reject the Call of God, in the Day of his Grace; and by way of Retaliation,
their Prayers are ineffectual, and rejected in the Day of his Wrath. And that
he is so highly and irreconcileably provoked for their despising his Mercy, is
a certain Indication how highly he would have been pleased with their humble
accepting it. Let none then by a vile and wretched Suspicion, that God's
repeated Calls to Sinners to return and live, do not signify his serious Will,
detract from the Glory of his Goodness, and blaspheme his unspotted Holiness.
His excellent Greatness secures us of his Sincerity. Why should the glorious
Majesty of Heaven court despicable Creatures to be reconciled? We are infinite
Descents below him, and no Advantage can accrue to him from us. Temporal
Princes may be swayed by Interest to send false Declarations to Rebels in Arms,
to reduce them to Obedience: but what can the most High gain by our Submission,
or lose by our Obstinacy? Counterfeit Kindness proceeds either from the Hope of
some Good, or the Fear of some Evil: and of both God is absolutely incapable.
We are all obnoxious to his severe Justice: There is no occasion that he should
intend by the gracious Offer of Pardon, to aggravate the Sin and Sentence of
those who refuse it. Whosoever with Heartbreaking Sorrow, and unfeigned Hatred
of his Sins, seeks for Pardon by the Mediator, he shall find his Experience of
sparing Mercy equal to the highest Expressions of it in Scripture, and
exceeding all his Thoughts.

4. It appears, that God is ready to pardon, in that he is so slow to punish.
Tho all the Divine Attributes are equal in God, and there is an entire
Agreement between them, yet there is a Difference in their external Operations.
St. John declares, God is Love; that signifies his communicative Goodness, the
Exercise whereof is more free and pleasing to him than the Acts of revenging
Justice. Lam. 3.
He does not afflict willingly the Children of Men. His Mercy in giving and
forgiving flows as Water from a Fountain: Acts of Justice are forced from him
(like Wine from the Grapes) by the pressing Weight of our Sins. In the first
Day of Judgment a Savior was promised before the Curse was threatened.
Notwithstanding sinful Men break his Laws, and trample on them before his Face;
they resist, and grieve, and quench his Spirit: yet he delays the Execution of
Judgment, that his Long-suffering may lead them to Repentance. This will appear
by considering that God's forbearing Sinners is not, 1. For want of Discovery
of their Sins. Humane Justice may suffer a guilty Person to escape Punishment
for want of clear Evidence, but this Case is not incident to the Justice of
Heaven. God is Light with respect to his Purity and Omniscience. His fiery Eye
pierces through the thickest Darkness wherein Sins are committed, and all the
Arts of Concealment used to cover them. He sees all the Sins of Men with the
Eye of a Judge; All things are naked and open before his Eyes with whom we have
to do. Therefore it is said, God will require what is past, and will observe
what is to come, in order to Judgment. 2. It Is not from a Defect of Power that
the Wicked are spared. Great Princes are sometimes hindered from the Exercise of
Justice, when the guilty Person is supported by a prevalent Party against them:
for the Power of a Prince is not in himself, but in those who are his Subjects.
Thus David was constrained to spare Joab, after the Murder of Abner, because of
his Interest in the Army; the Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him, he feared
their rebellious Resistance. But the Power of God is inherent in himself, and
depends upon no Creatures: O Lord, be exalted in thine own Power. He fears
none, and is to be feared by all. With one Stroke of Omnipotency he can destroy
all his Enemies for ever. He can with more Ease subdue the most stubborn
Rebels, than we can breathe. His Strength is equal to his Authority, both are
truly infinite. 3. The Guilty are spared sometimes from the vicious Partiality
of Princes to their Favorites, or a wretched Neglect of Justice: But the high
and holy King is without respect of Persons: He hates Sin with a perfect
Hatred, and is angry with the Wicked every day. The Scripture gives an Account
why Execution is respited: The Lord is not slack, (as some Men count Slackness)
but is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance. He waits to be gracious and spares Men in order
to their Salvation.

5. It appears that God is ready to forgive, in that upon the first Suit of
humble and penitent Believers he presently pardons them. If we consider how
long Men continue in a Course of voluptuous or profitable Sins, how many
Repulses to the Offers of Mercy they are guilty of, it might justly be
expected, that God should with Disdain reject their Petitions, or not be
entreated without a long Exercise of Repentance, and continued, submissive, and
earnest Solicitations for his Mercy. But the King of Heaven keeps no State, the
Throne of Grace is always open and accessible to humble Penitents: When their
Hearts are prepared, his Ear is inclined to hear them. David, after his
commission of very foul Sins, and long continuing in a State of Impenitency,
yet upon his melting in the Sense of his Wickedness and Resolution, to humble
himself by a mournful Acknowledgment of it, he was restored to the Divine
Favor. I said I would confess my Sins, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my
Sin. Repenting Ephraim is an admirable Instance of God's relenting Bowels to
Sinners: I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, Thou have chastised me,
and I was chastised as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: Turn thou me, and I
shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh; I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the Reproach of my Youth: Is
Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I
earnestly remember him still: therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will
surely have Mercy on him, says the Lord. The Prodigal upon his Resolution to
return to his Father, and debase himself as utterly unworthy of being received
as a Son, while he was in the way, his Father saw him at a distance, and ran to
him, fell on his Neck and kissed him, and entirely forgave his past Rebellion.
The Soul-wounded Publican said, Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, and was
justified rather than the proud Pharisee.

6. It Is a convincing Argument, that God is ready to forgive Sin, in that he
affords Grace to Men to prepare them for his pardoning Mercy. Repentance and
Faith are sacred Plants that do not spring from our Earth, but have their Roots
in Heaven. Acts 11.
God gives Repentance unto Life. Faith is not of our selves, Ephesians. 2.
it is the Gift of God. In our corrupt State Sin is natural to Man, and has
entirely possessed all his leading Faculties. Romans 8.
The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, and judges according to the carnal
Affections which deprave it. The Will is rebellious, and strongly inclined to
charming Lusts: Temptations are so numerous and delightful, that Sinners will
venture to be miserable for ever, to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin that die in the
tasting. It Is true, such are the inviolable Inclinations of the humane Nature
to Happiness, that no Man can love undisguised Death, nor choose Damnation for
it self: yet the Affection to Sin is so overruling, that they will not forsake
it tho complicated with Death. The Wisdom of God tells us, Those that hate me,
love Death, Prove. 9. ult.
i. e. constructively. Our Savior compassionately reproves the Jews, Ye will
not come to me that ye may have Life. John 5.
This is the Cause of their remaining in a State of Guilt for ever.

Now such is the Mercy of God, that he gives his Spirit, to assist Men by his
illuminating, preventing, restraining and exciting Grace, to forsake their
Sins, that they may be saved: and if they did faithfully improve the lower
degrees of Grace, (tho they can claim nothing by right) he would from his good
Pleasure afford them more Grace: but they are so averse from God, and strongly
bent to the present World, that they so long resist the pure Motions of Grace
in their Hearts, till the Gales of the Spirit expire, and revive no more;
according to that terrible Threatening, Genesis 6.
My Spirit shall no longer strive with Man, for he is Flesh.

Besides the common Grace afforded to natural Men, there is a Super-effluence
of Grace bestowed upon some to convert them, which infallibly obtains its end.
Those who are the Patrons of Free Will, methinks should allow that God is
Master of his own Will, and the free Dispenser of his own Grace. This special
Grace works powerfully, yet conveniently, to the reasonable Nature. There is no
Charm so sweet, no Constraint so strong, as the Operation of it: For the
Understanding is convinced by so clear and strong a Light of our being undone
for ever without God's pardoning Mercy, that his Loving Kindness is better than
Life; and this is represented to the Will with that powerful Application, that
the Will certainly chooses it. When there is a Wavering and Indifferency of the
Will to a propounded Object, it is either from some Defects in the Object, or in
the Apprehension of it: but when the supreme Good is so represented, that it
fills all the Capacities of the Soul, the Will as certainly embraces it, as one
that is burnt up with Thirst, and near a cool Stream stoops and drinks to
quench it. The Holy Spirit, who knows the manner of his own Operations,
expresses the Efficacy of them in the Resemblances of the Creation and
Resurrection, wherein the Divine Power cannot be frustrate; yet it is so
congruous to the Frame of Man's Nature, that the Freedom of the Will is then in
its most noble Exercise: Men are drawn to Christ by the Teachings of God; not
by overruling Violence upon their Faculties, but by Instruction and Persuasion
suitable to them.

Now from hence it is evident that all the Persons in the Godhead concur in
bestowing this admirable Blessing, the Pardon of our Sins: they all willingly
join in this undivided Work, tho with different Operations. The Father
pronounces our Pardon from the Throne: his Majesty shines without Diminution or
Condescension of his Person in forgiving us. The Son purchased our Pardon by
the sacred Treasure of his Blood. The Holy Spirit qualifies us, and applies the
Pardon of our Sins to us.

3. I now come to the third general Head, that God is abundant in Forgiveness.
This God has declared in Words so full and expressive, as may exceedingly
satisfy the most tender and fearful Spirits: Let the Wicked forsake his Way,
and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. For my
Thoughts are not your Thoughts, neither are your Ways my Ways, says the Lord.
For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my Ways than your Ways,
and my Thoughts than your Thoughts. The Distance is so great between the
Heavens and the Earth, that the Sun, so vast a Globe of Light, seems to be of a
small Circumference; and the Stars of the first Magnitude, tho many times
bigger than the Earth, appear like glittering Points of Light. This Comparison
is so convincing, as may assist us in our Contemplation of his Mercy. The
Apostle says, God is rich in Mercy. Ephesians. 2.
It Is not said, that he is rich in Substance, tho the Earth be the Lord's, and
the Fullness thereof. He is rich in his own Perfections, not in external things.
It Is not said, God is rich in Power, tho he is Almighty; nor in Justice, but in
Mercy: This signifies, that of all the Divine Perfections, none do shine so
radiantly as his Mercy. This reflects a Luster upon his other Attributes. His
Goodness is the Foundation of his Glory. He pardoned ten thousand Talents to
the Servant that was insolvent, and his Treasure is unwasted.

I will consider the Extent of his pardoning Mercy, and the Entireness of it.

1. The Extent of it, with Respect to the Number and Quality of the Sins that
are pardoned.

1 st. The Number of them. David, after an attentive Consideration of the
Purity and Perfection of God's Law, breaks forth in a very great Anxiety, Who
can understand his Errors? Who can enumerate the many Defections from that
strait Rule of our Duty? In many things we offend all. We are obliged
perpetually to obey and glorify God: yet in every Action, even in our religious
Duties, there are many Defects and Defilements that want Pardon. How many
Swarms of vain and unprofitable Thoughts, of carnal, covetous, proud, envious,
and revengeful Thoughts and Desires lodge in the Hearts of Men? What a Torrent
of idle, sensual, vainglorious and passionate Words flow from their Lips? How
many thousand sinful Actions proceed from them? When the enlightened Conscience
seriously reflects upon our Sins of Omission and Commission, how astonishing is
their vast Number? What a mountainous Heap appears? They reach as low as Hell,
and rise as high as Heaven. It would tire the Hand of an Angel to write down
the Pardons that God bestows upon one penitent Believer.

2 dly. Divine Forgiveness extends to Sins of all kinds and degrees, habitual
and actual. Tho no Sins are absolutely small, being committed against the
Majesty of God, yet comparatively, with respect to their Quality and
Circumstances, there is a manifest Difference between them. Some are of a
weaker Tincture, some are of a deeper Die: Some slightly wound the Conscience;
some waste it, and let out its vital Blood: Some do as it were whisper against
the Sinner, some cry for Vengeance. Sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, Sins of
sudden Surreption, that steal upon us without observing, Sins by surprise of
the Passions, when there is no time to deliberate, have extenuating
Circumstances: but Sins against Light, wherein there is more of the Nature of
Sin; Sins against Mercies, which in the Language of the Apostle, are a
despising of God's Goodness; Sins against solemn Vows, wherein Men break double
Bands, the Law of God and their sacred Engagements; Sins committed habitually
and presumptuously, as if God were ignorant, or indifferent and unconcerned, or
impotent and without Power to punish Offenders: These Sins derive a greater
Guilt, and expose to a more terrible Punishment. Now a gracious Pardon is
offered in the Gospel to all Sinners, whatever the Quality and Circumstances of
their Sins be, if they apply and address themselves to the Father of Mercy
through the compassionate Mediator, and forsake their Sins. Of this we are
assured from the most solemn Declaration of God to Moses, The Lord is merciful
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy
for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin. The Promise is
comprehensive of all sorts of Sins, how manifold and mighty soever. Besides, to
encourage us to repent and believe, God promises Pardon for Sins of the
fiercest Provocation. Judah had violated the Marriage-Covenant with God by
their impure Idolatries, yet he offers to receive them. Thou have played the
Harlot with many Lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord. Relapses into
rebellious Sins argue a strong Propensity to them, and exceedingly aggravate
their Guilt; yet God promises Pardon for them: Return ye backsliding Children,
and I will heal your Backslidings. There are eminent Instances of God's
pardoning Mercy recorded in the Scripture. The Apostle having enumerated many
sorts of Sinners guilty of enormous Crimes, Idolaters, Adulterers, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, tells the Corinthians, And such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God. There is one sort of Sinners
excepted from the general Promise of Mercy, those who sin against the Holy
Ghost. The Reason of the Exception is not, that the Holy Spirit is superior in
Dignity to the Father and the Son, for they are all coeternal and coequal, but
from his Operations, i. e. the revealing the Truth and Grace of God in the
Gospel. Now the obstinate malicious contradicting the Truth of the Gospel
shining in the Minds of Men, and the perverse despising the Grace of the
Gospel, is unpardonable to infinite Mercy. Those who are guilty of that Sin,
have transformed themselves into the Image of the Devil, and Salvation cannot
save them. But no others are excluded from Repentance and Pardon.

2. As the Extent, so the Intireness of Pardon offered to Sinners declares
God's abundant Mercy.

1 st. The Pardon is as full as free, according to his excellent Goodness: The
Imputation of the Fault ceases, and the Obligation to Punishment is abolished.
We have clear Evidence of this from the Scripture. God assures those who repent
and reform, Tho your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow: tho
they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Pardon is more than a Reprieve
or Suspension of Judgment, it is a perfect Freedom from it: A repenting Believer
is as clear from the Charge of the Law as an innocent Angel. There is no
Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Our cleansing from the
Defilements of Sin is imperfect, therefore we must be always purifying our
selves, till we attain to absolute Purity: but our Pardon is perfect. It Is
irrevocable; we are assured, that as far as the East is from the West, Psalm.
103.
God removes our Transgressions from us. As soon those distant Points may be
united, as Guilt may be fastened upon those whom God has pardoned. The Prophet
declares, that God will subdue our Iniquities, Mich. 7.
and cast them into the Bottom of the Sea: From whence they can never rise. God
promises, I will forgive their Iniquities, Jer. 31.34.
and remember them no more. Pardon is complete and final. It Is the Misery of
the Wicked, they are condemned already; they live by a Reprieve and Suspension
of Judgment: it is the blessed Security of Believers, they shall not fall under
Condemnation. There is such an Inconstancy in the Nature of Men, that they
often repent and revoke the Favors and Privileges they have bestowed; they
like to day, and loath to morrow the same Persons: but the blessed God is not
subject to Change or Contingency. His Love, his Purpose, his Promise to his
People, are unalterable.

From the Sense of God's pardoning Mercy, Conscience is freed from those just
Terrors that are the Consequents of Guilt. Heb. 9.14.
The Blood of Christ purges our Conscience from dead Works: from the deadly
Guilt of Sin that cleaves to the Conscience. A temporal Prince may pardon a
Murderer; and Conscience with a Countenance of Despair may summon him to appear
and be accountable for his bloody Crime before the High and Everlasting Judge:
but those who are justified by Faith, have Peace with God. When the Original
Bond is cancelled, the Counter-part has no Force; Conscience is subordinate to
God, and when he justifies, has no Authority to condemn. When God blots out the
Iniquities of his People as a thick Cloud, there is a clear Sky, a divine Calm
and Serenity in Conscience. It may be enquired how the complete Pardon of Sin
is consistent with the temporal Evils inflicted upon the Children of God for
their Sins. The Answer is obvious and easy. Temporal Evils inflicted on the
Children of God, are declarative of his holy Displeasure against Sin, but are
not for Satisfaction to vindictive Justice: This would be derogatory to the
Love of God, and the meritorious Sufferings of our Savior, who did not
compound with God, but made full and absolute Satisfaction for our Sins. In the
12 th Chapter to the Hebrews, where the Apostle so divinely and accurately
treats of this Argument, there is a clear Account of the Cause, the Nature, and
the Product of the temporal Sufferings of God's Children. The Cause of them is
the Love of their heavenly Father displeased for their Sins: Whom the Lord
loves he chastens, and scourges every Son whom he receives. Earthly Parents in
their various Fits of Folly, sometimes chasten their Children only for their
Pleasure, and sometimes spare the Rod to their Ruin: but our heavenly Father
is equally wise and compassionate, and uses such Discipline as is requisite for
their Profit, to prevent their Continuance in Sin, that would be destructive to
them. Believers are chasten'd of the Lord, Cor. 11.
that they may not be condemned with the World. And the Wisdom and Love of our
Father and Physician mixes such bitter Ingredients, and in that Proportion, as
are requisite for the Quality of the Disease, and the Strength of the Patient.
He corrects them in measure; he will not suffer them to be tempted above what
they are able. Their Afflictions are deliberate Dispensations. The Nature of
them is signified in the word Chastisement: The Correction of a Child is in
order to his Amendment: They are medicinal, and have a main Relation and
Prospect to the future, to make us more fearful to offend God, and careful to
please him. They are more lively and sensible Lessons of our Duty, than the
Instructions of the Word, and are of the same Order.

The Product of the Chastisements of God's Children, Heb. 12.
is the pleasant Fruit of Righteousness to them who are exercised thereby: that
is, the sanctifying Graces of the Spirit, Repentance, Faith, Hope, Patience,
Self-denial, Contempt of the World, Resignation to the Divine Will, are
exercised, illustrated, and increased in those Christians who with unfainting
Perseverance endure Affliction.

In short, Death that was the penal Effect of Sin, (for the first Man while
innocent was immortal) tho continued, yet the Sting is taken away, the Quality
of it is changed: The Issues of it are vastly different to the Saints and the
Wicked: To the Saints it is the Period of their Fears and Sorrows, the final
Remedy of all their Miseries; to the Wicked it is the Beginning of their Woe.
The Saints pass through the Darkness and Corruption of the Grave into the
Kingdom of Glory: the Wicked pass to the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

2 dly. The Intireness of this great Benefit is evident in that God restores
his Love and forfeited Favor to all that are pardoned. Princes sometimes
pardon Offenders, but never receive them into their Favor. Absalom was
recalled from Banishment, but for two Years was not admitted to see the King's
Face. But God does magnify and manifest his Love to those whom he pardons. He
does not distinguish them from the Angels that always obeyed him. He forgives
our Sins as entirely as if they had never been committed, and is reconciled as
if he had never been offended. We have the most clear Discovery of this in the
Parable of the Prodigal. It might have been expected, that his Father should
have reproached him for his obstinate deserting his House, his wasting his
Portion in Lewdness and Luxury, and that bitter Constraint forced him to
return: no, he dearly embraces him, and cancels all the Debt of his past
Offenses with a most affectionate Kiss: and whereas the poor Penitent presumed
only to be received as a Servant, he was restored in the most affectionate
manner to the Dignity and Relation of a Son; and universal Joy was diffused
through all the Family for his Return. If our Savior had not made this
Relation with all its endearing Circumstances, our narrow Hearts durst never
presume and promise to us such compassionate Love of God to repenting Sinners.
But whoever imitates the Prodigal in his Return, shall find the Reality to
exceed the Representation. I shall add some Examples of this Love of God to
those who repent. Mary Magdalen had been guilty of foul Sins, yet our Savior
graciously received the tender Expressions of her Grief and Love, to the
Astonishment of Simon: She washed his Feet with her Tears, and wiped them with
the Hair of her Head, and kissed them: and after his Resurrection appeared
first to her as his endeared Favorite. It Is recorded by the Evangelist, with
an infinite Emphasis of his Love, that he first appeared to Mary Magdalen, out
of whom he had cast seven Devils. Peter, in whose Denial of Christ there was
such a Mixture of Infidelity, Ingratitude, and Impiety, he promised he would
die with him or for him; yet being questioned not with Terror by an armed
Magistrate, not surprised by a subtle Examiner, but at the Question of a Maid
renounced him, yet he was restored to the Honor of his Office, and the
Affection of his Master. It Is very observable, that when he appeared to Mary
Magdalen, he directs her to tell his Disciples and Peter of his Resurrection;
he particularly mentions Peter, to raise his drooping Spirit by this new
Assurance of his Love.

This happy Privilege belongs to all penitent Believers, for whomsoever God
pardons he prefers, and adopts into his Family, and makes them Heirs of Heaven.
The first Beam of Mercy shines in the Pardon of our Sins, which is an
infallible Assurance of freeing us from the Punishment of Sin in Hell, and of
our obtaining the Joys of Heaven. Our Savior has by his meritorious and
voluntary Sufferings paid our Ransom from eternal Death, and purchased for us a
Right to eternal Life: accordingly whom God justifies he glorifies. The formal
Effect of Justification is the restoring us to the forfeited Favor of God, and
from that Fountain all blessed Benefits flow. God declares concerning his
People: Mal. 3.
They shall be mine in the day that I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them
as a Man spares his Son that serves him: Which two Acts of the Divine Mercy are
inseparable.

The APPLICATION.
The first Use shall be of Caution, lest Men abuse carelessly and contemptuously
the Doctrine of Divine Forgiveness. Many sin freely, as if they believed the
Permission of Sins, or presumed upon a ready Remedy, and are without Fear of
Judgment to come. This is the Language of their Actions, tho not of their
Tongues. There are not a worse sort of Sinners out of Hell. If that which
should soften and reclaim Sinners hardens them, the Case is desperate and
incurable. To correct the vile Conceits Men have of obtaining an easy Pardon of
their Sins, tho habitually committed upon that Account, let them consider,

1. The Angels who were the first and brightest Offspring of the Creator, for
one Sin were decreed and doomed to an Exclusion from the Glory of Heaven for
ever. Mercy did not suspend the Sentence: Their mighty Numbers, and the
Nobility of their Nature, did not incline the Judge of the World to spare them.
They are now in the Chains of powerful Justice, and have perpetual Hell within
them. And shall rebellious Men, who are but Dust in their original Composition
and final Resolution, expect to escape Vengeance? If we should see a hundred
Noble Men executed in a Day, the Sight would strike us with Terror: How much
greater Reason is there awfully to adore the inflexible Judge, for such a
dreadful Execution and Example of Justice upon an innumerable Company of Angels?

2. To pardon Sin is an Act of greater Power than to create the World: If we
consider the Distance of the Terms, and the Difficulty of the Means, there is a
wider Distance between a righteous God infinitely provoked by Sin, and the
guilty Creature, than between a State of not being, and the actual Existence of
the World. One powerful Word raised this great World from its native nothing.
But to accord the Divine Attributes between which there seemed a Repugnance,
and reconcile God to sinful Men, cost the dearest Price. The anxious Sinner
makes Inquiry, Mic. 7.
Shall I give the Firstborn of my Body for the Sin of my Soul? that is too
mean an Offering: no less than the Firstborn of the Almighty could by the
Sacrifice of himself make an Atonement for our Offenses.

3. Vengeance belongs to God as well as Forgiveness. Romans 1.
The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men. It was decreed in Heaven, it is denounced in his Word,
and shall be executed by his just Power in its Season. There is a time to
pardon, and a time to punish. God is styled the God of Patience: in the present
World his Patience has its perfect Work. But in the next World Justice will
gloriously appear against the Wicked who are devoted to Destruction.
Forbearance is not Forgiveness. The last Day will close the Accounts of the
Judge of the World with Sinners, and a terrible Arrear will be exacted of them
for all the Treasures of his Goodness and Clemency wasted by them.

4. Those who indulge themselves in a Course of Sin upon the Presumption of an
easy Pardon, are the most unworthy and incapable of the Divine Mercy. They sin
against the Nature and End of Grace: and by an immediate and direct Opposition
to it in the proper Notion of Grace, cut off all their Pleas for it. It Is true,
God is very merciful, and easy to be entreated by those who sincerely repent
and reform their Lives: but he is inexorable to all those who harden themselves
in their Sins by the false and presumptuous Hopes of his Mercy. He declares in
his Word, that when Sinners despise the Curse threatened against them, Deuteronomy. 29.
and bless themselves in their Hearts, that they shall have Peace, tho they
walk in the Imagination of their own Hearts, to add Drunkenness to Thirst; the
Lord will not spare them, but then the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against them, and all the Curses written in this Book shall lie upon them
without Mitigation or Intermission. No less Punishment than eternal Damnation
is equal to their Sin. They resist and renounce Mercy by their abusing it to
the worst ends, yet are confident of their Interest in it. What a prodigious
Contradiction is there between the Hopes of presumptuous Sinners and their
Practices? They kindle his Anger every day, and inflame Anger into Wrath, and
Wrath into Vengeance, and yet strongly fancy they shall find Mercy. What a
diabolical Wonder is it, as astonishing as extraordinary Miracles, but that
it is commonly seen, that Men without a Promise, and against the Threatening,
should expect the Favor of God, that is the Portion of his Children, and
continue in high and actual Rebellion? If a Spark of Reason or Grain of Faith
were shining in their Breasts, they would be restless in the Apprehension of
his fiery Displeasure. The Tempter over-reaches their Minds by a double
Delusion, that they shall have Time and Grace to repent, and overrules their
Wills, that the most terrible Threatenings and Divine Disswasives are not
effectual to make them forsake their Sins. They are secure, tho not safe one
Hour: for it is in the Power of their Judge, and they have Reason to fear in his
Purpose, Prove. 29.
to destroy them suddenly, and without Remedy. The presumptuous Conceit of
immense Mercy has so fully possessed their Minds, that like a powerful Opiate
it makes them sleep securely upon the Brink of Ruin: but Conscience is of an
immortal Nature, and tho it may be stupefied, it cannot be extinguished. In the
present Life sometimes a sharp Affliction awakens it into a furious Activity;
and then presuming Sinners that have been indulgent to their Lusts, despair of
Pardon: for when Mercy, that is our only Advocate in his Bosom to avert Wrath
for Sins against the other Attributes, shall turn our Accuser, and solicit
Justice to revenge its Dishonor upon those who have abused it, there remains
no Shadow of Hope to refresh their Sorrows. But suppose the Charm be not
unbound, and the Self-deceiver continues his evil Course to the end of Life,
and perishes pleasantly with the vain Hopes of Mercy, yet immediately after
Death his Conscience will be irresistibly convinced of his outrageous
Provocations of the righteous God, and be more tormenting than the hottest
Flames of Hell.

Let us attend to the instructive Inference in the Text, There is Forgiveness
with thee that thou may be feared: that is, with a Fear of Reverence for his
amiable Excellencies, for the Attractives of his pardoning Mercy; and of
Caution, lest by abusing we should make a deadly Forfeiture of it. If God
should appear as an irreconcilable Judge, armed with Terror against all
Offenders, the Apprehension would produce Hatred, and a dreadful Flight from
him: it would make Men boldly wilful, and harden them in their Rebellions: for
if they cannot be pardoned for their past Sins, and can be but damned for their
Continuance in them, they will give License to their roving and impetuous
Appetites, and commit Iniquity with Greediness. Now God has appointed a Way for
the Pardon of Sin, wherein there is a bright and equal Discovery of his
Greatness and Goodness, his Purity and Righteousness, that his Law may be more
sacred and inviolable, more remembered and obeyed by us. He has declared in the
Death of his Son, wherein the equal Extremes of Ignominy and Torment were
combined, what an Evil Sin is, that required such a mighty Expiation. We may
from the Depth of his Sufferings conceive the Excess and Height of our
Provocations: We may understand the deadly Guilt of Sin, that can only be
washed away in the Blood of Christ, the Fountain of Remission. To turn the
Grace of God into Wantonness, to be more loose and secure in committing Sin, is
to turn the Antidote into Poison, and defeat his blessed End. It Is a main
Article of our Reconciliation, The Lord will speak Peace to his People, but let
them not return to Folly. We may conceive, that God speaks to the pardoned
Sinner what our Savior said to the Man whom he miraculously healed, Go away,
sin no more, lest a worse thing befall you.

It Is both the Duty and Disposition of those who have received the Pardon of
their Sins, to fear the Lord and his Goodness. There is no Principle more
clearly natural and sensible than this: Dependence includes Observance; the
receiving Benefits obliges a Person to the Benefactor. Accordingly the Psalmist
expresses the Affections of the humane and the holy Nature, Psalm. 116.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits? and breaks out in an
Ecstasy of Thankfulness, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, thou
have broken my Bands. The repenting Believer receives Pardon from God with
joyful Admiration, that fastens his Mind in the Contemplation of his glorious
Mercy: the serious Thought of it kindles a sacred Fire in his Breast: as it is
said of Mary Magdalen, Much was forgiven her, for she loved much. Love to God
that results from his pardoning Love to us, is singular and supreme, and
necessarily produces an ardent Desire to please and glorify him, and an
ingenuous grateful Fear of offending him. The Soul that has felt the Terrors of
the Lord, as the holy and righteous Judge of the World, and afterward has been
revived by the Light of his Countenance, and has tasted how good the Lord is,
how is it possible to resist such dear and immense Obligations? How prodigious
to turn the strongest and sweetest Engagement to Reverence and Obedience, into
an Encouragement to do that which is odious and offensive in his Sight? To sin
against Light heightens a Sin into Rebellion, but to sin against revealed Love
makes it above-measure sinful. This is so contrary to natural Conscience and
supernatural Grace, that it is the Leprosy of the Wicked, not the Spot of God's
Children: Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and unwise? The
upbraiding reduces them to a defenseless Silence, and covers them in black
Confusion. When Divine Grace pardons our past Sins, it cures our depraved
Inclinations to future Sins.

The clearest Discovery of the Heart is by Reflections on God's Mercy. The Fear
of God's Justice is natural, the reverent Regard of his Goodness is a spiritual
Affection. There is a great Difference between filial Fear of the divine
Goodness that is so becoming the Breast of a Christian, and so congruous to our
present State, and servile Fear, that is the proper Character of one in the
Bondage of Sin.

The Filial Fear of God is an ingenuous voluntary Affection, flowing from Love,
and freely exercised, and esteemed the Treasure of the Soul. Servile Fear, the
Sequel of Guilt, is a judicial Impression from the sad Thoughts of the provoked
Majesty of Heaven; and if the Offender could dissolve the Bands of Conscience,
he would throw it off. Filial Fear is mixed with Joy, it is the Preservative of
God's Favor to us; it makes us more circumspect, but not less comfortable: it
opposes Security, but establishes the Assurance of Faith: the Fear of the Lord,
and Hope in his Mercy, are united Graces. Servile Fear has Torment, it is an
Alarm within that disturbs the Rest of the Sinner; it is a fretting Fire that
secretly torments him in his most luscious Fruitions. Filial Fear restrains
from all Sin in the Heart and Life, because it dishonours and displeases God;
it denies the carnal Appetites with Sweetness and Satisfaction to the Soul: it
excites us to obey God with Choice and Complacency. Servile Fear induces an
Abstinence from some Sins, which fly in the Face of Conscience, and which the
Sinner loves, and urges to the outward Performance of Duties, which he hates.
The slavish Spirit is afraid to burn, not to sin; he is fearful to be damned,
not to displease God. Filial Fear is a serious and habitual Constitution of the
Soul, inseparable from it in all Times and Places, it is influential into the
whole Life. Servile Fear is a sudden Passion, and transient: sometimes a sharp
Affliction, a piercing Sermon, awakens a secure Wretch into a Fit of Terror.
Filial Fear keeps the Soul close to God, makes it solicitous, lest any Sin
should intercept the Light of his Countenance, and obstruct Communion with him,
which is the Paradise of a Saint: it is the gracious Promise of God to his
Children, I will put my Fear into their Hearts, and they shall never depart
from me. Servile Fear makes the Sinner shy of God's Presence, and as unwilling
to find him, as a Saint is to lose him: He is not pleased with Solitude, lest
the guilty Conscience should have time of Recollection, and should look to the
Judge above: He takes no Delight in the Society of the Saints, and the Enjoyment
of the Ordinances, because God is peculiarly present there; and above all
things he is afraid to die, because then the Spirit returns to God that gave
it. In short, the filial Fear of God ascends with the Soul to Heaven, and is
the eternal Respect that the blessed Spirits continually pay to his adorable
Perfections. Servile Fear attends the Sinner to Hell, and settles into Despair
for ever.

2 dly. The Doctrine of Divine Forgiveness affords strong Consolation to those
who are wounded in Spirit in the Sense of their Sins. Those only who feel the
intolerable Burden of Guilt, will come to Christ to find Rest: and only those
our Savior invites and promises graciously to receive. A tender and timorous
Conscience does often impute the Guilt of Sin, when it is abolished; a seared
Conscience does not impute it, when it abounds. God has revealed his Mercy in
so full a manner, as to answer all the Allegations of a repenting Sinner
against himself. He objects his Unworthiness of Pardon: but this cannot exclude
him from it: for the Grace of God springs from within, and has no original
Cause without it self. It Is like celestial Fire that feeds it self: God
declares his sovereign Pleasure in the Exercise of Mercy: I will be gracious to
whom I will be gracious, Exodus 33.
and will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy. If Mercy were bestowed only
upon the worthy, none could be saved: for all have sinned and come short of the
Glory of God. The humble Penitent urges against himself, that he has been a
singular and extraordinary Offender, that none is like him in sinning: but we
are assured none is like God in pardoning. Mic. 7.
The Number of our Sins is terrifying: This so affected the Psalmist, that he
fainted with desponding Fear; My Sins are like the Hairs upon my Head,
therefore my Heart fails me. But the Multitude of God's Mercies incomparably
exceed our numerous Sins. They are renewed every Moment of our Lives:
Stupendous Infinity! they are over all his Works; and over all his Attributes.
God is Love, and Love covers a Multitude of Sins.

The killing Aggravations of our Sins strike us through: but there is not so
much Evil in Sin as there is Goodness in God. Our finite Acts cannot
preponderate his unlimited Essence. He declares, I am God and not Man, Hos. 11.
therefore ye are not consumed. We hardly forgive a few Pence, he forgives ten
thousand Talents. He is God, infinite in Mercy, and as liberal as infinite.
Delight in Sin is an aggravating Circumstance; but God delights in Mercy.
Continuance in Sin inflames the Guilt; but his Mercy extends to Eternity.

I shall add, for the Support of returning Penitents, some Examples of God's
forgiving great Sinners recorded in Scripture. He charges the People of Israel,
Isa. 43.25.
Thou have made me serve with thy Sins, and wearied me with thine Iniquities.
It might be expected, that the next Words should have been, I will revenge your
dishonouring of me according to the Glory of my Majesty, and the Extent of my
Power: but he promises Pardon; I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
Transgressions for my Name sake, and will not remember thy Sins. By the
Comparison of their Sins, he illustrates the Glory of his Mercy. Lot, guilty of
Incest with his Daughters; David, of Murder and Adultery; Manasseh, a Sorcerer
and Idolater, that burnt his Children alive in Sacrifice to the Devil, and
filled Jerusalem with innocent Blood; Mary Magdalen, out of whom seven Devils
were cast; Peter, who was so faint-hearted and false-hearted, that with
Execrations he denied his Master; Paul, that was a bloody Persecutor; are the
Instances of the astonishing Omnipotent Mercy of God, who can as easily pardon
the greatest Sins as the least, and makes no Difference when our Repentance is
sincere, and our Faith unfeigned: tho according to the degrees of their Guilt
Conscience should be affected. How many pardoned Sinners, Miracles of the
Divine Mercy, are in Heaven happy in the Love of God, and glorious in Holiness,
who were as deeply guilty and polluted as any that now mournfully seek the
Favor of God? These are Examples of Grace so excellent and so divine, to
encourage us in our Addresses for Pardon. The Apostle Paul tells us, That for
this Cause he obtained Mercy, 1 Timothy 1.
that in me Jesus Christ might show all Long-suffering for a Pattern to them
who shall hereafter believe on him to everlasting Life. There is the same
Motive in God; he forgives Sins for his Name sake: The Treasures of his Mercy
are not wasted by communicating: There is the same Merit in Christ, his
precious Blood shed upon the Cross is pleaded in Heaven, He ever lives to make
Intercession for us: and if we obtain the same precious Faith, we shall have
the same Acceptance. In short, let those who are overwhelmed with Fear
consider, it is not only our Privilege, but Duty, to trust in the Divine Mercy:
We are commanded to believe in the Mediator: Despair is more dishonorable to
God than Presumption, in that it is a Sin directly against a superior
Attribute, the Exercise of which is his Delight and dearest Glory.

3 dly. Let us be excited to seek the pardoning Mercy of God with Humility,
with Fear and all possible Diligence, lest we should not obtain it. Our Hearts
should be set upon this with the most intense Zeal, for it is our Life. Every
impenitent Sinner is under the condemning Sentence of the Law, and there is but
a step between him and Death: the only Hope is, that it is not yet ratified by
the Judge, nor inflicted, but it is reversible by suing out a Pardon in the
superior Court of the Gospel. Now it is astonishing, that when the Danger is so
great and present, (for it is as morally impossible to be sure of time to come,
as to recall time past) that Men should be so unconcerned and secure, and
neglect the main Work for which they are spared by the admirable Patience of
God. Time is certainly short, and uncertainly continued; and when the Oil that
feeds the Lamp of Life is spent, the next State is the Blackness of Darkness
for ever to all unpardoned Sinners* Now the Scepter of Grace is extended to us,
we are within the Call of pardoning Mercy; God waits to be gracious: but there
is a sad Assurance, if we do not sue out our Pardon in the present Life, the
time of our Reprieve, Death is immediately attended with eternal Judgment; the
Belief of which makes the Prince of Darkness, with the most stubborn Spirits of
Hell, to tremble: yet Men continue in the Guilt of their unrepented Sins
without Fear, and wretchedly deceive themselves with a vain Presumption that
the Door of Mercy will be open when they leave the World; or bear up themselves
by the numberless Multitude of stupid Sinners, and make a resolute Reckoning
they shall do as well as the most. They are studious and contriving, active and
ardent about the Affairs of this low Life, and careless of being reconciled to
God, a Matter of the highest Concernment and eternal Consequence. Prodigious
Folly, never enough lamented! though Vengeance from above is ready to fall upon
them, and Hell below with its dark Horrors is open to swallow them up, yet they
are stupid and fearless: The Remembrance of this will rack and torment them for
ever; for when extreme Folly is the Cause of extreme Misery, the Sufferer is
the most cruel Enemy to himself.

Let us therefore seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while
he is near. Now God offers his Pardon to the greatest Sinners that will humbly
submit to the gracious Terms proposed in the Gospel for our obtaining it.
Besides what has been said of Faith and Repentance, I will more particularly
consider what God requires of guilty Creatures in order to their Pardon.

First, The Confession of our Sins is indispensably required to qualify us for
Pardon. The Promise is express and full, He that confesses and forsakes Sin,
Prove. 28.13.
shall find Mercy. That we may not be deceived in the Application of this
Promise, I will briefly consider what is preparatory to this Duty, the
Properties of it, and the Connection of Pardon with it.

1 st. The Understanding must be enlightened by the Divine Law to discover Sin.
The Law is the Rule of our Duty, and the Obligation to obey it is immediately
conveyed by Conscience. While there is a Cloud of Darkness in the Mind, there
will be a Silence in the Conscience. Paul declares, that he was once alive
without the Law, i. e. not understanding his Guilt, he presumed of his
Justification; but when the Commandment came in its Light to convince him of
the Transgression of it, the Apparition of Sin in the clear Glass of the Law
struck him dead. There must be a Discussion of Conscience, a comparing our
Actions with the Rule, to discover their Obliquity: for Sins unknown and
unconsider'd cannot be confessed. Some Sins are notorious, and present themselves
to our Knowledge and Memory: others are of a weaker Evidence, Inquiry must be
made after them. It Is an unpleasant Work to rake in the Sink of a corrupt
Heart, but it is necessary.

2 ly. The Properties of Confession are,

(1.) It must be free and ingenuous: That which is extorted by bitter
Constraint is of no Value and Acceptance. Pharaoh, an obstinate Rebel, upon the
rack, acknowledged he had sinned. It Is true, the Penal Effects of Sin may be
the first Excitation of Sinners to consider their Ways, but the Holy Spirit by
that Means so deeply affects them with the Evil of Sin, that they voluntarily
confess them before the all-discerning Judge. David declares, When I kept
Silence, my Bones waxed old: I said, I will confess my Sins, and thou forgavest
them. He came to a deliberate Resolution, I will confess them.

(2.) Confession must be sincere and full, that our Sins may be more evident
and odious to us. Alitur vitium, vivitque tegendo.
The covering of Sins is like the keeping a Serpent warm, that will sting more
fiercely. The concealing Sin argues the Love of it, and is a Bar against
Pardon. Psalm. 32.2.
Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes no Iniquity, in whose Spirit
there is no Guile. It Is not said, In whose Spirit there is no Sin, but no
Guile, no reserved allowed Sin. The sincere Penitent pours forth his Heart like
Water before the Lord. Of all Liquids none are so clearly poured out of a
Vessel as Water: Wine or Oil leave a Tincture. We should in Confession pour out
all our Sins, and leave no Tincture of Affection to them. If it be said, How
can we confess our Sins that are above our counting? It Is true, but we must
reserve none. We must confess the kinds of our Sins, against the first and
second Table, that were both written with God's Hand; Sins of Omission and
Commission, and particular Sins of greater Guilt: we must wash off their
deceitful Colors, that they may appear in their hellish Shape, and more deeply
affect us. Men are very averse from this Duty, and apt to conceal or extenuate
their Sins. The Art of concealing and Excuses is learnt from the first
Transgressor. When God called to Adam, Where art thou? tho his Dread to appear
before the Divine Presence was a tacit Confession of his Fault, and his hiding
himself discovered his Sin; yet he does not acknowledge his Sin, but alleges
the Consequence of it, his Shame, to be the Cause of his guilty Fear. I heard
thy Voice, Genesis 3.10.
and was afraid, because I was naked. And to extenuate his Offense, transfers
his Guilt on the Woman, and constructively reflects upon God as the Cause of
it: The Woman which thou gave me, gave me of the Fruit, and I did eat. The
wicked Excuse did infinitely aggravate his Sin. The Woman lays her Fault at the
Serpent's door, The Serpent beguiled me. Aaron pretends that the People
compelled him to Idolatry: and that the golden Calf was not the Effect of
Design and Art, but of Chance: I cast the Gold into the Fire, and there came
out this Calf. Exodus 32.
Saul colored his Rebellion with the Pretense of Religion: He kept the best of
the Cattle for Sacrifice. In short, 1 Samuel 15.15.
as in Sweating, it is observed that a general Sweat of the Body is for its
Advantage, but the Sweat of a Part only is the Symptom of a Disease: So a clear
unfeigned Confession is for our Profit, but a semi-Confession is counterfeit,
an Indication of Hypocrisy.

(3.) Confession must be mixed with Sorrow and Shame in the Remembrance of our
past Sins.

1. A piercing deep Sorrow from spiritual Principles and Perswasives is the
Ingredient of an acceptable Confession. There is a natural Sorrow proceeding
from the Impression of afflicting Evils. Sense is very tender and apt to resent
what is oppressive to it. A Sinner that has wasted his Estate, blasted his
Reputation, shortened his Life by his Excesses, and hastened his Damnation, may
feel Anguish in his Breast for his Sins, the procuring Causes of his
Punishment. But this Sorrow proceeds only from the Sense of external Evils, not
from the melted Heart for the intrinsic Evil of Sin: As Marble Pillars are
wet, from the Moisture of the ambient Air. It Is the miserable Man, not the
miserable Sinner that mourns. This Sorrow is consistent with the Love of Sin;
and when the penal Evil is removed, the Sinner returns to the Practice of it.
Carnal Sorrow only respects a Man's self as a Sufferer: it is in Hell, in the
extreme Degrees, there is weeping for ever.

There is a godly Sorrow, of which the Holy Spirit is the Spring. It Is the
Promise of God to his People, I will pour forth the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and they shall see him whom
they have pierced, and mourn over him, as one mourns for the Death of his
Firstborn. The Persuasive of our Sorrow is answerable to its Principle. The
serious Contemplation of our bleeding dying Savior, is a spiritual and
powerful Motive to melt us into the Tears of Repentance. How congruous is it,
if the Purchase of our Pardon cost our Savior his bloody Agony, that the
applying of the Pardon to us should cost us the most bitter Sorrow? Divine
Grief is more from the Memory of the Evils we have committed against our
heavenly Father, than from the Evils we suffer. Carnal Sorrow is barren and
unprofitable. It may be said of it, what the wise Preacher says of wild Mirth,
What do thou? only that Sorrow that comes from Heaven is accepted there: One
spiritual Tear is of more Value and Efficacy with God than a Torrent of natural
Sorrow.

Repenting Sorrow is an indispensable Qualification in order to our Pardon, not
merely from the Will of the Lawgiver as the Reason of our Duty, but from the
Congruity of the thing it self. It Is observable, that it is the Wisdom and
Kindness of the God of Nature, that the Food that preserves Life is pleasant to
our Taste, to invite us every Day to eat, and renew our Strength; but Physic
that is necessary for the Recovery of Health, is very distastful, that our
Aversion from it may make us circumspect, to prevent all Excesses that are the
Causes of Diseases. Thus the sorrowful Confession of Sin which is medicinal to
the Soul, is very afflicting; it wounds the Spirit, and breaks the Heart, that
we may be jealous of our selves, lest we eat of the forbidden Fruit that
requires so bitter a Remedy.

Godly Sorrow, tho it be very afflicting to Nature, yet the Exercise of it is
more satisfying to a sincere Penitent, than all the Pleasures of Sin. In two
cases Grief is pleasant: when it is upon the account of a Person dearly loved; a
Parent indulges his Sorrow for the Death of a Child that was the Life of his
Life. Or when Pain is beneficial and an Advantage: as in the Application of a
Plaster, we are pleased with the Pain it causes, that being a Sign and Effect
of its healing Operation. Now both these Considerations are mixed with
repenting Sorrow: for it principally arises from the Reflection upon Sin, as
that which has so dishonored and displeased the blessed God our Maker,
Preserver and Redeemer; that we have preferred the pleasing our corrupt and
licentious Appetites, before the obeying his holy, just, and good Will. The
repenting Sinner declares his Love to God by his Grief for offending him, and
voluntarily remembers his past Sins, and is pleased in overflowing Sorrow for
them. And this Sorrow is preparative for Peace: Unutterable Groans are
introductive of unspeakable Joys: the Holy Spirit that convinces of Sin is the
blessed Comforter.

2. The Confession of Sin must be mixed with Shame. All the just Causes of
Shame, Guilt, Turpitude, Folly and Disappointment, are complicated in Sin. The
repenting Sinner, by Consciousness and Reflection upon Sin, that induces so
heavy a Guilt, that defiles the Soul with so deep a Pollution, that no Ray of
its Original Purity remains, that debases it infinitely below its heavenly
Descent, mourns with Tears of Confusion for what he has done. Jer. 31.
Repenting Ephraim bemoans himself, that he had been rebellious against the
Methods of God's Mercy, like a refractory Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: and
his recoiling Thoughts made him to smite on his Thigh, to be ashamed to the
degree of Confusion for his Disobedience. How affecting an Object he was in
God's Eye, the immediate Answer declares: Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a
pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have Mercy upon
him, says the Lord. The Psalmist reflecting upon his being almost vanquished
by a vexatious Temptation, degrades and vilifies himself, so foolish was I and
ignorant, Psalm. 73.
and like a Beast before thee. Ezra in the Confession of the Holy Seed's mixing
with Heathen Idolaters, says, O Lord, I blush and am ashamed at the foul
Deformity of their Sin. The Apostle upbraids the Romans with a stinging
Reproach, What Fruit have you of those things whereof ye are now ashamed, the
End whereof is Death? When a foolish Choice is made, and the Folly is detected,
and Experience disappoints the Expectation, the natural Consequent is Shame. At
the last Day, when the Filthiness and Folly of Men shall be published before
God, and all the Angels and Saints, how much rather would they be hid in the
Darkness of their Graves, than be clothed with Confusion before that glorious
and immense Theater? The sorrowful Confession of Sin, with deep Shame here,
will prevent the exposing the Sinner to public Shame hereafter.

(4.) Confession must have Concomitant with it, the judging our selves as
unworthy of the least Mercy, and deserving severe Punishment. The Apostle
assures us, If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. He does not
say, if we are innocent we shall not be condemned, for then who can appear
before the high and enlightened Tribunal of Heaven? but if we acknowledge our
Guilt, and the Righteousness of the Sentence to which we are obnoxious, we
shall be spared. We cannot satisfy God's Justice, but we must glorify it: In
this the admirable Mercy of God appears. Suppose a Court on Earth, wherein the
Rule of Judgment were, that all the Faults which the Guilty confess and condemn
themselves for, should be pardoned, and only those they conceal should be
deadly to them; how willingly and humbly would those who are conscious of many
capital Crimes, and are summoned to appear, accuse themselves? In the Court of
Heaven, if we are faithful to God and our own Souls, in the confessing our
Sins, and passing Sentence upon our selves, we prevent his Sentence against us.

(5.) Prayer for Pardon must be joined with the Confession of Sin: The Lord is
good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in Mercy unto all that call upon him.
God who is rich in Mercy, has appointed Prayer as the Means of our receiving
it; it being most honorable to him, that we should have a serious Sense of our
Wants and Unworthiness, and our absolute Disability to supply them: and by our
Desires we should glorify his Power and Love, whereby he is all-sufficient and
ready to bestow upon us his Blessings. Prayer for Pardon must have these
Ingredients. 1 st. Humility is the most becoming Qualification of a Suppliant
to the high Judge of the World, to reverse the Sentence of eternal Death. The
deep Apprehension of our Guilt will humble us before his dreadful Tribunal. 2
dly. Fervency, which is the Life of Prayer. A cold Prayer, the spiritless
Motion of the Lips, is so far from inclining the Divine Mercy to pardon us,
that it increases our Guilt, and provokes God's Displeasure. If our
Apprehensions were as real and quick of our spiritual Wants as of our temporal,
our Prayers would be as ardent for Supplies. Our Desires should be raised in
the most intense degrees, in some proportion to the Value of the Blessing; they
should be strong, as our Necessity to obtain it. The Pardon of our Sins is the
Effect of God's highest Favor, of that Love that is peculiar to his Children,
it is the Fruit of our Savior's bloody Sufferings; without it we are miserable
for ever, and can we expect to obtain it by a formal superficial Prayer? It
deserves the Flower and Zeal of our Affections. How solicitous and vehement,
and unsatisfied should we be, till we have the clear Testimony that we are in a
State of Divine Favor? Only fervent Prayers are regarded by God, and recorded
in Heaven. We disvalue his Pardon by our Indifferency and faint Desires. In our
Petitions for temporal things, our Affections should be temperate, always mixed
with resigned Submission to the Will and Nam pro jucundis aptissimae, quaeque
dabunt Dii: charior est illis homo quam sibi. Juven.
Wisdom of our Heavenly Father, who knows what is better for us than we do, and
loves us better than we do our selves: but in praying for the Pardon of our
Sins our Affections should be inflamed, we should as it were offer Violence to
the King of Heaven, and be unsatisfied without it.

What ardent and repeated Addresses were made by David for this great Blessing:
Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, according to thy Loving Kindness, according to the
Multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my Transgression. Wash me thoroughly
from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin. Purge me with Hyssop, and I
shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow. Deliver me from
Blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my Salvation. He prays as if the Ghost of
Vriah were always in his View, covered with Blood, and reproaching him for his
treacherous Cruelty. The Affairs and Pleasures of his Kingdom could not divert
and calm his Spirit, till he was restored to the joyful Sense of God's saving
Mercy. If it be said, that David's complicated Sins were of a crimson Guilt,
and justly terrified his Conscience with the Apprehension of Vengeance: I
answer, it is true, but supposing that preventing Grace has kept us from Sins of
a high Nature, whereby we should have incurred greater Guilt, and been exposed
to greater Punishment, yet even the best Men are in infinite need of pardoning
Grace; for the least Sin makes us guilty of eternal Death, and the infinite
Number of our Sins, tho according to the carnal Conceits of Men small, would be
overwhelming. What is weaker than a Drop of Water, yet the Sea that is a
Collection of innumerable Drops of Water, does often by an irresistible
Inundation drown the Land. The Wind is a Collection of many Vapors, which
singly are of no Force, yet it often tears up the strongest Trees, and
overthrows the firmest Buildings. If the numerous Sins of one Man's Life were
set in order before his Eyes, he would sink into the Depths of Despair, were
not the Divine Mercy superabundant to our abounding Sins. We must renew our
Requests for Pardon every day: it is more necessary than to pray for our daily
Bread. We contract new Guilt every day: and as our Savior tells us, he that is
washed needs to wash his Feet, i. e. the Sins of Frailty and daily Incursion
must be purged away by serious Repentance, and the Application of the Blood of
Christ, and our earnest Prayer for Pardon. It Is the cruel Character of Satan,
he accuses the Saints before God Day and Night: He is an ardent Accuser, and
watchful always to find Matter to provoke God's Displeasure against us. It Is
therefore a Duty of daily Revolution, to pray for our Pardon. Besides, the
Neglect of seeking for the daily Pardon of our Offenses against God, argues the
despising his Anger, and consequently the despising his Love, which is
infinitely provoking. We are commanded not to let the Sun go down upon our
Wrath, much less upon God's. Repentance is not an initial Act of Sorrow, but
must be renewed all our Lives. God's pardoning us is not a transient Act, but
continued, as Conservation is a continued Creation.

Prayer for Pardon must be mixed with Faith in our blessed Advocate, who ever
lives to make Intercession for us. If we could fill the Air with our Sighs, and
Heaven with our Tears, we could not incline the righteous and holy God to
pardon us: his Justice is inflexible, and his pardoning Mercy a sealed
Fountain; it is by the precious Merits and Mediation of his Son we are
reconciled to him. Jesus Christ is the same powerful compassionate Savior,
yesterday, to day, and for ever. His obedient Sufferings are of infinite Value,
and everlasting Efficacy.

Lastly, Confession of Sin is a relative Duty, and must be joined with
forsaking of Sin. The sharpest Sorrow, the most confounding Shame for Sin, the
strongest Desires for Mercy, without the forsaking of Sin, are ineffectual.
There must be a renouncing of Sin in our Hearts, a Resolution firm and
permanent against it, an avoiding the Appearance and Approaches of Sin, and an
actual leaving it. If it be said, it is impossible we should preserve our selves
from all Sin: St. John tells us, If any Man says he has no Sin, he is a Liar,
there is no Truth in him. I answer, we must distinguish between Sins: there are
some, which while we are united to Flesh, that is a Principle of Weakness, and
are in this open State, surrounded with Temptations, we cannot absolutely be
freed from. Such are Sins of Ignorance and Inadvertence, and of sudden
Surreption: for Grace is not bestowed in such a degree of Eminence to the
Saints here, whereby they may obtain a clear and final Victory over them: but
if we pray, and watch, and strive against them, and mourn for their Adherence
to us, God will spare us as a Father spares his Son that serves him. And it is a
certain Sign of our Sincerity, if we are gradually cleansing our selves from
them. If they grow and increase, it is a sad Indication: as it is said, if a
Scald in the Head spreads, it is a Leprosy. Lev. 5.13.
But there are Sins of a more heinous Nature, the not forsaking whereof
excludes from Heaven: such are enumerated by the Apostle, Gal. 5.
The Works of the Flesh are manifest, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and
such like: of the which I have told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Besides, if the Love of any Sin
remains in the Heart of a Man, he cannot be justified here, nor glorified
hereafter. An indulged Sin, tho small in the Matter, is great in the
Disposition of the Sinner. In short, God requires sincere Repentance, expressed
in the confessing of our Sins, not to inform him, for neither the Solitude or
Secrecy wherein Sin is committed, can hide us from his all-discerning Eye: tho
there is no Witness to accuse and give Evidence, nay if the Sinner could
extinguish his Conscience, yet God will set the Sins of Men in order before
them, and convince the Guilty, he needed not their Confession to discover them:
but the humble ingenuous and sorrowful Confession of Sin is required, that his
Mercy may be more illustrious in the Pardon of our Sins, and that the Sinner
may fear to return to Folly. And this Confession must be attended with the
forsaking of Sins, in order to our Pardon, because of his immutable
Perfections. A Malefactor may justly be condemned for his Crimes, and tho he
remains impenitent and obstinate in Evil, may be pardoned, because a temporal
Prince is capable of various Apprehensions and Passions, and may deflect from
the Rule of Justice: but the Judge of the World is unchangably righteous and
holy, and cannot pardon Sinners to the Disparagement of his Majesty, his Purity
and Justice.

2. Our pardoning the Offenses of others is an evangelical Condition of our
obtaining Pardon: We are commanded, When ye stand praying, Mark 11.25, 26.
forgive if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which is in Heaven
may forgive you your Trespasses. But if you do not forgive, neither will your
Father which is in Heaven forgive your Trespasses. The Command is peremptory
and universal, frequently and severely urged upon us by our Savior. The
Reasonableness and Congruity of it is most evident, if we consider the
Disparity of the Object, or the Number of Offenses. Our Sins against God are
relatively infinite, for his Majesty and Authority are truly infinite, which
are despised and abused by the Transgression of his Laws: they are against all
the Duty and Motives of Justice and Gratitude that oblige reasonable Creatures
to obey their Maker. Now the Offenses and Injuries done to us are incomparably
less: for we are mean Creatures, far less in comparison to God, than a Worm is
to an Angel; and by our Sins are viler than the Earth. Besides, the Obligation
that should restrain Men from being injurious to us, are of infinitely a lower
Nature. The Disparity in the Number is very considerable. Our Sins against God
are like the Sand upon the Seashore, their Number is astonishing: Our
Imaginations have been continually evil, from the dawning of our Reason: but
Offenses against us are comparatively few: for the Variety of Objects in the
World often divert the Thoughts and Passions of our Enemies from us. We owe to
the Lord 10000 Talents, a vast Sum that can never be paid if it be not
forgiven, and shall we be unwilling to forgive a few Pence? What is more
becoming than that we who want a great Pardon, should give a little one? The
Divine Mercy is proposed as a Model for our Imitation. We must pardon entirely,
and take no Revenge for Injuries done to us, but return Love for Hatred, Good
for Evil, for so God does to us. We must not only forgive, but forget Injuries
in the Sense of Love: not like those who pardon in Words, but retain the Memory
of Offenses, and upon a slight Occasion renew their Resentments. We must
forgive great Offenses as well as small, and renew our Pardon as often as
Offenses are repeated, unless we will set Bounds to the Divine Mercy. We must
rejoice more in pardoning than in revenging Injuries, and seek to be reconciled
to those who are averse from us, for that is according to our Pattern. It Is
pretended, that by bearing a single Injury, we expose our selves to a double
Injury: but we must imitate our heavenly Father: If we do not follow him in
forgiving, he will follow us in retaining our Sins. The Psalmist tells us, With
the Merciful God will show himself merciful, but with the Froward he will show
himself froward: A holy and righteous Punishment in Retaliation of their sinful
Disposition.

The pardoning Injuries is contrary to corrupt Nature, and the Duty is
difficult, but the Reward is infinite. Tho it seems to vilify us, as if
defective in our Minds, not to understand Injuries, or in Courage not to repay
them, which makes Men hard to forgive; yet upon calm Consideration we shall
esteem it a Duty easy and honorable: for it prevents the inflaming our
Passions, and the troubling of our selves and others: it is an Act of Royalty,
and makes us superior to them: it is the noblest Victory, and often conquers
and changes an Enemy into a Friend. And above all Motives this should recommend
it to us, it seals our Pardon from God, and conveys the most clear and
comfortable Sense of it to us: For, as the Psalmist excellently argues, He that
planted the Ear, shall he not hear: He that formed the Eye, shall he not see?
If we are by Divine Grace inclined and enabled to pardon frequent Offenses
against us, shall not the God of all Grace be ready to pardon our many Offenses
against him? Our Savior reasons from the Love of natural Parents; If you that
are evil know how to give good things to your Children, how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those that ask it? The Illation is
as strong in forgiving Love. If we who are of an unforgiving Nature sincerely
forgive those who injure us, and restore them to our Favor, how much more
shall God who is Love, forgive our Sins, and be reconciled to us?

4. The Divine Forgiveness should be a powerful Motive to Thankfulness. David
addresses to his Soul in an ardent and lively manner; Bless the Lord, Psalm.
103.1, 2.
O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name. He excites every
Faculty, the Understanding to consider and value the Mercies of God, the Memory
to register them, and retain a thankful Sense of them, the Affections to
celebrate them. He repeats the Call, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his Benefits. We are apt to forget Favors, and remember Provocations.
Benefits are written in the Dust, Injuries are engraven in Marble. But strong
Affections will make indelible Impressions of Thankfulness. If we duly consider
the Greatness and Goodness of God, and our Meanness and Unworthiness, that we
are less than the least of his Mercies, we must be convinced every Benefit we
receive from God deserves to be remembered and acknowleged with serious
Thankfulness. That God draws a Curtain of Rest about us in the Night, provides
for us in the Day, regards us with a compassionate Eye, and relieves us in our
Wants and Sorrows, should cause such deep Affections as flow into outward
Declarations of Praise.

It Is true, our most solemn Recognition of his Benefits is but a poor Duty
compared with his immense Bounty to us: our Thanksgiving is an Echo to God's
Mercies, that repeats a few Syllables: what can our fading Breath add to his
Blessedness and Glory, that are in the highest degree of Perfection, and truly
infinite? But it is most reasonable, that as all our Blessings flow from his
Mercy, they should fall into the Sea of his Glory: and when our Souls bless
him, he accepts our Sincerity, and does not despise our Thanksgivings for want
of Perfection.

In the recounting God's Benefits, the Psalmist mentions in the first place the
Pardon of Sin, who forgives all thy Iniquities, as the Principal and Foundation
of all the rest. This in a most powerful way entered into his Heart, and
kindled a sacred Fire there. I will briefly show, that the Pardon of Sin is so
divine a Benefit, that it deserves our most solemn Thankfulness, and that it
inclines and disposes the Soul to that Duty.

1 st. That the Pardon of our Sins deserves our most solemn Thankfulness, will
appear by an evident Light, if we consider the Nature and Quality of the
Benefit, the Means by which it is obtained, the Circumstances in the dispensing
it, and the Consequents.

(1.) The Quality and the Nature of the Benefit. Our Blessedness consists in
the Forgiveness of our Sins. David inspired from Heaven declares, Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity is forgiven, and whose Sin is covered. The
worst Effect of Sin is the Separation between God and the Soul. In his Presence
is Fullness of Joy, in his Absence Fullness of Sorrow. Go ye cursed, is as
terrible a Part of the Sentence as the everlasting Burning. Hell is the Element
of Sin and Misery: wherein the Fire made fierce with Brimstone, and the undying
Worm of Conscience, torment the Wicked. Now the Pardon of Sin secures us from
the Wrath of God, the supreme Evil, and the Cause of all other Evils.

Besides, the Love of God that pardons us is our sovereign Good, and is the
productive and conservative Cause of all Good: It bestows upon us celestial
Happiness, in comparison of which all the Degrees of worldly Honor, and Power,
and Pleasure, and Riches, are but Dross and Dung. The Pardon of Sin has
inseparably annexed to it the Privilege of Adoption, and a Title to the Kingdom
of Glory. Our Savior declared to the Apostle, that the End of the Gospel is to
open the Eyes of Men, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, Acts 26.18
that they may receive the Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them
who are sanctified by Faith that is in me.

God permitted the Fall of Man, to raise him to a more excellent and stable
Felicity. Adam was dignified with Dominion over the lower World, and seated a
Prince in Paradise; but his Happiness depended upon his Obedience, and that
upon the Freedom of his Will, which proved a dangerous Endowment by his Abuse
of it. He was foolish and fickle in the best State of Nature: he affected an
independent Immortality, and being in Honor, became like the Beasts that
perish. But the Pardon of Sin is the Foundation of eternal Happiness. Those who
are justified shall be glorified, and made equal to the Angels, who are
constant in Good, as the Devils are obstinate in Evil. The blessed State above
is secure and unforfeitable: the Saints are incapable of sinning and dying.

(2.) The Means whereby our Pardon is obtained. I shall not dare to determine,
that God could not have pardoned us by his Sovereignty without Satisfaction to
his Justice, but he has been pleased to save us in a way most honorable to
himself, and comfortable to us. The Psalmist tells us, according to the Name of
God, so is his Praise. Psalm. 48.
As his excellent Attributes are manifest in his Works, understanding Creatures
adore and celebrate them. The Wisdom of God so gloriously appears in the way of
our Salvation, that the admiring Angels praise him for ever. And the Goodness
of God is so conspicuous in saving us by Christ, that our exuberant Affections
should be poured forth in Thankfulness. The Remission of our Sins is by
Redemption in his Blood. It was an Expression of David's Piety, that he would
not serve God with that which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24.
but purchase the Sacrifice by a Price: and it was the high Expression of God's
Love, that he would not save us with that which cost him nothing, but with the
sacred Treasure of Heaven, the precious Blood of his Son. Besides, the guilty
Conscience has so quick a Sense of God's revenging Justice, that our Assurance
would not be so entire in his Mercy, without Satisfaction made by the
Sufferings of our blessed Mediator. In this we have the Advantage of David, who
had not so clear a Discovery of the Means of our Pardon, but a general Knowledge
of the Forgiveness of Sins; yet that inspired such flaming Affections into his
Breast, that he begins the Eucharistical Psalm for that Mercy, and concludes it
with Bless the Lord, O my Soul: But we that have had Jesus Christ evidently set
forth as crucified before our Eyes, to reconcile God to us; we to whom it is
revealed, that the Robe of our Salvation is woven out of his bleeding Bowels,
in the same Proportion as our Knowledge of this mysterious Mercy, our
Thankfulness should exceed his. If any do not with the most ardent Affections
acknowledge the Mercy of Forgiveness so dearly purchased, it is an unhappy Sign
he has no Interest in it.

(3.) The Circumstances of dispensing our Pardon. I shall consider two that
make the Divine Mercy more glorious and worthy of our Thankfulness.

1 st. That pardoning Mercy was dispensed to us, notwithstanding our continued
Rebellions against God. A Prince is sometimes induced to pardon a Criminal, by
the Solicitations of his Friends, and by his Prayers and Tears: but the Divine
Goodness was the sole Mover for us, and interposed between Justice and our
Offenses. Instead of appeasing God by humble and mournful Submission, and
ardent Addresses for Mercy, we repeated the Provocations of his Displeasure
every day. How long did he with unwearied Patience wait to be gracious? If
after ten thousand Denials of accepting his Mercy, he had forsaken us, we had
been as miserable as we are sinful. But notwithstanding our being inflexible to
the innumerable Calls of his Word, impenetrable to the pure Motion of his
Spirit, and insensible of his excellent Goodness that leads Sinners to
Repentance; tho the Love of Heaven or Fear of Hell could not prevail with us to
forsake our Sins: when we were prepared for Wrath, and averse and utterly
indisposed for the receiving his Mercy, then his Grace, as free as omnipotent,
gave us Repentance unto Life, and qualified us for Pardon, and bestowed it upon
us. The Extenuation of our Sins is inconsistent with the Exaltation of Grace:
but the more humble we are in the deep Sense of our Guilt, the more thankful
for the Divine Clemency. That God was pleased to crown us with Loving Kindness
and Mercy, when a killing Charge of innumerable Offenses was levelled against
us, O Goodness, truly Divine and Infinite, and should accordingly affect us
with Admiration!

2 dly. Pardoning Mercy distinguishes between Sinners of equal Guilt, and often
saves those of greater Guilt when others die eternally: This Comparative
heightens God's Love and our Thankfulness. How many are surpised and cut off
in a Course of Sin? how many die without Repentance, and are under a notorious
Necessity of perishing? yet we that were as bad or worse, neither melted and
made pliable by his Goodness, nor bettered by his Judgments, he spared, and by
his Grace cleansed and changed us, that we might partake of Mercy. In this
Dispensation the Question of the Apostle may be put in its full Force, Who made
thee to differ? Nothing within us, nothing without us, distinguished us from
those that perish; there were the same polluted Principles in our Hearts, and
the same rebellious Sins in our Lives: only the Mercy of God that has no moving
Cause but it self, made the Difference. Let the Comparison be contracted
between us and our Associates in Sin, and as the Sunbeams concentered in a
Burning-glass, it will more inflame our thankful Affections. How many that were
joined in the commission of social Sins, of Intemperance, Uncleanness,
Unrighteousness, and the like, are dead, and without the Reserve of pardoning
Mercy, and some were rescued from Damnation, as due to them as to the rest. At
the last Day when there shall be an everlasting Separation between those at the
right Hand, and those at the left Hand of the Judge of the World, we shall
understand the Riches of Grace that distinguish between us and the Partners of
our Guilt: as by seeing us justified and received into Glory, their sad
Exclusion will be aggravated to Extremity; so by seeing them doomed to
Destruction for ever, the saving-Grace of God to us will be more glorious.

(4.) The Consequents of Pardon in the present Life deserve our most
affectionate Thankfulness.

1. The Pardon of Sins gives us a regular Title to all temporal Blessings, and
the truest Sweetness in their Fruition. God is the universal and absolute
Proprietary of all things in this World, being made by his creating Power, and
continued by his preservative Power. By our rebellious Sins we were under a
just Deprivation of them. Now the Pardon of Sin takes off the deadly
Forfeiture, and restores the Use and Benefit of temporal Blessings to us. It Is
true, God by his general Bounty affords Supplies to his Enemies; The Sun rises
with his cheerful Light, and the Rain falls upon the Just and Unjust; and
wicked Men have a civil right to their Possessions: but they are not the Gifts
of his special Love to them. The Prodigal was first pardoned, and then
entertained with a Feast. The Love of God gives a cheerful Tincture to all his
Benefits. It Is emphatically said, God, even our own God, shall bless us. As he
is pleased to value and accept the meanest Service that is mixed with our
Affections to him: A Cup of cold Water that comes from the Spring of Love,
shall have its Reward: So his Love raises the Price of every Blessing. The
Psalmist having set forth the Riches, and Prosperity, and Peace of a Kingdom,
breaks forth, Happy is the People that are in such a case. But he presently
revokes it, and ascends with a Gradation of Light and Force; Yea, happy is that
People whose God is the Lord; who are in a State of Divine Favor. Temporal
Blessings, if they are not the Gifts of God reconciled to us in the Redeemer,
are Snares that alienate the Hearts of Men from God, and foment their Lusts,
and prepare them for final Destruction. The rich Man had his good things here;
and was tormented after his sensual Fruitions. A rebellious Sinner is spared
for a time, and punished for ever. The King of Sodom was rescued from Captivity
by Abraham, and reserved for Destruction by a Shower of Fire and Brimstone.

2. The Pardon of our Sins allays and mitigates all Afflictions in the present
State. The Conscience of Guilt mixed with Affliction, is like the poisoning a
Sword that makes it wound more deadly. The Spirit of a Man may bear temporal
Evils; that is, by Counsel and Constancy may support himself under them; but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? Conscience in Anguish by the feeling of God's
Wrath for our Sins, and Fear of the Extremity of it hereafter, is an
intolerable Evil. Let the Affliction be a light Touch upon the outward Man, yet
when the afflicted Person considers, that it is sent from God as an Enemy, and
it is the Beginning of his Wrath that is a consuming Fire, he is dispirited and
sinks under the Weight of it. How can frail Man encounter with offended
Omnipotence, sinful Man conflict immediately with the Holy God? The Sense of
Guilt makes a Man a Terror to himself, and consequently makes Afflictions to be
more piercing and dolorous. Whereas when the Soul is established in the Peace
of God, it finds Consolation in his pardoning Love, superior to all kinds and
degrees of external Evils that can afflict us here. It Is the happy Privilege of
the Inhabitants of Zion, the holy City, Isa. 33. ult.
They shall not say they are sick, for their Iniquities shall be forgiven. The
Divine Comforter fortifies their Faith in the Promises of the blessed Issue out
of all their Afflictions: All things work together for the Good of those who
love God. Our Love to God is the Reflection of his Love to us, that is powerful
so to order all Evils, that they shall harmoniously conspire to our eternal
Happiness. The Impression of this in the Spirits of God's Children, makes them
patient and submissive with Resignation under all Afflictions. It Is certain the
fastening of the Mind in Contemplation of an excellent Object, may cause so
strong a Diversion, that bodily Pains are much mitigated. The Martyrs, by the
powerful Impression of the glorious Reward, seemed to be in an Ecstasy, without
Feeling in the midst of their cruel Sufferings. The Prophet Habakkuk
triumphantly declares, Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall
Fruit be in the Vines: the Labor of the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall
yield no Meat: The Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no
Herd in the Stalls. Tho all the Supports and Comforts of Life fail, yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Joy is the
Affection of Prosperity; but as the scalding Drops of God's Wrath upon the
Conscience turn all the Comforts of a Man into Torment, so the cordial Drops of
his Love change Afflictions into Consolations.

3. I will show that the Pardon of our Sins produces an excellent Temper and
Disposition of Soul to praise God. Love to the Benefactor, and Joy in the
Benefit, are the Incentives of Thankfulness. They tune the Heart and Tongue in
the Music of Praise. When they are raised to a Flame, they have a kind of
Charm, of Rapture and extatick Force, and transport the Soul above it self in
Expressions of Praise. These holy Affections in the Angels and Saints above are
in their Exaltation: and the Circle of their Employment is, to acknowledge and
admire, to reverence and magnify God, for his absolute Excellencies, and his
relative Benefits. Love and Joy are regulated by their Objects and Motives.
Exceeding Love and Joy, when terminated on worldly things, are exceeding Folly:
they are empty and vanishing, a sudden Blaze that dies in a Moment. But the
Pardon of our Sins infinitely endears God to us, and produces a substantial
permanent Joy. His Love, tho our Hearts be as hard as a Rock, as cold and dead
as the Grave, will melt us, and kindle a holy Heat of Affection, a Love
singular and supreme to God, according to the Excellency of the Benefit. Love
will ingeminate the Praises of God: Psalm. 118.
Thou art my God, I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will exalt thee. Our
Joy in the Benefit will be according to our extreme want of it, and the
Strength of our Desires to obtain it. Without the Pardon of our Sins, it had
been better for us we had never been born; or made in a lower Rank of Creatures
incapable of Damnation. According to the Conviction of the Greatness of our
Misery, our Longings will be for Deliverance: The Desire accomplished is a Tree
of Life. The Tree of Life was in the midst of Paradise, the Center of its
Pleasures. According to the Degrees of our Desires, such is the Sweetness of
Fruition. Now when the Soul is overwhelmed with the fearful Apprehensions of
everlasting Death, how ardent are the Desires of Pardon? how unsatisfied
without it? and what Impressions of Joy are felt from the sealing its Pardon?
Solomon tells us, That good News from a far Country is like cooling Water to
one burnt up with Thirst. How much more refreshing is the Testimony of the
blessed Comforter from Heaven, to one fainting in the Estuations of Conscience,
that his Sins are pardoned? David expresses his Valuation and earnest Longing
for the Favor of God, and his joyful Sense of it: There be many that say,
Psalm. 5.
Who will show us any Good? Lord, lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon me:
Thou have put Gladness in my Heart, more than in the time that their Corn and
Wine increased: An inward cordial Joy, that far exceeds the counterfeit Joy in
the Countenance, that ends in Heaviness. Now the thankful Sense of a Benefit is
correspondent to the joyful Sense of it, and the joyful according to our
languishing longing after it. Fervent Prayer for the pardoning Mercy of God,
and a frozen Acknowledgment of it, are utterly inconsistent. There is no Joy in
the World so sensible and affecting, as the Joy of one saved from present
Death. A condemned Man values and rejoices more in receiving two Lines where
his Pardon is contained, than in the Conveyance of a Kingdom. Hezekiah, when
under the Sentence of Death in his Sickness, how passionate were his Addresses
for Recovery? how exuberant were his Joy and Thankfulness for his Rescue from
perishing? The living, the living, Isa. 38.19.
he shall praise thee, as I do this day. He resolves to renew the Praises of
his gracious Preserver every day: The Lord saved me; Ver. 20.
therefore we will sing my Songs to the stringed Instruments all the Days of
our Life, in the House of the Lord. Had he so quick and warm a Sense of the
Divine Mercy that saved him from the Grave, how much more ardent should our
Acknowledgments be for the saving us from Hell? If we have the Feeling of Sin,
as we have of Sickness, and are as duly sensible how much the Life of the Soul,
our excellent and immortal Part, is to be preferred before the Life of the
frail and perishing Body, our Joy and Thankfulness would be in the highest
Elevation, in remembering forgiving Mercy. This will be the Argument of the high
and everlasting Praise of God in Heaven.

I shall conclude with this Advice, Let us not content our selves with verbal
Acknowledgments of this real and glorious Benefit: Let our Thanksgiving be
joined with Thanksdoing; then we shall be accepted. Of this we have the most
comforting Assurance from God himself; He that offers Praise glorifies me:
Psalm. 50. ult.
and to him that orders his Conversation aright, I will show the Salvation of
God.

FINIS.
BOOKS writ by William Bates, D.D. and sold by B. Aylmer.
THE Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: Or Discourses wherein is showed, how
the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God, are glorified in
that great and blessed Work.

Considerations of the Existence of God, and of the Immortality of the Soul,
with the Recompenses of the future State. To which is now added, The Divinity
of the Christian Religion, etc.

The Four Last Things, Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, practically
considered and applied.

The Danger of Prosperity discovered, in several Sermons.

The great Duty of Resignation in Times of Affliction, etc.

A Funeral-Sermon on Dr. Thomas Manton, who deceased October 18, 1677. With the
last public Sermon Dr. Manton preached.

The Sure Trial of Uprightness, opened in several Sermons upon Psalm. 18. v. 23.

A Description of the blessed Place and State of the Saints above, on John
14.2. Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Clarkson.

The Way to the highest Honor, on John 12.26. Preached at the Funeral of Dr.
Jacomb.

The speedy Coming of Christ to Judgment, on Rev. 22.12. Preached at the
Funeral of Mr. Benj. Ashhurst.

A Sermon on the Death of the Late Queen Mary.


