THE Speedy Coming OF CHRIST to Judgment, Represented in a FUNERAL SERMON, On
the Death of Mr. Benjamin Ashurst, Who deceased the 11th of September, 1687.

By William Bates, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXVII.

To his Honored Friend, HENRY ASHURT, Esquire.
SIR,
I Have complied with your desire in publishing the following Sermon upon the
Death of your Dear Brother. The Sovereign Disposer of all things has been
pleased to take away in a few Years several Persons very near to you in the
Consanguinity of Nature, and younger than your Self: a solemn Call to remember
you, that the last Day of your present Life is approaching that will be
attended with its Night, and to excite you to prepare for your great Change
from Time to Eternity. You have indeed peculiar Obligations and Encouragement
to be Religious in a degree of Eminence; whose Father was so bright a Light,
and Guide to all his Relations in the Everlasting Way, by his Holy Counsels and
Heavenly Conversation. Of him I could speak many excellent Things, were not his
Goodness so universally known, that Detraction it self could never fasten an
unworthy Imputation upon him.

It shall suffice to give this short Character of him sincerely: He was adorned
with all Divine Graces, and by their conspicuous Exercise was singularly
eminent among the Saints. He made so particular an Application of that general
Precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul, with all thy Strength, and with all thy Mind, as if it had been solely
given to himself: the Love of God inflamed his Heart, and shined in his Life.
This made him one day in a week (besides that which is Sacred by Divine
Appointment) to withdraw himself from the Business of the World, that he might
more freely enjoy Communion with the blessed Object of his Spiritual Desires.
His Piety was in Conjunction with all those Virtues that are requisite to
accomplish a Christian: Temperance and Purity of Manners, Justice and Equity in
his Commerce with others, and those Virtues that cast a more lively Luster, and
have an attractive force upon Men. A rare Humility, an amiable Meekness,
condescending Affability and Sweetness, compassionate Charity and Beneficence
to the Souls and Bodies of Men, were really exhibited in his Deportment and
Actions. He was so lovely in his Conversation, so loving to all, that he was
beloved of all. The uniform and regular Tenor of his Life obtained this
Testimony, that was given to our Blessed Master, he did all things well. A
constant Serenity reigned in his Countenance, the visible sign of the Divine
Calm in his Breast, the Peace of God that passes Understanding. And for an
entire Conformity to our Savior, that the Image of his meek suffering Evil, as
well as his zealous doing Good, might radiantly appear in this chosen Saint,
the Divine Providence called him forth to a very sharp Trial; for being under
the afflicting Severities of the Stone, and by the Advice of his dear Friends
persuaded to submit to the dangerous Remedy of Cutting, with what resigned
Submission did he yield himself to the Will of God? With what Tranquillity did
he expect the issue either of surviving or dying? You remember his words before
that terrible Operation, When I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death,
I will fear no Evil: When so great a Wound was made in his Flesh as an open
passage for Death to enter, and such cruel pains followed as struck the
Spectators with trembling, he endured them with an inspired Patience and
Constancy. Thus God was pleased to perfect dear his Servant by Sufferings.

Your descent from such a Father should be a powerful Incentive to you to
imitate his admirable Example: you should consider whose Name you bear: to be a
faint Copy of so bright an Original, as it is below your Duty, so I am
persuaded will not satisfy your Affections. Methinks a sacred Ambition should
inflame you to excel in all Holiness and Godliness, that the living Image of
your Father's Graces may be clearly visible in your Person and Conversation.
Proceed, dear Sir, in the everlasting way, wherein you are so happily advanced;
be always aspiring, and with Zeal endeavoring to obtain the Celestial Prize.
I unfeignedly recommend your self, your Excellent Lady, and your Family to the
Divine Blessing. I am with great Respect,

Sir, Your affectionate and faithful Servant, W. BATES.

Books newly printed for J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Short Description of the Blessed Place and State of the Saints above, in a
Discourse on the words of our Blessed Savior, Joh. 14. 2. Preached on occasion
of the Death of the Reverend Mr. David Clarkson. By Will. Bates, D. D.

The Way to the Highest Honor, a Funeral Sermon on John 12. 26. Preached upon
the Decease of the Reverend Dr. Tho. Jacomb. By the same Author.

A Plain Representation of Transubstantiation, as it is received in the Church
of Rome, with the Sandy Foundations it is built upon, and the Arguments that
clearly evert and overturn it.

Errata corrigenda.
Page 8. line 5. for was, read be. l. 7. f. Appetite, r. Appetites. P. 11. l.
18. f. conveyed, r. conceived. P. 25. l. 6. f. it is, r. til. P. 28. l. 6. f.
Judgment, r. Judgments. P. 65. l. 3. f. Atheist, r. Atheists.

There is now in the Press the Third Edition of Dr. Bates's Harmony of the
Divine Attributes, etc.

REVEL. xxii. 12. And he said, behold, I come quickly, and my Reward is with
me, to give every Man according as his Work shall be.
THESE words were spoke by the Lord Jesus Christ, the supreme Judge of the
World, upon his finishing the Revelation to St. John. In them we may observe,
1. An Excitation, Behold. 2. The Celestial Object, I come quickly. 3. The End
of his Coming, my Reward is with me, to render to every one according to his
Works.

It Is observable that the prophetical Notice of the Lord's coming to Judgment
is ushered in with great Solemnity: Thus Enoch the seventh from Adam,
foretelling his Judiciary Appearance, said, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all: and the Circumstance of
the suddenness of his Coming, is used as a powerful Motive to awaken our drowsy
Spirits, and fix our scattered Minds entirely on this so eminent an Object. So
the Apostle James gives an awful Admonition, Behold, the Judge stands before the
door ready to pass a final Sentence. And St. John breaks forth in an Ecstasy at
this admirable Spectacle, Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every Eye shall see
him, and they which pierced him: And the everlasting Judge himself assures us of
his speedy Coming with this Preface, Behold, I come quickly. The words contain
this Proposition.

It Is our high Wisdom and Duty, to represent by actual and solemn thoughts the
certain and speedy Coming of Christ to the righteous Judgment of the World.

I will illustrate and prove this Doctrine in this order.

First; Consider what is revealed in the Scripture of his certain coming to
Judgment.

Secondly; The circumstance of Time, his coming quickly.

Thirdly; The Rewards he will then immediately distribute.

Fourthly; The respective difference of the Rewards, according to the Actions
of Men in this Life. And then apply it.

First; In the managing the first Point, I shall not insist upon the Proofs of
a future Judgment, but only direct to the Fountains of Arguments that are
demonstrative to attentive* and unperverted Minds.

It Is a Doctrine of Natural Reason and Divine Faith: if we consider the
essential and necessary Perfections of God, or the Frame of Man, we must
strongly infer his accountableness for his Actions. There is an essential
Subordination between Man and his Divine Maker, and being endowed with
Understanding and free Faculties, it is becoming the Wisdom of God to govern him
by a Law, to regulate his Choice and Actions: This is the Rule that
distinguishes between Virtue and Vice, and the Holiness, Justice, and Goodness
of God are infallible assurances to us, that there will be Recompenses
according to the diversity of Men's Actions, either conforming or transgressing
his Laws. Besides, every Man has an internal Sentiment, a judicial Impression
in his Breast of this great Truth. Conscience, the inseparable Faculty of the
reasonable Soul, has a directing and reflecting Light, to show us our Duty, to
examine our Actions, and accordingly to excuse and comfort, or to accuse and
terrify; which Acts necessarily imply, that it is deputed by the Supreme Judge of
the World, to observe our ways in order to its final Testimony before his
Tribunal. This Proof is the more convincing and palpable, in that those Persons
who are exempted from humane Judgment by their Power and Dignity, those who are
above Reproof, and by a fatal Privilege damn themselves with less contradiction
than others, yet are not impenetrable to the stings of Conscience, but at times
have a conscious feeling of their Guilt: and in those who have so far stupefied
Conscience, that it is either silent, or speaks with a low Voice, yet when they
are in distress, especially in the approaches of Death, Conscience recovers
Life and Vigor, sets their Sins in order before them, and flashes the Terrors
of future Judgment in their faces; an evident presage that although Conscience was
not strong enough to control their licentious Appetite here, it will be strong
enough for their Conviction and Torment hereafter.

Now Divine Revelation renews the decayed Notions of the future Judgment that
are natural to the Minds of Men, and confirms them against the opposition of
the Carnal Faculties, it regulates and enlarges them, with respect to the
Certainty and Circumstances of it, who shall be Judge, and the manner of his
coming, and transacting the Affairs of the great Day.

I will more particularly insist upon the certain coming of Jesus Christ in
Person to judge the World; and for the orderly discourse of it, it is observable
that a double coming of Christ is foretold in Scripture: The first in a low
Condition; the second in a glorious State. The ends of his first and second
coming regulate their manner: The Messiah came at first, to be the Mediator
between the righteous God and sinful Man, by patient suffering the most
afflictive Evils; to propitiate the incensed Justice of Heaven against us; to
restore us by Humility who fell by Pride; To illustrate his signal Love to us,
to recommend by the efficacy of his Example, the meek Suffering all the
transient Evils of the World: But the second will be to perform the last Act of
his Regal Office, to determine the eternal States of Angels and Men, and
suitably in the Glory of his Deity. The Divine Oracles were never less obscure
than in describing the first and second coming of the Messiah; the Eclipses of
the Sun of Righteousness, and his future Glory: and the most clear
accomplishment of them in his Humiliation, is a convincing visible Argument
they shall be fulfilled in his Exaltation. Now in regard his lowly Obedience,
and sorrowful Sufferings, are the Titles to his Triumph, and the height of his
Glory shall be answerable to his extreme Debasement; I will briefly compare his
first and second Coming.

His first Coming was in the likeness of sinful Flesh: tho he was exempt from
the rebellious Sin of our first Parents, and the poisonous tincture that is
derived to their common Race, being miraculously conveyed by the Holy Ghost,
yet he was charged with the Frailties, and exposed to those Afflictions that
are the Penalties of Sin. His first reception in the World was so mean, that if
Poverty it self had assumed a visible Appearance, it could not be received more
poorly. He was born in a Stable, and died on the Cross, the humble Poverty of
his beginning was not discordant from his ignominious End: and his Life from
his first Breath to his last in the World, was a course through Poverty,
Disgrace, Injuries, Indignities, and the most cruel Sufferings. He was made not
only lower than the Angels, but than the lowest of Men: In the language of his
Type, Psalm. 22.
a Worm and no Man. In this poor, weak, and contemptible State, darkened with
the Clouds of Sorrows, O how unlike to him, who appeared in a Celestial Vision
to the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 6.
sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and the glorious Seraphims in a
posture of Reverence about him, and in an Ecstasy of Admiration crying, one to
another, Joh. 12. 41.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his
Glory.

Carnal Eyes could not discover the Son of God in the Son of Man so vilified
and afflicted. The words of the Prophet are justly applicable to him in the
state of his Humiliation, Isa. 45. 15.
Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior.

Now to all those steps of our Saviors depression in his first coming, are
correspondent the degrees of his Exaltation in his second coming. He shall come
the second time from the highest Heaven the true Sanctuary of God, and appear
without Sin, having perfectly expiated it by his Sufferings on Earth. His first
coming was in Dishonor, his second shall be in Glory. He came at first on
foot, in the form of a Servant, then he shall come in the form of God, riding
on the bright Clouds, and all the Chariots of God, the Angels of Light
attending him. Psalm. 68. 17.
He shall come in the Glory of his Father, in the visible brightness of the
Deity. The Rods, the Thorns, the Nails, the Cross, all the conspiring
Instruments of his cruel and disgraceful Sufferings shall be exchanged for the
Ensigns of Majesty: His Sacred Head shall be crowned with Glory, of which the
Sun in its Luster is but a dark shadow; a Scepter of Righteousness shall be in
his hand, he shall sit on a great white Throne, the Emblem of his unspotted
Holiness.

His first coming was in Weakness, but his second shall be in Power. Thus he
told his Enemies, Mat. 26. 64.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven. His Voice shall break the silence of the Grave,
and all that are in the bowels of the Earth, or the bottom of the Sea, shall
come forth; they that have done good, Joh. 28. 29.
unto the Resurrection of Life; they that have done evil, to the Resurrection
of Damnation. By his Omnipotence he will change our vile Bodies, Phil. 3. 21.
that they may be fashioned like to his Glorious Body. As Gold at first taken
out of the Mine, seems but common Earth, but by the refining Fire has a
Brightness superinduced, that it seems rather the product of the Fire, than
from the Vein of the Earth from whence it was taken: Thus our Bodies that in
their Original are but Earth; from the Earthly Adam; shall by the Power of the
Lord from Heaven be made heavenly, clothed with a living Luster and Vigor. He
will then convent the God of this World, with all the invisible Legions of
rebellious Spirits, and force their Submission to his High Tribunal. He will
dissolve the old World, and raise the new: from his Face the Earth and the
Heaven shall flee away, and there shall be no place found for them. According
to his Promise we look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness.

Briefly, in his first coming he was despised and rejected of Men, condemned
and crucified, but then he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance upon all that know not God, and
disobey the Gospel. How will the wicked be surpised with the Terrors of the
Lord? At the promulgation of the Law, the Senses of Hearing and Seeing, that
are the inlets of* Terror, were so strongly affected with the Presence of God,
when fearful Lightnings were darted from his Eyes, and Clouds of Smoke came
from the Breath of his Nostrils, and at the loud sounding of the Trumpet, and
the quaking of the Mountain; that the Hearts of the Spectators were ready to
die within them, and Moses himself was terribly afraid; but how will the Sights
and Sounds at the last day overwhelm the guilty with Terrors, when the Son of
God shall appear in his terrible Majesty! when the Archangel shall blow the
Trumpet of God, when the Pillars of Heaven shall fall, and the Foundations of
the Earth be overthrown, and a dreadful Judgment shall pass upon the impenitent
Transgressors of the eternal Law! how will they appear spiritless, in sad
Confusion in the great Day of the Lord Almighty?

Secondly; We are to consider the Circumstance of Time, his coming quickly.
It Is verified by universal Experience, that no carnal Principle does more
fortify Sinners in a false Security, than putting the evil day far from them,
and the Presumption that they are not in present danger of God's Displeasure,
when inevitable and great Evils are looked upon as remote, they make a slite
Impression, but the Propinquity of such Evils inspires Terrors. We have an
Instance of this in Cain, who (after God had denounced his Punishment for his
bloody crying Sin) full of Perplexity and Despair breaks forth, My Punishment
is greater than I can bear! and it shall come to pass, that every one that
finds me, shall slay me. But when he was secured from present Revenge, and
expected a long Life in this World, he freely indulged his sensual Desires, and
built a City, to drown the noise of his accusing Conscience. The World follows
this way of Cain, and freely pursues the Satisfaction of their Lusts. When Men
look upon the Divine Judgment at an immense distance, and when the evil Servant
shall say in his Heart, Mat. 24.
my Lord delays his coming, he will satisfy both the angry and voluptuous
Appetites, he will smite his Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the
drunken. To awaken therefore Men's drowsy Spirits to prepare for the Judgment of
the great Day, to check their exorbitant Lusts, their Lasciviousness, excess of
Wine, and Reveling it is threatened, they shall give an account of them, 1 Pet.
14. 1, 3.
to him who is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead. And to induce a patient
Temper and assuage Sorrow, the Apostle James encourages afflicted Christians,
that the Judge stands before the door.

There is a seeming difficulty how to reconcile the Predictions of Christ's
sudden coming to Judgment, with the interval of so many entire Ages lapsed
since, and what may remain of Time before the last Day is uncertain. This
difficulty will be resolved by considering the following Particulars.

1. The words of the Text are to be understood in the strict literal Sense: For
our Savior having represented in a visionary Scene the State of the Church in
the several Periods of its Duration to the end of the World, its Conflicts,
Victory, and Triumph over Antichristian Enemies, and having described the
Tranquillity, Purity and Glory of the Church in the very last part of Time,
which is preparative to the glorious everlasting State in the next World, he
declares, I come quickly, Rev. 22. 5.
and my Reward is with me: After the final accomplishment of those Prophecies,
there is no more use of Time, the unjust, and unrighteous, and filthy, Esa. 22.
1.
continue unchanged and impenitent; Micah. 7. 1.
the righteous and holy are confirmed in their Perseverance, Heb. 1.
and immediately shall receive Recompenses according to their Works.

2. The whole flux of Time, from the first to the second coming of Christ is
called the last days. The Prophets foretold of an astonishing Change that
should arrive in the Church and the World, that the Ceremonial Law should be
abolished, when the Messiah, the Substance of it, and Perfection was come, and
a new Covenant be immutably established in the Church, it is the final expiring
of Time. In this Sense the Apostle speaks to Christians in the first Age of the
Church; 1 Cor. 10. 11.
Now all these things happened unto them for Examples, and they are written for
our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. Now in the division
of Time, this being the last part of it, for the duration of the World, the
second coming of Christ is represented as near. The last Glass of Time was
turned up at the Revelation of the Gospel by the Son of God, and now the last
Sands are running; when it is out, it shall never be turned more.

3. Sometimes the speedy coming of Christ to Judgment immediately respects the
destruction of the Jewish State, and their principal City. Thus in his last
Serm^n on Mount Olivet, the T^mple being in his view, he f^retold that one
Stone shall not be left upon another: And after his describing the fearful
Events that should surprise that Nation, tells his Disciples, Verily I say unto
you, this Generation shall not pass, Mat. 24. 24.
till all these things be fulfilled. The time of this Judgment, is called the
great and illustrious Day of the Lord, Acts 2. 20.
when by visible Vengeance upon that Nation, he declared his Divine Power and
Glory before the World. And to this famous Destruction of the Jews, may refer
several places, where the Apostle encourages Believers to unfainting
perseverance in their Duty, notwithstanding the cruel Opposition they met with
from Infidels of the Jewish Nation: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves,
Heb. 10.
as the manner of some is, but exhort one another, and so much the more as ye
see the day approaching; that is, when Christ will appear for the subduing his
Enemies, and for the relieving his People.

4. We must distinguish between the Judgment of Sense and of Faith, and this
will rectify our estimate of the time of God's particular Judgment upon Earth,
and of his universal Judgment when he will distribute eternal Recompenses. To
Sense Afflictions seem not only grievous, but often they seem long: for Sorrow
fastens the Thoughts upon the Affliction; in sharp Pains the Soul is as it were
confined to the diseased part, and strictly observes all the hours and smaller
parts of their Duration, which when we are at ease slip away without notice. In
distress we would fain hasten away the present time, expecting Relief by what
shall succeed: and winged time seems slow in its motion. From hence are so many
doleful Complaints of the Saints, Lord, how long? Psalm. 70. 8, 9.
Lord, make haste: as if he had forgot to be gracious to relieve them, and just
to repay their cruel Enemies. But Faith in the Divine Promises looks to their
accomplishment in the time set by the most wise and holy disposer of all
things. A steadfast Believer never counts God slow in coming to Judgment; for he
is never too late. The Vision of the Churches Deliverance is for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; tho it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry. This is applied by the Apostle
to the particular Judgment upon Jerusalem; and is applicable to the universal
Judgment: For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, Heb. 10.
and will not tarry: tho he bears long with the Sufferings of his own Elect,
yet he will avenge them speedily: At the prefixed time, when the number of the
Elect shall be complete, and all the Vessels of Wrath are fitted for
Destruction, the discerning Judge will come and separate them for ever.

5. Compare Time with Eternity. Time is numbered and distinguished by the
Motions of the Sun and Moon, and is accounted long or short by us with respect
to our transient and limited Duration in the present World: but Eternity is an
endless Duration. The whole space of Time, from the first Motions of the
Heavens to the last, has not that proportion to Eternity, as a short Span has
to the vast Compass of the Heaven. Now God, who is absolutely eternal, and
truly infinite, measures the continuance of things by his own Standard:
accordingly the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 90. 4.
A thousand Years in his sight, are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a
Watch in the Night: as the space of a few hours that passes without the least
perception in sleep. God comforts his suffering Church: for a small moment have
I forsaken thee, Esa. 54. 7, 8.
but with great Mercy will I gather thee: In a little Wrath I hid my face from
thee, but with everlasting Kindness will I have Mercy on thee. St. Peter
replies to the Infidels of the last days, who scornfully say, Where is the
Promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.
One day with the Lord is as a thousand Years, and a thousand Years as one day:
all the measures of Time are determined in Eternity. This estimate will
reconcile the two seeming opposite Durations, the long delaying, and the speedy
coming of the Judge.

If a Malefactor be taken, sentenced and executed in a day, it is quick Justice:
(...) the longest (...) in God's Duration is no more than the shortest among
Men. And the Application of this is more sensible and evident, with respect to
the particular Judgment that immediately attends the Death of Men, whether
graciously rewarding, or justly punishing them: The Afflictions of the Saints
are but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.
compared with the eternal State of Glory they enter into: and tho an
impenitent Sinner live to extreme Age, yet his Judgment did not slumber, but
was hastening, for his Death, that is the end of an hundred Years on Earth, will
be to him the beginning of an hundred thousand Years in Hell, attended with an
endless Duration after.

Thirdly; We are to consider the Rewards he will then immediately distribute.
What the Rewards shall be in their general nature we may understand, but the
degrees of Happiness or Misery in the future State are beyond the utmost
comprehension of our Thoughts, or expressions of our Words. A Child may as soon
be instructed to understand and relate the deepest Counsels of a Senate; as a
mortal Man can fully conceive or explicate what Heaven or Hell is. The Judge
styles it my Reward, who is the great. God and our Savior: and it is
correspondent to his infinite Goodness and Bounty, or to his terrible Majesty
and offended Justice. Who can unfold the Treasures of his Love, or the
Treasures of his Wrath? Who knows the Power of his Anger? Tho no Resemblance be
capable to express fully the sovereign Felicity, and the extreme Misery in the
future State, yet for our Instruction they are set forth in the most
intelligible and affecting manner with respect to our narrow Capacities. The
Reward of the Saints is a State of Glory and Joy in the Presence of the blessed
God, the Fountain of true Felicity. The Apostle assures us, that those who
continue in well-doing shall be rewarded with Glory, and Honor, Romans 2.
and Immortality. The Reward is shadowed forth by chosen Comparisons, a Crown
of Glory, a Crown of Life: by the Joys of a Marriage Festival that shall be
celebrated in the City of God. In short, the Reward contains the highest
Perfection and exceeding Satisfaction of the reasonable Nature. Our most
beautiful Expressions darken the Eternal Brightness of that State: Heaven is
infinitely better known by one minutes Enjoyment, than by the Description of
the Divinest Orator.

The Recompense from revenging Justice is set forth by words of the heaviest
Signification: by Indignation and Wrath, Romans 2.
Tribulation and Anguish: and by most fearful Representations, to typify the
Torments of the Damned: by the Worm that never dies, and the Fire that shall
never be quenched: by the blackness of Darkness for ever, and the bottomless
Gulf of Horror and Misery. Briefly, as the blessed Reward eminently contains
all those Joys, of which we have but dark shadows here, so the Punishment is
more extreme and fearful than the literal meaning of the most violent Figures
express. This Reward he says is with him. This I shall consider in three
things.

1. It Is a present Reward. Here the Saints have a sure Title to the immortal
and undefiled Inheritance; a right to the Tree of Life. He that has the Son,
has everlasting Life: an unfeigned Faith that unites us to Christ, that
purifies the Heart and Conversation, and works by Love to our Redeemer, secures
to us an entire Interest in the Kingdom of Glory, both upon the account of the
Purchase of it by the sacred Treasure of Christ's Blood, and the unchangeable
Tenor of the Gospel, wherein God promises Heaven to all obedient Believers: but
the actual bestowing of this upon their entire Persons, is not till the last
day. Then the King will say to them on his Right Hand, come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.
He will crown them with his own Hands, and imediately introduce them into his
own Joys.

Now Sentence is past upon those who disobey the Gospel; he that believes not,
is condemned already, but the Execution of it is suspended for a while. Tho
sinful Men are guilty of such violent Provocations as would conquer all created
Patience, yet their Judge endures with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath
fitted for Destruction. He is the God of Patience, it is one of the Divine
Attributes, and cannot be violated by the Indignities of rebellious Sinners,
but has its perfect Work in this lower World. He ever enjoys the Serenity and
Blessedness that is inseparable from the Perfections of his own Nature, and
spares the wicked for a time in order to their Salvation: but when he comes to
Judgment, the Execution will immediately follow: For the Sentence will be
peremptory and final; there can be no Appeal from it: The Son shall then appear
with equal Majesty and Authority with the Father: All Judgment is committed to
him: And his Power to execute the definitive Sentence is irresistible, we may
read the Tenor of it, Take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer
Darkness: there is no possible escape by flight from his righteous Fury, no
possible resistance of his Almighty Power, but the Wicked shall presently
suffer the decreed Vengeance.

2. The Reward is complete: for it shall be the issue of final Judgment, with
respect to all things done in the Body, whether good or evil. Separate Souls
act in their opposite States: the Saints above continually glorify God, and do
his Commands: The wicked in Hell continually blaspheme God: but the obedience
of the Saints in Heaven is not in order to a Reward, for they are actually
possessed of it, and complete Holiness is a principal part of their Felicity: and
the Sins of the Damned do not incur a new Guilt, and expose them to more
Severities of Punishment, for they are in the hands of revenging Justice, and
their Sin is a principal part of their Punishment. The Rewardableness of Humane
Actions is limited to the present Life; and when Men shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, a full Reward will be distributed to them.

Here the faithful Servants of God have some Vails to encourage them in their
Work, and to delight in their Duty: and in their various Sorrows and Sufferings
they are cheared with some forerunning Beams of Heavenly Light, revived with
the Air of Paradise, refreshed with Waters of Life from the sacred Springs of
Comfort, the Promises of God, and rejoice in the hope of Glory: but then they
are received into God's glorious Presence, where there is fullness of Joy, and
Rivers of Pleasure for ever. What Defect can there be in their Happiness when
they are entered into the Joy of their Lord, and Joy enters into them
replenishing all their Faculties?

Here the wicked feel some beginnings of Sorrows, the twinges of an accusing
Conscience that settles into the undying Worm: The first Breath of God's
Indignation sometimes singes them here: but then the Flames of it will break
forth with vehemence: in this World his Dispensation is a Compound of Justice
and Mercy, he is unwilling to use Extremity: when he is exceedingly provoked,
Mercy mollifies the Rigor of Justice, calms the Fierceness of his Wrath,
lightens the Weight of his Power: he does not reward them according to their
Iniquities: but then nothing will break the blow of his Revenging Hands: Strict
Justice will then inflict a Punishment commensurate to the guilt of their Sins.
All the leading Faculties of the Soul, the Mind, the Fancy, the Memory, the
Will, the Affections, that have been polluted with Sin, all the sensitive
Faculties of the Body that have been instrumental in the commission of Sin,
shall be tormented. The voluptuous Wretch, whose Soul was drowned in Flesh and
Blood, and riotously feasted every day, his Tongue was tormented in the Fire.

Briefly, Pain is more intense and violent according to the Capacity of the
Patient, and the Activity and Impression of the Agent: Thus in the Body those
parts that are of the quickest and most tender Sense, are most receptive of
Pain; and whersharp and piercing Humors fall upon them, are vehemently
affected: How great shall be the Punishment, when the entire Man the Soul and
Body are prepared to be most capable of Torment, and Infinite Power inflict it?
weeping and gnashing of Teeth, extreme Sorrow, and extreme Rage, are the
Characters of Damnation. O doleful State beyond all possible Expression!

3. The Reward is perpetual: it is the issue of Eternal Judgment: The Sentence
is fixed and unalterable for ever. The Saints shall ever be with the Lord, whose
Presence is the living Fountain of Felicity. Their Bodies shall be endowed with
a Celestial unfading Beauty and Vigor becoming the glorious Quality of the
Sons of God: their Souls shall for ever be satisfied with the sight of his
Glory, and ravished with the Fruition of his Love. There is no defect in that
blessed State, and no danger of losing it. The Love of God toward his elect
Vessels of Mercy is as unchangeable as his Nature: and the Divine Beauty fixes
the flame of their pure Affections upon the Deity: They enjoy an everlasting
Communion with him. Eternity crowns and consummates their Happiness.

The wicked are excommunicated from the Beatifical Presence of God, and the
joyful Society of the Saints for ever. They are imprisoned in Hell during the
Displeasure of the Immortal King, who is inflexibly angry, and irreconcilable
for ever In the present State violent Pains or Passions extinguish Life, as a
fierce Fire devours the matter that feeds it: The natural Body could not endure
the Torments of Hell a moment, the frail Tabernacle of Flesh would presently be
dissolved: But the Divine Power will uphold the damned in vivacity to feel
infernal Torments. Here there are intermissions and pauses between the strokes
of God's Hand; even Pharaoh that proud Rebel was indulged at times, to lead him
to Repentance: but there is an uncessant perpetuity of* Torments: the obstinate
Sons of Darkness are without ease or end of their Misery.

Fourthly, We are to consider the respective difference of the Rewards,
according to the Actions of Men in this Life* and that with respect to the
kinds whether good or evil, and the degrees of good and evil in them. He will
then lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet, and bring
every Work to Judgment, Eccles. 12. 14.
whether good or evil. He will try our good Works inclusively, with our
Principles, and Aims, and Affections, wherein their spiritual value consists.
He alone has exact Scales to weigh the Spirits of Men, a Divine Faculty to see
the deepest Seeds of their Actions. When Religious Duties, when Acts of Charity
and of any Virtue are performed in Obedience to God, to please and glorify him,
they shall be rewarded accordingly: but when done from Carnal Motives, for our
own Repu^ation, our own Interest or Pleasure, the Judge will then declare, I
have not found your Works full before me: Rev. 3. 2.
tho never so specious and glittering in the Eyes and esteem of Men, tho
appearing with a great show of Goodness, yet without the internal Exercise of
gracious Affections that are the Life of Obedience, they are of no account in
that day. According to the Sincerity, Zeal, and measure of our good Works, the
Reward shall be: He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; 2 Cor. 9. 6.
and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. This Rule of Judgment
does not in the least imply that there is any desert of the Reward in the best
Works of Men: the Scripture is most express, that Eternal Life is the Gift of
God through Jesus Christ our Lord: The Kingdom of Glory is infinitely more a
Gift than a Reward.

As the Predestination of the Saints to Life is an Act of Sovereign Mercy; so
the Glorification of them is an Act of equally free Mercy, without respect to
any Merit of ours: but the wise and holy Lawgiver dispenses the blessed Reward
according to the Tenor of our good Works: and as by the excellence of the
Reward he declares what value he sets upon our Obedience; so by the exactness
of our Obedience we declare what value we set upon the Reward.

The Recompenses of distributive Justice shall be according to the evil Works
of Men. All Sins with the inhancing Circumstances of Guilt shall be brought to
Judgment Sins of Omission, I was an hungry, and you gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and you gave me no drink, shall be charged upon the Reprobates by the
Judge himself. To him who knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is a
Sin. Jam. 4. 17.
All Sins of Commission, whether secret or open: God will judge the Secrets of
Men by Jesus Christ: The Sins concealed from the Eye of the Day, the Light of
the Sun, and from the Eye of the Night, the Light of a Candle, shall then be
made manifest: and all the notorious and infamous Sins, Lasciviousness, Lusts,
excess of Wine, Revelings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatry, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5.
Men shall give an account of to him, who is ready to judge the Quick and the
Dead. Sins of Thoughts and Words, as well as of Actions, shall then be
remembered; the vain Thoughts that have lodged in the Heart, and every idle word
that has been spoken by Men, they shall give an account of in the day of
Judgment.

The degrees of Punishment shall be correspondent to Men's Sins: How much they
have lived deliciously and presumptuously, so much Sorrow and Torment shall be
given them. The more rebellious, outrageous, and obstinate Sinners now are, the
more fearful Severities shall be their portion. Those who know their Masters
will, and do it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes.

The Proceedings of that day shall be transacted by the Son of God in his
glorified Humane Nature, and suitably to the Capacities of Men that the Justice
of his Sentence may be evident: therefore St John, describing the process of
the last Judgment, relates, Rev. 20. 12.
I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened;
and the Dead were judged out of those things that were written in the Books,
according to their Works.

The Records of Conscience shall then be opened, and all the Sins of Men, even
those that are now obliterated and forgotten, shall then appear in so clear an
Impression, with all their Aggravations, that the wicked will be inexcusable to
themselves, and Conscience will subscribe their Condemnation. The Judge himself
who knows all things will then unfold the Registers of his Omniscience, and
publish their Sins before the World. Then shall the King say, I was hungry, and
ye gave me no Meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink: and by just Analogy
we may infer he will charge Sins of all kinds upon the Wicked, of which they
have been guilty, that the Righteousness and Reasonableness of his Proceedings
may appear: he will overcome when he judges, the Condemned shall have nothing
to reply, struck into Silence and Confusion: the Saints and Angels shall with
Admiration magnify his true and righteous Judgments.

Application.
The Doctrine of Christ's speedy coming to Judgment, should be a powerful
Incentive to our most solemn and ready preparing for it. The Affair is
infinitely serious, it is our incomparable Interest to secure the Favor of the
Supreme Judge: if we are cast in Judgment, our Misery is irrecoverable. There
may be Errors in Humane Judgments, and other days of Trial to review and alter
the Sentence; but the Judgment of the last day is irrevocable. And is it a
slight matter to be saved or damned for ever? Then the Children of this World
are absolutely wiser than the Children of Light. But it is not possible for the
Mind of Man, unless monstrously perverted, to conceive such a Thought. From
whence then is it, that the eternal Judgment is so unconsider'd, so unexpected,
and unprepared for, by most of the World? Should not the Excellence of their
Judge make Sinners afraid? His universal Knowledge, for all things are naked and
open to him, with whom we have to do; His immaculate Holiness, for he is of
purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity without aversation; His incorruptible
Justice that will not spare the guilty; His Eternal Power that can so easily
and terribly revenge all wilful Disobedience to his Law, and has been so
insolently contemned, all the Perfections of his Divine Nature, and the
bleeding Sufferings of his Hmane Nature to purchase Salvation so wretchedly
neglected, will render their Judgment fearful and intolerable. Esa. 10. 3.
What will they do in the day of Visitation? Can their Hearts endure, Ezekiel. 22.
or their Hands be strong in the day that he will deal with them? Can they
think to mitigate his hot Displeasure, when his Clemency, so often despised,
will inflame his Justice? All the Mercies which they have so ungraciously
abused, shall be produced in Testimony of their Rebellion, heightened with the
most unworthy Ingratitude: What Consternation will seize the Guilty, when ten
thousand Accusers shall rise up in Judgment against them, and not one Advocate
appear for their Defense? Methinks the hearing such terrible Truths should make
their Ears tingle, and their Hearts die within them, yet (O astonishing
Security!) tho God speaks so loud by the Voice of his Ministers, and sometimes
by his powerful Providence, they are as deaf as Adders; but let a carnal Lust
whisper within from their earthly part, they presently hear and are charmed.
From whence is it that the Eternal Judgment, so sure as Death, does not cause
an extreme Apprehension in unpardoned Sinners? The next cause of this Stupidity
is, that they put the evilday at a remote distance, as the Scorners said, the
Vision is Ezekiel. 12. 22.
for many days: they study to be secure, and delay their Preparations,
presuming to have time enough before them. Vain Men! how willingly do they
deceive themselves? Can they be assured of the present Life one hour? Some in
their impure Embraces, others at voluptuous Feasts have been seized by Divine
Justice: the day of Death is equivalent to the day of Judgment; for immediately
after there is a final decision and actual disposing of Men for ever.

That we may therefore be duly prepared, these Directions are to be followed.

1. Let it be our special care to plant the Belief of this great Truth in our
Minds, and preserve it in its Vigor, that we may feel its Efficacy and
Influence in our Hearts and Lives. Customary Believers, whose assent to Divine
Truths is only from the prejudice of Education, and the current Opinions of
others with whom they live, are as careless and secure as direct Atheist: The
substantial Fruits of Godliness and Holiness spring from internal Notions
deeply established, and experimentally felt in the Soul. The usual coldness in
the Duties of Religion, and presumptuous boldness in Sin, is because Men have
but a slite Belief of their great account. But we have infallible assurance
from the Judge himself: Behold, I come quickly: his Throne is like the fiery
Flame, and his Wheels as burning Fire, an Emblem of his swift coming to
Judgment. The steadfast Belief of this will arrest our vain Thoughts, and
control our vicious Affections, and regulate our Conversations. Faith is the
Principle of Fear; and Fear is a preventive Passion, it engages the Mind to
consider with becoming seriousness, how to escape the Damnation of Hell. Then
we thoroughly believe this fundamental Principle of Religion, when the design
and work of our Lives is to be approved by our Judge.

2. Moderation both in the Pleasures and Business of the World is requisite,
that we may with entire Application of Mind prepare to appear before our Judge.
It Is the aweful Caution of our Savior to his Disciples, Take heed to your
selves, Luke 21. 34, 35.
lest at any time, your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
and Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares. For as a Snare
shall it come on all them, that dwell on the face of the whole Earth. Watch ye
therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man. The
universal Snares that fasten Men in security are sensual Pleasures and Worldly
Cares: They are natural and insinuating into our Hearts. A dissolute voluptuous
course is attended with a stupid neglect of God and the Soul: and the indulging
of the Carnal Appetites, tho not in such vicious Excesses, as the notoriously
profane are guilty of, lessens the fear of Caution, which is instrumental to
make us serious and diligent, lest we be surprised in an unprepared State by
the Judge of the World. The subtilty of Satan is to be observed, he does not
tempt Men to take so deep a surfeit of Pleasures as might cause a loathing of
them, but gently feeds the voluptuous diseased Appetites, knowing that a
Sensual Life alienates the Mind from a severe reflecting upon the State of
their Souls, and induces a deep forgetfulness of their Accounts with God. From
hence it is, that the danger wherein so many are of losing their Souls for
ever, is not perceived till their case be desperate.

Others are so involved in Secular Business, their Minds are so overshaded with
the Cares of the World, that they are not at leisure to attend to the one thing
necessary, and can take no right Aspect of the World to come. Their Affections
are stiff and settled in the Earth, their Thoughts are immerst in the Affairs of
this present Life; they think it their Discretion and Duty to engage in the
uncessant prosecution of their Worldly Designs, and the Devil takes this
advantage to prevent in them the pity and care of their Immortal Souls: Or if
at any time serious Desires are kindled in them to Salvation, an inundation of
Worldly Thoughts presently quench them. Thus Men perish by the abuse of lawful
things. The Flood broke in upon the old World whilst they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in Marriage, buying and selling, and destroyed
them all: The last Fire will devour the present World in the same dull
Incogitancy, and stupid neglect to prepare themselves for Judgment, As it was
in the days of Noah, Luke 17. 26.
so it shall be in the days of the Son of Man. The sensual and worldlyminded
are usually secure, and when they shall say Peace and Safety, sudden
Destruction comes upon them, as Travel upon a Woman with Child, as
surprizingly as irresistably, and they shall not escape. It Is a divine and
solemn warning, Rev. 16. 15.
Behold, I come as a Thief in the night, blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his Garments unspotted from the World, lest he be found naked without
the Robe of Holiness, and be exposed to confounding Shame in the great Day.

3. The frequent and serious trial of Conscience with respect to our spiritual
State, and the Actions of our Lives is requisite to our preparing our selves
for our last account: for there will be a a manifestation of them in that day.
The most never spend a serious hour in considering whether they are translated
from Death to Life. The Rule of Judgment is declared by St. John; He that has
the Son, has Life: and he that has not the Son, has not Life. The
Justification of our Persons from the guilt of our Sins, is wholly to be
ascribed to the Divine Mercy upon the account of his most precious Merits and
Mediation: and all the saving Benefits purchased by his Death are actually
applied only to those who are united to him by an unfeigned lively Faith. All
the vital Influences of his Merits are derived from him to his Members: he is
the Head of the Church and Savior of the Body. His most precious Blood that
was shed on the Cross, must be sprinkled on the Conscience to purge it from
dead Works: The Blood of sprinkling speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel. And the Faith that is saving is not a mere assent in Speculation to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, but such a Belief in the Blessed Mediator of his
reconciling us to God, as produces a superlative Love to him, and by that Love
sincere and uniform Obedience to his most holy Laws. By Faith we are justified
from the Guilt of Sin, by Works from the Charge of Hypocrisy, in that we have
sincerely complied with the Terms of the Gospel, by receiving entire Christ as
our Lord and Savior.

We can never with Comfort appear before the righteous Lord, if we have not an
interest in him as the Lord our Righteousness.

There are some of a Moral Temper and Civil Conversation that finally miscarry,
by their neglect of coming to Christ with earnest hunger and thirst after his
Righteousness, which alone can endure the Trial of God's Judgment Seat for our
Absolution: They have not such a conscious feeling of their undone Condition by
Sin, as to make them earnestly seek for a Remedy: the Deceiver of Souls
insinuates into their secret Thoughts, that they are safe enough, and shall
stand in Judgment, because they are not guilty of enormous Crimes; they rarely
feel the lashes of Conscience, which those who rebel against the clear Light
do. But how fair so ever the Lives of Men appear, such is the exact Purity of
the Divine Law, so many known and secret Sins even the most circumspect are
guilty of, that without an interest in the Blessed Mediator, they will be cast
in Judgment for ever. It Is therefore of infinite Consequence to examine our
selves whether we are in a state of Favor and Acceptance with God: the
Jealousy of many holy and tender Spirits suspends the comfortable Judgment of
Conscience, and the vicious Self-love of carnal Persons supends the condemning
Judgment of it.

Besides, the daily review of our Actions is of excellent use to prepare us for
our last account. Conscience is placed in our Bosoms as a vigilant Inspector
and Domestic Judge, to observe our Actions and compare them with the Rule, and
accordingly to censure or approve us: When we fail in our Duty, and violate
God's Precepts, it should work upon the Affections of Grief and Shame, and
cause us earnestly to address to the Throne of Grace for Pardon: and renew the
Application of the Blood of Christ to our Souls. According to the quality of
our Sins, our Repentance should be more solemn and special, we should more
severely judge our selves that we may not be judged by the Lord. This is very
unpleasant Work to carnal Men: but it is the indispensible Condition of
obtaining pardoning Mercy: it is the most congruous way of recovering Sinners
both for the Honor of God, and our Good, for the broken and contrite Person
will most prize the Favor of God, and be most fearful of returning to Sin.
Indeed then our Repentance is unto Life, when the dominion of Sin is subdued,
and the way is forsaken. Now, the speedy coming of our Judge should recommend
this severe Repentance to us: it should excite Conscience to the daily
observation of our Errors, then when Sins are committed, we may be restless
till we get them pardoned: tho Men may suppress and smother the Convictions of
Conscience at the present, yet it will shortly, like a fierce and terrible
Officer, take the Guilty by the Throat and command him to pay what he owes to
Divine Justice. It Is our Wisdom to compare the bitterness of Repentance with
the Torments of Hell: Repenting Sorrow is for the cure of Sin, the Sorrow of
Hell is for the Punishment of Sinners for ever. Repent, that your Sins may be
blotted out in the times of Refreshment from the Presence of the Lord.

4. The persuasion of this Doctrine is an excellent means to obtain a calm and
contented frame of Spirit in every State: For if we consider within a little
while all Civil Distinctions of High and Low, Rich and Poor, shall be at an
end, and only the Moral Distinctions of Holy and Unholy, Righteous and
Unrighteous, shall remain, that all must stand in an equal Line before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive eternal Recompenses, how will it vilify
this World in our esteem, and consequently make a mean and low Condition
tolerable to us? It Is related of Julius Caesar, that being in a Storm at Sea,
he was fain to strip himself naked and swim for his Life, carrying in one hand
his Commentaries written by himself of his Military Actions: Within a short
time we must be divested of all the external Circumstances of the present Life,
Riches, Honors, Dignities, and of the Garment of our Flesh, and our naked
Souls shall only carry with them the Book of Conscience, wherein all our
Actions are recorded with our own Hands, into that vast Eternity before us:
this should make us more indifferent what our present State is, that we must
shortly leave, and very sollicitous to order our Conversation so as to be
accepted of our Judge.

Particularly it should render the Praise or Dispraise of Men a very small
matter to us. Within a little while we shall only have to do with God, depend
entirely upon him, and according as his Sentence shall be favorable or fatal,
must be determined for ever; how reasonable then is it in comparison of his
Judgment to disvalue the contingent Opinions of Men, who raise or depress our
Names according to their Fancies and Passions, and to be satisfied in God's
Approbation.

5. The Consideration of this Point should encourage us joyfully to endure
Reproach or Violence for the Testimony of Divine Truth, to suffer for
Righteousness sake: for, as the Apostle comforts the suffering Christians,
Within a little while, he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; and
will bestow an excellent Reward in Heaven upon his faithful Servants. This,
duly considered, will inspire not only Patience, but Divine Joy in the Saints
in their most afflicted State for the Name of Christ.

6. The Consideration of this great Truth should regulate our Deportment
toward all Men, with Sincerity, Equity, Benignity, and Clemency. It Is the
Apostles chosen Argument, Let no Man go beyond, or defraud his Brother in any
matter; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
because the Lord is the Avenger of all such. Let your Moderation be known to
all Men, Phil. 4. 5.
the Lord is at hand.

To sum up all: Let us with entire Application of Soul, and zealous Endeavors
strive to be approved by our Judge. We labor, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.
whether present or absent, to be accepted by him. The certain Rules of
pleasing him, are to imitate his Example, and obey his Precepts. He will be a
Lamb to all who are like him in Innocence, Patience, and Purity. He went about
doing Good: let us do good to all, especially to the Household of Faith. To use
an Estate only for mean Ends, our Temporal Conveniences, much more to abuse
and pervert it, to foment Pride and Luxury, will make our Accounts to be
uncomfortable, and grievous: but to be liberal and rich in Good Works, is the
infallible way to obtain a rich Reward. He forgave his cruel and unrighteous
Enemies; his dying Prayer mixed with his precious Blood was to reconcile God to
those who shed it; and our Absolution in his Judgment is suspended upon this
indispensable Condition, that from the Heart we forgive even the most injurious
Offenses, Mat. 6.
and violent Provocations from others. An unforgiving Temper, like a Millstone
fastened about the Neck, will sink us into unfathomed Misery. He that is stiff
and irreconcilable, either never seriously considers his own numerous Sins, or
never received God's pardoning Mercy.

Let us uniformly obey the Commands of Christ. We must stoop to his Power as
our Judge; As I live says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
Tongue shall confess to God; it is our Wisdom therefore to yield Obedience to
his Authority as our Lawgiver. He is the Author of eternal Salvation to all who
obey him.

Let us faithfully improve all our Talents, all the means and advantages to
serve and glorify him, for the Account will be strict, and the Reward infinite.
Briefly, let us learn this point of Wisdom of our spiritual Enemy, who, because
his time is short, is more active and vigilant to do Mischief; so considering
our opportunity of doing good is short, and the omission irreparable, 1 Cor. 15.
let us with zealous diligence always abound in the Work of the Lord, knowing
that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. O that Men were wise to
consider their Mortality and Immortality: to do those things now, which in the
last and great Day they shall wish they had done.

I shall now, as the present occasion directs, speak of the deceased Mr.
BENJAMIN ASHURST, of whose Goodness there are very valuable Testimonies. He had
the Felicity to be instructed and ordered in his early and obsequious Age by a
wise and holy Father: and as usually the gracious or vicious Habits of the
first Age are transfused into the next, so his succeeding Life was
correspondent to his Education. There is a fit resemblance between the natural
Culture of the Earth and the moral of our Minds: Three things are requisite to
make the Earth fruitful, a good Soil, good Culture, and good Seed; so by
Analogy, that Education may be successful, a welldisposed Nature, an
Understanding and good Instructor, and the Precepts of Religion and Virtue are
necessary. All these concurred in the present Subject. Some by a rare Privilege
are exempted from those tyrannous Passions that so frequently disorder the
Lives of Men; and in their Childhood are of such mild and gaulless Spirits, so
receptive of virtuous Impressions, that at the sight of their Dispositions and
Carriage we may have a conjecture of the Felicity of the innocent State, of
which one Ray, or rather Shadow, is so amiable. With such a happy Temper God
was pleased to endow our deceased Friend: his Spirit was humble, modest, gentle
and complying with the Counsels of his gracious Father, who with tender Care
led him in the way to Heaven. When he was grown up to the Age of Vanity, he was
preserved from youthful Lusts: His Conversation was unstained: He was not
swelled with Pride, nor ruffled with Passion, nor disordered with Excess. And
as to a judicious Eye, no Spectacle is more deformed than an old Man in whom
the Vices of Youth are notorious, levity of Mind, vehemence of Passions, and
vanity in Conversation: So on the contrary, there is not a more amiable sight,
than a young Man in whom the Virtues of Age are conspicuous; a staid Mind,
temperate Desires, a composed Deportment: and it were happy for the World if
foolish old Men were as rare to be found, as wise young Men.

This Praiseworthy Person, when fit to enter into a particular Calling, was
placed in the Family of a Turkey Merchant: there his Behavior was so religious
and serious, that it was said of him by some that observed his Actions, that he
would be a Merchant for Heaven. He after some time went to Smyrna, and
preserved his Integrity and Purity in the midst of Temptations: where many by
vicious Excesses disparage the Sanctity of the Christian Religion professed by
them, he adorned it by the Sobriety of his Conversation. He returned to England
after some Years spent beyond Sea, and persever'd in his Christian Course,
serious and solemn in his Carriage, and ready to do good to those that wanted
supplies from relieving Charity. A few Years after his return, he fell into a
dying Consumption that quickly put a Period to his Days. In his languishing
Disease he expressed an humble quiet Submission to the Divine Disposal: he was
silent from murmuring, but not from Prayer, which he performed with solemn
Reverence to the Lord of Life and Death even in his Weakness. When the hour of
his Departure was come, he calmly rendered his Soul to his faithful Creator.
There is just cause of Sorrow that one in the Flower of his Age, of such hopes,
should so suddenly wither and return to Dust: if one old in Years and Vices, a
Corrupter of others by his contagious Example die, the World is well rid of
him: if a good Man comes to the Grave in a full Age, like as a shock of Corn
comes in his season, there is cause of Thanksgiving, that he was so long a
Blessing to the World: But when a young Saint dies, that might according to
expectation have long glorified God upon the Earth, and been a happy Instrument
of doing good, we should pay our tributary Tears, and have a due and tender
sense of the general Loss. Yet those who are most nearly concerned, and
mournfully affected should quiet their troubled Thoughts by considering the
unaccountable Will of God, nay, comfort their sad and dejected Spirits, by
considering, that he has lived long enough in the present World, who by dying
arrives to Perfection and Felicity.

FINIS.

